Learning Relational Concepts through
Unitary versus Compositional Representations
Daniel Corral (daniel.corral@colorado.edu) & Matt Jones (mcj @colorado.edu)
Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, University Colorado Boulder,
Boulder, CO 80309 USA
Abstract
Current theories of relational learning on structure mapping
emphasize the importance of compositional representations,
based on the concept’s components and the relations among
them. We consider the possibility that relational concepts can
also be represented unitarily, whereby the concept is a
property of the stimulus as a whole. The distinction between
compositional and unitary representations of relational
concepts is a natural consequence of structure-mapping
theory, but its psychological implications have not been
explored. We report two experiments in which we examine
how encouraging subjects to represent relational concepts
compositionally versus unitarily affects learning on
classification- and inference-based category learning tasks.
Our findings show that unitary representations lead to better
learning than compositional representations, especially for the
inference task. We conclude that unitary representations incur
less cognitive load than structural alignment of compositional
representations, and thus may be the default for everyday
relational reasoning.
Keywords: Relational Learning; Relational Structure;
Concept Representation; Category Learning; Inference.

Introduction
On a daily basis, people encounter many complex concepts
that are defined by a relational structure – the specific
pattern in which two or more objects are bound together by
interconnected relations (Corral & Jones, 2014). For
instance, consider a simple scenario in which a dog chases a
cat. In this example, the dog and the cat share a specific
relationship with one another, such that it is the dog that fills
the role of the chaser and the cat fills the role of being
chased (chase(dog, cat)). Critically, this structure is
different from a scenario in which a cat chases a dog
(chase(cat, dog)). These types of concepts differ from those
that are defined by features, which can be identified by the
presence of a given set of attributes (Estes, 1986). For
example, a bird might be identified by the presence of
certain prototypical features, such as {feathers, beak, wings
…}. Although feature-based representations can provide
extensive knowledge about a given scenario, they do not
convey structural information (Markman, 1999). Thus, a
feature-based representation does not allow one to readily
distinguish a simple scenario in which a dog chases a cat
from an instance in which a cat chases a dog (Markman &
Gentner, 2000), as both would be represented as an
unstructured set: {dog, cat, chase}.
The ability to recognize and reason about structured
concepts has been posited to be one of the cornerstones of
human cognition (Penn, Holyoak, & Povinelli, 2008).
According to structure-mapping theory, the dominant theory

of relational learning, structured concepts are acquired via
structure mapping, wherein the elements of two analogous
scenarios are put into alignment in a way that preserves their
common roles. For example, in the hypothetical scenarios
described below, the dog in the first scenario maps to the cat
in the second scenario because both fill the role of the
chaser. Alignment of two scenarios highlights their common
structure and facilitates abstraction of new relational
concepts (Gentner, 1983; Hummel & Holyoak, 2003).
Importantly, structure-mapping theory1 makes the implicit
assumption that a relational concept can be represented in
two fundamentally different ways: (1) as a system of
relations, with meaning derived both from the identities of
those relations and from how they are interconnected by
shared role-fillers (Corral & Jones, 2014); or (2) as a
primitive, atomic relation that is explicitly represented. We
refer to these as compositional and unitary representations.
Although this logical distinction has been noted (Gentner,
1983), its potential psychological implications have largely
been neglected.
To elaborate further, the first of these representational
assumptions is premised on the idea that representations are
constructed from two basic types of building blocks: objects
and relations. The second assumption is based on the idea
that a relation operates on a set of n objects, that is, for
every ordered set of n objects, the relation returns a truthvalue indicating whether the objects satisfy the relation.
Equivalently, for every ordered set of n objects (o1…,on) for
which the relation holds, there is an explicit token of that
relation: R(o1…,on). We refer to any relation of this sort as a
unitary relation.
In recent work, Corral, Kurtz, and Jones (under revision)
raise the possibility that subjects might indeed represent
some relational concepts unitarily, such that the concept is a
component or a property of the stimulus as a whole. This
type of representation would lack explicit structure and
could be recognized directly in a stimulus, similarly to a
feature. This idea is perhaps best exemplified in language
comprehension, where people appear to seamlessly
understand a multitude of rich relational concepts, without
explicitly representing their substructure. For example,
consider the concept of investigation. An investigation
consists of an agent, a given question, the approach the
agent takes to answering that question, and the specific
1
It is important to note that there are numerous domains within
cognitive science that formalize representation in various ways. In
the present paper, we work within the framework of structuremapping theory.

1830

pattern of interconnections among these components.
Nevertheless, people can likely recognize this concept
without explicitly representing its structure. Likewise, a ttest involves a complex structure of mathematical elements
and relations (as many hapless introductory statistics
students will attest), but for experienced scientists it is easily
conceived of as a unitary event—one can hear the sentence
“I ran a t-test” and immediately comprehend its meaning
without needing to invoke the concept’s substructure.
The literature on structure-mapping theory has focused on
compositional representations, through its emphasis on the
alignment process. Furthermore, it has been proposed that
people must use compositional representations in order to
learn relational concepts (Markman & Gentner, 2000).
Compositional
representations
are
computationally
expensive (Forbus, Gentner, & Law, 1995) and can place a
high strain on working memory (Kintsch & Bowles, 2002).
They are also unnecessary for learning feature-based
concepts (Markman, 1999), which can be recognized
(without regard to structure) by attending to a stimulus’
defining attributes (e.g., Nosofsky, 1986). Similarly,
relational concepts that are represented unitarily can be
explicitly recognized as a global attribute of the given
scenario, and thus can be learned in an unstructured manner.
Such representations allow for computationally efficient
processing (Forbus et al., 1995), and based on principles of
cognitive economy, it follows that people should avoid
compositional representations and structural alignment
whenever a unitary representation and setwise (featurestyle) comparisons are adequate.
Evidence from related literatures suggests that people in
fact do not use compositional representations as much as
might be expected based on structure-mapping theory. One
prediction that follows from compositional representations
is that people should be able to report the structural
elements of the relational concepts they are familiar with.
However, despite subjects reporting high confidence in their
comprehension of various types of common relational
systems (e.g., how helicopters fly), they are often mostly
unaware of their structural elements (Keil, 2003; Rozenblit
& Keil, 2002). Another prediction from compositional
representations is that, because relational structure must be
explicitly represented (Kintsch & Bowles, 2002), it should
take longer to comprehend and recognize structured
information than information that is not structured.
However, various studies have found no differences in the
time it takes subjects to comprehend structured (metaphors)
and non-structured statements (e.g., “the ball is blue”)
(Glucksberg, Gildea, Bookin, 1982). Related work has
shown that subjects can often understand metaphors
automatically,
with
minimal
explicit
processing
(Glucksberg, 2003). Taken together, these findings suggest
that many relational concepts may not typically be
represented compositionally.
Due to the representational flexibility that humans possess
(Chalmers, French, Hofstadter, 1992), it seems plausible
that relational concepts can be represented both unitarily

and compositionally. For instance, a person might represent
a concept such as investigation based on a global attribute
(e.g., an inspection), but can also likely represent its
relational substructure when necessary (explicitly
representing the agent, question, line of inquiry, and their
interrelations). This idea leads to the question of which type
of representation people use by default when learning a
relational concept. The main hypothesis of the present paper
is that, because unitary representations should allow for
more efficient processing, subjects will use such
representations when they are available. We test this
prediction by giving subjects relational category learning
tasks and encouraging them to represent the stimuli either
compositionally or unitarily. If people typically learn
relational concepts from structural alignment, then
encouraging subjects to use compositional representations
should aid learning. However, if people instead learn more
efficiently with unitary representations, than the opposite
outcome should be expected.
Half the subjects in our experiments were given a
classification task, in which they were shown a series of
stimuli and asked to make categorization judgments.
Unitary representations seem especially well-suited for such
a task, because they should enable subjects to directly
recognize the diagnostic property in a stimulus, just as with
feature-based categories. The other subjects were given an
inference task, in which they were asked on each trial to
determine a missing property of a stimulus that was
presented together with its category label. Research with
feature-based categories has shown that classification and
inference learning tend to yield different category
representations, with inference tasks encouraging learning
of internal category structure, such as correlations among
features (Markman & Ross, 2003; Yamauchi & Markman,
2000). This finding suggests that compositional
representations should be particularly well-suited for
inference learning with relational categories, as such
representations highlight the internal structure of stimuli.
The inference conditions of our experiments thus provide a
more stringent test of our hypothesis that people can learn
relational concepts better through unitary representations.

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 examines how providing unitary and
compositional descriptions of relational concepts affects
learning on classification and inference tasks (description
and task type both manipulated between subjects). Subjects
were provided either a unitary or compositional hint at the
start of learning and again after every third error, in order to
assess whether each type of hint can improve learning.
Control groups who were given no hints were also included
in order to assess baseline performance in both tasks.
The stimuli used in this study were taken from Corral, et
al. (under revision), which were adopted and modeled after
those used by Rehder and Ross (2001). A stimulus consisted
of three sentences, each of which describes a different
component of a machine that works to remove waste

1831

material: (1) the location of where the machine operates, (2)
the waste material the machine removes, and (3) the
instrument the machine uses.
Stimuli were sampled from two categories: coherent and
incoherent. Each category consisted of 18 exemplars. The
categories were determined by how a machine’s
components were related to one another. For exemplars
from the coherent category, the machine’s instrument is
suited for collecting the waste material that the machine
works to remove, which can be found in the location where
the machine operates. Consider the following example:
“Operates on the seafloor, works to remove lost fishing nets,
and has a hook.” This exemplar is coherent because of the
secondary relations among the machine’s component parts
(presumed to be known by subjects), such that lost fishing
nets can be found on the seafloor and a hook can be used to
retrieve lost fishing nets. In contrast, exemplars from the
incoherent category do not satisfy either of these secondorder relations (i.e., the machine’s tool cannot be used to
collect the machine’s target waste material and that material
cannot be found where the machine operates). Non-Morkels
were thus made to be as incoherent as possible so as to
maximally differentiate the categories and better facilitate
learning of the task. Figure 1 illustrates the abstract
relational structure of the two categories.
Half of the subjects completed an A/¬A classification
task (in which each stimulus was to be categorized as either
a category member or a nonmember), and the other half
completed an inference task. On each trial, the subject was
presented a single stimulus and asked to make an inference
or classification judgment (depending on the condition).
After the response, the subject was shown whether the
response was correct along with the correct answer.
Operates on the surface of the water

Operates on the surface of the water

Works to clean spilled oil

Works to collect dangerous gaseous ions

Has a spongy material

Has a shovel

Oil

Gas

Removes

Fo
un
Water

e
ov
m
re

Removes

d

on

n
Ca

Operates in

Has

Machine
Coherent Item

Operates in
Sponge

Water

Has

Machine

Shovel

Incoherent Item

Figure 1. Illustration of the relational structure for items in
the coherent and incoherent categories in Experiment 1. The
structures differ in that coherent items satisfy the relations
indicated by diagonal lines: the machine’s implement can
remove the target, and the target is found in the machine’s
location. Recreated from Corral et al. (under revision).

Method
Two hundred eighteen undergraduates from the University
of Colorado Boulder participated for course credit in an
introductory psychology course. Subjects were randomly

assigned to six conditions. Type of hint (compositional vs.
unitary vs. control) was crossed with task type
(classification vs. inference).
Subjects were told that they would be shown short
descriptions of various types of cleaning machines, some of
which were made by the Morkel Company (coherent
category) and some were not (incoherent category). Subjects
were provided a positive example of a Morkel (randomly
selected) and told that all Morkels share a certain
commonality and it was their job to figure out what it was.
Subjects in the unitary condition were shown the
following hint: “On each trial try to think about how "well
suited" the machine is for performing its task. Keep in mind
that consumers say machines from Morkels are built
"intuitively" in a way that makes sense.” This hint was
intended to shift subjects’ attention toward finding a global
attribute of the stimulus and away from the explicit
relationships among its components. Using this hint, it is
possible for subjects to learn how to distinguish the
categories without explicit knowledge of their relational
structure. This hint can therefore be said to encourage
subjects to represent each stimulus unitarily.
Subjects in the compositional condition where shown the
following hint: “On each trial try to think about the specific
manner in which the machine's 1st property relates to its 2nd
and 3rd properties, as well as how its 2nd property relates to
its 3rd property.” This hint was intended to focus subjects’
attention on the relationships among the component parts of
the stimulus, and thus to encourage them to represent the
stimulus compositionally.
Subjects were presented the appropriate hint during the
initial task instructions, after the first trial, during rest
breaks, and following every third error the subject
committed (on a blank screen after corrective feedback was
shown). Subjects were asked to read the hint carefully and
press the spacebar when they were ready to continue.
Subjects in the control group were not shown a hint and
were instead asked to continue to try their best; this
reminder was presented on every third error the subject
committed and on rest breaks.
Each subject completed 72 trials. The order in which the
items were presented was randomized for all subjects. In
each block of 18 trials, all 18 stimuli appeared in a random
order. After each block, subjects were given a self-paced
rest break and were shown the proportion of correct
responses they answered correctly over those trials, along
with the number of trials they had completed and the
number that remained.
On each trial in the classification condition, a single,
complete stimulus was presented and the subject was asked
to type “A” if the machine was a Morkel or “L” if it was
not. On each trial in the inference condition, the category
label for a stimulus was shown (Morkel or non-Morkel)
directly above an incomplete stimulus consisting of two of
its three components (i.e., sentences). Below the stimulus
were two response options, one of which was the missing
component and the other was a lure. The component the

1832

subject was asked to infer (i.e., implement, target material,
or location) was randomly selected on each trial. Subjects
were asked to select which was the missing component by
typing “A” if the correct choice was the top option or “L” if
it was the bottom option. The order in which the two options
were presented was randomized on every trial. For items
that were Morkels, the correct response was the option that
shared secondary relations with the given stimulus
components. The lure did not share secondary relations with
either of the stimulus components. For items that were nonMorkels, the correct response was the component that did
not share any secondary relations with either of the stimulus
components. The accompanying lure shared at least one
secondary relation with one of the stimulus components.
Figure 2 shows an example trial from the inference
condition.

additional 2 (unitary vs. compositional) × 2 (classification
vs. inference) ANOVA was conducted, which excluded
control subjects. This analysis revealed an interaction, F(1,
138) = 4.01, p = .047, MSE = .013, indicating that the
unitary advantage was stronger in the inference task than in
the classification task.
Taken together, the findings presented here suggest that
unitary and compositional representations can both be used
to acquire relational concepts. However, subjects who were
encouraged to represent the stimuli unitarily showed more
robust learning than subjects who were encouraged to
represent the stimuli compositionally, especially in the
inference task. These findings thus provide support for our
main hypothesis that, when both types of representations are
available, subjects learn better with unitary than with
compositional representations.
1
0.9

Machine: Morkel

Proportion Correct

0.8

Operates on the seafloor
?
Has a hook

0.7
0.6
Unitary Classification
Compositional Classification
Control Classification
Unitary Inference
Compositional Inference
Control Inference

0.5

Works to remove lost fishing nets
Works to gather harmful solids

0.4
0.3

0

10

20

30

40
Trial

50

60

70

80

Figure 3. Average learning curves and standard errors
across blocks of nine trials for each condition in Experiment
1.

Figure 2. Example of a stimulus display from the coherent
category (Morkels) from the inference task in Experiment 1.

Results & Discussion
Figure 3 shows average learning curves for subjects in each
group. An ANOVA was conducted to examine differences
in performance among groups. The analysis showed a main
effect of hint, F(2, 212) = 42.14, p < .0001, MSE = .014,
and an interaction, F(1, 212) = 8.90, p = .0002, MSE =
.014, indicating that the main effect of hint depends on the
type of task that subjects completed. On the classification
task, control subjects (M = .61, SE
= .017) were
outperformed by subjects in the compositional (M = .775,
SE = .014; p < .0001) and unitary groups (M = .83, SE =
.016; p < .0001). In the inference condition, only subjects
who received a unitary hint (M = .716, SE = .012)
performed better than control subjects (M = .585, SE = .012;
p < .0001), as no differences were observed between
subjects who were presented a compositional hint (M =
.587, SE = .011) and subjects in the control group.
Planned t-tests were conducted to compare the unitary and
compositional groups, separately for each task. On the
classification task, subjects in the unitary condition (M =
.83, SE = .014) outperformed subjects in the compositional
condition (M = .775, SE = .014), t(71) = 1.85, p = .068, d =
.45. This same pattern was observed in the inference
condition (unitary M = .716, SE = .012; compositional M =
.587, SE = .012), t(67) = 5.28, p < .0001, d = 1.29. An

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 builds on the findings from Experiment 1 and
examines how category learning is affected when subjects
represent a relational concept one way (either unitarily or
compositionally) and are subsequently made aware of an
alternative representation. Experiment 2 used the stimuli
from Experiment 1, and all subjects performed the
classification task. All subjects were either provided a
unitary or compositional hint prior to the start of learning.
For half of the subjects, the hint was changed after the 18th
trial (i.e., the unitary hint was replaced with the
compositional one and vice versa). For the other half of
subjects, the hint they were shown remained the same
throughout the study. These latter conditions were identical
to the unitary and compositional classification conditions in
Experiment 1.

Method
One hundred fifty-seven subjects were randomly assigned
to four conditions: unitary/switch (N = 40),
compositional/switch (N = 39), unitary/no-switch (N = 39),
and compositional/no-switch (N = 39). After the 18th trial
(i.e., in the first rest break), the screen was cleared and
subjects in the switch conditions were shown a prompt that

1833

notified them that Morkels could be represented differently
from the initial hint and were shown the other hint.
Following the 19th trial, this hint was presented once more
and subjects were reminded to use it to try to figure out
what constitutes a Morkel. Subjects in the switch conditions
were shown this hint for the remainder of the study (i.e., on
rest breaks and following every 3rd error), whereas noswitch subjects continued to see the hint they had seen at the
beginning. The rest of the procedure was identical to that of
Experiment 1.

Results & Discussion
Figure 4 shows average learning curves for subjects in each
condition. A t-test showed that subjects in the unitary/noswitch condition (M = .79, SE = .017) outperformed subjects
in the compositional/no-switch condition (M = .716, SE =
.017), t(76) = 2.23, p = .03, d = .50. This finding directly
replicates the results from the classification condition in
Experiment 1, which showed a unitary learning advantage.
1

Proportion Correct

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
Unitary/Switch
Compositional/Switch
Unitary/No-Switch
Compositional/No-Switch

0.5
0.4

0

10

20

30

40
Trial

50

60

70

80

Figure 3. Average learning curves and standard errors
across blocks of nine trials for each condition in Experiment
2.
In addition to this analysis, a series of planned
comparisons were conducted to examine differences among
groups from the point at which subjects were introduced to
the other hint (trials 19-72). The first analysis showed that
subjects in the compositional/switch condition (M = .82, SE
= .017) outperformed subjects in the compositional/noswitch condition (M = .743, SE = .017), t(76) = 2.26, p =
.027, d = .51. Additionally, subjects in the unitary/switch
condition (M = .802, SE = .018) marginally outperformed
subjects in the compositional/no-switch condition, t(77) =
1.77, p = .08, d = .45. However, no differences in
performance were observed among any of the three groups
that were presented a unitary hint at some point in the study.
Thus, it seems that as long as a unitary hint is presented,
regardless of whether it is the only hint that is shown or if it
is presented before or after a compositional hint, subjects
are able to benefit from it. Taken together, these findings
support the conclusion from Experiment 1 and suggest that
subjects indeed learn better when they rely on unitary
representations.

General Discussion
We report two experiments that test how encouraging
subjects to represent relational stimuli unitarily or
compositionally affects concept learning. The findings from
Experiment 1 showed that both types of hints can aid
learning on a classification task, but only the unitary hint
was a useful learning aid on the inference task. These
findings provide support for the idea that subjects can
indeed use both types of representations to understand and
learn relational concepts, but that unitary representations are
as or more effective than compositional ones. This latter
conclusion challenges the emphasis on compositional
representations at the core of most research on analogical
reasoning.
Experiment 2 used only a classification task and was able
to replicate the findings from the classification condition in
Experiment 1, as subjects who received only a unitary hint
outperformed subjects who received only a compositional
hint. Furthermore, the results from this study showed that
subjects who received a unitary hint at any point in the
study (with a compositional hint coming before, after, or not
at all) outperformed subjects who did not receive a unitary
hint at all. No differences in performance were found among
subjects in the groups who received a unitary hint. These
results lend more support to the dominance of unitary
representations, in that subjects will abandon or ignore
suggestions for compositional representations if they have
discovered a unitary one.
One surprising finding from Experiment 1 was that the
unitary advantage was stronger for the inference task than
for classification. The effect size for the inference task was
actually quite dramatic (Cohen’s d of 1.29). We had
predicted that, if anything, the interaction would go in the
opposite direction, given that inference tasks encourage
learning the relationships among a concept’s components
(Markman & Ross, 2003; Yamauchi & Markman, 2000).
One speculative possibility is that inference learning
encourages a top-down approach, in that subjects must
reason from the category label to the stimulus, whereas
classification encourages a bottom-up approach of reasoning
from the stimulus to the category label. Likewise, a unitary
representation is top-down in that it embodies a global
property of a stimulus that can be used to deduce its internal
structure, whereas a compositional representation is bottomup in that the local structure is explicitly represented and the
global property emerges only implicitly from the relational
system. Under this view, there might be a congruency effect
between the stimulus representation and the processes
involved in carrying out the task. In particular, a unitary
representation might be more congruent with an inference
task, because it facilitates conceiving of a concept by a
single attribute that can then be used to infer missing parts
of a stimulus.
These speculations aside, the main conclusion of the
present studies is that, although relational concepts are
defined by the interconnections among their component
parts, subjects seem to learn these concepts better when they

1834

can be represented unitarily, which might facilitate a global
understanding that is easier to discover and use than an
explicitly
structured
one.
Furthermore,
although
compositional-based instruction can help subjects classify a
given concept, it might not be optimal for inference-based
reasoning.
These findings seem particularly applicable to education
and instruction, as they might provide insight into how
different types of descriptions for a given relational concept
can affect students’ representations, as well as how such
representations affect learning. Indeed, students are often
required to learn various types of structured concepts, and
must often engage in both classification and inference. For
instance, in mathematics, students must recognize various
instantiations of a given problem type, a process that relies
on classification, and must also make inferences about how
to apply a given solution. These findings thus hold the
potential to improve how relational concepts are taught in
the classroom.
Furthermore, the present findings have theoretical
implications for relational concept learning and
representation, and have the potential to affect current
theories of analogical reasoning and learning. In particular,
research within the theoretical framework of structure
mapping (Doumas, Hummel, & Sandhofer, 2008; Hummel
& Holyoak, 2003) has placed a heavy emphasis on
alignment
processes
operating
on
compositional
representations, but our findings suggest that subjects more
naturally represent such concepts unitarily, and that such
representations produce a greater and more robust benefit to
learning. During comparison of two scenarios, if the critical
information can be represented unitarily, then there is no
need for structural alignment, because the two can be
recognized through the same sort of processing that is
possible with feature-based representations, that is, flat
(setwise) comparison to identify which properties they have
in common. To be clear, this proposal is not intended to
argue against the idea that structural alignment of
compositional representations plays a prominent role in the
more impressive feats of human reasoning (e.g., creativity
or scientific discovery), but rather to point out that in more
mundane cases, simpler processes and representations may
be involved. Nevertheless, further work is necessary to
better understand which conditions facilitate unitary and
compositional representations.
Lastly, we note one potential shortcoming of the present
studies. Although subjects were encouraged to represent the
stimuli unitarily or compositionally, we cannot know for
certain whether subjects adopted either of these
representations. This issue has historically plagued
researchers in this domain of study and highlights the need
for improved assessment on concept representation. We
welcome suggestions in helping us to address this challenge.

References

critique of artificial intelligence methodology. Journal of
Experimental and Theoretical and Artificial Intelligence,
4, 185-211.
Corral, D., & Jones, M (2014). The effects of relational
structure on analogical learning. Cognition, 132, 280-300.
Corral, D., Kurtz, K. J. & Jones, M. Learning relational
concepts from within- vs. between-category comparisons.
Under revision.
Doumas, L. A. A., Hummel, J. E., & Sandhofer, C. M.
(2008). A theory of the discovery and predication of
relational concepts. Psychological Review, 115, 1-43.
Estes, W. K. (1986). Array models for category learning.
Cognitive Psychology, 18, 500-549.
Forbus, K. D., Gentner, D., & Law, K. (1995). MAC/FAC:
A model of similarity-based retrieval. Cognitive Science,
19, 141-205.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Glucksberg, S. (2003). The psycholinguistics of metaphor.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7, 92–96.
Glucksberg, S., Gildea, P., & Bookin, H. (1982). On
understanding nonliteral speech: Can people ignore
metaphors? Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 21, 85-98.
Hummel J. E., & Holyoak K. J. (2003). A symbolicconnectionist theory of relational inference and
generalization. Psychological Review, 110, 220-264.
Keil, F. C. (2003). Folkscience: Coarse interpretations of a
complex reality. Trends in Cognitive Science, 7, 368-373.
Kintsch, W., & Bowles, A. R. (2002). Metaphor
comprehension: What makes a metaphor difficult to
understand? Metaphor and Symbol, 17, 249–262.
Markman, A. B. (1999). Knowledge representation.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Markman, A. B., & Gentner, D. (2000). Structure-mapping
in the comparison process. American Journal of
Psychology, 113, 501-538.
Markman, A. B., & Ross, B. H. (2003). Category use and
category learning. Psychological Bulletin, 129, 592-615.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1986). Attention, similarity, and the
identification-categorization relationship. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 115, 39-57.
Penn, D. C., Holyoak, K J., & Povinelli, D. J. (2008).
Darwin’s mistake: Explaining the discontinuity between
human and nonhuman minds. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 31, 109-178.
Rehder, B. & Ross, B.H. (2001). Abstract coherent
concepts. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 27, 1261-1275.
Rozenblit, L. R. & Keil, F. C. (2002). The misunderstood
limits of folk science: An illusion of explanatory
depth. Cognitive Science, 26, 521-562.
Yamauchi, T., & Markman, A. B. (2000). Inference using
categories. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 26, 776-795.

Chalmers, D. J., French, R. M., & Hofstadter, D. R. (1992).
High-level perception, representation, and analogy: A

1835

