Leveraging mutual exclusivity for faster cross-situational word
learning: A theoretical analysis
Shohei Hidaka (shhidaka@jaist.ac.jp) and Takuma Torii (tak.torii@jaist.ac.jp)
Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
1-1 Asahidai, Nomi, Ishikawa, Japan

George Kachergis (george.kachergis@gmail.com)
Dept. of Artificial Intelligence / Donders Institute, Radboud University
Nijmegen, the Netherlands
Abstract
Past mechanistic accounts of children’s word learning
claim that a simple type of cross-situational learning is
powerful enough to match observed rates of learning,
even in quite ambiguous situations. However, a limitation in some of these analyses is their reliance on an unrealistic assumption that the learner only hears a word in
situations containing the intended referent. This study
analyzed a more general type of cross-situational learning based on the relative frequency of word-object pairs,
and found it to be slower than the simple mechanism
analyzed in prior work. We then analytically explored
whether relative-frequency learning can be improved by
incorporating the mutual exclusivity (ME) principle–
an assumption that words map to objects 1-to-1. Our
analyses show that with a certain type of correlation in
word-to-word relationship, ME makes relative frequency
learning as efficient as fast-mapping, which can learn a
word in one exposure.
Keywords: Word learning; Cross-situational learning
models; Mutual exclusivity; Language acquisition

Introduction
To a new learner of a language with a completely
unknown word-referent mapping system, determining
which words refer to which referents in any given scene
may seem impossible on the face of it, since a word could
refer not only to an object (e.g., ‘apple’), but to a class
of objects (e.g., ‘fruit’), a property (‘red’), or any one of
endless possible combinations or configurations of features in the scene–an unconstrained problem of logical
induction (Quine, 1960). In contrast to this theoretical
observation about referential uncertainty, children are
thought of as efficient learners, and in fact most human
children do learn to understand and use an impressive
number of words within the first years of life, achieving a vocabulary of roughly 60,000 by 18 years of age
(Bloom, 2000). Developmental researchers have theorized that children use a variety of lexical constraints
to limit the number of possible mappings they consider,
and a number of empirical studies support these claims
(Clark, 1987; Markman, 1990, 1992; Golinkoff, HirshPasek, Bailey, & Wegner, 1992). One lexical constraint,
used here as in past theoretical accounts–and supported
by empirical developmental data, is that learners are biased to map words to entire objects, rather than to a
feature of an object, or a group/configuration of objects
(Markman, 1990).

Beyond lexical constraints that reduce the number of
hypothesis meanings considered for a given word in a
given situation, another possible remedy for the contradiction between the difficulty of the unconstrained inductive account of word learning and the ease of the
observed process is that learners also reduce uncertainty in the word-object map by statistical inference
over time, based on observing word-object pairs across
multiple situations. Cross-situational learning (Pinker,
1984; Akhtar & Montague, 1999; Siskind, 1996) is a
type of learning based on this idea, which has been analyzed both empirically and theoretically over decades
(Yu, 2008; Blythe, Smith, & Smith, 2010). Blythe et al.
(2010) formally quantified the effect of a type of crosssituational learning in terms of the rate of vocabulary
growth. More recent studies (Blythe, Smith, & Smith,
2016; Vogt, 2012) further showed that this type of crosssituational learning can be considerably slowed down for
certain types of word co-occurrence distributions, including power-law distributions in which most words are seen
relatively rarely, which describe word frequency distribution in natural languages (Zipf, 1949).
These theoretical analyses are still quite limited in
their generality. The class of cross-situational learning
analyzed in these past studies is called eliminative learning. In this scheme, when a learner is exposed to a set
of referents, a correct word is spoken–never is a word
spoken when its intended referent is not present. In this
case, the learner can safely “eliminate” the possibility
of word A being associated to the object B, if he or
she experiences one episode that the word A is spoken
without the object B. As this special assumption does
not generally hold in real-world learning, the estimates
on the speed of cross-situational learning in past studies give only an optimistic upper bound for its learning
efficiency.
In this study, we consider a more general type of crosssituational learning, called relative frequency learning,
of which eliminative learning is a special case. In the
relative frequency learning scheme, it is assumed that
a language system encodes the word-object pair with
frequency higher than the other candidate pairs as the
correct one, and the learner infers such relatively more

2205

frequent word-object pairs from the sample. Under this
assumption, the eliminative learning scheme is identified
with the special case of seeing the correct word-object
pair with probability 1. In general, however, the eliminative learning rule cannot apply (or will mislead the
learner if it is forced to apply) in word learning of a
relative-frequency language system.
Therefore, relative frequency learning is generally
slower than the eliminative learning. Thus, the main
problem considered in this study is what plausible factor might make this type of learning more efficient – and
can it be made efficient enough to be a realistic account
for children’s word learning? Specifically, we analyze the
beneficial effect of learners applying a general principle
of mutual exclusivity (ME), an assumption of a wordobject regularity requiring that no two objects are associated to one word. Application of a ME principle has long
been theorized to be a constraint that can speed children’s word learning (Markman & Wachtel, 1988), and
has found empirical support in both children (Halberda,
2003) and adults (Yurovsky & Yu, 2008; Kachergis, Yu,
& Shiffrin, 2012). We then consider a word-word statistical relationship in which a group of distractor objects
tend to co-occur with a word and thus slow learning.
In the following, we first outline the theoretical framework in which we provide a series of analyses of relative
frequency learning. Second, we evaluate the basic learning efficiency in this scheme. Then we extend this evaluation of learning efficiency to multiple scenarios with
different word-to-word statistical relationships.

Relative-frequency learning
Basic framework
In this study, we consider the following word learning
scenario. The learner is exposed to multiple words and
objects in each situation. In each situation, the learner
does not know which word refers to which object, and
the correct word-object mapping can only be inferred
by integrating evidence across observations of multiple
situations. Let W = {1, . . . , n} be a set of words and
O = {1, . . . , m} a set of objects (or referents) which
appear in these situations. In this study, we consider
a language structure with one-to-one word-object mapping, in which n = m and the word i refers to object
i. This is a quite strong assumption, which may not be
considered entirely realistic as it is. It offers, however, a
first approximation upon which we can base the analysis
and later extend it.
Here, we consider a particular word learning scheme,
called relative frequency learning, in which each object’s
to-be-associated (i.e., ‘correct’) word is spoken in its
presence with greater frequency than any other word.
This is a code in the sense of information theory – the
signal, the correct word-object mapping, is encoded in
the statistical regularity in observation across situations

(channel), and the learner decodes (infers) the correct
word-object map using the underlying regularity: the
correct word-object pair is the most frequent among the
others.
There are theoretical analyses of a special case of this
relative frequency learning, in which the correct word
is spoken only in the presence of the corresponding object (i.e., p(object|word) = 1). In this special case, the
learner can use not only the knowledge that the correct
pair is more frequent, but also the quite strong rule that
any object which does not appear with a spoken word
cannot be the intended referent of that word. Thus, this
learning scheme, which eliminates any word-object pair
with probability less than 1 is called eliminative learning
(Blythe et al., 2010). In this study, beyond this special
case, we analyze a more general case of language and
learning coded on the basis of relative frequency.

Formulation
Denote the frequency of object o given word w by f (o |
w). Then, suppose the learner (decoder) declares that
the object o ∈ O is the referent of the word w ∈ W with
probability
ef (o|w)
.
f (o|w)
o∈{O} e

P (o | w) = P

In this scheme, the error, wrong declaration of the
correct object, for word w with the number of observed
situations n is proportional to (n, w) :=
P
f (o|w)−f (w|w)
e
. The sum of the errors for all words
o6=w
P
(n, w) := w∈W (n, w) is an exponential function of
the number of situations. Let us denote the rate of
the exponential function as R, and thus (n) = e−Rn .
For aPcode with rate R encoding less than eRn signals,
limn w∈W P (o | w) = 1, and thus it is said to be learnable (reachable in information-theoretic terminology). If
the rate satisfies (n) = e−Rn < e−Cn for any code, the
constant C is said to be the capacity of this channel in
information-theoretic terms (Shannon, 1948). The rate,
or the exponent coefficient of the error function, is a fundamental characteristic of the language-learning system
when viewed as a signal transmitting process.

Efficiency
In the relative frequency learning scheme, the object o
with the second largest probability given the word w,
pw|w > po|w > po0 |w for o0 6= o, w, is a key parameter
giving the asymptotic time to learn the word w. With
objects with the largest and second largest probability,
the sample frequency can be written as follows. Let p =
1 − p. Specifically, consider that the sample frequency
fnow = fn (o|w) follows the binomial distribution


n
now
P (fnow |n, pow ) =
pfnow · pn−f
ow
fnow ow

2206

with probability pow .
Given this, the error probability in learning is characterized as follows. The probability for the word w to
be associated with the object o is proportional to efnow .
For a sufficiently large n, the difference between the two
random variables asymptotically approaches

Randomly distributed distractors

efnow −fno0 w
= C,
n→∞ en∆o,o0 |w
lim

ow −po0 w
where ∆o,o0 |w := pow p̄pow
+po0 w p̄o0 w . If there are m objects with the second largest probability pow > q >
maxo0 6=w, po0 w for the word w, the error probability is

−n

pow −p 0
o w

1 − P (w|w) → Cme pow p̄ow +po0 w p̄o0 w . Thus, the rate of
the relative-frequency code is R = minw ∆w|w where
∆o|w :=

corresponding object can be uniquely identified, which
is effectively the same as fast mapping. Thus, the worstcase learning time approaches that of relative frequency
learning, and the best-case learning time approaches that
of fast mapping, as the number of words is sufficiently
large.

pow − maxo0 6=o po0 w
.
pow pow + maxo0 6=o po0 w maxo0 6=o po0 w

This analysis implies that the word-object pair with the
smallest margin to second largest probability decides the
learning rate in the relative frequency code.

Incorporating mutual exclusivity (ME)
In the above analysis of the relative frequency code,
the lexical constraint of one-to-one word-object mapping
is not taken into consideration in the learning process.
However, if the learner exploits the fact that no two objects are associated with the same word, namely correct
word-object pairs are mutually exclusive, the learning is
expected to be more efficient than the alternative without the knowledge. Let us call this ME learning. The
difference in the rate of learning assuming ME and general relative frequency would be the effect of introducing
a ME constraint in cross-situational learning.
With ME, the learner can exclude object o when learning word w, if the object o is likely to be associated
with some other word w0 6= w. Thus, the learning order of the words has considerable impact in learning under ME. As the previous analysis shows that the second most probable objects for word w is the key factor giving the learning rate, let us call them distractors
against the word w, and denote the set of distractors by
D(w) := {w0 | maxo6=w fo|w = fw0 |w }.

Best- and worst-case scenarios
Here let us analyze ME learning under a simplification
that the learning time for the words with no distractor
is T0 and that for the words with one more distractors
is T1 . The former case with no distractor is said to be
fast mapping, in which a particular word-object pair is
presented alone in a situation, and the learner learns
the pair in a single shot (Carey & Bartlett, 1978). The
latter case is analyzed in the previous section in case of
the relative frequency learning. In this case, if all the
distractors has been eliminated, by the effect of ME, the

Random learning order Consider the case that each
word is learned in a serial order and each has k distractors. Furthermore suppose that the learning order is
a random permutation, namely any order is uniformly
sampled. Figure 1 shows a schematic co-occurrence matrix of the five such word-object pairs (filled markers)
with k = 2 randomly distributed distractors (open markers) for each pair. In this case, one expects that one word
is likely to be learned after the k distractors with probability 1/(k + 1). This is exactly true, if the number of
words n approaches to infinitely large. Therefore, the
sum of expected learning time for all the words is


1
k
T1 +
T0 .
(1)
T =n
k+1
k+1
Thus, when the learning order is a random permutation, the expected learning time is only the factor of
1
k+1 shorter than the original time nT1 at shortest.

Word
“Circle”
●
“Triangle”
“Square”
○
“Star”
○
“Diamond”

Objects
△
☆
▲ □
◇
△ ■
★ ◇
△ □
◆

#D
2
2
2
2
2

Figure 1: A schematic word-object co-occurrence matrix
in the case with random learning order and randomly
distributed distractors.

Shared distractors
Best and worst learning order Let us consider the
best and worst case by manipulating which words the
k distractors are associated. In one of the best cases,
every word shares the same set D of k distractors. Figure 2 shows a schematic co-occurrence matrix of the five
such word-object pairs (filled markers), and each pair
has k = 2 distractors (open markers) and most of words
share the same two distractors. In this case, the shortest learning time is obtained by a sequence of learned
words in which the k words with the k distractors as
their correct objects first (required about T1 time each)
and the others later (required T0 time each). In the example (Figure 2), one of the best order is to learn the
word “Circle” and “Triangle” at the first two rows in the

2207

matrix, and then learn the other words. In this case, the
total learning time is
T = kT1 + (n − k)T0 .
As the number of words n gets larger with a constant k,
the learning time approaches to that of the fast mapping
(T0 per word), which is the lower bound of learning time.
In one of the worst cases, on the other hand, the
longest learning time is obtained by the reversed sequence, in which the words with the k distractors as their
correct objects are learned last. In total, the longest
learning time is
T = nT1 .
As the number of words n gets larger with a constant
k, learning time approaches that of relative frequency
learning, which is the upper bound of learning time.
Random learning order Thus, this analysis with the
best and worst case scenario suggests that the learning
order of words has a large impact on learning time. However, the expected learning time with the shared distractors is, again, exactly 1/(k + 1), which is no better than
the learning time of the case with k random distractors
(Equation (1)):


1
k
T1 +
T0 .
T =n
k+1
k+1

specific class of statistical regularity in the word-word relationship. Specifically, suppose there are two groups of
words: in the one group of words, each word has no distractor, and in the other group of words, each word has
k distractors, whose referring words have no distractor
(Figure 3). Thus, the learner is exposed to a mixture of
two groups of words with and without distractors. Figure 3 shows a schematic co-occurrence matrix of such
five word-object pairs, in which each of the first group of
words (“Circle” and “Star”) has no distractors, and each
of the other group of words has two distractors whose referring words are the members of the first group.
Although this statistical regularity in word-to-word
relationships looks similar overall to the previous case
(compare Figure 2 and 3), this new case is substantially
different from the previous cases. The key observation
here is that no distractor words have any distractors
against themselves. Thus, the first group of words (potential distractors to the other group of words) would
be learned via fast mapping, and the other group would
be learned also via fast mapping after their distractors
are learned before their learning. The learning timing of
these two groups are probabilistic, but the first group of
words are expected to be learned earlier on average than
the other group.

Word
“Circle”
“Triangle”
“Square”
“Star”
“Diamond”

This analysis suggests that even systematically shared
distractors cannot improve the learning time on average,
if the learning order is uniformly at random.

Word
“Circle”
“Triangle”
“Square”
“Star”
“Diamond”

●
○
○
○
○

Objects
△ □
▲ □
△ ■
△
★
△
◆

#D
2
2
2
2
2

Objects
●
○
○
○

▲
■

☆
☆
★
☆

◆

#D
0
2
2
0
2

Figure 3: A schematic word-object co-occurrence matrix
in the case with the two groups of words. Each of the
first group of words (“Circle” and “Star”) has no distractors, and each of the second group of words (“Triangle”,
“Square” and “Diamond”) has k = 2 distractors, whose
referring words (“Circle” and “Star”) has no distractors.

Figure 2: A schematic word-object co-occurrence matrix in the case with random learning order and k = 2
distractors shared by all the words systematically.

Efficiency analysis
Specifically, suppose that each word in the group with
distractors is learned at the time step t by the probability

Correlation in word-to-word relationship

pt = (qt + qt p)pt−1 ,

Mixture of two groups of words
As the previous analysis suggests that the relative frequency learning of a one-to-one word-object map in the
cross-situational setting is as slow as independent learning even by incorporating ME. This result is largely due
to the statistical structure of the word-word relationship
– in the previous analysis, each word has k other random words as distractors. In this section, we consider a

where p is the probability to learn this word with distractors at each step, and qt is the probability to learn
it without distractor at step t, or is said the probability
for the
learning at step t to be fast mapping. By setP∞
ting t=1 (1 − p)pt−1 t = T1 and qt = 0 for any t, this
learning time with k > 0 distractors is identified with
the previous analysis.

2208

Suppose that there are n0 words without distractors,
and t0 < t samples out of the all t − 1 samples are drawn
from this group of words with equal probability. Then,
according to Hidaka (2014), as n0 → ∞, the probability
to learn the m words of this group with the t0 samples
asymptotically approaches to the binomial distribution
n0  
X
n0 m n0 −m
r rt
m t
m=0

where rt := 1 − (1 − 1/n0 )t0 . If each word in the group
with distractors is associated to k distractive words uniformly at random, the fast-mapping probability is
qt =

   
n0  
X
n0 m n0 −m m
n0
rt rt
/
.
m
k
k
m=0

As the hypergeometric distribution1 approaches the binomial distribution as n0 → ∞, we obtain
m−k
       k 
k
m
n0
m
k
→ 0.
1−
/
−
n0
n0
k
k
k
Using these asymptotic distributions for n0 → ∞, we
obtain the binomial distribution

k 
n0 −k
n0 !
k
k
qt →
rt
1 − rt
.
k!(n0 − k)!
n0
n0
With further transform for a sufficiently large n0 , we
obtain the fast-mapping probability to be

qt ≈

t0
n0

k
.

This expression thus implies that the probability qt of
learning via fast mapping with k distractors approaches
1, if the sample of the words without distractors t0 is
comparable to the number of such words n0 .

Implications
Suppose the number of words without distractors is n0 =
γn with a certain constant 0 < γ < 1, and the number of
samples t0 = γt. In this case, as t0 /n0 = t/n, after the
point when the number of samples is comparable with
the number of words, this learning is sufficiently treated
as the fast mapping. Thus, the learning time of a word
with k distractors asymptotically approaches the speed
of fast-mapping after some constant number of samples
for each word. In other words, in the long run, any
words would be considered learned in the fast-mapping
manner, if any distractor word has no distractors against
itself.
1

Gives the probability of k successes in n draws, from a
population of size N with exactly K successes. Thus, similar
to the binomial distribution, but drawing without replacement.

This analytic implication is striking in that crosssituational learning on the basis of relative frequency,
which itself is as slow as independent learning with a
random word-word relationship, can become as efficient
as fast-mapping, up to a constant time per word. At the
very least, this analysis implies that the nature of the
word-to-word relationships is a critical factor in determining the efficiency of relative-frequency based crosssituational learning.

Discussion
In this paper, we studied cross-situational word learning from a theoretical perspective as the formation of a
one-to-one word-object map. Our formulation of crosssituational learning is defined as learning on the basis of
the relative frequency of objects for each word, which
is a more realistic alternative model than eliminative
learning, a model analyzed in past studies (Blythe et
al., 2010, 2016) that is anyhow a special case of relative frequency learning. Thus, our analysis of relative
frequency learning is both more general and more realistic than previously-proposed frameworks. Our analysis shows that its total learning time depends on the
minimal difference between the most frequent and the
second-most frequent objects among all the words, and
that it is quite slow.
Given that relative frequency learning alone is inefficient, we next analyzed the case when the learner applies
the lexical constraint that no two referents are associated
to a single word. This principle of mutual exclusivity
(ME) has been hypothesized to be an important means
of reducing ambiguity for children learning language
(Markman & Wachtel, 1988; Markman, 1990, 1992), and
empirical work has found that both children (Golinkoff et
al., 1992; Halberda, 2003; Markman, Wasow, & Hansen,
2003) and adults in cross-situational word learning experiments (Yurovsky & Yu, 2008; Kachergis et al., 2012)
show a preference for learning mappings consistent with
ME. Using ME, a word can be learned via fast mapping
(learned on its first sample), if all the distracting words
appearing with it are already learned. However, the effect of ME on the average learning time is quite limited
– the same (up to a constant multiplier) as that of independent relative frequency learning, if the distractors
for each word are distributed uniformly. In summary,
this analysis suggests that the order in which words are
learned is related to the statistical nature of the wordto-word relationship–i.e., the structure among the cooccurring distractors.
Therefore, we finally analyzed the case in which a set
of words is composed of two word groups: in one group,
each word has no distractors, and in the other group
each word has k distractors, which are the words without any distractors. Here, it is not just a mixture of
two types of words, but the distracting words have no

2209

distractors to themselves, and thus they are likely to
be learned earlier than the other group. Thus, in this
schematic word structure, the expected learning order is
correlated to the number of distractors for the group of
words. We hypothesize that, with this statistical regularity, relative frequency learning can be as efficient
as learning via fast-mapping, which has been observed
in young children (Mervis & Bertrand, 1994; GershkoffStowe & Hahn, 2007). Our analysis suggests that this
hypothesis is supported: the learning time is comparable
with that of fast mapping learning up to a constant number of samples per word, when a certain ratio of words
has no distractors. We expect that this analytic result
can be extended to a more general case, such that there
are multiple groups with different numbers of distractors
up to k and a group of words with k distractors that has
no distractors which have k or more distractors against
themselves.
In summary, we have analyzed a more general and
more realistic class of word learning models, relative frequency learning. Although we showed that learning in
this more general framework can be quite slow, we then
examined learning under assumptions of mutual exclusivity and word-to-word correlations that might more
closely approximate learning situations in the natural
language environment. By modifying situations to include realistic variants of these two factors, we showed
that learning a full-sized vocabulary could be accomplished on a realistic timescale. Although this work is
preliminary, the analytical techniques employed here can
be applied to other, yet more realistic cross-situational
learning schemes, incorporating better approximations
of the language environment, of the problem faced by
the learner, and of the biases employed by the learner.

Acknowledgments
This study is supported by the JSPS KAKENHI Grantin-Aid for Young Scientists JP 16H05860.

References
Akhtar, N., & Montague, L. (1999). Early lexical acquisition: the role of cross–situational learning. First
Language, 19 , 34–358.
Bloom, P. (2000). How children learn the meaning of
words. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Blythe, R. A., Smith, A. D. M., & Smith, K. (2016).
Word learning under infinite uncertainty. Cognition,
151 , 18–27.
Blythe, R. A., Smith, K., & Smith, A. D. M. (2010).
Learning times for large lexicons through crosssituational learning. Cognitive Science, 34 (4), 620–
642.
Carey, S., & Bartlett, E. (1978). Acquiring a single new
word. Papers and Report on Child Language Development, 15 , 17–29.
Clark, E. V. (1987). The principle of contrast: A constraint on language acquisition. In B. MacWhinney

(Ed.), Mechanisms of language acquisition. Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Gershkoff-Stowe, L., & Hahn, E. R. (2007). Fast mapping skills in the developing lexicon. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research, 50 , 682–697.
Golinkoff, R. M., Hirsh-Pasek, K., Bailey, L. M., & Wegner, N. R. (1992). Young children and adults use
lexical principles to learn new nouns. Developmental
Psychology, 28 (1), 99–108.
Halberda, J. (2003). The development of a word-learning
strategy. Cognition, 87 (1), B23–B34.
Hidaka, S. (2014). General type token distribution.
Biometrika, 101 (4), 999–1002.
Kachergis, G., Yu, C., & Shiffrin, R. M. (2012). An associative model of adaptive inference for learning word–
referent mappings. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review ,
19 (2), 317–324.
Markman, E. M. (1990). Constraints children place on
word meanings. Cognitive Science, 14 , 57-77.
Markman, E. M. (1992). Constraints on word learning:
Speculations about their nature, origins and domain
specificity. In M. R. Gunnar & M. P. Maratsos (Eds.),
Modularity and constraints in language and cognition:
The minnesota symposium on child psychology (pp.
59–101). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Markman, E. M., & Wachtel, G. F. (1988). Children’s
use of mutual exclusivity to constrain the meanings of
words. Cognitive Psychology, 20 , 121–157.
Markman, E. M., Wasow, J. L., & Hansen, M. B. (2003).
Use of the mutual exclusivity assumption by young
word learners. Cognitive Psychology, 47 (3), 241–275.
Mervis, C. B., & Bertrand, J. (1994). Acquisition of the
novel name - nameless category (n3c) principle. Child
Development, 65 , 1646-1662.
Pinker, S. (1984). Learnability and cognition. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Quine, W. V. O. (1960). Word and object. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Shannon, C. E. (1948). A mathematical theory of communication. Bell System Tech. Journal , 27 , 379–423.
Siskind, J. M. (1996). A computational study of crosssituational techniques for learning word-to-meaning
mappings. Cognition, 61 , 39–91.
Vogt, P. P. (2012). Exploring the robustness of crosssituational learning under Zipfian distributions. Cognitive Science, 36 (4), 726–739.
Yu, C. (2008). A statistical associative account of vocabulary growth in early word learning. Language Learning and Development, 4 (1), 32–62.
Yurovsky, D., & Yu, C. (2008). Mutual exclusivity in
cross-situational statistical learning. In Proc. of cogsci
30. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Zipf, G. (1949). Human behavior and the principle of
least effort. Cambridge, MA: Addison-Wesley.

2210

