Mental Representations and Computational Modeling of Context-Specific Human
Norm Systems
Vasanth Sarathy (vasanth.sarathy@tufts.edu) and Matthias Scheutz (matthias.scheutz@tufts.edu)
Department of Computer Science, Tufts University, Medford, MA, USA

Yoed Kenett (yoedkenett@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA

Mowafak M. Allaham (mallah5@uic.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA

Joseph L. Austerweil (austerweil@wisc.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Wisconson, Madison, WI, USA

Bertram F. Malle (bfmalle@brown.edu)
Department of Cognitive, Linguistic, and Psychological Sciences, Brown University, Providence, RI, USA
Abstract
Human behavior is frequently guided by social and moral
norms; in fact, no societies, no social groups could exist without norms. However, there are few cognitive science approaches to this central phenomenon of norms. While there
has been some progress in developing formal representations
of norm systems (e.g., deontological approaches), we do not
yet know basic properties of human norms: how they are
represented, activated, and learned. Further, what computational models can capture these properties, and what algorithms could learn them? In this paper we describe initial experiments on human norm representations in which the context
specificity of norms features prominently. We then provide a
formal representation of norms using Dempster-Shafer Theory
that allows a machine learning algorithm to learn norms under uncertainty from these human data, while preserving their
context specificity.
Keywords: social cognition, moral psychology, computational modeling, machine learning

Introduction and Motivation
Someone’s cell phone begins to ring in the library. The person
quickly answers it by whispering “hold on,” then leaves the
library and takes the call in a normal voice outside. The person understands that taking a phone call in the library is not
socially acceptable, though briefly whispering is. Somehow,
the situation activated a set of norms in this person’s mind,
including: “when someone calls you, you should answer the
phone”; “when in a library, you must not talk on the phone”;
“when in a library, you may briefly whisper.”
Humans living in social communities function more effectively and peacefully when their actions are guided by
a shared set of norms (Bicchieri, 2006; Ullmann-Margalit,
1977). The ability to represent and follow norms has many
advantages: Norm-consistent actions increase multi-party coordination and cooperation and thus benefit the community
as a whole. Norms also simplify people’s action selection
and standardize behaviors across time and generations. And
norm-consistent actions are more predictable and understandable (Malle, Scheutz, & Austerweil, 2017).

But how does the human mind represent norms, and how
are they activated and learned? Surprisingly, there are few
cognitive science approaches to the central phenomenon of
norms. Logical and specifically deontological approaches
have been proposed to formally represent a system of norms
(Bringsjord, Arkoudas, & Bello, 2006; Scheutz & Malle,
2014; Pereira & Saptawijaya, 2009; Beller, 2010). These are
important starting points, but their formalizations do not necessarily correspond to how norms are represented in the human mind. By contrast, a cognitive science approach would
aim at an account of how norms are cognitively represented,
how they are activated in relevant situations, and how they
are learned in the first place. Here we take a first step toward such an account, following a recent theoretical proposal (Malle et al., 2017). We introduce a basic formal representation of norms that allows us to examine the mentioned
cognitive properties of norms (representation, activation, and
learning), and we ask what computational models can capture
these properties, and what algorithms could learn norms.
Our paper has three main parts. In the first, we present
a novel belief-theoretic norm representation format that explicitly captures the context-specificity of norms and incorporates uncertainty associated with norm representations, using
Dempster-Shafer Theory (Shafer, 1976). In the second part,
we introduce experimental data on human norm representation and activation that underscore the context-specificity of
norms and community members’ strong but imperfect agreement (uncertainty) over norm applications. In the third part
we use our formal norm representation to ask how such imperfect norms systems can be learned by a computational algorithm that honors several of the critical features of norms,
including their context specificity and uncertainty.

Part 1: A Representation Format for Norms
We begin by briefly outlining our norm representation format in first-order logic and provide some intuitions as to how
context and uncertainty are accounted for in the format. The

1035

purpose is to introduce some terminology and a minimal degree of formalism in the proposed approach, which will later
be useful in developing an algorithm that can learn norms.
Consider a first-order alphabet L , in which we have all the
standard symbols (variables, predicates, functors) and logical
connectives. In a deontic alphabet, we further include O, F, P
that denote modal operators (generally, D) for obligatory, forbidden and permissible, respectively. In this alphabet, we define a norm, as follows:
Definition 1 (Norm). A norm is an expression of the form:

N := C1 , . . . ,Cn =⇒ (¬)D(A1 , . . . , Am ),
where C represents context conditions and A represents actions or states. The norm expression states that when the contextual atoms Ci are true then the Actions or States A j are
either obligatory, forbidden or permissible, or their negation.
This type of norm definition follows an approach to normative reasoning and norm formalism that some of us have
taken previously (Malle et al., 2017; Bringsjord et al., 2006;
Scheutz & Malle, 2014).
In this paper, we expand the above representation format
by explicitly accounting for uncertainty of a norm as follows:
Definition 2 (Belief-Theoretic Norm).
norm is an expression of the form:

N := [α, β] :: C1 , . . . ,Cn =⇒ (¬)D(A1 , . . . , Am ),
where [α, β] represents a Dempster-Shafer uncertainty interval, with 0 ≤ α ≤ β ≤ 1.

N1 := [0.9, 1] :: in(library, X) =⇒ O state(X, quiet)
N2 := [0.8, 0.95] :: in(library, X) =⇒ P action(X, reading)
N3 := [0.9, 1] :: in(library, X) =⇒ F action(X, yelling)
N4 := [0, 0.3] :: in(library, X) =⇒ O action(X,talking)
N5 := [0.3, 0.6] :: in(library, X) =⇒ F action(X,talking)
The norms in this example have intuitive semantics.
They generally state that when agent X is in the library (i.e., in(library, X)), then the norm is activated
and the agent is obligated to enter a certain state (e.g.,
state(X, quiet)) or prohibited from performing a certain action (e.g., action(X,talking). The location of the center of
the uncertainty interval generally suggests the degree of truth
of the norm applying and the width of the interval generally
suggests the level of support or evidence for that norm. So
norms N1 , N2 , and N3 have tight uncertainty intervals close
to 1 indicating a confident support for their truth. Norm N4
states that the action of “talking” is obligatory in libraries. Although the uncertainty interval for this norm is tight, the center is closer to zero indicating confident support for the falsity

Definition 3 (Norm Frame). A norm frame NkΘ is a set of k
norms, k > 0, in which every norm has the same set of context predicates and corresponds to the same deontic operator.
Thus, in Example 1, norms N3 and N5 would constitute a
norm frame.
We define a norm frame in this way because it allows for
cognitive modeling in a situated manner—that is, reasoning
about behavior relevant to a specific situation. This contextspecificity provides a convenient constraint that can help simplify computation and better capture human norm representations, as introduced next.

A belief-theoretic

Example 1 Consider an example of an agent reasoning
about actions it can perform or states it can enter in a library. We can represent this scenario as a Belief-Theoretic
Norm System, T , as follows:

of the norm. Finally, in rule N5 the question of whether talking is forbidden in a library may be more uncertain, generating a wider interval centered close to 0.5, indicating support
for both truth and falsity, but a general lack of confidence in
the evidence.1
A belief-theoretic norm system of this form allows the separation of evidence from the norms themselves. The evidence
may come in different forms across different modalities and
from different sources. The norm system, however, displays
the agent’s current level of belief about a set of norms that are
influenced by the evidence.
In any given situation, the agent may not be reasoning with
every norm in a norm system. Instead, the agent may consider
a subset of the system, perhaps including only norms that are
applicable to the current situation. We capture this intuition
in a norm frame, defined below.

Part 2: Norm Representation and Activation in
Human Data
We are currently engaged in an empirical research program
that tests a number of novel hypotheses about the cognitive
properties of norms (Malle et al., 2017). Here we summarize two experiments that illustrate some of these properties
and provide the learning data for the norm learning algorithm
we introduce in Part 3. In the first experiment, participants
generated norms relevant to a variety of contexts; in the second experiment, participants detected norms relevant to those
contexts.

Methodology
In the generation experiment (Kenett, Allaham, Austerweil,
& Malle, 2016), participants (n = 100 recruited from Amazon Mechanical Turk, AMT) inspected four pictures, one at
a time, that depicted an everyday scene (e.g., library, jogging path; see Figure 1 for examples). While inspecting
each picture, they had 60 seconds to type as many actions as
came to mind that one is “allowed” to perform in this scene
1 The use of deontic logic for normative reasoning is the subject
of active debate. Although further discussion of this debate is outside the scope of this paper, we note that our proposed approach does
not require using deontic operators. We can still reason about norms
and learn them using the schema described in Definitions 2 and 3.
We would simply need to replace the deontic operators and modify
the predicates slightly. Norm N5 in example 1 would become:
N5 := [0.3, 0.6] :: in(library, X) =⇒ forbidden(X,talking)

1036

(Permissions), or is “not allowed” to perform (Prohibitions),
or is ”supposed” to perform (Prescriptions). This betweensubjects manipulation of norm type was constant across pictures so that each participant answered the same question
(e.g., “What are you permitted to do here?”) for all four pictures they encountered.

Table 1: Eliciting Probes for Three Norm Types
Norm Type
Permission
Prohibition
Prescription

Probe formulations
Are you allowed to do this here?
Are you permitted to do this here?
Are you not allowed to do this here?
Are you forbidden to do this here?
Are you supposed to do this here?
Should you do this here?

seven most frequently generated actions for the given scene
and norm type in the above generation experiment—for example, the seven actions most frequently mentioned to be permitted in the library. Imported actions were comprised of
top-seven actions generated for other scenes (but under the
same norm type). Thus, imported actions were still frequent
responses to the same norm probe, but in different contexts.2
Table 2 provides an illustration of this selection process.
Table 2: Origin of Selected Actions for Library Scene
Figure 1: Four sample scene pictures used to elicit norms
To increase generalizability at the stimulus level, the total
number of scenes used in the experiment was in fact eight,
four that previous participants had tended to describe as locations (e.g., library, cave), and four that they had tended
to describe as activities (e.g., jogging outdoors, serving in a
restaurant). Each participant was randomly assigned to receive either the “location” set or the “activity” set. Item set
made no difference in the results.
The resulting verbal responses were lightly cleaned for
spelling and grammatical errors and responses identical in
meaning were assigned the same response code, using a conservative criterion so that variants such as “listening” and “listening to music” were counted as distinct. The resulting data
structures were then analyzed for consensus (i.e., how many
people generated a given response for a given scene) and context distinctiveness (i.e., whether a response generated for one
scene was also generated in a different scene).
In the detection experiment, we presented participants (n
= 360 recruited from AMT) with the same pictures, four per
participant. Along with each picture, we presented 14 actions
(randomly ordered, one at a time) that a person might perform
in this context. Any given participant’s task was the same for
each of their four pictures: to consider the particular scene
and judge whether each of the 14 actions is either permitted,
or prescribed, or prohibited. This norm type factor was again
a between-subjects manipulation and hence constant across
pictures. In addition, to increase generalizability, we used
two different formulations for each norm type, summarized
in Table 1. Formulation made no difference in the results.
The 14 actions assigned to a given scene under a given
norm type (e.g., Library/permitted) consisted of seven “local” and seven “imported” actions. Local actions were the

Action
Local, permitted
reading
studying
sitting
checking out a book
learning
being quiet
using computers
Imported, permitted
eating
walking
listening
filling boxes
washing hands
running
talking

Origin
from top 7 of Library
from top 7 of Library
from top 7 of Library
from top 7 of Library
from top 7 of Library
from top 7 of Library
from top 7 of Library
from top 7 of Beach
from top 7 of Cave
from top 7 of Boardroom
from top 7 of Harvesting
from top 7 of Public Bathroom
from top 7 of Jogging
from top 7 of Restaurant

Experimental Results
We begin by highlighting three findings from the generation
experiment.3 First, even though people were entirely unconstrained in their norm-guided actions, they showed a great
deal of consensus on the most central norms for each scenario. Table 3 displays (in column Consensus) the seven most
frequently mentioned permission norms in two representative
scenarios, Library and Jogging, with consensus computed as
the percentage of participants who mentioned the particular
2 We ensured that the imported actions were physically plausible
in the given scene/context.
3 We focus here on permissions. Prescriptions and prohibitions
show very similar patterns overall, but prohibitions differ from the
other two norm types in interesting ways (e.g., less consensus,
slower activation) that will be treated in a separate investigation.

1037

action as permitted in the scenario. (The patterns are consistent across other scenarios.) Second, the most consensual
norms are mentioned early on; in other words, what comes to
mind first is likely to be a consensual norm. Table 3 shows (in
column Position) the average rank position (1 = first, 2 = second, etc.) at which each action was generated, whereby the
expected position under a random distribution would be 4.2
for Library and 4.6 for Jogging. Third, the norms generated
for the eight scenarios showed remarkable context specificity.
Not only do the two illustrated scenes have no norm in common among their top seven, but of the 56 permitted actions
that were mentioned in the top-7 in each of the 8 scenes, only
5 appeared in more than one scene.

photographs, and people show high agreement in explicitly
recounting these norms (generation experiment). In a more
implicit setup (detection experiment), people are fast and almost unanimous in affirming the most important norms of a
given context and differentiate them well from norms originating from a different context. Thus, both explicit and implicit judgments show substantial context sensitivity. If these
are some of the properties of human social and moral norms,
how can they possibly be learned, by humans and machines?

Part 3: Learning Norms
How Do People Learn Norms?

Table 3: Permission Norms for Library and Jogging Scenes
in the Norm Generation Experiment
Library
Permitted Action
reading
studying
sitting
checking out books
using computers
learning
being quiet
Jogging
walking
running
jogging
talking
listening to music
biking
looking at birds

Consensus
84%
68%
47%
47%
32%
32%
32%

Position
2.1
1.8
3.1
4.4
5.3
6.0
7.5

87%
87%
53%
53%
33%
27%
27%

1.4
1.9
4.8
5.1
4.3
4.7
6.2

Two main results stand out from the detection experiment.
First, people showed very high consensus in affirming the
permissibility of the seven local actions for their respective
scenes. For both Library and Jogging, this rate was 99%;
and across all scenes, the number was 97.2%. That is, even
though some of these local actions were actively generated
as “permissible” by only a third or half of previous participants (see Table 3), when directly confronted with these actions, people almost uniformly recognized their permissibility. (Moreover, this recognition was fast, taking only about
1100 ms on average.)
Second, participants clearly distinguished between the local and the imported actions, accepting the latter as permissible at a significantly lower rate. For Library, this rate was
43%; for Jogging, it was 75%; and across all scenes, it was
66.1% (all statistical comparisons to local actions p < .001,
signal detection discrimination parameter d’ = 1.49). That is,
for a given context on average, 34% of presented actions were
judged to be not permitted even though they were explicitly
deemed permissible in other contexts.
These results suggest that norms can be activated by static

In learning social and moral norms, people deal with multiple different norm types (permissions, prescriptions, prohibitions), using many different learning mechanisms, and taking
input from many different sources. Here we focus on the process of learning permission norms from simple observation,
using responses from a sample of community members described earlier in the detection experiment. Our main goal is
to put our proposed computational framework to a test. In the
future we will develop further applications (e.g., learning of
obligations or learning from instruction)
Consider a person who has never spent time in a library.
Upon entering one for the first time, he observes several people reading, studying, and a few whispering. Some sit at
computers, one is eating while sitting in an armchair, although there is a sign that says ”No food or drink in the library.” Our observer also sees several people at the check-out
counter, subsequently exiting the library, where another sign
says ”Don’t forget to check out.” Briefly, a younger person
runs alongside the stacks but then sits down next to an adult.
The number of people performing each behavior, their age,
expertise, appearance, perhaps responses from others, and the
meaning and force of various physical symbols will all contribute to the speed and confidence with which our protagonist learns the norms of a library. Below we offer a data representational format that incorporates these and other properties of the norm learning process, a format that can also
accommodate partial information and unknown prior probability distributions and that can be extended to other learning
mechanisms, such as verbal instruction or trial and error.

Data Representation Format of Norm Learning
Consider a set S = {s1 , . . . , sn } of n evidence sources. For example, an evidence source si could be a student in the library,
the librarian, or a sign at the entrance. To simplify, we are
interested in learning about a norm frame NkΘ comprising k
norms (out of a larger possible set) that all share the same deontic type (here, permissions) and the same general context
precondition (here, library).
Let an endorsement ei, j be the ith data source’s endorsement of the jth norm, where e ∈ {0, 1, ε}. The value ei, j is a
form of truth assignment, indicating whether the source endorses the norm to be true (1), false (0) or unknown (ε). For
example, an observation that a student is reading can be in-

1038

terpreted as showing that this student endorses the norm N2
to be true in this context, hence ei,N2 = 1. The set Φsi represents a given source’s finite set of endorsements within a
given norm frame, such that |Φsi | = k.
Informally, for a set of norms in a given context and for
a particular source, we can learn about that source’s endorsement of each norm; if we also assign a weight (e.g., reliability,
expertise) to the source, we form a data instance. Multiple
data instances (i.e., evidence from multiple sources) form a
data set. More formally:
Definition 4 (Data Instance).
A data instance d =
(NkΘ , si , Φsi , msi ) is a tuple comprising a norm frame NkΘ ,
a specific source si , a set of endorsements Φsi provided by
that source, and a mass assignment msi corresponding to the
amount of consideration or reliability placed on source si .
Definition 5 (Dataset). A dataset D is a finite set of n data
instances {d1 , . . . , dn }.
Some of the desirable properties of the proposed data
representation format are that we can accommodate various
types of sources (e.g., behavior, verbal responses, signs and
symbols), differential source reliability (mass), order effects
(updates can be tuned, if necessary, to the order of received
data), missing and imprecise information (we use ε to represent ignorance), lacking prior probability distributions (we do
not require any priors), and varying norm dependencies (e.g.,
we can capture a correlation between the prohibition to yell
and the prohibition to talk).

As noted earlier, each data instance d represents a potential arrangement of true and false values for each of the
norms in a frame. Setting aside the possibility that ei, j = ε,
each data instance thus provides a k-length string of 1s and
0s (a given participant’s response string in the detection experiment). This string is a sample of the normative endorsements in the given community. The norm learning algorithm
represents each string as a hypothesis in a set of hypotheses
(termed Frame of Discernment in Dempster-Shafer theory)
and assigns uncertainty parameters to each norm, updating
those values as it considers each new data instance. Algorithm 1, displayed below, achieves this form of norm learning from a human dataset.
Algorithm 1 getParameters(D , NkΘ )
1: D = {d1 , . . . , dn }: Dataset containing n data instances for a
2:
3:
4:
5:
6:
7:
8:
9:

Algorithmic Learning of Experimental Data
We can now apply this representation format to the detection data we introduced earlier. The detection experiment
featured, for each scene, a norm frame NkΘ with k = 14 potentially permissible actions, where half of the potential actions
had been specifically identified as permitted in this scene and
the other half as permitted in other scenes (see Table 2). Each
participant, si , indicated whether each of 14 actions was in
fact allowed in this scene, providing responses of yes (1) or
no (0) or no response (ε), thus forming a set of endorsements
Φsi , with |Φ| = 14. In this particular case we treat all sources
as equally reliable, hence carrying identical msi weights.
With these representations in hand we can formally define
the norm learning problem within our framework and set the
stage for an algorithm to analyze evidence and derive a norm
structure for a given context in a given community. We remind the reader that, according to Definition 2, any norm
(e.g., with respect to reading in a library) has an uncertainty
interval [α1 , β1 ] associated with it, which reflects the quality
and consistency of the evidence for a given norm to hold. The
learning problem thus becomes a parameter learning problem
for discovering the values of the uncertainty interval for each
norm in a norm frame:
Definition 6 (Norm Learning Problem).
For a norm
frame NkΘ and dataset D , compute the parameters
α1 , . . . , αk , β1 , . . . , βk of that norm frame.

10:
11:
12:
13:
14:
15:
16:
17:
18:
19:

norm frame
NkΘ : An unspecified norm frame containing k norms N
Initialize DS Frame Θ = {θ1 , . . . , θ2k }
m(Θ) = 1
for all d ∈ D do
for all N ∈ NkΘ do
Set learning parameters p1 and p2
Bel(N ∩d)
Bel(N |d) = Bel(N ∩d)+Pl(d\N )
Pl(N |d) =

Pl(N ∩d)
Pl(N ∩d)+Bel(d\N )

Bel(N )new = p1 · Bel(N ) prev + p2 · Bel(N |d)
Pl(N )new = p1 · Pl(N ) prev + p2 · Pl(N |d)
end for
Set frame Θ with Bel(N )new and Pl(N )new
end for
for all N ∈ NkΘ do
αN ← Bel(N )
βN ← Pl(N )
end for
return α1 , . . . , αk , β1 , . . . , βk

The algorithm iterates though each data instance in the data
set (line 6) and, per instance, through each norm in the norm
frame (line 7). For each iteration, we first set the hyperparameters p1 and p2 (line 8) that specify how much weight
the algorithm will place on previous learned knowledge (p1 )
and on each new data instance (p2 ). These hyper-parameters
are then used to compute a conditional belief and plausibility for a norm given that particular instance of data (lines
9,10). The conditional beliefs and probabilities then yield
an updated belief and plausibility for each norm (lines 11,
12). Finally, the algorithm updates the uncertainty interval
for each norm with the new belief and plausibility values.
The result is a set of belief-theoretic norms (norms accompanied with uncertainty intervals), where the width of the uncertainty interval indicates the amount of support for the norm
(which may vary, for example, as a function of number of respondents in the human data sample) and the center position
of the interval should correspond to the level of agreement in
the human respondents’ endorsement of the norm.
To put this algorithm to the test, we selected, from our detection experiment, a norm frame of 6 (out of 14) actions for

1039

the context of Library and a frame of 6 (out of 14) actions for
the context of Jogging Path. However, we wanted to capture
the context specificity of norms and constructed the frames
such that 4 actions (running, sitting, walking, and washing
hands) were the same in each frame, albeit differentially endorsed in the two contexts (e.g., running was clearly not permissible in Library but very much permissible in Jogging).
Thus, the algorithm had to track the norm value of a given
action not in general, but conditional on the specific context.
If the algorithm succeeds it should recognize which actions
people consider permissible and which ones they consider impermissible, for each of the two contexts, and even for those
actions that occur in both contexts.
Figure 2 illustrates this success. We display single runs of
the algorithm across the dataset. In the single runs, the algorithm considers each data instance (each of 30 participants’
judgments) in each context once (in a fixed order), leading to
wide uncertainty intervals at first, but narrower ones as the
number of data instances increases (up to the maximum of
30) . We also performed iterative runs (not shown), in which
the algorithm considers the dataset multiple times, each time
randomly selecting a possible order of instances, and converging on an optimal estimate of the norm endorsements in
the given community. These estimates are highly comparable
to the end points of single runs after 30 data instances.

Conclusion
In this paper we presented a formal representation of norms
using first-order logic and Dempster-Shafer theory. The representation captures the context specificity of norms that our
experimental data suggest are strongly present in humans.
Using a data representation format that incorporates several
properties of human norm representation and learning, we
then developed a novel algorithm for automatically learning
context-sensitive norms from the human data. Because the
data format is highly generalizable, norms could be learned
from different types of evidence sources in different contexts, and explicitly captures uncertainty due to variations in
the source’s reliability and the quality of the evidence. The
proposed representation and learning techniques provide a
promising platform for studying, computationally, a wide array of cognitive properties of norms.

Acknowledgment
This research was funded in part by grants from the Office of Naval Research (ONR), N00014-14-1-0144, and from
the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA),
SIMPLEX 14-46-FP-097. The opinions expressed here are
our own and do not necessarily reflect the views of ONR or
DARPA.

References

Figure 2: Single run of learning across two contexts. The
narrowing shaded regions indicate converging uncertainty
intervals as new data instances are processed. Filled circles represent the descriptive statistics from the experimental data, indicating actual norm endorsement averages among
participants—the proportion of participants who answered
yes to the question: “Is this action allowed here?” The algorithm displays convergence towards the descriptive statistics
(which it was not given), while maintaining a level of uncertainty reflecting the imperfect agreement within the data.

Beller, S. (2010). Deontic reasoning reviewed: psychological
questions, empirical findings, and current theories. Cognitive Processing, 11(2), 123–132.
Bicchieri, C. (2006). The grammar of society: The nature
and dynamics of social norms. New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press.
Bringsjord, S., Arkoudas, K., & Bello, P. (2006). Toward a
general logicist methodology for engineering ethically correct robots. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 21(4), 38–44.
Kenett, Y. N., Allaham, M. M., Austerweil, J. L., & Malle,
B. F. (2016, November). The norm fluency task: Unveiling
the properties of norm representation. (Poster.). In Poster
presented at the 57th Annual Meeting of the Psychonomic
Society, Boston, MA, November 2016.
Malle, B., Scheutz, M., & Austerweil, J. (2017). Networks
of social and moral norms in human and robot agents. In A
world with robots (pp. 3–17). Springer.
Pereira, L. M., & Saptawijaya, A. (2009). Modelling morality
with prospective logic. International Journal of Reasoningbased Intelligent Systems, 1(3-4), 209–221.
Scheutz, M., & Malle, B. F. (2014). “Think and do the
right thing”—A plea for morally competent autonomous
robots. In Ethics in science, technology and engineering,
2014 IEEE international symposium on (pp. 1–4).
Shafer, G. (1976). A Mathematical Theory of Evidence.
Princeton University Press.
Ullmann-Margalit, E. (1977). The emergence of norms. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

1040

