Metaphor Congruent Image Schemas Shape Evaluative Judgment: A
Cross-Linguistic Study of Metaphors for Economic Change
Patricia Lichtenstein (plichtenstein@ucmerced.edu)
Cognitive & Information Sciences, University of California, Merced
5200 N. Lake Road; Merced, CA 95343 USA

Ekaterina Shutova (es407@cam.ac.uk)
Computer Laboratory, University of Cambridge
15 JJ Thomson Avenue; Cambridge CB3 0FD UK
Abstract
Metaphor pervades discussions of important socio-political
topics. Recent research indicates that metaphorical language
can influence how people reason about such topics, potentially
affecting real-world decision-making. In this study, we report
on research into the effects of metaphor on evaluative judgment, another aspect of decision-making that has been less
well studied than reasoning. We use a cross-linguistic difference in the metaphors used by English and Spanish speakers
to discuss economic change to investigate how metaphorical
language affects evaluative judgment. We show that the image
schematic information inherent in the semantics of the different metaphors performs a central role in shaping this process.
Keywords: metaphor; evaluative judgment; cross-linguistic
variation; image schemas; socio-political discourse

Introduction
I say, block those metaphors. America’s economy isn’t
a stalled car, nor is it an invalid who will soon return to health if he gets a bit more rest. Our problems
are longer-term than either metaphor implies. And bad
metaphors make for bad policy. – Paul Krugman
We often use metaphorical language to express a stance toward an object or event. The metaphors invoked by Mr.
Krugman operate by applying a basic image schema from the
domain of spatial motion to the complex socio-political domain of the economy. The image schema is that of B LOCK AGE . Image schemas are dynamic representations of spatial
relationships, force relationships, and motion in space (Langacker, 2001; Talmy, 1990). They develop through experience as encoded in our daily sensory-motor activities, and
are thought to be the basis of the human conceptual system
(Lakoff & Johnson, 1999). The B LOCKAGE image schema
entails an entity whose tendency towards motion is being impeded. It can be used in metaphorical expressions to signal
evaluative judgment.
Evaluative judgment is the process of assessing a stimulus through the filter of an internal network of beliefs, values,
and aesthetics. This process interacts with sensory-motor nervous system circuitry to influence how we interpret other people’s behavior and whether we participate in select activities
or events (Norman et al., 2011). It contributes to basic human
impulses, such as avoidance and approach. It further serves
to guide complex behavior. For example, evaluative judgment
informs activities such as participating in a social movement,

contributing to a charity, and voting for a presidential candidate where the choice of candidate can be based more heavily
on evaluative processes than on reasoning.
Evaluative processes pervade human language on many
levels. People use linguistic information as an input into evaluative judgments at the social and interpersonal level: we assess our partners in communication positively or negatively
based on accent, intonation, prosody, word choice, and grammatical complexity (Berger & Calabrese, 1975; Fuertes et
al., 2012). Evaluative information is, in turn, directly encoded in the lexical semantics of language. For instance,
cross-linguistic research shows evaluative information to be
the semantic component that factors most frequently and consistently into lexical expressions from a wide variety of language families (Triandis & Osgood, 1958). The words in an
utterance, then, potentially lead to entailments and evaluative
inferences that are congruent with the stance of the speaker.
Similarly, framing a topic to highlight and promote one’s own
evaluative judgment can influence how that topic is evaluated
by others.
Framing can be achieved through metaphorical language,
the semantics of which convey an evaluative component that
can be as basic as avoidance versus approach: while the
specter of urban violence must be strictly avoided, an epidemic of urban violence can be cautiously approached (Thibodeau & Boroditsky, 2011). Metaphor theorists from ancient times to the present have considered evaluative judgment to be one of the primary functions of metaphorical language (Lakoff & Johnson, 1980). This evaluative information
is conveyed largely through the image schemas that are encoded in language and accessible to human cognition through
our experiences of perceiving, interacting with, and emotionally responding to our environment (see for example Barsalou, 2010; Zwaan, 2008).
Interestingly, recent experimental research on metaphorical language provides evidence for the influence of image
schematic information on evaluative judgment. In one study,
participants were more likely to judge immigrants negatively
after being primed to view their own country as a human body
(e.g., a nation undergoing a growth spurt) rather than as an
abstract entity (e.g., a nation undergoing a period of innovation), an effect that is congruent with a conventional metaphor
that describes immigrants and immigration in terms of dis-

2567

ease (Landau et al., 2009). Keefer et al., (2014) have characterized this effect as metaphoric fit. Metaphoric fit refers to
maintaining consistent image schematic information across
metaphors during discourse. In a test of the metaphoric fit
hypothesis, they asked participants to read an article on depression and its symptoms, and then evaluate the effectiveness of a proposed antidepressant medication. Three versions
of the article framed depression in terms of a spatial metaphor
(D EPRESSION IS D OWN), or in terms of a visual metaphor
(D EPRESSION IS DARK), or using non-metaphorical language. Participants in the spatial metaphor condition judged
a drug called Liftix as more likely to be effective, whereas
participants in the visual metaphor condition judged a drug
called Illuminix more likely to be so. Recent results from
another study (Thibodeau, 2016) support the metaphoric fit
hypothesis, finding that people evaluated solutions to social
problems more favorably when the solution and the problem were framed with congruent metaphoric schemas. For
example, given a description of economic hardship in terms
of a BALANCE schema, participants preferred a solution that
involved “returning to equilibrium”. When the description
was given in terms of a S PLITTING schema, they preferred
one that “narrowed the gap”. Taken together, these findings
present compelling evidence that the image schematic information specified by metaphorical language can impact how
people evaluate situations. A question that naturally follows
from such findings is whether cross-linguistic differences in
metaphor usage produce similar effects. For example, if spatial metaphors for depression were predominant in one language, while visual metaphors for depression were in another,
would speakers of the first language favor Liftix and speakers
of the second Illuminix?
Although several studies have demonstrated that spatial
metaphors for time vary across languages (e.g., Chan &
Bergen, 2005; Fuhrman & Boroditsky, 2010; Nuñez &
Sweetser, 2006), and that these distinctions are reflected in
differences in how speakers conceptualize and reason about
time (e.g., Casasanto & Boroditsky, 2008), less attention has
been directed towards cross-linguistic contrasts in other conceptual domains. Nor has evaluative judgment, as opposed
to reasoning, been the focus of previous cross-linguistic
research on metaphor. Here, we discuss an investigation
into cross-linguistic differences in metaphors for economic
change and whether these differences are reflected in speakers’ evaluative judgments about economic change. In this
study, we focus on the domain of the economy for a few reasons. Behavior related to the economy and financial decisionmaking is largely motivated by evaluative judgment, and evaluative judgment is consequently a topic of great interest in behavioral economics. In addition, patterns of cross-linguistic
differences in the metaphors used to discuss economic change
and issues related to the economy have been identified in previous research (e.g., Boers & Demecheleer, 1997). CharterisBlack & Ennis (2001), for instance, compared metaphor use
in news coverage of business and financial matters across

English and Spanish publications. They found many crosslinguistic similarities in metaphor use, including the tendency
to characterize the state of the economy in terms of the physical or psychological health of an organism, to characterize
change in the economy in terms of physical motion, and to
characterize unusual economic events in terms of natural disasters. At a higher resolution of analysis, however, divergent
patterns emerged. The salience of certain metaphors varied
across the two languages, as did the types of subordinate concepts favored in metaphor use. Nautical metaphors, for example, were found to be common in English reports on the
economy but rare in Spanish reports.
Recent developments in natural language processing approaches to metaphor research have allowed the analyses
of much larger corpora to corroborate such hand-annotated
corpus studies. Gutiérrez et al., (2017) present a method
for detecting fine-grained, cross-linguistic textual differences
through the automated analyses of large multilingual corpora.
Employing data-driven techniques from natural language processing and machine learning, this method can identify crosslinguistic variation in the use of metaphor among multiple topics. Regarding the topic of the economy, the study
found that English discussions of economic change most frequently employ metaphors based on locative motion verbs
(e.g., “the economy was going backwards” to describe negative growth). In comparison, Spanish discussions typically
rely on metaphors based on expanding/contracting motion
verbs (e.g., “la economia se contrajo” to describe negative
growth). The image schematic structure of locative motion
verb metaphors as in the English example can be categorized
as S OURCE -PATH -G OAL with a focus on PATH. Figure 1a
illustrates how the English phrase instantiates this schema.
The image schematic structure of volumetric motion verbs
as in the Spanish example can be categorized as E QUILIB RIUM . Figure 1b illustrates how the Spanish phrase instantiates it. Notably, locative motion verbs feature movement outof-place whereas expanding/contracting motion verbs feature
movement in-place. The experiment in the present study was
designed in accordance with these results. In the experi-

←←←←
←

: PATH (time)

: VOLUME (la economia)

: TRAJECTORY (the economy)

: COMPRESSION FORCE (stronger)
: EXPANSION FORCE (weaker)

1a

1b

Figure 1: The S OURCE -PATH -G OAL and E QUILIBRIUM image schemas prominent in English and Spanish metaphors for
economic change.

2568

ment, conducted across a sample of native English and native Spanish speakers, we tested whether people were more
sensitive to information presented in a form congruent with
the more salient metaphors for economic change in their language. For the experimental task, participants made an evaluative judgment (“Improved” or “Worsened”) regarding economic change in a fictional country based on a representative
graphic. Change was depicted in the graphic along the two dimensions characteristic of the S OURCE -PATH -G OAL image
schema (henceforth referred to as M OTION) and the E QUI LIBRIUM image schema (henceforth referred to as VOLUME ).
That is, the figure in the graphic progressed from a starting
point along a linear path to an end point at the same time
that it expanded or contracted. If metaphor-congruent image
schemas are active during the process of forming evaluative
judgments, we expect English speakers’ evaluations of the
economy to align more closely with the direction of change
in the linear dimension of the graph, and Spanish speakers’
evaluations to align more closely with change in the volumetric dimension.

Experiment
Methods
Participants We recruited 60 participants from one
English-speaking country (the US) and 60 participants from
three Spanish-speaking countries (Chile, Mexico, and Spain)
using the CrowdFlower crowdsourcing platform.1 All participants answered a demographic questionnaire, reporting gender, age, location, native language, level of education, color
vision deficiencies, and use of touchscreen device during task.
Results from nine US and three non-US participants were discarded for failure to meet the language requirement.
Materials & Design Participants first read a brief description of the experimental task, which introduced them to a fictional country in which economists are devising a simple but
effective graphic for representing change in the economy (see
Figure 2 for the English version). Spanish speakers read a
translation of the English text provided by a native speaker of
Spanish who is also fluent in English. They then navigated
to a new page to begin the task. Stimuli were presented in a
1200-pixel by 700-pixel frame. The center of the frame contained a sphere with a 64-pixel diameter. For each trial, participants clicked on a button to activate an animation of the
sphere which involved (1) a positive displacement (in rightward pixels) of 10% or 20%, or a negative displacement (in
leftward pixels) of 10% or 20%; and, (2) an expansion (in increased pixel diameter) of 10% or 20%, or a contraction (in
decreased pixel diameter) of 10% or 20%. Participants saw
each of the resulting conditions three times. The displacement and size conditions were drawn from a random permutation of conditions using a Fisher-Yates shuffle (Fisher
& Yates, 1963). Crucially, stimuli in half of the trials contained conflicting image schematic information with respect
1 http://www.crowdflower.com

Oxar is a country on the planet Xor. Oxarian
economists are experimenting with new ways of modelling economic trends in their country. A group of
economists are attempting to design a simple yet intuitive way of representing changes in the economy
of the country. You are here to help them in their
mission! During the experiment, you’ll see a series
of graphics representing change in Oxar’s economy.
Your task will be to decide, according to the dynamic
graphic you have just seen, whether the economy has
improved or worsened. Then, you will be asked to estimate how much the economy changed according to
the graphic. Please try and give your judgments about
the economy as accurately as possible.
Figure 2: Description of the experimental task in English.
to the displacement and volumetric metaphors for economic
change (e.g., the sphere could both expand and move backwards).
Once the sphere had completed its movement across the
screen, participants recorded a judgment of whether the economy improved or worsened by clicking on the appropriate radio button. They then indicated on a seven point scale how
confident they were in their judgment and by how much they
judged the economy to have changed.

Results & Discussion
Congruence & Direction To analyze participant judgment of the direction of economic change, we first coded
the responses as being M OTION–congruent or VOLUME–
congruent. For instance, if on a given trial the sphere was
expanding while moving backwards and the response was
“Economy Improved”, the result was coded as VOLUME–
congruent. If the response had been “Economy Worsened”,
the result would have been coded as M OTION–congruent.
Figure 3 presents the mean proportion of responses that fall
into these categories for both languages,2 showing that Spanish speakers’ judgments were more likely to align with the
VOLUME dimension of the stimuli (i.e., the dimension encoded in the image schemas used most frequently in Spanish to discuss economic change metaphorically), and English speakers’ judgments were more likely to align with the
M OTION dimension (i.e., the dimension encoded in image
schemas used most frequently in English to discuss economic
change metaphorically). To test whether people’s judgments
followed a language–specific, metaphor–congruent response
more often than predicted by chance, we used a mixed effects logistic regression model to analyze the data using the
lme4 package in the R statistical language.3 We compared
two models: one that modeled the influence of language on
2 The mean proportion of dimension–congruent judgments is the
mean of congruent responses per participant over 24 responses.
3 http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/lme4/

2569

Figure 3: Mean proportion of dimension-congruent responses
by language for B OTH-congruent, M OTION–congruent and
VOLUME–congruent judgments.

Figure 4: The ROC curve showing the ability of our model to
correctly classify the judgments of participants.

judgment for the conflicting trials (n = 2520), and one that
modeled the influence of language on judgment for the nonconflicting trials (n = 2520). We reasoned that, if the image
schematic information in the experimental stimuli is influencing judgment in a manner that is both language–specific and
metaphor–congruent, language would be a significant predictor of judgment in the conflicting trials but not in the nonconflicting trials.
Both models included random effects for participant and
item to control for their associated intraclass correlation, and
both used the Laplace approximation for parameter estimation. The results of the analyses show an effect of language in
the conflicting trials (β = 3.96, p < 0.001), but not in the nonconflicting trials (β = 0.23, p = 0.57). To evaluate model fit,
we randomized the subset of our data containing the results of
the conflicting trials and split it into testing and training sets.
We then modeled the data in the training set using the same
mixed effects logistic regression equation from our original
analysis, and used this model to predict participant judgment
in the testing set. The prediction accuracy of our model was
0.84. The AUROC (area under ROC curve) for predicting
judgment with the model was 0.93 (see Figure 4), indicative
of the expected proportion of true positives ranked before a
uniformly drawn random negative. The above analyses indicate that participants’ judgments of whether the economy
improved or worsened varied in a predictable manner based
on their native language. The estimated odds that the judgment of a Spanish speaker aligned with changes in VOLUME
image schematic information in the stimuli rather than M O TION image schematic information were 52.46 greater than
the corresponding odds for an English speaker.
Congruence & Magnitude We also examined whether image schematic information influenced participants’ judgments
of the magnitude of economic change. Here, we focused on
the nonconflicting trials. Recall that for these trials when-

ever the sphere was moving forward, it was expanding; and,
whenever it was moving backwards, it was contracting. However, in half of the trials (n = 1260), the sphere was either expanding or contracting to a greater degree than it was moving
forward or backwards, or vice versa. If metaphor–congruent
image schemas are affecting speakers’ judgments, then we
would expect Spanish speakers to increase their estimates of
the magnitude of change when expanding or contracting of
the sphere is the dominant schema. Similarly, we would expect English speakers’ judgments to be greater when forward
or backward motion is the dominant schema.
On average, English and Spanish speakers estimated the
amount of economic change to be greater when the sphere
was expanding/contracting than when it was moving forward/backwards, as shown in Figure 5. To assess whether
the differences across language and dominant schema were
significant, we analyzed the data using cumulative link (probit) models via the ordinal package in R.4 We first modeled
amount of change with additive predictors of language and
dominant schema, with participant and item as random effects. To test for an interaction between these factors, we fit a
second model with the interaction as a predictor and used the
likelihood ratio test to compare the two models. Our analysis indicated no main effects for language or for the interaction between language and dominant schema. There were
marginal effects for VOLUME as the dominant schema both
when contracting (β = 0.3122, p = 0.009) and when expanding (β = 0.3150, p = 0.009). These results tell us that a 10%
change in contraction of the sphere increases the probability
of higher estimates of the amount of change by 31.22% for
Spanish and English speakers. A 10% change in expansion
of the sphere increases the probability of higher estimates of
the amount of change by 31.50%, again for both groups of
speakers.
4 http://www.cran.r-project.org/package=ordinal/

2570

confidence in judgment relied on magnitude. In the first
two conditions where confidence increased, the sphere was
increasing or decreasing to a maximum degree along both
dimensions. Hence, it is unclear whether participants were
more sensitive to language-specific, metaphor-congruent image schematic information. That participant confidence increased in the third condition noted above suggests that participants overall were more confident when the sphere was
moving forward rather than backwards. Since the results
were consistent across languages, we found no evidence that
any particular combination of schemas were more difficult to
parse for one, but not the other, group of speakers.

General Discussion
Figure 5: Mean estimated amount of change per language and
stimuli dimension.

Congruence & Confidence With the last metric we collected from participants, that of confidence, we investigated
whether one group of speakers found a particular set of stimuli (or the experimental task itself) to be more difficult or
confusing than was the case for the other group of speakers.
English speakers, for example, may have had more difficulty
in assessing the stimuli with contradictory information since
English employs M OTION and VOLUME based metaphors in
discussions of economic change.
We again analyzed the data using cumulative link (probit) models, here with additive predictors of language and
stimuli class, with participant and item as random effects.
To test for an interaction between the factors, we fit a second model with the interaction as a predictor and used the
likelihood ratio test to compare the two models. We found
no significant differences across languages and no significant interaction between language and stimulus condition.
English speaking participants and Spanish speaking participants both showed a highly significant increase in confidence
for judgments in three of the stimulus conditions: when the
sphere was contracting by 20% and moving backward by
20% (β = 0.4907, p < 0.001), when the sphere was expanding
by 20% and moving forward by 20% (β = 0.6553, p < 0.001),
and when the sphere was expanding by 20% and moving forward by 10% (β = 0.4815, p < 0.001).
Both groups of participants, then, showed greater confidence in their judgments, with a 49.07% increased probability, given a stimulus congruent with a large decline in the
economy across both image schemas. Given a stimulus suggesting a large improvement in the economy across image
schemas, participant confidence increased with a probability of 65.53%. Given a stimulus congruent with a large improvement in the economy per the VOLUME dimension of
the stimuli and a moderate improvement per the M OTION dimension, confidence improved with an increased probability
of 48.15%. These results suggest that, for all participants,

Metaphors based on movement are regularly used in English
and Spanish (amongst other languages) to discuss the economy and economic change. Past research suggests that in
discussions of important socio-political topics, such as the
economy, metaphorical language can influence people’s reasoning. Here, we presented evidence that metaphorical language also affects people’s evaluative judgment. Evaluative
judgment, which differs from reasoning in that it is not logicbased, is a crucial component of decision-making. The results
of our study thus serve to tease apart how these two mechanistically different processes influence decision-making, with
our results indicating that metaphorical language affects the
evaluative judgment component of decision-making through
the image schematic information present in the semantics of
the metaphor. These findings corroborate accounts of language and cognition that emphasize the role of language
in the development of associative and representational routines. In line with such accounts, the current findings reflect
Spanish speakers learning to associate economic change with
shifts in VOLUME and habituating focus to volumetric image
schematic information. English speakers, who learn to associate economic change with shifts in M OTION, habituate focus to image schematic information involving displacement.
Our findings with respect to congruence and amount of
change, and with respect to congruence and confidence, provide further nuance to this view. While judgments of economic improvement or decline aligned more consistently
with language-specific, metaphor-congruent dimensions in
the stimuli, judgments regarding the amount of change were
more consistent with changes in VOLUME for both groups
of speakers. A possible explanation for this effect is that visual experience of a change in amount is more strongly correlated with a change in density than with a change in location. Another possible explanation is that English speakers associate direction of change with motion through space
but associate amount of change with manner of motion, and
changes in the size of the sphere were more suggestive of
manner of motion. As noted above, judgments of confidence
were consistent with changes across both schemas for both
groups of speakers, as long as the changes were consistent
across schemas. This indicates that, while participant focus

2571

may have been driven by metaphor-congruent schemas, they
were still sensitive to both aspects of the stimuli. This latter finding supports the view that language probabilistically
influences other cognitive functions as opposed to those that
consider language to have a more discrete effect on other aspects of cognition.
Evaluative judgment is a core component of decisionmaking, especially in the socio-political domain, and it is
highly reliant on the image schematic information shared
across percepts and concepts. Such image schematic information is also key to the cognitive function of metaphor. The
present work represents a preliminary step in linking evaluative judgment and its reliance on image schematic information to cross-linguistic variation in metaphor use. Future
studies along these lines should shed further light on how the
image schematic information intrinsic to metaphorical language shapes evaluative judgment in discussions of the economy, as well as discussions of other important socio-political
domains.

Acknowledgements
We thank the CrowdFlower workers who participated in
our experiment and the CogSci reviewers for insightful
feedback on our study. Ekaterina Shutova’s research is
supported by the Leverhulme Trust Early Career Fellowship.

References
Barsalou, L. (2010). Grounded cognition: Past, present, and
future. Topics in Cognitive Science, 2, 716–724.
Berger, C., & Calabrese, R. (1975). Some exploration in initial interactions and beyond: toward a developmental theory of interpersonal communication. Human Communication Research, 1, 99–112.
Boers, F., & Demecheleer, M. (1997). A few metaphorical
models in (western) economic discourse. In W. Liebert,
G. Redeker, & L. Waugh (Eds.), Discourse and perspective in cognitive linguistics. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: Benjamins.
Casasanto, D., & Boroditsky, L. (2008). Time in the mind:
Using space to think about time. Cognition, 106, 579–593.
Chan, T., & B.Bergen. (2005). Writing direction influences
spatial cognition. In Proceedings of the twenty-seventh annual conference of the cognitive science society (pp. 510–
516). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Charteris-Black, J., & Ennis, T. (2001). A comparative study
of metaphor in Spanish and English financial reporting. English for Specific Purposes, 20, 249–266.
Fisher, R., & Yates, F. (1963). Statistical tables for biological,
agricultural, and medical research. Edinburgh: Oliver and
Boyd.
Fuertes, J., Gottdiener, W., Martin, H., Gilbert, T., & Giles, H.
(2012). A meta-analysis of the effects of speakers accents
on interpersonal evaluations. European Journal of Social
Psychology, 42, 120–133.

Fuhrman, O., & Boroditsky, L. (2010). Cross-cultural differences in mental representations of time: Evidence from
an implicit non-linguistic task. Cognitive Science, 34, 401–
450.
Gutiérrez, E., Shutova, E., Lichtenstein, P., de Melo, G., &
Gilardi, L. (2016). Detecting cross-cultural differences
using a multilingual topic model. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 71–81.
Keefer, L. A., Landau, M. J., Sullivan, D., & Rothschild, Z. K.
(2014). Embodied metaphor and abstract problem solving:
Testing a metaphoric fit hypothesis in the health domain.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 55, 12–20.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by.
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the flesh:
The embodied mind and its challenge to western thought.
Basic books.
Landau, M. J., Sullivan, D., & Greenberg, J. (2009). Evidence
that self-relevant motives and metaphoric framing interact
to influence political and social attitudes. Psychological
Science, 20(11), 1421–1427.
Langacker, R. (2001). Concept, image, and symbol. Berlin,
Germany: De Gruyter Mouton.
Norman, G., Norris, C., Gollan, J., Ito, T., Hawkley, L.,
Larsen, J., . . . Berntson, G. (2011). Current emotion research in psychophysiology: he neurobiology of evaluative
bivalence. Emotion Review, 3, 349–359.
Nunez, R., & Sweetser, E. (2006). With the future behind
them: Convergent evidence from aymara language and gesture in the crosslinguistic comparison of spatial construals
of time. Cognitive Science, 30, 401–450.
Talmy, L. (2000). Toward a cognitive semantics. Boston,
MA: MIT Press.
Thibodeau, P. H. (2016). Extended metaphors are the home
runs of persuasion: Don’t fumble the phrase. Metaphor
and Symbol, 31(2), 53–72.
Thibodeau, P. H., & Boroditsky, L. (2011). Metaphors we
think with: The role of metaphor in reasoning. PloS one,
6(2), e16782.
Traugett, E. (1978). On the expression of spatiotemporal
relations in language. In J. Greenberg (Ed.), Universals
of human language. vol. 3: word structure. Stanford, CA:
Stanford University Press.
Triandis, H., & Osgood, C. (1958). A comparative factorial analysis of semantic structures in monolingual Greeks
and American college students. Journal of Abnormal and
Social Psychology, 57, 186–196.
Zwaan, R. (2008). Experiential traces and mental simulations
in language comprehension. In M. de Vega, A. Glenberg,
& A. Graesser (Eds.), Symbols and embodiment: Debates
on meaning and cognition. Oxford, UK: Oxford University
Press.

2572

