Metaphors, Roles, and Controls in Framing Studies
Paul H. Thibodeau (pthibode@oberlin.edu)
Oberlin College, Department of Psychology
120 W. Lorain St., Oberlin, OH 44074, USA

Stephen J. Flusberg (stephen.flusberg@purchase.edu)
SUNY Purchase College, Department of Psychology
735 Anderson Hill Road, Purchase, NY 10577, USA
Abstract
Metaphors have been shown to be effective explanatory and
communicative tools, shaping how people think and reason
about complex domains. To date, however, most studies have
addressed only coarse-grained effects of metaphor framing,
leaving many questions unanswered about the relative power
of metaphor compared to more literal linguistic framing
devices. We addressed this issue in a large, pre-registered
framing study, comparing the effects of describing the role of
police officers as (a) metaphorical guardians of a community
(b) literal protectors of a community, and (c) a no-label
control. We found no main effect of framing condition,
suggesting that positively valenced metaphors may exert little
influence on their own in this domain. However, we did
observe an interaction between condition and political
ideology, such that the guardian metaphor was especially
effective at improving attitudes towards police officers for
liberals, whose initial approval ratings were relatively low.
Keywords: metaphor, framing, attitudes, policing

Introduction
“Evolutionary sequences,” wrote the popular biologist
Steven Jay Gould (1977, p. 61), “are not rungs on a ladder,
but our retrospective reconstruction of a circuitous path
running like a labyrinth, branch to branch, from the base of
the bush to a lineage now surviving at its top.” Metaphorical
explanations like this are common, and research has
established that they can be effective as well: framing a
discussion or explanation with metaphor has been shown to
shape how people understand and reason about a range of
complex issues (Flubserg, Matlock, & Thibodeau, 2017;
Sopory & Dillard, 2002; Thibodeau, 2016; Thibodeau &
Boroditsky, 2011; Thibodeau, Crow, & Flusberg, 2016).
In a recent study, for example, Thibodeau, Crow, and
Flusberg (2016) sought to test the explanatory power of
metaphor in the context of people’s understanding of––and
attitudes towards––law enforcement. Our primary research
question was whether or not people would spontaneously
use the structure of a metaphorical source domain (guardian
or warrior) to reason about a target domain (policing).
One way that we tested this question was by having
participants read that police officers are either guardians or
warriors of the community before reporting on their
attitudes toward policing and the criminal justice system.
We found that participants who had read that police officers
are guardians expressed more positive attitudes about
policing and the criminal justice system, overall, compared
to people who had read that police officers are warriors.

This effect may be the result of the emotional tone that is set
by the metaphors: we found that guardian, in the context of
policing, conveys a more positive emotional valence than
warrior.
In addition, we found that the metaphorical explanations
selectively affected certain attitudes toward policing and the
criminal justice system more than others. Specifically,
people who read that police officers are guardians
expressed a more favorable “attitude toward police
practices” than people who read that police officers are
warriors, but the metaphorical explanation had no effect on
participants’ views about the “difficulty of being a police
officer.” This was consistent with the results of an initial
norming study, where a separate group of participants made
an explicit judgment about which metaphor––guardian or
warrior––was more appropriate for the current state of
policing (rather than being exposed to just one of the
metaphors). That is, the norming study found that people
who came into the study with the view that police officers
are more like guardians expressed more a favorable view of
police practices compared to people who considered police
officers to be warriors. However, people who considered
police officers to be guardians expressed similar beliefs
about the difficulty of being a police officer as people who
considered police officers to be warriors. Taken together,
these findings suggest that the metaphors instantiate
different schematic knowledge structures for policing and
the criminal justice system—and that they capture and
convey more than an emotional tone.
A second way that we tested our research question was by
having participants list a synonym either to “guardian” or
“warrior” before reporting on their attitudes toward the
police and criminal justice system. We found no effect of
these lexical primes: people who listed a synonym for
“guardian” expressed similar attitudes toward policing and
the criminal justice system as people who listed a synonym
for “warrior.” Participants expressed more moderate
attitudes in these conditions compared to the conditions in
which a metaphor was used to explain the role of police
officers (i.e. less positive than participants who read that
police officers are guardians but more positive than
participants who read that police officers are warriors).
We interpreted these results as showing (a) that
metaphorically framing police officers as guardians
activates a different mental model of policing (with a
different affective profile) than metaphorically framing
police officers as warriors, and (b) that simply seeing the

3326

word “guardian” or “warrior” is insufficient to activate this
mental model. In other words, people have prior knowledge
about what it means to be a guardian (and warrior). This
knowledge influences how people think about policing
when police officers are explicitly described as guardians
(or warriors)—but not when people are asked questions
about policing after simply seeing the word “guardian” (or
“warrior”).
A natural follow up question to this study might be: which
metaphor has a bigger effect on how people think about
policing? Intuitively, it may seem like there is an easy way
to address this question: by running a condition that does
not include a metaphorical explanation. One might expect
that describing police officers as guardians would lead to a
more positive view of policing compared to a “neutral
control” condition, and that describing police officers as
warriors would lead to a more negative view of policing
compared to a “neutral control” condition. In addition, one
might be tempted to infer that the metaphor condition that is
more different from the “neutral control” condition is
having a bigger effect on people (cf. Reijnierse, Burgers, &
Steen, 2015; Steen, Reijnierse, & Burgers, 2014).
However, as we have argued before (see Thibodeau, In
press; Thibodeau & Boroditsky, 2015), there are many
differences between metaphor frames and “neutral control”
conditions that make such comparisons difficult to interpret.
For example, it is not clear that there is a suitable nonmetaphorical counterpart to the “guardian” and “warrior”
metaphors for policing (e.g., a term like “protector” could
be used, since it is less metaphorical than the two
metaphorical frames; but its meaning seems more similar to
“guardian” than “warrior,” making it a poor candidate to
serve a “neutral control” condition along side the two
metaphorical conditions). Comparing the two metaphorical
frames to a condition that omitted a nominal descriptor
altogether would confound a variety of factors between the
two metaphor conditions and the “neutral control”
condition, including the valence, tone, and word frequency
of the language used to describe policing—not just the
metaphoricity of the conditions.
We do, however, think that there are research questions
that warrant a comparison between metaphorical frames and
non-metaphorical counterparts. Here, we consider such a
case. Namely, does a guardian metaphor lead people to
adopt a more favorable view of policing than a comparable
literal description of the role police officers play in the
community? Addressing this question is important when
considering the potential practical applications of research
on the persuasive power of metaphor. Therefore, we
compared three conditions in the present study, building on
the work described in Thibodeau, Crow, & Flusberg (2016).
Before reporting their attitudes towards law enforcement
and the criminal justice system, participants read one of the
following framing prompts:
a.

Police officers are the guardians of modern
communities. They are strong men and women who
serve a vital role in society.

b.
c.

Police officers are the protectors of modern
communities. They are strong men and women who
serve a vital role in society.
[No label control: participants simply answered the
targeted questions about police officers in this
condition]

We chose “protector” as a non-metaphorical counterpart
to guardian because it was the word most frequently used to
explain what it means for police officers to be guardians in
the original study (Thibodeau, Crow, & Flusberg, in press).
In the context of this more applied question, we did not
include a condition that described police officers as
warriors, since such a description would be expected to
elicit comparatively negative views of police officers.
Instead, we compared the effects of a metaphor frame (and a
matched literal frame) to a “neutral control” condition
because we were interested in whether and to what extent
describing police officers as guardians leads people to
express a more favorable view of policing.
We were also interested in a mechanistic question about
the role of metaphor in explanatory discourse, which we
addressed by comparing the guardian and protector
conditions. Are metaphors more persuasive than literal
counterparts? In a meta-analysis, Sopory and Dillard (2002)
found that metaphors are about 6% more persuasive than
literal language, which they attributed to the power of
metaphors to organize the way people think about a target
domain.
The design of the current study provides a novel context
for testing this claim. One possibility is that the guardian
metaphor may call to mind a more coherent and favorable
mental model of policing than the non-metaphorical
counterpart, protector, and lead people to the most positive
view of police officers and the criminal justice system—
more positive than the protector and “neutral control”
conditions.
An alternative possibility, though, is that the literal
counterpart to guardian (protector) serves a similar
organizational function in describing the role of police
officers in the community. That is, depending on the
complexity of the target domain and intended meaning of
the metaphor, there may be issues for which a literal frame
is as effective as a metaphorical one in shaping thought.
Support for this possibility would be found if people express
similarly positive views of the police in these two
conditions—both of which should lead people to a more
positive view of policing than the “neutral control”
condition. Such a finding would contribute to the literature
by identifying an important boundary condition on
metaphor framing effects (cf. Steen, Reijnierse, & Burgers,
2014).
In addition to the framing experiment, we also conducted
a norming study to assess the perceived metaphoricity and
emotional valence of three possible descriptions of police
officers: (a) guardians of modern communities, (b)
protectors of modern communities, and (c) warriors of
modern communities. One critical assumption that was

3327

made in our prior work was that the terms guardian and
warrior were actually interpreted as metaphors, and not, for
example, as literal descriptions of the role of police
officers1. The norming study allows us to test this
assumption. We expected that the guardian and warrior
descriptions would be rated as more metaphorical than
protector. The norming study also allowed us to quantify
the emotional tone of the three descriptions. We expected
that the guardian and protector descriptions would be rated
as conveying a more positive emotional valence than
warrior. Both studies were pre-registered on the Open
Science Framework: osf.io/eb853.

Norming Study
Methods
Participants We recruited 100 participants for the norming
study from Amazon’s Mechanical Turk. After excluding
participants who failed to finish the study or provide a valid
completion code, we were left with data from 88
participants for analysis (51% male; Mage = 33).
Materials and Design Participants were asked to rate the
metaphoricity (1, Not at all metaphorical, to 5, Very
metaphorical) and valence (1, Very negative, to 5, Very
positive) of three statements on 5-point scales (Thibodeau &
Boroditsky, 2015).

Metaphoricity

1
We do not view the boundary between the “literal” and the
“metaphorical” as so sharp, “metaphoricity” is best thought of a
continuous rather than categorical variable (cf., Rumelhart, 1979).
That said, the distinction is still useful and informative in the
context of understanding the nature of abstract thought (Lakoff &
Johnson, 1980).

5
Guardian
Warrior
Protector

4
1.0

4

Results and Discussion
A repeated measures ANOVA revealed differences in the
rated metaphoricity of the three statements, F(2, 174) =
27.59, p < .001, η2 = .24. Warrior (M = 3.56, SD = 1.33)
was rated as more metaphorical than guardian (M = 3.02,
SD = 1.21), t(87) = 3.48, p < .001, or protector (M = 2.38,
SD = 1.28), t(87) = 6.35, p < .001; guardian was rated as
more metaphorical than protector, t(87) = 4.82, p < .001
(see Figure 1).

Valence

2.0
1.5

5

3

0.5

These statements were presented on the same screen; the
order of the statements was randomized across participants.
Afterward, participants were asked background and
demographic questions, including their gender, age,
education level, political ideology (0, Very liberal, to 100,
Very conservative), and political affiliation (Democrat,
Independent, Republican, Other). They also completed the
attitudes towards policing measure described in the
experiment below, although we did not analyze responses to
these questions for participants in the norming study.

3

0.0

Police officers are guardians.
Police officers are warriors.
Police officers are protectors.

Mean Rating

a.
b.
c.

On the one hand, this pattern of results confirms our
intuition that the terms warrior and guardian are perceived
as more metaphorical than the term protector in the context
of describing the role of police officers. On the other hand,
we did not predict that the term warrior would be viewed as
more metaphorical than guardian.
One possibility is that people consider the guardian
metaphor to be more apt (cf. Glucksberg, 2001), which
affects judgments of metaphoricity (Thibodeau, Sikos, &
Durgin, 2015). In our original study, 82% of participants
thought police officers should strive to be guardians (rather
than warriors) of their communities (Thibodeau, Crow, &
Flusberg, 2016). Talking about police officers in a way that
is inconsistent with a preferred mental model of policing
(i.e. in a way that is less apt) may lead people to think the
description is more metaphorical. In any case, the critical
difference in metaphoricity for the present study pertains to
the contrast between guardian and protector: as expected,
people interpreted guardian to be more metaphorical than
protector.
A second repeated measures ANOVA revealed
differences in the rated valence of the three statements, F(2,
174) = 51.01, p < .001, η2 = .37. Warrior (M = 3.38, SD =
1.21) was rated as more negative than both guardian (M =
4.32, SD = 0.80), t(87) = 7.22, p < .001, and protector (M =
4.49, SD = 0.82), t(87) = 8.04, p < .001; protector was rated
as more positively valenced than guardian, t(87) = 2.19, p =
.031 (see Figure 1).
Again, this pattern largely conforms to our predictions:
guardian and protector both express a positive view of
policing compared to warrior. Although protector was
judged to be more positive than guardian, this difference
was fairly small.

2

2

1

1

Figure 1. Ratings of the metaphoricity and valence of three
descriptions of police officers. Error bars denote standard
errors of the means.

Experiment
In the experiment, we tested whether describing police
officers as guardians, compared to protectors (and to a
condition that lacked a label for police officers), leads to

3328

more positive attitudes toward policing. That is, previous
work has suggested that metaphorical language is more
persuasive than literal language, owing to the organizational
role that metaphors play in discussions of complex issues
(Sopory & Dillard, 2002). The norming study suggests that
guardian and protector differ substantially in the extent to
which they are metaphorical, but only slightly in the
emotional tone that they convey (in favor of the nonmetaphorical label).
If the guardian label leads people to express to more
positive attitudes towards policing than protector, the
experiment would provide further evidence of the
persuasive value of metaphor (over and above comparable
literal language). If people express similar attitudes in the
guardian and protector conditions, on the other hand, it
would suggest that, in some cases, non-metaphorical
language can serve a similar organizational function as
metaphorical language.

Methods
Participants We recruited 600 participants to participate in
the experiment on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk. After
excluding participants who failed to finish the study or
provide a valid completion code, we were left with data
from 592 participants for analysis (49% male; Mage = 34).
Materials and Design Participants were randomly assigned
to one of three conditions. In one, police officers were
described as guardians, “Police officers are the guardians of
modern communities—strong men and women who serve a
vital role in society.” In the second, police officers were
described as protectors, “Police officers are the protectors of
modern communities—strong men and women who serve a
vital role in society.” A comparable sentence about police
officers was omitted from the third condition. In other
words, there was no description of police officers in the
third condition; this group simply answered the follow-up
questions about policing. Participants in all three groups
were instructed, “Although most people agree that police are
necessary for maintaining law and order, there is
disagreement about a variety of issues related to policing.
On the following screen, you will be asked several questions
about your view of police officers and the criminal justice
system. Please answer candidly; your responses are
anonymous.”
Then participants were asked eight questions about
policing and the criminal justice system. Consistent with
Thibodeau, Crow, and Flusberg (2016), three of the
questions were asked on a 7-point scale: “Police officers
have a __ job” (from very easy to very difficult), “Police
officers are __ at maintaining law and order” (from very
ineffective to very effective), and “How would you describe
the criminal justice system in the U.S.?” (from very far from
the ideal to very near to the ideal). The other five questions
included two response options, asking about whether
participants thought police treated citizens equally (yes/no),
whether they thought the police were more fair or unfair,

more honest or deceitful, more selfish or selfless, and
whether participants felt safe or unsafe around police
officers. Responses to all eight of these questions were
combined into a single measure of participants’ attitudes
toward policing, using principal components analysis (see
Thibodeau, Crow, & Flusberg, 2016).
Finally, participants completed the same demographics
questions as participants in the Norming Study.

Results
A between-subjects ANOVA with predictors for
condition (guardian, protector, none) revealed no effect of
the descriptions on participants’ attitudes toward policing,
F(2, 589) = 0.18, p = .837. That is, neither the guardian (M
= 3.12, SD = 1.28) nor the protector (M = 3.14, SD = 1.45)
labels for police officers led people to a more positive
attitude toward policing compared to a description that
lacked a label (M = 3.20, SD = 1.44). And the two treatment
conditions (guardian vs. protector) did not differ from one
another.
Given the lack of support for our primary prediction, we
considered alternative hypotheses that could be explored in
the data. One salient possibility highlights the role of
peoples’ prior beliefs (e.g., Hardisty, Johnson, & Weber,
2009; Johnson & Taylor, 1981; Thibodeau & Boroditsky,
2011; Thibodeau & Flusberg, 2017) in combination with a
mechanistic claim about how metaphors are processed—by
serving as peripheral or heuristic cues, rather than through a
process of conscious deliberation and rationalization (cf.
Chaiken, Wood, & Eagly, 1996; Petty & Cacioppo, 1986).
That is, prior work has found that framing manipulations
are, not surprisingly, more impactful on people who have
room to be persuaded about an issue (i.e. are not already at
ceiling). For instance, Hardisty, Johnson, & Weber (2009)
found that Democrats would support a program designed to
decrease the level of carbon dioxide in the environment,
regardless of whether it was described as an “offset”
program or a “tax.” Since Democrats tended to support this
type of environmental action, their attitudes were relatively
consistent, regardless of how it was framed (i.e. a ceiling
effect). Republicans, on the other hand, showed lower
support for the program overall, affording more opportunity
for attitude change. In turn, Hardisty et al. (2009) found that
Republicans were more likely to endorse the program when
it was framed as an “offset” than a “tax.”
Since political conservativeness tends to be associated
with more positive attitudes toward policing (Gerber &
Jackson, 2017), this suggests that the framing
manipulation—describing police officers as guardians or
protectors—may have a more pronounced effect among
politically liberal participants.
One reason to think that the guardian frame will be more
persuasive among liberal participants than the protector
frame is that metaphors have been argued to exert a
persuasive influence through an indirect route. People who
are skeptical about the increasing tendency for violence
among police officers may perceive the term protector as an

3329

overt attempt to change the way they think about police
practices, making them resistant to the persuasive appeal. In
contrast, the term guardian may not register as a persuasive
message and, thus, bypass this sort of counter-arguing
among participants (cf. Chaiken, Wood, & Eagly, 1996;
Petty & Cacioppo, 1986).
To examine these possibilities, we conducted a second
analysis on the data in which political ideology (a
continuous variable ranging from 0, Very liberal to 100,
Very conservative) was included as a covariate. To conduct
this analysis, we first tested for an expected positive
relationship between political ideology and attitudes toward
policing. We found a strong positive relationship, F(1, 590)
= 79.54, p < .001: the more politically conservative the
participant, the more positive their view of the police, B =
.34, SE = .04, p < .001. We then tested for an interaction
between political conservativeness and condition (guardian,
protector, none), which was significant, F(2, 586) = 3.06, p
= .048. Of note, the relationship between political
conservativeness and condition did not differ for a contrast
between the “neutral control” condition and the protector
condition, F(1, 397) = 1.53, p = .217. However, the
relationship between political conservativeness and
condition did differ when contrasting the “neutral control”
condition to the guardian condition, F(1, 391) = 6.52, p =
.011 (see Figure 2).

Attitude towards Policing

5
No Frame
Protector
Guardian
4

3

2
0
Very liberal

25

50

75

100

Very conservative

Political Ideology
Figure 2. Attitudes toward policing by political ideology
(left = very liberal; right = very conservative) and frame
(none, protector, guardian). Lowess smoothing (f = 2/3) was
applied to the lines to facilitate presentation of the trends.
Specifically, among the most liberal participants (i.e.,
those who reported a score less than 33 on the continuum of
political ideology that ranged from 0, very liberal, to 100,
very conservative; n = 256), attitudes toward policing were
more positive in the guardian condition (M = 2.93, SD =

1.06) than in the protector condition (M = 2.54, SD = 1.44),
t(160) = 1.98, p = .049; but no different from the condition
that lacked a label (M = 2.63, SD = 1.52), t(178) = 1.54, p =
.126. There were no differences between conditions for
participants whose political ideology was in the middle of
the ideological spectrum (i.e. between 33 and 66; n = 229),
ps > .1, and no differences between conditions for
participants whose political ideology was at the conservative
end of the spectrum (i.e. > 66; n = 107), ps > .1.

Discussion
In response to mounting tensions between law
enforcement and civilians, former president Barack Obama
commissioned a task force on 21st century policing, which
released its final report in 2015 (Ramsey & Robinson,
2015). The report suggested that to increase trust between
police officers and the communities they serve, “Law
enforcement culture should embrace a guardian––rather
than a warrior––mindset.” In a previous set of experiments,
we used this real-world example as a case study to explore
the power of explanatory metaphors, demonstrating that
describing police offers as guardians did in fact lead people
to express more positive attitudes towards law enforcement
than describing them as warriors (Thibodeau, Crow, &
Flusberg, 2016). Because of the real-world applications of
this line of research, however, there are additional questions
that warrant empirical investigation.
In the present study, we took a preliminary step in this
direction by asking whether metaphorical framing provides
any additional persuasive power over and above a more
literal linguistic descriptor. In an initial norming study, we
confirmed that describing police officers as guardians of a
community was perceived as more metaphorical than
describing them as protectors of a community. In our main
experiment, we contrasted the effects of framing the role of
law enforcement using these two terms, along with a
“neutral” control condition that included no framing device.
Our initial analysis revealed that participants in these
three conditions did not differ overall with respect to their
attitudes towards policing. This could suggest that there is
little advantage to using metaphorical framing compared to
more literal language (or even to no frame whatsoever) in a
practical attempt to improve attitudes towards policing in
the United States. This also offers some support for the view
that in our original study, it was the more negatively
valenced warrior metaphor that was “doing the work,” so to
speak, in shifting attitudes towards policing (i.e., in a
negative direction). This would be consistent with a large
body of work in psychology that suggests people are
typically more sensitive to negative information (or losses)
than positive information (or gains; Baumeister et al., 2001).
However, we also considered an alternative possibility:
that individual differences in prior attitudes towards
policing (e.g., due to ideological commitments) might
interact with our framing manipulation in a principled
fashion. Previous research has shown that framing effects
are most effective when they target people who are not at

3330

ceiling (or floor) on an issue already (i.e., who have room to
be persuaded; Hardisty, Johnson, & Weber, 2009;
Thibodeau & Boroditsky, 2011; Thibodeau & Flusberg,
2017). In the present case, we reasoned that because
ideologically conservative participants would have come
into the study with very positive views of policing already
(Gerber & Jackson, 2017), they might be less persuaded by
a positive metaphorical frame compared to more liberal
participants. To test this possibility, we included a
continuous measure of political ideology as a covariate in an
exploratory analysis.
The results of this analysis supported our revised
hypothesis: for the most liberal participants, framing police
officers as guardians of the community led to more positive
attitudes compared to framing them as protectors of the
community. This is consistent with previous work
demonstrating a principled interaction between metaphor
framing and prior beliefs (Hardisty, Johnson, & Weber,
2009; Thibodeau & Boroditsky, 2011; Thibodeau &
Flusberg, 2017), and lends support to the view that
metaphors may provide an additional persuasive punch
compared to more literal language (at least under certain
conditions; Sopory & Dillard, 2002).
Taken together, these findings paint a more nuanced
picture of the relationship between, and consequences of,
metaphorical versus literal framing, at least in domain of
attitudes towards policing. To be sure, more research in this
vein is required, especially considering the practical
applications of this sort of work, and the assumptions that
often accompany reasoning about metaphor and thought
(Lakoff & Johnson, 1980; Ramsay & Robinson, 2015). We
suggest researchers and public policy communicators
interested in these issues should aim for more large-scale,
pre-registered, and nuanced empirical studies of framing
effects.

References
Baumeister, R. F., Bratslavsky, E., Finkenauer, C., & Vohs,
K. D. (2001). Bad is stronger than good. Review of
general psychology, 5(4), 323-370.
Chaiken, S., Wood, W., & Eagly, A. H. (1996). Principles
of persuasion. In E. T. Higgins & A. W. Kruglanski
(Eds.), Social psychology: Handbook of basic
principles (pp. 702–742). New York, NY: Guilford.
Flusberg, S. J., Matlock, T., & Thibodeau, P. H. (2017).
Metaphors for the war (or race) against climate change.
Environmental Communication.
Gerber, M. M., & Jackson, J. (2017). Justifying violence:
legitimacy, ideology and public support for police use
of force. Psychology, Crime & Law, 23, 79-95.
Glucksberg, S. (2001). Understanding figurative language:
From metaphor to idioms. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Hardisty, D. J., Johnson, E. J., & Weber, E. U. (2009). A
dirty word or a dirty world? Attribute framing, political
affiliation, and query theory. Psychological Science, 21,
86-92.

Johnson, J. T., & Taylor, S. E. (1981). The effect of
metaphor on political attitudes. Basic and Applied
Social Psychology, 2, 305-316.
Gould (1977). Ever Since Darwin. W. W. Norton &
Company, Inc. New York, NY.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Petty, R. E., & Cacioppo, J. T. (1986). The elaboration
likelihood model of persuasion. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.),
Advances in Experimental Social Psychology (pp. 123–
205). New York, NY: Academic Press.
Ramsey, C., & Robinson, L. (2015). Final report. The
President’s task force on 21st century policing.
Retrieved Oct 28, 2016 https://cops.usdoj.gov/pdf/
taskforce/taskforce_finalreport.pdf
Reijnierse, W. G., Burgers, C., Krennmayr, T., & Steen, G.
J. (2015). How viruses and beasts affect our opinions
(or not): The role of extendedness in metaphorical
framing. Metaphor and the Social World, 5, 245–263.
Rumelhart, D. E. (1979). Some problems with the notion of
literal meanings. In Ortonoy, A. (ed). Metaphor and
Thought. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sopory, P., & Dillard, J. P. (2002). The persuasive effects of
metaphor: A meta-analysis. Human Communication
Research, 28, 382–419.
Steen, G. J., Reijnierse, W. G., Burgers, C. (2014). When
Do Natural Language Metaphors Influence Reasoning?
A Follow-Up Study to Thibodeau and Boroditsky
(2013). PloS ONE, 9(12): e113536.
Thibodeau, P. H. (In press). The Function of Metaphor
Framing, Deliberate or Otherwise, in a Social World.
Metaphor and the Social World.
Thibodeau, P. H. (2016). Extended metaphors are the home
runs of persuasion: Don’t fumble the phrase. Metaphor
and Symbol, 31, 2, 53-72.
Thibodeau, P. H., & Boroditsky, L. (2011). Metaphors we
think with: The role of metaphor in reasoning. PLoS
ONE, 6(2), e16782.
Thibodeau, P. H., & Boroditsky, L. (2015) Measuring
Effects of Metaphor in a Dynamic Opinion Landscape.
PLoS ONE, 10(7): e0133939.
Thibodeau, P. H., Crow, L. & Flusberg, S. J. (2016). The
metaphor police: A case study of the role of metaphor
in explanation. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review. doi:
10.3758/s13423-016-1192-5
Thibodeau, P. H., & Flusberg, S. J. (2017). Metaphorical
accounting: How framing the federal budget like a
household’s affects voting intentions. Cognitive
Science. doi: 10.1111/cogs.12475
Thibodeau, P. H., Perko, V. L., & Flusberg, S. J. (2015).
The relationship between narrative classification of
obesity
and
support
for
public
policy
interventions. Social Science & Medicine, 141, 27-35.
Thibodeau, P. H., Sikos, L., & Durgin, F. H. (2016). What
Do We Learn from Rating Metaphors? Proceedings of
the 38th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society, Philadelphia, PA.

3331

