Mindfulness and Fear Conditioning
Fergal W. Jones (Fergal.Jones@canterbury.ac.uk)
Salomons Centre for Applied Psychology, Canterbury Christ Church University,
Runcie Court, Broomhill Road, Tunbridge Well, Kent TN3 0TF, UK

Rossy P. McLaren (R.P.McLaren@exeter.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, College for Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Exeter,
Washington Singer Building, Perry Road, Exeter EX4 4QG, UK

Ian P. L. McLaren (I.P.L.McLaren@exeter.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, College for Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Exeter,
Washington Singer Building, Perry Road, Exeter EX4 4QG, UK
Abstract
During mindfulness-based interventions participants can be
invited to bring aversive stimuli to mind while practicing
mindfulness. This is thought to help the stimuli become less
aversive. However, the mechanisms underlying this process
are not fully understood. In this study we explored these by
examining the effects of mindfulness practice and stimulus
visualization on stimuli associated with electric shocks.
Participants were trained on a discrimination between two
visual stimuli using a standard electrodermal conditioning
procedure, in which one stimulus (CS+) was paired with
shock and the other (CS-) was not. They then visualized either
the CS+ or CS-, while practicing mindfulness or performing a
control activity. Following a number of extinction trials, the
impact of these manipulations was assessed during a
reacquisition test-phase. Both mindfulness and visualization
of the CS+ led to slower reacquisition of the CS+/shock
association, when measured physiologically, and their effects
were additive. Moreover, these effects dissociated from
participants’ expectancy of shock. If confirmed in future
work, these findings may have implications for the treatment
of stimulus-specific anxiety.
Keywords: mindfulness, associative learning, extinction,
reacquisition

Introduction
In recent years there has been a rapid growth of interest in
mindfulness (e.g. Mindfulness All-Party Parliamentary
Group, 2015). This has been driven in part by the growing
evidence for the efficacy of mindfulness-based therapeutic
interventions, such as mindfulness-based cognitive therapy
(Segal, Williams & Teasdale, 2013), which has been shown
to reduce the risk of relapse of depression relative to
treatment as usual and more active controls (Kuyken et al.,
2015). However, much remains to be understood about the
nature and mechanisms of action of mindfulness (Tang,
Holzel & Posner, 2015; van der Velden et al., 2015). In this
paper, we attempt to further this understanding in one
particular area, namely how mindfulness interacts with basic
human learning processes (cf. Treanor, 2011). To set the
stage for this, it is helpful to first consider mindfulness in
more detail.

Mindfulness
Kabat-Zinn’s (1994) frequently cited definition of
mindfulness describes it as ‘paying attention in a particular
way: on purpose, in the present moment, and nonjudgmentally’. Mindfulness meditation practice is seen as a
means of cultivating this way of attending. In a typical
practice, ‘mindfulness of the breath’, participants are invited
to pay attention to and be curious about their moment-bymoment experience of breathing, and to be gentle with
themselves should their attention wander away from this
(Kabat-Zinn, 1990).
In mindfulness-based interventions, such as mindfulnessbased cognitive therapy, after participants have developed
some experience at practicing mindfulness, they are invited
to deliberately bring attention to a difficult experience
during mindfulness practice (Segal et al., 2013). Frequently
this can be a memory or image associated with feelings of
anxiety and/or low mood. This is thought to help
participants learn to not engage in unhelpful rumination and
worry when faced with a difficulty (cf. Segal et al., 2013),
and to help them to build their ability to tolerate distress (cf.
Lotan, Tany & Bernstein, 2013). In addition, theories of
associative learning would suggest that basic associative
learning processes should be in play (cf. Treanor, 2011).
However, the latter aspect has yet to be adequately
investigated empirically. A laboratory model that can be
used to examine such processes further is the electrodermal
fear conditioning paradigm.

Electrodermal Fear Conditioning
In this paradigm, a neutral stimulus, referred to as the
conditioned stimulus (CS), becomes capable of eliciting fear
through its repeated pairing with an aversive unconditioned
stimulus (US), such as electric shock (see McAndrew et al.,
2012 for details of the procedure used here). Participants’
learning of this CS-US association is typically measured in
two ways. The first is through their ‘conditioned response’
(CR), which in this case usually includes increased arousal
following the CS, due to increased anxiety at the prospect of
being shocked. This can be detected by measuring the

2327

Table 1: The study’s design
Group

Training

MV+

A+ B-

Manipulation

Extinction

Reacquisition

Mindfulness & A

A- B-

A+ B-

MV-

A+ B-

Mindfulness & B

A- B-

A+ B-

CV+

A+ B-

Control & A

A- B-

A+ B-

CV-

A+ B-

Control & B

A- B-

A+ B-

conductance of electricity between two electrodes on the
skin, and is typically referred to as the skin conductance
response (SCR). Secondly, when presented with the CS,
participants can be asked to rate how much they expect a
shock.
Under certain conditions, dissociations can be obtained
between SCRs and expectancy ratings (e.g. Knight, Nguyen,
& Bandettini, 2003; Tabbert, Stark, Kirsch, & Vaitl, 2006;
McAndrew et al., 2012). These can be explained by dual
process models of human learning, such as that proposed by
McLaren, Green and Mackintosh (1994), and further
developed in McLaren, Forrest, McLaren, Jones, Aitken and
Mackintosh (2014). They argue that people can learn using
both associative processes, which are similar to those found
in other animals, and through rule-based processes capable
of symbolic manipulation (though Lovibond and Shanks,
2002 take an alternative view). Thus, as well as having the
potential to provide a useful laboratory model to investigate
mindfulness further, the fear conditioning paradigm enables
an examination of the degree to which mindfulness interacts
differently with different learning processes.

The current study
Therefore, in the current study we aimed to embed
mindfulness practice in a human electrodermal, fear
conditioning procedure. More specifically, we planned to
train people to learn a ‘CS’-> shock association (along with
an appropriate comparison) before inviting them to practice
mindfulness while visualizing the CS, in a similar way to
how distressing events can be brought into attention during
mindfulness practice. We then planned to examine what
effects, if any, this mindfulness visualization had on the
learning of the CS -> shock relationship, relative to various
comparison groups. Furthermore, we sought to examine
whether such mindfulness-based visualization had
differential effects on the different learning processes tapped
by SCR and expectancy. We hoped that this investigation
would provide us with a better understanding of the learning
processes in play during mindfulness practice, which in turn
could help contribute to improving the efficacy of
mindfulness-based interventions for anxiety.

Method

ages ranged from 18 to 30 years, with a mean of 20.4 years
(SD=2.75). All were paid £6. Participants were randomly
allocated to the groups described below, constrained to
ensure equal group sizes (N=24 in each group). The study
received ethical approval from the University of Exeter,
Psychology Ethics Committee.

Design
The study began with a training phase during which all the
participants learnt an A+ B- discrimination; that is, they
learnt that one conditioned stimulus (the CS+), which we
will refer to as A, was always followed by an electric shock,
while a second, the CS- (B), never was.
Following this, each of the four groups received a
different manipulation, as illustrated in Table 1. In the
mindfulness visualization plus (MV+) condition,
participants were invited to visualize the CS (i.e. A) that had
been previously paired with shock while they practiced
mindfulness. In the mindfulness visualization minus (MV-)
condition, they visualized the unpaired CS (i.e. B) while
practicing mindfulness. The two control conditions were
identical to the mindfulness ones, with the exception that,
instead of practicing mindfulness, participants were asked to
listen to an excerpt from an audio book. Thus, in the control
visualization plus (CV+) condition, participants listened to
the audiobook while visualizing stimulus A, and in the
control visualization minus (CV-) condition, participants
listened to the audiobook while visualizing stimulus B.
Following this manipulation, all the groups received an
extinction test phase, during which A and B were presented
but neither were paired with shock. This was followed by a
reacquisition test phase, during which all participants were
again trained on the original A+ B- discrimination; that is, A
was once again followed by a shock, whereas B was not.
This second test phase was included, as pilot work
suggested it was more sensitive to the effects of the
manipulation. This may be because extinction happens
relatively quickly in this paradigm, resulting in very few
trials that provide useful data from the extinction test phase.
Therefore, there were three independent variables; namely
practice type (mindfulness vs. control), stimulus visualized
(A vs. B), and stimulus tested (A vs. B), with the former two
being between-subject factors and the later being a withinsubject factor.

Participants
Ninety-six University of Exeter students participated in this
experiment. There were 72 women and 24 men and their

2328

Stimuli
The two CSs were a brown cylinder 4.5 x 6cm onscreen,
and a pink square 5.5 x 5.5cm onscreen. Each CS
presentation lasted for 5 seconds. The use of these stimuli as
CS A and CS B was counterbalanced across participants.
The unconditioned stimulus (US) was a 500ms shock
administered with a PowerLab 26T generator using stainless
steel electrodes attached to the left proximal and medial
phalanges of the index finger. At the beginning of the
experiment, participants set their own shock level between 5
and 20mA, to a level that was “definitely uncomfortable but
not painful”.

Visualization Guidance
Mindful Visualization This period of practice began with
7.5 minutes of ‘mindfulness of the breath’ guided by audio
CD. This practice was of the sort used in mindfulness-based
cognitive therapy (Segal et al., 2013), and the CD had been
recorded by the first author (who has a postgraduate
qualification in teaching mindfulness). The intention of this
initial period of practice was to help establish a more
mindful state of mind before the participant began stimulus
visualization. After 7.5 minutes, the CD guidance asked the
participant to open their eyes, if they were closed, and look
at the name (either ‘pink square’ or ‘brown cylinder’, as
appropriate to the condition) that the experimenter had
placed in front of them. The audio CD then invited them to
close their eyes and continued as follows:
‘… as best you can, remembering what this shape looked
like in the first part of the study, and seeing if it is possible
to hold an image of this shape in your mind. [pause] Don’t
worry if you find it hard to picture this shape, as this is
more difficult for some of us than others, [pause] just doing
your best to bring to mind whatever memories and images
you have of this shape from the first part of the study.
[pause] And if it seems to help, you might want to
sometimes say the name of the shape to yourself. [pause]
And if there are any feelings or bodily sensations that
accompany the memory or image of the shape, just
acknowledging those and allowing them to be present as
you hold this shape in mind. [pause] And if at any point you
forget which one of the shapes you are being invited to hold
in mind, opening your eyes again briefly and re-reading the
piece of paper.’
The CD guidance subsequently invited participants to
expand their attention so that they both held in mind an
‘image or memory’ of the shape and attended to ‘the
experience of breathing’. This was followed by periods of
silence, interspersed with guidance to the same effect. In
total, the audio CD lasted 13 minutes 20 seconds.
Control Visualization In the control visualization
conditions, participants were asked to listen to an excerpt
from an audiobook by Bill Bryson. This material was
chosen as the calm tone of delivery was similar to that for
the mindfulness visualization guidance and the content was
likely to be experienced as engaging but uncontroversial. As

with the mindfulness visualization conditions, after 7.5
minutes participants were asked to look at the name of the
shape that the experimenter had placed in front of them, and
then hold an image of this shape in mind. The wording and
timing of the stimulus visualization instructions were
identical to the mindfulness visualization conditions, with
the exception that guidance pertaining to attending to the
breath was omitted. In between visualization guidance, the
audiobook continued to play. Each control visualization
condition lasted for the same amount of time as each
mindfulness visualization condition.

Measures
Skin conductance Skin conductance response (SCR) was
measured using LabChart software via MLT116F GSR
electrodes attached to the medial phalanges on the left third
and fourth fingers.
Expectancy Expectancy ratings for the US were recorded
using a Contour Shuttle Xpress device. Participants were
required to make an expectancy rating about the extent they
thought the shock would happen during presentation of the
CS. The device had five buttons and fitted nicely into one
hand such that one button corresponded to one finger. The
different expectancy values were: 1 “There will definitely
not be a shock”, 2 “There might not be a shock”, 3 “Not
sure either way”, 4 “There may be a shock”, and 5 “There
will definitely be a shock”. A continuously available legend
explained which buttons represented which ratings.
State mindfulness As a manipulation check, the State
Mindfulness Scale (Tanay & Bernstein, 2013) was
administered to all participants immediately after the
visualization stage. This 21-item, self-report measure asks
participants to rate how well each item (e.g. ‘I felt closely
connected to the present moment’) describes their
experience over the past 15 minutes. It has satisfactory
psychometric properties, for example Cronbach’s α = .95
(Tanay & Bernstein, 2013). Higher scores indicate higher
levels of state mindfulness. Therefore, if the mindfulness
visualizations were successful at inducing a more mindful
state of mind than the control visualizations, participants in
the former conditions should score significantly more highly
on this measure than those in the latter.

Procedure
With the exception of the visualization stage (see below),
the participants were told they would receive shocks to
some of the visual stimuli throughout the experiment. They
were asked to rate their expectancy that the shock would
occur during each stimulus presentation, using the Shuttle
Xpress device. Otherwise they were asked to remain still to
avoid motion artefacts in the SCR. On shock (A+) trials, a
500ms US was administered after 4500ms of CS A being on
screen, whereas on no shock (B–) trials no US occurred.
SCR recordings were taken on every trial, during the five
seconds prior to CS onset (Pre-CS), five seconds while the

2329

Data Preparation
The SCR data were recorded in micro-Siemens in LabChart
and exported to Excel. For each trial, a mean SCR was
calculated for both the ‘pre-CS’ and ‘CS’ periods. These
data were then transformed using a log transformation to
reduce the variability between participants. In order to
measure the change in SCR associated with the occurrence
of the CS, for each trial a ‘CS-SCR minus pre-CS-SCR’
difference score was then calculated. This score was taken
to be a measure of the conditioned response to the CS, and
henceforth is simply referred to as the ∆SCR (change in skin
conductance response). For the expectancy data, the rating
in the CS period was used as the participant’s expectancy of
the US on that trial. Subsequent data analysis was conducted
using SPSS version 22.

(F(1,92)=12.46, p<0.005), with participants exhibiting
higher SCR scores after A+ (mean=0.069, SE=0.007) than
B- (mean=0.048, SE=0.007). This difference in SCR scores
did not significantly differ between the groups
(F(3,92)=1.14, n.s.), as their training regime was the same.
This pattern was also observed in a stimulus by group
analysis of the expectancy ratings from training.
Specifically,
participants
had
a
significantly
(F(1,92)=396.56, p<0.001) higher expectation of shock on
A+ training trials (mean=4.1, SE=0.06) than on B- training
trials (mean=1.9, SE=0.07). Furthermore, this difference did
not significantly differ across the groups (F(3,92)=0.37,
n.s.). Thus, as expected, participants showed learning of the
A+ B- discrimination in both the ∆SCR and expectancy
data, and this did not differ between groups.

Manipulation Check
The state mindfulness scale data were analyzed using a
practice type (mindfulness vs. control) by stimulus
visualized (A vs. B) ANOVA.
Participants in the
mindfulness conditions had significantly higher state
mindfulness scores than those in the control conditions
(F(1,92)=9.37, p<0.01; respective means: 76.2 (SE=1.72)
and 68.7 (SE=1.72)). This difference did not significantly
differ across stimulus visualized (F(1,92)=0.01, n.s.). Thus,
as intended, the mindfulness practice appeared to have
increased state mindfulness levels relative to control, and
regardless of whether stimulus A or B was visualized.

Test Data
The focus here is on the ∆SCR and expectancy data from
the reacquisition test-phase, as pilot work suggested this
would provide a more sensitive test of any effects than the
data from the extinction phase. It also included twice as
many trials as the extinction phase, and so should produce
less noisy data.

0.25
0.2
∆SCR

CS was on screen and five seconds after the CS (Post-CS).
The inter-trial interval (ITI) was randomly varied between
30 and 40 seconds in order to stop participants timing the
onset of the CS. Long ITIs were required to allow the SCR
recording to reach baseline after the previous US.
This experiment had an initial training phase of 12 trials:
six each of A+ and B-, in a random order. This was
followed by either the mindfulness visualization guidance or
control visualization guidance, as appropriate for the
condition. Participants were advised that there would be no
stimuli on the screen and no shocks, during this stage of the
experiment. Participants were then given a copy of the state
mindfulness scale, with its name removed. They were asked
to tell the experimenter their rating of each statement, rather
than write it, so that they could keep their hands still and
remain wired to the electrodes.
After this, participants were advised that the stimuli
would be appearing on the screen again, and that some of
these would be accompanied by shock. They were asked to
rate their expectancy of shock in the same manner as
previously. There were four extinction trials, in the order A,
B, B, A, (counterbalanced) during which no shocks were
administered. These were followed immediately by eight
trials of re-acquisition, comprising four A+ trials and four
B- trials, in a random order. During this reacquisition phase,
CS A was accompanied by shock and CS B was not, in
exactly the same manner as during the initial training.
Participants were then asked whether they had previous
experience of mindfulness practice. The word mindfulness
had not been used up to this point, in case it influenced
participants’ responding, given the frequency with which
this topic is currently covered in the UK mainstream media.
Finally, participants were debriefed, thanked for their time
and paid.

0.15
A

0.1

B

0.05
0
MV+

MV-

CV+

CV-

Group

Results

Figure 1: Mean change in skin conductance by Group and
by CS tested, from the reacquisition test-phase. Error bars
represent the standard error.

The ∆SCR data from training were analyzed using a
stimulus (A vs. B) by group (MV+, MV-, CV+, CV-)
ANOVA. The main effect of stimulus was significant

Considering the ∆SCR data first, these were analyzed
using a stimulus tested (A vs. B) by practice type
(mindfulness vs. control) by stimulus visualized (A vs. B)

Training Data

2330

Expectancy rating

ANOVA. The means can be seen in Figure 1; note that in
this figure the four combinations of practice type and
stimulus visualized are represented by the four groups on the
x-axis. As would be expected given the contingencies, there
was a significant main effect of stimulus tested
(F(1,92)=18.32, p<0.001), with higher ∆SCRs to stimulus A
than stimulus B. In addition, there were significant two-way
interactions between stimulus tested and practice type
(F(1,92)=6.71, p<0.05), and between stimulus tested and
stimulus visualized (F(1,92)=6.10, p<0.05). None of the
other main effects, nor the three-way interaction, were
significant (all p>0.4). Thus the findings suggest that
practice type and stimulus visualized had additive effects on
the difference in ∆SCR between A and B. More specifically,
practicing mindfulness appeared to decrease the difference
in ∆SCR between the two, as did visualizing stimulus A.
Hence the condition (MV+) containing both mindfulness
and visualization of stimulus A had the smallest difference
between A and B; the condition containing neither (CV-)
had the biggest difference between the two; and the other
two conditions were somewhere in between.

5
4
3
2

A

1

B

0
MV+

MV-

CV+

CV-

Group
Figure 2: Mean expectancy ratings by Group and by CS
tested, from the reacquisition test-phase. Error bars
represent the standard error.
Turning to the reacquisition expectancy data (Figure 2),
these were analyzed using the same three-way ANOVA as
above. As with the ∆SCR data, there was a main effect of
stimulus tested (F(1,92)=677.26, p<0.001), with a correct,
higher expectation that a shock would follow stimulus A
than B. However, none of the other main effects or
interactions were significant (all p>0.1). Thus, in contrast to
the ∆SCR data, none of the manipulations had a measurable
effect on the participants’ expectation of shock.

Discussion
There are a number of results that emerge from this study.
Perhaps the first point to make is that training was very
effective, and produced good conditioning both in terms of
conscious cognitive expectancy and in terms of change in
skin conductance. There were no confounding differences
during training across groups, and the manipulation check at

the end of the interposed activity indicated that mindfulness
practice was also successful. We can be fairly confident,
then, that the study we set out to conduct has actually taken
place. We can now ask what the effects of mindfulness
practice and visualization are on differential fear
conditioning.
Starting with expectancy ratings for shock to the CS+ and
CS- during re-acquisition, the answer is equally
straightforward. Our manipulations had no differential
effect. All groups showed the same (highly significant) level
of differential conditioning on this measure. Any account
that would claim that conscious expectancy is what drives
changes in skin conductance would thus have to postulate a
similar pattern of results in the ∆SCR measure, but this was
not what we observed. Instead, ∆SCR varied across groups,
and in particular the extent to which differential
conditioning was re-acquired differed across groups. Group
MV+, which received mindfulness practise and visualised
the CS+ at the same time, showed no differential
conditioning. Group CV-, which listened to the audio book
and visualised the CS- at the same time, showed strong
differential conditioning, actually stronger than that during
initial training. The difference, then, between these groups
was considerable, and our analysis produced results that
suggested that both mindfulness practise and visualisation
of the CS+ had some protective effect against re-acquisition
of differential fear conditioning.
This contrast between effects on expectancy and on ∆SCR
suggests that after mindfulness practise and visualisation of
the CS+, even though people knew that a shock was likely
to occur to A and not to B, this had no effect on their
physiological response to those stimuli. In some sense, then,
their autonomic response has become decoupled from their
conscious cognitive appraisal of the situation. We can argue
that this has happened to a lesser extent for Groups MV- and
CV+, and not at all for CV-. This is not the only possible
interpretation of these results, however, and we need to
consider others that might generate the same pattern on our
two measures.
One such possibility is that rather than visualisation of the
CS+ having a protective effect, it was in fact visualisation of
the CS- that simply extinguished any fear generalising to
that stimulus and so led to stronger differential conditioning.
We cannot rule this possibility out, but would expect
visualising the CS+ to have had an even stronger effect than
visualising CS-. This is because the CS+ would have had
stronger associations to shock after training, and the
extinction would be expected to have been proportional to
the strength of the association. This mechanism could, then,
explain why visualising the CS+ seemed to impair
differential conditioning, and visualising the CS- seemed to
(relatively speaking) help it. On this account, the
visualisation effect was just one of imagined extinction
feeding through into re-acquisition. But understanding the
effect of mindfulness practise in this way is probably not
helpful. The effect was additive with visualisation, which
indicates a different source for it, and claiming that listening

2331

to Bill Bryson potentiated fear conditioning does seem a
little unlikely (as well as unkind).
We can ask, however, why the effect we observed was on
differential conditioning, and why the ∆SCR for B was so
high in the MV+ group. This was undoubtedly a
contributory factor to our result, though the stronger effect
across groups may have been the effect of our manipulations
on A. In fact, it is quite striking that the average ∆SCR to A
and B was roughly the same in each group. Thus, we can
argue that the overall physiological reactivity of each group
was approximately constant, it was just how that was
distributed over A and B that varied. If it was the case that
the training data were mostly based on conscious
expectancy of shock (and that would not be surprising in
such a simple preparation), then the implication is that this
factor was no longer effective in Group MV+ during reacquisition, since if participants’ expectancies had driven
their physiological reactivity in that case, we would have
seen a difference in ∆SCR to A and B equivalent to that in
the other groups, but we did not. It is possible that instead
we observed the effects of the underlying associative
learning as a result of training, extinction and re-acquisition
and that this had become decoupled from control by
conscious cognitive expectancy. It is also possible that one
belief about the contingencies had been replaced by another,
though our expectancy rating data argues against this.
Further research will be needed to establish exactly what the
effective contribution of the mindfulness practise is here.

Conclusion
We ran this experiment to try to understand what effect
mindfulness might have on the processes underlying
conditioned fear (and hence anxiety). We can be confident
that it does have an effect, and that this effect appears to be
separate from that of visualisation. Whatever the exact
mechanism involved, mindfulness practise appears to
protect against re-acquisition of conditioned fear after
extinction, a result that must be worth pursuing and that
may have implications for the treatment of stimulus-specific
anxiety.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by British Academy / Leverhulme
Small Research Grant SG150007.

References
Bryson, Bill. (2003). A short history of nearly everything.
USA: Broadway Books.
Kabat-Zinn (1990). Full catastrophe living: using the
wisdom of your body and mind to face stress, pain and
illness. New York: Bantam Dell.
Kabat-Zinn, J. (1994). Wherever you go, there you are:
mindfulness meditation in everyday life. New York:
Hyperion.

Knight, D.C., Nguyen, H.T., & Bandettini, P.A. (2003).
Expression of conditional fear with and without
awareness. PNAS, 100(25), 15280-15283.
Kuyken, W., Warren, F.C., Taylor, R.S., Whalley, B.,
Crane, C., et al. (2016). Efficacy of mindfulness-based
cognitive therapy in prevention of depressive relapse: an
individual patient data meta-analysis from randomized
trials. JAMA Psychiatry, 73, 565-574.
Lotan, G., Tanay, G., & Bernstein, A. (2013). Mindfulness
and distress tolerance: relations in a mindfulness
preventive intervention. International Journal of
Cognitive Therapy, 6, 371-85.
Lovibond P.F., & Shanks, D.R. (2002). The role of
awareness in Pavlovian conditioning: Empirical evidence
and theoretical implications. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes, 28(1), 3-26.
McAndrew, A., Jones, F. W., McLaren, R., & McLaren, I.
P. L. (2012). Dissociating expectancy of shock and
changes in skin conductance: an investigation of the
Perruchet effect using an electrodermal paradigm. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes,
38, 203-208.
McLaren, I. P. L., Forrest, C.L., McLaren, R.P., Jones,
F.W., Aitken, M.R.F. and Mackintosh, N.J. (2014).
Associations and Propositions: The case for a dualprocess account of learning in humans. Neurobiology of
Learning and Memory, 108, 185-95.
McLaren, I.P.L., Green, R.E.A., & Mackintosh, N.J. (1994).
Animal learning and the implicit/explicit distinction. In
N.C. Ellis (Ed.), Implicit and explicit learning of
languages. Cambridge, MA: Academic Press.
Mindfulness All-Party Parliamentary Group (2015). Mindful
nation UK. London: The Mindfulness Initiative.
Segal, Z. V., Williams, J.M.G., & Teasdale, J.D. (2013).
Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for depression: a
new approach to preventing relapse (2nd ed.). New York:
Guilford.
Tabbert, K., Stark, R., Kirsch, P., & Vaitl, D. (2006).
Dissociation of neural responses and skin conductance
reactions during fear conditioning with and without
awareness of stimulus contingencies. Neuroimage, 32(2),
761.
Tanay. G., & Bernstein, A. (2013). State mindfulness scale
(SMS): development and initial validation. Psychological
Assessment, 25, 1286-99.
Tang, Y. Y., Holzel, B. K., & Posner, M. I. (2015). The
neuroscience of mindfulness meditation. Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 6, 213–225.
Treanor, M. (2011). The potential impact of mindfulness on
exposure and extinction learning in anxiety disorders.
Clinical Psychology Review, 31, 617-25.
van der Velden, A. M., Kuyken, W., Wattar, U., Crane, C.,
Pallesen, K. J., Dahlgaard, J., Fjorback, L. O., & Piet, J.
(2015). Attentional orienting and executive control are
affected by different types of meditation practice.
Consciousness and Cognition, 46, 110-126.

2332

