Mindshaping the world can make mindreading tractable:
Bridging the gap between philosophy and computational complexity analysis
Andrea Zeppi (azeppi@unime.it)
Department of Cognitive Science, University of Messina
Messina, Italy

Mark Blokpoel (m.blokpoel@psych.ru.nl)
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Radboud University
Nijmegen, The Netherlands

Abstract
It is often assumed that the socio-cultural context positively
influences mindreading performances. Among the available
theories, mindshaping is proposed to consist of cultural
mechanisms that make the social domain homogeneous and,
hence, easier to interpret. Proponents of the mindshaping
hypothesis claim that homogeneity is responsible for the
computational tractability of mindreading, which is otherwise
intractable. In this paper, we examine this core claim of
mindshaping and investigate how homogeneity influences
mindreading tractability. By taking action understanding as a
case-study for mindreading, we formally operationalize
mindshaping homogeneity in different ways with the goal of
bridging the gap between informal claims and formal
(in)tractability results. The analysis shows that only specific
combinations of homogeneity may lead to tractable
mindreading, whilst others do not. Additionally, the analysis
reveals the possibility of a yet undiscovered mindshaping
mechanism.
Keywords: mindshaping; mindreading; computational
intractability; culture; goal inference; conceptual/philosophical
analysis; computational modeling

Introduction
The ability to understand what motivates other people’s
behavior is often considered a defining capacity of human
cognition. Theories of this mindreading capacity, however,
are challenged with explaining how humans can interpret
behaviors in a timely manner, because the available theories
are often computationally intractable (Alechina & Logan,
2010; Apperly, 2010; Zawidzki, 2013). As Gigerenzer and
colleagues proposed:
“The computations postulated by a model of cognition
need to be tractable in the real world in which people
live, not only in the small world of an experiment with
only a few cues. This eliminates NP-hard models that
lead to computational explosion, …” Gigerenzer (2008)
Given that mindreading is performed in a complex, realworld socio-cultural environment (Adams et al., 2010; PerezZapata, Slaughter, & Henry, 2016; Tomasello, Carpenter,
Call, Behne, & Moll, 2005), it stands to reason that
intractable (NP-hard) theories of mindreading cannot explain
how humans can perform the computations postulated by the
theory quickly.

In an attempt to address this theoretical paradox, Zawidzki
has proposed that the socio-cultural environment plays a key
role. Zawidzki proposes that this environment is shaped by
agents themselves so that mindreading can be tractable
(Mameli, 2001; Zawidzki, 2008, 2013). Introduced as the
mindshaping hypothesis, this claim entails a collection of
(social) cognitive and evolutionary mechanisms that bring
structure to the environment.
In this paper, we assess the potential that the mindshaping
hypothesis has to solve the intractability paradox of
mindreading. Given that computational (in)tractability is a
well-defined mathematical property of computational-level
theories (Marr, 1982; van Rooij, 2008), a bridge will have to
be built between Zawidzki’s informal theoretical
contributions and formal complexity-theoretic results. We
propose that such a bridge can be built by taking action
understanding as a special-case proxy for evaluating how
mindshaping mechanisms may pave the way for tractable
mindreading.
In order to do this, we take two steps. First, we analyze the
mindshaping hypothesis and extract specific claims about the
effects that mindshaping mechanisms may have on the
structure of the socio-cultural environment and consequently
the (in)tractability of mindreading. Second, we assess the
plausibility of the claims identified in the first step by
operationalizing the mindshaping structuring effects in a
computational-level model of action understanding (viz.,
Bayesian inverse planning; Baker, Saxe, & Tenenbaum,
2009; Baker, Tenenbaum, & Saxe, 2008). This allows us to
relate mindshaping effects to formal (in)tractability results
(Blokpoel, Kwisthout, van der Weide, Wareham, & van
Rooij, 2013). The analysis will show that only certain
combinations of mindshaping effects lead to tractable
mindreading, whilst other effects do not. Furthermore, the
analysis also suggests the possibility of a novel effect that is
necessary for tractability, which may lead to the discovery of
new mindshaping mechanisms.

Mindreading as abductive inference
Several theoretical accounts of mindreading have been
proposed. Fast and frugal heuristics theories (Chater,
Oaksford, Nakisa, & Redington, 2003) conjecture that
humans can understand what motivates other people’s
behavior through simple cue-based rules. Simulation theory

1418

(Goldman, 2006) conjectures that we understand external
behaviors by the means of mental simulations. In this paper,
we focus on a third hypothesis proposed by Zawidzki. By
rejecting modularity, acknowledging domain-generality and
the relevance problem (Fodor, 1983; Heal, 1996) for social
reasoning, Zawidzki implicitly accepts isotropy and with it a
mindreading account that is inferential in nature (Zawidzki,
2013).1 Under this view, mindreading can be construed as a
mapping from an observed socio-cultural environment
(consisting of observed behaviors, actions and context) and
social knowledge to the intentional attributions that best
explain the observed social environment. Unfortunately, with
the notion that mindreading is inferential also comes
intractability.
Zawidzki attributes intractability of mindreading to the
problem of holism/isotropy. Because in principle any
information that a person has might be relevant for any
inference that is made, every possibility must be considered
(Fodor, 2001). The intractability of inferential mindreading is
corroborated by the fact that many of our best theories of
inferential cognitive capacities are computationally
intractable (NP-hard or worse) (Cherniak, 1986; Frixione,
2001; Levesque, 1988; Thagard & Verbeurgt, 1998; Tsotos,
1990; van Rooij, 2008; van Rooij & Wareham, 2012).
An intractable theory makes unrealistic (exponential or
worse) demands on computational resources (van Rooij,
2008). Hence, such a theory cannot satisfactorily explain why
people can ‘mindread’ as quick as they do (see Table 1). This
leads to the paradox mentioned in the introduction. However,
rather than rejecting the inferential mindreading account
altogether, the paradox may be resolved if the effects of
mindshaping mechanisms are adequately fleshed out. In the
next section, we discuss the different possible structuring
effects that mindshaping mechanisms may have on the
environment.

Deconstructing mindshaping
First proposed by Mameli (2001) and later developed by
Zawidzki (2009; 2008; 2013), the mindshaping hypothesis
proposes that the success of human social cognition is
explained by the (evolutionary) development of behavioral
mechanisms that “shape our socio-cultural environment in
ways that make coordination exponentially more tractable”
(Zawidzki, 2013). Examples of mindshaping mechanisms
are: imitation, over-imitation, the chameleon effect
(Chartrand & Bargh, 1999), pedagogy, norm following and
self-constituting narratives (Zawidzki 2013). Although these
mechanisms are individually quite different, they all
implement a form of social expectancy and conformity
mechanism that ‘mindshape’ both the socio-cultural
environment and social knowledge through biased
transmission and selection of behaviors. Under the
1In

assumption that mindreading is a capacity that operates on
the social environment and social knowledge, mindshaping
may potentially have a positive effect on the tractability of
mindreading. To assess this claim, however, it is necessary to
characterize in more detail the different kinds of effects that
mindshaping may have on the input of mindreading.
Table 1: An illustration of polynomial and exponential time
requirements. The input size corresponds to the size of the
representation of the input (e.g., the observed social
environment and social knowledge encoded in a Bayesian
network). The other columns illustrate the difference
between tractable (i.e., polynomial time) intractable (i.e.,
exponential time or worse). The time required to compute
intractable theories quickly outgrows the age of our
universe.
Input
size n
5
10
20
50
100
250
500

Polynomial time
required n2
0,25 msec.
1 msec.
4 msec.
25 msec.
0,10 sec.
0,63 sec.
2,50 sec.

Exponential time
required 2n
0,32 msec.
10 msec.
10,5 sec.
130312 days
4×1017 years
5,7×1062 years
1,0×10138 years

Unfortunately, the literature only vaguely provides such a
characterization of the effects of mindshaping, which is
thought to ‘homogenize’ the social environment and
knowledge to make mindreading easier. Such a
characterization is insufficient as it states only the ultimate
effect of mindshaping (i.e., tractability of mindreading),
which is exactly that which needs to be explained. In order to
unravel if and how mindshaping can render mindreading
tractable, we need to understand two things. First, we need to
understand that by putting constraints on the input of a
mindreading, those constraints may render mindreading
tractable. Second, we need to understand how mindshaping
can implement such constraints through homogeneity.

How homogeneity should affect mindreading
The main claim put forth by mindshaping is that
mindshaping mechanisms positively affect the reliability of
mindreading (Zawidzki, 2013). The term reliability,
however, conflates two different meanings: accuracy and
tractability. In order for mindreading to be reliable, inferred
propositional attitudes need to be good and the computations
need to be performed in a short amount of time (tractability).
Perhaps counterintuitively, accuracy does not always cause
intractability. An intractable function can be extremely
inaccurate and it is also possible for a tractable function to,

a recent book chapter (Zawidzki, forthcoming), Zawidzki takes
a stronger stance on mindshaping. Although Zawidzki seemingly
proposes mindshaping as a separate alternative to inferential
mindreading, in doing so one may throw out the baby with the

bathwater. If, as originally proposed, we can show how
Mindshaping mechanisms can render inferential mindreading
tractable, it would strengthen the plausibility of the mindshaping
account whether it is separate of mindreading or not.

1419

instead, be accurate. Even approximate accuracy (compared
to e.g., optimality) does not necessarily grant tractability (van
Rooij & Wareham, 2012). It seems, therefore, that the reason
mindreading is tractable for humans lies not in mindreading
trading off accuracy, but in the homogeneity effect that
mindshaping has.
Research has focused on characterizing the phylogenetic,
ontogenetic and cultural evolution of human social cognition
(Mameli, 2001; Zawidzki, 2008, 2013). Although the
computational details are underspecified, the mindshaping
hypothesis clearly states that the tractability of mindreading
is not obtained by altering the mindreading capacity, but by
changing the socio-cultural environment and social
knowledge on which mindreading operates. Mindshaping
mechanisms are hence not modules (Zawidzki, 2009, 2013).
Therefore, for the purpose of assessing the claim about
mindreading tractability, they can be considered
complementary to mindreading. This allows us to abstract
away from the evolutionary mechanisms that underlie
mindshaping and focus on their homogeneity effect.
The solution for tractable mindreading lies “not within
human mind readers, but, rather, outside of them" (Zawidzki,
2009). The idea is promising, since it is known that some
intractable functions f:I→O can be tractable when their input
domain is constrained f’:I’→O, where I’⊂I (Downey &
Fellows, 1999; van Rooij, 2008). These constraints can be the
result of naturally occurring or ‘mindshaped’ structure in the
world. They are formally defined as restrictions on properties
of the input of computational-level models, called parameters
(e.g., see Figure 1). When the tractability of a function is
obtained through such restrictions it is said to be fixedparameter tractable for that subset of the input. Fixedparameter tractability, however, is a formal, mathematical
property of computational-level models. In order to assess if
homogeneity can render mindreading tractable, we need a
formal computational-level model of mindreading. Although
such an account does not yet exist for mindreading in general,
we can investigate the tractability claim using a special-case
capacity for mindreading. In the next section, we take
(inferential) action understanding as a special case of
(inferential) mindreading and present possible ways of
operationalizing homogeneity in Bayesian inverse planning
(Baker, Saxe, Tenenbaum 2009). We then show that only
certain combinations of homogeneity effects render Bayesian
inverse planning tractable, whilst other do not.

Bridging homogeneity to tractability of
Bayesian inverse planning
The ability to understand what goals underlie the actions of
others is a prime example of the human capacity to mindread.
In the Bayesian inverse planning model (Baker et al. 2009),
action understanding is characterized as inferring the most
probable goal given observed social behavior. In other
words, a mapping from an observed socio-cultural
environment (consisting of observed behaviors, actions and
context) and social knowledge (about planning) to the
intentional attributions (goals) that best explain the

observations. Table 2 compares the input and output domains
of mindreading and Bayesian inverse planning and Figure 1
illustrates the Bayesian network that underlies Bayesian
inverse planning.
Figure 1. In Bayesian inverse planning knowledge about
planning is represented by state, action and goal variables
(circles) and the probabilistic dependencies between them
(arrows). Each variable has a domain (boxes). The input of
the model consists of such a network and observed states
and actions (gray variables). The output is the most likely
value assignment to the goal variables. Several parameters
are: The number of goals |G|, the number of observed
actions |A|, the maximum number of values a goal variable
can have g and the maximum number of values an action
variable can have a.

Table 2. Comparing the input and output of the mindreading
capacity with those of the special case Bayesian inverse
planning model.

Input

observed sociocultural environment
and
social knowledge

Bayesian inverse
planning
observed states,
actions
and
knowledge about
planning encoded in a
Bayesian network

Output

intentional
attributions

most probable goals,
given the input

Mindreading

Like Bayesian inference (Chater, Tenenbaum, & Yuille,
2006; Martignon & Hoffrage, 2002), Bayesian inverse
planning is computationally intractable in general (Blokpoel
et al., 2013). This is consistent with the idea that (inferential)
mindreading is computationally intractable too. Blokpoel et
al. (2013), however, used formal analysis to prove that when
certain constraining assumptions are made on the input of
Bayesian inverse planning, it becomes tractable. To
investigate whether or not a more homogeneous sociocultural environment and more homogeneous social
knowledge may lead to tractable mindreading, we have to
build a bridge all the way to Bayesian inverse planning. We

1420

first start by illustrating possible interpretations of
homogeneity. We then operationalize these interpretations in
Bayesian inverse planning, and finally relate the
operationalized homogeneity effects with known
computational tractability results.

Interpreting homogeneity effects
There are two types of homogeneity that are consistent
with the mindshaping literature: Cognitive homogeneity and
mindshaping homogeneity. This analysis is a first attempt and
by no means exhaustive, i.e., more homogeneity effects may
be postulated/discovered in the future. For example, our
analysis will point to possible novel homogeneity effect that
is not yet covered by a mindshaping mechanism.
Cognitive homogeneity
Since all humans have similar biological and cognitive
systems, one could argue that humans also share the majority
of their propositional attitudes. For example, if all humans
behave rationally, they all have the same (rational) bias when
deciding how to act to achieve a goal.
Cognitive homogeneity mechanisms may result in a
population where sets of intentions overlap a lot (i.e., most of
people’s possible intentions are shared; CH-S). This,
however, does not necessarily restrict the number of possible
intentions, as the shared set can still be very large.
Furthermore, Zawidzki argues that tractability of
mindreading cannot be achieved only by cognitive
homogeneity. This seems to make sense from a
computational perspective as well. Even if, for example, all
humans mindread ‘rationally’ this does not explain why
mindreading is tractable. And even if all humans share most
of their intentions, that set can still be extremely big. Other
restrictions are needed to provide any computational benefits.
Mindshaping homogeneity
Mindshaping homogeneity is effected by a set of mechanisms
either cognitive, cultural or evolutionary that decrease the
heterogeneity of the socio-cultural environment and social
knowledge. For example, by having a culture that keeps
reinforcing the same knowledge and behaviors through
pedagogy, norms enforcement and imitation (Zawidzki
2013), the knowledge in that population can become more
and more homogeneous over generations.
Mindshaping homogeneity can be conjectured to result in
the following restrictions as a consequence of biased
transmission of knowledge over generations:
• Biased transmission can restrict on the number of
available behaviors in a population (MH-B);
• Biased transmission can make social knowledge
(i.e., the relations between behaviors and intentions)
less ambiguous (MH-A).
• Mindshaping mechanisms resulting in ritualization
phenomena may limit, regardless of the total
number of possible actions available, the number of
executed and observed actions (MH-R).

•

Habitualization and culture codification may further
limit the complexity of what people can achieve to
facilitate social understanding (MH-C).
In the mindshaping literature, the focus has been on
identifying the nature of the mindshaping mechanisms that
lead to homogeneity. Here instead, we focus on the actual
contribution of mindshaping mechanisms and the relative
homogeneity. Hence, we assume the validity of mindshaping
as a starting point, together with homogeneity, and
investigate if their effect can render an intractable model of a
mindreading capacity tractable.

Operationalizing homogeneity effects in Bayesian
inverse planning
Taking Bayesian inverse planning as our case-study we can
now investigate the possible input-restrictions that can result
from the mindshaping hypothesis for action understanding,
and show which of the homogeneity-based restrictions may
lead to tractability of action understanding. To this end, we
build the final part of our bridge by linking the homogeneitybased restrictions to input restrictions of the Bayesian inverse
planning model. The effect of these restrictions on the
(in)tractability has been investigated by Blokpoel et al.
(2013). Table 3 and Figure 1 provide an overview of the five
parameters they analyzed.
The above-mentioned parameterizations of Bayesian
inverse planning and the previously given interpretations of
homogeneity make it possible to operationalize homogeneity.
Our contribution is to provide these operationalizations as
restrictions on input parameters for Bayesian inverse
planning. We go beyond what is currently in the literature by
fleshing out more detailed effects that mindshaping might
have.
Table 3. Possible parameters for the Bayesian inverse
planning model (taken from Blokpoel et al. 2013) and their
associated homogeneity hypothesis.

|A|

Homogeneity
MH-R (partly)

|G|

MH-C

a

MH-B

g

unknown

1-p

MH-A

Description
The number of actions that are
observed by an interpreter.
The number of goal variables
that are inferred by an
interpreter.
The number of available actions
values per action variable.
The number of available values
per goal variable.
The probability of the most
likely goal inference, dependent
on the probabilistic knowledge
encoded in the Bayesian
network.

Restricting the number of observed actions |A|
Parameter |A| defines the number of actions that an
interpreter observes in order to infer the underlying goal.

1421

Mindshaping mechanisms at work in phenomena like
ritualization may limit the number of executed and observed
actions. However, ritualized behavior may only explain why
|A| may be small in those codified situations. Action
understanding transcends those cases. If MH-R proponents
are committed to small |A| in general, the account needs to be
strengthened. Regardless, restricting |A| does not lead to any
known tractability result.
Restricting the number of inferred goals |G|
If action understanding is to be tractable, then one option is
for |G|, the number of possible goals that an interpreter
actually pursues, to be small (together with g). If, within a
social community, an actor would like his/her actions to be
timely interpretable to others, then this actor might pursue
few goals at a given time so as to make |G| small. This
behavior might be the result of mindshaping mechanisms
such as habitualization, culture and phenomena like
ritualization (MH-C).

Restricting the domain of goals g
Parameter g can be seen as the maximum number of possible
goal attributions available for the given inference. This
number is upper-bounded by the total number of intentions
available to an agent. One might argue that sharing the same
intentions (CH-S) may lead to a restriction on g, but it does
not as humans may in principle share even an infinitely large
set. If anything restricts g, it seems there must be some not
yet discovered mindshaping process that does so, or another
cognitive process that selects the relevant intentions from the
set of all possible intentions. The latter, however, would
imply solving the relevance problem (Fodor, 1983, 2001;
Pylyshyn, 1989) which is notoriously hard but perhaps the
solution lies in a combination of mindshaping and cognitive
relevance selection. Due to the ubiquity of g in tractability
results discovering these processes would be paramount for
having a complete picture of the relation between
homogeneity and tractability of mindreading.

2 Blokpoel et al. proved that Bayesian inverse planning can
encode and ‘solve’ computational problems that are amongst some
of the hardest problems known in computer science. For details (and
a full tutorial) see Blokpoel et al. (2013).

Computational complexity of Bayesian inverse
planning in ‘mindshaped’ worlds
Blokpoel et al. (2013) proved several computational
complexity results for Bayesian inverse planning.2 These
results show that tractability is not easily achieved. Even
restricting multiple parameters simultaneously does not
necessarily render the model computationally tractable. The
following two intractability results prove that either by
themselves or in combination, these restrictions do not make
Bayesian inverse planning tractable:
1. Restricting |A|, a, and |G| simultaneously, or
2. Restricting |A|, a and g simultaneously
Importantly, none of the parameters by themselves render
Bayesian inverse planning tractable. 3 Only when the right
combination of parameters is restricted, i.e., only when the
world is mindshaped in the right way, Bayesian inverse
planning does become tractable. The following two results
show that if either (3) or (4) or both conditions hold, then
action understanding is tractable.
3. Restricting |G| and g, and/or
4. Restricting 1-p and g

Restricting the domain of actions a
Parameter a can be seen as the maximum number of possible
actions that are available at any point in time. This number is
upper-bounded by the total number of possible actions that
are available to a person (MH-B).

Restricting the ambiguity of behavior to make 1-p low
The relational probabilities between variables can be seen
as encoding the social knowledge that is brought to bear when
inferring the most probable goal. The prior probabilities of
variables can be seen as the disposition a person has towards
particular unobserved variables (such as goals) at the time of
the inference. Together, these probabilistic relations between
variables and the prior probability of variables may be shaped

by pedagogy, norm following and imitation such that, 1-p is
low (MH-A).

These two tractability results show that in principle, under
the correctly (mind)shaped conditions, Bayesian inverse
planning can be tractable. However, the results also reveal (at
least for the restricted case of action understanding) a gap in
the mindshaping theory. While one of the main claims of
mindshaping is the importance of homogeneity for the
tractability of mindreading, homogeneity alone cannot (yet)
fully explain tractability. All known tractability results show
that a restriction on g is always necessary for tractability, but
no known mindshaping process leads to that restriction.

Discussion
Explaining why people can understand what motivates
other people’s behavior quickly is, at least from a
computational perspective, not trivial. Often, culture or
evolution are used to trivialize the paradox of mindreading
intractability and explain the speed at which people
understand the social world around them. These ideas are
embodied by Zawidzki’s mindshaping hypothesis. In our
analysis, we have shown that, a bridge can be built between
mindshaping and a special-case capacity for mindreading, a
lot of ground still needs to be covered if these ideas are to
fully deal with the intractability paradox.
By detailing possible interpretations of mindshaping
effects and relating those to known (in)tractability results for
a computational model of action understanding, we have
3No

results are known for 1-p by itself. It is, however, prudent to
assume that restricting 1-p by itself also does not lead to tractability
of Bayesian inverse planning.

1422

shown that only very specific combinations of mindshaping
effects have the potential to explain the performance of
human mindreading.
The analysis has also revealed that a restriction on the
number of available intentions (specifically, the maximum
number of possible goal attributions) is a necessary condition
for tractability. At the same time, no clear homogeneity effect
leads to this restriction. Theoreticians interested in
computationally explaining the speed of human mindreading
through mindshaping may look for mindshaping mechanisms
that specifically lead to this constraint.
Even for a restricted case of mindreading such as action
understanding, some of these restrictions have an effect on
the tractability of this capacity, while others do not. It stands
to reason that caution is in order when claims about
tractability are concerned. While not exhaustive, our analysis
can be seen as a structured attempt at capturing philosophical
and psychological claims about the influence of culture on
mindreading into a systematic computational framework.

References
Adams, R., Rule, N., Franklin, R., Wang, E., Stevenson, M.,
Yoshikawa, S., … Ambady, N. (2010). Cross-cultural
reading the mind in the eyes: an fMRI investigation.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 22(1), 97–108.
Alechina, N., & Logan, B. (2010). Belief ascription under
bounded resources. Synthese, 173(2), 179–197.
Apperly, I. (2010). Mindreaders: the cognitive basis of‘
theory of mind’. Psychology Press.
Baker, C. L., Saxe, R., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2009). Action
understanding as inverse planning. Cognition, 113(3),
329–349.
Baker, C. L., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Saxe, R. R. (2008).
Bayesian models of human action understanding.
Consciousness and Cognition, 17(1), 136–144.
Blokpoel, M., Kwisthout, J., van der Weide, T. P., Wareham,
T., & van Rooij, I. (2013). A computational-level
explanation of the speed of goal inference. Journal of
Mathematical Psychology, 57(3–4), 117–133.
Chartrand, T. L., & Bargh, J. A. (1999). The chameleon
effect: The perception–behavior link and social
interaction. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 76(6), 893.
Chater, N., Oaksford, M., Nakisa, R., & Redington, M.
(2003). Fast, frugal, and rational: How rational norms
explain behavior. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 90(1), 63–86.
Chater, N., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Yuille, A. (2006).
Probabilistic models of cognition: Conceptual
foundations. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 10(7), 287–
291.
Cherniak, C. (1986). Limits for knowledge. Philosophical
Studies, 49(1), 1–18.
Downey, R. G., & Fellows, M. R. (1999). Parameterized
Complexity. New York, NY: Springer New York.
Fodor, J. (1983). The Modularity of Mind. (Z. W. Pylyshyn,
W. Demopoulos, Z. W. E. Pylyshyn, & W. E.

Demopoulos, Eds.)Philosophical Review (Vol. 94).
MIT Press.
Fodor, J. (2001). The Mind Doesn’t Work That Way: The
Scope and Limits of Computational Psychology.
Representation and mind (Vol. 10). MIT Press.
Frixione, M. (2001). Tractable competence. Minds and
Machines, 11(3), 379–397.
Gigerenzer, G. (2008). Why heuristics work. Perspectives on
Psychological Science, 3(1), 20–29.
Goldman, A. I. (2006). Simulating Minds. Philosophical
Books (Vol. 49).
Heal, J. (1996). Simulation, theory, and content. Theories of
Theories of Mind, 75–89.
Levesque, H. J. (1988). Logic and the complexity of
reasoning. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 17(4), 355–
389.
Mameli, M. (2001). Mindreading, Mindshaping, and
Evolution, 597–628.
Marr, D. (1982). Vision. San Francisco: W.H. Freeman and
Company.
Martignon, L., & Hoffrage, U. (2002). Fast, frugal, and fit:
Simple heuristics for paired comparison. Theory and
Decision, 52(1), 29–71.
Perez-Zapata, D., Slaughter, V., & Henry, J. D. (2016).
Cultural effects on mindreading. Cognition, 146, 410–
414.
Pylyshyn, Z. W. (1989). The Robot’s Dilemma: The Frame
Problem in Artificial Intelligence. Norwood: Ablec
Publishing Corporation.
Thagard, P., & Verbeurgt, K. (1998). Coherence as constraint
satisfaction. Cognitive Science, 22(1), 1–24.
Tomasello, M., Carpenter, M., Call, J., Behne, T., & Moll, H.
(2005). Understanding and sharing intentions: The
origins of cultural cognition. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 28(5), 675–691.
Tsotos, J. K. (1990). Analyzing vision at the complexity
level. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, Behavioral(13),
423–469.
van Rooij, I. (2008). The Tractable Cognition Thesis.
Cognitive Science: A Multidisciplinary Journal, 32(6),
939–984.
van Rooij, I., & Wareham, T. (2012). Intractability and
approximation of optimization theories of cognition.
Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 56(4), 232–247.
Zawidzki, T. (forthcoming). Mindshaping. In A. Newen, L.
de Bruin, & S. Gallagher (Eds.), Oxford Handbook of
4E Cognition. Oxford University Press.
Zawidzki, T. (2008). The function of folk psychology: mind
reading or mind shaping? Philosophical Explorations,
11(3).
Zawidzki, T. (2009). Theory of mind, computational
tractability, and mind shaping: 2009 Performance
Metrics for Intelligent Systems Workshop. In
Proceedings of the 9th Workshop on Performance
Metrics for Intelligent Systems (pp. 149–154). ACM.
Zawidzki, T. (2013). Mindshaping: A New framework for
understanding human social cognition. MIT Press.

1423

