Modality Switch Effects Emerge Early and Increase throughout Conceptual
Processing: Evidence from ERPs
Pablo Bernabeu (pcbernabeu@gmail.com)
Centre for Language Studies, Radboud University
Erasmusplein 1, 6525 HT - Nijmegen, Netherlands

Roel M. Willems (r.willems@let.ru.nl)
Neurobiology of Language dept., Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics
Wundtlaan 1, 6525 XD - Nijmegen, Netherlands

Max M. Louwerse (m.m.louwerse@tilburguniversity.edu)
Tilburg center for Cognition and Communication, Tilburg University
Warandelaan 2, 5037 AB - Tilburg, Netherlands
Abstract
We tested whether conceptual processing is modality-specific
by tracking the time course of the Conceptual Modality
Switch effect. Forty-six participants verified the relation
between property words and concept words. The conceptual
modality of consecutive trials was manipulated in order to
produce an Auditory-to-visual switch condition, a Haptic-tovisual switch condition, and a Visual-to-visual, no-switch
condition. Event-Related Potentials (ERPs) were time-locked
to the onset of the first word (property) in the target trials so
as to measure the effect online and to avoid a within-trial
confound. A switch effect was found, characterized by more
negative ERP amplitudes for modality switches than noswitches. It proved significant in four typical time windows
from 160 to 750 milliseconds post word onset, with greater
strength in posterior brain regions, and after 350 milliseconds.
These results suggest that conceptual processing may be
modality-specific in certain tasks, but also that the early stage
of processing is relatively amodal.
Keywords: conceptual processing; time; modality switch;
perceptual simulation; amodal; event-related potentials; ERP

Introduction
Research in the cognitive sciences has extensively
investigated whether conceptual processing is modalityspecific (Barsalou, 2016). In a commonly used paradigm
known as the Conceptual Modality Switch (CMS),
participants perform a property verification task in which
they decide whether certain property words can reasonably
describe certain concept words. For instance, Pecher,
Zeelenberg, and Barsalou (2003) presented sentences such
as Blenders can be loud. Covertly, the conceptual modality
of consecutive trials was manipulated in order to produce
specific switches. A sentence like Blenders can be loud,
which is mainly related to the auditory modality, could
either be followed by a sentence within the same modality—
e.g., Leaves can be rustling—, or by a sentence in a
different modality—e.g., Cranberries can be tart
(gustatory). Pecher et al. found that when the modalities of
consecutive trials did not match, participants took longer to
respond. Such an effect suggested that perceptual features of
concepts (operationalized in the modality shifts) are

accessed during conceptual processing. More recently,
however, the CMS effect was reanalysed using a nonperceptual alternative, language statistics (i.e., how words
co-occur in a language). Louwerse and Connell (2011)
found that language statistics were able to approximately
predict what modality a concept and property pair belonged
to. Specifically, they could predict a visual/haptic modality,
an olfactory/gustatory modality, and an auditory modality,
but they could not predict the subtler differences between
visual and haptic, and between olfactory and gustatory,
which seemed to be reserved for perceptual simulations.
Moreover, when a language statistics explanation and a
perceptual explanation were compared against one another,
faster response times (RTs) were best explained by language
statistics, whereas slower RTs were best explained by
perceptual simulations (for similar findings with switches in
emotion, see Tillman, Hutchinson, Jordan, & Louwerse,
2013). Louwerse and Hutchinson (2012) further replicated
these findings in an Electroencephalography (EEG)
experiment in which they showed that those cortical regions
commonly associated with language processing are
relatively more active in the beginning of processing,
whereas those regions commonly associated with perceptual
processing are relatively more active later on. These studies
demonstrated that the time course of processing is important
in the study of language statistics and perceptual simulation.

Time Course of Effects in Word Processing
The time course of word processing may be relevant for an
effect such as the CMS. Hauk (2016) zooms into the one
second during which a word is processed, proposing the
following timeline. A reader or listener starts to identify a
word and to access part of its meaning within around 150
milliseconds (ms) from word onset. Building on that
information, working memory processes emerge at around
170 ms post word onset, followed by response-related
processes at around 250 ms. Mental imagery and episodic
memory are the last-emerging processes, both around 400
ms post word onset. Once started, each of these processes
extends further, gradually overlapping with each other. This

1629

timeline suggests two important things about the earlier and
the later stages of word processing. First, having an early
emergence—e.g., at 250 ms—does not make an effect
lexicosemantic per se because the meaning encoded could
have gone through working memory before activating the
actual system of interest, e.g., sensorimotor (Mahon &
Caramazza, 2008). Second, it suggests that effects emerging
later face that same challenge and, in addition, the potential
influence of response-related and forthcoming processes.
If even an effect measured online with high temporal
resolution (EEG or Magnetoencephalography) may be
subject to alternative causation, effects measured with lower
temporal resolution (functional Magnetic Resonance
Imaging) or off-line (RT) are arguably more challenged by
this. With regard to the current topic specifically, sensory
and motor effects may possibly be epiphenomenal to the
representation of concepts online, independently of what is
suggested by the measurements off-line or online lagged.
There is a technique especially apt for testing the
causality of cognitive systems, namely, Transcranial
Magnetic Stimulation (TMS). Willems et al. (2011) found
that comprehension of hand-related verbs was improved as a
consequence of stimulating the hand area of premotor
cortex. It was particularly improved when the TMS was
applied in the hemisphere controlling the dominant hand.
More recently, Vukovic et al. found an impairment in the
processing of action-related words, along with an
improvement in the processing of abstract words, after TMS
was applied over motor cortex, 200 ms after word onset.
The latter finding suggests that the contribution of modalityspecific systems (in this case, motor ones) can emerge
relatively early (see also Amsel, Urbach, & Kutas, 2014;
Van Dam, Brazil, Bekkering, & Rueschemeyer, 2014).
In our view, two interlocked questions stand out in the
current topic area. The causality question asks whether
modality-specific effects reflect a functionally relevant
simulation process or arise only after basic conceptual
processing has been attained. The compatibility question
asks whether different processing systems, amodal and
modal, may compatibly operate in conceptual processing.

Experiment
We addressed the causality and the compatibility questions
by revisiting the CMS paradigm (see most recent previous
study in Scerrati, Lugli, Nicoletti, & Borghi, 2016).

effect over time because earlier processing is relatively
amodal (Louwerse & Hutchinson, 2012).
The three previous ERP studies on the CMS time-locked
the measurement to property words placed last in the target
trials (Hald, Marshall, Janssen, & Garnham, 2011; Collins,
Pecher, Zeelenberg, & Coulson, 2011; Hald, Hocking,
Vernon, Marshall, & Garnham, 2013). A potential problem
of those measurements is a lack of certainty on the
emergence of the effect, because a switch might reasonably
emerge already at the first content word in the target trial.
Therefore, in our design we placed the property word first in
the target trial, and time-locked ERPs to its onset. This had
an important advantage, as it helped avoid a confound
caused by the relation between the property and the concept
in each target trial (see Hald et al., 2013). The possibility of
those two confounds—the lagged measurement and the
within-trial relationship—could explain why the CMS effect
has sometimes failed to appear in RTs (Hald et al., 2011;
2013; Collins et al., 2011; Scerrati et al., 2016).
We did not have clear hypotheses on what we would find
as the time course of the CMS because we were the first to
time-lock ERPs to the first word. Nonetheless, the effects
found in the three ERP studies cited above were generally
characterized as N400—linked to semantic violation—, with
more negative amplitudes for modality switches than noswitches. The earliest emerging effect appeared in Hald et
al. (2011), in a time window from 270 to 370 ms.

Different Switches and Processing Speeds
In order to further explore the compatibility question, we
drew on Louwerse and Connell (2011). As reviewed in the
Introduction, they found that quick processing was able to
pick up most switch types but missed the subtler ones, for
instance, between haptic and visual. By contrast, slow
processing had the advantage of picking up even those
subtler switches. Here we brought these findings to a group
design. We distinguished a Quick group of participants and
a Slow group of participants based on their average RT.
Maintaining the CMS as a within-subjects factor, we
predicted that the larger modality switches (e.g., auditory to
visual) would be picked up equally by both groups, whereas
the subtler switches (e.g., haptic to visual) would be picked
up only—or more clearly—by the Slow group.

Method

Tracking the Time Course of the CMS
We measured the CMS online by time-locking EventRelated brain Potentials (ERPs) to the onset of the first word
in the target trials. We wanted to establish where exactly the
effect—indexing access to perceptual information—
emerged, how far it extended, and the relative strength over
the time course. These measures would allow us to
relatively assess how strongly the CMS may be influenced
by response-related and other extra-semantic processes (see
Hauk, 2016). Concerning the compatibility question,
previous research would predict an increase in the CMS

Accuracy Pretest The task was validated in a behavioural
pretest (N = 19; Radboud U., Tilburg U.) revealing that all
participants but one had an average response accuracy over
50%, and the overall average was 63% (SD = 48 pp.).
Participants Forty-nine participants—native speakers of
Dutch with no relevant disorders—were recruited at the
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics. They were paid
a small fee after participating. Participants were randomly
assigned to one of three experimental groups: a Quick
response group (n = 22), a Self-paced response group (n =
21), and a Null group who got the same experimental design

1630

as the Self-paced group but no instructions on response
speed (n = 5) (see Figure 1). One participant had to
prematurely leave the experiment. Another participant had
to be removed from the data due to too noisy ERPs (7
retained trials out of 108). Under visual inspection, all other
participants’ waveforms—preprocessed and averaged per
CMS condition—approximately presented the typical peaks
of word reading. Last, one participant, the only one with an
accuracy below 50%—i.e., 37%—, was also removed from
further analyses. Forty-six participants remained. Because

the Groups presented rather close, significantly equal RTs,
we pooled them together and re-split them in two groups on
the basis of each participant’s average RT. The effects CMS
and CMS by Group were equally significant with the old
and new groups in both ERPs and RTs. New groups were:
Quick (n = 23; mean RT = 568.40 ms, SD = 104.83; age 19–
31, mean = 23.3; 19 females), and Slow (n = 23; mean RT =
937.21 ms, SD = 265.56; age 18–25, mean = 22.2; 18
females). The different tests—stimulus norming, pretest,
and main experiment—did not share any participants.

Figure 1: Schema illustrating materials, design, and procedure. Note that Groups were pooled and re-split (see Participants).
Materials and Design As in previous CMS studies, the
stimuli consisted of pairs of property and concept words, but
we had a small novelty in this combination. Whereas
previous studies presented the concept and the property in
declarative sentences (Pecher et al., 2003; Louwerse &
Connell, 2011; Hald et al., 2011), or with the concept
followed by the property alone (Collins et al., 2011), the
current experiment presented the property followed by the
concept alone, e.g., Soundless Answer. In this design, as in
most, the property word took the most relevant position for
the measurement, because properties are generally more
modality-specific than concepts (Lynott & Connell, 2013).
The properties and concepts, all in Dutch, were partly
based on Lynott and Connell’s (2009, 2013) norms. We
normed our items similarly too, by asking forty-two
respondents to rate 0 to 5 the extent to which they
experienced each property or concept with the senses of
hearing, touch, and vision. Then we computed the dominant
modality of each word (Bernabeu, Louwerse, & Willems, in
prep.). Next, we created 216 trials by joining properties and
concepts within the same modalities. 1 Half of the trials
contained a fairly related property and concept, while the
other half presented rather unrelated pairs. These
1

Olfactory and gustatory words were not used because there
were too few in our candidate stimuli, and were not required.

relationships served to engage participants in a semantic
task, yet conveniently did not affect the ERP measurement
because ERPs were measured before the concept word was
presented in each trial (Figure 1). In spite of this, we wish to
acknowledge that some trials came out rather unnatural—
Lukewarm Volume—or fuzzy—Solid Ideal—because they
were created out of a fixed set of modality norms (Bernabeu
et al., in prep.). In order to alleviate that problem, the
instructions of the experiment stated that the accuracy
feedback following every response was based on the
answers of previous participants (in reality, it wasn’t).
Furthermore, the stimuli and the task were validated by the
accuracy rates in the pretest and in the main experiment.
For the critical CMS manipulation, trials were covertly
paired as context and target trials. This was done pseudorandomly within participants and CMS conditions by using
the software PresentationTM. Three conditions were
created—Auditory-to-visual, Haptic-to-visual, and Visualto-visual—, each with 36 context trials and 36 target trials.
One auditory-to-visual switch for one participant was:
Soundless Answer | Bumpy Wage (bold added to ERP-target
word). For another participant, the latter target trial was
instead preceded by the context trial Loud Welcome. The
pseudo-randomization ensured that ERP-target words
(properties) were matched across CMS conditions on the

1631

essential criteria—word frequency and length (letters), and
semantic class. Also, ERP-target words occurred only once.
Procedure The entire experiment was in Dutch. By means
of written instructions, participants were asked to respond in
each trial whether the first word, a property, could be used
to describe the second word, a concept. Two buttons were
used to respond. An example was provided based on the
property ‘grey’ and the concept ‘snow.’ Snow is often
white, but it can also be grey. By contrast, a property that
would not match is ‘pink.’ Then, the instructions diverged
for the different groups of participants: while the Quick
group was asked to respond as quickly as possible in every
trial, the Self-paced group was asked to respond self-paced,
and the null group was altogether unconstrained (see design
constraints for each group in Figure 1). Further, the
instructions stated that feedback would be provided for each
response, and that this was based on all preceding answers
(although it was not), and therefore participants need not
worry too much about mistakes. Last, they were asked to
move or blink as little as possible, and do so only while the
cross was on the screen. Twelve practice trials ensued, after
which participants could ask questions. The experiment ran
on PresentationTM. The experiment proper lasted about 20
minutes, with a break in the middle. Taking into account
EEG procedures, it lasted about 1 hour and 45 minutes.
ERP Recording and Preprocessing The EEG signal was
recorded with BrainVision Recorder 1TM, in differential
mode, utilizing 65 active Ag/AgCI electrodes. The ground
electrode was positioned just above the nose, at the glabella.
Three other electrodes were used to register eye movements,
two placed at the outer canthi of each eye, and one placed
below the left eye. The remaining 59 electrodes were
mounted in a custom, equidistant ActiCap cap. Impedance
was kept below 10 kΩ by applying electrolyte gel at the tip
of each electrode. The signal was amplified through
BrainAmp DC amplifiers with a bandpass filter of 0.016–
100 Hz, and an online sampling frequency of 500 Hz (i.e.,
every 2 ms). Afterwards, the signal was preprocessed in
BrainVision Analyzer 2TM, with the following steps: CMS
condition segmentation, automatic ocular correction, 200 ms
baseline correction, artefact rejection via semi-automatic
segment selection.2 The proportion of segments (trials)
retained from the 46 final participants was: 77.4% in the
Visual-to-visual condition, 78.0% in the Haptic-to-visual
condition, and 78.6% in the Auditory-to-visual condition.
2

Segment selection (partly based on the Brian Vision Analyzer
tutorials at http://www.erpinfo.org/the-erp-bootcamp.html). The
critical period spanned from 300 ms before target onset to 800
ms after target onset (the period before onset is 100 ms longer
than the general baseline of the ERPs because that improved the
selection of segments). Gradient: 75 µV/ms. Threshold for
difference between maximum and minimum voltage in segment:
±150 µV (this was increased or decreased by up to 40 µV in a
minority of cases where the automatic selection yielded too
noisy waveforms), interval length 200 ms. Amplitude: -100 µV,
+100 µV. Low activity: 0.5 µV, interval length 50 ms.

ERP Analysis The ERPs, averaged per CMS condition,
were downsampled to 125 Hz due to computational
demands. Electrodes were divided into an anterior and a
posterior area (also done in Hald et al., 2011). Albeit a
superficial division, we found it sufficient for the research
question. Time windows were selected as in Hald et al.,
except for the last window, which was extended up to 750
ms post word onset, instead of 700 ms, because the
characteristic component of that latency tends to extend
until then, as we confirmed by visual inspection of these
results. Window 1 was meant to capture N1-P2 components,
window 2 the pre-N400, window 3 the N400, and window 4
the LPC/P600. Analyses were performed in the software R.

Results
All final participants responded correctly in over half of the
trials. The average accuracy was 63% (SD = 48 pp.), nearly
identical in each participant Group and CMS condition.3
ERPs The ERP results revealed a CMS effect from time
window 1 on, larger after 350 ms. It appeared with both
switch conditions, and was characterized by a more negative
amplitude for the switch conditions compared to the noswitch condition. In certain parts over the time course, the
effect appeared in both anterior and posterior areas, and in
both participant groups, but it was generally stronger in the
posterior area and in the Slow group (Figure 2).
The ERPs per window were analyzed with Linear Mixed
Effects models (lmer R package). Random intercepts and
slopes, and fixed effects, were tested with the critical factors
and interactions, as well as with potential confounds, e.g.,
handedness, sex, age. Each inclusion was tested in a
stepwise fashion based on the significance of the Likelihood
Ratio. The final models presented good fits, with R2 ranging
from .748 (time window 4) to .862 (time window 2). Table
1 sums up the results. First, the CMS effect in time window
1 was confirmed significant (see detailed waveforms in
Figure 3). Such an early emergence is unprecedented in the
CMS literature, and it may have been enabled by the timelocking of ERPs to the first word in target trials. In this time
window, the only process not lexicosemantic is possibly
working memory (Hauk, 2016), and therefore this early
emergence lends support to the possibility that the CMS had
a lexicosemantic basis (but see Mahon & Caramazza, 2008).
Whereas in time window 1 (160–216 ms), the CMS effect
was circumscribed to an interaction with Brain Area
(anterior/posterior), by time window 2 (270–370 ms) a main
effect of CMS emerged. Finally, in window 3 (350–550 ms)
and window 4 (500–750 ms), the only critical effect was
CMS. Window 3 presented the largest main effect of CMS.
Planned ANOVA contrasts into CMS conditions, corrected
for multiple comparisons, revealed that the no-switch
condition differed significantly from the switch conditions.

1632

3

Quick group: Auditory-to-visual: 62% (SD=48 pp.). Haptic-tovisual: 61% (SD=49 pp.). Visual-to-visual: 63% (SD=48 pp.).
Slow group: Auditory-to-visual: 64% (SD=48 pp.). Haptic-tovisual: 64% (SD=48 pp.). Visual-to-visual: 64% (SD=48 pp.).

Figure 3: Subset of electrodes from the Slow group at time
window 1 (the Quick group presented a slightly smaller but
also significant effect). Y-axis ranges from -1 μV to +4 μV.
Red labels signal the equivalents in the 10-20 montage.
our predictions based on Louwerse and Connell (2011).
Whereas the Slow group picked up the switches across all
modalities similarly, the Quick group picked up the
Auditory-to-visual switch more clearly than the Haptic-tovisual switch, fitting with an amodal-modal compatibility.
Figure 2: Data per Group and Area, with 95% Confidence
Intervals every 2 ms, and time windows. Negative up.
Table 1: Effect of CMS and its interaction with Ant./Pos.
brain Area and with Group. ***p < .001; **p < .01; *p < .05.
Time window
1) 160–216 ms

2) 270–370 ms
3) 350–550 ms
4) 500–750 ms

Effect: χ2
CMS
1.40
CMS x Ant/Pos Area
48.59***
CMS x Ant/Pos Area x Group 23.63**
CMS
6.40*
CMS x Ant/Pos Area
10.89**
CMS x Ant/Pos Area x Group 4.13***
CMS
9.47**
CMS
7.58*
Factors

RTs This design was tailored to measure ERPs. RTs were
not reliable enough regarding the CMS because the last
word in the target trials—critical for RTs—had not been
matched across conditions on the essential criteria (see
Materials section above). Nonetheless, we analysed RTs,
statistically controlling for the confounds. No effects
involving CMS were found, all ps < .05 (model R2 = .552).

Discussion

By contrast, the switch conditions hardly differed from each
other—statistically equal in some sections of the data—,
fitting the CMS effect. The fit of these follow-up ANOVAs
was high in time windows 1 to 3, and medium in window 4.
Although the interaction of Group and CMS was only
significant in time windows 1 and 2, the waveforms in
windows 2, 3, and 4 presented a pattern that precisely fitted

CMS effects are a well-known, replicated demonstration of
the relevance of modality-specific information for
conceptual processing. In the current study, we tracked this
effect online in order to ascertain at what stages perceptual
information is processed, and in what degree (see Mahon &
Caramazza, 2008; Hauk, 2016). Time-locking ERPs to the
onset of the first word in the target trials brought the added
advantages of cancelling confounds within the target trial
and measuring the effect at the onset, un-lagged. On the
other hand, this design had the disadvantage of some
unnatural stimuli. In spite of these novelties, though, our
broad randomization of trials and the results found suggest
that this experiment preserved the essence of the CMS
paradigm. We found the CMS effect emerging at the start of
lexicosemantic and working memory processing, then

1633

increasing through the rest of word processing. The virtually
immediate effect upon word recognition offers further
support for the suggestion that sensory brain regions have a
functional role in conceptual processing, at least in a fairly
demanding semantic analysis as in the current task (see
Louwerse & Hutchinson, 2012). Solving the causality
question, nonetheless, may require in the future more
fundamental research on word processing, in addition to
TMS-based work, in order to qualify the degree of semantic
and post-semantic processing in an effect (see Hauk, 2016).
The increase in the CMS effect over the time course
converges with previous findings in suggesting that
distributional processing—language statistics—may play a
greater role earlier on (Louwerse & Connell, 2011;
Louwerse & Hutchinson, 2012). This early-late distribution
fits with Hauk’s (2016) word processing timeline, where the
early stage has a greater relative proportion of
lexicosemantic processing, which would presumably
support language statistics. Increasing evidence on the
compatibility of amodal and modal/embodied processing
invites further research. Concerning the CMS specifically,
we still need to establish whether this effect can best be
explained by language statistics or by perceptual
simulations. The current work at least demonstrates that it
emerges early and increases throughout word processing.

Supplementary Material, Acknowledgments
All data, including the stimuli, set-up, raw files, and results
in detail, are available through https://osf.io/97unm/
We received funding from the Neurobiology of Language
department at Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics,
from the Experimental Psychology Society, and from the
Cognitive Science Society. We received valuable advice
from Gwilym Lockwood, Johan Weustink, Monique
Flecken, Ronald Fischer, Sean Roberts, Brain Products
staff, and the reviewers. Also, thanks to the participants.

References
Amsel, B. D., Urbach, T. P., & Kutas, M. (2014).
Empirically grounding grounded cognition: the case of
color. Neuroimage, 99, 149-157.
Barsalou, L. W. (2016). On staying grounded and avoiding
quixotic dead ends. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 23.
Bernabeu, P., Louwerse, M. M., & Willems, R. M. (2017,
April 11). Modality exclusivity norms for 747 properties
and concepts in Dutch: a replication of English
http://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/BRKJW
Collins, J., Pecher, D., Zeelenberg, R., & Coulson, S.
(2011). Modality switching in a property verification task:
an ERP study of what happens when candles flicker after
high heels click. Frontiers in Psychology, 2.
Hald, L. A., Hocking, I., Vernon, D., Marshall, J.-A., &
Garnham, A. (2013). Exploring modality switching
effects in negated sentences: further evidence for
grounded representations. Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 93.
Hald, L. A., Marshall, J.-A., Janssen, D. P., & Garnham, A.
(2011). Switching modalities in a sentence verification

task: ERP evidence for embodied language
processing. Frontiers in Psychology, 2.
Hauk, O. (2016). Only time will tell—Why temporal
information is essential for our neuroscientific
understanding of semantics. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 23, 4, 1072-1079.
Louwerse, M., & Connell, L. (2011). A taste of words:
linguistic context and perceptual simulation predict the
modality of words. Cognitive Science, 35, 2, 381-98.
Louwerse, M., & Hutchinson, S. (2012). Neurological
evidence linguistic processes precede perceptual
simulation in conceptual processing. Frontiers in
Psychology, 3, 385. doi:10.3389/ fpsyg.2012.00385
Lynott, D., & Connell, L. (2009). Modality exclusivity
norms for 423 object properties. Behavior Research
Methods, 41, 2, 558-564.
Lynott, D., & Connell, L. (2013). Modality exclusivity
norms for 400 nouns: The relationship between perceptual
experience and surface word form. Behavior Research
Methods, 45, 516-526.
Mahon, B. Z., & Caramazza, A. (2008). A critical look at
the Embodied Cognition Hypothesis and a new proposal
for grounding conceptual content. Journal of Physiology Paris, 102, 59-70.
Pecher, D., Zeelenberg, R., & Barsalou, L. W. (2003).
Verifying different-modality properties for concepts
produces switching costs. Psychological Science, 14, 2,
119-24.
Scerrati, E., Baroni, G., Borghi, A. M., Galatolo, R., Lugli,
L., & Nicoletti, R. (2015). The modality-switch effect:
visually and aurally presented prime sentences activate
our senses. Frontiers in Psychology, 6, 1668.
Scerrati, E., Lugli, L., Nicoletti, R., & Borghi, A. M.
(2016). The Multilevel Modality-Switch Effect: What
Happens When We See the Bees Buzzing and Hear the
Diamonds Glistening. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review,
doi:10.3758/s13423-016-1150-2.
Tillman, R., Hutchinson, S., Jordan, S., & Louwerse, M.
M. (2013). Verifying properties from different emotions
produces switching costs: Evidence for coarse-grained
language statistics and fine-grained perceptual simulation.
Proceedings of the 35th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 3551–3556). Austin,
TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Van Dam, W. O., Brazil, I. A., Bekkering, H., &
Rueschemeyer, S.-A. (2014). Flexibility in embodied
language processing: context effects in lexical access.
Topics in Cognitive Science, 6, 407–424.
Vukovic, V., Feurra, M., Shpektor, A., Myachykov, A., &
Shtyrov, Y. (2017). Primary motor cortex functionally
contributes to language comprehension: An online rTMS
study. Neuropsychologia, 96, 222-229.
Willems, R. M., Labruna, L., D., Esposito, M., Ivry, R., &
Casasanto, D. (2011). A functional role for the motor
system in language understanding: Evidence from ThetaBurst Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation. Psychological
Science, 22, 849-854.

1634

