Modeling the Ellsberg Paradox by Argument Strength
Niki Pfeifer (niki.pfeifer@lmu.de)
Munich Center for Mathematical Philosophy, LMU Munich, Germany

Hanna Pankka (hanna.pankka@helsinki.fi)
Department of Philosophy, History, Culture and Art Studies, University of Helsinki, Finland
How can we measure the strength of an argument? There
are at least two formal approaches to study (probabilistic) argument strength. In the first approach argument strength is
based on uncertain consequence relations, i.e., by presupposing that the conclusion follows to some degree from the
premises. Usually, this is modeled by a conditional probability of “the conclusion given (some combination of) the
premises” of the argument (see, e.g. Hahn & Oaksford, 2006;
Oaksford & Hahn, 2007). As pointed out by Osherson, Smith,
Wilkie, López, and Shafir (1990), measures of confirmation
can serve as models for argument strength (for an overview
of measures of confirmation see Crupi, Tentori, & Gonzales, 2007). Measures of confirmation and previous attempts
to model argument strength by uncertain consequence relations are problematic when arguments involve conditionals,
like the modus ponens above (see premise (P1)): it is far
from clear to give a precise meaning of conditionalizing on
a combination of premises, when the premise set contains
conditional events. There is ample formal and experimental
evidence that uncertain conditionals are best modeled by conditional probabilities (see, e.g., Evans & Over, 2004; Oaksford & Chater, 2007; Over & Cruz, in press; Pfeifer, 2014,
2013a). Therefore, conditionals should be modeled by conditional probabilities. However, this requirement would imply
to measure the uncertainty of a conclusion given (some combination of) the premises. Unfortunately, satisfactory seman-

Abstract
We present a formal measure of argument strength, which
combines the ideas that conclusions of strong arguments are (i)
highly probable and (ii) their uncertainty is relatively precise.
Likewise, arguments are weak when their conclusion probability is low or when it is highly imprecise. We show how
the proposed measure provides a new model of the Ellsberg
paradox. Moreover, we further substantiate the psychological plausibility of our approach by an experiment (N = 60).
The data show that the proposed measure predicts human inferences in the original Ellsberg task and in corresponding argument strength tasks. Finally, we report qualitative data taken
from structured interviews on folk psychological conceptions
on what argument strength means.
Keywords: argument strength; coherence; Ellsberg paradox;
probability logic

Introduction
Measuring Argument Strength
Probabilistic models of argumentation became popular in
cognitive science and its subfields including psychology, philosophy, and computer science in recent years (see, e.g., Hahn
& Oaksford, 2006; Haenni, 2009; Zenker, 2013). Like logicbased nonmonotonic approaches for defeasible argumentation (see, e.g. Prakken & Vreeswijk, 2002), probabilistic
approaches allow for dealing with exceptions and retracting
conclusions in the light of new evidence. However, in contrast to qualitative logical approaches, probability allows for
managing degrees of belief in the sentences involved in common sense argumentation. Moreover, degrees of belief can
be used to model the strength of arguments (Hahn & Oaksford, 2006; Oaksford & Hahn, 2007; Pfeifer & Kleiter, 2006;
Pfeifer, 2007, 2013b).
The concept “argument” is ambiguous. In logic, it denotes
a triple consisting of a (possibly empty) premise set, a
conclusion indicator, and a conclusion set. Consider, for
example, the following argument, which is an instance of
modus ponens:
(P1) If I take the train at five (T ), I’ll be home at six (H).
(P2) I take the train at five (T ).
(C)
Therefore, I’ll be home at six (H).
Here, (P1) and (P2) are the premises, “Therefore” the conclusion indicator and the sentence “I’ll be home at six” is the
conclusion. In argumentative contexts, “argument” may also
denote a premise which speaks for or against a conclusion.
For example “The train conductors are on strike”, can serve
as an argument for concluding that it is better to take the bus.
In what follows, however, we will focus on arguments in the
logical sense only.

conclusion

premises

}|
{
z}|{ z
tics of expressions like
C | (A and (C|A)) do not exist
yet. Such semantics would, however, be necessary to capture the underlying logical structure of the modus ponens (for
an approach which deals with nested conditionals and which
avoids Lewis’ triviality results, see Gilio, Over, Pfeifer, &
Sanfilippo, 2017; Sanfilippo, Pfeifer, & Gilio, 2017). Modus
ponens is just a relatively simple example here: there are,
of course, many other argument forms involving conditionals. The inability to deal with conditionals seems to us to be
one of the main reasons, why currently no formally satisfactory measure of argument strength exists within the first approach: measures based on uncertain consequence relations
do not seem to be able to deal with the logical form of the
argument.
In this paper, we advocate the second approach to argument strength. It satisfies the requirement of doing justice to
the logical form of arguments involving conditionals (Pfeifer,
2007, 2013b). Specifically, we define argument strength
based on the following ideas: (i) keep the consequence relation deductive, (ii) assign probabilities to the premises, and

925

then (iii) define the measure of argument strength based on
the propagated coherent lower and upper probability bounds
on the conclusion (Pfeifer, 2007, 2013b). Probability propagation from the premises to the conclusion is governed by
coherence based probability logic (see, e.g. Coletti & Scozzafava, 2002; Pfeifer & Kleiter, 2009; Gilio, Pfeifer, & Sanfilippo, 2016). The coherence approach to probability was
originated by Bruno de Finetti (de Finetti, 1970/1974). It
conceives probabilities as subjective degrees of belief. Conditional probabilities (p(C|A)) are primitive. This allows for
zero probabilities of the conditioning event (A). Note that
in standard approaches to probability, p(C|A) is undefined
if p(A) = 0, which is problematic in many argument forms
(see, e.g. Pfeifer, 2014; Gilio et al., 2016). Moreover, coherence allows for managing imprecise probabilities (set-valued
probabilities involving lower and upper probability bounds),
which is relevant for formalising arguments under incomplete
probabilistic knowledge. The above mentioned modus ponens, for example, is formalised as follows (see, e.g. Pfeifer
& Kleiter, 2009, Example 1, p. 209):
(P1’) p(H|T ) = x
(P2’) p(T ) = y
(C’)
Therefore, z′ ≤ p(H) ≤ z′′ , where z′ = xy and
z′′ = xy+1−y are the best possible coherent probability bounds on the conclusion.
Following Pfeifer (2013b), we define the measure of argument strength s on an argument A as follows:

Measure s has a number of plausible consequences: it
ranges always from zero to one (i.e., 0 ≤ s ≤ 1, since z′ and
z′′ are probability values, which are also in the unit interval,
[0, 1]). The extreme “0” denotes weak arguments and “1” denotes strong arguments. Arguments with conclusion probability 1, are strong arguments, since s = 1 if z′ = z′′ = 1.
Arguments with conclusion probability 0 (i.e., z′ = z′′ = 0)
are weak arguments, since s = 0. Likewise, probabilistically
non-informative arguments (i.e., z′ = 0 and z′′ = 1) are weak
arguments, since s = 0.
Interestingly, measure s also provides a new solution to the
Ellsberg paradox (Ellsberg, 1961),1 which we describe in the
next section.

Modeling the Ellsberg Paradox by Measure s
Ellsberg described the following situation (Ellsberg, 1961):
An urn contains 90 balls, of which 30 are red (R) and 60
are black or yellow. The ratio of the black and yellow
balls is unknown—there might be anything between 0 to
60 black (or yellow) balls. One ball is drawn at random
from the urn and you are asked to choose a bet between
two bets. If you take Bet 1, you will win $100, if the
ball drawn from the urn is red. If you take Bet 2, you
will win $100, if the ball drawn from the urn is black.
Ellsberg predicted that most people choose Bet 1 when asked
to decide which of the two bets they prefer. Then, considering
again the same urn, Ellsberg predicted that people will choose
Bet 4, when they are asked to decide between the following
two alternative bets:

Let z′ and z′′ denote the coherent lower and upper probability bounds, respectively, on the conclusion of argument A . Then,

If you take Bet 3, you will win $100, if the ball drawn
from the urn is red or yellow. If you take Bet 4, you
will win $100, if the ball drawn from the urn is black or
yellow.

location

precision
z }| {
}|
{ z′ + z′′
z
.
s(A ) =def. (1 − (z′′ − z′ )) ×
2

(1)

Intuitively, measure s combines the precision and the location
of the coherent conclusion probability interval. Specifically,
strong arguments are arguments with low imprecision of the
conclusion probability (measured by the one-complement of
the distance between the upper and the lower probability
bounds, 1 − (z′′ − z′ )) and with conclusion probabilities close
to one (measured by the mean of the lower and upper probability bound, (z′ + z′′ )/2). Weak arguments are characterized
by a large conclusion interval (i.e., high imprecision) or by a
low-probability conclusion (i.e., the center point of the conclusion interval is close to 0). For a discussion of how logical
validity relates to whether the degree of belief in the conclusion is constrained by the assessment of the premises see, e.g.,
Pfeifer and Kleiter (2009). Of course, precision and location
could be modeled differently (e.g., by using the geometric or
the harmonic mean instead of the arithmetic mean). Moreover, in contexts where the location is more important than
the precision of the conclusion probability interval (or vice
versa), adding suitable weights to formula (1) can adjust the
measure for such cases. However, for the purpose of our paper it is sufficient to keep the measure as simple as possible.

Ellsberg’s predictions create a well-known paradox as they
violate the independence axiom of rational choice (see, e.g.,
Briggs, 2016). Moreover, Ellsberg’s predictions were experimentally confirmed in many studies (see, e.g., Becker &
Brownson, 1964; Slovic & Tversky, 1974; MacCrimmon &
Larsson, 1979).
We propose to frame the Ellsberg paradox in terms of probability logical arguments. Specifically, the premises represent the probabilistic information given in the description of
the urn, and the conclusions represent the respective bets involved in the Ellsberg paradox. Thus, we obtain four arguments. Each argument speaks for choosing the corresponding
bet. The associated argument to Bet 2, for example, is argument A2 (where “∨” denotes disjunction (“or”) and R, B and
Y are mutually exclusive):
p(R) = .33
p(B ∨Y ) = .67
Therefore, 0 ≤ p(B) ≤ .67 is coherent.
1 We thank Kevin T. Kelly for pointing us to the Ellsberg paradox.

926

The strength of this argument is denoted by s(A2 ) and by
applying equation (1) equal to .11 (i.e., s(A2 ) = .11). Table 1 lists the conclusions and the argument strengths s for
each argument for the corresponding four bets involved in the
Ellsberg paradox.

• Do the results of the argument strength rating tasks predict
the responses in the argument strength ranking tasks?
Moreover, we explored empirically, whether argument
strength formulated in epistemic or in persuasive terms impacts participants’ reasoning. Finally, we systematically manipulated the information conveyed in the argument rating
and in the argument ranking tasks by the following independent variables: (i) only the uncertainty of the conclusion was
presented, (ii) only the uncertainties of the premises were presented, and (iii) uncertainties of the premises and the conclusion were presented. The instructions introduced the following symbol for marking not conveyed information in the
respective conditions which correspond the variables (i) and
(ii): . By using a 2 × 3 between-participant design we fully
crossed epistemic versus persuasive formulations and the manipulated information conveyed in the arguments. In the epistemic booklets we used knowledge-oriented phrasings like
“Which argument is stronger to know which bet to choose?”,
whereas in the persuasive booklets we used according phrasings like “Which argument convinces stronger which bet to
choose?”. The experimental conditions are explained in Table 2.

Table 1: Conclusions and normative strengths (s) of Arguments A1 , . . . , A4 associated with the four bets involved in the
Ellsberg paradox. The premises are always p(R) = .33 and
p(B ∨Y ) = .67.
Bet 1
Bet 2
Bet 3
Bet 4

Conclusion
p(R) = .33
0 ≤ p(B) ≤ .67
.33 ≤ p(R ∨Y ) ≤ 1
p(B ∨Y ) = .67

Argument strength
s(A1 ) = .33
s(A2 ) = .11
s(A3 ) = .22
s(A4 ) = .67

The four argument strength values in Table 1 induce the
following preference orders in the classical Ellsberg task: Bet
1 ≻ Bet 2, since s(A1 ) = .33 > s(A2 ) = .11, and Bet 4 ≻
Bet 3, since s(A4 ) = .67 > s(A3 ) = .22 (where X ≻ Y denotes X is preferred over Y ). This preference order corresponds to Ellsberg’s predictions and matches the data (see,
e.g., Becker & Brownson, 1964; Slovic & Tversky, 1974;
MacCrimmon & Larsson, 1979). The functions of the four
arguments can be understood in an epistemic and in a persuasive sense. The epistemic function of the arguments is to gain
knowledge about which bet should be preferred. The persuasive function of the arguments is to convince someone which
bet should be preferred.
In the following section we further investigate the psychological plausibility of s by an experiment.

Table 2: Experimental conditions (Cd 1–Cd 6; N = 60).
Presented probabilities
Premise & conclusion
Conclusion only
Premise only

Method

Epistemic
Cd 1 (n1 = 10)
Cd 3 (n3 = 10)
Cd 5 (n5 = 10)

Persuasive
Cd 2 (n2 = 10)
Cd 4 (n4 = 10)
Cd 6 (n6 = 10)

Argument ranking tasks In these tasks, the participants
were instructed to imagine two friends arguing about which
bet the participant should choose. Then, argument A1 for
Bet 1, and argument A2 for Bet 2 were presented to the participant, e.g.:

Participants
In this experiment 60 university students (mean age 25.9
years (SD = 5.6), 48 females, 12 males) participated for a
compensation of 15¤. All of the participants were Finnish
native speakers and none of them had studied psychology,
mathematics, statistics or philosophy as their major.

Argument 2 for Bet 2

Design and Materials

I am % sure that the ball drawn from the urn is red.
I am % sure that the ball drawn from the urn is black
or yellow.
Therefore, I am at least 0 % and at most 67 % sure that
the ball drawn from the urn is black.

We used three target task types: argument ranking tasks, argument rating tasks, and the (original) Ellsberg tasks. The argument ranking tasks first instructed the participants to rank
the strength of arguments A1 and A2 (see Table 1). Second,
the participants were instructed to rank the strength of arguments A3 and A4 . The argument rating tasks instructed the
participants to rate the strength of each of the four arguments.
In the original version of the Ellsberg task, participants had to
rank which bets they preferred as described in the Introduction. We investigated the following questions which relate
argument strength to the Ellsberg problem:

The participants were then presented with the question
“Which argument is stronger to know which bet to choose?”
(Kumpi argumentti on vahvempi sen tietämiseen, kumpi veto
kannattaisi valita?) in the epistemic condition. In the persuasive condition, they were asked “Which argument convinces you stronger which bet to choose?” (Kumpi argumentti vakuuttaa sinut vahvemmin siitä, kumpi veto kannattaisi
valita?). Then, the participants were instructed to indicate

• Do the results of the argument strength rating tasks predict
the responses in the Ellsberg tasks?

927

their choice by ticking the respective box for Argument 1 (i.e.,
A1 ) or Argument 2 (i.e., A2 ). Finally, the participants ranked
Argument 3 (i.e., A3 ) and Argument 4 (i.e., A4 ).

Table 3: Percentages of argument preferences in the argument
ranking tasks (rnk(A )) and in the Ellsberg tasks (N = 60).
%
Bet1
Bet2

Argument rating tasks In these tasks participants were
presented with the same four arguments as in the argument
ranking tasks. They were asked to carefully reconsider each.
Instead of using forced choice response formats, each argument was followed by a question, e.g., “How strong is Argument 2 for choosing Bet 2?” (Kuinka vahva Argumentti 2 on
Vedon 2 valitsemiseksi?; original epistemic formulation) or
“How strong is Argument 2 for convincing to choose Bet 2?”
(Kuinka vahva Argumentti 2 on vakuuttamaan Vedon 2 valitsemisesta?; original persuasive formulation). The participants were asked to mark their responses on a ten point rating
scale (see Figure 1).

rnk(A )
73,3
26,7

Ellsberg
93,3
6,7

%
Bet3
Bet4

rnk(A )
25,0
75,0

Ellsberg
23,3
76,7

the tasks and what they thought determined the strength of an
argument.

Results and Discussion
We performed Fisher’s exact tests to compare the impact of
the different booklets on the response frequencies in the argument ranking tasks and in the Ellsberg tasks. Moreover,
we tested influences of the different conditions in the argument rating tasks by analyses of variance. After performing
Holm-Bonferroni corrections we did not observe any significant differences. We therefore pooled the data for further
analysis (N = 60).
Ellsberg’s predictions The majority of responses in all
three types of tasks (i.e., argument ranking, argument rating and Ellsberg task) are consistent with Ellsberg’s predictions. Our findings also replicate empirical findings reported
in the literature (see, e.g., Becker & Brownson, 1964; Slovic
& Tversky, 1974; MacCrimmon & Larsson, 1979). Moreover, our data suggest that classical findings in Ellsberg tasks
carry over to (isomorphic) problems formulated in terms of
argument strength.
Table 3 shows how the participants ranked the arguments
in the argument ranking tasks and how they ranked the bets
in the Ellsberg tasks. Bet 1 (resp., argument A1 supporting
Bet 1) is more frequently chosen than Bet 2 (resp., A2 supporting Bet 2). Likewise, Bet 4 (resp., argument A4 supporting Bet 4) is more frequently chosen than Bet 3 (resp., A3
supporting Bet 3).
Moreover, we constructed the underlying preference orders
of the argument strengths and the bets from the participants’
responses in all the three task types. This allows one to see
which choice strategies were most commonly used. In all
tasks, strategies consistent with the independence axioms of
rational choice were less frequently preferred, as can be seen
in Table 4. For constructing the preference orders based on
the responses in the argument strength ratings tasks, we made
the following assumption: if the strength of an argument Ax
was rated higher than the strength of an argument Ay , then
the corresponding Bet x is preferred over Bet y. Again, our
findings replicate the predictions of Ellsberg and the previous empirical findings (see, e.g., Becker & Brownson, 1964;
Slovic & Tversky, 1974; MacCrimmon & Larsson, 1979).
Table 5 shows the mean argument strength rating responses. As predicted by measure s, the mean argument strength ratings reflect the Ellsberg predictions, i.e.,

Figure 1: Answer scale used in the argument rating tasks.

Ellsberg tasks Here, as explained in the introduction, the
participants had to choose which rankings among bets they
preferred (Bet 1 or Bet 2 and Bet 3 or Bet 4). All participants
were presented with the same Ellsberg tasks.

Procedures
Participants completed the booklets individually in a quiet
room. At the beginning of the testing, participants were informed to take as much time as needed for completing the
tasks. Furthermore, they were instructed not to look back on
their previous responses. After reading the introduction the
participants worked on tasks which differed from the Ellsberg problem (and which are not in the scope of the present
paper). After that, the target tasks were presented in the following order: (i) argument ranking tasks, (ii) argument rating
tasks, and (iii) the Ellsberg tasks. The easier argument ranking tasks (rankings require less cognitive effort than ratings)
appeared prior to the argument rating tasks to further help
participants to familiarize themselves with the task materials.
To avoid any influences of the Ellsberg tasks on the argument
strength tasks and to see whether our samples replicate the
findings in the literature, the Ellsberg tasks were presented
at the end of the booklet. Then, the participants filled in demographic data and rated the difficulty and clearness of the
tasks. Participants used 9.6 minutes (SD = 2.8) on the average to work on the booklets. Each session concluded by an
interview to further explore argument strength from a qualitative point of view: we asked how the participants solved

928

Table 4: Percentages of responses consistent with Ellsberg’s
predictions (E), the independence axiom of rational choice
(I). The preference order R can be interpreted as a reversed
version of E. “(x, y) ≻ (u, v)” means “arguments (resp. bets)
x and y are preferred over arguments (resp. bets) u and v”.
Preference order responses consistent with s are in bold.

Table 6: Predictions of bet rankings in Ellsberg tasks based
on responses in the argument strength rating tasks (N = 60).
Ranking
%
Bet 1 vs. Bet 2 Bet 3 vs. Bet 4
Chose as predicted
55.00
56.67
Did not choose as predicted 18.33
23.33
No prediction made
26.67
20.00

Preference
Tasks (N = 60)
Order
A Ranking Ellsberg A Rating
(1, 4) ≻ (2, 3)E
56.67
71.67
56.10
(2, 3) ≻ (1, 4)R
8.33
1.67
4.88
(1, 3) ≻ (2, 4)I
16.67
21.67
21.95
(2, 4) ≻ (1, 3)I
18.33
5.00
17.07

Table 7: Predictions of argument strength rankings based on
the responses in argument strength rating tasks (N = 60).
Ranking
%
Chose as predicted
Did not choose as predicted
No prediction made

mean rating(A1 ) > mean rating(A2 ) and mean rating(A4 ) >
mean rating(A3 ).
Table 5: Means and standard deviations (SD) of the argument
strength ratings on a scale from 0 (“extremely weak”) to 10
(“extremely strong”; N = 60).
Mean
SD

A1

A2

A3

A4

5,20
2,64

3,98
2,58

5,77
1,74

6,95
1,87

A1 vs. A2

A3 vs. A4

56.67
16.67
26.67

60.00
20.00
20.00

means by structured interviews. We asked the participants
how they would define argument strength in their own words.
Participants who had received the persuasive booklets, we hypothesized, mentioned persuasive aspects (like how convincing arguments are) more frequently than those of the epistemic condition. Moreover, participants who had received the
epistemic booklets focused more on epistemic aspects (like
truth and knowledge) than those of the persuasive condition.
However, the interview responses do not confirm these hypotheses.
The responses to the interview question concerning the
meaning of “argument strength” reflected features of our
measure s. Specifically, the location of the coherent conclusion probability interval was referred to by almost all of the
participants. For many participants the location seemed to be
more important than the precision of the coherent conclusion
probability interval. They had, for example, focused solely
on the lower probability bound of the interval and ignored the
upper bound or responded based on the mean value of the
interval.
However, a few participants also referred to the precision
of the coherent conclusion probability interval by sentences
like:

Consistency among the data Based on the argument
strength ratings, we predicted the participants’ choices in the
ranking and in the Ellsberg tasks. The data support our predictions: the argument strength rating responses predict the
ranking responses in the Ellsberg tasks. The rating responses
also predict the responses in the argument strength ranking
tasks (see Table 6 and Table 7).
As some participants had rated the arguments for the bets
equally strong, no predictions could be derived in these cases.
When taking into account only those cases, in which making
predictions was possible, the responses of roughly 3/4 of the
participants were consistent with their responses in the ranking tasks. In the argument strength ranking tasks, 77.3 % of
the participants chose as predicted between the first two bets
and 75.0 % chose as predicted between the second two bets.
For the Ellsberg tasks, we observed similarly high percentages (i.e., 75.0 % and 70.8 % of the participants, for the first
and the second bet rankings, respectively). This is again experimental support for the psychological plausibility of measure s.
Finally, we discuss qualitative data taken from structured
interviews on folk psychological conceptions on what argument strength means.

“The size of this gap between 33 [%] and 100 [%] is
so big that it increases the uncertainty.” (Epävarmuutta
lisää se, että väli 33:n ja 100:n välillä on niin suuri)
Some participants also talked about the truth or correctness of
the probability bounds of the conclusion. For them, the arguments were strong, when the probabilities in the conclusions
were correct, almost regardless of the values in them.
The interview responses provide folk psychological evidence for using location and precision of conclusion probability intervals for evaluating the strength of uncertain argu-

Interview results After the participants completed the paper and pencil tasks, we collected folk psychological conceptions on what “argument strength” (argumentin vahvuus)

929

ments. Location and precision are the key ingredients of our
argument strength measure s.
Finally, we note that Bet 1 is usually not compared directly
against Bet 3 in the traditional Ellsberg task. The corresponding s(A1 ) is a bit higher compared to s(A3 ): epistemically,
this makes sense since the conclusion of A3 is highly imprecise while the conclusion of A1 is perfectly precise (see
Table 1 above). However, it seems plausible to assume that
people would prefer Bet 3 over Bet 1. To accommodate s for
this prediction, one could reduce the impact of the precision
by adding suitable weights to the definition of s.

M. B. Ferraro et al. (Eds.), Soft methods for data science
(pp. 253–260). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer.
Gilio, A., Pfeifer, N., & Sanfilippo, G. (2016). Transitivity
in coherence-based probability logic. Journal of Applied
Logic, 14, 46–64.
Haenni, R. (2009). Probabilistic argumentation. Journal of
Applied Logic, 155–176.
Hahn, U., & Oaksford, M. (2006). A normative theory of
argument strength. Informal Logic, 26, 1-22.
MacCrimmon, K. R., & Larsson, S. (1979). Utility theory: Axioms versus ‘paradoxes’. In M. Allais & O. Hagen
(Eds.), Expected utility and the Allais paradox (Vol. 1979,
pp. 333–409). Dordrecht: Reidel.
Oaksford, M., & Chater, N. (2007). Bayesian rationality:
The probabilistic approach to human reasoning. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Oaksford, M., & Hahn, U. (2007). Induction, deduction, and
argument strength in human reasoning and argumentation.
In A. Feeney & E. Heit (Eds.), Inductive reasoning (pp.
269–301). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Osherson, D. N., Smith, E. E., Wilkie, O., López, A., &
Shafir, E. (1990). Category-based induction. Psychological
Review, 97(2), 185–200.
Over, D. E., & Cruz, N. (in press). Probabilistic accounts
of conditional reasoning. In L. Macchi, M. Bagassi, &
R. Vialem (Eds.), International handbook of thinking and
reasoning. Hove Sussex: Psychology Press.
Pfeifer, N. (2007). Rational argumentation under uncertainty.
In G. Kreuzbauer, N. Gratzl, & E. Hiebl (Eds.), Persuasion
und Wissenschaft (pp. 181–191). Wien: L IT Verlag.
Pfeifer, N. (2013a). The new psychology of reasoning: A
mental probability logical perspective. Thinking & Reasoning, 19(3–4), 329–345.
Pfeifer, N. (2013b). On argument strength. In F. Zenker (Ed.),
Bayesian argumentation. The practical side of probability
(pp. 185–193). Dordrecht: Synthese Library (Springer).
Pfeifer, N. (2014). Reasoning about uncertain conditionals.
Studia Logica, 102(4), 849-866.
Pfeifer, N., & Kleiter, G. D. (2006). Inference in conditional
probability logic. Kybernetika, 42, 391-404.
Pfeifer, N., & Kleiter, G. D. (2009). Framing human inference by coherence based probability logic. Journal of
Applied Logic, 7(2), 206–217.
Prakken, H., & Vreeswijk, G. (2002). Logic for defeasible
argumentation. In D. M. Gabbay & F. Guenthner (Eds.),
Handbook of philosophical logic (2nd ed., Vol. 4, pp. 219–
318). Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Sanfilippo, G., Pfeifer, N., & Gilio, A.
(2017).
A generalized probabilistic version of modus ponens.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1705.00385.
Slovic, P., & Tversky, A. (1974). Who accepts Savage’s
axiom? Behavioral Science, 19(6), 368–373.
Zenker, F. (Ed.). (2013). Bayesian argumentation: The
practical side of probability. Dordrecht: Synthese Library
(Springer).

Concluding Remarks
Based on the location and the precision of the conclusion’s
probability interval, we proposed a formal measure of argument strength s and showed how s predicts responses in Ellsberg tasks. Specifically, we framed choices among bets in
terms of probability logical argument forms. Our data support the hypothesis that Ellsbergs predictions can be justified
by argument strength rankings and argument strength ratings.
Since the proposed measure exploits tools available in
coherence-based probability logic and since it is based on a
deductive consequence relation, it allows for dealing with arguments involving conditionals. The proposed measure has
many plausible consequences, which calls for future formalnormative and experimental research for modeling also other
argument types, like the conditional syllogisms.
Understanding argument strength is important for theories about reasoning and argumentation in general. Our paper sheds formal and experimental light on what argument
strength can mean.
Acknowledgments

DFG project PF740/2-2 (SPP1516).

References
Becker, S. W., & Brownson, F. O. (1964). What price ambiguity? or the role of ambiguity in decision-making. Journal
of Political Economy, 72(1), 62–73.
Briggs, R.
(2016).
Normative theories of rational
choice: Expected utility. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.), The
Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy (Winter 2016 ed.).
http://tinyurl.com/hjwmajw.
Coletti, G., & Scozzafava, R. (2002). Probabilistic logic in a
coherent setting. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Crupi, V., Tentori, K., & Gonzales, M. (2007). On Bayesian
measures of confirmation. Philosophy of Science, 74, 229252.
de Finetti, B. (1970/1974). Theory of probability (Vols. 1, 2).
Chichester: John Wiley & Sons.
Ellsberg, D. (1961). Risk, ambiguity, and the Savage axioms.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 75(4), 643–669.
Evans, J. St. B. T., & Over, D. E. (2004). If. Oxford: OUP.
Gilio, A., Over, D. E., Pfeifer, N., & Sanfilippo, G. (2017).
Centering and compound conditionals under coherence. In

930

