More than meets the eye:
Early relational reasoning cannot be reduced to perceptual heuristics
Caren M. Walker (carenwalker@ucsd.edu)
Department of Psychology, McGill Hall (#0109), University of California San Diego
9500 Gilman Dr., La Jolla, CA 92093 USA
Alison Gopnik (gopnik@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, 3210 Tolman Hall, University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720 USA

Abstract
The ability to represent same-different relations is a condition for
abstract thought. However, there is mixed evidence for when this
ability develops, both ontogenetically and phylogenetically.
Apparent success in relational reasoning may be evidence for
conceptual understanding or may be due to low-level, perceptual
strategies. We introduce a method to discriminate these possibilities
by pitting two conditions that are perceptually matched but
conceptually different: in a “fused” condition, same and different
objects are joined, creating single objects that have the same
perceptual features as the pairs in the “relational” condition.
However, the “fused” objects do not provide evidence for the
relation. Using this method in a causal task provides evidence for
genuine conceptual understanding. This novel technique offers a
simple manipulation that may be applied to a variety of existing
match-to-sample procedures used to assess same-different reasoning
to include in future research with non-human animals, as well as
human infants.
Keywords: cognitive development; causal inference; relational
reasoning; perceptual processes

The ability to represent relations between objects and events
is an essential condition for abstract thought; some have
suggested that relational abilities may be the key to the
cognitive differences between humans and other animals
(Penn, Holyoak, & Povinelli, 2008). However, there is mixed
evidence about when this ability develops, both
ontogenetically and phylogenetically. Traditionally, there
was little evidence for relational reasoning in either young
children or non-human animals. More recent results,
particularly involving the foundational relations “same” and
“different” challenge that conclusion. Ducklings can
generalize these relations in an imprinting paradigm
(Martinho & Kacelnik, 2016). Human infants are able to
generalize these relations in looking-time experiments. In
particular, pre-verbal infants can be habituated to pairs of
same and different objects (Addyman & Mareschal, 2010;
Ferry, Hespos, & Gentner, 2015; Hochman, Mody, & Carey,
2016; Tyrell et al., 1991), discriminate and generalize
patterns of repeated visual or auditory elements
(ABA/AAB/ABB) (Dawson & Gerken, 2009; Johnson et al.,
2009; Marcus et al., 1999; Saffran et al., 2007), and provide

a conditioned response to pairs of identical stimuli (Kovács,
2014; Hochmann, 2010). Moreover, very young toddlers can
apparently use same-different relations in an active causal
learning paradigm (Walker & Gopnik, 2014), although this
ability declines in the preschool period (Walker, Bridgers, &
Gopnik, 2016). In these studies, toddlers, aged 18-30-months,
were able to infer same-different relations in a causal version
of a match to sample task (i.e., matching AA’ with BB’, not
CD, and matching EF with CD, not BB’).
On the other hand, it is possible that these successes may
be mediated by perceptual factors that are quite separate from
the abstract same-different concepts that these tasks are
intended to assess (see Addyman & Mareschal, 2010 for a
review). It is clear that both human and non-human animals
are able to perceive the similarity of objects, agents, and
events in their environment; these abilities are necessary for
basic cognitive functions (Martinho & Kacelnik, 2016;
Hochman, Mody, & Carey, 2016). However, noticing
similarity does not necessarily imply the existence of the
conceptual representation, same. This distinction is difficult
to make, and this point has been widely debated in the
comparative literature (Penn, Holyoak, & Povinelli, 2008;
Thompson & Oden, 1996).
For example, non-human primates (Wasserman, Fagot, &
Young, 2001) and several species of birds (Smirnova et al.,
2015; Pepperberg, 1987) have succeeded in solving similar
relational problems, in the context of multiple trials in
reinforcement learning paradigms (Wasserman, Fagot, &
Young, 2001; Smirnova et al., 2015; Pepperberg, 1987),
suggesting that these species, like humans, may possess the
ability to learn abstract relational properties (Cook &
Wasserman, 2007). However, there is also growing evidence
indicating that these trained abilities may be grounded in
perceptual expertise, reflecting learned sensitivity to surface
cues, rather than higher-order reasoning, per se (Thompson
& Oden, 2000).
This suggests that the match to sample tasks that have
historically served as the standard for assessing samedifferent understanding across species may be passed in the
absence of genuine conceptual representations. In particular,
lower-level, perceptual strategies, like attention to the
symmetry, contrast, and the variance of the stimuli could
contribute to success (Young & Wasserman, 2001; Smith et

1302

al. 2008; Blaisdell & Cook, 2005). Might infants, toddlers,
and non-human animals in an imprinting paradigm, like nonhuman animals in reinforcement training, be responding to a
perceptual analysis of the stimuli pairs rather than a samedifferent strategy?
One candidate for such a strategy is a low-level heuristic,
called “perceptual entropy,” that has been proposed to
facilitate relational recognition in non-human animals (Penn,
Holyoak, & Povinelli, 2008; Wasserman, Fagot, & Young,
2001; Fagot, Wasserman, & Young, 2001; Young &
Wasserman, 1997; Wasserman, Young, & Cook, 2004;
Wasserman & Young, 2010; Zentall et al., 2008). In
particular, any visual display can be reduced to “a continuous
analog estimate of the degree of perceptual variability
between the elements” (Penn, Holyoak, & Povinelli, 2008,
pg. 112), a strategy similar to a process of conceptual
chunking (Halford, Wilson, & Phillips, 1998). In other
words, because there is a lower amount of perceptual
variation among the elements for ‘same’ displays (AA’) than
for ‘different’ displays (AB), toddlers (as well as human
infants and non-human animals) may succeed by learning and
applying the following rule: If the variability of the effective
training sample is low, select the test pair that also has low
variability.
This attention to variance would also subsume a range of
other perceptual cues including symmetry, oddity, and spatial
orientation, among others (Cook & Wasserman, 2007). Adult
humans show some sensitivity to the amount of perceptual
variance in a display, but this evidence is not sufficient to
prove that it is responsible for their performance. In fact,
previous findings suggest that additional processes of
categorization likely play a role in the human
conceptualization of “same-different” relations (Smith et al.,
2008; Fagot, Wasserman, & Young, 2001). Interestingly,
similar findings have been recently found with baboons
(Flemming, Thompson, & Fagot, 2013).
Discriminating between conceptual and perceptual
learning strategies in non-verbal relational reasoning tasks is
a notoriously difficult problem to solve in both
developmental and comparative contexts. In the current
study, we introduce a novel method designed to directly pit
the perceptual and conceptual accounts against one another.
The method involves a contrast between one condition
relying upon a traditional match to sample task involving
same-different relations (i.e., matching AA’ with BB’, not
CD, and matching EF with CD, not BB’) and a “fused” object
condition. Exactly the same objects are used in the two
conditions, but in the “fused” condition the objects are
physically joined to create a single compound object.
Importantly, the amount of perceptual entropy, or variance,
as well as other perceptual features such as symmetry is
matched between the two conditions. However, only the
unfused/relational condition also provides evidence for the
higher-order relation ‘same.’ In the fused/single object case,
there is no relation between objects to learn – there is only
one object present.

As a proof of concept, we applied this method to assess
human toddlers in a causal match to sample task originally
developed by Walker and colleagues (Walker & Gopnik,
2014; Walker, Bridgers, & Gopnik, 2016). In the current
study, children observed two trials in which a pair of “same”
objects, or a fusion of those objects, activated a machine, but
a pair or fusion of two “different” objects did not. Then,
children had to select a novel pair of objects or a novel fused
object to activate the machine (see Figure 1). If children are
indeed relying upon a low-level perceptual heuristic, they
should select the lower entropy pair (i.e., the pair with less
variance among its features) consistently across both
conditions, whether they are fused or not. On the other hand,
if children learn the abstract relation ‘same’ during the
training trials, they should privilege this test pair only in the
unfused/relational condition, where there is a relation
between objects to learn.
Although the current study applies this method to assess
human reasoning in a previously published causal reasoning
paradigm, this same technique is intended to be used for
discriminating perceptual strategies from genuine relational
reasoning in a variety of existing paradigms, across species.

Method
Participants
A total of 80 18-30-month-olds participated (M = 24.3
months; SD = 3.6 months; range = 17.9 - 31.1 months; 40
girls), with 40 toddlers randomly assigned to one of two
conditions (fused/single object or unfused/relational). There
was no difference in age between conditions, t(1) = 1.21, p =
.23, and approximately equal numbers of males and females
were assigned to each. Sixteen additional children were tested
but excluded for failure to complete the study (11) or due to
experimenter error (5). Children were recruited from a local
museum.

Materials
The toy was a 10” x 6” x 4” opaque cardboard box containing
a wireless doorbell. When a block or pair of blocks
“activated” the toy, the doorbell played a novel melody. In
fact, the toy was surrepticiously activated by a remote
control. Eight painted wooden blocks in assorted colors and
shapes (2 pairs of ‘same’ blocks and 2 pairs of ‘different’
blocks) were placed on the toy in pairs during the
unfused/relational condition training. The ‘same/low
entropy’ blocks were identical in color and shape, and the
‘different/high entropy’ blocks were distinct in color and
shape. An identical set of these eight painted blocks were
used to create the “fused” objects to be placed on the toy as
single objects in the fused/single object condition training. In
this condition, each pair of training blocks were glued
together to create a single, larger block. Four additional
blocks were used during the test phase of each condition,
including 1 novel pair of ‘same’ and 1 novel pair of
‘different’ blocks. The test blocks either appeared as two
pairs of blocks or as two fused, single objects, depending

1303

upon condition (see Figure 1). The pairs of test blocks in each
condition were placed on 4” x 4” plastic trays.
Two different complete sets of blocks were constructed for
each condition. In the simple set, all blocks were composed
of simple, symmetrical geometric shapes (e.g., cubes,
spheres, cylinders) with a single color and no pattern. In the
complex set, all blocks were composed of asymmetrical,
irregular polygons. Half of the children in each condition
were randomly assigned to receive each stimuli set.

of objects on the toy in the same orientation as the objects
that formed the fused blocks, so that they were perceptually
identical. Except for the particular objects used in the training
trials (fused or unfused), there were no other differences in
procedure between conditions.

Procedure
All children were tested one-on-one, seated at a table across
from the experimenter. Following a brief warm-up, the
experiementer introduced a toy that was placed on the table.
The experimenter said, “This is my toy. Some things make
my toy play music and some things do not. Let’s try some
things on my toy and find out how it works.”
In the unfused/relational condition, children observed as
the experimenter placed a pair of ‘same’ blocks (AA’) on the
toy, causing it to activate and play music (twice). They then
observed that a pair of ‘different’ blocks (BC) failed to
activate the toy (twice). This procedure was repeated for two
additional pairs, one pair of ‘same’ (DD’) and one pair of
‘different’ blocks (EF) (see Figure 1). The ‘same’ pairs (AA’,
DD’) were composed of individual blocks that were identical
in both color and shape, and the ‘different’ pairs (BC, EF)
were composed of individual blocks distinct in both color and
shape. In the fused/single object condition, children observed
an identical presentation with one critical exception: each
pair of blocks were glued together to form single objects (Alow entropy, B-high entropy, C-low entropy, D-high entropy)
(see Figure 1).
In detail, the experimenter selected the first pair [block],
saying, “Let’s try!” and placed them [it] on the toy. Children
in both conditions observed the ‘same’ pair [‘low entropy’
block’] activate the toy. The experimenter said, “Music! Let’s
try again!”, picked up the pair [block], and placed them [it]
back on the toy a second time, and children observed the
outcome. The experimenter said, “Music! These ones [this
one] made my toy play music.” After this second
demonstration, the experimenter removed the pair [block],
selected another – a ‘different’ pair or a ‘high entropy’ block
– and placed it on the toy. This time, children in both
conditions observed no effect. The experimenter said, “No
music. Let’s try again!” As with the first pair [block], this was
demonstrated a second time. The experimenter concluded,
“No music. These ones [this one] did not make my toy play
music.”
This procedure was repeated for all 4 pairs [blocks]: 2 pairs
[blocks] of ‘same’ [‘low entropy’] objects and 2 pairs
[blocks] of ‘different’ [‘high entropy’] objects. All pairs were
placed on the toy twice. Therefore, children observed a total
of 8 outcomes (4 positive and 4 negative). The order that the
individual pairs [blocks] were presented was randomized,
however, the order of the presentation pairs was fixed,
beginning with a causal pair, and alternating between causal
and inert pairs. In all cases, the experimenter placed all pairs

Figure 1: Schematic of study design (simple set). On
training trials, pairs of blocks were placed on the toy. In the
fused/single object condition, fused, identical/low entropy
objects activated the toy, while fused, distinct/high entropy
objects did not. In the unfused/relational condition, pairs
of identical/low entropy objects activated the toy while
pairs of distinct/high entropy objects did not. Participants
observed 4 pairs (2 causal, 2 inert). On each test trial, the
child selected between 2 novel pairs (“low entropy [same]”
or “high entropy [different]”).

Following the training phrase in both conditions, the
experimenter said, “Now it is your turn. Can you help me pick
the thing[s] that will make my toy play music?” The
experimenter produced 2 pairs of test blocks (1 novel ‘same’
pair [‘low entropy’ block], 1 novel ‘different’ pair [‘high
entropy’ block]). In order to avoid a novelty preference, both
test pairs were composed of novel objects. The pairs were
presented to the child on trays. The experimenter held up the
two trays, saying, “I have these [this] and I have these [this].
Only one of these trays has the thing[s] that will make my toy

1304

play music.” She then lowered the trays and placed them on
opposite sides of the table in front of the child, saying, “Can
you point to the one[s] that will make my toy play music?”
The side on which the correct pair was placed was
randomized between subjects.
Coding The first tray that the child selected (pointing,
reaching, picking up objects) was recorded. Children
received 1 point for selecting the low entropy pair/object that
was consistent with their training and 0 points for selecting
the high entropy pair/object. Children’s responses were
recorded by a second researcher during the testing session,
and all sessions were video recorded for independent coding
by a third researcher who was naïve to the the hypotheses of
the experiment. Interrater reliability was very high; the two
coders agreed on 99% of the children’s responses to the test
questions.

Results
Results show no difference between the complex objects and
simple objects, in either condition, χ2(1) = 0, p = 1, φ = 0
(fused/single object); χ2(1) = .13, p = .72, φ = -.06
(unfused/relational). We therefore combined data from the
two stimuli sets within each condition for all subsequent
analyses. Children in the unfused/relational condition
selected the ‘same’ test pair more often than chance (73%), p
= .006 (two-tailed, exact binomial). These results replicate
previous findings with 18-30-month-olds (Walker & Gopnik,
2014; Walker et al., 2016). However, in contrast with the
perceptual account, children of the same age in the
fused/single object condition selected at chance (40%), p =
.27 (two-tailed, exact binomial). There was a significant
difference between conditions, χ2(1) = 8.58, p = .004, φ =
.33.

Discussion
Results demonstrate that when perceptual cues are matched,
but no relation is present, toddlers do not appear to learn and
generalize an abstract concept of ‘same’ to a novel set of
objects. These findings therefore suggest that early relational
competence in humans found here and elsewhere is unlikely
to be the result of reliance on a perceptual heuristic, and
provide evidence for genuine conceptual understanding of
‘same’ at this young age.
This novel method offers a simple, non-verbal
manipulation that may be applied to a variety of existing
match-to-sample procedures used to assess same-different
reasoning to include in future research with non-human
animals across species, as well as human infants. If infants or
animals show the discriminative pattern of the toddlers in this
experiment – generalizing the unfused/relational but not the
fused/single objects – that suggests that they genuinely
understand the relations. On the other hand, if they respond
in the same manner to both conditions, the perceptual
hypothesis would gain more weight. The latter pattern would
not eliminate the possibility that relational reasoning was in
play – perhaps children or animals are using different kinds

of reasoning in the two conditions. But it would place the
burden of proof on the relational claim.
Whatever the results of non-human animals or infants
might turn out to be, the present results are consistent with
previous claims that, from a very early age, as young as 18
months, humans posess cognitive tools for genuine
conceptual understanding of same-different relations. These
findings are also consistent with the idea that humans may
possess a qualitatively different system for abstracting
relations.

Acknowledgments
Research for this project was funded by the American
Psychological Foundation to C. Walker (Elizabeth
Munsterberg Koppitz Child Psychology Graduate
Fellowship) and the National Science Foundation to A.
Gopnik. We thank all of the parents and children who
participated in this research, as well as the Childhood
Creativity Center at the Bay Area Discovery Museum for
facilitating recruitment. Finally, we thank Rosie Aboody,
Hannah Broidy, and Gillian Rush for their efforts towards
data collection.

References
Addyman, C., & Mareschal, D. (2010). The perceptual
origins of the abstract Same/Different concept in human
infants. Animal Cognition, 13(6), 817–833.
Blaisdell, A. P., & Cook, R. G. (2005). Two-item same
different concept learning in pigeons. Animal Learning &
Behavior, 33(1), 67-77.
Cook, R. G., & Wasserman, E. A. (2007). Learning and
transfer
of
relational
matching-to-sample
by
pigeons. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 14(6), 11071114.
Dawson, C., & Gerken, L. A. (2009). From domaingenerality to domain-sensitivity: 4-month-olds learn an
abstract repetition rule in music that 7-month-olds do not.
Cognition, 111, 378–382.
Fagot, J., Wasserman, E. A., & Young, M. E. (2001).
Discriminating the relation between relations: the role of
entropy in abstract conceptualization by baboons (Papio
papio) and humans (Homo sapiens). Journal of
Experimental
Psychology:
Animal
Behavior
Processes, 27(4), 316.
Ferry, A., Hespos, S. J., & Gentner, D. (2015). Prelinguistic
relational concepts: Investigating the origin of analogy in
infants. Child Development, 86(5), 1386–1405.
Flemming, T. M., Thompson, R. K., & Fagot, J. (2013).
Baboons, like humans, solve analogy by categorical
abstraction of relations. Animal cognition, 16(3), 519-524.
Halford, G. S., Wilson, W. H., & Phillips, S. (1998).
Processing capacity defined by relational complexity:
Implications for comparative, developmental, and
cognitive
psychology. Behavioral
and
Brain
Sciences, 21(06), 803-831.
Hochmann, J. R. (2010). Categories, words and rules in
language acquisition (Doctoral Dissertation).

1305

Hochmann, J. R., Mody, S., & Carey, S. (2016). Infants’
representations of same and different in match-and nonmatch-to-sample. Cognitive psychology, 86, 87-111.
Johnson, S. P., Fernandes, K. J., Frank, M. C., Kirkham, N.
Z., Marcus, G. F., Rabagliati, H., & Slemmer, J. A. (2009).
Abstract rule learning for visual sequences in 8- and 11month-olds. Infancy, 14, 2–18.
Kovács, Á. M. (2014). Extracting regularities from noise: Do
infants encode patterns based on same and different
relations?
Language
Learning.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/lang.12056.
Marcus, G. F., Vijayan, S., Bandi Rao, S., & Vishton, P. M.
(1999). Rule-learning in seven-month-old infants. Science,
283, 77–80.
Martinho, A., & Kacelnik, A. (2016). Ducklings imprint on
the relational concept of “same or different”. Science, 353
(6296), 286-288.
Penn, D.C., Holyoak, K.J., Povinelli, D.J. (2008). Darwin’s
mistake: Explaining the discontinuity between human and
nonhuman minds. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 31, 109178.
Pepperberg, I. M. (1987). Acquisition of the same/different
concept by an African Grey parrot (Psittacus erithacus):
Learning with respect to categories of color, shape, and
material. Animal Learning & Behavior, 15(4), 423-432.
Saffran, J. R., Pollak, S. D., Seibel, R. L., & Shkolnik, A.
(2007). Dog is a dog is a dog: Infant rule learning is not
specific to language. Cognition, 105(3), 669-680.
Smirnova, A., Zorina, Z., Obozova, T., & Wasserman, E.
(2015). Crows spontaneously exhibit analogical
reasoning. Current Biology, 25(2), 256-260.
Smith, J. D., Redford, J. S., Haas, S. M., Coutinho, M. V., &
Couchman, J. J. (2008). The comparative psychology of
same-different judgments by humans (Homo sapiens) and
monkeys (Macaca mulatta). Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes, 34(3), 361.
Thompson, R. K. R., & Oden, D. L. (1996). A profound
disparity revisited: Perception and judgment of abstract
identity relations by chimpanzees, human infants, and
monkeys. Behavioral Processes, 35, 149–161.

Thompson, R. K. R., & Oden, D. L. (2000). Categorical
perception and conceptual judgments by nonhuman
primates: The paleological monkey and the analogical
ape. Cognitive Science, 24(3), 363-396.
Tyrell, D. J., Stauffer, L. B., & Snowman, L. G. (1991).
Perception of abstract identity/difference relationship by
infants. Infant Behavior and Development, 14, 125–129.
Walker, C.M., Bridgers, S., & Gopnik, A. (2016). The early
emergence and puzzling decline of relational reasoning:
Effects of knowledge and search on inferring abstract
concepts. Cognition, 156, 30-40.
Walker, C. M., & Gopnik, A. (2014). Toddlers infer higherorder relational principles in causal learning.
Psychological Science, 25(1), 161–169.
Wasserman, E.A., Fagot, F., & Young, M.E. (2001). Samedifferent conceptualizations by baboons (Papio papio):
The role of entropy. Journal of Comparative Psychology,
115(1): 42-52.
Wasserman, E. A., Young, M. E., & Cook, R. G. (2004).
Variability discrimination in humans and animals:
implications for adaptive action. American
Psychologist, 59(9), 879.
Wasserman, E. A., & Young, M. E. (2010). Same–different
discrimination: The keel and backbone of thought and
reasoning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal
Behavior Processes, 36(1), 3.
Young, M. E., & Wasserman, E. A. (1997). Entropy
detection by pigeons: Response to mixed visual displays
after same–different discrimination training. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior
Processes, 23(2), 157.
Young, M. E., & Wasserman, E. A. (2001). Entropy and
variability discrimination. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 27(1),
278.
Zentall, T. R., Wasserman, E. A., Lazareva, O. F.,
Thompson, R. K., & Rattermann, M. J. (2008). Concept
learning in animals. Comp Cogn Behav Rev, 3, 13-45.

1306

