Narrowing of the Cone-of-Direct Gaze Through Reinforcement Learning
Sam Blakeman (sam.blakeman.15@ucl.ac.uk) & Denis Mareschal (d.mareschal@bbk.ac.uk)
Department of Psychological Sciences, Birkbeck, University of London
Abstract

eye gaze direction is not uniform across eye gaze deviations.
The Cone-of-Direct gaze (CoD), is defined as the range of
gaze deviations that we perceive to be looking directly at us
(Gamer and Hecht., 2007). The CoD, therefore, has
implications for how we perceive social situations and our
interpretation of eye gaze. For example, if a gaze deviation
falls inside our CoD then we may perceive it as looking
directly at us and not engage in any eye gaze following
behavior.
The perception of whether an individual is looking
directly at you or not is also of particular interest to those
investigating social anxiety disorders (Schulze et al., 2013).
For example, a study by Jun et al. (2013) reported a wider
CoD for high socially anxious males compared to low
socially anxious males. Similarly, Gamer et al. (2011)
conducted a study where participants had their CoD
measured in response to a virtual head. They found that
participants with social phobia had a wider CoD in the
presence of a second virtual head that was directed at them.
Such studies suggest that a wider CoD is associated with
social anxiety and may play a role in the disorder.
Both eye gaze following and the CoD undergo changes
during development. Eye gaze following emerges and
improves during infant development (Brooks and Meltzoff.,
2005, Deak., 2015), while the CoD becomes narrower
during childhood (Mareschal et al., 2016). This equates to
older children being more reliable at following eye gaze and
more accurate at interpreting small eye gaze deviations as
not being directed at them. It is possible that these
developmental timelines for eye gaze following and the
CoD are crucial for infant and child development and may
be altered in clinical disorders such as autism and social
anxiety. It is therefore important to understand their
emergence and developmental trajectory.
Reinforcement learning (Sutton and Barto, 1998) has
received much interest in recent years and there is now good
evidence of the neurocomputational basis of reinforcement
learning (Schultz et al., 1997). It has been proposed as a
possible mechanism for the emergence and improvement of
eye gaze following in infants. Triesch et al. (2006), describe
a reinforcement learning model in which rewards obtained
by following a caregiver’s gaze led to the reinforcement of
eye gaze following behavior. According to this account,
infants associates the rewarding object that the caregiver is
looking at with the act of following the caregiver’s gaze,
thereby building a predisposition to follow gaze as a
consequence of experience rather than an innate behavior.
While reinforcement learning may account for the
emergence of eye gaze following, the mechanism behind the
emergence of a CoD is yet to be elucidated. To what extent
is the CoD and its development the result of an innate prior

The Cone of Direct Gaze (CoD) is described as the range of
eye gaze deviations over which an observer reports gaze as
being directed towards them. The CoD has been found to
narrow with age across childhood (Mareschal et al. 2016). We
investigated whether reinforcement learning, so critical in
shaping eye gaze responses in infancy, was able to account
for the emergence of a CoD and its narrowing in childhood.
To this end, we adapted Triesch et al.'s (2006) reinforcement
learning model by (1) defining a topology over object
locations, and (2) introducing opponent non-linear reward
profiles for looking at objects and caregivers. In Simulation 1
we show that these modifications give rise to a functional
CoD in which there is reduced eye gaze following and
increased fixation on the caregiver for locations with a small
caregiver eye gaze eccentricity. In Simulation 2 we show that
the width of this effect reduces with learning, suggesting that
developmental decreases in the CoD may be driven by
reinforcement learning. In Simulation 3 we explore how
changes in model parameters can explain the CoD in high
anxiety populations. Finally, the model provides one way of
unifying the developmental gaze-following and CoD
literatures, until now considered largely independent.
Keywords: Reinforcement Learning; Cone of Direct Gaze;
Gaze Following; Development; Social Anxiety; Autism;

Background
The eyes are a key aspect of social intelligence. From the
eyes one can infer an individual’s emotions or desires,
which can help guide social behavior, and also learn about
the surrounding environment (Shepherd et al., 2010).
Through joint attention, individuals can alert others to
interesting objects in the environment by guiding their
attention to that object. Eye gaze following is one form
(Scaife and Bruner, 1975). In this seminal study the authors
showed that infants were able to interpret the direction of
another individual’s eye gaze could and use that as a cue to
look in the perceived direction. This allows infants to find
objects of interest in the environment and learn from
experienced caregivers in a non-verbal manner. Indeed,
infants have been shown to be sensitive to eye gaze from a
very young age, appearing to show a preference for eyes
over other parts of the face (Hains & Muir, 1996).
Infants with autism have a reduced ability to follow eye
gaze (Leekam et al., 1997). A recent study by Thorup et al.
(2016) found that infants at high risk of developing autism
rely disproportionally on directional information from the
head as compared to the eyes. This reduced ability to follow
eye gaze may be a contributing factor to the deficits in
social cognition and communication associated with autism.
While joint attention via eye gaze following appears to be
a crucial tool for the developing infant, the perception of
1

130

and to what extent is it the result of learning and the external
environment? To investigate such a question, we explored
whether the reinforcement learning framework could also
account for the CoD and its changes through development.
If reinforcement learning where to play a role in the
emergence of a CoD then it may provide a link between eye
gaze following and the CoD. It would also highlight
reinforcement learning as a promising target for the
therapeutic investigation of disorders such as autism and
social anxiety.

for deciding where to shift the gaze. These decisions are
driven by the rewards encountered in the environment by
the infant. In this environment the infant has four possible
views, each of which having an associated reward:
1. An empty location (Rnothing)
2. A location containing the object (Robject)
3. A profile view of the caregiver (Rprofile)
4. A frontal view of the caregiver as they look
directly at the infant (Rfrontal)
For each of these views the infant receives the associated
reward (Rx) multiplied by a habituation value. This
habituation value exponentially decreases as the infant
fixates on a location. The degree of this decrease is
controlled by the habituation parameter beta ( ). Equally,
the reward value for locations that have been habituated to,
but the infant is no longer looking at, recover at the same
rate. Habituation is important in a reinforcement learning
framework such as this because otherwise the infant could
just fixate on a single reward (e.g. the caregiver), and never
have the motivation to shift gaze.
Taking the reward structure and habituation into account,
the state-space of the when agent becomes two dimensional.
The first dimension is how long has the infant been looking
at the same location and the second dimension is the reward
received by the infant. Representing the state-space with
these two dimensions allows the when agent to decide
whether to carry on looking at the same location or look
somewhere else. If the decision is made to look somewhere
else, then the where agent then specifies the location of the
new gaze. The state-space of the where agent varies along a
single dimension, which represents the gaze of the
caregiver. This corresponds to N+2 states. There are N
number of states for when the caregiver is looking at each of
the N object locations. It is these states that the infant uses
to interpret where the caregiver is looking. Another state is
for when the caregiver is looking directly at the infant and a
final state is for when the gaze of the caregiver is unknown
to the infant. While the action-space of the when agent is
simply stay or move, the action-space of the where agent is
of size N+1. The where agent can decide to shift gaze to one
of the N object locations or to look directly at the caregiver.
Both the when and where agents learn using temporal
difference (TD) learning and the SARSA algorithm
(Rummery and Niranjan, 1994; Equation. 1).

Triesch et al.’s (2016) Model
Triesch et al.’s (2006) model serves as a spring board for
this study. The model consists of an infant, a caregiver and
an object (Figure 1). Both the infant and caregiver remain in
fixed positions while the object is able to move around N
discrete locations. Two parameters, T_min and p_shift are
responsible for the movement of the object around these
locations. T_min specifies the minimum amount of time an
object must spend in a location, while p_shift specifies the
probability of shifting to a new location per time step after
T_min. This shifting of the object also determines the
shifting of the caregiver’s gaze.

Figure 1. Diagram of the gaze following reinforcement
learning model proposed by Triesch at al. (2006).
When the object moves to a new location the caregivers
gaze is shifted to a new location. The caregiver can look at
N+1 potential locations; the N locations the object can
reside in plus the location of the infant. The parameter
p_valid determines the probability that the new location of
the caregiver’s gaze is the same as the new location of the
object. This probability effectively models two scenarios.
The first scenario is when the caregiver’s gaze may not be a
100% predictive of where the object is and the second
scenario is when the infant’s interpretation of the
caregiver’s gaze may not be a 100% accurate. The p_valid
parameter accounts for both of these scenarios because both
an inaccurate caregiver gaze or a poor interpretation of the
caregiver gaze will lead to the infant following the
caregivers gaze to an incorrect location.
The infant’s behavior is modelled using a reinforcement
learning framework whereby it is essentially driven to
maximize rewards in the environment. The infant is broken
up into two agents, a ‘when’ agent and a ‘where’ agent. The
when agent is responsible for deciding whether it is time to
shift gaze on a time step and the where agent is responsible

In this framework the temporal difference error is calculated
and the parameter gamma ( ) is used as the discount factor
2

131

for future rewards. This temporal difference error is then
used to update the appropriate state-action value and the size
of this update is controlled by the learning parameter alpha
( ). A softmax function was used to mapped the state-action
values to actions. This allowed for a balance between
exploration and exploitation, determined by the parameter
tau was responsible for this balance. A larger value of tau
results in more exploration and less exploitation of the stateaction values.

visual field are more likely to be unexpected ( so
informative) and therefore more rewarding than objects that
currently reside in the visual field. These two modifications
to the reward structure had the net effect of increasing the
caregiver’s relative reward at smaller eye gaze deviations
and increasing the object’s relative reward at large eye gaze
deviations.

Simulation 1 – Emergence of the Cone of
Direct Gaze
To investigate whether reinforcement learning could also
account for the emergence of a CoD, the reward structure of
Triesch et al.’s model was modified to include a spatial
topology in the reward space

Methods

Figure 3. The modified reward structure for the object and
the profile view of the caregiver.

A CoD is inherently a spatial phenomenon that is assessed
by having an individual look further and further away from
a participant until the participant judges the gaze to no
longer be directed at them. For this reason, the N object
locations in Triesch et al.’s model were first given a spatial
location identity based on the gaze deviation required from
the caregiver to look at them (Figure 2). Values stepped four
degrees at a time and the N locations were arranged in a
linear manner. This alteration to Triesch et al.’s model
allowed for the analysis of gaze following behaviour based
on the spatial location of the caregiver’s gaze.

To evaluate the effect of these modifications 500
simulations were run for 100,000 learning iterations to
establish gaze following. After learning, each simulation
was run for 10,000 iterations without any learning to gather
stable gaze following measurements, which were then
averaged across simulations. The model parameters were as
follows: Number of locations ( N)= 10; Degree step per
location (D)= 4; Reward for looking at empty location
(Rnothing ) = 1; Reward for looking at the frontal view of the
caregiver (Rprofile )=1; Peak Reward for looking at the object
(Robject )= 1; Sigma of the Gaussian applied to the object
reward (Sobject )= 9; Sigma of the Gaussian applied to the
caregiver (Sprofile )=9; Habituation rate (b) =0.5; Learning
Rate (a) =0.0025; Discount Factor (g) =0.8; Exploration vs.
exploitation(t)=0.095; Minimum fixation time (Tmin)=4;
Probability of shifting (pshift)=0.5; Predictiveness of
caregiver gaze (pvalid)=0.75. Unless otherwise stated, these
values were used in all simulations

Figure 2. Layout of the object locations in the model.
Next, the model’s reward structure was modified.
Specifically, the caregiver profile reward (Rprofile) and object
reward (Robject) were changed in an opposing manner using
Gaussian functions (Figure 3).
Various studies have shown that infants prefer direct gaze
over averted gaze (e.g., Farroni et al., 2002), which in the
model equates to Rfrontal > Rprofile. In terms of a CoD, small
eye gaze deviations are likely to be interpreted as being
direct and so Rprofile should have a higher reward value for
small eye gaze deviations compared to large eye gaze
deviations. A Gaussian function was therefore applied to
Rprofile so that it increased in value as the caregiver looked at
locations which required smaller eye gaze deviations.
The opposite transformation was applied to Robject so that
it decreased in value as the caregiver looked at locations
which required smaller eye gaze deviations. This aimed to
represent the fact that objects outside of the infant’s current

Results
Two measurements were used to assess the effect of the
modified reward structure. The first measurement was the
mean time spent by the infant fixating on the caregiver. This
represented how long the infant looked at the caregiver
before shifting gaze and served as an indirect measure of the
probability of shifting gaze. The second measurement was
the total number of gaze follows made by the infant. This
was a direct measure of eye gaze following behaviour. Both
of these measurements were examined as a function of
object location.
After implementing the reward structure in Figure 3, the
mean time spent fixating on the caregiver was larger when
the caregiver was looking at locations that required small
eye gaze deviations (Figure 4, left panel). This contrasted
with the model’s performance when endowed with a flat
reward profile. In addition, the total number of gaze follows
3

132

was smaller when the caregiver was looking at locations
that required small eye gaze deviations (Figure 4, right
panel). These findings are consistent with the concept of a
CoD. By fixating on the caregiver for longer during small
eye gaze deviations the infant acts as if the caregiver is
looking directly at them and is unable to follow their gaze to
another location. Similarly, the increased number of eye
gaze follows for large eye gaze deviations indicates that the
infant is correctly classifying them as indirect and can
therefore follow them to the object. These findings suggest
that a CoD can emerge under a reinforcement learning
framework where the caregiver and object rewards act in an
opposing manner.

was taken as a proxy for the width of the CoD in the model
(Figure 5).
Equation 2
To observe the change in this width over time, 500
simulations were run for 1,000,000 learning iterations. At
100,000 learning iteration intervals, learning was halted and
10,000 iterations were run to gather stable gaze following
measurements. These results were averaged across all
simulations for each break in the learning process.

Figure 5. Quantification of the width of the CoD effect. After
feature scaling each measure, Gaussians were fit to both of
them. The intersect points of these Gaussians were then
calculated and the horizontal distance between the
intersection points was taken as a proxy for the width of the
CoD effect.

Figure 4. (Left panel) Mean time spent by the infant fixating
on the caregiver as a function of the caregiver’s gaze. The
dotted magenta line represents the results when the object
reward and caregiver profile reward are not modified, as in
the original Triesch et al. (2006) model. (Right pane) Total
Number of gaze follows made by the infant as a function of
the caregiver’s gaze. The dotted magenta line represents the
results when the object reward and caregiver profile reward
are not modified.

Results
The CoD width was found to decrease as the number of
learning iterations increased (Figure 6). This is consistent
with the finding that the CoD decreases during child
development (Mareschal et al., 2016) and suggests that
reinforcement learning may be one explanation for these
changes.

Simulation 2 – Developmental Trajectory of
the Cone of Direct Gaze
After confirming that reinforcement learning could lead to
the emergence of a CoD, we investigated the effect of
reinforcement learning on the CoD over time to see if it
could also explain known developmental changes.

Methods
In order to get a measure of the width of the induced
CoD, the mean fixation duration and the number of gaze
follows were overlaid and their intersects calculated. To
achieve this, it was first necessary to rescale the feature so
that both measurements were operating on the same scale
(Equation 2). Each value had the minimum value subtracted
and this was then divided by the range of the values. This
produced a final value that ranged between 0 and 1.
Gaussian curves were then fit to both feature scaled
measures, with the mean fixation time requiring a single
term and the number of gaze follows requiring two terms.
Finally, the two intersection points of the fitted Gaussian
curves were calculated and the width between the two points

Figure 6. Change in the width of the CoD effect as a
function of the number of learning iterations.

Simulation 3 –High Anxiety Populations
In this simulation, we explore different parameter values
in an attempt to capture known differences in the CoD for
individuals with social anxiety.

4

133

Methods

infant’s gaze fixation time on the caregiver, as would be
expected from avoidance. Increasing the value of resulted
in a progressively narrower CoD effect (Figure 8). This
effect was evident after around 200,000 learning iterations.

The peak reward value for both the frontal and caregiver
rewards (Rfrontal, Rprofile) were systematically decreased. For
each set of Rfrontal and Rprofile values 500 simulations were
run for 1,000,000 learning iterations. At 200,000 learning
iteration intervals, learning was halted and 10,000 iterations
were run to gather stable measurements. These results were
averaged across all simulations for each break in the
learning process. The same method was used for decreasing
values of
(habituation rate) but results were taken at
100,00 learning iteration intervals. The values allowed for
a finer temporal resolution than adjusting the Rfrontal and
Rprofile values because when Rfrontal and Rprofile were set to a
value of 0.5 the CoD effect broke down at 100,000
iterations.

Figure 8. Change in the width of the CoD effect for different
values of
as a function of the number of learning
iterations. Larger values of resulted in a narrower CoD
effect.

Results
Socially anxious individuals have a wider CoD than
control individuals (Jun et al., 2013; Gamer et al., 2011).
One possible explanation for this is that they are avoiding
eye contact (Schneier et al., 2011; Schulze et al., 2013) and
therefore may have a reduced ‘caregiver’ reward compared
to non-socially anxious individuals. To test this hypothesis,
we reduced the rewards associated with the caregiver
(Rfrontal, Rprofile) and looked at the effect on the width of the
CoD. Simulations were run for longer than previous
simulations because the wider CoD for highly anxious
individuals should be present during adulthood (Jun et al.,
2013; Gamer et al., 2011). Reducing Rfrontal and Rprofile did
not result in a wider CoD (Figure 7). On the contrary, the
simulations suggest that after 600000 iterations, there is a
trend towards a narrower CoD when Rfrontal and Rprofile were
reduced.

Discussion
We have demonstrated that a reinforcement learning
account of eye gaze following behavior can be extended to
account for the emergence and development of a CoD. In
addition, the model also captured the developmental
narrowing of the CoD (Mareschal et al., 2016). While a
preference for direct gaze may be present from birth for
example (Farroni et al., 2002), the fact that the CoD appears
to narrow under the influence of reinforcement learning, as
seen in developing children, suggests that at least some
aspects of the CoD are experience dependent.
The fact that the CoD appears to be influenced by
experience and learning poses interesting questions for
researchers investigating clinical populations of socially
anxious individuals. Importantly it suggests that a critical
developmental period may exist that could act as a
therapeutic window to reduce the occurrence of behaviors
such as social anxiety. We used the model to investigate
which aspects of the reinforcement learning framework
could influence the developmental trajectory of the CoD.
One theory for why socially anxious people may have a
wider cone than control individuals is because of their
aversion to direct eye contact (Schneier et al., 2011; Schulze
et al., 2013). To probe this further, we reduced the rewards
associated with the caregiver (Rfrontal and Rprofile) and looked
at the effect on the width of the CoD. Reducing Rfrontal and
Rprofile resulted in a trend towards a narrower CoD, the
opposite of what is seen in highly anxious individuals.
As an alternative to reducing Rfrontal and Rprofile, we also
investigated the effect of increasing the value of the
habituation parameter . This was done in an attempt to
capture the hyper-vigilance-avoidance hypothesis, which
states that socially anxious individuals are quicker to engage
and then avoid anxiety provoking stimuli. An increase in the
value of however, did not lead to a wider CoD. That said,
care must be taken when making conclusions from this
result. We used mean the infant’s fixation time on the

Figure 7. Change in the width of the CoD effect for different
values of Rprofile and Rfrontal as a function of the number of
learning iterations.
Another common theory relating to social anxiety is the
hyper-vigilance-avoidance hypothesis (Horley et al., 2004)
(Wieser et al., 2009). This hypothesis states that socially
anxious individuals are hyper-vigilant towards anxiety
provoking stimuli and tend to engage in avoidance by
looking away. To investigate whether such a hypothesis
could account for the wider CoD in socially anxious
individuals we increased the value of the habituation
parameter . The goal of this modification was to reduce the
5

134

Gamer M. & Hecht H. (2007) Are you Looking at me?
Measuring the Cone of Gaze. JEP: HPP, 33:705-15.
Gamer M., & Hecht H., Seipp N. & Hiller W. (2011) Who is
Looking at me? The Cone of Direct Gaze Widens in Social
Phobia. Cog. & Emotion, 25:756-64.
Hains S.M.J. & Muir D.W. (1996) Infant Sensitivity to Adult
Eye Direction. Child Development, 67:1940-51.
Horley K., Williams L.M., Gonsalvez C. & Gordon E. (2004)
Face to Face: Visual Scanpath Evidence for Abnormal
Processing of Facial Expression in Social Phobia. Psychiatry
Res, 127:43-53.
Jun Y.Y., Mareschal I., Clifford C.W. & Dadds M.R. (2013)
Cone of Direct Gaze as a Marker of Social Anxiety in Males.
Psychiatry Res, 210:193-8.
Leekam S.R., Baron-Cohen S., Perrett D.I., Milders M. &
Brown S. (1997) Eye-Direction Detection: A Dissociation
Between Geometric and Joint Attention Skills in Autism.
BJDP, 15:77-95.
Mareschal I., Otsuka Y., Clifford C.W., Mareschal D. (2016)
“Are you Looking at me?” How Children’s Gaze Judgments
Improve with Age. Dev. Psy, 52:695:703.
Matsuyoshi D., Kuraguchi K., Tanaka Y., Uchida S., Ashida H.
& Watanabe K. (2014) Individual Differences in Autistic
Traits Predict the Perception of Direct Gaze for Males, but
not for Females. Molecular Autism, 5:12.
Rummery G.A. & Niranjan M. (1994) On-Line Q-Learning
Using Connectionist Systems. CUED/F-INFENG/IR 166.
Cambridge University, UK.
Scaife M. & Bruner J.S. (1975) The Capacity for Joint Visual
Attention in the Infant. Nature, 253:265-66.
Schneier F.R., Rodebaugh T.L., Blanco C., Lewin H. &
Liebowitz M.R. (2011) Fear and Avoidance of Eye Contact
in Social Anxiety Disorder. Compr Psychiatry, 52:81-7.
Schulze L., Renneberg B. & Lobmaier J.S. (2013) Gaze
Perception in Social Anxiety and Social Anxiety Disorder.
Front. in Human Neuroscience, 7:872.
Schultz W., Dayan P. & Montague P.R. (1997) A Neural
Substrate of Prediction and Reward. Science, 275:1593-9.
Shepherd S.V. (2010) Following Gaze: Gaze-Following
behaviour as a Window into Social Cognition. Front. in
Integrative Neuroscience, 4:5.
Sutton R.S.& Barto A.G. (1998) Reinforcement Learning: An
Introduction. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Thorup E., Nystrom P., Gredeback G., Bolte S., Falck-Ytter T.
& the EASE Team (2016) Altered Gaze Following During
Live Interaction in Infants at Risk for Autism: an Eye
Tracking Study. Molecular Autism, 7:12.
Triesch J., Christof T., Deak G.O. & Carlson E. (2006) Gaze
Following: Why (not) Learn it? Dev. Sci, 9:125-47.
Wieser M.J., Pauli P., Weyers P., Alpers G.W. & Muhlberger
A. (2009) Fear of Negative Evaluation and the
Hypervigilance-Avoidance Hypothesis: An Eye-Tracking
Study. Journal of Neural Transmission, 116:717-23.

caregiver as a functional measure of COD. This measure
was used because under a CoD an infant should fixate for
longer at small eye gaze deviations because it judges the
gaze to be direct. However, this poses a problem when we
want to model hyper-vigilance and avoidance by increasing
. An individual exhibiting hyper-vigilance and avoidance
will have a reduced mean fixation time on the ‘caregiver’
even if they perceive the gaze to be directed at them because
they would rather shift their gaze to nothing than hold direct
gaze. So while increasing the value of may capture this
behaviour, the measure of mean fixation duration will be
lower for these cases causing the width of the CoD effect to
be smaller even if the CoD is actually wider. Therefore, in
order to accurately assess the effect of hyper-vigilance and
avoidance on the width of the CoD effect, a different
measure that captures when the infant perceives the gaze as
being direct is needed.
Our findings (and Triesch et al’s) have potential
implications for several disorders other than social anxiety.
The fact that both eye gaze following and the CoD appear
linked by reinforcement learning could provide novel
opportunities to investigate disorders that produce both
characteristic eye gaze following and CoD behavior. One
example of this is autism spectrum disorder. Triesch et al.
(2006) put forth multiple candidates under the
reinforcement learning framework that could produce the
reduced eye gaze following described in individuals with
autism. These candidates included a reduced learning rate,
reduced caregiver reward and increased shifting latency.
The fact that reinforcement learning can account for both
eye gaze following and the CoD allows us to explore these
candidates further. For example, studies have suggested that
individuals with autism have a narrower CoD (Matsuyoshi
et al., 2014) and so these candidates should be able to
account for that. Indeed, in this study we demonstrated that
reducing the caregiver rewards resulted in a slightly
narrower cone in the later stages of a simulation. This
finding lends weight to reduced caregiver rewards being
present in autism. A similar approach should be taken for
the other candidates to see if they too can account for both
the eye gaze following and CoD differences described in
autism, thereby either confirming or rejecting their validity.

Acknowledgments
This work was funded by the Biotechnology and Biological
Sciences Research Council (BBSRC), UK. We thank
Isabelle Mareschal for very helpful input.

References
Brooks R. & Meltzoff A.N. (2005) The Development of Gaze
Following and its Relation to Language. Dev. Sci, 8:535-543.
Deak G.O. (2015) When and Where do Infants Follow Gaze?
5th International Conference on Development and Learning
and on Epigenetic Robotics, Providence, RI USA.
Farroni T., Csibra G., Simion F. & Johnson M.H. (2002) Eye
Contact Detection in Humans From Birth. PNAS, 99: 9602-5.

6

135

