Non-Symbolic Exact Quantity Representation in a Language Impaired Population
John Verbos (verbosj@duq.edu)
Department of Psychology, 600 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15282

Sarah E. Wallace (wallaces@duq.edu)
Department of Speech-Language Pathology, 600 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15282

Alexander Kranjec (kranjeca@duq.edu)
Department of Psychology, 600 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15282
Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition, 4400 Fifth Avenue, Suite 115
Pittsburgh, PA, 15213
Abstract
English-speakers whose access to number language is
artificially compromised by verbal interference and the Pirahã
(an Amazonian tribe without exact number words) appear to
rely on analog magnitude estimation for representing nonsymbolic exact quantities greater than 3. Here, 16 participants
with aphasia performed the 5 counting tasks from these
previous studies. Performance was poorest when targets were
not visible during response (70% correct, task 4; 71% correct,
task 5) and best when targets were presented as subitizable
groups of 2 and 3 (98% correct, task 2). Western Aphasia
Battery-Revised subtest scores correlated with task
performance, suggesting diverse forms of language
impairment may contribute to errors. Coefficients of variation
for tasks and significant correlations of target magnitude with
error rate (r2=.88) and error size (r2=.87) across tasks suggest
participant use of analog magnitude estimation. Experiments
involving people with aphasia may further refine our
understanding of how language and thought interact.
Keywords: aphasia, language, number

Introduction
“Linguistic relativity” occupies the broad theoretical middle
ground where language and cognition interact, where the
grammatical structures and lexicons of a language are
believed to influence thought to a greater or lesser degree.
While the idea that language can influence thought,
perception, and action has a long history in Western
philosophy, Whorf (1956) provided the first and clearest
articulation of a strong version of this position. According to
linguistic relativity, words aren’t just names for pre-existing
concepts; thought is influenced by the way particular
languages are structured, what languages have words for,
and what they don’t. When a language is transmitted from
one generation to the next, so are particular ways of “cutting
up” the world that come with speaking that language.
Everett (2013) compiles a diverse array of recent research
that explores domains like space, time, quantity, gender, and
color and draws positive conclusions about the effects of
language on thought. Similarly, Frank, Fedorenko, Lai,

Saxe, and Gibson (2012), review several studies that find
“meaningful cognitive differences” (p. 75) between speakers
of languages that have words for particular concepts and
those that don’t. Such cognitive differences appear to exist
both across cultures and across development. At the same
time, experimentally manipulated verbal interference can
temporarily remove differences otherwise present.
The domain of number is a good entry point for testing
the linguistic relativity hypothesis. Numeracy develops
alongside language in humans, and there are clear
differences between the ways adult speakers of different
languages perform number-related tasks. The Pirahã, an
indigenous Amazonian tribe, are of particular interest here,
as their language lacks words for exact number. Gordon
(2004) engaged seven Pirahã tribe members in a series of
nonverbal matching tasks where participants were asked to
reproduce a visual array that matched a model. The Pirahã
struggled to accurately reproduce any set of objects
containing more than three items, even when the model was
visible to copy. Gordon (2004) also noted Pirahã responses
produced a coefficient of variation (CoV) of approximately
0.15, congruent with evidence that without access to number
language and counting, people use less accurate but inborn
abilities to estimate quantities larger than three1.
Frank, Everett, Fedorenko, and Gibson (2008) replicated
the tasks from Gordon (2004) with fourteen participants in a
different Pirahã village. The authors found similar results
for each task with the exception of the one-to-one matching
task, where results were near ceiling. Consequently, Frank
et al. (2008) concluded that some of the startling results of
Gordon (2004) might be the product of participants not
understanding the task or inconsistencies in the experiment.
Everett and Madora (2012) sought to resolve the
conflicting results of Gordon (2004) and Frank et al. (2008).
The authors recreated the three tasks from Frank et al.
1

CoV is the standard deviation of a data set divided by its mean.
Studies of magnitude estimation in animals and humans have
found that response variability correlates with target magnitude,
producing a CoV of 0.15 (see Whalen, Gallistel, & Gelman, 1999).

1290

(2008) with fourteen participants in a third Pirahã village.
With one exception, Everett and Madora (2012) found no
significant differences when making intra- or inter-study
task comparisons. The exception was the one-to-one
matching task from Frank et al. (2008), which was
significantly different from control tasks and the Everett and
Madora (2012) one-to-one matching task. The CoVs for all
tasks in Everett and Madora (2012) were 0.15, consistent
with Gordon (2004) and the hypothesis that the Pirahã were
employing analog estimation strategies.
Frank et al. (2012) extends the experimental tasks
performed with the Pirahã to a numerate population by
using verbal interference in an attempt to force participants
to resort to analog magnitude estimation (Whalen et al.,
1999). The authors hypothesized that if language is not
crucial to establishing exact number, then participants
should successfully perform non-verbal number tasks under
verbal interference. Should language be necessary for exact
numeracy, however, these same participants should fall
back on analog magnitude estimation under verbal
interference revealing a constant CoV, as seen in other
studies. To test this, Frank et al. (2012) had thirty-five MIT
students attempt the matching tasks performed with the
Pirahã while simultaneously repeating radio news
broadcasts aloud. The results of these experiments were then
compared to each other and to the results of the same
experiments with the Pirahã from Frank et al. (2008).
While the English-speakers were found to be more
accurate than the Pirahã, both groups made “significant and
systematic errors” (p. 79) on the “nuts-in-a-can” task (see
Figure 1 below), where participants have no access to a
direct or remembered visual representation of the array.
Here, college students under verbal interference, like the
Pirahã, produced a flat CoV of 0.15 across targets,
suggesting the use of analog magnitude estimation. Frank et
al. (2012) drew the conclusion that the concept of “exact
match” does not require language, but that language is
crucial to storing and manipulating exact quantities greater
than three. This conclusion is in line with the language as a
technology or tool-kit version of the linguistic relativity
hypothesis, wherein language allows us to transcend our
pre-linguistic cognitive capacities (Gentner & GoldinMeadow, 2003).
The evidence to date strongly suggests that language for
number has a significant influence on how quickly and
accurately we comprehend and process quantities larger
than three. At the same time, there is room for debate as to
how fundamental number language is to the correct
apprehension of exact quantity. One largely unexplored
route to an understanding of the relationship between
language and counting (and more generally, questions
regarding linguistic relativity) involves studying people with
organic language impairments. People with focal brain
lesions—either as a result of infarcts, tumor resections or
other restricted lesions—may acquire aphasia, an
impairment of a person’s ability to comprehend and
formulate language across multiple modalities, including

speaking, reading, writing, and listening (Rosenbek,
LaPointe, & Wertz, 1989). Consequently, people with
aphasia may experience difficulty in the use of language for
number and calculation (Dragoy, Akinina, & Dronkers,
2016). McNeil and Pratt (2001) specify that aphasia is a
processing or performance disorder—that is, a problem in
using language for a known concept. By this reasoning, if
aphasia were to affect a person’s ability to represent exact
quantity on a non-symbolic task such as the one employed
in the current study, it may work in a similar fashion to
verbal interference—by disrupting access to a number
concept and consequently impairing comprehension or
speech in relation to that concept. However, it is
conceivable that aphasia may impair some individuals’
ability to represent exact quantity in a manner more like
the Pirahã, who have no exact number language to employ.
In such a scenario, a person with aphasia may be impaired
because they have no stored verbal label for exact quantity
available for access. While the current study cannot
adjudicate between these possibilities, we hope the diversity
of impairment within the present aphasia population may
provide a window into qualitative differences that account
for errors across the kinds of tasks used with the Pirahã. We
also hope to suggest ways that aphasia populations may
generally contribute to investigations of the linguistic
relativity hypothesis.
While several case studies have examined the impact of
aphasia on calculation—e.g., Dragoy et al. (2016), where 7
of 10 participants with aphasia struggled with basic
arithmetic and when comparing Arabic representations of
quantities—little research to date has examined the impact
of language impairment on non-symbolic representation of
quantity. Lemer, Dehaene, Spelke, and Cohen (2003)
examined a person with acalculia due to a focal lesion of the
left parietal lobe and another person with semantic dementia
from predominantly left temporal hypometabolism to
demonstrate dissociations between tasks associated with
counting and those associated with innate quantity systems
of number processing. As predicted by a lesion in the
parietal lobe, the patient with acalculia showed a severe
slowness in approximation, and exhibited impairments in
subitizing and numerical comparison tasks. Meanwhile, the
patient with semantic dementia had intact approximation
abilities and showed preserved processing of non-symbolic
small numbers—that is, her “quantity processing” systems
were functioning as expected—but struggled with tasks that
required intact verbal processing and counting. Given these
findings and related results with other populations, language
impairment in the form of aphasia may be predicted to
negatively affect the individual’s ability to produce nonverbal and non-symbolic representations of exact quantity.
In the current study, participants with aphasia performed
the same set of five, increasingly complex matching tasks
used with the Pirahã and English-speakers whose access to
language was artificially compromised by verbal
interference (Frank et al., 2012). It bears noting that unlike
the previously studied groups, a clinical aphasia population

1291

consists of individuals with a diversity of verbal and
nonverbal impairments. Regardless, we hypothesize that
participants will make more frequent and larger errors (1) in
proportion to target size; (2) on each subsequent, more
difficult, task; and (3) produce a flat coefficient of variation
(CoV) on each task and across target quantities, suggesting
reliance on the analog magnitude system to estimate
quantity. Such results would lend further support to the
hypothesis that access to language for exact number is
necessary for the recognition and representation of exact
quantities. While general severity of language impairment is
predicted to correlate with performance across tasks, we are
also interested in whether particular aspects of language
impairment point to specific qualities of language involved
in counting and exact quantity representation.
Results suggesting that aphasia limits a person’s ability to
represent non-symbolic exact quantities would complement
the body of evidence demonstrating a relationship between
exact number language and the ability to perform nonsymbolic exact quantity tasks. When taken alongside similar
evidence from previous studies with different human
populations—i.e. children raised in numerate cultures but
who have yet to develop number-language skills (e.g.,
Condry & Spelke, 2008), adults in numerate cultures under
verbal interference, and adults in an anumeric culture—it
would seem difficult not to conclude that access to exact
number language has an effect on the way that humans think
about numbers. More broadly, these findings may refine
hypotheses generated by linguistic relativity with regard to
the necessity and/or effective use of language in
representing basic number concepts.
The linguistic
diversity present within the present clinical aphasia
population may provide deeper insight into relations
between particular aspects of language function and the
representation of exact quantity.

Aphasia assessment. Participants completed the AQ
portion of the WAB-R (Kertesz, 2006). This formal
assessment includes tasks such as answering simple
questions, describing pictures, manipulating and naming
common objects, following directions, repeating words, and
matching pictures to printed words and sentences.
Matching tasks (Everett & Madora, 2012; Frank et al.,
2012). Participants completed five non-verbal and nonsymbolic exact quantity representation tasks in the
following order: a one-to-one matching task, an uneven
matching task, an orthogonal matching task, a hidden
matching task, and a “nuts-in-a-can” task (see Figure 1). In
every task, the experimenter presented a quantity of spools
of thread (approximately 1” tall, ¾” in diameter) and asked
the participant to construct a row of un-inflated balloons
(approximately 4” long and 2” wide) that matches the
number of spools of thread. In the one-to-one task, the
experimenter placed the spools one at a time in an evenly
spaced line from left to right. In the uneven task, the spools
were presented in the same manner as in the one-to-one
task, but broken randomly into smaller groups of two and
three. The orthogonal task is identical to the one-to-one task
except that the row of spools is presented in a line
perpendicular to the participant. The hidden matching task
is identical to the one-to-one task except that the row of
spools is hidden from the participant after being presented.
In the “nuts-in-a-can” task, the experimenter places spools
one by one into an opaque cup. Participants were tested
once per task on each quantity from four to twelve in one of
two random orders, totaling forty-five trials per participant.

Methods
Sixteen participants (3 female) completed aphasia
assessments and the set of five non-verbal and non-symbolic
exact quantity representation tasks from Everett and Madora
(2012) and Frank et al. (2012). Thirteen participants also
completed a numeral elicitation task, confrontation naming
task, and free counting task. Eight completed tests of
nonverbal semantic processing and short-term memory—the
Semantic Category Probe (Freedman & Martin, 2001), and
Pyramids and Palm Trees tests (Howard & Patterson, 1992).
All participants had aphasia resulting from a lefthemisphere stroke as determined by their score on the
Aphasia Quotient (AQ) portion of the Western Aphasia
Battery-Revised (WAB-R) (Kertesz, 2006) and a speechlanguage pathologist. Within this framework, 5 participants
are considered to have Broca’s aphasia, 6 Anomic aphasia, 2
Wernicke’s aphasia, 2 conduction aphasia, and 1 global
aphasia. Eligible participants were a minimum of six
months post onset of aphasia (M=73 months, R=9–159
months), between the ages of eighteen and eighty-five years
(M=61, R=43–75) and native English speakers.

Figure 1: Schematic of each matching task. From left to right: oneto-one match (task 1), uneven match (task 2), orthogonal match
(task 3), hidden match (task 4), “nuts-in-a-can” (task 5). Image is
from Frank et al. (2012).

Numeral elicitation task. Participants were asked to name
the number of spools of thread presented, increasing from
one to twelve and then decreasing from twelve to one. In
each case, participants were asked, “How many spools of
thread are there?” by the researcher. Divergence between
performance on this task and on the matching tasks might
illuminate whether the participant is having difficulty
recognizing, articulating, or representing the target quantity.
Confrontation naming task. Participants were asked to
name the Arabic numerals one through twenty as presented
individually on flashcards. In each case, participants were
asked, “What number is this?” This task assessed the
participant’s ability to recognize and name Arabic numerals.
Confluent or divergent performance on this task when

1292

compared to the matching and counting tasks might help
differentiate the participant’s ability to recognize and name
symbolic and non-symbolic numbers.
Free counting task. Participants were asked to count up
from one to twenty and down from twenty to one. The
researcher says, “Please count from one up to twenty” and
“Please count from twenty down to one.” Participants were
allowed five minutes to recite each count list. Performance
on this task indicates the participant’s capacity to access and
articulate counting numbers in order, a factor in the
participant’s performance on the matching tasks.

quantities and tasks (Fig. 2, far right), but higher on task 4
(0.10) and task 5 (0.11) (Fig. 3, bottom row). Across
analyses, aphasia participants’ performance was remarkably
similar to the performance of English speakers under verbal
interference from Frank et al. (2012) (Figs. 2 and 3).
Compared to the Pirahã (Figs. 2 and 3, aggregated from
Everett & Madora, 2012; Frank et al., 2008; and Gordon,
2004), participants with aphasia and English speakers under
verbal interference were generally more accurate and made
smaller errors, but all three groups showed similar patterns
of responding across tasks.

Participant

Semantic Category Probe Test (Freedman & Martin,
2001). Participants listened to a list of three or more words
and determined whether the final word is from the same
category as any of the preceding words by saying or
pointing to “Yes” or “No.” This task assesses the
participant’s capacity to retain semantic information in their
short-term memory, where impairment might be a potential
reason for poorer performance on the matching tasks.
Pyramids and Palm Trees Test (Howard & Patterson,
1992). Participants matched a pictured item to the closest
associate among a set of two pictured choices (e.g., fish
matched to: cat, table). This task assessed the participant’s
capacity to process non-verbal semantic information.
Distinguishing between semantic and verbal impairments
may help explain performance on the matching tasks.

Results
There was notable variation across participants and tasks.
Percent correct scores for all tasks ranged from 53% to 98%
(Table 1). Participants responded correctly on 83% of task 1
trials, 98% of task 2 trials, 90% of task 3 trials, 70% of task
4 trials, and 71% of task 5 trials (Fig. 2, far left).
Participants’ accuracy descreased as the target quantity
increased across all tasks (r2 = 0.87) (Fig. 2, center left) and
for each individual task (Fig. 3, top row). Similarly, error
magnitude increased as target quantity increased (r2 = 0.88)
(Fig. 2, center right). CoV was similar across target

2
16
7
1
10
12
13
11
15
3
9
6
14
4
8
5

1

2

0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
2
1
4
2
5
5
4

0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1

Task
3
4
0
0
0
0
0
0
3
0
0
1
2
2
2
0
2
3

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
5
4
3
2
2
4
3
6
7

5

Total

0
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
5
4
5
2
4
4
3
6

1
2
2
2
2
3
7
7
9
10
10
10
12
13
16
21

%
Correct
97.8
95.6
95.6
95.6
95.6
93.3
84.4
84.4
80.0
77.8
77.8
77.8
73.3
71.1
64.4
53.3

Table 1: Participant errors across tasks. The maximum number of
errors on each task is nine. Darker colors indicate more errors.

WAB-R AQ and subtest scores were reliably correlated
with task performance on tasks 4 and 5. AQ and subtest
scores were most predictive of performance on task 5, the
“nuts-in-a-can” task (Table 2).
Thirteen participants completed additional number tasks.
While, generally speaking, participants with higher AQ
scores who had made fewer errors on the nonverbal
matching tasks also performed better on the additional

Figure 2: Matching task summary data for participants with aphasia, Pirahã, and adults under verbal interference. Far left: For participants
with aphasia, performance was poorest when targets were not visible during response (70% correct, task 4; 71% correct, task 5) and best
when targets were presented as subitizable groups of 2 and 3 (98% correct, task 2). Center left: Significant correlations were found
between target magnitude with both error rate (r2=.87) and error size (r2=.88) (Center right) across tasks. Far right: Coefficients of
variation for participants with aphasia mirrored those of adults under verbal interference. “Pirahã” data is from Everett and Madora (2012);
Frank et al. (2008); and Gordon (2004). “Verbal Interference” data is from Frank et al. (2012).

1293

WAB-R
subtest

counting tasks, there were exceptions. Participant 13, who
has a high AQ score and made no errors on the additional
number tasks made seven errors across matching tasks.
Participant 11 made as many matching task errors as
Participant 13 (refer to Table 1), but scored only 4 of 12 on
the numeral elicitation task. Additionally, Participant 11,
despite correctly reciting 18 of 20 numbers on the ascending
free counting task, could not count backwards from 20 to 1,
receiving a score of zero on the descending free counting
task. Across all 8 participants who completed the nonverbal
semantic processing and short-term memory tasks, higher
AQ scores predicted better performance on the Pyramids
and Palm Trees and Semantic Category Probe tests.

AQ
Speech
Comprehension
Repetition
Naming

1
0.41
0.30
0.42
0.38
0.49

2
-0.02
-0.04
0.04
-0.01
-0.10

Task
3
0.23
0.18
0.10
0.16
0.33

4
0.61
0.62
0.38
0.50
0.66

5
0.77
0.74
0.69
0.68
0.72

Table 2: Correlations between task performance and WAB-R
subtest scores. AQ = Aphasia Quotient, Speech = Spontaneous
Speech, Comprehension = Auditory Comprehension, Naming =
Naming and Word Finding. Darker colors indicate larger r-values.

Discussion
Generally, participants (1) made more errors for larger
target quantities, (2) made errors of greater magnitude for
larger target quantities, and (3) had more difficulty with
tasks where targets were not visible during response. There
was consistency among those participants with the greatest
overall task impairments. Participants who made ten or
more incorrect responses also made errors across tasks 1, 3,
4, and 5. Eight different participants responded incorrectly

to at least one trial of task 1, where the target remained
visible and did not require conservation in space or time,
nor, presumably, counting: correct responding only required
participants to match one object to another. The results of
task 1 stand in stark contrast to near-ceiling results on task
2. In task 2, targets were presented in groups of 2 and 3.
This is the only difference between tasks 1 and 2,
suggesting that many participants were able to subitize the
visible targets on task 2 in order to answer accurately, but
were unable to do so consistently on task 1. Near-ceiling
performance on task 2 also suggests that perceptual and/or
attentional impairments (e.g., field cuts, neglect) do not
explain poor performance on tasks 1, 3, 4, and 5; this
represents an important control condition in a stroke
population with expected neurological and behavioral
heterogeneity. Surprisingly, performance on task 3 was
superior to performance on task 1, despite the required
spatial translation between the perpendicular target array
and horizontal response. Participants responded incorrectly
on 10% of task 1, 2, and 3 trials, where the target remained
visible for comparison, matching, and recounting.
Performance on tasks 4 and 5 was poorer, as expected: both
involve responding without the target array still visible.
These results mirror those of previous studies with the
Pirahã and adults under verbal interference, although the
Pirahã made more frequent and larger errors, more clearly
suggesting a reliance on analog magnitude estimation in
attempting to represent target quantities. Of all the research
of this kind conducted with the Pirahã, only the one-to-one
matching task in Frank et al. (2008) produced a CoV
markedly different from 0.15. Everett and Madora (2012)
offered a speculative explanation: unlike the others, the
village tested in Frank et al. (2008) had been exposed to
math tutoring that included neologisms for number words. It
is the neologisms for number words that are exceptional—
all the villages had been exposed to the one-to-one matching

Figure 3: Task accuracy and CoV for participants with aphasia, Pirahã, and adults under verbal interference. Accuracy (Top row) and CoV
(Bottom row) for participants with aphasia mirrored those of adults under verbal interference. “Pirahã” data is from Everett and Madora
(2012); Frank et al. (2008); and Gordon (2004). “Verbal Interference” data is from Frank et al. (2012).

1294

task and other attempts at basic math training by the
Brazilian government, but only the site of Frank et al.
(2008) had been exposed to number word neologisms. The
authors are clear that this is speculation on their part, but it
dovetails with a possible explanation as to the task
performance differences between the Pirahã on the one hand
and the verbal interference and aphasia participants on the
other. In attempting to account for the lower CoVs and
greater accuracy of the verbal interference participants,
Frank et al. (2012) suggests that participants’ “differential
cultural experience with mathematics and other uses of
exact numerosity led to their relatively more precise
representation of analog magnitude” (p. 82). The same
could be suggested of the aphasia participants in this study.
Certainly there are differences between the current
population of people with aphasia, people of an anumeric
culture, and English-speakers under verbal interference.
What separates the Pirahã from other populations under
discussion here is that they exist in a world without exactquantity language and may not have a concept of number to
access. English speakers under verbal interference,
meanwhile, are members of a numeric culture who have had
their ability to use language temporarily disrupted, and
people who have aphasia are members of the same culture
with a more permanent disruption. Also, an aphasia
population consists of individuals with distinct lesions,
resulting in a range of verbal and nonverbal impairments
and significant heterogeneity is to be expected, compared to
a population of English speakers undergoing experimental
manipulation via verbal interference. While diversity within
the current aphasia population is viewed as a potentially rich
source for identifying particular aspects of language (e.g.,
comprehension, speech) that may uniquely affect particular
aspects of number use (e.g., mental representation of exact
quantity, counting), it also suggests caution before drawing
definitive conclusions based on group performance.
That several studies have repeatedly found similar results
despite population differences lends support to established
ways of thinking about number, thought, and language.
According to the model put forth by Feigenson, Dehaene,
and Spelke (2004), we are born with two systems for the
cognitive
representation
of
number—a
parallelindividuation system that can track up to three or four
discrete objects and an analog magnitude estimation system
we use to approximate large quantities. While these
cognitive systems are also found in other animals, humans
appear to use exact number words as tools that enhance our
capacity to do things with quantities by bridging these
systems. The results of the present and previous studies fit
this model: language impairment, like verbal interference
and living in a culture without exact number words, makes
it difficult, if not impossible, for individuals to bridge the
two systems for cognitively representing quantities. The
present study also suggests that experiments involving
people with aphasia may serve to further refine our
understanding of how language and thought interact.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Michael C. Frank and Peter
Gordon for sharing raw data from Frank et al. (2008), Frank
et al. (2012), and Gordon (2004), respectively.

References
Condry, K., & Spelke, E. (2008). The development of
language and abstract concepts: The case of natural
number. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
137(1), 22-38.
Dragoy, O., Akinina, Y., & Dronkers, N. (2016). Toward a
functional neuroanatomy of semantic aphasia: A history
and ten new cases, Cortex, 1-19.
Everett, C. (2013). Linguistic relativity: Evidence across
languages and cognitive domains. Berlin: De Gruyter
Mouton.
Everett, C., & Madora, K. (2012). Quantity recognition
among speakers of an anumeric language. Cognitive
Science, 36(1), 130-141.
Feigenson, L., Dehaene, S., & Spelke, E. (2004). Core
systems of number. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8(7),
307-314.
Frank, M., Fedorenko, E., Lai, P., Saxe, R., & Gibson, E.
(2012). Verbal interference suppresses exact numerical
representation. Cognitive Psychology, 64(1-2), 74-92.
Frank, M., Everett, D., Fedorenko, E., & Gibson, E. (2008).
Number as a cognitive technology: Evidence from Pirahã
language and cognition. Cognition, 108(3), 819-824.
Freedman, M., & Martin, R. (2001). Dissociable
components of short-term memory and their relation to
long-term learning. Cognitive Neuropsychology 18(3),
193–226.
Gentner, D., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (Eds.). (2003).
Language in mind: Advances in the study of language and
thought. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gordon, P. (2004). Numerical Cognition Without Words:
Evidence from Amazonia. Science, 306(5695), 496-499.
Howard, D., Patterson, K. (1992). Pyramids and palm trees:
A test of semantic access from pictures and words. Bury
St. Edmunds, UK: Thames Valley Test Company.
Kertesz, A. (2006). Western Aphasia Battery–Revised. New
York, NY: Pearson.
Lemer, C., Dehaene, S., Spelke, E., & Cohen, L. (2003).
Approximate quantities and exact number words:
Dissociable systems. Neuropsychologia, 41(14), 19421958.
McNeil, M. & Pratt, S. (2001). Defining aphasia: Some
theoretical and clinical implications of operating from a
formal definition. Aphasiology, 15(10/11), 901-911.
Rosenbek, J., LaPointe, L., & Wertz, R. (1989). Aphasia: A
clinical approach. Boston, MA: Little, Brown & Co.
Whalen, J., Gallistel, C., & Gelman, R. (1999). Nonverbal
counting in humans: The psychophysics of number
representation. Psychological Science, 10(2), 130-137.
Whorf, B. (1956). Language, thought and reality: Selected
writings of Benjamin Lee Whorf (J.B. Carroll, Ed.).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

1295

