Numbers Uniquely Bias Spatial Attention: A Novel Paradigm for Understanding
Spatial-Numerical Associations
Lauren S. Aulet (lauren.s.aulet@emory.edu)
Department of Psychology, Emory University
Atlanta, GA 30322 USA

Sami R. Yousif (sami.yousif@yale.edu)
Department of Psychology, Yale University
New Haven, CT, 06520 USA

Stella F. Lourenco (stella.lourenco@emory.edu)
Department of Psychology, Emory University
Atlanta, GA 30322 USA
(Fischer, 2003; but see, e.g., Zanolie & Pecher, 2014, for
replication failure). Further, changes in spatial attention
bias number generation: when asked to randomly generate
numbers while making alternating left/right head
movements, participants more frequently generate small
numbers when their head is oriented to the left and large
numbers when their head is oriented to the right
(Loetscher, Schwarz, Schubiger, & Brugger, 2008).
A common theory of the spatial-numerical associations
(SNAs) described above is that they are the product of a
stable mental number line (MNL), wherein smaller
numbers are represented on one side of space and larger
numbers are represented on the other (in Western
cultures, smaller numbers are represented on the left and
larger numbers on the right; e.g., Dehaene et al., 1993).
Yet there remain objections to this theory. Proctor and
Cho (2006), for example, argued that polarity
correspondence (a +/- categorization of stimulus and
response) can explain the observed associations. Indeed,
many tasks rely on a dichotomous response (e.g.,
left/right keys, left/right head position), and may be
explained in this way. Another view, which has posed an
even greater challenge to the MNL account, argues that
SNAs are a product of task-specific associations
established online within working memory (WM; van
Dijck & Fias, 2011). The crux of this debate is whether
the observed SNAs are driven by a stable spatialnumerical link (e.g., MNL) or by transient mappings of
number onto space (e.g., polarity correspondence, or a
WM account; for further discussion, see Cheung et al.,
2015).
In general, those who argue in favor of a WM account
argue that the ostensibly transient mappings are, at least in
part, a product of task demands. For example, in the
classic parity judgment task, participants respond using
leftward and rightward oriented keys. One may argue that
the relative orientation of these keys is sufficient to
induce a spatial mapping (see Viarouge, Hubbard, &
Dehaene, 2014 for discussion on the induction of spatial
reference
frames
in
SNA
tasks).

Abstract
Over the past two-and-a-half decades, numerous empirical
studies have demonstrated a relationship between numbers
and space. A classic interpretation is that these spatialnumerical associations (SNAs) are a product of a stable
mental number line (MNL) in the mind, yet others have
argued that SNAs are a product of transient mappings that
occur in working memory. Importantly, although the latter
interpretation has no implications for the representation of
number, the former suggests that the representation of
number is inherently spatial. Here, we tease apart questions
of spatial representation (à la an MNL perspective) and
spatial strategy (à la alternative accounts). In a novel placethe-number task, we demonstrate that numbers
automatically bias spatial attention whereas other ordinal
sequences (i.e., letters) do not. We argue that this is
evidence of an inherently spatial representation of number
and explore how this work may help answer future
questions about the relationship between space and
number.
Keywords: spatial-numerical associations (SNAs); mental
number line (MNL); automaticity; working memory;
polarity correspondence; synesthesia

Introduction
Since the seminal work of Dehaene, Bossini, and Giraux
(1993), the link between space and number has inspired a
wealth of research (for recent review, see Fischer &
Shaki, 2014). In the classic paradigm, participants made
parity judgments (odd/even) of Arabic numerals using left
and right response keys, finding that participants
responded faster to smaller numbers when using the left
key and faster to larger numbers when using the right key.
This general finding has since been replicated using
numerous paradigms. One such example is the magnitude
comparison task in which participants indicated whether
the digit shown is greater than or less than some value
(e.g., 5; Fitousi, Shaki, & Algom, 2009). Later work
demonstrated that simply perceiving numbers biases
spatial attention: participants were faster to detect a
leftward target when primed with a small digit and faster
to detect a rightward target when primed with a large digit

75

Table 1: SNA tasks and their task demands.
Task demands
Category
Parity Judgment
Mag. Judgment
Lat. Comparison
Numerical Posner
Num. Bisection
Number generation
Eye-tracking

Ordinal control

Examples

Dichotomous
Categorization

Dehaene et al., 1993
Marghetis et al., 2013
Fitousi et al., 2009
Marghetis et al., 2013
Lavidor et al., 2004
Cheung et al., 2015
Fischer et al., 2003
Ruiz Fernández et al., 2001
Fischer et al., 2001
Calabria & Rossetti, 2005
Loetscher et al., 2008
Cheung et al., 2015
Holmes et al., 2016
Schwarz & Keus, 2004

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

✓

X

✓

✓

✓

X

X

✓

X

X

X

✓

X

X

X

✓

✓

X

X

X

✓

X

X

X

X

✓

Place-the-number

In particular, a polarity correspondence account would be
concerned about the use of a dichotomous response. Indeed,
many of the SNA tasks mentioned above possess some kind
of task demand. Parity judgment tasks and magnitude
comparison tasks involve both a dichotomous manual
response (left key/right key) and a dichotomous judgment
(less than/greater than). Other parity and magnitude
judgment tasks have utilized a go/no-go paradigm to
circumvent the spatial information provided by the response
keys, but these tasks nevertheless depend on a dichotomous
response scheme (e.g., Marghetis, Kanwal, & Bergen,
2013). This dichotomous response, though not spatial,
nevertheless lends itself to a polarity correspondence
account. Furthermore, even tasks that do not require a
dichotomous response still have certain features that may
instantiate a left-to-right reference frame. For example, in
the work of Fischer and colleagues (2003), a left-to-right
frame may be induced by the locations of the target (as
either on the left or right side of fixation). The same may be
said for the paradigm utilized by Ruiz Fernández and
colleagues (2011), wherein, after presentation of a number,
they made an arbitrary selection between items construed on
the left and right sides of space. In the work of Loetscher
and colleagues (2008), a left-to-right frame is being
specifically induced by the turning of the head. (For a more
complete list of SNA paradigms and their task demands, see
Table 1). Thus, it is unclear whether there is any evidence of
an SNA (and consequently, a stable MNL) in the absence of
any such task demands.
Eye-tracking paradigms have been promising in this
regard. For instance, Holmes, Ayzenberg, and Lourenco
(2016) had participants play a virtual blackjack game while
their eye gaze was being tracked. It was found that both the
value of a card on a given trial as well as the overall value

Directional
prime

Magnitude
salience

of one's hand at a given time significantly predicted eye
gaze in a manner consistent with observed SNAs for
Western participants (i.e., smaller magnitudes produced
more leftward eye movements and larger magnitudes
produced more rightward eye movements). This study
provides strong evidence for a left-to-right oriented MNL by
demonstrating that number representations bias spatial
attention even in the absence of a directional prime and a
dichotomous response scheme (see Table 1). Other eyetracking studies have yielded similar results (e.g., Schwarz
& Keus, 2004; Loetscher et al., 2010). Yet in Holmes et al.
(2016), the task requires the explicit processing of numerical
value (e.g., value of a card or hand). Though the processing
of numerical magnitude may not be explicitly required in
the other tasks above, they do invoke some property of
number (e.g., parity). As such, two questions remain: do
numbers automatically bias spatial attention in the absence
of a directional prime and even when numerical properties
are irrelevant to the task at hand? Furthermore, and
critically, is this bias specific to number?

Automaticity as a criterion for representation
Understanding whether SNAs manifest automatically (i.e.,
in the absence of task demands) is crucial for understanding
the relationship between space and number, in large part
because automaticity suggests that the relationship is
representational (as an MNL hypothesis would predict)
rather than transient (as a polarity correspondence or WM
account would predict). Nowhere is this criterion more
apparent than in the literature on synesthesia. Automaticity,
here, is where many have drawn the line between a
relationship that is merely associative as opposed to truly
synesthetic (see Grossenbacher & Lovelace, 2001;
Mattingley, 2009). We argue that the spatial-numerical

76

relationship should be considered in similar terms (see also,
Cohen Kadosh & Henik, 2007). By this criterion,
automaticity helps us to understand the nature of the relation
between space and number: namely, whether they share
representational space (as an MNL hypothesis predicts), or
whether the two are only transiently associated with one
another (as alternative hypotheses predict).
Here, we present evidence from a novel SNA paradigm -the place-the-number task -- which suggests that numbers
do in fact automatically bias spatial attention. Very simply,
participants viewed a number on a screen, memorized its
location, and, after a delay, placed the number back in its
original location. This task revealed a robust spatialnumerical relationship. In two additional control
experiments, we found no consistent mapping of letters to
space, suggesting that these attentional biases are specific to
number and not ordinal sequences (a control which has not
always been tested with other paradigms). Predictions made
by MNL and WM accounts of SNAs diverge in such
conditions: an MNL account predicts that this spatial bias is
specific to number whereas a WM account predicts that this
bias generalizes to any ordinal sequence (e.g., letters,
months, etc.; van Dijck et al, 2014).

Results
The remaining participants (N = 36) had a mean accuracy of
18.76 pixels (SD = 13.67). The variable of interest was
participants’ accuracy along the horizontal axis1. For each
trial, we calculated accuracy as the difference between the
x-coordinate of the participant’s final placement and xcoordinate of the digit’s original location, such that a
negative value represents a more leftward placement, in
comparison to the original location, and a positive value
represented a more rightward placement, in comparison to
the original location. For each participant, we calculated the
mean accuracy for each digit and calculated a slope by
regressing these values onto their corresponding numerical
value (See Fig 1). Thus, in this paradigm, a positive slope
represents the canonical, left-to-right SNA. Participants’
slopes were significantly greater than zero, t(35) = 2.11, p <
.05, d = .35. Furthermore, a significant number of
participants (N = 24) showed this effect (binomial test, p <
.05). In other words, participants placed smaller numbers
more leftward than larger numbers, consistent with a left-toright SNA2. To determine whether the SNA shown here is
unique to number (as an MNL account predicts) or occurs
for any ordinal sequence (as a WM account predicts), we
conducted a control experiment (Exp. 2A) with letters.

Experiment 1: Place-the-number task
Method
In this novel paradigm, participants viewed an Arabic
numeral (1-9) presented in black font within a rectangle
(white fill with black outline; 918 × 495 pixels). This task
was created in Visual Basic and presented on a 19in
computer monitor. Participants sat approximately 65cm
from the monitor. Each digit was presented 20 times, for a
total of 180 trials, randomly ordered. On each trial,
participants were instructed to remember the location of the
digit. The digit remained on screen until participants clicked
a button located at the bottom of the screen, at which time
the digit disappeared. Participants were then instructed to
click the remembered location to place the digit at that
location. These instructions were presented in a pop-up
dialog box, which also ensured that participants did not
fixate on the original location of the digit. Participants could
further adjust this initial placement by dragging and
dropping the digit. Participants then confirmed their final
placement by clicking another button on screen and
immediately proceeded to the next trial.
Thirty-seven undergraduates participated in this task for
course credit. All participants had normal or corrected-to
normal vision. Procedures were approved by the
Institutional Review Board (IRB). One participant was
excluded from the statistical analyses due to poor accuracy
(> 2.5 SD from the group mean), where accuracy is
calculated as the distance between the digit’s original
location and the participant’s final placement.

Figure 1: Scatterplot displaying mean spatial bias (final –
original placement) for digits 1-9 including the best-fitting
regression line.

1

Across all three experiments, we find no evidence of spatialnumerical associations in the vertical dimension.
2
Consistent with previous research on pseudoneglect (Lourenco
& Longo, 2007; for review, see Jewel & McCourt, 2000), there is
an overall leftward bias in all three experiments.

77

example. Thirty-eight undergraduates participated for
course credit. One participant was excluded from the
statistical analyses as they did not complete all trials. One
participant was excluded from the statistical analyses for
poor accuracy.

Experiment 2A: Letter control (A-I)
Method
The procedure for Experiment 2A was identical to
Experiment 1 except instead of Arabic numerals as stimuli,
participants were presented with the first nine letters of the
alphabet (A-I). Thirty-eight undergraduates participated for
course credit. One participant was excluded from the
statistical analyses as they did not complete all trials. One
participant was excluded from the statistical analyses for
poor accuracy.

Results
The remaining participants (N = 36) had a mean accuracy of
13.65 pixels (SD = 9.11)3. Consistent with the findings of
Experiment 2A, participants’ slopes were not significantly
different from zero, t(35) = -.14, p = .89, confirming that
letters do not generate a spatial association in this paradigm.

Results
The remaining participants (N = 36) had a mean accuracy of
14.25 pixels (SD = 7.62). Importantly, unlike Experiment 1,
participants’ slopes were not significantly different from
zero, t(35) = -.85, p = .40. These results demonstrate that
letters, although ordinal, do not generate a spatial
association in this paradigm. However, since the letters used
only spanned the beginning of the alphabet, it remains
possible this sequence was not comparable to the Arabic
numerals used in Experiment 1. The following experiment
was designed to address this concern.

Figure 3: Scatterplot displaying mean spatial bias (final –
original placement) for letters evenly distributed in the
alphabet including the best-fitting regression line.

General Discussion
A primary goal of this study was to demonstrate an SNA in
the absence of any sort of task demand. In the place-thenumber task, participants’ responses are non-dichotomous,
there is no left-right directional prime, and the value of the
stimulus is not necessary to complete the task. Yet
participants nevertheless exhibited an SNA consistent with
past results. Our two control experiments demonstrate that
this effect is specific to number and not other ordinal
sequences such as letters.
Consistent with our hypotheses, these findings
demonstrate that numbers — but not letters —automatically
bias spatial attention in accordance with an MNL account.
The fact that this effect occurs in the absence of relevant
task demands is critical. Those who posit alternative
accounts of SNAs often offer explanations that rest on
demand characteristics of the tasks themselves, but there are

Figure 2: Scatterplot displaying mean spatial bias (final –
original placement) for letters A-I including the best-fitting
regression line.

Experiment 2B: Letter control (A-Z)
Method
The procedure for Experiment 2B was identical to
Experiment 1 and 2A but instead of Arabic numerals as
stimuli, nine letters evenly spaced throughout the alphabet
(A, D, G, J, M, P, S, V, Y) were presented, as we
hypothesized participants could more easily distinguish
between the ordinal position of “A”/“Y” than “A”/“I”, for

3
Mean accuracy was not significantly different across the three
experiments as determined by a one-way analysis of variance
(ANOVA).

78

no such demands here. Therefore, we conclude that the
automaticity of the spatial bias in this task sheds light on the
nature of numerical representations — that they are
inherently spatial unlike other ordinal sequences. Though
other accounts exist, we believe these results provide strong
evidence in favor of an MNL account of SNAs.
This interpretation is consistent with recent neural work
which has explored the relation between space and number
(Harvey et al., 2013). Harvey and colleagues (2013) found
evidence of a topographic map for numerosity in the
posterior superior parietal lobule, akin to topographic maps
for sensorimotor systems (Udin & Fawcett, 1988). Within
this area, medial regions preferred small numerosities and
lateral regions preferred large numerosities. Importantly, the
location and numerosity preference of this topographic map
was consistent across participants. These data support the
growing body of evidence not only that number and space
are deeply related in the mind, but, additionally, that
numerical representations have an inherently spatial
organization.

visualization — is at least two millennia old (as in Cicero’s
De Oratore), but it has nothing to do with intrinsic
characteristics of the representation. Thus, it becomes
important to differentiate questions of spatial representation
and spatial strategy. Previous tasks, some rife with potential
task demands, failed to make a distinction between these
two perspectives, yet have been interpreted as evidence of
spatial representation. van Dijck and Fias (2011) have
argued, partially on account of these task demands, that
SNAs are merely transient mappings that occur in working
memory – which, within our framework, falls under the
purview of spatial strategy. In pursuing the latter issue of
strategy, those who have espoused this WM perspective
have overlooked the former, more crucial question of
representation. That is, while we have argued that numbers
are unique insofar as they are inherently spatial, van Dijck
and Fias have succeeded only in showing that other
sequences can, in certain contexts, be mapped spatially.

Empirical horizons
What does the distinction between spatial representation and
spatial strategy buy us? As a starting point, it establishes
that numbers are in fact unique: they bias spatial attention
automatically which suggests that their representation is
inherently spatial in a way that other ordinal sequences are
not. With this in mind, we are able to ask more nuanced
questions about the underlying relationship between space
and number. For example, why are numbers unique in this
way? Do we come into the world with the propensity to
represent numbers spatially, or is it learned? Perhaps more
critically: what is the utility of a spatial-numerical mapping?
For example, despite the seeming ubiquity and permanence
of SNAs, it is unclear whether this spatial-numerical bias is
related to math performance, with some studies reporting a
positive relationship, some a negative relationship, and
some no relationship at all (for review, see Cipora, Patro, &
Nuerk, 2015).
Not only does the place-the-number task play a part in
raising these questions, it may also help to answer them. To
further understand the phylogenetic and ontogenetic
development of these associations, it is necessary to
examine them in early childhood as number concepts are
still being acquired. This has proven challenging, however,
given that many SNA tasks are difficult to administer to
children. The place-the-number task alleviates these
concerns and might allow for the study of SNAs at a time in
development when they have greater utility.
In sum, we have shown that numbers, but not letters, bias
spatial attention in a manner that is consistent with an MNL
hypothesis of SNAs. We argue that previous work which
has posited alternative explanations to this account have
been inadvertently answering a separate question – one
about spatial strategy rather than spatial representation.
Here, we have clarified the difference between these two
accounts and suggested how the place-the-number task may
be used to guide future research on the deep relationship
between space and numbers in the mind.

Spatial representation versus spatial strategy
One question that arises from this interpretation is why
others have demonstrated effects of ordinal sequences (e.g.,
Gevers, Reynovet, & Fias, 2003; van Dijck & Fias, 2011).
To answer this question, we want to make a critical
distinction. On the one hand, we might ask what things we
can organize spatially; on the other hand, we might ask what
things are inherently spatial. It is only in the context of the
latter question that we argue numbers are unique. That we
can organize ordinal sequences spatially should come as no
surprise. People can organize items in any number of spatial
arrangements and this type of spatialization has often been
considered important for reasoning (Johnson-Laird, 1983).
But the question that concerns the authors here is whether
numbers are unique in the sense that they are automatically
represented spatially in the mind.
This dichotomy is reminiscent of the so-called “dualprocess” model of SNAs (e.g., Ginsburg & Gevers, 2015)
which entail both long-term SNAs as well as spatialization
in working memory. Abrahamse, van Dijck, and Fias (2016)
have argued against this view, suggesting that their WM
account is more parsimonious – that it “captures the
complexity of the empirical database” without the need for
long-term associations (p. 7). Indeed, if the mind were
constructed for the sole purpose of representing number,
then it may have evolved to do so in a parsimonious
manner. Yet, Abrahamse and colleagues (2016) ignore the
possibility that multiple mechanisms, some of them domaingeneral, may be at play. As we suggest, all ordinal
sequences can be represented in space, but only numbers are
automatically represented in this manner.
A working memory account of SNAs suggests that we
have the propensity to organize sequences spatially in order
to minimize the load of maintaining the sequence in the
mind at once. This idea is reminiscent of the "method of
loci" — a means of improving memory per spatial

79

Jewell, G. & McCourt, M. E. (2000). Pseudoneglect: a
review and meta-analysis of performance factors in line
bisection tasks. Neuropsychologia, 38, 93-110.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1983). Mental models: Towards a
cognitive science of language, inference, and
consciousness. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Loetscher, T., Bockisch, C., Nicholls, M. E. R., & Brugger,
P. (2010). Eye position predicts what number you have in
mind. Current Biology, 20, R264-R265.
Loetscher, T., Schwarz, U., Schubiger, M., & Brugger, P.
(2008). Head turns bias the brain’s internal random
generator. Current Biology, 18, R60-R62.
Longo, M. R. & Lourenco, S. F. (2007). Spatial attention
and the mental number line: Evidence for characteristic
biases and compression. Neuropsychologia, 45, 14001407.
Marghetis, T., Kanwal, J., & Bergen, B. K. (2013). Placing
numbers in behavioral space: Activity-specific
interactions between numbers and space with a single
response button. Proceedings of the 35th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 972977). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Mattingley, J. B. (2009). Attention, automaticity, and
awareness in synesthesia. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences, 1156, 141-167.
Proctor, R. W. & Cho, Y. S. (2006). Polarity
correspondence: A general principle for performance of
speeded binary classification tasks. Psychological
Bulletin, 132, 416-442.
Ruiz Fernández, S., Rahona, J. J., Hervás, G., Vázquez, C.,
Ulrich, R. (2011). Number magnitude determines gaze
direction: Spatial-numerical association in a free-choice
task. Cortex, 47, 617-620.
Schwarz, W. & Keus, I. M. (2004). Moving the eyes along
the mental number line: comparing SNARC effects with
the saccadic and manual responses. Perception &
Psychophysics, 66, 651-664.
Udin, S. B. & Fawcett, J. W. (1988). Formation of
topographic maps. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 11,
289-327.
van Dijck, J. P. & Fias, W. (2011). A working memory
account for spatial-numerical associations. Cognition,
119, 114-119.
van Dijck, J. P., Abrahamse, E. L., Acar, F., Ketels, B., &
Fias, W. (2014). A working memory account of the
interaction between numbers and spatial attention.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 67, 15001513.
Viarouge, A., Hubbard, E. M. & Dehaene, S. (2014). The
organization of spatial reference frames involved in the
SNARC effect. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 67, 1484-1499.
Zanolie, K. & Pecher, D. (2014). Number-induced shifts in
spatial attention: a replication study. Frontiers in
Psychology, 5, 987.

References
Abrahamse, E., van Dijck, J. -P., & Fias, W. (2016). How
does working memory enable number-induced spatial
biases? Frontiers in Psychology, 7, 977.
Calibria, M. & Rossetti, Y. (2005). Interference between
number processing and line bisection: a methodology.
Neuropsychologia, 43, 779-783.
Cheung, C. –N., Ayzenberg, V., Diamond, R. F. L., Yousif,
S. R., & Lourenco, S. F. (2015). Probing the mental
number line: A between-task analysis of spatial-numerical
associations. Proceedings of the 37th Annual Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 357-362). Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Cipora, K., Patro, K., & Nuerk, H. -C. (2015). Are spatialnumerical associations a cornerstone for arithmetic
learning? The lack of genuine correlations suggests no.
Mind, Brain, and Education, 9, 190-206.
Cohen Kadosh, R. & Henik, A. (2007). Can synesthesia
research inform cognitive science? Trends in Cognitive
Science, 11, 177-184.
Dehaene, S., Bossini, S. & Giraux, P. (1993). The mental
representation of parity and number magnitude. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 122, 371-96.
Fischer, M. H. (2001). Cognition in the bisection task.
Trends in Cognitive Science, 5, 460-462.
Fischer, M. H., Castel, A. D., Dodd, M. D., & Pratt, J.
(2003). Perceiving numbers causes spatial shifts of
attention. Nature Neuroscience, 6, 555-556.
Fischer. M. H., & Shaki, S. (2014). Spatial associations in
numerical cognition— From single digits to arithmetic.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 67, 14611483.
Fitousi, D., Shaki, S., & Algom, D. (2009). The role of
parity, physical size, and magnitude in numerical
cognition: The SNARC effect revisited. Perception &
Psychophysics, 71, 143-155.
Gevers, W., Reynvoet, B., & Fias, W. (2003). The mental
representation of ordinal sequences is spatially organized.
Cognition, 97, 87-95.
Ginsberg, V. & Gevers, W. (2015). Spatial coding of ordinal
information in short- and long-term memory. Frontiers in
Human Neuroscience, 9, 8.
Grossenbacher, P. G. & Lovelace, C. T. (2001).
Mechanisms of synesthesia: cognitive and physiological
constraints. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 5, 36-41.
Harvey, B. M., Klein, B. P., Petridou, N., & Dumoulin, S.
O. (2013). Topographic representation of numerosity in
the human parietal cortex. Science, 341, 1123-1126.
Hoffmann, D., Hornung, C., Martin, R., & Schiltz, C.
(2013). Developing number-space associations: SNARC
effects using a color discrimination task in 5-year-olds.
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 116, 775-791.
Holmes, K. J., Ayzenberg, V. & Lourenco, S. F. (2016).
Gamble on gaze: Eye movements reflect the numerical
value of blackjack hands. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 23, 1974-1981.

80

