Part-whole categorization is culture-specific
Timothy J. Tilbe (timothyt@buffalo.edu)
Department of Linguistics, University at Buffalo, 609 Baldy Hall
Buffalo, NY 14260 USA

Jürgen Bohnemeyer (jb77@buffalo.edu)
Department of Linguistics, University at Buffalo, 609 Baldy Hall
Buffalo, NY 14260 USA

Gabriela Pérez Báez (PerezBaezG@si.edu)
Department of Anthropology, National Museum of Natural History,
P.O. Box 37012 Smithsonian Institution, Washington D.C., 20013-7012 USA

Dedre Gentner (gentner@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University, Swift Hall 102, 2029 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208 USA

Abstract
We present two experiments on the role of culture in the
categorization of object part-whole structures. A triadic
categorization task pitted shape against function as factors
driving similarity judgments on selected parts of different
types of objects. Speakers of American English were
significantly more likely than speakers of two indigenous
languages of Mexico, Tseltal Maya and Isthmus Zapotec, to
choose categorization by function, even when familiarity of
the various stimulus objects was factored in. In the second
study, members of the two indigenous groups matched parts
of a doll to parts of novel objects of unfamiliar shape. The
Tseltal participants were significantly more likely to match
according to a shape-analytical algorithm rather than global
analogy, consistent with predictions based on prevalent
strategies in verbal part labeling in the two languages. We
conclude that while cognition of object parts undoubtedly has
a strong biological basis, there are also robust cultural effects.
Keywords: object mereology; meronymy; shape perception;
function; cross-cultural research

Introduction
The ability to categorize objects crucially involves
identifying their parts. In general, mereology – the
conceptualization of parts, and of how they relate to each
other and to the wholes they form – is deeply involved in
how humans make sense of their physical world.
A strong case can be made that the segmentation of
physical objects into parts has a basis in shape recognition
(Biederman 1987; Marr 1982; Palmer 1977; Tversky &
Hemenway 1984; inter alia) and is thus likely biologically
grounded. At the same time, function plays a key role in the
categorization of both body parts of living things and object
parts of artifacts (e.g., Croft & Cruse 2004: 153-156; Rose
& Schaffer 2015; Svorou 1994: 78-79, 91-92; Tversky
1989). Ears and lids can come in a great many distinct
shapes; what unites these diverse manifestations is the
function they play in the whole of which they are a part. But

the attribution of functions depends on knowledge, beliefs,
and assumptions that are at least to a large extent learned.
Function dependence thus creates an opening for cultural
effects in cognition of parts.
In addition, there is some evidence suggesting that the
role of shape, and geometry more generally, in mereological
cognition may be to some extent subject to cultural variation
as well. This evidence comes from meronymy, the
nomenclature for object parts. In-depth studies of the
meronymy of non-Indo-European languages are few and far
between. But the few available reports present evidence of
striking differences vis-à-vis the terminology familiar from
English and other European languages.
Our interest in this complex was aroused by descriptions
of the meronymies of two indigenous languages of southern
Mexico, Ayoquesco Zapotec (MacLaury 1989) and Tseltal
Maya (Levinson 1994). Both languages belong to the
Mesoamerican linguistic and cultural area, the members of
which have been in contact with one another for millennia
(Campbell, Kaufman & Smith-Stark 1986).
A feature that the accounts of MacLaury (1989) and
Levinson (1994) converge on is a core set of meronyms that
are assigned both to body parts of humans and animals and
to the parts of inanimate objects (though not generally to
plants). They claim that labeling of object parts with
general-purpose body part terms is pervasive, and based
largely on shape and geometry. In contrast, function-based
meronyms for inanimate objects are largely absent.
Where the two systems appear to diverge is in the
strategies used to assign the generalized meronyms to object
parts. MacLaury (1989) describes a strategy strictly based
on a global analogical mapping from the human body in
canonical erect position to the object in its actual orientation
at the time the assignment pertains to. (See Figure 1A for
the part labelings that this account predicts for a novel
object.) The parts that are named in this manner, the ‘head,’
‘face,’ ‘sides,’ ‘back,’ and ‘buttocks,’ have fixed spatial

3332

relationships to each other in any object. For instance, if one
knows which part of the object is called its ‘face,’ and the
vertical axis is determined, one can correctly predict the
locations of its ‘head,’ ‘sides,’ ‘back,’ and ‘buttocks.’ The
orientation of the object with respect to gravity is crucial;
for example, the topmost part is the ‘head,’ no matter what
the structure of that part happens to be, and changing the
orientation of the object causes the labels to be reassigned.
In contrast, Levinson (1994) discusses the process by
which meronyms are assigned to objects in Tseltal as an
algorithm that takes a visual segmentation of the object as
its input. (See Figure 1B for an example this account’s
predicted labelings for a novel object.) Axes of generalized
cones are identified for the main volume and any secondary
volumes of the object, as well as axes of symmetry. A sense
of direction is assigned to each axis, and meronyms are
assigned to the ends of the axes, in some instances taking
the shape of the part into account. So, for instance, the
default meronym for the head (in the vector sense) of the
main axis is the word for ‘head,’ but if that region of the
object is pointy, ‘nose’ is used, and if it is a negative space,
‘mouth’ is used. This system does not take into account the
orientation of the object with regard to gravity, and because
the axes are in certain ways independent of each other,
meronyms do not occur in a fixed spatial schema. 1
The question we wish to address in this paper is whether
these putatively distinctive properties of meronymy are
restricted to language, or whether they are associated with
deeper cognitive differences - between Mesoamericans and
English speakers on the one hand, and between Zapotec and
Tseltal speakers on the other. We present two studies.
Experiment 1 explores the respective role of shape and
function in object part categorization, comparing data from
speakers of Tseltal, Zapotec, and American English in a
three-population design. Based on the available descriptions
of verbal behavior, we predict function to play a greater role
in the mereological categorizations of Americans than in
those of either Tseltal or Zapotec participants.
Experiment 2 compares Tseltal and Zapotec participants
in terms of their preference for categorizing the parts of
unfamiliar objects by comparing them globally to the human
body vs. by doing so based on the shape-analytical
algorithm even when it is not licensed by a global mapping.
If the differences in part categorization strategies go beyond
language, we predict that the Tseltal participants should be
more likely to prefer mappings that are at odds with global
analogies.

Experiment 1: shape vs. function
Speakers of English, Tseltal Maya, and Isthmus Zapotec
compared images (with one exception, photographs were
used) of part-whole configurations. Isthmus Zapotec is
1

MacLaury (1989) characterizes the application of Zapotec
body part terms to parts of inanimate objects as analogical or
metaphorical mappings from human body parts. An alternate view,
taken by Levinson (1994) in his work on Tseltal, is that the terms
are general abstractions and not metaphorical.

Figure 1. A: Meronyms predicted by the global mapping
account. B: Meronyms predicted by the algorithmic account.
closely related to Ayoquesco Zapotec as described by
MacLaury (1989); ongoing field research by the third author
suggests that MacLaury’s analysis of Ayoquesco meronymy
applies to Isthmus Zapotec as well as far as the predictions
of the present study are concerned, though with additional
complications (Pérez Báez 2011). Each trial involved a triad
of images. The participants selected the configuration that
was least like the other two. The triads were composed so as
to trade off functional against shape-based similarity. Since
function attribution likely depends on the participants’
knowledge of the object, a norming study was carried out to
assess their familiarity with the stimuli.

Method
Participants. 27 participants of each population were
recruited at field sites in La Ventosa, Oaxaca, Mexico
(Isthmus Zapotec – 16 women, 11 men; 14 young adult, 9
middle-aged, 4 elderly) and Tenejapa, Chiapas, Mexico
(Tseltal Maya – 18 women, 7 men; 16 young adults, 8
middle-aged, and 1 elderly, with 2 participants’
demographic information missing), the University at
Buffalo and in Raynham, Massachusetts (English – 19
women, 8 men; 17 young adults, 6 middle-aged, and 4
elderly). Recruitment was conducted by word of mouth and
at the University at Buffalo by flyer. Participants completed
the tasks in about 30 minutes and were compensated 100
Pesos (approximately $5) and $10, respectively.
Materials. Each participant was given 12 test trials
interspersed with 17 fillers, for a total of 29 trials, preceded
by one practice trial of the same design as the fillers. The
three pictures for each trial were printed on a single sheet,
and the sheets placed into a binder so that one triad could be
displayed at a time. The placement of the images on each
page was pseudo-randomized, in order to reduce any
possible bias toward choosing the picture in any particular
one of the three positions.
Each trial consists of showing a participant three pictures
of artifacts or plants that are presumably familiar to all three
populations, with certain parts highlighted in red, and asking
them to choose the one whose highlighted part they judge to

3333

be most different from the other two. The experimental
triads are designed to pit shape against function, in that
there is a pivot object part and two alternates: the pivot
shares its shape with one alternate, and its function with the
other. An experimental triad is shown in Figure 2.
The filler trials use the same visual layout as the
experimental trials, and the action the participant is
expected to perform is the same. However, instead of a
single pivot, there are two pictures in which the indicated
parts of the object are similar in both shape and function,
while the remaining picture’s indicated part is the odd one
out in terms of both shape and function. Therefore, a shapebased strategy and a function-based strategy would tend to
produce the same response. This provides a check on the
participants’ attention to and comprehension of the task.
Procedure. The participants were instructed in their native
languages by the first author and, in the case of the Tseltal
and Zapotec participants, by bilingual assistants with
experience in linguistic field research, to pick out the partwhole configuration in each triad they considered least like
the others. The following standardized instructions were
used: “In this game, I am going to show you some drawings
and photos of various things – three at a time. And if you
are not sure of what some of the objects are, please ask me.
One part of each thing is red. Two of the parts are more
similar, and the other is different. I want you to look at those
parts, and find the different one. You should compare only
the parts, not the whole objects. When you decide which is
different, circle it using this marker. For example, let’s look
at these three [the practice triad]. Here there’s a dog, with its
leg red. And here is a cat, with its head red. And a pig, with
its leg red. So, which part is different? Correct, the head.
And so, do you have any questions before beginning?”2
Norming. As part of the follow-up task ‘Shape-Function
Norming,’ participants rated the familiarity of each
individual picture used in the Shape-Function Triads. This
serves the purpose of checking their interpretation of the
pictures and providing additional factors for statistically
modeling the experiment’s results. Participants rated each of
the three pictures in each experimental trial for familiarity,
using a five-point Likert scale in their native language.

Figure 2. Example of a test triad for Experiment 1
pivot as the odd one out in the trial in question, which is not
interpretable as classifying by shape or function (11 trials in
the Zapotec data set, 12 in the Tseltal data set, and 8 in the
English data set). In the other situation, they did not give an
answer to that trial at all (1 trial in the Zapotec data, 0 in the
Tseltal data, and 0 in the English data). Approximately 4%
of the data points were missing or excluded.
Analysis. Figure 3 shows the breakdown of responses.
The responses to the norming scale, interpreted as numerals,
were centered so that -2 corresponded to “completely
unfamiliar” and 2 corresponded to “completely familiar.”
(The standard deviations of the ratings for each object
ranged from 0.37 to 1.26 for the Zapotec speakers, and from
0.23 to 1.49 for the Tseltal speakers.) Within each language
population, the mean of these familiarity scores was
calculated for each picture in order to generalize across
participants. Any picture whose average rating was equal to
or greater than 1 was counted as “familiar,” and any whose
average rating was less than 1 was counted as “unfamiliar.”
The overall familiarity of each triad was coded by the
number of familiar and unfamiliar pictures it contained,
from “A” for three familiar pictures through “D” for none,
and this code was treated as an ordinal factor in the
regression models of the responses.
A binomial logistic mixed-effects regression model was
fitted with population (identified by language) and code of
triad familiarity as fixed factors, and random intercepts for
participant and trial. Tseltal and Zapotec participants proved

Results
Participant exclusions. The responses of two Zapotec
participants were excluded from the analysis because their
performance on the filler trials was below the preestablished 80% threshold, indicating that they did not
sufficiently comprehend the task.
Trial exclusions. Trials were excluded from the analysis
in two situations. In one of these, the participant chose the
2 Since the instruction for the practice trial contained the
meronyms ‘head’ and ‘leg’, a subvocal rehearsal effect on the test
trials cannot be ruled out.

Figure 3. Experiment 1 responses by population and type.
Error bars represent 95% prediction intervals.

3334

significantly different from American participants at
the p<.001 level and from one another at the p<.05
level. No significant effect of familiarity was obtained.
Discussion
As predicted, the Mesoamerican participants were more
likely to categorize parts by shape than the American
participants. Shape in fact strongly dominated the Tseltal
and Zapotec speakers’ categorizations (at 65.4% and 76.8%
of responses), whereas function strongly dominated among
the English speakers (67.7%).3 Familiarity did not appear to
significantly affect these ratings, suggesting that the
selection of the stimuli from among objects of everyday
interactions for all three cultures was successful. It is
possible, however, that the similarity judgments were
influenced by subvocal use of meronyms.

Experiment 2: global vs. shape-analytical
mapping
The purpose of this experiment was to test for population
differences in mereological cognition, by obtaining
responses of nonverbal mapping from body parts to the
parts of novel objects. This was done with the researcher
indicating various parts of a humanoid doll, and asking the
participants to find as many corresponding parts as they
could on the Novel Objects. In order to test for effects of
subvocal rehearsal, this task had two conditions: In one
condition, the participants did a verbal elicitation task before
the experiment, and in the other condition, they did not.

Method
Participants. 44 Tseltal speakers (29 women, 16 men;
mean age 39.7, SD 12.6) and 45 Isthmus Zapotec speakers
(33 women, 12 men; mean age 33.2, SD 13.6) were
recruited and tested in La Ventosa, Oaxaca, Mexico
(Isthmus Zapotec) and San Cristóbal de las Casas, Chiapas,
Mexico (Tseltal), relying again on word of mouth. The task
took about an hour to complete and the participants were
compensated 100 Pesos (approximately $5).
Materials. The tasks used as stimuli a set of six solid plastic
forms, part of the MesoSpace Novel Objects stimuli.4 These
are abstract forms that, as far as possible, bear little
resemblance to any item familiar to the participants, so that
the objects are not biased toward any particular meronym
assignment strategy, and the participants have to fall back
on their general principles for construing mereological
structure. Figure 1 features an example. For the practice
3 An anonymous reviewer points out that, since the instructions
indicated there was a correct answer for each triad, the English
speakers’ responses may have been motivated by trying to find
counterintuitive answers, as in an IQ test.
4 A total of nine Novel Objects were originally designed by the
third author and produced for the project Spatial language and
cognition in Mesoamerica (‘MesoSpace’; NSF Award #BCS0723694) directed by the second author.

trial, instead of a Novel Object, a blobby humanoid figure
made of Sculpey modeling clay was used. A plastic action
figure doll representing a young adult male, fairly realistic
in proportions, was used to represent a target body part in
each trial - either the head, face, side (flank), back, or
buttocks. These five parts were used because both
MacLaury (1989) and Levinson (1994) had identified the
meronyms for them as belonging to the languages’ most
productive meronymic systems, and these Zapotec and
Tseltal terms are rough translation equivalents with regard
to the human body. The participants used bits of Play-Doh
to mark the parts of the Novel Objects that they judged as
corresponding with these target parts. This doll was in a
standing position in each trial, which, if an orientationdependent mapping strategy is used, would favor the choice
of the uppermost part of the Novel Object as corresponding
with the doll’s head, the part(s) of the Novel Object to the
participant’s left or right as corresponding to the doll’s side,
etc.
Procedure. Conditions: In order to detect possible subvocal
rehearsal effects, half of the participants carried out a verbal
labeling task prior to the experiment; the other half did not
do this task. Participants were randomly assigned to one
condition or the other.
The verbal elicitation task was administered as follows:
the participant was handed each of the Novel Objects, one at
a time (in an opaque bag to avoid imposing any orientation
on the object), asked to take it out and inspect it from all
sides, and then prompted to delineate and label its parts. The
experimenter recorded the delineated areas on twodimensional images of the objects.
Setup: In each trial, the experimenter set one of the Novel
Objects on the tabletop directly in front of participant,
sticking it into a base of Play-Doh if it would not stay in the
desired orientation unsupported. Each Novel Object was
therefore relatively in front of the participant and absolutely
to the north (the participants were seated to face north).
Trials: In each trial, one of the target parts of the doll was
manually indicated by the experimenter. In view of the
importance of vertical orientation in Zapotec meronymy, the
trials were administered in two orientation variants:
“aligned” (that is, the gravitationally-defined vertical axis
coincides with the Novel Object’s algorithmically-defined
‘model axis’, i.e., the axis from which the central volume of
the object is generated), or “unaligned” (these axes are
orthogonal). This yielded a total of 60 test trials: 5 doll parts
x 6 Novel Objects x 2 orientations. In addition, there was
one practice trial employing instead of a Novel Object a
blobby humanoid figure made of Sculpey, designed to
abstractly resemble the doll.
Instructions: The participants were instructed that when
the experimenter indicated a part on the doll by delineating
it with a finger, they should mark with the Play-Doh as
many parts on the Novel Object as they thought
corresponded to the doll’s part, whether this resulted in no
part being marked, just one part, or multiple parts. The

3335

participants were instructed in their native languages by
bilingual research assistants working with the first author as
follows: “I’m going to give you some objects, one at a time.
This first object is an example. You can turn it around to see
how it is. And I’m going to show you some part of this doll,
and you should decide if the object has a part of the same
kind. It’s possible that it doesn’t have any. In that case,
simply tell me that it isn’t there. It’s also possible that it has
a part like that, or more than one at a time. In that case, take
a bit of this Play-Doh and stick it to the part or parts that are
similar. And when it’s finished, I want you to lift the object
and turn it slowly to show what you have done.”
Recording: The responses, in terms of the landing sites on
the Novel Objects the participants marked with Play-Doh,
were recorded by the first author verbally in English on a
coding sheet. The sessions were videotaped in their entirety.

(1994) shape-analytical algorithm (‘Algorithm only’), by
both, or by neither. From MacLaury’s (1989) global
mapping account, two key predictions were derived: the
‘face’ of any object faces toward the observer, and the
‘head’ of any object points up against the pull of gravity.
Since Levinson’s (1994) algorithm is orientationindependent, it was assumed that given a part of the doll and
a Novel Object, the intrinsic location of the matched part on
the Novel Object will be constant across varied orientations.
Analysis. Figure 4 shows the breakdown of the four
response types across the two populations.

Results
Participant exclusions. One Zapotec participant’s
responses had to be excluded because the participant
appeared unable to grasp the instructions.
Trial exclusions. 16 of the 60 test trials were excluded from
the analysis because the algorithm Levinson (1994)
proposed for meronymic labeling in Tseltal predicted that
the particular Novel Object lacked a corresponding part, and
the Tseltal participants nevertheless in almost all cases
identified some part of it despite having been given the
option not to select a mapping. These responses therefore
could not be evaluated for whether they fulfilled the
predictions of the algorithm. One Tseltal trial was not
completed. The analysis was thus performed on 1,936 trials
with Zapotec participants and 1,979 trials with Tseltal
participants.
Coding. In order to code the responses for whether they fit
the global mapping account, simplifying assumptions were
adopted. When the ‘head’ of the doll had been indicated, the
global prediction was considered fulfilled if and only if the
Play-Doh was placed somewhere on the upper region of the
object (as defined by the vector of gravity). Globally, the
‘buttocks’ had to be on the lower region, the ‘face’ on the
region toward the participant, the ‘back’ on the region away
from them, and the ‘sides’ on the regions to their relative
left or right. These regions were interpreted as both surfaces
and volumes. So, for example, a placement that was both on
the top surface of the object, and also displaced from the
center of that surface in the direction toward the participant,
would satisfy the prediction for ‘head’ by virtue of being on
the upper part of the object, and would also satisfy the
prediction for ‘face’ by virtue of being on a volume part that
is toward the participant. The volume interpretation of parts
was also followed for the algorithmic predictions.
Response types. Four response types were distinguished,
based on whether the proposed match was predicted solely
by global mapping (‘Global only’), solely by Levinson’s

Figure 1. Experiment 2 responses by population and type.
Using Begg-Gray approximation of multinomial logistic
regression (Begg & Gray 1984), four binomial logistic
mixed effects regression models were fitted, one for each
response category, with population identified in terms of
language, condition, alignment, and trial as fixed factors,
and random intercepts for the stimulus doll part, the Novel
Object, and the participant. The Algorithm-only model
showed significant effects of population and alignment at
the p<.001 level. The Global-only model showed effects of
alignment and trial at the p<.001 level. There was a
significant interaction between Zapotec and alignment at the
p<.05 level. The Both model yielded a significant effect of
population at the p<.01 level and alignment and trial at the
p<.001 level. The Neither model yielded no significant
effects. None of the models produced a significant effect of
condition.

Discussion
As predicted, the Zapotec participants were significantly
more likely to propose matches that agreed with global
analogical mapping, but violated Levinson’s (1994) shapeanalytical algorithm. Also in line with predictions, the
orientation of the Novel Object had a significant effect on
the Zapotec participants’ matches, but not on those
proposed by the Tseltal participants. Also as predicted, the
“aligned” trials favored responses in the ‘both’ category.
There was no effect of condition; we take this to suggest
that subvocal rehearsal played no major part in the results.
Subvocal rehearsal would have predicted that the two
populations should have performed significantly more

3336

different from one another in the Verbal-priming condition,
contrary to fact.5

We gratefully acknowledge the contributions of JeanPierre Koenig, Peter Pfordresher, Gilles Polian, Reyna
López López, Rosaura López Cartas, Antonia Sántiz Girón,
María Gómez Sánchez, and John Pate.

General discussion
In both experiments, language proved a significant predictor
of nonverbal mereological categorization: English speakers
significantly preferred categorizing parts in terms of
function, whereas Tseltal and Zapotec speakers were
significantly more likely to categorize parts by shape
(Experiment 1). And Zapotec speakers proved significantly
more likely than Tseltal speakers to adhere to global
analogy in mapping the parts of the human body to those of
inanimate objects of unfamiliar shape, and were also
significantly more likely to factor the orientation of the
objects into their matches (Experiment 2).
We cannot exclude the possibility of subvocal rehearsal
effects in Experiment 1. It is possible that the participants
used their native languages for guidance in deciding
between function-based and shape-based categorization.
Future research will have to determine to what extent our
results are truly representative of the nonverbal cognition of
these groups. However, our findings are in line with
previous research suggesting that geometry, as opposed to
function, plays a relatively greater role among
Mesoamericans compared to Westerners (Lucy & Gaskins
2001). Meanwhile, in Experiment 2, we plausibly ruled out
a significant contribution from language as a direct resource,
suggesting robust differences in nonverbal cognition.
The findings presented here are also in line with Whorfian
interpretations according to which language use may
habituate speech communities to particular biases in
mereological cognition and serve as a conduit of their
cultural transmission (Bohnemeyer et al 2015). Here, too,
we must defer to future research for ascertaining whether
language merely reflects mereological cognition or is a
causal factor in it.

Conclusions
We have provided evidence of the existence of significant
cross-cultural differences in the categorization of the
mereology of physical objects. This is hardly surprising, as
the categorization of objects and their parts clearly depends
in part on acquired knowledge. What is surprising, in our
view, is that research into such cultural effects is still in its
infancy. We hope to have made a small contribution
towards rectifying this.

Acknowledgments
This material is based upon work supported by the
National Science Foundation under Grant No. BCS-1354277,
‘Doctoral Dissertation Research: Parts and Wholes in
Mesoamerican Language and Cognition,’ awarded to the
first author.

References
Begg, C. B., & Gray, R. (1984). Calculation of
polychotomous logistic regression parameters using
individualized regressions. Biometrika, 11-18.
Biederman, I. (1987). Recognition-by-components: a theory
of human image understanding. Psychological review,
94(2), 115.
Bohnemeyer, J., Donelson, K. T., Moore, R. E., Benedicto,
E., Eggleston, A., O’Meara, C. K., Pérez Báez, G.,
Capistrán Garza, A., Hernández Green, N., Hernández
Gómez, M., Herrera Castro, S., Palancar, E., Polian, G., &
Romero Méndez, R. (2015). The Contact Diffusion of
Linguistic Practices. Language Dynamics and Change,
5(2), 169-201.
Campbell, L., Kaufman, T., & Smith-Stark, T. C. (1986).
Meso-America as a linguistic area. Language, 530-570.
Croft, W., & Cruse, D. A. (2004). Cognitive linguistics.
Cambridge University Press.
Levinson, S. C. (1994). Vision, shape, and linguistic
description: Tzeltal body-part terminology and object
description. Linguistics, 32(4-5), 791-856.
Lucy, J. & Gaskins, S. (2001). “Grammatical categories and
the development of classification preferences: a
comparative approach.” In S. C. Levinson & M.
Bowerman (eds.), Language acquisition and conceptual
development. Cambridge UP.
MacLaury, R. E. (1989). Zapotec body-part locatives:
Prototypes and metaphoric extensions. International
Journal of American Linguistics, 55(2), 119-154.
Marr, D. (1982). Vision: A computational investigation into
the human representation and processing of visual
information. San Francisco: W. H. Freeman.
Palmer, S. E. (1977). Hierarchical structure in perceptual
representation. Cognitive psychology, 9(4), 441-474.
Pérez Báez, G. (2011). Semantics of body part terms in
Juchiteco locative descriptions. Language Sciences,
33(6), 943-960.
Rose, D., & Schaffer, J. (2015). Folk mereology is
teleological. Noûs.
Svorou, S. (1994). The grammar of space (Vol. 25). John
Benjamins Publishing.
Tversky, B. (1989). Parts, partonomies, and taxonomies.
Developmental Psychology, 25(6), 983-995.
Tversky, B., & Hemenway, K. (1984). Objects, parts, and
categories. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
113, 169-193.

5 However, this result is also consistent with subvocal rehearsal
being already at ceiling even in the non-primed condition.

3337

