Peculiarity doesn't trump ordinarity:
On recognition memory for exceptions to the category rule
Olivera Savic (savic.7@osu.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1835 Neil Avenue,
Columbus, OH 43210, United States

Vladimir Sloutsky (sloutsky.1@osu.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1835 Neil Avenue,
Columbus, OH 43210, United States

Abstract
While exceptions to a regularity might be rare, categories that
have exceptions are not. Previous studies on learning
categories that have exceptions suggested special status of
exceptional items in memory (e.g. Palmeri & Nosofsky, 1995,
Sakamoto and Love, 2004). However, this might be true only
for a special kind of exceptions – those that call for forming
complex binding structures, and could be learned only if they
are fully memorized. In the two experiments in this study, we
show that memory for exceptions is not better than memory for
regular category members (Experiment 1). On the contrary,
both children and adults had better memory for the features of
regular items (Experiment 2). In addition, adults, but not 4year-olds, showed better memory for the rule than for
probabilistic features. The overall results challenge the idea of
the special status of exceptions in memory.
Keywords: rule-plus-exception;
category structure

differential

memory;

Introduction
An exception is a case to which a rule or a general statement
does not apply. Tomatoes are an exception to the category of
vegetables, penguins are an exception to the category of
birds, bats to the category of mammals, and the verb “cut”
(since it does not change its form) is an exception to the rule
of tense formation. While exceptions may be of various
kinds, what is common for all of them is that they violate our
expectations about how something (or someone) should
behave, what it should look like, where it should belong, as
well as other expectations that are based on our previous
knowledge. Therefore, understanding of how we learn about
and how we represent those rare, deviant cases is an
interesting problem for the theories of category learning.
A common assumption underlying models that aimed to
explain how we learn and represent exceptions, is that
exceptions have a privileged memory status. Work in the
schema literature contrasting memory for schema-consistent
(i.e., in accord with expectations) and schema-inconsistent
information, demonstrated that schema-inconsistent
information is remembered better (for meta-analysis see,
Rojahn & Pettigrew, 1992). It has been argued that the
schema-inconsistent memory advantage (i.e. tendency to
false alarm to schema-consistent information) may be a
specific case of a general advantage for distinctive

information. Similar to the “von Restorff effect”, where there
is a recall advantage for a single word in uppercase in a list
of lowercase words (von Restorff, 1933), it is expected that
once expectations about an event or category structure are
formed, the deviant item should attract more attention and
thus have stronger memory trace.
Another account that aimed to explain inconsistent
information memory advantage focused on the difference in
the depth of processing. Since deviant items may be more
difficult to process than regular items (Fabiani & Donchin,
1995; Graesser, 1981), they tend to receive more study time
(Stern, Marrs, Millar, & Cole, 1984), and this leads to better
memory. When study time is limited, there should be no
advantage, or the pattern may even be reversed (Metcalfe,
2002; Thiede & Dunlosky, 1999).
Studies in category learning also support the claim of better
memory for exceptions. In an old-new recognition task,
Palmeri and Nosofsky (1995) tested participants’ memory for
two newly learned categories. In both categories, the majority
of items could be categorized based on a simple (singledimension) rule, but there was one exception item which
respected the rule of the contrasting category. The main result
of their study was that participants showed superior
recognition memory for those items that were exceptions to
the rule. These findings were in accordance with the
prediction of the RULEX (rule-plus-exception) model of
classification learning (Nosofsky, Palmeri and McKinley,
1994). According to this model, people tend to form simple
logical rules to define categories, and if not all the members
of the category follow the formed rule, those occasional
exceptions are stored in memory. Thus, regular members of
the category and exceptions are supposed to be learned using
two independent mechanisms. Based on RULEX, the role of
memory processes in categorization of the regular category
items should be minimal, which stands in high contrast with
purely memory based representation of the exception.
Similar to RULEX, SUSTAIN (Love, Medin, Gureckis,
2004) model assumes formation of specialized
representations (clusters) for exceptions that violate initially
formed representation (cluster), and predicts that differential
storage of exceptions makes them more distinctive in
memory. The main difference between the two models lies in
flexibility. SUSTAIN emphasizes the need for a flexible
search of a given category structure, and allows for clusters

3058

to be of different nature (e.g. rules, prototypes, attractors), all
depending on the (sub)structure of the category and the task
goals. That way, in addition to successfully predicting
memory advantage for exceptions, SUSTAIN is sensitive to
effects of structure saliency (e.g. frequency effects),
familiarity effects (differentiating between old and new rulefollowing items) or unsupervised learning, which are all
problematic for RULEX to account for (Sakamoto & Love,
2004).
Despite described differences, both RULEX and
SUSTAIN are in accord with the previous categorization and
schema literature regarding (a) memory advantage for ruleviolating exceptions, (b) deeper (at a greater detail)
processing of exceptions compared to regular category
members (Loftus & Mackworth, 1978) and (c) attribution of
memory advantage for exceptions to differential attention
during encoding (von Restorff, 1933).
Nature of the exceptions
It is important to note here that previous studies (e.g.
Palmeri & Nosofsky, 1995, Sakamoto and Love, 2004;
Davis, Love, & Preston, 2012) focused primarily on a
specific type of exceptions – exceptions that violate prior
knowledge expectations by respecting the contrasting
category rule. Those exceptions could not be learned by
relying on a rule, nor by relying on the similarity with the
other category members. In order to be successfully
categorized they required forming complex binding
structures. Thus, it is unclear whether the better memory for
exceptions results from exceptions being rare and violating
the prior knowledge expectation (in this case, the category
rule), or because of their peculiar structure.
Developmental differences
All hypothesized solutions for learning and representing
exceptions were formulated with an adult in mind. Little is
known about how exceptions may be learned and represented
early in development.
Both RULEX and SUSTAIN assume engagement of
selective attention and (to different extent) optimization of
memory resources during category learning. However,
previous studies suggest that in contrast to adults and older
children, who optimize their attention to category and task
relevant dimensions, young children tend to allocate attention
to both relevant and irrelevant information (Sloutsky, 2010;
Deng & Sloutsky, 2016). The developmental differences in
attention allocation during category learning (i.e., selective
vs. distributed) have important consequences on what is
remembered about categories. While selective attention
results in better memory for information that is particularly
useful for distinguishing the categories (e.g. rule features),
distributed attention results in all information, relevant and
relevant, being remembered equally well (Deng & Sloutsky,
2016). Thus, if difference in recognition memory for regular
category members and exceptions arise from optimization
and selectivity, as previously suggested, no difference in
memory for regular and exceptional items should be expected
for young children.

Current study
In the two experiments reported here, we tested the
generalizability of the assumption of memory advantage for
exceptions. In Experiment 1, we tested the claim of memory
advantage for exceptions in situation of learning categories
that have exceptions that violate previous expectation since
they look more like the members of the other category and
they also violate the category rule. However, in contrast to
the exceptions used in the previous studies that respect
contrasting category rule, they have a new rule on the
deterministic dimension, which is on its own sufficient for
successful categorization. In Experiment 2, the structure of
the regular category members remained the same, but the
nature of the exceptions was changed. In Experiment 2,
exceptions were items that had all features new. Since
exceptions in our study are individuals, for this latter kind of
exceptions, different kinds of rules could be formed, since
each feature is fully predictive.
Although the exceptions used here are very different from
the ones used in the previous studies, they retain all the
characteristics that are assumed to contribute to their special
status in memory. They are rare, they may be studied for
unlimited amount of time, and, most importantly, they violate
the expectations based on the knowledge of regular items,
both in terms of rule and appearance. On the other hand, they
could be categorized equally successfully by employing
different learning mechanisms and forming different
representations, which makes them advantageous in
comparison to the types of exceptions that could be learned
by memorizing only.
Additionally, we examined developmental differences in
learning and representing exceptions. Two age groups
participated in the experiments: four-year-olds and adults. As
previously described, a developmental study is particularly
interesting since it will allow test of differences in the
memory status of exceptions under regimes of distributed end
selective attention category learning.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants
Participants were 27 four-year-old children (Mage = 54.6
months, range 48.5 – 59.9 months, 14 girls) and 36 adults.
Data of one additional child and one adult participant were
excluded due to the failure to discriminate between old
(High-Match) items and items that had 5 of 6 features
completely new (All-new-P) (A’ not different from chance
level of 0.5, one sample t-test ps > .05).
All four-year-olds that took part in the experiments
reported in this paper were recruited from preschools located
in middle-class suburbs of Columbus. In order to take a part
in the study they had to be between 48 and 60 months old.
They were tested during their regular school hours in a quiet
room in their preschool.

3059

All adults that participated in the experiments reported here
were The Ohio State University undergraduate students.
They were tested in a quiet room in the laboratory located on
campus and they received course credits for their
participation.
Stimuli
Stimuli were artificial dinosaur-like creatures created using
Spore Creature Creator and Gimp (Figure 1). These creatures
were accompanied by two novel category labels: Lulu and
Momo.

4 types of items. Those new items were based on High-Match
and Exception items, but either had one probabilistic feature
new (One-new-P, E-One-new-P), or all probabilistic features
new (All-new-P, E-All-new-P).
Design and procedure
For adults, all instructions and questions were written on
the screen and they responded by pressing designated keys on
a computer keyboard. For four-year-olds, all instructions and
questions were read by a trained experimenter who collected
their verbal responses using a computer keyboard.

Figure 1. Examples of stimuli used in the study where hands
are the rule feature.
The category structure
The categories of Lulus and Momos were dense 7dimensional categories with 1 non-diagnostic dimension, 5
probabilistic dimensions and 1 deterministic dimension
(Table 1). Non-diagnostic dimension varied independently
and gave no information about the category membership.
Probabilistic dimensions varied between categories and
within-category, with significantly higher between-category
in comparison to within-category variance. Hence,
probabilistic dimensions were predictive when taken
together, since they reflected the overall similarity between
category items. Deterministic dimension was fully predictive.
The neck length (short/long) was always the nondiagnostic dimension. The other 6 dimensions were:
antennas, mouth, belly, wings, hands and feet. All
dimensions were binary. The choice of deterministic feature
(belly or hands) was balanced across the participants. Table
1 presents the structure of training and test items.
During the training, only High-Match and Exception items
were presented. High-Match items always respected the
category rule and had most of the probabilistic features of
their own category (4 of 5). Exceptions were designed so they
look more like the other category members (they had
probabilistic features of the other category) but they also had
a new rule feature.
In the test session, in addition to items presented during the
training (High-Match and Exceptions), there were additional

Table 1: The abstract category structures used in Experiment
1 and Experiment 2.
Momo
Lulu
Experiment 1
Probabilistic Rule Probabilistic Rule
High Match 1 0 0 0 0 0
0 1 1 1 1 1
New-D
1 0 0 0 0 N
0 1 1 1 1 N
One-new-P
0 N 0 0 0 0
1 N 1 1 1 1
All-new-P
N N N N N 0
N N N N N 1
Exception
1 1 1 1 1 2
0 0 0 0 0 3
E-One-new-P 1 N 1 1 1 2
0 N 0 0 0 3
E-All-new-P N N N N N 2
N N N N N 3
Experiment 2
Probabilistic Rule Probabilistic Rule
High Match 1 0 0 0 0 0
0 1 1 1 1 1
New-D
1 0 0 0 0 N
0 1 1 1 1 N
One-new-P
0 N 0 0 0 0
1 N 1 1 1 1
All-new-P
N N N N N 0
N N N N N 1
Exception
4 4 4 4 4 4
5 5 5 5 5 5
E-New-D
4 4 4 4 4 N
5 5 5 5 5 N
E-One-new-P 4 N 4 4 4 4
5 N 5 5 5 5
E-All-new-P N N N N N 4
N N N N N 5
Instructions
After the cover story about the two dinosaur families,
Momos and Lulus, was read, participants were presented with
the prototypes of Momos and Lulus. The prototypes were
presented together, on the same screen. Participants were told
that that is how Momos and Lulus usually look like and each
of the six features of the two creatures was introduced, using
the sentence frame: “Momos/Lulus usually have antennas
like these” and pointing to the named feature (Figure 2).
Training
During the training participants were presented with the
exemplars of Lulus and Momos and they were asked to
classify them. Items were presented individually in the center
of a white background screen, accompanied by the question
“Is this is a Momo or a Lulu?” Two buttons, labeled Momo
and Lulu, were presented on the same screen. Participants
responded by pressing one of the buttons if adults, or giving
verbal answers if children. After they made a response,
corrective feedback was provided. Feedback had two

3060

elements. First, the button of the correct response was
presented (that is, the correct answer button stayed on the
screen) and second, feedback sentence was presented. If
participant gave the correct answer, she received message
“That’s right! That’s Momo (Lulu)!” If participant made a
wrong choice, message “Oops! That’s Momo (Lulu)!” was
presented.
During the training session, 70 items were presented: 60
High Match items and 10 Exceptions. In the first block only
High Match items were presented (20), while in the second
and the third block participants saw both High Match (20)
and Exception (4) items in random order. At the end of the
third block, we presented additional 2 Exception items. The
logic behind the dynamics described was that in order for
Exceptions to be seen as Exceptions they should be presented
after a representation of High-Match items was formed, and
they needed to be less frequent. Order of presentation was
randomized for each participant.
Memory test
Memory test was introduced immediately after the training
session. Items were presented individually, followed by the
question „Did you see exactly the same creature in the first
part of the game?“ and two buttons labeled „old“ and „new“.
After participant gave a response, the next trial was
presented. There was no feedback.
Memory test was given in one block. It had 64 trials in
total, 8 trials of each item type, presented in random order.

F (1, 120) = 8.87, p < .01, η = .07 with 4-year-olds’
performance being significantly lower than adults’
performance (Figure 2).
The pattern was the same for the memory for probabilistic
features. Again, adults have shown better memory than 4year-olds (F (1, 120) = 8.61, p < .01, η = .07) and there was
no difference in memory for regular items and exceptions.
Note here that the lack of difference in memory for regular
and exceptional items may be due to poor learning. This
problem is resolved in Experiment 2.

Results

Figure 2. Memory sensitivity scores (A-prime) for overall
memory (OLD – All-new-P) across age groups and two item
types in Experiment 1. The dashed line represents the point
of no sensitivity. Error bars represent the standard errors of
the mean.

Training performance
For both age groups, average accuracy in categorizing HighMatch items was above the chance (one-sample t-tests
against chance yield ts > 2.70, both ps < .05, two-tailed).
Both groups of participants misclassified Exceptions. The
average proportion of accurately classified items was .41 for
four-year-olds and .33 for adults, based on performance on
all 10 items presented during the training session (both
bellow the chance, ts > 2.38, ps < .05). Since Exceptions had
probabilistic features of the other category High-Match
items, participants based their responses on the overall
similarity of exceptions to High-Match items.
Recognition memory
In order to estimate participants’ recognition memory, we
calculated A’ scores (Snodgrass, Levy-Berger, & Haydon,
1985). A’ is a non-parametric analogue of the d’ statistic
(Brophy, 1986) and it is a measure of discriminability. No
discrimination (chance performance) is indicated by value of
0.5. With better discrimination the A’ score increases.
Both age groups demonstrated high recognition accuracy
(old – All-new-P). Average memory sensitivity scores were
well above chance (both ps < .001).
To examine the hypothesized differences in memory for
regular items and exceptions, A-prime scores were subjected
to a two-way (Age by Type) ANOVA.
For the overall memory (old – All-new-P) the analysis
indicated that there was no significant main effect of item
type (p > .05), whereas the main effect of age was significant,

Experiment 2
Method
Participants
Thirty-three four-year-olds (Mage = 52.6 months, range 44.0
– 53.6 months, 12 girls) and 39 adults took part in Experiment
3. Three additional 4-year-olds and one adult were excluded
based on the same criteria used in Experiment 1(A’ not
different from chance level of 0.5, one sample t-test, all ps
>.05). Participants were recruitment from the same
participants’ pool as in Experiment 1.
Stimuli
The structure of the High-Match items and accompanying
test items was the same as in the Experiment 1. The same
stimuli set was used. Exceptions were different. They had all
features new. Exceptions were individuals, thus there was
one exception of Momo and one of Lulu category.
In addition to the stimuli types used in the Experiment 1,
there were 2 additional item types: New-D and New-D
Exceptions (See Table 1).
Design and procedure
Design and procedure of Experiment 2 respected the one
described for Experiment 1 in every respect. Memory test had

3061

88 trials. The experiment took approximately 15 - 20 minutes
for adults and 25 - 30 minutes for children.

Results
Training performance
Performance on High-Match items was above chance for
both age groups (ts > 4.78, both ps < .001, two-tailed). Both
children and adults learned to categorize exceptions (ts (36,
23) = 3.57, 6.64, ps < .001).
Recognition memory
Overall memory sensitivity was high for both age groups and
well above chance (both ps < .001) (Figure 3). Differences in
overall memory (old – All-new-P) were tested in a 2 (Age: 4year-olds, adults) x 2 (Type: regular, exception) ANOVA.
Participants had better memory for regular items (A’ scores),
regardless of their age (F (1, 140) = 4.88, p < .05, η = .03).

that both children and adults have better memory for features
of regular items than features of exception. These findings
have at least two important implications. First, they show that
regular category members are not processed minimally, as it
is suggested by models which assume high level of
optimization of attention. Secondly, they also show that
exceptional items are not represented fully, that is, they are
not necessarily memorized. Not only that RULEX model
cannot account for these findings, but it predicts completely
the opposite pattern. Although SUSTAIN would fit the data
better (especially good memory for regular items), the finding
of better memory for exceptions runs counter to its
assumptions.

Figure 3. Memory sensitivity scores (A-prime) for overall
memory (OLD – All-new-P) across age groups and two item
types in Experiment 2. The dashed line represents the point
of no sensitivity. Error bars represent the standard errors of
the mean.
In order to test for differences in memory for (P and D)
features, 2 (Age: 4-year-olds, adults) x 2 (Type: regular,
exception) x 2 (Feature: P, D) ANOVA was conducted on A’
scores. The analysis revealed significant main effects of age
(F (1, 280) = 5.13, p < .05, η = .02) and type (F (1, 280) =
13.26, p < .001, η = .05), and a significant age by feature
interaction (F (1, 120) = 6.05, p < .05, η = .02) on A’ scores.
As expected based on the previous studies (Deng & Sloutsky,
2016), adults, but not 4-year-olds, have shown differential
memory - specifically better memory for rule than
probabilistic feature. Both age groups had better memory for
features of High-Match items, than those of exceptions
(Figure 4).

Discussion
Results presented in this paper challenge assumptions of the
models of classification learning like RULEX and
SUSTAIN. In two experiments reported here we have shown

Figure 4. Memory sensitivity scores (A-prime) for
probabilistic and deterministic features of two item types in
Experiment 2 (Panel A: four-year-olds; Panel B: adults). The

3062

dashed line represents the point of no sensitivity. Error bars
represent the standard errors of the mean.
The representation of an exception depends on its nature.
When exceptions violate categories defined by rules by
respecting contrasting category rule and can be learned only
if there is binding of features, there is better memory for
exceptions than regular items, as shown in the previous
studies (e.g. Palmeri & Nosofsky, 1995, Sakamoto and Love,
2004). However, when the nature of exceptions, and the
nature of a category they belong to, allows for more flexible
approach, participants tend to optimize. In the case of the
exceptions used in this study, they could be equally
successfully categorized based on different representations,
some of which could simply contain memory for one of the
item’s features. However, despite their easy-to-learn
structure, if special status of exceptions is to be attributed to
the fact they violate previous knowledge expectations, they
are schema-inconsistent and rare, exceptions in our study
would also be processed with more attention, more deeply
and they would have stronger memory trace. However, this
was not the case.
Contrary to the predictions based on schema literature, that
participants are more prone to notice missing features or new
features in schema-inconsistent items than schema-consistent
items (Friedman, 1979; Goodman, 1980), our participants
were more sensitive when we changed regular items’
features.
In addition to the difference in memory for regular
category members and exceptions, developmental
differences in memory were also found. While adults had
better memory for rule, than for probabilistic features, 4-yearolds didn’t show differential memory. This pattern is in
accordance with previous studies (Deng and Sloutsky, 2016).
However, contrary to our predictions, there were no
developmental differences in memory status of exceptions.
Both age groups had better memory for regular category
members, despite differences in attention allocation
(selective vs. distributed).
Taken together, findings of this study suggest new
directions for models of category learning and memory, by
providing new evidence on attention and memory
optimization during category learning.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Sophia Deng for her comments on
the design of the study. This research was supported by NIH
grants R01HD078545 and P01HD080679 to VMS.

References
Davis, T., Love, B.C., & Preston, A.R. (2012). Learning the
Exception to the Rule: Model-Based fMRI Reveals
Specialized Representations for Surprising Category
Members. Cerebral Cortex, 22, 260-273.

Deng, S., & Sloutsky, V. (2016) Selective attention, diffused
attention, and the development of categorization. Cognitive
Psychology, 91, 24-62.
Fabiani, M., & Donchin, E. (1995). Encoding processes and
memory organization: A model of the von Restorff effect.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 21, 224–240.
Friedman, A. (1979). Framing pictures: The role of
knowledge in automatized encoding and memory for gist.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 108, 316–
355.
Goodman, G. S. (1980). Picture memory: How the action
schema affects retention. Cognitive Psychology, 12, 473–
495.
Graesser, A. C. (1981). Prose comprehension beyond the
word. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Loftus, G. R., & Mackworth, N. H. (1978). Cognitive
determinants of fixation location during picture viewing.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 4, 565–572.
Love, B. C., Medin, D. L., & Gureckis, T. M. (2004).
SUSTAIN: A network model of human category learning.
Psychological Review, 111, 309–332.
Metcalfe, J. (2002). Is study time allocated selectively to a
region of proximal learning? Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 131, 349–363.
Nosofsky, R. M., Palmeri, T. J., & McKinley, S. C. (1994).
Rule-plusexception model of classification learning.
Psychological Review, 101, 53–79.
Palmeri, T. J., & Nosofsky, R. M. (1995). Recognition
memory for exceptions to the category rule. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 21, 548–568.
Rojahn, K., & Pettigrew, T. F. (1992). Memory for schemarelevant information: A meta-analytic resolution. British
Journal of Social Psychology, 31(2), 81–109.
Sakamoto, Y., & Love, B. C. (2004). Schematic influences
on category learning and recognition memory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 133, 534–553.
Sloutsky, V. M. (2010) From perceptual categories to
concepts: What develops? Cognitive Science, 34, 12441286.
Stern, L. D., Marrs, S., Millar, M. G., & Cole, E. (1984).
Processing time and recall of inconsistent and consistent
behaviors of individuals and groups. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 47, 253–262.
Thiede, K. W., & Dunlosky, J. (1999). Toward a general
model of selfregulated study: An analysis of selection of
items for study and selfpaced study time. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 25, 1024–1037.
von Restorff, H. (1933). Analyse von vorgängen im
spurenfeld: I. Über die wirkung von bereichsbildungen im
spurenfeld [Analysis of processes in the memory trace: I.
On the effect of group formations on the memory trace].
Psychologische Forschung, 18, 299–342.

3063

