Perception Meets Examination: Studying Deceptive Behaviors in VR
Carla Aravena1∗ Mark Vo1∗
Tao Gao2 Takaaki Shiratori1 Lap-Fai Yu1
1 University of Massachusetts Boston
2 General Electric
∗ Equal Contributors
Abstract
Students cheating on an exam in an academic setting creates
an environment where one person (the student) must reason
about the perception of another (the teacher). In exploring the
student’s mindset, trends concerning how humans make decisions based on their understanding of another human’s intentions and knowledge can be uncovered. In this work, we study
human cheating behavior through simulated examinations in
virtual reality, showing that the teacher’s animacy and orientation plays a large part in the student’s reasoning of the teacher’s
awareness. By utilizing a virtual classroom setting and accurately tracking a users behavior (through head tracking, eye
movement, etc.), we have also demonstrated how a novel virtual reality approach can be used for such experiments involving human behavioral observations, which can be further explored in other cognitive science research experiments.
Keywords: deceptive behavior; behavior modeling; virtual reality; game experimentation; human vision; Theory of Mind

Introduction
Imagine you are a teacher surveying your classroom of students who are taking a final exam. You know that the exam
is very difficult and you expect that some students may attempt to cheat. Perhaps you find yourself scanning the room
for signs of cheating behavior. But, what do such signs look
like? A student looking around the room could simply be in
the process of managing their thoughts. If a student is looking straight at you for a while, are they waiting for you to look
away or are they wondering if they should ask you a question?
How can you determine which students are simply feigning
innocence while planning a cheating attempt? What if you
have a large classroom of students; how would you be able to
keep an eye on all of them at once?
Cheating remains a common problem in examinations,
which creates an interesting scenario for cognitive psychology research in its need to have one person relying upon their
perceptions of the intentions of another person to behave. In
a classroom, the student must rely upon the teacher’s actions
and movements in order to determine when the best window
to cheat off of another student’s exam is. How the student
reasons about a teacher’s intentions, formulates the right time
to cheat, and performs certain behaviors to ”trick” the teacher
are areas that have yet to be explored in a way that does not
simply rely on asking students how they cheat. Discovering
how a cheater successfully accomplishes his or her task is related to the cognitive science concept of the Theory of Mind,
defined as ”a mechanism that helps [one] to make sense of the
behaviour of others in specific contexts and to predict their
next action” (Dias, Aylett, Paiva, & Reis, 2013). In the situation of cheating during an examination, the student must
predict what the teacher is perceiving in order to gauge the
success of their cheating attempt.
In this work, we study the signs and visual behaviors of
cheating through virtual reality. Having actual students in real
life to participate in our experiments and produce the cheating data gives us a realistic dataset to visualize and analyze
how university students may actually cheat on classroom examinations. We recreate the cheating situations captured in

(a) Cheating in a real classroom
(b) Our game
Figure 1: (a) Cheating in a real classroom during an exam. (b) A
screenshot of our game that mimics the settings of a real exam. The
player cheats during a simulated examination in virtual reality while
avoiding getting caught by the teacher similar to a real-life situation.

virtual reality to establish ecological validity and track various factors of the participants’ behavior with respect to the
state of the teacher.
Figure 1(b) shows a screenshot of our game. Our game
premise is inspired by Sunken Places’ virtual reality game
”Classroom Aquatic”. In their game, the player is asked
to complete their multiple-choice examination within a time
limit by cheating off of other students’ examinations, avoiding the teacher’s and students’ gazes, and using objects as
distractions to answer the questions correctly. This premise
takes an ordinary situation and recreates it in virtual reality,
encouraging players to use deceptive behavior to complete a
task. From a cognitive science standpoint, such a game setting is interesting as it provides a good scenario for studying
how humans exhibit cheating behavior and for understanding
how humans judge the actions of others to be deceptive.
The major contributions of our work include the following:
• Analyzing how students cheat on classroom exams based
on their behavior within a virtual setting.
• Demonstrating that virtual reality environments can produce a way to objectively gather data on human behavior.

Hypothesis
Through our experiments, we seek to answer the question
of how students use information of a teacher’s movements
to perceive the teacher’s intent (i.e. how does the teacher’s
movement and placement in the room affect the student’s
judgment on when it is ”safe” to cheat?). This question contributes to the discussion of the Theory of Mind and how humans process information of others’ behaviors to make judgments. Inspired by the previous research on animacy and
how that influences a human’s decision-making process, we
hypothesize that (1) players will cheat most often when the
teacher is completely turned away from them. For this hypothesis, we believe that players will assume that the teacher
will keep walking in the same direction, away from them, for
a long enough time for them to safely cheat. As for how the
players will choose to cheat, we also make the hypothesis
that (2) the players will not look directly at another students’
exam, and will instead cheat while employing their peripheral

1562

vision in order to appear innocent to the teacher and also to
keep an eye on the teacher as much as they can.

Related Work
Common Cheating Behavior in Exams.
Prior methods used to prevent cheating and to catch potential cheaters
are common in research literature on the topic of student
cheating. The factors behind why students cheat is welldocumented and analyzes how certain variables affect the
students’ likeliness to cheat including gender, GPA, parental
pressure, etc.
(Batool, Abbas, & Naeemi, 2011). Although such findings are useful, their applications in preventing cheating are difficult to place given that one may not be
able to generalize which students are likely to cheat based on
their personal life (such as parental pressure) as well as the
fact that some of these variables may not be accessible by an
educational institution. An examination of classrooms and
learning environments that are best able to dissuade cheating
has been performed in prior research (Cizek, 2003), which
found that students tend to cheat less often when (a) classes
are smaller; (b) classroom conditions (both physical and instructional) are established that are conducive to learning; (c)
instruction, assignments, and examinations are clear, welldesigned, meaningful, and relevant; (d) teachers take reasonable steps to prevent cheating . While (a) is an issue that is
generally assumed to be handled by the educational institution, and (b) and (c) are obvious goals that any class setting
should aim to achieve, it is (d) that we are most interested in
cultivating by finding out how students actually cheat.
Many of the methods used to discover how cheating is
conducted is qualitative and frequently relies upon students’
readily answering questions on the matter (e.g., (Batool et
al., 2011; Shon, 2006; Yee & MacKown, 2009)). Relying
upon student responses alone is problematic for the obvious
reason that students could easily lie and fail to realize their
exact behavioral habits when trying to be deceptive. By taking data from “cheaters” in a quantitative way through automatically tracking their actions throughout a cheating session,
this problem would be resolved. Previous attempts to automate detection have applied text-mining based approaches,
which only evaluate cheating after the fact and is limited to
open-ended exams (Cavalcanti, Pires, Cavalcanti, Pires, et al.,
2012). We are more interested in studying the cheating behavior at the instant it occurs, which forces the student to rely
upon his or her reasoning of the teacher’s perception, as it is
highly relevant to the Theory of Mind.
Prior Cognitive Science Studies on Deceptive Behavior.
According to previous studies, students cheat by first ”qualifying the professor”: determining how likely they could get
away with cheating based on evaluating the teacher’s behavior (Batool et al., 2011). This is an area that we would like
to explore further as it is an extension of a human’s Theory
of Mind, defined as the ability to infer the full range of epistemic mental states of others, i.e., beliefs, desires, intentions
and knowledge (Dias et al., 2013). This is a mechanism that
helps to make sense of the behavior of others in specific contexts and to predict their next action. Through our experiments and analysis, we investigate the Theory of Mind in that
we are trying to find out how people figure out whether or not
the teacher is catching on to them and, based on the teacher’s
behavior, when it is safe to cheat.

In a recent study, (Dias et al., 2013) established a game
in which different artificial intelligence models with varying
levels of Theory of Mind were set to perform deceptive behaviors in a game setting, finding that those with higher levels of Theory of Mind (and thus a greater ability to reason and
make inferences on others’ behaviors) were more successful
in deceiving, showing how frequently deception is founded
when making judgments upon the actions of others. In our
experiments, we examine the behaviors of the human players against the actions of a virtual teacher to discover how
humans may similarly reason about the teacher’s behavior in
order to be successfully deceitful.
Gao’s et al. (Gao, Newman, & Scholl, 2009) research concerning how animacy is involved in a person’s reasoning on
intent provides a possible explanation for what we are observing in our players’ behavior. Their study found that humans
rely on the direction and orientation of an object to perceive
its animacy, movement, and intent. Subjects were more likely
to reason that a wolf shape was ”chasing” a sheep shape if orientation was present. Therefore, animacy and orientation of
movement may be influential when humans apply the Theory
of Mind. In our experiment, we will observe to what extent
the player will use the teacher’s animacy and movements in
making their decision of what time is best to cheat.
Investigating how humans reason about their game opponents in game settings is well-documented and is helpful to
those in game-development who are concerned with realistic
AI mechanisms. Prior research in turn-taking games follows
a similar setup in exploring the Theory of Mind and looks
into ”which rules govern human strategic thinking” (Halder,
Sharma, Ghosh, & Verbrugge, 2015). Such findings inspired
us to determine which aspects of human behavior we should
track and record, taking note to include timing and duration of
actions (such as cheating) in our own experiments. However,
unlike such studies, we are dealing with continuous gameplay and so we cannot delineate a player’s choices in a clearcut manner as we would in a turn-taking game. Having a
continuous gameplay setup serves our purpose in mirroring a
situation that would take place in everyday life.
Using Games for Cognitive Science Research. The involvement of videogames into academic research has an established, albeit relatively new, presence in academic research. Previous branches of research involving videogames
in the fields of Cognitive and Social Psychology have studied the effect of entertaining games on basic cognitive skills
while another has researched the success of educational gaming (Killingsworth & Clark, 2013). Instead of contributing
to either of these branches, our experiment seeks to instead
use a videogame format in order to observe human behavior,
which is an ability afforded to us through the use of virtual
environments that are now even more immersive with the aid
of a suitable virtual reality headset.
Previous research studies have used virtual reality technology to recreate real-life situations and examine human behavior in such instances (Kozlov & Johansen, 2010; Olivier,
Bruneau, Cirio, & Pettré, 2014; Li, Liang, Quigley, Zhao, &
Yu, 2017; Rovira, Swapp, Spanlang, & Slater, 2009). These
studies have found that virtual scenarios are a good fit in measuring human responses to real events due to the close correspondence in human behavior between the two environments

1563

(a) Oculus Rift VR headset
(b) Player controller
Figure 2: Experiment setup. The participants performed the examinations using (a) an Oculus Rift virtual reality headset and (b) a
Microsoft Xbox 360 game controller.

as well as the fact that the virtual reality settings can be finetuned by the researchers (Rovira et al., 2009). If the virtual
setting is close enough to pass as its material counterpart, it is
safe to claim that observations made on participants are valid.

Approach
Overview. To study how students cheat, we seek to gather
information on how players cheat on exams within a game
session that models the real-life situation. In our experiments,
the player takes on the role of a student taking a multiplechoice paper exam. The player is immersed in a virtual classroom environment and is asked to achieve two objectives:
(1) answer as many questions on the examination correctly
as possible by cheating off of other students’ exams and (2)
avoid detection of the teacher. If the teacher is able to catch
the student in the act of cheating, the player will fail the task
and that round will end.
User Interaction. Figure 2 depicts the experiment setup for
the game sessions. We decided to use an Oculus Rift DK2
as our virtual reality hardware setup due to its ability to conduct the sessions in a small space and immerse players within
the game setting. A Microsoft Xbox 360 wireless controller
is used as the primary controller for which the player cheats
and answers questions with. The player can change his viewpoint and shift his gaze as he would in reality with the use of
the virtual reality headset. Other primary modes of interaction will be the act of cheating, which is triggered when the
Left/Right Bumper Button is held down by the player (the
answer retrieved from the examination paper of the classmate
sitting on the left or right will be displayed); and the abilities
to switch through and answer examination questions, which
are respectively achieved by pressing Left/Right on the directional pad and either A/B/Y/X.
Virtual Environment Design. We designed a 3D virtual
environment in the form of a classroom in which the player
is a student surrounded by other students at individual desks,
much like how most classrooms are set up at colleges today.
The classroom objects, the teacher, the player character, and
the other 3D student models were found at the Unity Asset
Store. The design of the classroom is not flashy nor distracting so that players can focus on the task at hand.
Gameplay. The exams of the students to the left and right
sides of the player will contain a correct answer to one of
the questions on the exams; these answers will change in a
preset interval every 5 seconds so that all answers can be obtained by cheating. The teacher moves along a preset path to
hit certain points along the classroom, rotates about every six
seconds, and seems to be checking over the room for signs
of potential cheating. The path of the teacher is shown in

Figure 3: The path of the teacher during the game. Walking through
the path once takes about 80 seconds and the teacher cycles through
the path until the player finishes his exam in the round, which usually
takes about 100-200 seconds. Arrow directions correspond to the
orientations of the teacher.

Figure 3. The questions that show up on the player’s exams
are derived from the website ”Trivia Country” (Trivia Country, 2016). We chose questions from this website due to their
specificity and very low chance that participants would know
the correct answers. For example, one question we ask participants on the exam is: The Philadelphia mint started putting
a ’P’ mint mark on quarters in which year? Answer Choices:
a)1980; b)1960; c)1950; d)never. We give the participants
an incentive to cheat by telling them that the number of correct responses they answer is important to getting the maximum amount of money. Since the multiple-choice questions
are derived from random, factual knowledge that the participants will most likely not know the answer to, cheating becomes a necessity to gathering the correct answers. Furthermore, we give an incentive for the players to cheat wisely by
telling them that, if they are caught cheating, their potential to
gather the maximum amount of points per round will be cut
short. The player is also told that the teacher is powered by
an advanced artificial intelligence and a human vision model
so that he can perceive the environment like a real human, so
that the player treats the teacher’s actions with severity. In actuality, the teacher has a limited, cone-shaped range of vision
that functions as a spotlight to detect cheating if the player is
within the cone of vision and holding down the cheat button
at the same time.
Data Collection. In order to gather data through the game
session playthroughs, we constantly track the position and
orientation of the teacher model. The position and orientations of the the teacher’s head and the player’s head movements are recorded during gameplay for later analysis. We
measure the user’s visual attention through game scripts that
track an approximation of the player’s gaze by creating a ray
at a point where the player is looking, as well as taking note of
at what time the player is cheating and which paper the player
is cheating off of (either the left or right exam). During the
player sessions, we also record a video of the gameplay, from
both the teacher’s and the student’s point of view. Refer to our
supplementary video which showcases some of this footage.

1564

Figure 4: Human’s field of vision.

Experiments

Figure 5: The angles by which players cheated off of the left or right
exam.

Results and Analysis

Subjects.
25 participants were recruited to conduct this
study with 22 being college students and the rest in high
school and middle school. The subjects were recruited
through emails sent out to the Computer Science department
at UMass Boston as well as through word of mouth. About
60% of the subjects were of a Computer Science background.
None of the students had played the aforementioned Classroom Aquatic game. Of all the subjects, there were 14 males
and 11 females. Each player session consisted of 3 rounds.
The participants participated individually for approximately
10 minutes for each player session and so completed each
round in about 3 minutes. Participants were paid $10 for their
time upon completion of their experiments.
Implementation. The virtual reality program was run on
a desktop computer installed with an AMD FX 8350 EightCore Processor (4.00GHz), 16GB memory (RAM) and a MSI
Radeon R9 390 8GB Graphics Card. Participants were given
a Xbox 360 wireless controller and an Oculus Rift DK2 headset to play the game created using the Unity game engine.
Briefing. Participants were given instructions on how the
controls of the game functioned through a short tutorial session. This tutorial session allowed players to understand how
to answer exam questions, how to cheat, as well as to become
accustomed to the game surroundings. The virtual teacher
was not introduced in the tutorial session. The players were
then told the following message before the start of the game
session:
You are a student looking to get a decent grade on an inclass, multiple-choice exam. The answers to the questions
correspond to the A-B-Y-X buttons on your controller. To gain
a good score, you can cheat off of the exams of the students to
the left and right of you. Hold down the left or right bumper
to cheat off of their exams, which will have a correct answer
to a question on the exam and will change answers in a set
time interval. There will be three rounds with five questions
on an exam each. You gain a point for each question that you
correctly answer. You can earn up to 10 dollars depending
on how many points you have at the end of the three rounds.
The teacher in this game is wearing a blue suit and is designed with advanced AI and vision capabilities such that they
can perceive the world like real humans can. If the teacher
catches you teaching, it’s game over for that round and you
will go on to the next round.

Using the data we have gathered during the game experiments, we plot several different variables against each other
to draw conclusions on students’ cheating behavior. We ignore the first round of data for each participant as the latter
two rounds are far more likely to contain the players’ intent
and are not marred by first-time errors.A total of 255 cheating
attempts were recorded (not counting the first round).
Peripheral Vision. We first examine the player’s use of
peripheral vision in order to cheat by inspecting the angle
between the player’s estimated gaze and the exam they are
cheating off of (either the left or the right exam). The angles
at which the player cheated off of the exams are shown in
Figure 5. The number of cheating attempts made off of the
left exam were 117 while the right exam had 138 in total. We
refer to the human’s field of vision (Bhise, 2011) depicted
in Figure 4 to compare the angle between the player’s central ray and the left or right exam to this diagram in order to
determine which area of their vision the participants used to
cheat.
For those who cheated on the left exam, a mere 2% cheated
using their central vision. 24% of participants utilized their
near-peripheral vision. The majority of the left attempts,
70% , cheated within the angle range considered to be midperipheral vision. The remaining 4% of these cheating attempts were conducted at an angle greater than 60 degrees.
Similar results were found for the cheating attempts done on
the right exam. 0% used their central vision on this side while
38% relied upon their near-peripheral vision. The remaining
62% all took place under the player’s mid-peripheral vision.
Instead of staring directly at the other students’ exams, the
subjects chose to keep the exam they were cheating off of to
the side of their vision. The reason for this result could be
the effect of the player exhibiting signs of ”sneaky” behavior. The player’s cheating status is turned off or on simply
by holding down the cheating buttons, which was made clear
to the participants during the tutorial. Therefore, looking directly at another exam or not has no bearing on how quickly
one can ”stop” cheating. Because of this, we can say that the
reason for this behavior is due to the player constantly keeping in mind the teacher, as the player exhibits signs of feeling
wary of the teacher. By only ”sneaking” glances at a nearby
exam they are cheating off of, the student is trying not to be
too ”obvious” in their cheating. This action reveals that the

1565

(a) Towards
(b) Away
(c) Left
(d) Right
Figure 6: Appearances of the teacher at different relative orientations with the player.

student is letting their perception of the teacher’s perception
shape their own actions. The students exemplify the Theory of Mind: they are reasoning and making inferences on
another’s perception based on that person’s behavior and are
changing their own behavior accordingly (Dias et al., 2013).
Teacher’s Orientation.
The teacher
in our experiment, in his pre-figured path
around the room, pauses about every six
seconds to rotate back and forth (as if he
is scanning the room for signs of cheating) and turns his body like a normal person walking around a room would. Fig7: Angle beure 6 shows the teacher’s appearances at Figure
tween the teacher’s
different orientations. We examine when central vision and
players chose to cheat according to the the student.
teacher’s orientation relative to the player by noting the angle
θ by which the teacher sees the student (depicted in Figure 7).
According to Figure 8, students mostly cheated during the
moments where the teacher was farther away from the student
and when the student was on the outskirts of the teacher’s
perceived vision. Out of 255 recorded cheating attempts,
only 7% of attempts were undergone when participants were
within the teacher’s central range of vision (and got caught
by the teacher during these attempts). 12% of cheating attempts were done under the teacher’s near-peripheral range
of vision and 9% under the teacher’s mid-peripheral range.
The majority of cheating was split between when the student
was within the teacher’s far-peripheral range of vision (the
dark purple points, taking up 34% of all cheating attempts)
or when he was not facing the student at all (the black points,
which make up 38%). When the teacher can see the student
only with his far-peripheral vision or not at all, the player
was able to be more certain that the teacher was not paying
attention to him and therefore cheated the most during those
moments.
Teacher’s Position. Figure 8 also shows that more than
half of all cheating attempts took place when the teacher’s
distance exceeded 3 meters, attesting to the player’s feeling
that, the farther away the teacher is, the ”safer” the cheater is.
Figure 9 shows further that students chose to initiate cheating
when the teacher was located in areas that were farther away
from them and did not feel safe enough to cheat when the
teacher was not in sight. The moments in the teacher’s path
with the most frequent cheating attempts, at around 32% of
all cheating instances, were located close to Area A, where
the teacher was within the student’s sight, was not relatively
close to the student, and was moving in a clear path towards
the back of the room. At this point, the student was able to
cheat off of the left exam and keep the teacher within their
line of sight. The least amount of cheating occurred around
Area B, where the teacher was completely out of the student’s
range of vision. We see a brief peak in cheating when the

Figure 8: Each dot refers to an occurrence of cheating, plotted
against the distance between the player and the teacher, and the angle by which the teacher saw the student.

teacher was close by but had his back turned to the player, in
Area C. The player might assume they were safe at this point,
thinking that the teacher would continue to walk away from
them. However, the teacher turned around shortly after and
walked by them again, moving back towards the front of the
room. Cheating instances only became more frequent again,
with around 9% of all cheating attempts happening, when the
teacher had traveled a farther distance away in Area D.
The players’ cheating patterns here reveal that students rely
upon their perception of the teacher’s perception to make
judgments on the teacher’s ability to spot them cheating. This
explains why they choose to cheat only when they are able to
see the teacher. It is also clear that the players used the animacy of the teacher to make predictions of the teacher’s perception and behavior as they were more likely to cheat when
he had his back turned or was walking away.

Discussion
Feedback and Observations. We asked the participants
how they felt about the experiment after receiving their compensation. The general feedback from the players was that the
game was “fun” and “interesting”. They claimed that, during
the game, they felt slightly afraid of the teacher model. From
our observations, we noted that, during the start of the first
round, the participants would be reluctant to look away from
their paper at all once they saw the teacher. Only after we reiterated the rules of the game (that the student is not cheating
unless the corresponding button is held down) did the players
feel comfortable looking around the room. However, even
still, very few players turned completely around to see where
the teacher was when he was behind the student, even though
they could have done so with no penalty. In reality, few students would turn all the way around to spot the teacher as this
might appear suspicious. This attests to the participants taking the game seriously and that they performed as they would
in an actual classroom.
Limitations. The participants’ experience with virtual reality and computer games may affect their performance in our
experiments. Most of our participants were students from the
Computer Science major. Many CS majors are exposed to
and regularly enjoy computer games, so they may have had
a slight advantage in escaping cheating during the game sessions, compared to participants from a non-CS background.
Furthermore, virtual reality headsets affected different partic-

1566

Research Grant Program provided by the Office of the Vice
Provost for Research and Strategic Initiatives & Dean of
Graduate Studies of UMass Boston. This research is supported by the National Science Foundation under award number 1565978. We also acknowledge NVIDIA Corporation for
graphics card donation.

References

Figure 9: Cheating frequencies when teacher was at different locations along his path. Redness corresponds to the cheating frequency.
Most cheating occurs when the teacher was at the far left. Refer to
text for detailed description of the observations.

ipants differently, especially when some were wearing glasses
or were just using a virtual reality device for the first time.
As a result, some might have experienced slight discomfort
with the virtual reality headset, perhaps leading to less ease
in playing the game. We are also limited by the teacher’s
lack of realistic head movement. The teacher’s torso and head
move in the same direction throughout the game, which the
player may or may not have realized as they were playing.
Because of this, the results may be slightly varied from a reallife classroom setting.
Conclusion. In this study, we have verified our hypothesis
about deceptive human behavior during an exam as the players (1) cheated most frequently when the teacher was turned
completely away from them and (2) used their peripheral vision frequently to cheat off of other exams, showing that the
teacher’s animacy and orientation play a significant role in
the student’s likeliness to cheat and that their own judgment
about “appearing” suspicious affected how they decided to
cheat. By utilizing a virtual classroom setting and accurately
tracking a user’s behavior, we have also demonstrated how
a novel virtual reality approach can be used for such experiments involving human behavioral observations, which can
be further explored in other cognitive science research experiments. An interesting venue for future work is to use the
human behavior data collected from virtual environments to
train a realistic, human-like AI that can exhibit human deceptive behaviors. The application of new virtual reality devices
that can accurately measure eye-tracking to this experiment
would lend itself to the peripheral vision analysis as well.
Furthermore, because students often cheat in collaboration
with other students, our extension of this work will include
a cooperative mode that allows two players to help each other
cheat. We are also developing a quantitative method analysis
of the player’s cheating by establishing a metric to estimate
the amount of visual attention the student is receiving from
the teacher at any given point in time.

Acknowledgments
This research is supported by the Oracle Undergraduate Research Fellowship, the McNair Program, the UMass Boston
StartUp Grant P20150000029280 and the Joseph P. Healey

Batool, S., Abbas, A., & Naeemi, Z. (2011). Cheating behavior among undergraduate students. International Journal
of Business and Social Science, 2(3), 246–254.
Bhise, V. D. (2011). Ergonomics in the automotive design
process. CRC Press.
Cavalcanti, E. R., Pires, V. F., Cavalcanti, E. P., Pires, C. E.,
et al. (2012). Detection and evaluation of cheating on college exams using supervised classification. Informatics in
Education-An International Journal(Vol11 2), 169–190.
Cizek, G. J. (2003). Detecting and preventing classroom
cheating: Promoting integrity in assessment. Corwin
Press.
Clark, K. (2008). Professors use technology to fight student
cheating. US News & World Report.
Dias, J., Aylett, R., Paiva, A., & Reis, H. (2013). The great
deceivers: Virtual agents and believable lies. In Cogsci.
Gao, T., Newman, G. E., & Scholl, B. J. (2009). The psychophysics of chasing: A case study in the perception of
animacy. Cognitive psychology, 59(2), 154–179.
Halder, T., Sharma, K., Ghosh, S., & Verbrugge, R. (2015).
How do adults reason about their opponent? Typologies of
players in turn-taking games. In Cogsci.
Killingsworth, S. S., & Clark, D. (2013). Connecting learning
goals and component cognitive skills in digital games. In
Cogsci.
Kozlov, M. D., & Johansen, M. K. (2010). Real behavior in
virtual environments: Psychology experiments in a simple
virtual-reality paradigm using video games. Cyberpsychology, behavior, and social networking, 13(6), 711–714.
Li, C., Liang, W., Quigley, C., Zhao, Y., & Yu, L.-F. (2017).
Earthquake safety training through virtual drills. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics.
Liang, W., Zhao, Y., Zhu, Y., & Zhu, S.-C. (2015). Evaluating human cognition of containing relations with physical
simulation. In Cogsci.
Olivier, A.-H., Bruneau, J., Cirio, G., & Pettré, J. (2014). A
virtual reality platform to study crowd behaviors. Transportation Research Procedia, 2, 114–122.
Rovira, A., Swapp, D., Spanlang, B., & Slater, M. (2009).
The use of virtual reality in the study of people’s responses
to violent incidents. Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience,
3, 59.
Shon, P. C. (2006). How college students cheat on in-class
examinations: creativity, strain, and techniques of innovation. Info: Ann Arbor, MI: MPublishing, University of
Michigan Library, 1.
Trivia Country. (2016). Trivia country - multiple choice
trivia quiz questions. http://www.triviacountry.com/
M1-Multiple-Choice-Trivia-Questions.htm.
(Accessed: 01-30-2016)
Yee, K., & MacKown, P. (2009). Detecting and preventing cheating during exams. PEDAGOGY, NOT POLICING,
141.

1567

