Perception is in the Details:
A Predictive Coding Account of the Psychedelic Phenomenon
Sarit Pink-Hashkes (S.PinkHashkes@student.ru.nl)
Radboud University, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition, and Behaviour,
PO Box 9104, 6500 HE Nijmegen, The Netherlands

Iris van Rooij (i.vanrooij@donders.ru.nl)
Radboud University, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition, and Behaviour,
PO Box 9104, 6500 HE Nijmegen, The Netherlands

Johan Kwisthout (j.kwisthout@donders.ru.nl)
Radboud University, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition, and Behaviour,
PO Box 9104, 6500 HE Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Abstract

In this paper, we combine both these computationallevel and implementational-level insights into a predictive
coding account of the effect of psychedelics. We unify
notions proposed by Kwisthout, Bekkering, & van Rooij
(2017) regarding the importance of the amount of details
or granularity of predictions, and Bastos et al.'s (2012)
canonical microcircuits for predictive coding. We propose
that the increased entropic state is created when top-down
predictions in affected brain areas break up and
decompose into many more overly detailed predictions
due to hyper activation of 5-HT2A receptors in layer V
pyramidal neurons. We demonstrate that this novel,
unified theoretical account can explain the various and
sometimes contradictory cognitive effects of psychedelics
such as hallucination, heightened sensory input,
synesthesia, increased trait of openness, ‘ego death’ and
time dilation by up-regulation of a variety of mechanisms
the brain can use to minimize prediction under the
constraint of decomposed predictions.
In the next section we will introduce the main ideas of
the predictive coding account. We will then formulize the
Entropic Brain hypothesis into a predictive coding
account of the psychedelic phenomenon. In the second
part of this paper we will show how this formalization can
explain the various and sometimes contradictory cognitive
effects of psychedelics.

Psychedelic substances are used for clinical applications
(e.g., treatment of addictions, anxiety and depression) as
well as an investigative tool in neuroscientific research.
Recently it has been proposed that the psychedelic
phenomenon stems from the brain reaching an increased
entropic state. In this paper, we use the predictive coding
framework to formalize the idea of an entropic brain. We
propose that the increased entropic state is created when
top-down predictions in affected brain areas break up and
decompose into many more overly detailed predictions due
to hyper activation of 5-HT 2A receptors in layer V
pyramidal neurons. We demonstrate that this novel, unified
theoretical account can explain the various and sometimes
contradictory effects of psychedelics such as hallucination,
heightened sensory input, synesthesia, increased trait of
openness, ‘ego death’ and time dilation by up-regulation of
a variety of mechanisms the brain can use to minimize
prediction under the constraint of decomposed prediction.
Keywords: predictive coding; psychedelics; level of detail;
Bayesian networks, Lysergic acid diethylamide, Psilocybin.

Introduction
A recent review paper (Nichols, 2016) examines both the
current scientific knowledge regarding psychedelics as
well as the many positive results in clinical experiments
using psychedelics to treat depression and addiction. The
brain, under the influence of psychedelics, has been
described as ‘being in more states than usual’ (CarhartHarris et al., 2014), based on an increased activity in a
number of specific brain networks such as the default
mode network. They suggested that this higher variance
of activity allows for enhancement of the repertoire of
possible states over time, and introduced the term
Entropic Brain to describe this higher entropic state. On a
more implementational level, the current consensus is that
psychedelics cause their effects by being (partial) agonists
of serotonin, i.e., 5-hydroxytryptamine 2A (5-HT2A)
receptors, with particular importance to those expressed
on apical dendrites of neocortical pyramidal cells in layer
V. The 5-HT2A receptors are excitatory receptors, making
the neurons more likely to fire.

A Predictive Coding Primer
In his book “The Doors of Perception” (1954), Aldous
Huxley described some of his psychedelic experiences,
which led him to propose the idea that perception is a
door between things that are known and things that are
unknown. This idea turned out prescient of the
contemporary predictive coding account of brain
processing. According to predictive coding, perception is
a continuous process of combining the brain’s previous
knowledge with new incoming data by using Bayesian
updating, so as to best represent the environmental causes
of its sensory input. This enables the brain to predict its
sensory inputs. Furthermore, the brain is thought to create
a hierarchically ordered model (Friston, 2008). For any

2907

pair of levels, the higher-level will have contextdependent hypotheses predicting the bottom-up signals
from lower-levels. The hypothesis that generates the best
predictions will determine perception. Calculating which
hypothesis generates the best predictions is done by
calculating the posterior probability of the hypothesis. The
posterior probability combines both the likelihood of the
bottom-up input and the prior probability of the
hypothesis before receiving the input. This can be seen as
an advantageous tactic especially under conditions of
noisy unreliable bottom-up data, since previous
knowledge can be used to come up with the best
hypothesis. The predictions stemming from the best
hypothesis inhibit the bottom up incoming data
‘explaining it away’ (Clark, 2016).
Recently, Kwisthout and colleagues proposed a
computational-level distinction between the precision of a
prediction and the amount of details or granularity of
predictions (Kwisthout & van Rooij, 2015, Kwisthout et
al., 2017). This work has shown that more detailed
predictions cause higher prediction errors. This work is
based on the idea that higher cognitive functions are better
described by categorical probability distributions rather
than the traditional Gaussian densities (Friston et al.,
2015). An important distinction between Gaussian
densities and categorical probability distributions is that in
the latter the state space granularity (how detailed are the
generative models and the predictions that follow from
them) is crucial. Whereas the amount of uncertainty (or
precision) in a Gaussian density can be adequately
described by its variance, a categorical distribution needs
both the state space granularity and the entropy of the
distribution to describe its precision (Kwisthout & van
Rooij, 2015).
Bastos et al. (2012) have suggested a ‘canonical
microcircuit’ that provides an implementational-level
account of the predictive coding in the brain. The idea of
such a canonical microcircuit is that a cortical column
contains the circuitry necessary to implements a form of
approximate Bayesian inference and that these circuits are
replicated with minor variations throughout the cortex.
This Microcircuit model is based on evidence showing
that superficial pyramidal cells have forward connections
to higher areas in the brain hierarchy while deep layers,
including pyramidal cells in layer V of the cortex, send
back propagating signals to lower areas. Bastos et al.
present evidence showing that these backwards
connections are inhibitory and can plausibly be seen as
implementing the top-down ‘predictions’ as suggested by
the predictive coding framework, while forward
connections are plausible realizations of the signals
representing ‘prediction error’. They further suggest that
superficial
layers
of
cortex
show
neuronal
synchronization and spike-field coherence predominantly
in the gamma frequencies, while deep layers prefer lower
(alpha or beta) frequencies. In essence, they claim that

the top down predictions are communicated by lower
alpha or beta frequencies while prediction error is
communicated by faster gamma frequencies.
Muthukumaraswamy et al. (2013) found, following
administration of Psilocybin, a desynchronization of
neural activity especially in the slower alpha and beta
rhythms, meaning neurons were acting in a more disjoint
and separate way, suggesting that the brain was at a higher
entropic state. Using dynamic causal modelling they
found that this desynchronization is “likely triggered by
5-HT2A receptor-mediated excitation of deep pyramidal
cells” (Muthukumaraswamy et al., 2013, p. 15171). While
synchronization of post synaptic neuronal groups creating
brain wave oscillations are thought to be needed for
communication between brain areas and passing of
information, the actual information is thought to be found
in the a sparse coding of neuron spiking as very specific
timings compared to the oscillations (Fries, 2015).

A Predictive Coding Account of the
Psychedelic State
As we have seen, the effects of psychedelics stem from
the 5-HT2A receptors on pyramidal cells in layer V being
activated, lowering the threshold of individual neuronal
firing and thus desynchronizing the activity of the
neuronal population. We discussed above Bastos et al.’s
(2012) view that the information communicated by the
synchronous activity of these specific cells is likely to
represent the brain’s top-down predictions. It is known
that within the neocortex, 5-HT2A receptors are not
distributed equally and different areas have different
binding potentials. Higher binding potentials can be found
in prefrontal and visual areas while the motor cortex has
lower binding potentials (Forutan et al., 2002). Our theory
focuses on the dense band of 5-HT 2A receptors in layer V
pyramidal cells.
Based on Kwisthout et al.’s (2017) notion of state
space granularity in predictions, we suggest that hyperactivation of the cells in layer V decomposes the broad
categorical prediction that is usually calculated by this
neuronal population into sub categories, creating a set of
higher detailed predictions. These decomposed
predictions stemming from prefrontal, parietal and
somatosensory cortex are sent backwards to lower layers
of the cortical hierarchy. The decomposed higher detailed
prediction that has the highest posterior probability now
dominates perception. However, under most conditions,
no matter which of the higher detailed decomposed
predictions best fits the data, it will still fit less data than
the ‘usual’ broad prediction. This will cause a higher level
of bottom up prediction error. As we shall see in the
second part of the paper, the compensatory mechanisms
called to deal with this higher level of prediction error can
explain the wide variety of psychedelic effects.

2908

Figure 1. The predictive coding account assumes that the brain generates predictions using a cascading hierarchy of generative models,
processing only that part of the inputs that was unpredicted. Under normal circumstances one might predict to observe animals or plants,
and interpret the inputs in a likewise manner (left panel). We suggest that after administration of psychedelics these predictions become
more decomposed, leading to more fine-grained, very specific predictions, each of which has a fairly low probability. This will in general
lead to a higher prediction error and unstable predictions (right panel). Figure adapted from Clark (2016).

To clarify further what a decomposed set of predictions
means, imagine a person walking in the forest receiving
some sensory input (Figure 1). Under regular conditions
the set of her predictions might be P(Animals) = 0.4,
P(Plants) = 0.6. The relatively low entropy of these
predictions can be computed to be H = –∑p i log2(1/pi) =
0.97 bits. This means there is relatively little uncertainty
regarding these possible predictions. Now let us imagine
this person is under influence of psychedelics. Under this
condition her set of predictions will be decomposed, for
instance: P(Birds) = 0.2, P(Dogs) = 0.1, P(Butterfly) =
0.09, P(Elf) = 0.01, P(Trees) = 0.3, P(Grass) = 0.6,
P(Flowers) = 0.1. As we can see, the main categorical
predictions of ‘Animals’ and ‘Plants’ break up, each into
more detailed sub categories. These decomposed
predictions bring about a higher entropic state, H = –∑p i
log2(1/pi) = 2.49 bit. In most cases this will result in
higher prediction error from lower layers as these
decomposed predictions ‘explain away’ less of the
prediction error from lower layers than normal. The
‘extra’ predictions being activated are likely to be
dependent on a subject’s personal experiences and history.
In general we should expect a flattening of the prediction
distribution, and well-established prediction categories
that contain many subcategories will be affected more
than predictions with fewer subcategories.

of Red Hot Poker flowers he perceived while under the
influence of psychedelics. However, due to environmental
changes and noise, this clear perception is not likely to
stay stable over time. The noisier the bottom-up signal,
the more the top-down predictions influence perception
(Seth, 2014). Under decomposed predictions, lowering
precision of sensory data can result in misclassification of
the data. The brain’s best explanation for the imprecise
‘noisy’ data might be one of the sub-threshold predictions
that got activated. This will result in a ‘hallucination’.
Psychedelics are known to both obscure and distort
perceptual data as well as add clarity and give the sense of
enhanced resolution. These two different sides of the
psychedelic state are dependent on the precision of the
bottom-up data, i.e., the noisiness of the setting. The more
noisy the bottom-up data is, the more likely hallucinations
will be.

Prediction error minimization and the
psychedelic state
Under normal conditions the brain can decrease prediction
error in several ways (Friston et al., 2012; Kwisthout et
al., 2017). It could update predictions; lower prediction
error by intervening in the world or it may update the
causal model that generated the predictions. In this
section, we explore how upregulating these mechanisms,
in order to deal with the increased prediction error caused
by decomposed predictions, can explain many of the
documented psychedelic effects. We will investigate the
effects of prediction updating, active inference, changing
the weight of predictions, and long-term learning effects.

The importance of bottom-up data in this process
A known concept in the psychedelic community is “set
and setting”. The mind’s set can be compared to the
brain’s predictions while setting considers the
environmental data. When precise environmental data
combines with decomposed higher detailed predictions
the result will be a uniquely clear perception. This type of
perception is commonly described by users and can be
read in Aldus Huxley’s (1954) description of the vividness

Updating the predictions
As we have explained, in the case of decomposed
predictions, a smaller amount of sensory inputs will be
explained by any specific prediction. This will cause

2909

increased prediction errors. One mechanism the brain
might use to minimize prediction error is to change the
prediction distribution. However, as the predictions
remain decomposed no prediction will be enough to
explain away the prediction error for long and so once
again the distribution will change and perhaps this time
the probability of an otherwise unlikely input becomes the
leading prediction and affects perception. This constant
revising of the probability distribution will lead to a
destabilization of perception. Objects, scenes and even
abstract thoughts will ‘morph’ and change at a rapid
speed; however, each percept reflects the best possible
prediction at that moment. A room might look bigger or
smaller or the prediction of the light condition might
change causing colors to morph. This can be the cause of
individuals reporting a tendency to see “multiple
viewpoints” (Sessa, 2008).
Predictions from other layers of the brain hierarchy that
were not affected by activation of the 5-HT2A receptors
can be upregulated by either increasing their relative
strength or lowering their level of detail. This will cause
the predictions from these layers to enforce their
predictions on more of the incoming data. Google’s deep
neural network ‘deep dream’1 (originally created for
identifying images) illustrates how this might happen. By
allowing different layers of the network to strengthen their
predictions these networks were able to produce
hallucinatory effects. Strengthening predictions of lower
layers (that identified lines) created images with amplified
lines, while increasing predictions from higher level
abstract layers (e.g., identifying buildings) created images
with ‘imaginary’ buildings being imposed on the original
picture. Further proof that this is actually happening in the
brain can be seen in the work of Bressloff et al. (2001).
Their simulated attenuated low-level predictions of the
visual system (V1) and found remarkable resemblance
with geometrical hallucinations drawn by people on LSD.
This shows that increased predictions from V1 are likely
to be behind the specific geometrical visual hallucination.
Furthermore, Carhart-Harris et al. (2016) found that
increased cerebral blood flow (CBF) in the visual cortex
as well as a greatly expanded functional connectivity
profile in V1 correlated strongly with subjects’ ratings of
visual hallucinations. It is impossible to know at the
moment whether the increase in CBF is due to increased
predictions errors, upregulating of predictions, or both.

in the primary motor cortex, top-down prediction from
that area wouldn’t be as affected and this mechanism is
likely to remain intact even under the influence of
Psychedelics. This can explain why hallucinations seem to
grow stronger while sitting still and can help influence
harm reduction policies. By creating motor output, for
instance while walking or dancing, the mechanism of
active inference (in which motor output minimizes
proprioceptive prediction error between the expected and
actual position of one’s limb, bringing the actual position
closer to the expected position; see, e.g., Brown et al.,
2011) might enable the brain to lower prediction errors
stemming from other parts of the brain too.

Changing Weight of the Prediction Error
While chemical tolerance to Psychedelics drugs should
not exist more than a few days after ingestion (Leshner,
2001) many experienced users will admit that the first few
experiences feel stronger than later experiences and
increased dosage is needed to reach the same state. This
might happen as a result of the brain’s attempt to
minimize prediction error by lowering the weight of the
prediction error or attributing this higher prediction error
to ‘inherent’ noise that does not need to be explained. An
example of inherent noise that the brain learns to ignore
can be seen in a fair coin toss (Kwisthout et al., 2017).
Even if you guess the coin will land on ‘heads’ and then it
actually lands on ‘tails’ no surprise will follow. The brain
has learnt that this type of stochastic noise is inherent to a
fair coin toss. The same could happen under extended use
of psychedelics. The brain could learn that this state is
inherently noisier and lower the weight of the prediction
error. We can only postulate that this might happen
through affecting the dopamine system which has been
implicated in precision weighting of prediction error
(Friston et al., 2012).

Long Term Learning Effects
Within the predictive coding framework the model
constructed by the brain is considered to be encoded in
the network connectivity. Changes in this connectivity
will lead to long term learning. While learning effects in
humans after administration of 5-HT2A agonists have not
directly been studied in the last decades an interesting
study in rabbits has found that agonists at the 5-HT2A
receptor including LSD enhanced associative learning at
doses that produce cognitive effects in humans (Harvey,
2003). Using the predictive coding framework,
depression, addiction and obsessive compulsive disorders
have been suggested to stem from overly strong and
narrow predictions from certain networks that get ‘stuck’
(Edwards et al., 2012) and aren’t updated based on the
bottom-up data. Momentarily decomposing these
predictions by 5-HT2A agonists, especially with a
combination of supportive bottom-up information coming
from a therapeutic setting, might lead to long term model
updates. This could be the reason behind the success of

Acting on the Environment
Another mechanism of minimizing prediction error is
intervening in the world (i.e., acting on the environment)
(Brown, Friston, & Bestmann, 2011). This changes the
actual inputs and sets some of the model’s parameters and
thus decreases uncertainty. Changing the brain’s input can
happen both in a passive way, for instance by moving
one’s eyes, or by actively moving objects in the
environment. Since 5-HT2A receptors are not as prevalent
1

https://deepdreamgenerator.com/

2910

recent clinical trials that have used 5-HT 2A agonist to treat
these disorders.
A long term model update that psychedelic are known
to cause is increasing the trait of ‘openness’ (MacLean,
Johnson, & Griffiths, 2011). The mechanism we suggest
to explain this is as follows. A higher prediction error state
caused by administration of 5-HT2A agonists coupled with
a positive rewarding setting, leads to surprise becoming a
more sought after state. Interest in exploring the unknown
and trying new things might grow and people might be
‘motivated to enlarge their experience into novel territory’
which is what defines the trait of openness (DeYoung et
al., 2009).

stimuli perceived as longer. Similarly, Tse et al. (2004)
found that a stimulus which stands out as different from
all the others in a series appears to last longer than the
other stimuli. An increase of prediction updates might
cause the subjective feeling that more time has passed.
This is similar to the common feeling that the first day of
a journey to another country seems longer because it is
filled with so many new experiences and so many
prediction updates must happen in that day.
The last phenomenon we would like to touch upon is
the notion of ‘Ego death’ many psychedelic users report.
Apps & Tsakiris (2013) describe a predictive coding
account of the neural and computational basis of selfrecognition. Here, one’s body is recognized as the most
likely “me”. This probabilistic inference arises through
the integration of information from hierarchically
organized unimodal systems in higher-level multimodal
areas. As we have seen, the brain’s attempt to minimize
increased prediction error induced by psychedelics breaks
down this hierarchical structure which might lead to a
total inability to distinguish between environment and self
and the unique perception of ‘oneness’ described by many
experiencing ‘ego loss’. While Apps & Tsakiris’ account
deals with the ‘minimal self’, we postulate looking at the
‘higher ego’ as a collection of high-level relatively
inflexible predictions regarding the future behaviour of
the ‘self-organism’ in a variety of situations. Following
administration of 5-HT2A agonists these predictions will
break up based on the subjective pieces of information
compromising this category. This relaxation of otherwise
rigid predictions about the self might explain positive
results for treatment of depression and addiction after
administration of psychedelics that have been reported
(Nichols, 2016).

Psychedelics research findings reinterpreted
In the following section we will re-interpret previous
findings in psychedelics research in light of our
theoretical account and see how our account can clarify
and shed further light on these results.
Kometer et al. (2006) presented so-called Kanizsa
triangles to subjects after administration of psilocybin.
These shapes are perceived as complete triangles and
circles rather than the complex shapes that they actually
are, because of a top-down learnt prediction. Viewing this
shape under normal conditions has been shown to evoke a
unique change lowering of voltage as measured on the
skull 170ms2 after presentation of this stimulus. Following
administration of Psilocybin, Kometer et al. found a
decrease in strength of this ERP suggesting a lower
strength of these predictions. This is in accordance with
the model of decomposed predictions, since decomposed
predictions will indeed cause each prediction to be weaker
than normal. This same experiment also found
desynchronization of alpha band activity which we have
discussed previously.
In a behavioral experiment, Spitzer et al. (1996) found
increased indirect semantic priming after administration
of Psilocybin. They claim their data suggests that
Psilocybin leads to an “increased availability of remote
associations and thereby may bring cognitive contents to
mind that under normal circumstances remain nonactivated” (Spitzer et al., p. 1056). This would indeed be
expected if broad categorical ‘semantic’ predictions are
decomposed, activating many more detailed semantic
predictions, and allowing for more remote associations to
be activated.
Another well-documented effect is known as ‘Time
Dilation’ in which subjective time seems to slow down. A
few minutes can subjectively be perceived as taking much
longer. Here we postulate that subjective sensation of time
is dependent on the amount of prediction error and
possibly prediction updates the brain makes in order to
minimize prediction error. This idea is based on Ulrich
(2006) who discovered that the extent to which a stimulus
can be predicted affects time perception, with unexpected
2

Conclusions
In this paper we presented a computational theory
explaining the effects of psychedelics in terms of the
predictive coding account of cortical processes. Our
theory further explicates the Entropic Brain hypothesis
(Carhart-Harris et al., 2014) in terms of predictive coding.
We proposed that administration of psychedelics cause the
brain to make overly detailed (i.e., decomposed)
predictions of the inputs it receives, leading to an
increased prediction error. Crucially, while dopamine is
considered to modulate precision weighting of prediction
errors (Friston et al., 2012), our theory suggests that
serotonin might have a role in modulating the granularity
(“level of detail”) of predictions. Our theory explains how
a simple lowering of the excitation threshold of the
pyramidal neurons in layer V in prefrontal, parietal and
somatosensory cortex (caused by administration of 5HT2A agonists) in fact decomposes predictions from those
areas, causing increased prediction errors from lower
levels in the brain hierarchy. The brain’s attempts to
minimize these increased prediction errors by active
inference, prediction updating, modulation of the weights

This is known as the N170 event-related potential (ERP).

2911

of prediction errors, or model revision can explain several
(and sometimes contradictory) cognitive effects of
psychedelics such as hallucination, heightened sensory
input, synesthesia, increased trait of openness, ‘ego death’
and time dilation.

Friston, K.J., Rigoli, F., Ognibene, D., Mathys, C.,
Fitzgerald, T., & Pezzulo, G. (2015). Active inference
and epistemic value. Cognitive Neuroscience, 13, 1–28.
Forutan, F., Estalji, S., Beu, M., Nikolaus, S., Hamacher,
K., Coenen, H.H., … & Larisch, R. (2002). Distribution
of 5HT2A receptors in the human brain: Comparison of
data in vivo and post mortem. Nuklearmedizin-Nuclear
Medicine, 41(4), 197.
Harvey, J.A. (2003). Role of the serotonin 5-HT 2A
receptor in learning. Learning & Memory, 10(5), 355–
362.
Huxley, A. (1954). The Doors of Perception. London:
Chatto and Windus.
Kometer, M., Schmidt, A., Jäncke, L., & Vollenweider,
F.X. (2013). Activation of serotonin 2A receptors
underlies the psilocybin-induced effects on alphaoscillations, N170 visual-evoked potentials, and visual
hallucinations. Journal of Neuroscience, 33(25),
10544–10551.
Kwisthout, J. & van Rooij, I., (2015). Free energy
minimization and information gain: The devil is in the
details. Cognitive Neuroscience, 6(4), 216–218.
Kwisthout, J,. Bekkering, H., & van Rooij, I., (2017). To
be precise, the details don’t matter: On predictive
processing, precision, and level of detail of predictions.
Brain and Cognition, 112, 84–91.
Leshner, A.I. (2001). Hallucinogens and Dissociative
drugs. NIDA - Research Report.
MacLean, K.A., Johnson, M.W., & Griffiths R.R. (2011).
Mystical experiences occasioned by the hallucinogen
psilocybin lead to increases in the personality domain
of openness. Journal of Psychopharmacology, 25(11),
1453–1461.
Muthukumaraswamy, S.D., Carhart-Harris, R.L., Moran,
R.J., Brookes, M.J., Williams, T.M., ... & Nutt, D.J.
(2013). Broadband cortical desynchronization underlies
the human psychedelic state. Journal of Neuroscience,
33(38), 15171–15183.
Nichols, D. E. (2016). Psychedelics. Pharmacological
Reviews, 68(2), 264–355.
Sessa, B. (2008). Is it time to revisit the role of
psychedelic drugs in enhancing human creativity?
Journal of Psychopharmacology, 22(8). 821–827.
Seth, A.K. (2014). A predictive processing theory of
sensorimotor contingencies: Explaining the puzzle of
perceptual presence and its absence in synaesthesia.
Cognitive Neuroscience, 5(2), 97–118.
Spitzer, M., Thimm, M., Hermle, L., Holzmann, P., Kovar,
A., ... & Schneider F. (1996): Increased activation of
indirect semantic associations under psilocybin.
Biological Psychiatry, 39, 1055–1057.
Tse, P.U., Intriligator, J., Rivest, J., & Cavanagh, P.
(2004). Attention and the subjective expansion of time.
Perception & Psychophysics, 66, 1171–1189.
Ulrich, R., Nitschke, J., & Rammsayer, T. (2006).
Perceived duration of expected and unexpected stimuli.
Psychological research, 70(2), 77–87.

References
Apps, M.A.J., & Tsakiris, M. (2013). The free-energy self:
A predictive coding account of self-recognition.
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 41, 85–97.
Bastos, A.M., Usrey, W.M., Adams, R.A., Mangun, G.R.,
Fries, P., & Friston, K.J. (2012). Canonical
microcircuits for predictive coding. Neuron, 76(4),
695–711.
Bastos, A.M., Vezoli, J., Bosman, C.A., Schoffelen, J.-M.,
Oostenveld, R., Dowdall, J.R., … & Fries, P. (2014).
Visual areas exert feedforward and feedback influences
through distinct frequency channels. Neuron, 85(2),
390–401.
Bressloff, P.C., Cowan, J.D., Golubitsky, M., Thomas,
P.J., & Wiener, M.C. (2001). Geometric visual hallucinations, Euclidean symmetry and the functional
architecture of striate cortex. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 356(1407), 299–330.
Brown, H., Friston, K.J., & Bestmann, S. (2011). Active
inference, attention, and motor preparation. Frontiers in
Psychology, 2(SEP), 1–10.
Carhart-Harris, R.L., Leech, R., Hellyer, P. J., Shanahan,
M., Feilding, A., Tagliazucchi, E., … & Nutt, D.J.
(2014). The entropic brain: a theory of conscious states
informed by neuroimaging research with psychedelic
drugs. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8(FEB), 20.
Carhart-Harris, R.L., Muthukumaraswamy, S., Roseman,
L., Kaelen, M., Droog, W., & Nutt, D.J. (2016). Neural
correlates of the LSD experience revealed by
multimodal neuroimaging. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 113(17), 4853–4858.
Clark, A. (2016). Surfing Uncertainty. Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press.
DeYoung, C.G., Shamosh, N.A., Green, A.E., Braver,
T.S., & Gray, J.R. (2009). Intellect as distinct from
Openness: Differences revealed by fMRI of working
memory. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
97, 883–892.
Edwards, M.J., Adams, R.A., Brown, H., Pareés, I., &
Friston, K.J. (2012). A Bayesian account of ‘hysteria’.
Brain, 135(11), 3495–3512.
Fries, P. (2015). Rhythms for cognition: Communication
through coherence. Neuron, 88(1), 220–235.
Friston, K.J. (2008). Hierarchical models in the brain.
PLoS Computational Biology, 4(11), e1000211.
Friston, K.J., Shiner, T., FitzGerald, T., Galea, J.M.,
Adams, R., Brown, H., … & Bestmann, S. (2012).
Dopamine, affordance and active inference. PLoS
Computational Biology, 8(1), e1002327.

2912

