Perspective-Taking in Referential Communication: Does Stimulated Attention to
Addressee’s Perspective Influence Speakers’ Reference Production?
Debby Damen (d.j.damen@uvt.nl), Per van der Wijst (per.vanderwijst@uvt.nl), Marije van Amelsvoort
(m.a.a.vanamelsvoort@uvt.nl), Emiel Krahmer (e.j.krahmer@uvt.nl)
Tilburg center for Cognition and Communication, Tilburg University, PO Box 90153, 5000 LE, The Netherlands

Abstract
We investigated whether speakers’ referential communication
benefits from an explicit focus on addressees’ perspective.
Dyads took part in a referential communication game and were
allocated to one of three experimental settings. Each of these
settings elicited a different perspective mindset (none, selffocus, other-focus). In the two perspective settings, speakers
were explicitly instructed to regard their addressee’s (otherfocus) or their own (self-focus) perspective before construing
their referential message. Results indicated that eliciting
speakers’ self- versus other-focus did not influence their
reference production. We did find that speakers with an elicited
egocentric perspective reported a higher perspective-taking
tendency than speakers in the other two settings. This tendency
correlated with actual referring behavior during the game,
indicating that speakers who reported a high perspective-taking
tendency were less likely to make egocentric errors such as
leaking information privileged to speakers themselves. These
findings are explained using the objective self-awareness
theory.
Keywords: perspective-taking; referential communication;
egocentricity bias; privileged information.

Introduction
Engaging in successful referential communication implies
that addressees are able to select the intended referent on the
basis of speakers’ descriptions. For this, speakers are
expected to design their message optimally (i.e., audience
design in Clark & Murphy, 1982), adhering to addressees’
informational need (Clark, 1992). Speakers are supposed to
exchange just the right amount of information, neither too
little nor too much (Grice, 1975), and base their contributions
on the knowledge, beliefs and assumptions that are shared or
salient between themselves and their addressee (i.e.,
common-ground information). This is necessary, because
addressees will rely on this shared, salient knowledge when
interpreting the referential message (Arnold, Kaiser, Kahn, &
Kim, 2013). Referential communication thus relies a great
deal on interlocutors’ ability to accurately engage in the
process of perspective-taking; the ability to take into account
the knowledge and attentional state of their interaction
partner at each step in the conversation. The questions that
arise here are whether interlocutors are inclined to regard the
other’s perspective accurately during interaction, and if this
is not the case, whether a stimulated attention to another’s
perspective would be beneficial for the referential
communication process.
The literature shows a puzzling picture with regard to
speakers’ ability and propensity to accurately regard
addressee’s perspective and, thus, to engage in an accurate

audience design. On the one hand, studies evidenced that
speakers succeed at assessing and adapting their
communication to their addressees’ knowledge (needs)
(Heller, Gorman, & Tanenhaus, 2012; Nadig & Sedivy,
2002), whereas others have indicated that these adjustments
are not always accurate (Horton & Keysar, 1996; Keysar,
Barr, Balin, & Brauner, 2000). According to these latter
studies, language production is not necessarily anchored to
addressees’ needs, but more to speakers’ own knowledge and
attentional state, resulting in utterances that are based on
information immediately accessible to speakers themselves.
Following this approach, addressee’s knowledge is only
considered in a later, optional stage in which speakers can
consciously choose whether to adjust their language
production to the common ground status (Horton & Keysar,
1996). Scholars defending the latter view argue for speakers’
egocentricity bias (Keysar, Barr, & Horton, 1998), entailing
that speakers use their own mental state as a representational
default to infer the one of their addressee (Epley, Keysar, Van
Boven, & Gilovich, 2004). Engaging in perspective-taking is
then considered to be a cognitive effortful process that can
result in egocentric anchor mistakes when speakers do not
correct their automatic response. Research indicated that
these errors are likely to occur in social interactions, as
speakers sometimes refer to information not known to their
addressee (Horton & Keysar, 1996), or even leak privileged
information that should have stayed confidential (Kaland,
Krahmer, & Swerts, 2014; Wardlow Lane, Groisman, &
Ferreira, 2006).
In a referential communication task, Wardlow Lane et al.
(2006) evidenced speakers’ informational leakage even when
it bore negative consequences. During the task, speakers
described geometrical objects to their addressees, with the
goal of earning both of them points if the addressee correctly
identified the referent. Before every description, speakers hid
one object from their addressee’s view. This object always
differed in size from the target object speakers had to
describe. Addressees could earn additional points by
correctly guessing the identity of the hidden object. Although
speakers were instructed not to let their addressee gain
additional points, results showed that speakers were likely to
cue the identity of their privileged object by referring to the
size contrast they themselves were seeing. This was
especially the case when the target object and speakers’
privileged object were similarly rather than differently
shaped, as the size contrast presented to speakers was then
most relevant (i.e., salient) for speakers to discern.
Subsequent studies replicated findings of Wardlow Lane et
al. (2006) by showing that speakers also leak information

1866

non-verbally (Kaland et al., 2014), and especially when they
do not have enough cognitive resources left to correct
perspective mistakes (Wardlow Lane & Ferreira, 2008).
Intriguingly, speakers are even more likely to refer to
privileged information when they are motivated to keep it
confidential. The motivation to keep private information
privileged further enhances its salience which, as a
consequence, can result in it being revealed (Wardlow Lane
& Liersch, 2012).
It seems that despite their efforts speakers are not always
able to monitor for perspective mistakes or to adjust their
egocentric errors to addressees’ informational need. The
question raised here is whether speakers’ audience design
would benefit from a constant reminder of interlocutor’s
informational need (i.e., perspective). Research has
suggested that audience design is more likely to occur when
speakers are made aware that such design is needed (Horton
& Gerrig, 2002). We therefore suggest that guiding speakers
through a perspective-taking process might inhibit egocentric
anchoring, and might boost their monitoring for perspective
mistakes. This might incite speakers to correct for egocentric
errors such as the leakage of privileged information (Horton
& Keysar, 1996), resulting in a references that are more
accurately based on addressee’s perspective, and less on
speakers’ own knowledge and attentional state.

Current Study
This study examines whether speakers’ elicited attention to
addressee’s perspective influences their reference
production. Following the assumptions of the egocentricity
hypothesis (Keysar et al., 1998), we expect speakers in a
baseline setting (i.e., in which perspectives are not induced)
to automatically anchor their referential expressions to their
private knowledge, increasing the likelihood they will refer
to this information, compared to other-focused speakers
whose attention is focused on their interlocutor’s perspective.
We further hypothesize that self-focused speakers who are
made explicitly aware of their own perspective will be more
likely to leak privileged information than speakers referring
in the baseline setting.
Based on the findings of Wardlow Lane et al. (2006), we
additionally expect that speakers will be more likely to leak
privileged information when this information is salient versus
non-salient to them. That is, if speakers refer to a commonground figure (e.g., a circle) that has a size-contrasting match
(e.g., a bigger circle) in their privileged ground, the size
difference is relevant and, thus, salient to speakers themselves
to discern. This in contrast to situations in which speakers are
presented with a size-contrasting mismatch (e.g., a bigger
triangle) in their privileged ground. The salience of the size
contrast presented by matching rather than mismatching
figures makes speakers more likely to add contrasting
adjectives in their description of the target figure (e.g., “the
small circle”), by which they leak privileged information.
Finally, we expect that the salience of privileged information
will interact with the induced perspective. Self-focused
speakers are expected to be more likely to leak information

when it is salient versus non-salient, compared to the baseline
setting. Since other-focused speakers explicitly focus on
addressee’s perspective, we expect these speakers to be less
influenced by the salience of their private information,
compared to the baseline setting.

Method
Participants
In total, 93 student-dyads (N = 186) participated in this study.
The data of three dyads were excluded from analyses, due to
an error in the experimental procedure (N = 2), or due to a
low proficiency in the language of the experiment (Dutch) (N
= 4). The analyses were based on 90 dyads in which the
participants were randomly assigned either the role of the
speaker (55 women, 35 men, Mage = 22.0 years; age range 1834 years) or the role of the addressee (59 women, 31 men,
Mage = 21.3 years; age range 17-27). All participants were
fluent in Dutch, did not experience problems at discerning the
colors used in the study, and received a small remuneration
for their participation.

Design
The experimental design and procedure were replicated from
Kaland et al. (2014), which in turn were inspired by Wardlow
Lane et al. (2006). The experiment consisted of a referential
communication task in which speakers were asked to
describe mutually visible geometrical figures in such a way
that the addressee could indicate the intended one out of a set
of four. These four figures were physically presented on the
table in between both interlocutors, and depicted on speakers’
private computer screen. From their private computer screen,
speakers were instructed to block one figure and,
subsequently, to identify another figure on the table in front
of them (figure 1). The occluded figure differed either in size
or color from the three mutually visible figures. In our
experiment, we replicated Kaland et al. (2014) privileged
situation and added a perspective-taking manipulation. In this
privileged setting, one object was always blocked from
addressee’s view and thus belonged to speaker’s privileged
ground.

Figure 1: The experimental setting in which the speaker (on
the bottom) identified figures to the addressee (on the top).

1867

Materials
Eliciting Self- Versus Other-Focus Speakers’ self- versus
other-focus was manipulated by asking them explicitly to
either regard their own (self-focus) or their addressee’s
(other-focus) perspective before they identified the target
object. Participants were randomly assigned to one of the
three communication settings (self-focus, other-focus,
baseline), resulting in 30 speakers per setting. The selfversus other-focus was operationalized by asking speakers to
answer a perspective question portrayed on the computer
screen next to them. In the self-focus setting, speakers
answered the question reinforcing their egocentric
perspective: “Which four figures are visible to you?”. This in
contrast to the speakers in the other-focus setting who were
asked to regard the perspective of their addressee: “Which
three figures are visible to your addressee?”. Speakers
answered the question by selecting the figures on their private
computer screen. To eliminate the possibility that the selffocused speakers would simply select all figures as a response
to the question, a fifth figure was added to the figures
presented on the computer screen.
To investigate the influence of our perspective
manipulation, we allocated one third of the speakers to a
baseline setting. In this setting, we did not reinforce speakers’
self- versus other-focus. In this way, we were able to examine
how speakers’ reference production in the self- versus otherfocused settings would diverge from a baseline situation.
Salience of Privileged Information The salience of
speakers’ privileged knowledge was manipulated within
communicative settings. Participants were confronted with
40 experimental trials, consisting of 20 salient and 20 nonsalient trials. In the salient trials, speakers’ privileged figure
was identically shaped to the target figure (e.g., both were
circles) whereas in the non-salient trials both figures were
differently shaped (e.g., a circle and a triangle). The salient
trials were designed to elicit utterances that contrasted the
target figure with the privileged one, whereas the non-salient
trials assessed how often speakers included adjectives
irrespective of the contrast presented. Figures in successive
trials were never identically shaped, and half of the figures
contrasted in size (big, small) and the other half in color (red,
blue, green, black, grey, yellow) (Kaland et al., 2014). The
figures’ shape, color, and position were balanced across all
trials. This resulted in 3 x 2 x 2 design, with communication
setting (self-focus, other-focus, baseline) as a between
subjects’ factor, and trial type (salient, non-salient), and
contrast type (color, size) as within subject factors.

Procedure
A throw of a dice decided which participant took the role
of the speaker. Participants were told that, when the addressee
was able to correctly identify the target figure, both the
speaker and the addressee would obtain one point.
Participants were told that failing to identify the target figure
would result in zero points obtained, and the goal of the game
was to obtain the maximum number of points.

Speakers and addressees sat down on opposite sides of a
table. Speakers were seated next to a computer screen on
which the experimental trails were presented using E-Prime
version 2. At the beginning of each trial, addressees closed
their eyes while the experimenter placed four cards on the
table. When the four cards were put in place, speakers (a) hid
one figure from their addressee’s view by placing an occluder
between the figure and their addressee. Subsequently in the
other- and self-focused setting, speakers (b) answered a
perspective question by selected either the three figures
visible to their addressee (other-focus) or the four figures
visible to them (self-focus). Hereafter, speakers (c) described
the target object with just enough information so that their
addressee was able to identify the intended figure. Speakers
were instructed to look at the four cards on the table when
referring to the target object. While hearing speakers refer to
a figure, addressees opened their eyes and pointed at the
intended figure on the table in front of them. Speakers
subsequently (d) informed their addressee whether their
selection was correct. Since speakers in the baseline setting
were not confronted with a perspective-taking manipulation,
these speakers only performed actions (a), (c), and (d). To
ensure all steps of the procedure were executed correctly, the
experimenter was present during the entire game.
The experimental game ended after 40 rounds. After the
final round, speakers indicated on a ten-point scale to what
extent they took into account their addressee’s perspective
during the game (1 = not at all, 10 = very much). Since audio
recordings were made of all sessions, participants’ consent to
making these recordings and using them for scientific
purposes were collected. Afterwards, all participants were
debriefed.

Coding
To measure speakers’ reference to privileged information
(RPI), we counted the adjectives that matched the contrast
between the target and privileged figure. Adjectives that did
not contrast the target figure to the privileged one were not
taken into account. Speakers’ RPI was calculated as a
proportion (1 = contrasting adjective uttered; 0 = no
contrasting adjective uttered).

Results
All dyads obtained the maximum of 40 points, indicating that
they were able to correctly identify all targets. In figure 2, the
mean proportions of speakers’ informational leakage (RPI) as
a function of the perspective manipulation (baseline, otherfocus, self-focus), whether the target and speakers’ privileged
figure were similarly (salient trials) or differently (nonsalient trials) shaped, and whether these contrasts were
presented in either color or size are shown. Overall, speakers
in the baseline setting referred to privileged information in
half of the produced references (50%), followed by the otherfocused (45%), and self-focused speakers (29%). Across the
three communicative settings, speakers seem to have referred
to privileged information to the same degree for salient (43%)
and non-salient (40%) trials.

1868

= .54, SD = .50). This pattern also held for salient size trials:
speakers’ RPI in the other- (M = .34, SD = .44, b = -0.07, SE
= 1.61, CI: [-2.92, 3.38]), and self-focused setting (M = .24,
SD = .41, b = 0.98, SE = 1.56, CI: [-1.86, 4.25]) did not
significantly differ from the baseline (M = .46, SD = .50).
Finally, speakers’ RPI on salient color trials in the other- (M
= .58, SD = .46, b = 0.57, SE = 2.36, CI: [-3.38, 5.88]), and
self-focused setting (M = .35, SD = .42, b = -3.26, SE = 4.41,
CI: [-12.64, 4.67]) did also not significantly differ from the
baseline (M = .55, SD = .49).

Figure 2: Mean proportions of speakers’ RPI. Error bars
represent 95% confidence intervals.
The influence of the perspective manipulation and the
interplay with the salience of speakers’ privileged
information on the probability of privileged information to be
mentioned was analyzed using a generalized linear mixed
model analysis with a binomial distribution. For this we used
the GLMER function from the lme4 package (Bates,
Maechler, & Bolker, 2011) in R (version 3.3.0; www.rproject.org). We constructed a maximal model that included
a full random effect structure (Barr, Levy, Scheepers, & Tily,
2013). This maximal model included the perspective
manipulation (self-focus, other-focus, baseline), the salience
of the trials (salient, non-salient), and the contrast (color,
size) presented in the trials as fixed factors. We included
random intercepts and slopes for both speakers and
experimental trials. The probability distribution was set on
binomial with a logit link function and we used parametric
bootstrapping over 100 iterations to estimate the confidence
intervals and p-values. When the maximal model did not
converge, we excluded random slopes with the lowest
variance until convergence was reached. We report the results
of the models that were the first to converge (Barr et al.,
2013). An alpha level of .05 was used for all statistical tests.
The models treated the baseline setting as the reference
category, to which speakers’ RPI in the other- and selffocused settings were contrasted.
Influence of Perspective on Speakers’ RPI Speakers’ RPI
in the self- and other-focused setting did not significantly
differ from speakers’ RPI in the baseline setting. For nonsalient size trials, speakers in the other-focused (M = .33, SD
= .45, b = 0.80, SE = 2.07, CI: [-3.02, 5.11]), and self-focused
setting (M = .24, SD = .41, b = 1.28, SE = 1.66, CI: [-1.98,
4.52]), were just as likely as the baseline speakers (M = .44,
SD = .50) to refer to privileged information. The same held
for non-salient color trials: other-focused (M = .55, SD = .47,
b = 1.24, SE = 1.90, CI: [-1.67, 5.76]), and self-focused
speakers’ RPI (M = .31, SD = .43, b = -3.31, SE = 4.41, CI: [12.06, 5.21]) did not significantly differ from the baseline (M

Influence of Salience on Speakers’ RPI In the baseline
setting, the salience of privileged information did not
influence speakers’ RPI. Baseline speakers were just as likely
to refer to privileged information on non-salient (M = .44, SD
= .50) and salient (M = .46, SD = .50) size trials (b = 1.53, SE
= 0.81, CI: [-0.33, 2.86]), and on non-salient (M = .54, SD =
.50) and salient (M = .55, SD = .49) color trails (b = 0.46, SE
= 2.04, CI: [-3.05, 4.93]).
Baseline speakers’ RPI was also not influenced by the
contrast presented in the trials. Speakers were just as likely to
refer to privileged information on non-salient size (M = .44,
SD = .50) and non-salient color (M = .54, SD = .50) trials (b
= -1.91, SE = 1.93, CI: [-6.59, 0.97]), as on salient size (M =
.46, SD = .50) and salient color (M = .55, SD = .49) trials (b
= -1.91, SE = 2.23, CI: [-6.81, 1.95]).
When the two perspective settings were contrasted to the
baseline setting, no significant differences were found. Like
the speakers in the baseline setting, other-focused speakers’
RPI did not differ between salient (M = .34, SD = .44) and
non-salient (M = .33, SD = .45) size trials (b = -0.88, SE =
0.90, CI: [-2.61, 0.93]), nor between salient (M = .58, SD =
.46) and non-salient (M = .55, SD = .47) color trials (b = 0.79, SE = 1.13, CI: [-3.10, 1.32]). The same held for the selffocused speakers. Their RPI did not differ significantly
between salient (M = .24, SD = .41) and non-salient (M = .24,
SD = .41) size trials (b = -0.30, SE = 0.90, CI: [-2.03, 1.51]),
nor between salient (M = .35, SD = .42) and non-salient (M =
.31, SD = .43) color trials (b = -0.24, SE = 1.16, CI: [-2.58,
1.97]).
Like the baseline speakers, other- and self-focused
speakers’ RPI did not depend on the contrast presented in the
trials. Other-focused speakers’ RPI did not significantly
differ between salient size (M = .34, SD = .44) and salient
color (M = .58, SD = .46) trials (b = 0.64, SE = 2.71, CI: [4.33, 6.27]), nor between non-salient size (M = .33, SD = .45)
and non-salient color (M = .55, SD = .46) trials (b = 0.64, SE
= 3.45, CI: [-5.32, 8.20]). Further, self-focused speakers’ RPI
did not significantly differ between salient size (M = .24, SD
= .41) and salient color (M = .35, SD = .42) trials (b = -4.24,
SE = 4.43, CI: [-13.71, 3.64]), nor between non-salient size
(M = .24, SD = .41) and non-salient color trials (M = .31, SD
= .43) (b = -4.24, SE = 5.11, CI: [-14.67, 5.37]).
Speakers’ Self-Reported Perspective-Taking A one-way
between-subjects ANOVA revealed that speakers’ selfreported perspective-taking tendency significantly differed

1869

between settings, Welch’s F (2,57) = 4.43, p < .05. Tukey
HSD post-hoc comparisons revealed that self-focused
speakers (M = 7.73, SD = 2.94) reported a significant higher
perspective-taking tendency than both other-focused (M =
5.62, SD = 3.63) and baseline speakers (M = 5.60, SD = 3.51)
(both p < .05). Perspective-taking tendencies did not
significantly differ between the other-focused and the
baseline setting (p > .05). To investigate whether speakers’
self-reported perspective-taking tendency corresponded with
their actual behavior during the game, a follow-up logit
mixed model analysis was conducted. This model included
speakers’ SELF-REPORT as fixed effect, a random intercept for
subjects, and a by-subject random slope for the effect of SELFREPORT. P-values were obtained using the Likelihood Ratio
Test (LRT). The LRT revealed that speakers’ SELF-REPORT
was a significant predictor of their actual RPI, χ2 (2) = 9.90,
p < .001. As speakers’ perspective-taking tendency increased,
they were less likely to have leaked privileged information
during the game, b = -2.75, SE = 0.45, p <.001.

Discussion
In this paper we studied whether eliciting speakers’ selfversus other-focus would influence their subsequent
reference production. We found that speakers in the otherand self-focused settings were just as likely to refer to
privileged information as the speakers whose perspectivetaking was not manipulated (i.e., in the baseline setting).
Further, we did not replicate the results of (Kaland et al.,
2014; Wardlow Lane & Ferreira, 2008; Wardlow Lane et al.,
2006; Wardlow Lane & Liersch, 2012) who found that the
salience of privileged information can boost the probability
of it being leaked. In our study, speakers were just as likely
to refer to private information, regardless of its salience.
Perhaps speakers’ tendency to retain a certain reference
strategy throughout the game could have interfered with their
audience design (Horton & Gerrig, 2002), and the extent to
which they were influenced by the elicited perspective and
the salience of their privileged knowledge.
In our study, 66% of speakers (N= 59) either referred to
color and size contrasts on all trials, or they refrained from
including any adjectives throughout the game. Speakers’
consistent referring behavior has been supported by previous
research (Brennan & Clark, 1996), and is strengthened by
addressees’ ability to identify the referent on the basis of
speakers’ descriptions (Clark & Krych, 2004). Addressees
partaking in our study were always able to correctly identify
the intended object, regardless of the presence or absence of
speakers’ informational leakage. Each time addressees
correctly identified the target object, they signaled to
speakers that the reference had been successful. This could
have inspired speakers to keep hold of their referential tactic
and to base their references on previous formulated
descriptions. This tendency to be consistent could have
interfered with our perspective-taking manipulation and the
extent to which speakers were influenced by (the salience of)
their privileged knowledge. Furthermore, in our study
speakers’ leakage did not bear negative consequences. As a

result, egocentric errors were not detected and speakers were
not encouraged to adjust their reference production. This
implies that increasing speakers’ awareness of the negative
consequences associated with their leakage could reduce the
extent to which they would leak such information. However,
as previous research has shown (e.g., Kaland et al., 2014;
Wardlow Lane et al., 2006) incentives to keep privileged
information confidential might increase speakers’ attention to
this information, thereby ironically boosting the likeliness of
it being mentioned. Enhancing speakers’ awareness of the
negative consequences of their leakage thus might not be the
right solution. There are, however, other factors that should
be considered with regard to addressing speakers’
consistency in reference production.
One of these factors is the self-paced method by which
speakers were confronted to the instructions and perspective
manipulation. The self-paced method could have induced the
routineness by which speakers performed the instructions and
completed the trials. Moreover, the fact that the perspectivetaking manipulation was posed on speakers’ private
computer screen in which perspectives were not visibly
marked could have reduced the intrusiveness of the elicited
mindsets. Although speakers were explicitly trained to return
their attention from their private screen to the physical
context shared between them and their addressee before they
identified the target figure, the possibility exists that speakers
were still regarding their private screen (in which
perspectives were not marked) while formulating their
reference. These issues could be addressed in a future study
by allowing the experimental leader to pace the experiment
and to expose speakers in the shared physical context to the
perspective-taking manipulation. For example, speakers
could be explicitly asked to indicate which figures are visible
to their addressee (i.e., eliciting an other-focus) or visible to
themselves (i.e., eliciting a self-focus) by using the figures
lying between them and their interlocutor.
Moreover, following the design of Kaland et al. (2014),
speakers were confronted with six color manipulations
compared to the two size manipulations. The obtrusive use of
color could have induced speakers to refer to color contrasts
on all of the experimental trials (Koolen, Goudbeek, &
Krahmer, 2013), irrespective of the elicited perspective or the
salience of privileged information. A future study could
explore this possibility by equalizing the number of colors
used to the number of size contrasts employed in the game.
An interesting finding of this study that merits further
attention is the result of speakers’ self-reported perspectivetaking tendency and its relation to their reference production.
Ironically, speakers with an elicited self-focus reported to
have regarded their addressee’s perspective more than the
speakers in the other two settings. This self-reported tendency
correlated negatively with speakers’ previous leakage
behavior, indicating that speakers with a high perspectivetaking tendency were less likely to have leaked private
information during the game. It thus seems that not an elicited
other- but instead a self-focus activated speakers’ awareness

1870

of their interlocutor’s informational need, reducing the
likelihood of egocentric perspective errors to occur.
Differences in speakers’ self-report and leakage between
the self-focused and baseline setting can be explained by the
presence or absence of the perspective manipulation. In the
self-focused setting, speakers answered a question that
enhanced their own mental representation of the scene,
whereas in the baseline setting, perspective enhancements
were absent. A more intriguing finding, however, is the
occurrence of a stronger perspective-taking tendency by the
self-focused speakers than by the other-focused speakers.
This tendency can be explained using the objective selfawareness theory (Wicklund, 1975). According to this
theory, self-aware persons reflect on themselves as if they are
an object under scrutinization. Under this scrutinization, the
difference between their actual and required behavior,
derived from the standards that apply to the interaction,
becomes salient. Our self-focused speakers could have found
themselves in such a reflective state, especially since a cue of
their addressee’s different perspective was present (Gendolla
& Wicklund, 2009). Speakers were able to see which figures
were available for addressee’s selection process (and which
one was not). As a consequence, self-focused speakers could
have been more aware of addressees’ informational need than
other-focused speakers, reducing the extent to which they
were influenced by privileged information. This possible
explanation needs further examination by exploring how
much the self- versus other-focus perspective questions used
in this study elicited speakers’ self-awareness. For this, the
validated Situational Self-Awareness Scale can be employed
(Govern & Marsch, 2001).

References
Arnold, J. E., Kaiser, E., Kahn, J. M., & Kim, L. K. (2013).
Information structure: linguistic, cognitive, and
processing approaches. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews:
Cognitive Science, 4(4), 403-413.
Barr, D. J., Levy, R., Scheepers, C., & Tily, H. J. (2013).
Random effects structure for confirmatory hypothesis
testing: Keep it maximal. Journal of Memory and
Language, 68(3), 255-278.
Bates, D., Maechler, M., & Bolker, B. (2011). Ime4: Linear
mixed-effects models using S4 classes. R package version
0999375–38. Retrieved from htttp.CRAN.Rproject.org/packages= Ime4.
Brennan, S. E., & Clark, H. H. (1996). Conceptual pacts and
lexical choice in conversation. Journal of Experimental
Psychology-Learning Memory and Cognition, 22(6),
1482-1493.
Clark, H. H. (1992). Arenas of Language Use. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Clark, H. H., & Krych, M. A. (2004). Speaking while
monitoring addressees for understanding. Journal of
Memory and Language, 50(1), 62-81.
Clark, H. H., & Murphy, G. L. (1982). Audience design in
meaning and reference. Advances in Psychology, 9, 287299.

Epley, N., Keysar, B., Van Boven, L., & Gilovich, T.
(2004). Perspective taking as egocentric anchoring and
adjustment. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 87(3), 327-339.
Gendolla, G. H., & Wicklund, R. A. (2009). Self-focused
attention, perspective-taking, and false consensus. Social
Psychology, 40(2), 66-72.
Govern, J. M., & Marsch, L. A. (2001). Development and
validation of the situational self- awareness scale.
Consciousness and Cognition, 10(3), 366-378.
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole & J.
L. Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and semantics. Volume 3:
Speech acts. New York: Seminar Press.
Heller, D., Gorman, K. S., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (2012). To
name or to describe: shared knowledge affects referential
form. Topics in Cognitive Science, 4(2), 290-305.
Horton, W. S., & Gerrig, R. (2002). Speakers’ experiences
and audience design: Knowing when and knowing how to
adjust utterances to addressees. Journal of Memory and
Language, 47, 589-606.
Horton, W. S., & Keysar, B. (1996). When do speakers take
into account common ground? Cognition, 59(1), 91-117.
Kaland, C., Krahmer, E., & Swerts, M. (2014). White bear
effects in language production: Evidence from the
prosodic realization of adjectives. Language and Speech,
57(4), 470-486.
Keysar, B., Barr, D. J., Balin, J. A., & Brauner, J. S. (2000).
Taking perspective in conversation: The role of mutual
knowledge in comprehension. Psychological Science,
11(1), 32-38.
Keysar, B., Barr, D. J., & Horton, W. S. (1998). The
egocentric basis of language use: Insights from a
processing approach. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 7(2), 46-50.
Koolen, R., Goudbeek, M., & Krahmer, E. (2013). The
effect of scene variation on the redundant use of color in
definite reference. Cognitive Science, 37(2), 395-411.
Nadig, A. S., & Sedivy, J. C. (2002). Evidence of
perspective-taking constraints in children's on-line
reference resolution. Psychological Science, 13(4), 329336.
Wardlow Lane, L. W., & Ferreira, V. S. (2008). Speakerexternal versus speaker-internal forces on utterance form:
Do cognitive demands override threats to referential
success? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 34(6), 1466-1481.
Wardlow Lane, L. W., Groisman, M., & Ferreira, V. S.
(2006). Don't talk about pink elephants! Speakers' control
over leaking private information during language
production. Psychological Science, 17(4), 273-277.
Wardlow Lane, L. W., & Liersch, M. J. (2012). Can you
keep a secret? Increasing speakers’ motivation to keep
information confidential yields poorer outcomes.
Language and Cognitive Processes, 27(3), 462-473.
Wicklund, R. A. (1975). Objective self-awareness.
Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 8, 233-275.

1871

