Planning in Action: Interactivity Improves Planning Performance
Emma Henderson, Gaëlle Vallée-Tourangeau

Frédéric Vallée-Tourangeau

Department of Management, Kingston University,
Kingston-upon-Thames UNITED KINGDOM KT2 7LB
e.henderson/g.vallee-tourangeau@kingston.ac.uk

Department of Psychology, Kingston University,
Kingston-upon-Thames UNITED KINGDOM KT1 2EE
f.vallee-tourangeau@kingston.ac.uk

Abstract
Planning is an everyday activity that is extended in time
and space, yet is frequently studied in the absence of
interactivity. Successful planning relies on an array of
executive functions including self-control. We
investigated the effects of interactivity and self-control
on planning using a sequential-task paradigm. Half of
the participants first completed a video-viewing task
requiring self-control of visual attention, whereas the
other half completed the same task without the selfcontrol constraint. Next, and within each of these
groups, half of the participants manipulated cards to
complete their plan (high-interactivity condition); for the
other half, plans were made with their hands down (lowinteractivity condition). Planning performance was
significantly better in the high- than in the lowinteractivity conditions; however the self-control
manipulation had no impact on planning performance.
An exploration of individual differences revealed that
long-term planning
ability and
non-planning
impulsiveness moderated the impact of interactivity on
planning. These findings suggest that interactivity
augments working memory resources and planning
performance, underscoring the importance of an
interactive perspective on planning research.
Keywords: personal planning, time management,
distributed cognition, self-control, ego depletion

Introduction
Planning is an essential cognitive process that is key to
achieving productive time management. Successful
planning depends on the ability to anticipate a sequence
of operations intended to achieve one or more goals,
requiring the capacity to effectively delay and resume the
pursuit of goals, according to current resources and
constraints (Hayes-Roth & Hayes-Roth, 1979; Patalano &
Seifert, 1997). The planning process may involve initial
planning; a systematic, rational approach where solutions
are formulated ahead of plan execution (Morris & Ward,
2004). As such they are subject to constraints on
processing, including working memory resources. An
alternative to this top-down model is opportunistic
planning where the plan develops in situ driven by
incoming information, rather than being entirely goaldirected in advance of any moves (Davies, 2005).
Selection of initial or opportunistic planning is based on
the problem complexity and environment, and individual
differences (Davies, 2005).
Efficient planning depends on the coordination of a

2181

variety of executive functions, ranging from formulating a
sequence of sub-goals that together embody a plan,
storing and updating the plan, consciously monitoring, up
to controlling and coordinating the plan to effect the
desired outcome (Morris & Ward, 2004). This view
suggests that successful planning depends on two key
cognitive concepts: working memory and self-control.
Self-control is defined as “the exertion of control over the
self by the self” (Muraven & Baumeister, 2000, p. 247),
occurring when a person attempts to override or inhibit
the way they would otherwise think or behave. Working
memory is a memory system for temporal information,
and is a key theoretical concept for understanding how a
limited amount of information is kept temporarily highly
available, integrating external and previously-stored
information in order to facilitate cognition and complex
behaviour (Logie & Cowan, 2015). Working memory
capacity has been linked with the ability to control
attention (Engle & Kane, 2004) and avoid impulsive
interferences. These are important requisites of selfcontrol (Broadway, Redick, & Engle, 2010). With
multiple perspectives and potential actions held in
working memory during planning, self-control seems key
to planning appropriate actions and suppress
inappropriate ones.
This conception of planning,
however, assumes that people solely rely on their mental
resources when they engage in planning tasks. Yet reallife planning admittedly involves more than just mental
processing: people who plan do so by making notes,
writing and rearranging “to-dos” in lists, emails or index
cards. In other words, they not only access but also
interact with external information by manipulating to-dos
while they plan.

Distributed Cognition and Interactivity
Traditionally, thinking is considered to occur in the head,
sandwiched between perceptual inputs and behavioural
outputs (to adapt Hurley, 2001). More recently an
epistemological shift to a distributed cognition
perspective proposes a dynamic cognitive system whose
structure is distributed across the internal resources of the
individual (such as acquired knowledge) and the
resources external to the individual (such as material
representations and tools; e.g., Kirsh, 2010). Studies of
planning are conventionally conducted in the absence of a
distributed cognitive system and with a focus on the

“temporal ordering of action” (Kirsh, 1995, p. 31).
Interactivity, by contrast, configures a dynamic agentenvironment system scaffolded from resources internal
and external to the agent. In all likelihood, interacting
with the physical feature of a problem results in a simpler
problem configuration that engages perceptual and pattern
matching processes. In addition, by changing the spatial
rearrangement,
non-strategic
manipulations
may
serendipitously determine what to do next. In mental
arithmetic, for example, moving number tokens when
performing long sums enhances accuracy and improves
efficiency (Vallée-Tourangeau, 2013); congenial, easy-toremember interim totals can be identified and physically
segregated, action affordances shift as the problem
configuration is transformed, the allocation of attentional
resources is governed by dynamic changes in the
problem. Similarly, in a Bayesian reasoning task,
manipulating cards representing elements of a statistical
sample led to a sharp increase in performance (ValléeTourangeau, Abadie, & Vallée-Tourangeau 2015). One
possible explanation for the positive impact of
interactivity on performance is that increasing
interactivity reduces the processing burden on an agent’s
working memory. If this is the case, we should expect that
higher levels of interactivity and resulting opportunities to
manipulate and rearrange information in a planning task
should promote better planning performance.

Self-control
Self-control is required to maintain goal intentions and
plans over time, and resist the conflicts of immediate
impulses such as attending to tempting stimuli.
(Hofmann, Friese, & Strack, 2009). Research into
failures of self-control (acting on impulses) proposes that
it is a finite mental resource that limits self-regulatory
capability. Motivated by this approach Baumeister and
colleagues (e.g., Baumeister, Bratslavsky, Muraven, &
Tice, 1998) developed the strength model of self-control
with the central tenet that willpower is a limited resource
akin to energy, which becomes fatigued or depleted with
use, temporarily reducing the capacity for subsequent
self-control. Baumeister et al. (1998) termed this state of
reduced self-control ego depletion. Support for the model
comes from research using a sequential-task paradigm;
participants are required to engage in an initial task of
self-control, and decrements in their performance are then
measured on a second, unrelated task of self-control. A
meta-analysis of 83 sequential-task studies reported a
medium effect size (Cohen’s d = .62) of ego-depletion
(Hagger, Wood, Stiff, & Chatzisarantis, 2010).
More recently, the ego-depletion effect has been called
into question with studies failing to detect the
phenomenon (e.g., Lurquin et al., 2016). A reanalysis of
the Hagger et al. (2010) data and another meta-analysis
identified small-study bias and an inflated effect size
(Carter & McCullough, 2014). This was followed by a

2182

multi-lab Registered Replication Report (RRR) involving
23 labs worldwide which found an overall ego-depletion
effect of close to zero (Hagger et al., 2016). This RRR
used just one combination of tasks, and the present study
responds to the recent calls for further replications using
different combinations of tasks, increased sample sizes,
and to investigate potential moderating variables (e.g.,
Lurquin et al., 2016).
Since planning involves self-control activities such as
monitoring and coordinating actions, we should expect
ego depletion to impair planning performance. Yet, as
interactivity may offer a platform for offloading some of
the cognitive processing required to monitor and
coordinate action, we anticipate that the impact of ego
depletion on planning performance will be tempered
when cognitive agents are free to physically interact with
their plan.

The Present Experiment
Despite its ubiquity and importance in everyday life,
planning research to date has tended to focus on planning
dysfunctions and the order of actions, ignoring both the
environment in which planning takes place and the
cognitive state with which the participant comes to the
task. This research typically uses one of two general types
of tasks: puzzle-based tasks, which involve simple,
mechanistic, easily-controlled procedures (e.g., the Tower
of London), or real-world planning tasks, which invoke
familiar procedures and contexts of a complexity
analogous to everyday activities (Morris & Ward, 2004;
e.g., the Virtual Planning Task, Miotto & Morris, 1998).
The present experiment adopted a distributed-cognition
perspective to determine how the manipulation of task
interactivity and ego-depletion would affect performance
on a real-world planning problem. We designed a lowinteractivity condition using a static paper presentation
during which participants had to keep their hands down,
while in the high-interactivity conditions cards
corresponding with to-be-executed tasks could be
manipulated and re-arranged as participants saw fit. Both
conditions required working memory and self-control to
switch and control attention between remembering plans
and actioning them. We hypothesised that the inflexible,
unmodifiable environment offered in the low-interactivity
condition would lead to poorer performance relative to
the high-interactivity condition. Since planning is
reflected in physical changes in the environment, we
hypothesised that the high-interactivity condition would
lead to improved performance relative to the lowinteractivity condition.
A secondary aim of this experiment was to test whether
the offloading of cognitive processing afforded by highly
interactive environments could act as a buffer for the
negative impact of depleted self-control resources on
planning performance. We selected a widely-used egodepletion task (e.g., Schmeichel, 2007), along with a

planning task that is demanding of executive control in
order to maximise the chances of demonstrating the egodepletion effect. The experimental set-up replicated as
closely as possible that of the original author (Brendan
Schmeichel), including a verbatim script of the original
task that was obtained with the help of the authors of the
recent replication study (Lurquin et al., 2016). We nearly
doubled the sample size used in typical ego-depletion
studies. Participants were allocated to either a control or
an experimental ego-depletion group, the latter requiring
self-control in order to direct attention towards an
interviewee and away from distracting words presented
on the screen. In order to understand what participants in
both conditions were really doing during the videoviewing task, and to ensure the two conditions were
indeed distinct, supplementary measures such as a word
memory task to test adherence to instructions and
additional questions regarding the ego depletion task were
included. Based on the resource model of self-control
participants in the ego-depletion condition, who
performed the initial act of self-control, should perform
worse in the subsequent planning task than participants in
the control condition. Though, given the conflicting
findings in the extant literature, and our new combination
of tasks, we set out with an exploratory perspective on the
effect of this frequently-used video-viewing task
combined with our planning task.
In addition, we included self-report measures of flow,
planning, and impulsivity to explore whether they would
moderate the impact of interactivity on planning
performance.

Method
Participants
One hundred participants (73 women, 27 men, Mage =
31.90 years, SD = 11.77) were recruited; some received
course credits. All participants were naive to the purpose
of the research.

Procedure
The experiment employed a 2 (interactivity: high or low) x
2 (ego depletion: depletion or control) between-groups
design. Participants were randomly allocated to one of the
four experimental conditions (n = 25 per group). All tasks
were completed in a single testing session, lasting
approximately 45 min, which was divided into three
phases. Participants first watched the ego-depletion video.
This was followed immediately by the planning task.
Finally, participants completed a series of self-report
measures.
Ego-depletion task. Participants watched a 6 min, silent
video featuring a woman being interviewed by an offscreen interviewer, as the initial task in a sequential-task
paradigm (Schmeichel et al., 2003). During the video 36

2183

common, one-syllable words (e.g., “play”) appeared at the
bottom of screen for 10 s each. Words appeared in black
font on a white background and took up approximately one
quarter of the screen.
In the ego-depletion condition participants were
instructed to focus attention on the woman’s face and not
to look at the words that appeared on the screen. The
control condition was identical except, crucially, no
instructions were given regarding the words that appeared
on the screen and participants were asked to watch the
video as if they were “sitting at home watching TV”.
While participants viewed the video, the experimenter
moved outside the room. Two modifications were made to
the original task. First, distance between participant and
screen was standardised at 40cm. Second, to increase their
saliency, the position of the words was changed from
bottom right to bottom centre. The size, colour and font
remained unchanged.
Planning task. Next, participants completed an adapted
version of Miotto and Morris’s (1998) planning task in
either the low-interactivity list condition, or the highinteractivity board game condition. The object of the task
was to plan and execute a sequence of specified activities
on the four days of the week preceding a trip abroad.
Twenty-eight activities were offered for completion, 16 of
which were relevant to the trip. The remaining 12 activities
were not relevant and were termed “distractors”. To
simulate the constraints of real world planning, once the
participant had executed the activities for a given day they
could not change their plan and had to move on to the next
day. Participants were seated at a desk and instructed on
the main features and rules of the task. They were advised
that they could carry out four tasks per day; two in the
morning and two in the afternoon and that not all tasks
could be completed. There was no time limit but
participants were instructed to complete the task as quickly
and as accurately as possible. Two measures were used to
calculate planning performance: (1) accuracy – a choice of
task was considered correct if it was one of the 16 relevant
activities, and where applicable, completed on the
specified day and time; (2) latency per correct task –
calculated as overall latency divided by accuracy.

Figure 1: The experimental setting, high-interactivity
condition (left), and low-interactivity condition (right).
High-interactivity condition. The 28 activities were
printed on individual action cards (55 x 88mm). These
action cards could be selected by moving the card into a

Results
Depletion participants rated the video task as more
effortful (M = 7.38, SD = 1.99) than did the control
participants (M = 6.74, SD = 2.32), however the difference
was not significant, t(98) = -1.48, p = .142. Participants in
the depletion condition remembered significantly fewer
words (M= 4.66, SD = 4.31) than control participants (M =
12.78 = SD = 3.72), t(98) = 10.09, p < .001, which

2184

suggests that they complied, in part, with the task
instructions. Although, if the depletion participants had
fully complied with the instructions then they would not
have remembered any words.
The main dependent measure in the planning task was
accuracy, the maximum possible score being 16; the data
are reported in Figure 2. Participants in the highinteractivity condition were more accurate than those in the
low-interactivity condition, but the ego-depletion paradigm
appeared to have no effect on planning performance. A 2 x
2 between subjects analysis of variance (ANOVA)
revealed a significant main effect of interactivity, F(1, 96)
= 78.03, p < .001, but neither the main effect of ego
depletion nor the interaction effect were significant (Fs <
1).
Accuracy
16

Depletion

Latency per Correct Task

No depletion

14

65

Mean Latency

Mean Accuracy

central day frame split into sections representing the
morning and afternoon. As in the low-interactivity
condition, a summary card which specified which activities
needed to be done during the week was always available.
Finally, an execution board was used to place cards that
had been selected and representing tasks that have been
completed (see Fig. 1, left panel). Participants were handed
the 28 activity cards in a randomly ordered pack and were
free to move the cards as desired in the working area.
Participants could monitor their goal progress at any stage
by checking the execution board.
Low-interactivity condition. The low-interactivity
condition used a list of 28 activities to be performed (see
Fig. 1, right panel). In this condition participants were
instructed not to touch any task materials and to keep their
hands on the desk for the duration of the task. To choose a
task for completion participants verbally instructed the
experimenter of their selection.
Additional Measures. Upon completion of the planning
task, participants answered a flow questionnaire developed
to gauge participant’s enjoyment and engagement during a
task (Vallée-Tourangeau et al., 2015). Next, all
participants were given a surprise memory test for the
words presented during the video in the first part of the
experiment. The test compromised 36 words: 18 that
appeared during the initial video-viewing task, and 18 that
did not (the same test designed by J. H. Lurquin, personal
communication, 2 March 2016). Participants then judged
whether they had seen the words previously by circling
either yes or no. The memory test was followed by a series
of manipulation checks for the ego depletion task.
Participants were asked to rate the difficulty of complying
with the video task instructions they were given prior to
watching the video (1 = not at all difficult to 10 = very
difficult). Following Lurquin et al. (2016) participants also
rated how much effort they had put in to the task, and how
hard they had tried to ignore or remember the words (1 =
none to 10 = a lot).
Finally, participants completed individual differences
measures of planning and impulsivity as an independent
measure of planning ability. Participants completed
Simons and Galotti’s (1992) planning survey, a 31-item
scale measuring everyday planning style, and Lynch,
Netemeyer, Spiller and Zammit’s (2009) propensity to plan
for time short run and long run 6-item scales. This is a 30item scale, scored using three sub-scales: attentional,
motor and non-planning.

12
10
8
6

60
55
50
45
40
35

4

30

Low Interactivity

High Interactivity

Low Interactivity

High Interactivity

Figure 2: Mean accuracy (left panel) and mean latency per
correct task (in seconds, right panel) as a function of level
interactivity and the experience of the ego depletion task
(error bars are standard error of the means).
Latency per correct task was calculated as total latency
divided by accuracy; lower scores reflect better
performance. Figure 2 shows that generally participants in
the high-interactivity condition were faster than those in
the low interactivity condition. A 2 x 2 independent
ANOVA revealed a significant main effect for interactivity
F(1,96) = 25.72, p < .001. Again, neither the main effect
of ego depletion nor the interaction effect were significant
(Fs < 1).
We explored whether individual differences in planning,
impulsiveness, and experience of flow moderated the
impact of interactivity on planning performance. Planning
performance was positively associated with flow,  = .22,
t(96) = 2.45, p = .016, although flow was not a moderator
of the interactivity effect on planning performance;  =
.03, t(96) = 0.36, p = .72. More interestingly, the impact of
interactivity on planning performance was moderated by
individuals’ propensity to plan in the long-run,  = -.15,
t(96) = -2.08, p = .04. Specifically, higher propensity to
plan in the long-run was associated with higher
performance under low interactivity but it did not predict
performance under high interactivity (see Figure 3, left
panel). The impact of interactivity on performance was
also moderated by non-planning impulsiveness,  = .16,
t(96) = 2.22, p = .03. In this case, higher scores of nonplanning impulsiveness were associated with higher

planning performance under high levels of interactivity
and lower planning performance under low levels of
interactivity (see Figure 3, right panel).

Figure 3: Relationship between planning accuracy
(Performance) and propensity to plan in the long run (left
panel) and non-planning impulsiveness (right panel) as a
function of interactivity levels (High vs. Low). Note. CF =
Centred Form or mean deviation form.

skills employed when planning in a distributed
environment. Long Run Planning ability only mattered for
those participants in the low interactivity condition; it had
no effect on performance in the high interactivity
condition. Conversely, high levels of non-planning
impulsivity put people at an advantage under high
interactivity, and at a clear disadvantage in the low
interactivity condition. The fact that planning performance
was superior in the high-interactivity, in the absence of a
difference in self-reports of planning ability, suggests that
the manipulation of cards augmented planning abilities
(via working memory) above those measured with
planning scales. This finding supports previous work (e.g.,
Vallée-Tourangeau, Sirota, & Vallée-Tourangeau, 2016)
and suggests that interactivity may functionally augment
cognitive resources.

Self-Control and the Elusive Ego Depletion Effect

Discussion
In this experiment participants completed a planning task
in two different interactivity conditions, one which
permitted spatial rearrangement of the task, and one which
did not. Generally, participants were more accurate and
achieved faster latency per correct answer in the highinteractivity condition. These results can be explained in
terms of the affordances provided by the different task
environments. In the low-interactivity condition
participants were forced to manipulate information
mentally, relying on executive function-directed initial
planning. As such, performance was limited by the
participants’ working memory capacity.
In contrast, the dynamic interface of the highinteractivity condition facilitated new affordances for task
completion and paved the way for opportunistic planning,
where task selection was guided, in part, by the physical
changes in the configuration of the problem. Planning was
interspersed with physical execution, alleviating the load
on the participants’ working memory compared to the
complex initial planning in the head required by the lowinteractivity constraints. The significant increase in task
performance in this condition could not be attributed to
individual differences since there were no condition
differences on measures of planning. Instead, the highinteractivity environment allowed participants to restructure and simplify the problem presentation in a way
that was conducive to solving the task. For example,
reorganising the activity cards made it possible to collate
related activities, discard distractor cards and constantly
track the state of the task. Furthermore, when participants
planned all time-specific tasks first, they then perceived
the gaps left in the plan, thus placements for single item
tasks were physically discovered (Kirsh, 2010).
We sought to explore cognitive individual differences
that would predict performance in both conditions of the
planning task. We hypothesised that the skills implicated
when planning in the head would be different from the

2185

The present experiment also examined the effect of ego
depletion on planning. As advocated by Lurquin et al.
(2016) we used a larger than average sample size (N =
100) and explored a new combination of tasks. Despite
making these and other modifications to this highlyreplicated depletion task, the main effect of ego depletion
was not significant. This result is inconsistent with the
strength model (Baumeister et al., 1998), and many
previous studies, including those from the laboratory
where the term ego depletion was first coined, and where
the video-viewing task was developed. However, it is
consistent with more recent research that has failed to
detect the ego-depletion effect, and most notably Lurquin
et al. (2016), which used the same initial video-viewing
task.
A critical pre-requisite of the sequential-task paradigm is
that both tasks require the use of self-control. The present
planning task has not been used as a second task in the
sequential task paradigm: one possible explanation for the
absence of ego depletion is that the outcome planning task
did not require self-control. Yet, there is little doubt that
planning requires the deliberate control of actions across
time, and Baumeister and Vohs (2016) argue that planning
draws on the same limited resource as self-control.
Additionally, in the present study, task constraints such as
adhering to activities stipulated on the summary card
required that impulses to follow habitual holiday-planning
responses be overridden using self-control. Further, it
could be argued that the low-interactivity instructions
demand self-control by requiring participants to keep their
hands down on the table. Despite apparently meeting the
conditions necessary to induce the ego-depletion, we found
no evidence of an effect. Since the video-viewing task
lacks an objective measure of task performance (Lurquin
& Miyake, 2017), we included the word memory task and
assume that performance here points to adherence to the
video task instructions. Participants in the ego-depletion
condition remembered some words, indicating that they

looked at them and so did not fully adhere to the task
instructions. If participants in this condition did not inhibit
their natural impulse to respond to the attention-capturing
words, they were not using self-control in the first task and
thus would not be, and indeed were not, depleted in the
second task. Without substantial modification to the task
procedure and an objective measure of performance, our
findings indicate that the video-viewing task does not
operationalise ego-depletion as intended.

References
Baumeister, R., & Vohs, K. (2016). Strength model of selfregulation
as
limited
resource:
Assessment,
controversies, update. Advances in Experimental Social
Psychology, 54, 67–127.
Baumeister, R. F., Bratslavsky, E., Muraven, M., & Tice,
D. M. (1998). Ego depletion: Is the active self a limited
resource? Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 74, 1252-1265.
Broadway, J. M., Redick, T. S., & Engle, R. W. (2010).
Working Memory Capacity: Self-control is (in) the
goal. Self control in society, mind, and brain, 1, 163174.
Carter, E. C., & McCullough, M. E. (2014). Publication
bias and the limited strength model of self-control: Has
the evidence for ego depletion been overestimated?
Frontiers in Psychology, 5, 823.
Davies, S. P. (2005). Planning and problem solving in
well-defined domains. In R. Morris & G. Ward (Eds.),
The cognitive psychology of planning (pp. 35–52). New
York: Psychology Press.
Engle, R. W., & Kane, M. J. (2004). Executive attention,
working memory capacity, and a two-factor theory of
cognitive control. Psychology of learning and
motivation, 44, 145-199.
Hagger, M. S., Chatzisarantis, N. L., Alberts, H., Anggono,
C. O., Batailler, C., Birt, A., & Zwienenberg, M.
(2016). A multi-lab pre-registered replication of the
ego-depletion effect. Perspectives on Psychological
Science, 11, 546-573.
Hagger, M. S., Wood, C., Stiff, C., & Chatzisarantis, N. L.
D. (2010). Ego depletion and the strength model of
self-control: A meta- analysis. Psychological Bulletin,
136, 495-525.
Hayes-Roth, B., & Hayes-Roth, F. (1979). A cognitive
model of planning. Cognitive Science, 3, 275-310.
Hofmann, W., Friese, M., & Strack, F. (2009). Impulse and
self-control from a dual-systems perspective.
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 4, 162-176.
Hurley, S. (2001). Perception and action: Alternative
views. Synthese, 129, 3-40.
Kirsh, D. (1995). The intelligent use of space. Artificial
Intelligence, 73, 31-68.
Kirsh, D. (2010). Thinking with external representations.
AI & Society, 25, 441-454.

2186

Logie, R. H., & Cowan, N. (2015). Perspectives on
working memory: Introduction to the special issue.
Memory & Cognition, 43, 315-324.
Lurquin JH, Michaelson LE, Barker JE, Gustavson DE,
von Bastian CC, et al. (2016) No Evidence of the EgoDepletion Effect across Task Characteristics and
Individual Differences: A Pre-Registered Study. PLoS
ONE, 11, e0147770.
Lurquin, J. H., & Miyake, A. (2017). Challenges to EgoDepletion Research Go Beyond the Replication Crisis:
A Need for Tackling the Conceptual Crisis. Frontiers
in Psychology, 8, 568.
LynchJr., J., Netemeyer, R., Spiller, S., & Zammit, A.
(2009). A generalizable scale of propensity to plan: The
long and the short of planning for time and for money.
Journal of Consumer Research, 37, 108-128.
Miotto, E. C., & Morris, R. G. (1998). Virtual planning in
patients with frontal lobe lesions. Cortex, 34, 639-657.
Morris, R., & Ward, G. (2004). The cognitive psychology
of planning New York: Psychology Press.
Muraven, M., & Baumeister, R. F. (2000). Self-regulation
and depletion of limited resources: Does self-control
resemble a muscle? Psychological Bulletin, 126, 247259.
Patalano, A. L., & Seifert, C. M. (1997). Opportunistic
planning: Being reminded of pending goals. Cognitive
Psychology, 34, 1-36.
Patton, J. H., & Stanford, M. S. (1995). Factor structure of
the barratt impulsiveness scale. Journal of Clinical
Psychology, 51, 768-774.
Schmeichel, B. J. (2007). Attention control, memory
updating, and emotion regulation temporarily reduce
the capacity for executive control. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 136, 241-255.
Schmeichel, B. J., Vohs, K. D., & Baumeister, R. F.
(2003). Intellectual performance and ego depletion:
Role of the self in logical reasoning and other
information processing. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 85, 33-46.
Simons, D., & Galotti, K. (1992). Everyday planning: An
analysis of daily time management. Bulletin of the
Psychonomic Society, 30, 61-64.
Vallée-Tourangeau, F. (2013). Interactivity, efficiency, and
individual
differences
in
mental
arithmetic.
Experimental Psychology, 60, 302-311.
Vallée-Tourangeau, G., Abadie, M., & Vallée-Tourangeau,
F. (2015). Interactivity fosters Bayesian reasoning
without instruction. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 144, 581–603.
Vallée-Tourangeau, F., Sirota, M., & Vallée-Tourangeau,
G. (2016). Interactivity mitigates the impact of working
memory depletion on mental arithmetic performance.
Cognitive Research: Principles and Implications, 1:26.

