Pragmatic aspects of spatial language acquisition and use across languages
Myrto Grigoroglou (Mgrigor@Udel.Edu)

Megan Johanson (Megan.johanson@Gmail.Com)

Department of Linguistics and Cognitive Science,
University of Delaware
125 East Main Street, Newark, DE 19716 USA

Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences,
University of Delaware
105 The Green, Newark, DE 19716

Anna Papafragou (APapafragou@Psych.Udel.Edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of Delaware
105 The Green, Newark, DE 19716

informational contribution is low (they do not specify where
something is) unless they can be interpreted as indicating a
change of location (The bird is out of the cage is more
felicitous than The egg is out of the cage; ibid.). Even though
it is often acknowledged that both conceptual and pragmatic
factors shape the way spatial language is used and acquired
(e.g., E. Clark, 1973; Levinson & Wilkins, 2006), the exact
contribution of each factor remains open. The objective of the
current study is to contribute to this debate.

Abstract
Across languages, back is produced earlier and more
frequently than front. This asymmetry has been attributed
either to a conceptual/semantic asymmetry in the early
meanings of these locatives (with back being more basic than
front; conceptual immaturity account) or to the fact that Back
configurations are inherently more ‘noteworthy’ than Front
configurations (pragmatic account). Here, we tested the two
accounts. In Study 1, children and adult speakers of English
and Greek described Front/Back motion events. In Study 2,
adult speakers of 10 additional languages described the same
events. Despite cross-linguistic differences, speakers of all age
and language groups typically used more Back than Front
adpositions; furthermore, they often encoded Back information
in occlusion verbs (e.g. hide) but no such verbs were available
for Front. Thus, the front/back asymmetry is not due to
children’s conceptual immaturity but should be linked to
pragmatic factors that also shape adult spatial language
production cross-linguistically.

Case study: the acquisition of front and back

Keywords: front; back; motion events; spatial cognition;
language production; pragmatics; theories of acquisition

Introduction
It is widely recognized that children acquire spatial locatives
in a consistent order cross-linguistically (e.g., E. Clark, 1980;
E. Clark, 1977; Johnston & Slobin, 1979; Parisi & Antinucci,
1970). In many cases, patterns of language use in children,
especially when these emerge cross-linguistically, have been
argued to point to shared (possibly universal) conceptual
asymmetries in underlying representations (Bowerman,
1996). For instance, the early emergence of prepositions such
as in and on has been considered to reflect the early
development of the notions of containment and support
(Johnston & Slobin, 1979; Piaget & Inhelder, 1967).
However, it remains unclear whether patterns of spatial
language use in children can be attributed merely to
conceptual factors. For instance, unlike their positive
counterparts in and on, ‘negative’ containment and support
prepositions such as out and off are used extremely
infrequently by children to mark locations, although, in
principle, both ‘positive’ and ‘negative’ prepositions should
present the same level of conceptual difficulty for the learner
(compare The egg is in the cage vs. The egg is out of the cage;
Papafragou, Viau, & Landau, 2013). By contrast, a pragmatic
explanation seems more adequate to account for these facts:
‘negative’ prepositions are used less frequently because their

The acquisition of the locatives front and back presents a
particularly good domain to explore the division of labor
between pragmatic and conceptual explanations of spatial
language acquisition and use. A number of studies have
shown that, across different languages, the locative back is
produced earlier and appears more frequently in children’s
speech than the locative front (Johnston, 1984; Johnston &
Slobin, 1979; Kubena, 1968). Some researchers have
suggested that this asymmetry should be attributed to the
conceptual immaturity underlying children’s early
representations of the relations front and back. According to
this view, although the adult meanings of front/back are
geometric and semantically symmetrical (“first/second inline-of-sight”), children’s early meanings are immature,
function-based and asymmetrical: front means “visible” and
back means “occluded”. This conceptual/semantic
asymmetry in the early meanings of Front and Back results in
the asymmetric acquisition of the locatives (Johnston, 1984;
Johnston & Slobin, 1979).
Other researchers have argued that the asymmetry in the
acquisition of front and back should be attributed to the
pragmatics of these spatial expressions (Hill & Vandeloise,
1991; Tanz, 1980). On this view, occlusion and visibility
characterize typical Back and Front configurations, with
occlusion (the functional corollary of Back) being, typically,
more informative than visibility (the functional corollary of
Front). Thus, children use back more frequently than front
because the communicative need to mark that an object is
occluded is (in most cases) more pressing than the need to
mark that an object is visible.
The two explanations converge on the view that children
should encode Back more frequently than Front but,
crucially, they differ on whether adults should also exhibit a

2132

similar asymmetry. If the asymmetry is due to early,
immature meanings for the prepositions front and back (i.e.,
visibility and occlusion), as posited by the conceptual
immaturity account, adults, having mature spatial semantics,
should use the two terms equally frequently. By contrast, if
the front/back asymmetry is driven by the inherent
‘noteworthiness’ of occlusion, as proposed by the pragmatic
account, adults–just like children–might also exhibit the
asymmetry.
Furthermore, the two accounts share the assumption that
the meanings of the prepositions front and back involve the
notions of visibility and occlusion, but they disagree on
whether adults should entertain such meanings. On the
conceptual immaturity account, adults (unlike children)
should not have a bias to mark occlusion (as opposed to
visibility) with expressions beyond front and back (e.g., with
verbs such as hide, etc.) because such function-based
representations should characterize only the early immature
child semantics. By contrast, on the pragmatic account,
adults–just like children–might also show a bias to mark
occlusion.

Current study
In the current study we test the predictions of the conceptual
immaturity and pragmatic explanations. In Study 1, we elicit
descriptions of Front/Back motion events from children and
adult speakers of two typologically distinct languages
(English and Greek). In Study 2, adult speakers of 10
additional languages describe the same events.
To evaluate the predictions of the conceptual immaturity
and pragmatic explanations we compare Front/Back motion
descriptions in both children and adults. Although previous
research, surprisingly, did not include adults, adult data,
especially if they represent a wide cross-linguistic sample, are
crucial for validating theories of spatial language acquisition
and use.
Furthermore, we look at elicited descriptions of motion
paths. Unlike prior work on locative front/back, the choice of
motion paths allows us to compare not only the use of ‘front’
and ‘back’ adpositions (prepositions and postpositions)
across the languages in our sample but also the use of
functional information (occlusion/visibility) encoded in
verbs (see Landau & Jackendoff, 1993; Miller & JohnsonLaird, 1976; Talmy, 1983, on the role of spatial verbs). To
ensure cross-linguistic validity, we include both satelliteframed languages that tend to encode motion paths in
particles/non-verb elements, and verb-framed languages that
tend to encode motion path information in the verb (Talmy,
1985). In study 1, we compare English (a satellite-framed
language) to Greek (a verb-framed language). In study 2, our
language sample contains an equal number of verb-framed
and satellite-framed languages. For completeness in path
descriptions, each Front or Back path has a goal variant (e.g.,
figure moving in front of/ behind the reference object) and a
source variant (e.g., figure moving from front of/ from behind
the reference object). In the case of Back paths, figures
undergo a dynamic change of state from visibility to

occlusion (for goals) or vice versa (for sources). In the case
of Front paths, figures undergo a change of location without
a change of visibility (e.g., when figure X moves to/from
front of Y, X moves along a trajectory while being
continuously visible).

Study 1
Methods
Participants Participants were 40 native English speakers
and 40 native Greek speakers. They fell into two age groups
(Children, Adults) with 20 participants in each age group for
each language. The English-speaking children were recruited
at daycares in Newark, DE and ranged between the ages of
3;8 and 5;5 (M=4;6). The English-speaking adults were
undergraduate students at the University of Delaware and
received course credit for their participation. The Greekspeaking children were recruited at daycares in Evia, Greece
and ranged between the ages of 3;9 and 5;3 (M=4;6). The
Greek-speaking adults were University students or young
professionals and were recruited in Evia and Athens, Greece.
Materials The stimuli consisted of a total of 48 dynamic
motion events presented in Microsoft PowerPoint. Each
event consisted of a Figure, which was always the same
soccer ball, and a Reference object, which was selected from
a set of simple, abstract 3D objects. We chose to use very
simple schematic stimuli to elicit only or mainly path
information (even from speakers of a language such as
English which regularly encodes manner of motion).
The motion events depicted a total of eight different spatial
relations, each with a source and a goal version. This battery
was part of a larger project investigating cross-linguistic
descriptions of motion paths. In the present study, we focus
on Front (IN FRONT OF/FROM IN FRONT OF) and Back
(BACK/FROM BACK). Stimuli depicting the Back relation
always involved occlusion but stimuli depicting the Front
relation never did (see Fig.1).

2133

Figure 1: Schematic examples of test events. In
FRONT/FROM FRONT scenes, the ball is always visible
but in BACK/FROM BACK scenes it is occluded at the
endpoint (goal scenes) or the beginning (source scenes) of
the event.

The remaining relations were Containment (IN/OUT OF),
Cover (UNDER/FROM UNDER), Support (ONTO/OFF
OF), Contact (TO/FROM), Vertical Proximity (TOWARDS
THE SIDE OF/AWAY FROM THE SIDE OF), and
Horizontal Proximity (TOWARDS THE TOP OF/AWAY
FROM THE TOP OF).
Six events were shown for each relation (3 exemplars, each
with a goal and a source version). The source and goal
versions of the same exemplar were identical except for the
color of the Reference object and the direction of the motion
path. The motion events lasted for three seconds and then the
end state of the event remained on the screen until a key was
pressed.
Procedure The adult participants were told that they would
see a series of motion events involving a ball and another
“toy.” After viewing each event, the participants had to
describe, in their native language, what the ball did in each
event. Events remained on the screen until a key was pressed.
The adult participants performed one practice trial.
Children were told that they were going to play a game where
animals play with balls and “toys.” They were then shown a
screen with all Reference objects, and were told to call them
all “toys.” In order to help children maintain attention, a slide
with a small cartoon animal in one of the bottom corners was
presented before each motion event. The children’s attention
was drawn to the animal by the experimenter saying “Look
at the (animal)! Let’s see what the (animal)’s ball will do!”.
The motion clip was then played and remained on the screen;
then the experimenter asked the child to describe what the
animal’s ball did. The children completed at least three
practice trials before beginning the experiment.
Coding Each linguistic description for the Front and Back
relations was first coded for the presence of a target
preposition that had to correspond to the type of scene
(goal/source). For Front (goal scenes), the target prepositions
were in front of/to front of in English and brosta apo/brosta
sto ‘in front of’ in Greek. For Front (source scenes), target
prepositions included from (in) front (of) in English and (apo)
brosta (apo) ‘(from) front (of)’ in Greek. For Back (goal
scenes), the target prepositions included behind, to back/in
back in English and piso (apo)/apo piso ‘behind’ in Greek.
For Back (source scenes), the target prepositions included
from behind in English and apo piso (apo) ‘from behind (of)’
in Greek.
The linguistic descriptions were also coded for the
presence of spatial expressions of visibility or occlusion. For
the Front relation, there were no expressions encoding
visibility. This fact is highly significant, and we return to it
in the Results section. For the Back relation, we coded
predominantly appearance/disappearance verbs that encoded
occlusion (or, more accurately, a change of state from or to
occlusion): disappear and hide (goal scenes), appear,
emerge (source scenes) in English, and hanome ‘disappear’,
krivome ‘hide’ (goal scenes) and emfanizome ‘appear’,
apokaliptome ‘reveal oneself’ (source scenes) in Greek.

Finally, all linguistic descriptions of Front and Back
relations were coded in terms of the total target spatial
information they contained (i.e., target preposition or
occlusion expression). This was done because there was
often overlap in the use of target prepositions and other
expressions to describe an event (e.g., in Greek I bala krivete
piso apo to pehnidi ‘the ball is hiding behind the toy’), so
analyzing each separately might not accurately represent the
way Front and Back relations are linguistically represented.

Results and discussion
In three separate analyses, we test the competing predictions
of the conceptual immaturity and the pragmatic account in
terms of (a) the use of front/back prepositions, (b) the use of
a broader set of visibility/occlusion expressions, (c) the use
of the devices in (a) and (b) combined.

Use of front vs. back prepositions
Beginning with prepositions, we performed a mixed 2 ×2 ×2
ANOVA with Relation (Front, Back) as a within subjects
factor, Age (children, adults) and Language (English, Greek)
as between subjects factors, and the proportion of target
prepositions as the dependent variable. The analysis yielded
a significant main effect of Relation (F(1, 76) = 11.29, p =
.001, η2 = .13): participants, overall, mentioned Back
prepositions more frequently than Front prepositions (MF =
.35, MB = .45). The analysis also yielded a main effect of Age
(F(1, 76) = 70.65 , p < .001, η2 = .48): unsurprisingly, adults
used more prepositions than children (MCH = .17, MAD = .65).
Finally, the analysis returned a marginally significant effect
of Language (F(2, 76) = 3.55, p = .063, η2 = .05) in the
expected direction: English speakers exhibited a small
tendency to use more target prepositions than Greek speakers
(MENG = .50, MGR = .29). The ANOVA did not show any
other effects or interactions.

Use of visibility vs. occlusion terms
We moved beyond front/back prepositions in the two
languages under study to consider a broader set of
expressions encoding visibility for Front and occlusion for
Back relations. As already mentioned, across ages and
languages, there was a great variety of expressions encoding
occlusion in Back scenes in the present dataset, but no
expressions encoding visibility in Front scenes. We, thus,
analyzed only expressions marking occlusion (since visibility
was not encoded). A two-way factorial ANOVA, with the
proportion of occlusion expressions as the dependent variable
and Age and Language as factors, returned a main effect of
Language (F(1, 76) = 10.51, p = .002, η2 = .12): because the
occlusion expressions were mainly verbs, Greek speakers
used occlusion expressions more frequently than English
speakers (MENG = .38, MGR = .60). Crucially, the ANOVA did
not yield an effect of Age (F(2, 76) = 0.87, p = .769, n.s.):
adults used occlusion expressions as frequently as children.

2134

Use of total Front vs. Back information
Finally, to explore the predictions of the conceptual
immaturity and pragmatic accounts at a more comprehensive
level of spatial encoding, we analyzed the proportion use of
total spatial information (target prepositions and occlusion
expressions) to mark Front and Back relations. We conducted
a mixed 2 ×2 ×2 ANOVA with Relation (Front, Back) as a
within subjects factor, Language (English, Greek) and Age
(children, adults) as between subjects factors, and the
proportion of total spatial information as the dependent
variable (see Fig.2). Results yielded a significant main effect
of Relation (F(1, 76) = 137.42, p < .001, η2 = .64) and a main
effect of Age (F(1, 76) = 52.19, p < .001, η2 = .41), qualified
by an Age by Relation interaction (F(1, 76) = 11.53, p = .001,
η2 = .13). T-tests within each relation revealed that the
interaction was due to the fact that although adults used a
higher amount of spatial information for both the Front and
Back relations than children (ps < .001), this difference was
smaller for the Back relation (MFRONT_DIFF = .47 vs.
ΜBACK_DIFF = .22). Importantly for present purposes, spatial
information was used more frequently to encode Back
compared to Front relations by both age groups (children:
t(39) = -10.33, p < .001; adults: t(39) = -6.22, p < .001).

asymmetries in encoding the two types of path are largely
informational: both children and adult speakers of English
and Greek marked Back paths more frequently than Front
paths. These findings are in accordance with the pragmatic
hypothesis, which allows for the asymmetry to be present in
various age groups and at any level of spatial encoding.

Study 2
In Study 2, we tested 14 native speakers of 10 languages
(Cantonese, Dhivehi, German, Javanese, Korean, Pashto,
Malay, Spanish, Swahili, Turkish) on a paradigm almost
identical to that in Study 1. We included both satellite-framed
languages that, like English, tend to encode motion paths in
particles/non-verb elements, and verb-framed languages that,
like Greek, tend to encode motion path information in the
verb (Talmy, 1985). Our new sample was split almost evenly
between these two language types (Spanish, Turkish, Korean,
and Swahili are verb-framed, German, Cantonese, and
Javanese are satellite-framed, and Dhivehi, Malay, and
Pashto are of unknown type).

Methods
Participants Native speakers of 9 languages (Cantonese,
Dhivehi, German, Korean, Malay, Pashto, Spanish, Swahili,
Turkish) were recruited from the graduate student population
of the University of Delaware. All students were proficient in
English as well as their native language and had spent on
average 5 years in the US. Data from one additional language
(Javanese) were collected at a site abroad (Jakarta,
Indonesia); see Table 1 for all 10 languages and language
families. One to two informants from each language were
tested. The average age of the informants was 26 years.
Participants received a $10 gift certificate as compensation
for their participation.
Table 1: Languages sampled in the cross-linguistic survey
(with number of participating speakers), language families,
countries of origin and typological classification in the
motion domain

Figure 5: Proportion of total spatial information given by
English and Greek speakers for the Front and Back
relations. Error bars represent standard error.
Overall, these results show that both children and adults
encode Back information more frequently than Front
information at the three levels of spatial encoding. The
analysis of Front and Back prepositions showed an
asymmetry in the use of ‘front’- and ‘back’-denoting
prepositions in both age and language groups. Furthermore,
the asymmetry generalized to a broader range of
occlusion/visibility expressions: Back scenes often elicited
expressions encoding the change to or from occlusion (e.g.,
verbs denoting appearance/disappearance), and these
expressions were used equally frequently by adults and
children. By contrast, Front scenes did not elicit any
expressions encoding visibility in any age or language group.
Finally, an examination of the total spatial information
offered in Front and Back paths confirmed the conclusion that

2135

Language
Cantonese
(n=1)
Dhivehi
(n=1)
German
(n=2)
Indonesian/
Malay (n=2)
Javanese
(n=1)
Korean
(n=1)
Pashto
(n=1)
Spanish
(n=2)
Swahili
(n=1)
Turkish
(n=2)

Language Family
Sino-Tibetan

Country
China

Motion Typology
S-Framed

Indo-Aryan/IndoEuropean
Indo-European

Maldives

Unclassified

Germany

S-Framed

Austronesian

Malaysia

Unclassified

Austronesian

Central Java

S-Framed

Altaic

Korea

V-Framed

Indo-Iranian/IndoEuropean
Indo-European

Pakistan

Unclassified
V-Framed

Niger-Congo

Mexico,
Columbia
Tanzania

Altaic

Turkey

V-Framed

V-Framed

Materials The same motion events as in Study 1 were used
but with one additional event for each relation (shown in both
a source and goal version) for a total of 64 stimuli.
Procedure The procedure was the same as in Study 1 except
that participants entered the descriptions of the events in a
spreadsheet using their native language. These descriptions
were glossed at a later stage by the participants and coded by
the experimenters. Further interviews with participants were
held to resolve any coding questions.

Results
To compare the two contrasting predictions of the conceptual
immaturity and pragmatic accounts, we recorded how
frequently ‘front’ and ‘back’ adpositions (prepositions and
postpositions) and visibility and occlusion expressions were
used in Front and Back scenes cross-linguistically, averaging
across informants of the same language (see Table 2).
Beginning with adpositions, numerical data showed that in 6
out of 10 languages (German, Javanese, Korean, Malay,
Spanish, and Turkish) ‘back’-denoting adpositions were
mentioned more frequently than ‘front’-denoting adpositions,
while in 3 languages (Dhivehi, Pashto, and Swahili) both
types of adpositions were mentioned equally frequently. The
opposite pattern was exhibited in the remaining language
(Cantonese).
We also inspected the proportion of expressions indicating
visibility (in the context of Front scenes) and occlusion (in
the context of Back scenes). This inspection revealed that
there were no visibility expressions for Front in any of the
languages surveyed but occlusion expressions for Back
occurred in 8 of the 10 languages in the sample (e.g., verbs
with meanings such as ‘hide’, ‘appear’/‘disappear’ etc.).
Table 2: Percentage of adpositions and expressions of
visibility and occlusion used for the FRONT and BACK
relations across languages
Language
Cantonese
(n=1)
Dhivehi
(n=1)
German
(n=2)
Javanese
(n=1)
Korean
(n=1)
Malay
(n=2)
Pashto
(n=1)
Spanish
(n=2)
Swahili
(n=1)
Turkish
(n=2)

FRONT
Adpositions
62.5

BACK
Adpositions
50

Visibility
Expressions
0

Occlusion
Expressions
0

100

100

0

50

75

100

0

0

0

50

0

37.5

12.5

100

0

100

25

100

0

12.5

100

100

0

100

87.5

100

0

100

100

100

0

12.5

87.5

100

0

62.5

Overall, the present cross-linguistic data largely replicated
the key findings from Study 1. Adult speakers of 9 different
languages (with the exception of the Cantonese speaker) used
‘back’-denoting adpositions and/or occlusion expressions
more frequently than ‘front’-denoting adpositions. Similarly
to the English and Greek data, there were no expressions
denoting visibility for Front scenes in any of the languages in
this wider cross-linguistic dataset. Despite the limitations of
working with such low numbers of informants, this set of data
presents suggestive evidence that our developmental
conclusions from Study 1 generalize across languages.

General discussion
Previous research shows that the acquisition of spatial
language follows a stable, potentially universal, crosslinguistic timetable. However, the precise factors involved
are not always clear. The acquisition of the locatives front
and back is a case in point. Across languages, the locative
back is produced earlier and is more frequent than the
locative front. This asymmetry has been attributed either to a
conceptual/semantic asymmetry in the early meanings of
these locatives (with back being more basic than front;
conceptual immaturity account) or to the fact that Back
configurations are inherently more ‘noteworthy’ than Front
configurations (pragmatic account). The present study put
these two accounts to test.
Results showed that, in Study 1, both children and adult
speakers of English and Greek typically used more Back than
Front prepositions. Furthermore, speakers of all age and
language groups often encoded Back information in
occlusion verbs (e.g. hide) but no such verbs were available
for Front. Study 2 provides suggestive evidence that the
English and Greek developmental findings extend to a wider
cross-linguistic sample of adult speakers of 10 additional
languages. Taken together, these data support the predictions
of the pragmatic hypothesis over those of the conceptual
immaturity hypothesis.
Why do speakers prefer to encode Back over Front? On a
pragmatic account that treats spatial language production as
a form of communication governed by broadly Gricean
(1975) or post-Gricean (Herskovits, 1985; Levinson, 2000;
Sperber & Wilson, 1985/1995) pragmatics, speakers need to
mark occlusion (or the change to/from occlusion in our
dynamic stimuli) so that the location (or path) of the Figure
can be identified correctly by a hearer, even if the hearer has
no visual access to the scene. By contrast, visibility for Front
(or no change of visibility in our stimuli) is a default situation
that speakers are less likely to mark. In our stimuli, speakers
used many other alternatives instead of ‘front’ (e.g., ‘beside’,
‘near’, ‘to/from the middle of’). It is possible that the bias
favoring Back might be supported by non-linguistic factors
relating to how occlusion is represented (e.g., see Hespos,
Gredebäck, von Hofsten, & Spelke, 2009; Spelke & von
Hofsten, 2001).
The present results have intriguing implications about the
nature of spatial language acquisition and use. According to
traditional theories of linguistic and cognitive development,

2136

the order in which children acquire spatial locatives (and
other non-spatial vocabulary) is considered as an index of
conceptual growth (e.g., see E. Clark, 1973; Bowerman,
1996; Huttenlocher, Smiley, & Charney, 1983; Johnston &
Slobin, 1979). Our results raise the possibility that pragmatic
pressures, which are active in adult communicators as well,
can also shape the way spatial language is acquired and used.
Furthermore, our findings suggest that pragmatic factors may
also yield cross-linguistically stable, and potentially
universal, patterns of spatial language use. Interestingly, the
pragmatic preference to encode Back over Front may also
affect the shape of cross-linguistic spatial semantic systems.
In an extensive cross-linguistic report, Levinson and Wilkins
(2006) state that, if a language has a ‘front’-denoting locative
it will necessarily have a ‘back’-denoting locative but the
reverse pattern does not occur. The way pragmatic
considerations interact with conceptual and other factors to
shape spatial language acquisition and use crosslinguistically is a rich avenue for future research.

Acknowledgement
We wish to thank Gaby Hermon and Tom Conners for help
with the Javanese data. This material is based upon work
supported by the National Science Foundation under grant
no. 1632849. M.J. is now with Community Research Partners
in Columbus, Ohio.

References
Bowerman, M. (1996). Learning how to structure space for
language: A crosslinguistic perspective. In P. Bloom,
M. A. Peterson, L. Nadel, & M. F. Garrett (Eds.),
Language and space (pp. 385-436). Cambridge, MA:
MIT press.
Clark, E. V. (1973). What's in a word? On the child's
acquisition of semantics in his first language. In T. E.
Moore (Ed.), Cognitive development and the
acquisition of language (pp. 65-110). New York:
Academic Press.
Clark, E. V. (1980) Here's the top: Nonlinguistic strategies in
the acquisition of orientational terms. Child
Development, 51, 329-338. doi:10.2307/1129265
Grice, H., P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole and
J. L. Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and semantics: Speech
acts, (Vol. 3, pp. 41–58). New York: Academic Press.
Herskovits, A. (1985). Semantics and pragmatics of locative
expressions. Cognitive Science, 9(3), 341–378.
Hespos, S., Gredebäck, G., von Hofsten, C., & Spelke, E. S.
(2009). Occlusion is Hard: Comparing predictive
reaching for visible and hidden objects in infants and
adults. Cognitive Science, 33(8), 1483–1502. doi:
10.1111/j.1551-6709.2009.01051.x
Hill, C., & Vandeloise C. (1991). Recherches
interlinguistiques en orientation spatiale [Crosslinguistic
studies
on
spatial
orientation].
Communications,
53,
171-207.
doi:
10.3406/comm.1991.1806

Huttenlocher, J., Smiley, P., & Charney, R. (1983).
Emergence of action categories in the child: evidence
from verb meanings. Psychological Review, 90, 72–93.
doi: 10.1037/0033-295X.90.1.72
Johnston, J. R. (1984). Acquisition of locative meanings:
Behind and in front of. Journal of Child Language, 11,
407-422. doi:10.1017/S0305000900005845
Johnston, J. R., & Slobin, D. I. (1979). The development of
locative expressions in English, Italian, Serbo-Croation
and Turkish. Child Language, 6(3), 529-545. doi:
10.1017/S030500090000252X
Kubena, M. D. (1968). An experimental study of the
comprehension and expression of prepositions of
location and direction of movement in the speech of
children (Unpublished master’s thesis). University of
Texas at Austin, Austin, TX.
Landau, B., & Jackendoff, R. (1993). "What" and "where" in
spatial language and spatial cognition. Behavioral and
Brain
Sciences,
16,
217-265.
doi:10.1017/S0140525X00029733
Levinson, S. C. (2000). H. P. Grice on location on Rossel
Island. Proceedings of the 25th Annual Meeting of the
Berkeley Linguistic Society (pp. 210–224). Berkeley,
CA: Berkeley Linguistics Society.
Levinson, S. C., & Wilkins, D. P. (Eds.). (2006). Grammars
of Space: Explorations in Cognitive Diversity.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Miller, G. A., & Johnson-Laird P. N. (1976). Language and
perception. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Papafragou, A., Viau, J., & Landau, B. (2013, November).
The ins and outs of spatial language: Paths, places,
and negative spatial prepositions. Paper presented at
the 38th Annual Meeting of the Boston University
Conference on Language Development, Boston, MA.
Parisi, D., & Antinucci, F. (1970). Lexical competence. In G.
B. Flores d’Arcais & W. J. M. Levelt (Eds.), Advances
in psycholinguistics. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Piaget, J., & Inhelder, B. (1967). The child’s conception of
space. New York: Norton.
Spelke, E. S., & von Hofsten, C. (2001). Predictive Reaching
for Occluded Objects by 6-Month-Old Infants. Journal
of Cognition and Development, 2(3), 261–281.
doi:10.1207/S15327647JCD0203_2
Sperber, D., & Wilson, D., (1986/1995). Relevance:
Communication and Cognition (2nd ed. 1995).
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Talmy, L. (1983). How language structures space. In H.L.
Pick & L.P. Acredolo (Eds.), Spatial orientation:
Theory, research and application (pp. 225-282). New
York: Plenum Press.
Talmy, L. (1985). Lexicalization patterns: Semantic structure
in lexical forms. In T. Shopen (Ed.), Language
typology and syntactic description (pp. 57-149). New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Tanz, C. (1980). Studies in the acquisition of deictic terms.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

2137

