Preschoolers appropriately allocate roles based on relative ability in a
cooperative interaction
Rachel W. Magid (rwmagid@mit.edu), Mary DePascale (mdepascale@wesleyan.edu) &
Laura E. Schulz (lschulz@mit.edu)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA
Abstract

resources: when the participant has both the tools
needed to achieve a joint goal while their partner has
only one, five-year-olds (though not 3-year-olds)
appropriately delegate to their partner the task
corresponding to their partner’s tool (Warneken,
Steinwender, Hamann, & Tomasello, 2014).
Preschoolers also collaborate to achieve goals by
considering what action the other partner has already
selected (Warneken et al., 2014).
Critically, previous research has focused on cases in
which both partners are, in principle, equally capable of
performing both roles. However, people differ not just
with respect to the availability of external resources, but
also with respect to their physical, cognitive, and
emotional resources. This is advantageous for living in
social groups, given that collaboration among
individuals with different skills might lead to more
efficient and effective actions, and better problemsolving (e.g., Azmitia, 1988; Dyer & Singh, 1998).
However, to capitalize on diverse skills, role allocation
should correspond to individuals’ differing capabilities.
Dividing labor in this way requires integrating
several pieces of information. Even in simple twoparticipant scenarios, the individual must represent both
her own and her partner’s ability to perform the
different tasks or components of the task, compare the
two, and allocate roles so the person relatively more
capable of each task performs it. Thus an adept
collaborator should take on a relatively easier task when
partnered with someone she regards as more capable
than she is, and a relatively more difficult task when
partnered with someone she believes is less capable
than she is. Here we ask whether preschoolers
effectively allocate roles in collaborative tasks by
considering their own abilities relative to a partner’s.
Previous research, in addition to the work reviewed
above, provides grounds for believing that children
might succeed at this kind of division of labor. Three
and four-year-olds acknowledge and comment on the
fact that different people have different abilities
(Mostache & Bragonier, 1981), and are sensitive to
differences in others’ knowledge, competence and
reliability (e.g., Jara-Ettinger, Tenenbaum, & Schulz,
2015; Koenig, Clément, & Harris, 2004; Sobel &
Kushnir, 2013). Such evaluations influence children’s
helping behavior; children as young as 3 who master a
problem-solving task spontaneously tutor learners they

In cooperative activities, all parties have a shared goal
but may not have the same set of skills. The current
study considers whether preschoolers are sensitive to
probable differences in individuals’ competence when
allocating roles. We found that 3.5- to 5.5-year-olds use
relative competence, as indexed by the age of their
intended partner, to determine who should do the harder
and easier of two tasks in a cooperative interaction. A
second experiment demonstrated that children allocate
roles differently in a competitive context. Young
children infer differences in others’ ability and can
divide labor efficiently to achieve their goals.
Keywords:
planning.

cooperation;

self/other

knowledge;

Introduction
Cooperation is a foundation of human culture, observed
in activities as diverse as governing, hunting, fishing,
building, and playing (Tomasello, 1999). Young
children begin cooperating in problem-solving tasks
and social games by their first birthday, and the
sophistication of their cooperative interactions increases
over the first few years of life (Brownell & Carriger,
1990; Cooper, 1980; Warneken, Chen, & Tomasello,
2006). Children cooperate by sharing food and toys
(Brownell, Svetlova, & Nichols, 2009; Hay, 1979),
pointing to inform others (Liszkowski, Carpenter,
Striano, & Tomasello, 2006; Liszkowski, Carpenter, &
Tomasello 2008), and assisting in goal-directed actions
(Warneken & Tomasello, 2007). Children also appear
to expect cooperation: when adults disengage from
cooperative interactions, they protest (Ross & Lollis,
1987).
Across species, the most sophisticated forms of
cooperation involve collaboration: cases in which
individuals flexibly adjust their behavior to accomplish
a goal – as in when some individuals pursue prey and
others block its escape (Boesch & Boesch, 1989). In
laboratory tasks, children as young as 3.5 engage in this
kind of collaboration, flexibly dividing labor, reversing
roles when necessary, and coordinating on tasks
involving different sub-goals (e.g., as when one child
lifts a lever and another pulls a handle to achieve a joint
goal; Ashley & Tomasello, 1998; Fletcher, Warneken,
& Tomasello, 2012). Moreover, older preschoolers
divide labor appropriately with respect to available

786

know are naïve (Johnson, Pynn & Nisbet, 2002).
Preschoolers’ ability to accurately represent their
own strengths and weaknesses is somewhat more
controversial. Some work suggests that preschoolers are
(excessively) optimistic about their abilities (Cimpian,
2010; Smiley & Dweck, 1994; Schneider, 1998), and
thus resilient in the face of negative feedback
(Boseovski, 2010; Droege & Stipek, 1993; Ruble,
Parsons, & Ross, 1976). To the degree that children
misjudge their own abilities, they would be relatively
incapable of efficient division of labor.
However, other work suggests that children begin to
regard themselves as good or bad at tasks even in very
early childhood (e.g., Gunderson et al., 2013; Heyman,
Dweck, & Cain, 1992; Smiley & Dweck, 1994).
Moreover, children begin to evaluate their own
performance relative to their peers as young as 3
(Butler, 1988; Cimpian, 2010; Magid & Schulz, 2015;
Rhodes & Brickman, 2008). For the current purposes,
note that even if children are relatively poor judges of
their abilities in an absolute sense, they might be able to
judge whether one task is easier for them than another,
and whether they are more or less capable than a peer.
If so, children might recognize that they should take the
easier task if they believe their partner is more capable
than they are, and the harder task if they believe their
partner is less capable.

participant (Older Other condition).
There are a number of possible results. If children are
poor judges of task difficulty, they should choose at
chance. If children judge the tasks accurately, but try
only to maximize their own chances of success (and
ignore the joint, collaborative nature of the task) they
should always choose the easy task for themselves and
the hard task for their partner. Alternatively, if children
tend to overestimate themselves (or underestimate their
partners) they should always choose the hard task for
themselves and the easy task for their partner.
However, if children’s role allocation in cooperative
tasks is sensitive to relative ability (as indexed by age),
they should choose the easier game for their partner if
their partner is younger, and the easier game to
themselves if their partner is older.
Hard Rings

Easy Balls
Machine

Easy Rings

Experiment 1
In the current study, we test this by introducing
children to two carnival style games: a ring toss and
ball toss. Each game had an easy and a hard version.
(See Figure 1.) Any individual child got the easy
version of one game and the hard version of the other
(counterbalanced across participants). Children were
not told that one game was “easy” and the other was
“hard” but they were allowed to try each game four
times to get a sense of their own ability to succeed on
each task. Children were then told that another child
was going to come to play with them. They were told
that they should choose one game for their partner, and
one game for themselves, and that if they both
succeeded – so that a ring went on a pole and a ball
went in the box— a special machine would light up.
How might children infer others’ capabilities on a
novel task? Considerable work suggests that children
play differently with peers of different ages (Brody,
Stoneman, & MacKinnon, 1982; Edwards & Lewis,
1979; French, 1984) thus here we manipulated the age
of the (fictitious) peer to see whether children would
use this to infer their peers’ competence relative to their
own and allocate roles accordingly. In one condition,
children were told that the partner would be younger
(Younger Other condition); in the other condition they
were told that their partner would be older than the

Machine

Hard Balls

Figure 1: Each participant saw only one setup (top or
bottom). Participants practiced each game before
allocating roles.

Method
Participants and Materials. All procedures and the
analysis plan for this study were pre-registered on the
Open Science Framework (osf.io/aq246). Assuming a
large effect size (Cramer’s V=.50), a power analysis
indicated that 44 participants were required to reach a
power of .90. All participants were recruited from an
urban children’s museum and randomly assigned to one
of two conditions: Younger Other or Older Other.
Forty-four children (mean age = 54 months; range 4366 months) were included in the final sample (n=22 per
condition). Ten additional children did not pass the
inclusion criteria. (See Procedure for details). An
additional five children were tested but excluded due to
parental interference (n=3) or failing to provide a
response to the test question (n=2).

787

A felt mat (132x94 cm) was placed on the floor for
game play. The mat was marked with three tape Xs and
a line (16cm in front of the Xs) to indicate where
participants should stand. Participants stood on the left
and right Xs to play games and the center X to answer
questions. Children played two games: a ring toss and a
ball toss. Each game had two versions—one easier
(Easy Rings, Easy Balls) and one harder (Hard Rings,
Hard Balls). The ring toss used a plastic pole on a black
circular plastic base. The easier version used a shorter
pole (22cm with a 5cm red tip) and was closer to the
tape line (13 cm away); and the harder version used a
taller pole (40cm with a 5cm red tip) and was farther
from the tape line (65cm away). The ring toss game
was played with blue rings (16cm diameter). Each ball
toss game used a gray fabric box placed on top of a blue
plastic crate (24x24x41cm) and was played with yellow
plastic balls (26cm circumference). The easier version
used a larger box (29x14x10cm) with a cardboard
backboard (17x28cm) and was placed at the front of the
crate, closer to the tape line (53cm). The harder version
used a smaller box (14x14x10cm) elevated on a black
box of the same size, and was placed at the back of the
crate, farther from the tape line (77cm). Half the
participants played the Easy Rings and Hard Balls; half
the Hard Rings and Easy Balls. Laminated cards
(23x6cm) showed photographs of Older Other or
Younger Other children. Children depicted in the
photographs were either two-year-olds (10cm tall) or
six-year-olds (15cm tall), based on the condition. A
laminated card of the same size had the word “YOU”
printed in the center and was used to represent the
participant. A remote-controlled LED light machine
(12x13x12cm) was used for the joint task.

their own age, specifying that the Other child was
younger or older, by condition. The Other child was
matched by gender to the participant. For each category
(Younger boy, Older boy, Younger girl, Older girl) two
pictures were used to reduce the possibility that
ancillary features of any picture might influence
children’s choices or perceptions of the Other child’s
abilities. The photographs represented a diversity of
races and ethnicities. The experimenter then asked
children to allocate roles by choosing which game the
Other child should play, placing the Other child’s
picture next to the game chosen for them and a card
with “YOU” written on it next to the game the
participant chose for themselves. One game was
designed to be easier than the other, however
differences in motor skills or experience might lead
different children to different conclusions, thus to
ensure that the role allocation matched children’s
judgment of the relative difficulty of the two games, we
asked children “Which game was easier?” As a followup, children were asked why they chose the game they
picked for the Other child. Finally, we asked children if
the Other child was older or younger to ensure that they
had understood the task. This last question was used as
an inclusion criterion: children who did not answer
correctly were not included in the analysis.1 Following
these questions, the experimenter left the room briefly
(15-30 seconds) and returned saying that she couldn’t
find the Other child. The experimenter then played the
games with the child to turn on the light machine.

Results
In response to, “Which game was easier?” 37 of the 44
children (84%) responded that the game we had
designed to be easier was easier for them. Children’s
self-reported judgment was used in all analyses
(consistent with the pre-registered design).
As predicted, children’s role assignments differed by
condition χ2(1)=7.62, p=.006, V=.462. In the Younger
Other condition, 64% of children assigned their partner
the Easy Game. In the Older Other condition, only 18%
of children assigned their partner the Easy Game.
Collapsing across conditions, 73% of children assigned
roles in a way corresponding to the difficulty of
fulfilling each role in the joint task, p=.004 by binomial

Procedure. All children were tested individually in a
quiet room at a children’s museum. Children were
shown two games (either Easy Rings and Hard Balls, or
Hard Rings and Easy Balls) and given the chance to
practice each game four times. The game played first
(rings or balls), the location of each game (right or left),
and the version of each game (easy or hard) were
counterbalanced across children. After children
practiced, the experimenter introduced the light
machine and explained that players of the two games
could work together to achieve a single joint goal: if the
ball went in the box and a ring went on the pole at the
same time, then the machine would light up. The
experimenter introduced the participant to the fictional
Other child, named Jamie, by explaining that she had
talked with the other child earlier that day and that s/he
wanted to come play the games together with the
participant. The experimenter then showed children a
card with a picture of the Other child and said that they
were either a toddler (Younger Other) or a first-grader
(Older Other). The experimenter then asked children

1

It might seem surprising that any children failed to
remember whether the Other child was older or
younger. However, recall that the photos of the Other
child used in the study reflected a range of ethnicities.
Anecdotally (given the small number of excluded
children) children who missed this question tended to
miscategorize the age of a photo of a child of another
race than themselves, possibly reflecting an own-race
bias in processing faces (Anastasi & Rhodes, 2005).

788

test. Children allocated roles in a way most likely to
their joint success. Given previous work showing that
five-year-olds, but not 3-year-olds allocate roles based
on available resources (Warneken et al., 2014), we also
asked whether the likelihood of participants allocating
roles based on ability increased with age. We found no
evidence of an age effect in the present task, β=.004(.75), p=.995, suggesting that even children as
young as 3.5 years can allocate roles in a cooperative
interaction given inferred differences in ability.
Although there was no significant difference in
children’s ability to allocate roles effectively in each
condition, Fisher’s Exact Test, p=.31, it is intriguing
that twice as many children (eight) in the Younger
Other condition misallocated the hard game to the
toddler whereas only four children in the Older Other
condition misallocated the hard game to themselves.
Both the Easy Game and the Hard Game were fairly
difficult for the preschoolers. Children scored a zero out
of four practice trials 32% of the time across both
games. As such, the decision of some children in the
Younger Other condition to allocate the Easy Game to
themselves may make sense: given that a toddler is
unlikely to do better, and the joint goal may thus seem
out of reach, it is reasonable for children to choose the
game at which they themselves are more likely to
succeed. Indeed, when partnered with a younger child,
the majority of preschoolers opted for a game that,
while increasing the probability of achieving the joint
goal, decreased the probability of their own success.

Figure 2: Proportion of children who chose the Easy
Game or Hard Game for their partner by condition in
Experiment 1: Joint Goal Context.

Discussion
Results from Experiment 1 suggest that children
appropriately consider their own and their partner’s
relative abilities in allocating roles in a cooperative
interaction. However, the results raise questions about
the extent to which preschoolers simply assign harder
games to older children and easier games to younger
children without regard for context in which they are
making this decision. Here children’s explanations
provide some insight. Recall that we asked children
why they chose one of the games for the Other child
and the other for themselves. Nine children did not
answer, and eleven gave uninformative answers.
However, 24 children referred to the difficulty of the
activities and/or alluded to relative ability (e.g., “She is
older and can get the balls in”; “Because it’s easier for
him (in context, this meant “than the other game” rather
than “easier for him than me”). Anecdotally, children’s
spontaneous behavior also provided some evidence that
children think about role allocation dynamically: one
child in the Younger Other condition who had assigned
the Easy game to her partner asked to switch roles when
she learned that the Experimenter, not a toddler, would
be her partner in the interaction.

Figure 3: Proportion of children who chose the Easy
Game or Hard Game for their partner by condition in
Experiment 2: Competitive Context.

Experiment 2
Testing the sophistication of children’s role allocation
requires seeing if children allocate the roles differently
if they are not in a cooperative context. In Experiment
2, we tested children in a competitive condition: in this
context, children should assign their partner the harder
game regardless of the other child’s ability.

Method
All participants were recruited from an urban children’s
museum and randomly assigned to one of two
conditions: Younger Other or Older Other. Forty-four
children (mean age = 54 months; range 42-65 months)
were included in the final sample (n=22 per condition).
Seven additional children did not pass the inclusion
criteria. (See Experiment 1 for details). Two additional

789

children were tested but excluded due to parental
interference. Materials were the same as Experiment 1.
Children were introduced to and practiced the two
games as in Experiment 1. After children practiced, the
experimenter introduced the light machine and
explained that the person who gets a ball in the box or a
ring on the pole before the other person wins and gets
to turn on the machine to establish a competitive
context. The introduction of other child, Jamie, and the
questions (asking children which game Jamie should
play, which game was easier, and how old Jamie is)
were identical to Experiment 1.

to ask how other contexts affect role allocation.
Consider for instance that one goal of an interaction
might be to allow the other partner to develop her skills.
In this case, less competent, and younger individuals
might be asked to do harder parts of a task. Note also
that the current study asks a single child to allocate
roles for herself and one other child, and to plan for a
task occurring immediately. How children allocate roles
among multiple individuals, in real time requires
negotiating myriad other factors that influence
successful cooperation. Additionally, we note that age
is a coarse proxy of ability: younger individuals can be
more skilled than older ones and in some contexts, most
likely are. Moreover, individuals of exactly the same
age may have special competencies and expertise in
particular areas. Studies suggest that children are
sensitive to these differences in ability and know who
to ask for help for particular kinds of tasks (Koenig &
Jaswal, 2011; Kushnir, Vredenburgh, & Schneider,
2013; Lutz & Keil, 2002). Future work might ask
whether children also use such knowledge to allocate
roles appropriately. However, these results suggest that
at least some of the core skills underlying teamwork
and collaborative problem-solving are in place in early
childhood.

Results
In response to, “Which game was easier?” 34 of the 44
children (77%) responded that the game we had
designed to be easier was easier for them. As predicted,
children’s role assignments did not differ by condition
χ2(1)=1.03, p=.31, V=.204. In the Younger Other
condition, 64% of children assigned their partner the
Hard Game, see Figure 3. In the Older Other condition,
only 82% of children assigned their partner the Hard
Game. Collapsing across conditions, 73% of children
assigned the harder game to the Other child, p=.004 by
binomial test. These results suggest that children do not
allocate the harder game to the older child and the
easier game to the younger child independent of
context. Instead, participants took into account the
competitive context of the interaction and assigned
roles accordingly.

Acknowledgements
We thank the Boston Children’s Museum and the
families who participated in this research and members
of the Early Childhood Cognition Lab for helpful
comments and discussion. This material is based upon
work supported by the Center for Brains, Minds, and
Machines, funded by NSF STC award CCF-1231216
and a NSF Graduate Research Fellowship to R.M.

Conclusions
In the current study we found that young children
allocate roles appropriately in 1) a cooperative
interaction, deciding that the less competent partner
should take on the easier task while the more competent
partner takes on the harder task and 2) a competitive
interaction, deciding that the partner should take on the
harder task. Note that we did not label the tasks as easy
or difficult prior to when children allocated roles.
Past work looking at children’s ability to use social
comparison information has focused on how children
compare themselves to others to evaluate their abilities,
or to plan future actions (Butler, 1998; Magid &
Schulz, 2015; Rhodes & Brickman 2008; Ruble, et al.,
1994). The current study shows that relative ability
appraisals are also involved in planning joint
interactions. Although one could imagine that
preschoolers would simply choose which games to play
based on how much they like playing each game, these
results suggest they consider the games as sub-goals in
a cooperative task and consider their own and others’
competence in allocating roles. In future work, we plan

References
Ashley, J., & Tomasello, M. (1998). Cooperative
problem-solving and teaching in preschoolers. Social
Development, 7, 143-163.
Azmitia, M. (1988). Peer interaction and problem
solving: When are two heads better than one? Child
Development, 87-96.
Boesch, C., & Boesch, H. (1989). Hunting behavior of
wild chimpanzees in the Tai National Park. American
Journal of Physical Anthropology, 78, 547-573.
Boseovski, J. J. (2010). Evidence for “rose‐colored
glasses”: An examination of the positivity bias in
young children’s personality judgments. Child
Development Perspectives, 4, 212-218.
Anastasi, J. S., & Rhodes, M. G. (2005). An own-age
bias in face recognition for children and older
adults. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 12, 10431047.

790

Brody, G. H., Stoneman, Z., & MacKinnon, C. E.
(1982). Role asymmetries in interactions among
school-aged children, their younger siblings, and
their friends. Child Development, 53, 1364-1370.
Brownell, C. A., & Carriger, M. S. (1990). Changes in
cooperation and self-other differentiation during the
second year. Child Development, 61, 1164-1174.
Brownell, C., Nichols, S. R., & Svetlova, M. (2013).
Converging developments in prosocial behavior and
self-other understanding in the second year of life:
the second social-cognitive revolution. Navigating
the Social World: What Infants, Children, and Other
Species Teach Us, 385-390.
Butler, R. (1998). Age trends in the use of social and
temporal
comparison
for
self-evaluation:
Examination of a novel developmental hypothesis.
Child Development, 69, 1054-1073.
Cimpian, A. (2010). The impact of generic language
about
ability
on
children's
achievement
motivation. Developmental psychology, 46, 13331340.
Cooper, C. R. (1980). Development of collaborative
problem solving among preschool children.
Developmental Psychology, 16, 433-440.
Droege, K. L., & Stipek, D. J. (1993). Children's use of
dispositions
to
predict
classmates'
behavior. Developmental Psychology, 29, 646-654.
Dyer, J. H., & Singh, H. (1998). The relational view:
Cooperative
strategy
and
sources
of
interorganizational competitive advantage. Academy
of Management Review, 23, 660-679.
Edwards, C. P., & Lewis, M. (1979). Young children’s
concepts of social relations: Social functions and
social objects. In M. Lewis et al., (Eds.) The child
and its family (pp. 245-266). New York, NY:
Springer US.
Fletcher, G. E., Warneken, F., & Tomasello, M. (2012).
Differences in cognitive processes underlying the
collaborative activities of children and chimpanzees.
Cognitive Development, 27, 136-153.
Frey, K. S., & Ruble, D. N. (1985). What children say
when the teacher is not around: Conflicting goals in
social comparison and performance assessment in the
classroom. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 48, 550.
Gunderson, E. A., Gripshover, S. J., Romero, C.,
Dweck, C. S., Goldin‐Meadow, S., & Levine, S. C.

helplessness: Relationship to beliefs about
goodness. Child Development, 63, 401-415.
Johnson-Pynn, J. S., & Nisbet, V. S. (2002).
Preschoolers effectively tutor novice classmates in a
block construction task. Child Study Journal, 32,
241-256.
Koenig, M. A., & Jaswal, V. K. (2011). Characterizing
children’s expectations about expertise and
incompetence: Halo or pitchfork effects? Child
Development, 82, 1634-1647.
Kushnir, T., Vredenburgh, C., & Schneider, L. A.
(2013). “Who can help me fix this toy?” The
distinction between causal knowledge and word
knowledge guides preschoolers' selective requests for
information. Developmental Psychology, 49, 446453.
Liszkowski, U., Carpenter, M., Striano, T., &
Tomasello, M. (2006). 12-and 18-month-olds point to
provide information for others. Journal of Cognition
and Development, 7, 173-187.
Liszkowski, U., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M.
(2008). Twelve-month-olds communicate helpfully
and appropriately for knowledgeable and ignorant
partners. Cognition, 108, 732-739.
Lutz, D. J., & Keil, F. C. (2002). Early understanding of
the
division
of
cognitive
labor. Child
Development, 73, 1073-1084.
Magid & Schulz (2015). Quit while you’re ahead:
Preschoolers persistence and willingness to accept
challenges are affected by social comparison. In
Proceedings of the Thirty-Fourth Annual Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society.
Rhodes, M., & Brickman, D. (2008). Preschoolers'
responses to social comparisons involving relative
failure. Psychological Science, 19, 968-972.
Ruble, D. N., Parsons, J. E., & Ross, J. (1976). Selfevaluative responses of children in an achievement
setting. Child Development, 990-997.
Schneider, W. (1998). Performance prediction in young
children: Effects of skill, metacognition and wishful
thinking. Developmental Science, 1, 291-297.
Smiley, P. A., & Dweck, C. S. (1994). Individual
differences in achievement goals among young
children. Child development, 65, 1723-1743.
Tomasello, M. (2009). The cultural origins of human
cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Tomasello,
M.
(2010).
Origins
of
human
communication. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Warneken, F., Chen, F., & Tomasello, M. (2006).
Cooperative activities in young children and
chimpanzees. Child Development, 77, 640-663.
Warneken, F., Steinwender, J., Hamann, K., &
Tomasello, M. (2014). Young children's planning in a
collaborative problem-solving task. Cognitive
Development, 31, 48-58.

(2013). Parent praise to 1‐to 3‐year‐olds predicts
children's motivational frameworks 5 years
later. Child Development, 84, 1526-1541.
French, D. C. (1984). Children's knowledge of the
social functions of younger, older, and same-age
peers. Child Development, 55, 1429-1433.
Heyman, G. D., Dweck, C. S., & Cain, K. M. (1992).
Young children's vulnerability to self-blame and

791

