Priming the production of implications
Alice Rees (reesa34@cardiff.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Tower Building, 70 Park Place
Cardiff, CF10 3AT UK

Lewis Bott (Bottla@cardiff.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Tower Building, 70 Park Place
Cardiff, CF10 3AT UK

Abstract
We present two experiments investigating the production of
implicit constructions. Using a confederate scripting paradigm
we find that after making an inference participants were more
likely to subsequently produce an implicature. This effect
occurred at a global and a local level and was unaffected by
the perceived role of the conversational partner. Our findings
demonstrate that the choice of whether to be implicit is
determined by the activation levels of representations specific
to implicatures and that inference and implications have
overlapping processing representations.
Keywords: Priming; Scalar Implicatures; Speech Production;
Inferring

Producing implications
During conversations speakers have to make a variety of
decisions about the message they wish to convey. These
decisions include what lexical material to include, what
syntactic forms to use, and whether or not to communicate
explicitly or implicitly. When communicating implicitly the
onus is on the listener to enrich the utterance to reach the
speaker's intended meaning.
Research into language production has predominantly
focused on speaker's choices of explicit material. That is,
their choices of which lexical items to use or which
syntactic constructions to use (e.g. Bock & Levelt, 1994;
Levelt, Roelofs, & Meyer, 1999; Pickering & Branigan,
1998). In this paper, we focus on the speaker's decision to
be implicit or explicit in their speech. Consider the
following:
1. A: “Did John eat the cookies?”
B: “He ate some of them.”
=> John ate some but not all of the cookies.
2. A: “Have you met Lucy’s new boyfriend? He’s
handsome and intelligent!”
B: “He’s handsome.”
=>He’s not intelligent.
In these exchanges B’s utterance conveys more than what
is explicitly coded. In (1) B’s utterance leads to the
inference John ate some but not all of the cookies. This
inference arises through the following steps (based on Grice,
1989): (i) speaker A recognises that B could have said “he
ate all of them.” (ii) Since B did not say this, and assuming
B is cooperative, A can infer that “he ate all of them” is not
true; (iii) combining what is said with the negation of the

alternative leads to the inference that “John ate some but not
all of the cookies.” Similar reasoning can be used for (2).
Speaker B could have said “Yes, I agree” or “He is
handsome and funny.” By not saying these A could infer
that B thinks Lucy’s boyfriend is not handsome. The result
of this reasoning process was termed implicatures by Grice
(1989).
Since Grice’s seminal work, implicatures have been
analysed in great detail. For example, there are analyses
from the perspective of theoretical semantics (e.g.,
Chierchia, 2004), acquisition (e.g., Noveck, 2001), clinical
disorders (e.g. Chevallier, Wilson, Happé, & Noveck,
2010), and sentence processing (e.g., Bott & Noveck, 2004).
What all previous work has in common, however, is that
they are from the perspective of the listener, and not the
speaker. Here we ask how the speaker makes the choice
about whether to make an implication1.

Why imply?
Why does a speaker imply when they could be explicit? One
reason is that using implicatures is efficient for a speaker.
Since articulation is much slower than speech preparation
processes, reducing the amount of material to be articulated
reduces this articulatory bottleneck and arguably minimises
speaker effort while maximising their benefits (Grice, 1989;
Horn, 2004; Levinson, 2000; Wheeldon & Levelt, 1995).
Another reason is that implicatures are used out of
politeness. Implicatures can be used to maintain face
(Bonnefon, Feeney, & Villejoubert, 2009; Brown &
Levinson, 1987; Feeney & Bonnefon, 2013; Goffman, 1967;
Holtgraves & Perdew, 2016). In face threatening contexts
listeners interpret the use of implicatures as a speaker’s
attempt at politeness.
Efficiency and politeness provide intuitive explanations
for why people use implicatures. However, it is unclear how
these socio-pragmatic factors interact with the language
processor. One possibility is that social factors modulate the
activation of representations specific to the implicature
process. That is, there are representations specific to
implicatures and the activation of said representations
underlie the production and comprehension of implicatures.
We present two experiments to investigate this.

1 We refer to implicit utterances made by the speaker as
implications and inferences made by the listener as inferences.

2969

Implicit representations
During conversations interlocutors tend to repeat
linguistic structures that they have recently heard or
produced. This repetition is known as structural priming
(e.g. Bock, 1986). Structural priming occurs throughout the
language system in production (Brennan & Clark, 1996;
Bock, 1986; Levelt & Kelter, 1982; Branigan, et al, 2000;
2005) and comprehension (Sturt, Keller, & Dubey, 2010;
Thothathiri & Snedeker, 2008), and in different languages
(Hartsuiker & Westenberg, 2000; Scheepers, 2003). There is
a general consensus that successful priming of a particular
structure indicates the presence of a corresponding
representation within the language system whereas
unsuccessful priming indicates the absence of such a
representation (Branigan, Pickering, Liversedge, Stewart, &
Urbach, 1995; Pickering & Ferreira, 2008).
Priming is not restricted to explicit linguistic forms;
Raffray, Pickering, Cai, & Branigan (2013) found that after
encountering a coerced sentence individuals were more
likely to subsequently produce a coerced sentence than after
a fully-formed sentence. Sentences involved coercion are
ambiguous. For example, "The author finished the book" is
ambiguous; the verb finish requires a complement that
specifies an event. For a comprehender to interpret the
sentence they must undertake an enrichment process which
coerces the noun into the correct semantic type. Since
individuals were more likely to subsequently produce a
coerced sentence after comprehending or producing a
coerced sentence than after a full-formed sentence Raffray
et al. suggested that there are distinct representations
corresponding to coerced and full-form sentences i.e. there
are distinct representations involved in implicit and explicit
language. While the sort of implicit language used by
Raffray et al. is very different to Gricean implicatures, their
study nonetheless demonstrates that it is possible to prime
the choice between using more or less linguistic material.
Further support comes from Bott and Chemla (2016).
They showed that that after deriving a Gricean enrichment
participants were more likely to subsequently derive an
enrichment. This held both within and between enrichment
categories. They suggested that there was a mechanism
which underlies the derivation of enrichment and after
making an enrichment these mechanisms retain some
activation which increases the likelihood of making a
subsequent enrichment. However, their findings relate to
comprehension (and not production), and so do not illustrate
how the speaker chooses between an implicit and an explicit
construction.
The success of communication can, in part, be ascribed to
priming. Representations that are shared between the
comprehension and production system reciprocally activate
each other so that after comprehending a particular structure
the speaker is more likely to use that structure.
Consequently interlocutors develop similar representations
of linguistic structures and thus become aligned via priming
(Pickering & Garrod, 2004). We propose that the same

occurs for the production of implicit and explicit
constructions. There are specific representations which
underlie implicit communication and the activation level of
these determines whether or not a speaker produces an
implicit construction. Thus in a dialogue if one speaker is
using implicit constructions it is likely that their
conversational partner will also produce implicit
constructions since the representations used to comprehend
the utterance will have an activation advantage over other
representations that were not used. Thus these
representations can be primed. We test this using a
confederate-scripting priming paradigm adapted from
Branigan, Pickering & Cleland, 2000).

Experiment 1
A participant and a confederate took turns describing and
identifying a referent card from a set of four. These cards
consisted of rectangles containing either one or two images
(see Figure 1). Cards were displayed on two separate
screens (one for the participant and one for the confederate),
and neither party could see each other’s screen. The referent
card was identified to the speaker by being embedded in a
bold square, but not to the listener. The task for the speaker
was to communicate to the listener which of the cards was
the referent card.
The structure of the images in the display were the same
on each trial. Figure 1 shows the structure (left panel) and
an example trial. The experimental cards were the A and AB
cards. Here, one of the images was duplicated (a pencil in
the example). This meant that to communicate that the A
card was the referent, the speaker could choose between an
implicit construction, “The card with the pencil,” in which
they relied on the listener making an inference, or an
explicit construction, “The card with the just the pencil,” in
which a modifier removed the ambiguity about which image
was the referent. Whether the participant (as speaker) chose
an explicit or an implicit form was the dependent measure.
There were two forms of priming. The first was a between
subjects manipulation in which one group of participants
were exposed to predominantly implicit constructions and
the other to predominantly explicit constructions. The
second was a within-subjects manipulation in which the
sequence of trials was designed to prime an implicit or an
explicit construction from the participant.
Our hypotheses were as follows. If there are
representations corresponding to implicatures, and if they
can be activated or deactivated during conversation, we
expect more explicit constructions in the explicit global
priming condition than in the implicit condition. Similarly,
if implicature representations can be activated at a local
level, trials in which the confederate uses an implicit
construction should be followed by more implicit
constructions than trials where the confederate used an
explicit construction.

2970

Figure 1. Example trials. Left panel shows the object
structure. Right panel shows an example trial.

Method
Participants. 35 Cardiff University undergraduate students
participated for either payment or course credit.
Materials and Design. On each trial the interlocutors were
presented with four cards, each containing one or two
images. Images were organized in the same structure (see
Figure 1). Both interlocutors would see the same set of four
cards however, on prime trials the confederate’s screen
would also display the description to use. The confederate’s
descriptions always named a single image, e.g. in
Experimental trials the confederate would describe the AB
card as “The card with the [B]”. Experimental trials referred
to either the A or the AB card and filler trials referred to the
C or DE card.
All trials were organized into pairs such that the
confederate described a prime trial and the participant
described a target trial. For experimental items there were
A, and AB primes and targets, thus there were 4 primetarget combinations. There were 8 examples of each
combination resulting in 32 experimental pairs. Filler items
were 32 pairs of C and DE trials. An additional 8 practice
pairs were presented at the start of the experiment to allow
participants to get used to the experimental procedure.
Consequently there were 32 experimental pairs + 32 filler
pairs + 8 practice pairs = 144 items in total.
Items were presented in a fixed pseudorandom order.
Experimental pair presentation was alternated with filler
pairs. To prevent any findings from being attributable to
order effects we reversed the presentation order of the pairs
to make two separate lists.
The dependent variable was the construction used by
participants to describe the card in target trials. Responses
which used a single, unmodified referent were coded as
implicit and responses that used two referents or a modified
single referent were coded as explicit.
Global priming. Global priming tested whether
participants would imitate the conversational style of their
partner. Since the A item was duplicated across the A and
AB cards, describing the A card was potentially ambiguous.
The confederate could either use an implicit description
“The card with the [A]”, which required the participant to
derive an inference (A and nothing else), or use an explicit
description “The card with just the [A]”. In the implicit
condition the confederate described the A card implicitly,
using an unmodified referent. In the explicit condition the
confederate always used a modifier.

Local priming. Local priming tested whether we could
prime the implicature representations on a trial by trial
basis. This was achieved by manipulating the sequence of
prime-target trials. There were two prime types (A cards,
AB cards) and two target types (A cards, AB cards), thus
there were four prime-target sequences: A->AB, A->A, AB>AB, AB->A. In the implicit condition the confederate’s
description of A cards required participants to make an
implicature and consequently raised the activation levels of
the implicature representations. The confederate’s
descriptions of AB cards, conversely, blocked the
implicature (since there was no card equivalent to B and
nothing else) and therefore lowered the activation levels of
the implicature representations. Consequently A->A
sequences should yield higher proportions of implicature
production (unmodified single referent descriptions) than
AB->A sequences. The reverse should hold for A->AB
descriptions; rates of implicatures should be high following
A trials, participants would avoid unmodified single item
descriptions for AB cards and instead use a conjunction
(“The card with the scooter and skateboard”).

Procedure
The confederate was a female native-English speaking
student from the Cardiff University student population. The
participant and confederate were sat at opposite sides of a
table facing a computer screen. They could not see the other
person’s screen. The confederate and participant were told
that they were “playing a game where they will take turns
describing and identifying cards. The same set of cards will
be displayed on both computer screens. If you see one with
a bold border it is your turn to describe. To make a guess
about which card your partner was describing press one of
the four keys corresponding to the position of the card on
the screen. Do not speak to your partner except to describe
the card”. Participants were not allowed to describe the
position of the card on the screen but, if they needed their
partner to, they could ask for their partner to repeat their
description.

Results
Each participant produced 32 target responses. Of the 1120
responses 22 were excluded due to experimenter error. To
ensure that participants were paying attention to the
confederate’s descriptions we looked at key press responses
to prime trials. Participants selected the correct card 98% of
the time. Therefore we can be confident that they were
paying attention to the confederate.
Data underwent a logit transformation and were analysed
using a 2x2x2x2 Mixed ANOVA. Prime type (A-card and
AB-card) and target type (A-card and AB-card) were
within-subjects factors and description form (implicit and
explicit) and list were between-subjects factors.

2971

Global priming. Participants adopted the conversational
style of their partner. When their partner was using
implicatures, participants were more likely to also use
implicatures (F (1, 31) = 125.11, p < .001).

Figure 3. Proportion of implicit responses to A and AB
targets by participants in implicit group.

consequence of participants believing that the
conversational partner was an experimenter. In Experiment
2 we tested this by manipulating whether the partner was
presented as an experimenter or another participant.
There is range of evidence suggesting that the
participant could be influenced by the interlocutor’s speech
characteristics and social status (e.g. Bergen & Grodner,
2012; Grodner & Sedivy, 2011; Holtgraves & Yang, 1990;
1992). For example, Grodner & Sedivy showed that
listeners were less likely to derive an inference when their
interlocutor was judged to be an unreliable speaker. We
therefore reasoned that our manipulation could have several
possible effects on participants’ utterances. One was that
participants might imitate their partner more in the
experimenter condition. Since the partner would be in a
position of authority, participants may feel that the best
strategy would be to do exactly as the experimenter did.
Previous work has shown that imitation is more likely when
the partner has higher authority (e.g. Bandura & Kupers,
1964; McGuigan, 2013). Alternatively, there may be less
imitation in the experimenter condition. Since the partner
would now be in the participant’s social outgroup, there
would be less pressure to conform (e.g. Bourgeois & Hess,
2008; Yabar et al. 2006).
Orthogonal predictions can be reached about the overall
levels of implicit language use. Participants might choose to
use more implications overall in the experimenter condition.
Since the experimenter would generally be in a position of
knowledge, there would be little risk of miscommunication
by using implications. Alternatively, participants might use
fewer implications because if the partner were the
experimenter, participants might feel they have to be
particularly informative and precise in their responses.
The basic design was exactly the same as Experiment 1.
The only difference was that one group of participants were
told that the partner was an experimenter and in the other
group they were not. In the latter group, there was an
experimenter and a confederate, whereas in the former
group one experimenter played the role of both
experimenter and conversational partner.

Discussion

Method

The results suggest that there are representations
corresponding to implicatures that can be activated and
deactivated during conversation. After comprehending an
implicature the representations involved had an activation
advantage over other representations that were not used.
Consequently these implicature representations were more
likely to be used in subsequent speech production. After
cancelling an implicature, the implicature representations’
activation was suppressed thereby reducing the likelihood of
them being used for subsequent production.

Design and materials were the same as in Experiment 1.
Participants. 35 Cardiff University undergraduate students
participated for either payment or course credit.
Partner manipulation. There were two roles that the
conversational partner could play: participant or
experimenter. When the conversational partner took the role
of a participant the participant was unaware of their
partner’s involvement in the experiment, just as in
Experiment 1. However, when the conversational partner
took the role of experimenter, the participant was fully
aware of this. The experimenter informed the participant
that they would be playing a communication game together
and instructed the participant of their task.

Figure 2. Proportion of implicit responses in implicit and
explicit group.
Local priming. We also manipulated which card was
described. Whilst there was no effect of prime (F (1, 31) =
1.98, p = .169) or target (F (1, 31) = 1.88, p = .180) there
was an interaction between prime and target (F (1, 31) =
8.08, p=.008). When participants had to describe an A-card
target they produced more implications after they had made
an inference (A-prime). When participants had to describe
an AB target they produced fewer implications after they
had made an inference. This is consistent with there being
specific representations involved in producing implicatures.

Experiment 2
Experiment 1 used a confederate as the interlocutor.
However, we have no way of knowing whether participants
believed our deception. Our results could therefore be a

2972

Results

Discussion

Each participant produced 32 target responses. Of the 1280
responses 49 were removed due to experimenter error.
Partner role. Numerically, participants produced more
implicit descriptions when they knew their conversational
partner was the experimenter compared to when they
thought their partner was another participant (see Fig. 1).
Despite the numerical difference this was not statistically
significant (F (1, 36) = 1.13, p = 30.). However, experiments
investigating social influences often have a larger sample
than that of Experiment 2. It is possible that our
manipulation was not strong enough, or that our sample size
is too small. This is borne out following a Bayesian analysis
(Dienes, 2011; 2014; Rouder et al., 2009). Using the default
JZS prior we obtained a Bayes Factor of 0.4. This indicates
that our data may not be sensitive enough to draw a strong
conclusion about the partner role manipulation.

The main findings from Experiment 1 were replicated:
Participants were more likely to produce implicit
constructions when their interlocutor was using implicit
constructions than when they were using explicit
constructions. These effects were shown for local and global
priming manipulations.
There appeared to be no influence of the social status of
the conversational partner. We found no significant main
effects or interactions of the partner manipulation. Global
priming effects occurred regardless of the partner role, and
local priming effects showed similar patterns in both
conditions but were narrowly nonsignificant. Overall, we
can conclude that the priming effects we observed in
Experiment 1 were not due to particular strategies adopted
by participants disbelieving that the partner was another
participant.

General discussion

Figure 4. Proportion of implicit descriptions in implicit
and explicit group with confederate as participant or
experimenter.
There was no interaction between interlocutor role and
conversational style (F (1, 36) = .13, p = .73, BF = 0.3).
Global priming. We replicated the findings from
Experiment 1. Participants in the implicit condition
produced more implicit utterances than those in the explicit
condition (F (1, 36) = 45.72, p < .001, 95% CI = 1.97 –
3.65). This was found irrespective of interlocutor role. The
global priming effect was found both when the interlocutor
was the experimenter (F (1, 16) = 19.25, p < .001, 95% CI =
1.53 – 4.39) and the participant (F (1, 16) = 30.06, p < .001,
95% CI = 1.65 – 3.68).
Local priming. As in Experiment 1 there was no effect of
prime (F (1, 32) = .016, p = .90) or target (F (1, 32) = 3.58,
p=.068). However, there was an interaction between prime
type and target (F (1, 32) = 6.64, p=.015). Following an Acard prime participants descriptions of A-card targets were
more implicit but when the target was an AB-card
descriptions were more explicit.
The general pattern of results was the same when taking
each partner role separately. However, there was no
significant interaction when the partner was a participant (F
(1, 16) = 3.01, p=.10, BF = 0.5) or when the partner was an
experimenter (F (1, 16) = 4.18, p=.058, BF = 0.4). The
Bayes Factors give no reason to suggest that these
nonsignificant results were anything else but a lack of
power.

We presented two experiments demonstrating that the
production of implicatures can be primed. After
comprehending an implicature participants were more likely
to subsequently produce an implicature. This effect was
replicated across two studies and was found both within and
between participants. Whilst implicatures are an ostensibly
pragmatic phenomenon these experiments suggest that there
are distinct representations underlying implicatures and it is
the activation levels of these representations that are
responsible for the production of implicatures.
Previous research has suggested that socio-pragmatic
factors influence the decision about whether to use implicit
constructions. For example, people might use implicit
language to be more polite or to be more efficient (e.g.
Holtgraves & Yang, 1990, 1992; Levinson, 2000). Whilst
these factors are likely to be important, our experiments
show that they cannot be the only factors involved. In
Experiment 1 we did not manipulate any social factors yet
participants systematically varied their choice of
construction across conditions.
In Experiment 2 we
manipulated the social status of the conversational partner
but found no difference in rates of implicature production as
a consequence. Taken together the experiments suggest that
there are distinct representations underlying implicatures
and their use is not determined entirely by socio-pragmatic
factors. Instead, we propose that socio-pragmatic factors
may modulate the activation levels of the implicature
representations but further work is needed to address this.
Finally, the priming effects we demonstrate speak to the
interaction between deriving an inference and producing an
implication. Inferring and implying must necessarily use
different representations (since one involves comprehension
and the other production) but if they were entirely separate
we would not have observed priming effects. That deriving
an inference primes the production of an implication shows
that the representations involved in the two processes
overlap. Exactly which representations are used in both, and

2973

which are restricted to the individual processes, is a topic Grodner, D., & Sedivy, J. (2011). The effect of speaker specific
information of pragmatic inferences. In Gibson, E., & Pearlmutter,
for future research.

Conclusion
Our study makes three novel contributions. We have shown
(1) that people can be primed to produce Gricean
implicatures (2) that there are factors other than the sociopragmatic that determine whether a speaker uses an implicit
construction (3) that inferring and implying share
overlapping mechanisms.

References
Bandura, A. & Kupers, C. J. (1964). Transmission of patterns of selfreinforcement through modeling. Journal of Abnormal and Social
Psychology, 69, 1-9.
Bergen, L. & Grodner, D. (2012). Speaker knowledge influences the
comprehension of pragmatic inferences. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 38, 1450-1460.
Bock, J. K., & Levelt, W. (1994). Language production: Grammatical
encoding. In Gernsbacher, M.A (eds) Handbook of
psycholinguistics. (pp. 945-84). London, UK: Academic Press.
Bonnefon, J., Feeney, A., & Villejoubert, G. (2009). When some is
actually all: scalar inferences in face-threatening contexts.
Cognition, 112, 249-258.
Bott, L. & Chemla, E. (2016). Shared and distinct mechanisms in
deriving linguistic enrichment. Journal of Memory and Language.
Bott, L. & Noveck, I. (2004). Some utterances are underinformative:
the onset and time course of scalar inferences. Journal of Memory
and Language, 51, 437-457.
Bourgeois, P. & Hess, U. (2008). The impact of social context on
mimicry. Biological Psychology, 77, 343-352.
Branigan, H., Pickering, M., & Cleland, A. (2000). Syntactic coordination in dialogue. Cognition, 75, 13-25.
Branigan, H., Pickering, M., Liversedge, S., Stewart, A., & Urbach,
T. (1995). Syntactic priming: Investigating the mental
representation of language. Journal of Psycholinguistic
Research, 24, 489-506.
Brown, P. & Levinson, S. (1987). Politeness: Some Universals in
Language Usage. Cambridge UK: Cambridge University Press.
Brown-Schmidt, S., Yoon, S.O., & Ryskin, R. (2015). Chapter threePeople as contexts in conversation. Psychology of Learning and
Motivation, 62, 59-99.
Chevallier, C., Wilson, D., Happé, F., & Noveck, I. (2010). Scalar
inferences in Autism Spectrum Disorders. Journal of Autism and
Developmental Disorders, 40, 1104-1117.
Chierchia, G. (2004). Scalar implicatures, polarity phenomena and
the syntax/pragmatics interface. In A. Belletti (Ed.), Structures and
Beyond. Oxford UK: Oxford University Press.
Dell, G. (1986). A spreading-activation theory of retrieval in sentence
production. Psychological review, 93, 283.
Dienes, Z. (2011). Bayesian versus orthodox statistics: Which side
are you on? Perspectives on Psychological Science, 6, 274–290.
Dienes, Z. (2014). Using Bayes to get the most out of non-significant
results. Frontiers in Psychology, 5, 1–17.
Feeney, A. & Bonnefon, J. (2013). Politeness and honesty contribute
additively to the interpretation of scalar expressions. Journal of
Language and Social Psychology, 32, 181-190.
Goffman, E. (1967). On face-work. In Interaction ritual, (pp. 5-45).
Chicago, IL: Aldine Publishing Company.
Grice, H. (1989). Studies in the Way of Words. Harvard MA: Harvard
University Press.

N. (eds) The Processing and Acquisition of Reference (pp. 239272). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Holtgraves, T. (1994). Communication in context: Effects of speaker
status on the comprehension of indirect requests. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 5,
1205-1218.
Holtgraves, T. & Perdew, A. (2016). Politeness and the
communication of uncertainty. Cognition, 154, 1-10.
Holtgraves, T., & Yang, J.N. (1990). Politeness as universal: Crosscultural perceptions of request strategies and inferences based on
their use. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59, 719729.
Holtgraves, T., & Yang, J.N., (1992). Interpersonal underpinnings of
request strategies: General principles and differences due to culture
and gender. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 42,
246-256.
Horn, L. (2004). Implicature. In Horn & Ward (eds.) The Handbook
of Pragmatics, 3-28. Oxford, UK: Blackwell.
Horton, W. & Gerrig, R. (2002). Speakers’ experiences and audience
design: Knowing when and how to adjust utterances to addressees.
Journal of Memory and Language, 47, 589-606.
Levelt, W. J. M. (1989). Speaking: from intention to articulation.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Levelt, W. J. M., Roelofs, A., & Meyer, A. S. (1999). A theory of
lexical access in speech production. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 22, 1-75.
Levinson, S. (2000). Presumptive Meanings: The Theory of
Generalise Conversational Implicature. Cambridge MA: MIT
Press.
McGuigan, N. (2013). The influence of model status on the tendency
of young children to over-imitate. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 116, 962-969.
Metzing, C. & Brennan, S. (2003). When conceptual pacts are
broken: Partner-specific effects on the comprehension of referring
expressions.
Noveck, I. (2001). When children are more logical than adults:
experimental investigations of scalar implicature. Cognition, 78,
165-188.
Pickering, M. & Garrod, S. (2004). Toward a mechanistic
psychology of dialogue. Behavioural and Brain Sciences, 27, 169225.
Pickering, M. J., & Branigan, H. P. (1998). The representation of
verbs: Evidence from syntactic priming in language
production. Journal of Memory and language, 39, 633-651.
Pickering, M. J., & Ferreira, V. S. (2008). Structural priming: A
critical review. Psychological Bulletin, 134, 427–459.
Raffray, C., Pickering, M., Cai, Z., Branigan, H. (2013). The
production of coerced expressions: Evidence from priming.
Journal of Memory and Language, 74, 91-106.
Rouder, J. N., Speckman, P. L., Sun, D., Morey, R. D., & Iverson, G.
(2009). Bayesian t tests for accepting and rejecting the null
hypothesis. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 16(2), 225–37.
Wheeldon, L. & Levelt, W. (1995). Monitoring the time course of
phonological encoding. Journal of Memory and Language, 34,
311-334.
Yabar, Y., Johnston, L., Miles, L. Peace, V. (2006). Implicit
behavioural mimicry: Investigating the impact of group
membership. Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 30, 97-113.

2974

