Processing Spatial Relations: A Meta-Analysis
Ann-Kathrin Kießner (Ann-Kathrin.Kiessner@venus.uni-freiburg.de)
Center for Cognitive Science, University of Freiburg, 79098 Freiburg, Germany

Marco Ragni (ragni@informatik.uni-freiburg.de)
Cognitive Computation Lab, Technical Faculty, University of Freiburg, 79110 Freiburg, Germany
Abstract

about reported factors of reasoning difficulty in the literature and present briefly implications of two cognitive theories relevant to our analysis. Cognitive psychologists have
disagreed about the exact character of underlying mental processes (Goodwin & Johnson-Laird, 2005) and the main question is, what reliable findings need to be explained by cognitive theories?

The ability to reason about relations is relevant for many spatial cognitive processes. This can involve: (i) to represent spatial information mentally, (ii) to manipulate the spatial representation, and (iii) to infer new spatial information. Several
cognitive theories make assumptions and predictions about the
underlying processes. A detailed and systematic overview and
analysis of ireliable effects across studies is missing. This article presents a meta-analysis of 35 studies about spatial relational reasoning. Studies were classified according to different
factors including the ambiguity of the spatial description, i.e.,
if it the description allows for more than one representation, the
presentation of information, i.e., if the information has been
presented auditorily or in a written form, and the task, i.e., if
a conclusion or model of the premises needs to be generated
or verified. Implications of the findings for the mental model
theory and working memory are discussed.
Keywords: reasoning; spatial relations; meta-analysis.

Factors of Reasoning Difficulty

Introduction
Spatial cognition allows us to perform a variety of everyday
actions, such as sharing spatial information, navigation, and
even assembling diverse kinds of objects. A successful spatial
interaction requires us to represent spatial relational information and to reason with and about this information. Human
communication mainly uses qualitative descriptions to specify relationships between spatial objects1 instead of a numerical or quantitative data description that is used in robot navigation. Relations which are expressed linguistically by the
comparative, such as ‘greater than’, have been extensively
investigated in the past century by using behavioral experiments (e.g., Hunter, 1957; Störring, 1908). Within an experiment, problems are often reduced to their essential characteristics limiting irrelevant information. Consider the following
example:
Premise 1: The post office is left of the train station.
Premise 2: The train station is left of the main crossroad.
Conclusion: The post office is left of the main crossroad.
The premises contain spatial information (“left of”) about the
relationships among spatial objects (e.g.,“post office”). A deductive inference makes implicit given information, e.g., the
relation between the post office and the main crossroad explicit. While this inference is easy, and most participants
solve it correctly, such transitive inferences can be at the core
of more difficult inference problems with more objects and
more relations. In the following we will give a brief overview
1 Although it would be more appropriate to speak about entities
including humans, in the following we refer to spatial objects.

In general reasoning difficulty can appear on all levels:
in comprehending the presented information (the language
level), generating a mental representation (the representational level including working memory) or reasoning about
the representation (reasoning level). The literature reports
several factors that can be related to these levels.
Behavioral findings support that the presentation format affects spatial relational reasoning (Van der Henst &
Schaeken, 2005): In comparison with simultaneous premise
presentation, accuracy is significantly lower in sequential
presentation of the premise information (Roberts & Sykes,
2003; Schaeken & Johnson-Laird, 2000; Van der Henst &
Schaeken, 2005). This difference presumably reflects that
during simultaneous premise presentation reasoners have all
information available until they respond in contrast to sequential premise presentation posing more demand on working
memory (Ormrod, 1979; Schaeken & Johnson-Laird, 2000).
Models of working memory, e.g., Baddeley’s Working Memory Model (WMM; Baddeley, 1986) support the assumption
that human reasoning is restricted by the limited capacity of
working memory (Klauer, 1997) and that there are different
components with specific limitations and modalities. Based
on Baddeley’s WMM, factors such as presentation form, task
type and number of terms may influence spatial relational reasoning. Similar to premise presentation, it can be assumed
that the presentation form (written vs. spoken language) may
affect the way a problem is processed (Ormrod, 1979).
If premises are presented auditorily the spatial information is presented sequentially and thus more load on working
memory is placed (Ormrod, 1979). According to the WMM,
the larger the number of terms within a problem, the higher is
the amount of information that must be retained (Clevenger &
Hummel, 2014). Lastly, the task type may have an influence
as well. In conclusion generation tasks reasoners have to generate a conclusion. Whereas during verification tasks, reasoners have to check if a putative conclusions follows. This type
of task captures only the ability to recognize a solution, but
not producing it and thus requires smaller amounts of work-

2401

ing memory (Klauer, 1997; Kubinger & Wolfsbauer, 2010).
Another factor is the so-called indeterminacy effect
(Byrne & Johnson-Laird, 1989). While Example 1 above allows only for one possible arrangement (that we call model)
and is called a determinate problem, indeterminate problems
are possible. Consider the following example:
Premise 1: The post office is left of the train station.
Premise 2: The train station is left of the police office.
Premise 3: The crossroad is right of the post office.
Conclusion: The police office is right of the crossroad.
An indeterminate problem is more difficult to solve than a
determinate one (e.g., Boudreau & Pigeau, 2001; JohnsonLaird & Byrne, 1991). Determinate problems allow only
one qualitative arrangement (in contrast to quantitative differences, e.g., metric distances), while indeterminate problems allow for multiple different arrangements – as explained
by the (preferred) mental model theory (MMT: Byrne &
Johnson-Laird, 1989; Ragni & Knauff, 2013):
(1) post office – crossroad – train station – police office
(2) post office – train station – crossroad – police office
Most people construct just one or two models at most and often neglect other models consistent with the premises. These
models differ qualitatively, e.g., there is mentally a different
arrangement of the train station and the crossroad possible
from the indeterminate description.
So far no systematic review of the recent literature has
been carried out and no uniform and unambiguous conclusions about differences in accuracy have been drawn. For
this reason, a cross-study meta-analysis of behavioural data
from spatial relational reasoning is conducted. The aim of
this paper is to test whether the predictions of individual studies and the predictions of MMT and WMM hold generally
and to give an detailed overview that can serve as a potential
benchmark for theories about spatial reasoning. This analysis investigates differences in accuracy depending on indeterminacy, premise presentation, presentation form, and type of
task as well as number of terms. Resulting from the theoretical background and empirical findings to spatial relational
reasoning, predictions are:
1. In spatial relational reasoning, determinate problems
are easier to solve than indeterminate problems (e.g.,
Boudreau & Pigeau, 2001; Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991).
2. Compared with problems presented in spoken language,
problems in written language appear with higher accuracy
(e.g., Ormrod, 1979; Van der Henst & Schaeken, 2005).
3. Reasoners solve more problems correctly when the task is
to verify instead of generating conclusions/models.
4. Problems consisting of three terms are less difficult to
solve than four-term problems.
5. In case of simultaneous premise presentation, accuracy is
higher than in case of sequentially premise presentation.

In the following, these predictions are analyzed with the aim
of gaining differences in accuracy specific to the various
types. The results of the analysis are evaluated and interpreted with respect to predictions of the mental model theory
and implications from working memory limitations.

The Meta-Analysis
Paper Acquisition In order to acquire sufficient and suitable data for the meta-analysis, we needed to find experiments in which the participants drew their own conclusions
to all sorts of tasks in spatial relational reasoning. An initial
set of eligible studies came from a meta-analysis database of
coded studies about spatial relational reasoning from the Cognitive Computation Lab (University of Freiburg, Germany)
the database incorporated a comprehensive search for studies reported until 2013. The database contained the literature
using the online platforms PubMed and Google Scholar for
entries by the following main query: ‘(relational) AND (reasoning) OR (reasoning) AND (about) AND (relations) OR
(transitive reasoning)’. All the studies in that database were
reviewed for eligibility and an independent search was conducted: Online literature searches were performed on the 29th
of October, and 29th of November 2016 using PubMed and
Google Scholar. For the first PubMed and Google Scholar
search, the same term like in 2013. For the second PubMed
search, conducted on the 29th of November, the query ‘(spatial) AND (reasoning) AND (relations) OR (spatial reasoning) AND (relations)’ was used, since the initial query was
too unspecific for this search engine.
Criteria for Inclusion of Studies Experiments were assessed and selected for this meta-analysis if they met not only
the search terms but also the following criteria: Experiments
containing spatial relations and in cases of visuo-spatial relations, experiments emphasizing on spatial representations
were also considered. All the experiments had to involve
healthy, adult participants and use a within-subjects design
to keep the homogeneity among different conditions. Participants had to know beforehand that their task was to reach a
conclusion and there had to be no secondary-tasks. These criteria were used to ensure that the reasoning process was actually taking place and to eliminate other cognitive processes as
a biasing factor. Moreover, only peer-reviewed and published
studies of both, behavioural and neurophysiological experiments conducted in any country were considered. Outcome
results of accuracy must have been presented in a quantitative
form that permitted computation or reasonable estimation of
an effect size statistic representing the difference in accuracy.
Finally, information on factors of interests had to be given in
the study. The literature search identified 138 experiments of
84 articles reporting results from psychological studies. Of
these, 32 experiments (23%) (e.g., Knauff & Johnson-Laird,
2002a) did not report behavioral data or did not present spatial realtions by means of language.
Twenty experiments (14%) were rejected because they
did not report or measured accuracy (e.g., Brüssow et al.,

2402

Table 1: Means and standard deviations of the overall accuracy for the studies (in %).
Dataset with indeterminacy condition
simultaneous-verbal presentation
sequential-verbal presentation
sequential-auditory presentation

determinate problems
70 (7)
65 (4)
63 (10)

indeterminate problems
52 (8)
42 (13)
34 (19)

Values are rounded to integers. Indeterminacy (simultaneous-verbal): Experiments with simultaneous premise presentation, generation task, verbal presentation form and 5-term problems. Indeterminacy (sequential-verbal): Experiments with sequential premise presentation, generation task, auditory
presentation form and 5-term problems. Indeterminacy (sequential-auditory): Experiments with sequential premise presentation, generation task, verbal presentation form and 5-term problems.

2013). Seventeen experiments (12%) did not report information about either indeterminacy, presentation form, type
of task or number of terms nor premise presentation (e.g.,
Fangmeier et al., 2006). For 13 experiments (9%) the original study was not available (e.g., Hagert, 1984). Eight experiments (6%) used secondary-task methods (e.g., Knauff et al.,
2004), six experiments (4%) used a between-subjects design
(e.g., Boudreau & Pigeau, 2001) and three experiments (2%)
included children or patients (e.g., Knauff & May, 2006).
In two experiments (1%) a recognition task was performed
(e.g., Mani & Johnson-Laird, 1982) and two other experiments (1%) used a visual presentation form (e.g., Knauff &
May, 2006). In total, 206 raw differences in means of accuracy between different types of spatial relational reasoning
problems and other types of (relational) reasoning met the inclusion criteria for this meta-analysis. An asterisk precedes
each of these reports in the reference list.

most values for comparison of two variants of a factor. For
this purpose, cross-classifying factors were used to build a
contingency table of the counts at each combination of factor levels resulting in eight combinations of data. In Table 2,
the datasets for all types of factors and its characteristics are
presented. The factor number of participants within an experiment was not included in matching since otherwise, the
number of raw means within subgroups would have been too
small for statistical analysis. For the results reported in this
study, statistical analysis consisted of non-parametric tests using one-sided Wilcoxon Rank-Sum Tests and a significance
level of α = .01 was defined. All statistical analysis was performed using R (R version 3.2.2, 2015-08-14; R Core Team,
2015).

Results and Discussion

Paper Classification After paper selection, experiment
characteristics were coded by the authors for the following
characteristics: indeterminacy, premise presentation, presentation form, number of terms, task and sample size. The sample size for each experiment was defined as the number of
participants at the time of the final measure of logical correct
answer. The first division of data was made between determinate and indeterminate problems. Furthermore, the data
was subdivided into groups of simultaneous and sequential
premise presentation. All premises were either displayed at
the same time and remained available (simultaneous), or were
presented one at a time and disappeared with the onset of a
new premise (sequential). Moreover, it was coded whether
the participants had to listen to the premises in form of audio
recording using spoken language (auditory form) or whether
the premises were presented by means of literacy language
on screen or on paper (verbal form). Likewise, the data was
grouped into experiments with either three, four, or five terms.
Finally, experiments were assigned to the group of verification task when the reasoners had to verify a outative conclusion or to select the correct model from a given set of models.
If the participants had to generate a model (an arrangement
of objects) or to draw a conclusion, tasks were characterized
as generation tasks. For each factor, the data was divided into
subgroups finding the combination of variants that had the

The data was corrected for outliers by excluding percentages
of accuracy with values greater than two standard deviations
from the mean value. All the statistical analysis reported is
based on the data corrected by outliers. We analysed the percentage of correctness for all eight combinations of data.2 Table 2 summarizes the descriptive statistics in all conditions.
The analysis shows that in the indeterminacy (simultaneous-verbal) sample, significantly more
correct responses were given if the problem was determinate
than indeterminate (Wilcoxon Rank-Sum Test W = 168,
p < .0001, one-sided). The same trend is also visible for
the sequential-verbal and sequential-auditory indeterminacy
cases (Table 1). One-sided Wilcoxon Rank-Sum Tests
showed that both trends were statistically significant (indeterminacy (sequential-verbal): W = 30, p < .05; indeterminacy
(sequential-auditory): W = 30, p = .01). These results
supports several empirical findings (e.g., Byrne & JohnsonLaird, 1989) and can be explained by MMT as well as
Baddeley’s WMM. For an indeterminate description, it is
necessary to construct not one but several mental models
in order to correctly represent its meaning. The larger the
number of models that reasoners must consider, the higher
is the load on working memory. The attempt to construct
2 This

was due to a better readability. For the purpose of calculating Odds Ratio and the further meta-analysis, absolute frequency
of accuracy based on the number of participants and the percentage
of the correctness of the given responses are used.

2403

Table 2: Descriptive statistics of the overall accuracy for the studies (in %).
Dataset

Factor

nrawmeans

n participants

Mean (SD)

Min

Q1

Median (MAD)

Q3

Max

Indeterminacy***
(simultaneous-verbal)
Presentation form 1 (n.s.)

det
indet
verb
audi
verb
audi
veri
gen
three
four
sim
seq

12
14
15
18
37
10
15
30
30
37
24
15

2384
2456
255
264
702
192
255
856
856
702
3504
255

70 (7)
52 (8)
90 (10)
87 (7)
72 (15)
57 (14)
90 (10)
76 (17)
76 (17)
72 (15)
49 (12)
90 (10)

64
40
68
77
40
33
68
54
54
40
27
68

64
43
89
81
61
47
89
58
58
61
44
89

66 (3)
54 (7)
90 (11)
88 (9)
77 (17)
61 (12)
90 (11)
75 (25)
75 (25)
77 (17)
48 (10)
90 (11)

78
58
98
94
84
67
98
91
91
84
55
98

80
59
98
96
92
76
98
99
99
92
66
98

Presentation form 2**
Task**
Number of terms (n.s)
Premise presentation (n.s.)

All values were rounded to integers. Factor labels refer to auditory vs. verbal presentation form (audi/verb), determinate vs. indeterminate
problems (det/indet), model generation vs. model verification task (gen/veri) and sequential vs. simultaneous premise presentation (seq/sim).
nrawmeans : number of raw differences in means; n participants : number of participants. Indeterminacy (simultaneous-verbal): Experiments with
simultaneous premise presentation, generation task, verbal presentation form and five-term problems. Presentation form 1: Experiments with
sequential premise presentation, verification task, determinate and three-term problems. Presentation form 2: Experiments with sequential
premise presentation, generation task, determinate and four-term problems. Task: Experiments with sequential premise presentation, verbal
presentation form, determinate and three-term problems. Number of terms: Experiments with sequential premise presentation, verbal
presentation form, verification task and determinate problems. Premise presentation: Experiments with verbal presentation form, verification
task, determinate and three-term problems. *** significant p < .001, ** significant p < .01

several models may overload working memory capacities
so that no models would be constructed. Likewise, the
accuracy was significantly higher if the problems were presented verbally than during auditory presentation (Wilcoxon
Rank-Sum Tests, presentation form 2: W = 283, p < .01,
one-sided). A similar but not significant trend showed in
the presentation form 1 condition (Wilcoxon Rank-Sum
Tests, W = 176, p = .07, one-sided). Spoken language
can only be presented in a serial way. Thus, the spatial
description has to be stored in the phonological loop using
a language-based form. At the same time, mental models
are built in the visuo-spatial sketchpad. When working
memory load increases it becomes harder to keep track of
all the premises and inferences separately. Additionally,
written language already implies information about spatial
relations and is, therefore, more similar to the information
contained in the problem description than in case of auditory
presentation. Furthermore, a one-sided Wilcoxon Rank-Sum
Test supports the prediction that reasoning difficulty is lower
in verification tasks (W = 332, p < .01). Thereby, reasoners
have to build a model based on the premises presented and
verify a proposed model or conclusion. In addition to model
construction, reasoners have also to draw a conclusion to
solve the generation task correctly. This requires a larger
amount of working memory (Klauer, 1997). The descriptive
results for the dataset number of terms are consistent with the
predictions. Three-term problems were higher in accuracy
than four-term problems (Table 2). However, the Wilcoxon
Rank-Sum Test showed no significant difference (W = 641,
p > .1, one-sided). One explanation could be the limited

capacity of the working memory that is roughly three to
five objects or role bindings (Clevenger & Hummel, 2014).
Both three-term and four-term problems do not exceed
the capacities of working memory. However, descriptive
results assume a tendency for an increasing memory load
in four-term problems. Contrary to the predictions, there
was no significant difference between accuracy in case of
simultaneous and sequential premise presentation (W = 0,
p > .1, one-sided Wilcoxon Rank-Sum Test). Furthermore,
descriptive results indicate that problems with sequential
premise presentation are less difficult to solve than simultaneously presented problems (Table 2). This result was
unexpected and contradicts previous findings (Roberts &
Sykes, 2003; Van der Henst & Schaeken, 2005). With regard
to the data used in this study, the following differences can
be observed which may have influenced the result: In case of
simultaneous presentation, the total number of participants
tested is higher than in sequential condition (N = 3504
vs. N = 255). The difference in sample size might have
influenced the results. In addition, the factor premise order
was not controlled in this study. The dataset of simultaneous
premise presentation contained discontinuous problems.
However, in the set of sequential premise presentation, the
factor premise order was either unspecified or continuous.
Studies have shown that accuracy is higher in case of
continuous premise order (Knauff et al., 1998). Thus, an
effect of premise order can not be excluded here. A further
explanation may be that the amount of information must be
processed is reduced as a result of sequential presentation.
Hence, attention control may be facilitated and a model can

2404

be constructed incrementally from the premises (principle of
economicity, Manktelow & Galbraith, 2012).

General Discussion
Despite a century of research on spatial relational reasoning
and more than a hundred articles there is still no systematic
analysis of which factors do contribute to the human difficulty
in reasoning about spatial relations. The quality of the reported experimental data differs, sometimes all relevant information is reported, sometimes the standard deviation is missing. Hence, only a limited number of experiments could be
included in our review. We identified reliable differences in
accuracy between determinate and indeterminate problems,
auditory and verbal presentation form and also between tasks
of model generation and verification. This meta-analysis confirmed previous empirical findings that are predicted by the
mental model theory and influenced by the limited-capacity
working memory as predicted by WMM (see Klauer, 1997):
The effect of indeterminacy is the strongest effect (see Table
2) that is directly related with the number of models that need
to be generated in the reasoning process. The same holds
for the task where the verification is easier (the constructed
models need to be compared with a given one), while in the
conclusion generation process all models need to be checked.
And, finally a generation task with four terms (Presentation
form 2 in Table 2) can lead to more demands on both the construction and storing the model in memory.
This systematic review has, however, a few limitations related to the results and their interpretation and leads to some
new questions. First, the number of studies considered is
a limiting factor to the expressive power of the analysis results. Furthermore, most of the studies included in this metaanalysis did not report any information about the premise
order (e.g., if the premise information is continuosly), so it
was not possible to control for this factor. Likewise, with
regard to the small number of raw means, it was not possible to factor in the sample size of each experiment. The
next step of analysis in this study will focus on this particular
point and investigates questions, such as the variability in effects across studies and how this variability can be explored
in terms of moderator variables. Identification of the moderator variables that describe the study characteristics associated
with larger and smaller effects is another kind of contribution
meta-analysis can make to understanding difficulties in spatial relational reasoning. Of particular importance is the role
such moderator analysis can play in ascertaining which variants of spatial descriptions are most effective for reasoning.
Taken together this study illustrates a use of meta-analysis
for data interpretation beyond conventional statistical analysis. Some cross-experimental results can be formulated:
First, determinate problems are easier to solve than indeterminate problems. Second, compared with auditory presentation, problems in form of written language are less difficult.
Further, the accuracy was better for tasks that require the verification of conclusions or models than in tasks that require to

generate conclusions or models. This meta-analysis confirms
some previous empirical findings, and supports predictions
of the spatial mental model theory together with assumptions
from a limited spatial working memory.

Acknowledgments
This work has been supported by a DFG Heisenberg fellowship RA 1934/3-1 and projects RA 1934/2-1 and 4-1.

References
Asterisks refer to studies included in the analysis.

Baddeley, A. (1986). Working memory. Clarendon Press,
Oxford.
Boudreau, G., & Pigeau, R. (2001). The mental representation and processes of spatial deductive reasoning with diagrams and sentences. International Journal of Psychology,
36(1), 42–52.
Brüssow, S., Ragni, M., Frorath, M., Konieczny, L., & Fangmeier, T. (2013). Premise annotation in mental model
construction: An ACT-R approach to processing indeterminacy in spatial relational reasoning. Cognitive Systems
Research, 24, 52–61.
*Bucher, L., & Nejasmic, J. (2012). Relocating multiple objects during spatial belief revision. In U. D. Stachniss C.
Schill K. (Ed.), International conference on spatial cognition (Vol. 7463, pp. 478–491). Springer.
*Byrne, R. M., & Johnson-Laird, P. (1989). Spatial reasoning. Journal of memory and language, 28(5), 564–575.
Clevenger, P. E., & Hummel, J. E. (2014). Working memory for relations among objects. Attention, Perception, &
Psychophysics, 76(7), 1933–1953.
*De Soto, C. B., London, M., & Handel, S. (1965). Social
reasoning and spatial paralogic. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 2(4), 513–521.
*Ehrlich, K., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1982). Spatial descriptions and referential continuity. Journal of verbal learning
and verbal behavior, 21(3), 296–306.
*Fangmeier, T., & Knauff, M. (2009). Neural correlates of
acoustic reasoning. Brain research, 1249, 181–190.
Fangmeier, T., Knauff, M., Ruff, C. C., & Sloutsky, V. (2006).
fmri evidence for a three-stage model of deductive reasoning. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 18(3), 320–334.
Goodwin, G. P., & Johnson-Laird, P. (2005). Reasoning about
relations. Psychological Review, 112(2), 468–493.
Hagert, G. (1984). Modeling mental models: Experiments
in cognitive modeling of spatial reasoning. In T. O’Shea
(Ed.), Proceedings of the 6th European Conference on Artificial Intelligence (pp. 179–188).
Hunter, I. M. (1957). The solving of three-term series problems. British Journal of Psychology, 48(4), 286–298.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. (1991). Deduction.
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Klauer, K. C. (1997). Working memory involvement in
propositional and spatial reasoning. Thinking & Reasoning, 3(1), 9–47.

2405

*Knauff, M., Bucher, L., Krumnack, A., & Nejasmic, J.
(2013). Spatial belief revision. Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 25(2), 147–156.
*Knauff, M., Fangmeier, T., Ruff, C. C., & Johnson-Laird,
P. (2003). Reasoning, models, and images: Behavioral
measures and cortical activity. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 15(4), 559–573.
Knauff, M., & Johnson-Laird, P. (2002a). Reasoning and
the visual-impedance hypothesis. In C. Freksa, W. Brauer,
C. Habel, & K. F. Wender (Eds.), International Conference
on Spatial Cognition (pp. 372–384). Springer.
*Knauff, M., & Johnson-Laird, P. (2002b). Visual imagery
can impede reasoning. Memory & Cognition, 30(3), 363–
371.
*Knauff, M., & May, E. (2006). Mental imagery, reasoning, and blindness. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 59(1), 161–177.
*Knauff, M., Mulack, T., Kassubek, J., Salih, H. R., & Greenlee, M. W. (2002). Spatial imagery in deductive reasoning:
a functional mri study. Cognitive Brain Research, 13(2),
203–212.
Knauff, M., Rauh, R., Schlieder, C., & Strube, G. (1998).
Continuity effect and figural bias in spatial relational inference. In M. A. Gernsbacher & S. J. Derry (Eds.), Proceedings of the 20th Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 573–578).
Knauff, M., Strube, G., Jola, C., Rauh, R., & Schlieder, C.
(2004). The psychological validity of qualitative spatial
reasoning in one dimension. Spatial Cognition and Computation, 4(2), 167–188.
*Krumnack, A., Bucher, L., Nejasmic, J., Nebel, B., &
Knauff, M. (2011). A model for relational reasoning as
verbal reasoning. Cognitive Systems Research, 12(3), 377–
392.
Kubinger, K. D., & Wolfsbauer, C. (2010). On the risk of
certain psychotechnological response options in multiplechoice tests. European Journal of Psychological Assessment, 26, 302-308.
Mani, K., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1982). The mental representation of spatial descriptions. Memory & Cognition,
10(2), 181–187.
Manktelow, K., & Galbraith, N. (2012). Thinking and reasoning: An introduction to the psychology of reason, judgment
and decision making. Psychology Press.
*Morra, S. (1989). Developmental differences in the use
of verbatim versus spatial representations in the recall of
spatial descriptions: A probabilistic model and an experimental analysis. Journal of Memory and Language, 28(1),
37–55.
*Morra, S. (2001). On the information-processing demands
of spatial reasoning. Thinking & reasoning, 7(4), 347–365.
*Nejasmic, J., Bucher, L., & Knauff, M. (2015). The construction of spatial mental models—a new view on the continuity effect. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 68(9), 1794–1812.

*Nejasmic, J., Krumnack, A., Bucher, L., & Knauff, M.
(2011). Cognitive processes underlying the continuity effect in spatial reasoning. In L. Carlson, C. Hoelscher, &
T. F. Shipley (Eds.), Proceedings of the 33rd annual conference of the cognitive science society (pp. 1127–1132).
Ormrod, J. E. (1979). Cognitive processes in the solution
of three-term series problems. The American Journal of
Psychology, 235–255.
*Prado, J., Van Der Henst, J.-B., & Noveck, I. A. (2010). Recomposing a fragmented literature: How conditional and
relational arguments engage different neural systems for
deductive reasoning. Neuroimage, 51(3), 1213–1221.
R Core Team. (2015). R: A language and environment for
statistical computing [Computer software manual]. Vienna,
Austria. Retrieved from https://www.R-project.org/
*Ragni, M., & Knauff, M. (2013). A theory and a computational model of spatial reasoning with preferred mental
models. Psychological Review, 120(3), 561-588.
*Roberts, M. J. (2000). Strategies in relational inference.
Thinking & Reasoning, 6(1), 1–26.
Roberts, M. J., & Sykes, E. D. (2003). Belief bias and relational reasoning. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Section A, 56(1), 131–154.
*Ruff, C. C., Knauff, M., Fangmeier, T., & Spreer, J. (2003).
Reasoning and working memory: common and distinct
neuronal processes. Neuropsychologia, 41(9), 1241–1253.
*Schaeken, W., Girotto, V., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1998).
The effect of an irrelevant premise on temporal and spatial
reasoning. Kognitionswissenschaft, 7(1), 27–32.
Schaeken, W., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2000). Strategies
in temporal reasoning. Thinking & Reasoning, 6(3), 193–
219.
Störring, G. (1908). Experimentelle Untersuchungen über
einfache Schlussprozesse. W. Engelmann.
Van Der Henst, J.-B. (2002). Mental model theory versus the
inference rule approach in relational reasoning. Thinking
& Reasoning, 8(3), 193–203.
Van der Henst, J.-B., & Schaeken, W. (2005). The wording
of conclusions in relational reasoning. Cognition, 97(1),
1–22.
*Vandierendonck, A. (1996). Evidence for mental-modelbased reasoning: A comparison of reasoning with time and
space concepts. Thinking & Reasoning, 2(4), 249–272.

2406

