Promoting Spontaneous Analogical Transfer: The Role of Category Status
Sean Snoddy (ssnoddy1@binghamton.edu)
Kenneth J. Kurtz (kkurtz@binghamton.edu)
Department of Psychology, Binghamton University (SUNY)
Binghamton, NY 13902 USA

Abstract
Analogical comparison promotes spontaneous transfer by
encouraging a more abstract representation that may be easier
to retrieve. The category status hypothesis states that: if
knowledge is represented as a relational category, it is easier
to activate as a result of categorizing (as opposed to cue-based
reminding). To investigate these two pathways to analogical
transfer, participants were assigned to different study
conditions: 1) standard comparison of two analogs; 2)
standard comparison followed by a second comparison of two
new analogs; or 3) a guided category-building task based on
sequential summarization. Category-building showed a
reliably higher rate of spontaneous transfer during an
analogical problem solving task than standard comparison
(numerically higher than double-comparison). Another
experiment measured spontaneous remindings to cues on the
basis of matching structure. Category-building showed a
reliable advantage over both comparison conditions. This
supports categorization as a novel pathway to spontaneous
transfer by enhancing retrieval of structurally similar
information.
Keywords: concepts and categories; analogy; problem
solving; comparison; transfer

General Introduction
People are able to transfer prior knowledge to solve
problems in a superficially dissimilar context. Gick and
Holyoak (1980) demonstrated that individuals who encoded
a base passage, which described how a general captured a
fortress by dividing an army into small groups of soldiers
that simultaneously attacked the fortress from various
angles, were able to transfer the passage’s solution to solve
an isomorphic target problem about how a doctor could
destroy a tumor with a ray of radiation. The prevailing
cognitive account (henceforth abstraction account) explains
knowledge transfer across domains (e.g., military strategy to
medical treatment) in terms of analogy. According to the
abstraction account, transfer involves a mapping process
where distinct superficial information between analogs is
filtered out (e.g., general and doctor), and similar
relationships between analogs are placed into
correspondence (e.g., simultaneous application) (Gentner,
1983; Gick & Holyoak, 1980). This mapping process allows
for candidate inferences from the structure of the base to fill
in missing predicates of the target problem, which allows
for a solution to be devised (e.g., lower intensity rays
simultaneously converging on a tumor from multiple
locations) (Gentner, 1983; Gick & Holyoak, 1980).
Despite the capacity for analogical transfer, individuals
often fail to spontaneously transfer knowledge from a single

base analog to solve a problem in a different domain
without an explicit hint about the base’s relevance (Gick &
Holyoak, 1980). This failure is known as the paradox of
similarity-based retrieval: superficially similar information
to the target problem (e.g., other medical problems) is
favored during retrieval, even though inferences require
structural overlap between the base and target (e.g., the
concept of convergence) (Gentner, Ratterman & Forbus,
1993; Holyoak & Koh, 1987; Ross, 1987). With this
paradox in mind, the key to understanding how spontaneous
transfer occurs is to determine what promotes structurebased retrieval.
Some key findings of the abstraction account are that
comparison is an effective way to learn (Alfieri, NokesMalach & Schunn, 2013) and to promote spontaneous
transfer (Gentner, Loewenstein & Thompson, 2003; Gick &
Holyoak, 1983). During comparison, cases with matching
structure are presented side-by-side and participants are
prompted to consider the similarities between them. This
facilitates a mapping process to occur during encoding that
is similar to the one that occurs during transfer, which
highlights commonalities between cases and promotes the
formation of an abstract schema via filtering out surfacelevel mismatches (Markman & Gentner, 2000). These
abstract schemas are more accessible in memory than
representations of specific cases due to a lack of superficial
mismatches with targets (Forbus, Gentner & Law, 1995;
Gick & Holyoak, 1983). The heightened accessibility of
abstract schemas facilitates retrieval of structurally similar
matches during the memory search triggered by an
opportunity to spontaneously transfer knowledge.
While the abstraction account focuses on the role of
schema abstraction in spontaneous transfer, the type of
materials used in these studies can also be viewed as
embodying relational categories (Gentner & Kurtz, 2005).
Categorization may provide another pathway to structurebased retrieval. The category status hypothesis predicts that
when knowledge is represented in the form of a category, it
is fluidly accessed and applied (Kurtz & Honke, submitted).
There are three important aspects that contribute to the
development of category status. First, category intension is
knowledge of the category defining structure. This may be
similar to an abstract schema, and could be conferred
through the comparison process (Goldwater & Schalk,
2016). Second, category extension is knowledge of specific
members and non-members of a category as well as how to
differentiate between them. Third, categorization confers
experience in bi-directional mapping between generic
knowledge of the category and specific cases. Thus, the key

3215

claim of the category status hypothesis is as follows: when
knowledge is represented as a psychological category,
construal of a target stimulus as a category member
facilitates direct activation of the category-defining concept
in semantic memory. The key difference is that the category
status hypothesis predicts direct activation of structurally
relevant matches as opposed to a filtering out of superficial
mismatches followed by an evaluation for any structural
similarity.
Initial support for the category status hypothesis comes
from Kurtz and Honke (submitted) who had participants
learn a relational principle either through category
construction or a single comparison opportunity. In the
category construction task, participants formed two
categories out of three examples of a principle and three
alignably different examples. This was compared to the
standard version of the comparison task that received two
cases presented side-by-side and provided a similarity rating
as well as an explanation of the similarities between cases.
Category construction led to a higher rate of spontaneous
transfer than the comparison task, which suggested that
promoting category status may provide a novel pathway to
spontaneous transfer (Kurtz & Honke, submitted).
The goals of the present work are: 1) to further evaluate
the plausibility of the category status hypothesis as an
alternative account of spontaneous transfer, and 2) to further
explore the abstraction account. To address the first goal, a
novel category building task based on the sequential
summarization of cases was used to promote category
status. This task is often used as a control to comparison,
and does not confer the same level of abstraction-based
transfer benefits (Catrambone & Holyoak, 1989; Gentner et
al., 2003; Rittle-Johnson & Star, 2007). If sequential
summarization can be combined with additional supports
that promote category status, then it should become an
effective way to promote transfer. The categorization
supports that were integrated with the core summarization
task were: 1) summarization of category-membershiprelevant aspects of multiple cases, 2) identification of each
case with a shared category label, and 3) a description of the
category after encountering all cases. If these supports
contribute to the development of category status, a
categorization-based summarization task should become an
effective way to promote transfer.
The second goal of the present work sought to further
understand the abstraction account. Prior analogical
comparison research has largely focused on the effects of a
single comparison opportunity on transfer success. The
effect of an additional comparison opportunity was
explored, which should improve schema abstraction by
providing additional surface-level mismatches to filter out.
The additional comparison opportunity also serves as a
control for case exposure in the category-building condition.

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 used the analogical transfer paradigm (Gick &
Holyoak, 1980, 1983) to assess the impact of categorization-

based summarization (category-building), the standard
version of the comparison task (single comparison) (cf.
Catrambone & Holyoak, 1989; Gentner et al., 2003; Gick &
Holyoak, 1983), a standard comparison task that is repeated
a second time with novel cases (double comparison), and a
baseline condition on spontaneous transfer performance.
Spontaneous transfer success is contingent upon being able
to both spontaneously access and retrieve relevant
knowledge from memory as well as apply that knowledge to
devise a solution (Gick & Holyoak, 1983). The use of both
spontaneous and hint-aided transfer assessments allows for
the differentiation of the relative impact that each study
condition has on application ability and retrieval.
Both the abstraction account and category status
hypothesis make different predictions about what type of
task will improve the retrieval process that underlies
successful spontaneous transfer. The predictions for
spontaneous transfer are as follows: 1) all study conditions
will promote transfer (i.e., result in a higher rate of transfer
than baseline), 2) the category-building condition will result
in a higher rate of transfer than both comparison conditions,
and 3) double comparison will result in a higher rate of
transfer than single comparison. Neither account makes
explicit predictions about application ability, so hint-aided
transfer performance is exploratory.

Method
Participants A total of 355 undergraduate students from
Binghamton University participated for course credit. Hintaided transfer data from seven participants were excluded
due to a failure to complete the assessment in the allotted
time.
Materials and Design The materials consisted of both
study cases and the transfer problem. All materials
demonstrated the principle “problem-as-a-solution”: when a
large-scale event causes a large amount of damage, the
event can be mitigated by repeatedly causing it on a small
scale and incurring minor damage each time. The study
cases were all from the domain of natural disasters. The
passages were a single paragraph that consisted of a
description of the problem followed by the solution.
The transfer problem involved the prevention of
cybercrime. It contained a similar description of the
problem as the study cases. However, the solution was
replaced with an open-ended question about how the threat
of computer hackers could be minimized. The general
formatting of the transfer problem was different from the
study tasks to make the separate phases appear unrelated.
The transfer problem was presented twice. It was first
presented under the guise of a new experiment about
problem solving (spontaneous transfer). The same problem
was presented again with a hint for participants to use their
knowledge from the study phase (hint-aided transfer).
Procedure Prior to the experiment, all participants were
informed that they would take part in multiple experiments,

3216

then were randomly assigned to one of the study tasks.
Participants in the single comparison condition received two
study cases, which were referred to as solved problems,
presented side-by-side. Participants were informed that there
were important ways that the solved problems were alike
and were asked to consider the similarities between them.
After reading the cases, participants provided a similarity
rating on a five-point scale that ranged from ‘not at all
similar’ to ‘very similar’. Participants were then asked to
describe the similarities and differences they considered
when making their similarity judgement. The doublecomparison task was similar to single comparison, with the
only difference being a second comparison opportunity for
two novel cases. During this second comparison
opportunity, participants were asked to consider the
important ways in which all four of the solved problems
were alike, provide a similarity rating for the two additional
cases, and describe the similarities used to create the rating.
In the category-building condition, participants were
given instructions that explicitly stated the task involved
learning about a category, and then were sequentially
presented with all four cases. Upon presentation of each
case, participants were provided with the label to identify
the case as a member of the category (e.g., “Here is an
example of the Tongo category”) and were asked to
summarize the relevant information to category
membership. After completion of the final summarization
task, participants were asked to provide a description of the
category they had just learned.
Following the study task, participants were told that they
were beginning a new experiment on problem solving, and
proceeded to the spontaneous transfer assessment. Since the
baseline condition was meant to establish chance production
of transfer solutions to the problem, participants in that
condition only received this assessment. After completion of
the spontaneous transfer assessment, participants were then
given another chance to solve the problem with an explicit
hint to use their knowledge from the study phase. Both of
these assessments presented participants with the transfer
problem, and asked them to devise a solution. For each
transfer opportunity, participants were allowed to provide
multiple solutions to the problem. Each of the proposed
solutions was scored by the first author blind to condition. If
at least one of a participant’s proposed solutions
demonstrated the target principle, that participant was coded
as a transfer success.

Results and Discussion
Hint-aided Transfer Hint-aided transfer performance
reflects participants’ ability to retain and apply the
knowledge from the learning tasks. To evaluate hint-aided
transfer performance, a logistic regression model (R Core
Team, 2016) was built to predict hint-aided success with
condition. There were no significant differences between
category-building and single comparison (β = 0.274, SE =
0.313, Wald Z = 0.872, p = .383) or double-comparison (β =
-0.174, SE = 0.318, Wald Z = -0.547, p = .585).

Additionally, there were no significant differences between
double-comparison and single-comparison (β = 0.447, SE =
0.313, Wald Z = 1.426, p = 0.154) (see Table 1).

Table 1: Hint-aided transfer performance.
Learning Task
Single-Comparison
Double-Comparison
Category-Building

% Transfer (N)
55% (47)
66% (58)
62% (52)

95% C.I.
45% - 66%
55% - 75%
51% – 72%

N
85
88
84

Spontaneous Transfer Spontaneous transfer success was
modelled using a logistic regression with condition as the
predictor. Both the category-building (β = 1.68, SE = 0.433,
Wald Z = 3.88, p < .001) and double-comparison (β = 1.1,
SE = 0.449, Wald Z = 2.453, p = .014) conditions resulted in
a higher rate of transfer than baseline. However, the single
comparison condition was not significantly different from
baseline transfer performance (β = 0.407, SE = 0.491, Wald
Z = 0.828, p = .408) (see Table 2).
The category-building condition led to a significantly
higher rate of spontaneous transfer than single comparison
(β = 1.274, SE = 0.393, Wald Z = 3.239, p < .01). However,
there was no significant difference between categorybuilding and double comparison (β = 0.579, SE = 0.339,
Wald Z = 0.171, p = .088). There was no significant
difference between double and single comparison (β =
0.695, SE = 0.411, Wald Z = 1.692, p = .091) (see Table 2).
To account for slight numeric differences in hint-aided
transfer, a more conservative analysis was done that
included only participants with hint-aided transfer success
to clearly reflect differences in the retrieval process. The
same pattern of results was observed.
Table 2: Spontaneous transfer performance.
Learning Task
Baseline
Single-Comparison
Double-Comparison
Category-Building

% Transfer (N)
9% (8)
13% (11)
22% (20)
34% (30)

95% C.I.
4% - 17%
7% - 21%
15% - 32%
25% - 45%

N
91
87
89
88

Contrary to prior research, which demonstrated
summarization was a less effective way to promote transfer
than comparison (Catrambone & Holyoak, 1989; Gentner et
al., 2003), the present work found that combining
summarization with categorization supports (categorybuilding condition) is an effective way to promote transfer.
The category-building led to a higher rate of spontaneous
transfer than single comparison, which provides support for
the category status hypothesis as a viable account of
transfer. The lack of a significant difference between
category-building and double comparison provides limited
support, since categorization supports in the categorybuilding task led to higher performance than is typically
expected of a summarization task (i.e., it was not

3217

significantly lower than double comparison). Further, the
lack of differences on the hint-aided transfer assessment
suggests that the category-building task’s spontaneous
transfer advantage cannot be attributed to a differential
ability to apply knowledge, but instead results from
improved structure-based retrieval. These findings support
the category status hypothesis as an alternative account of
transfer.
The interpretation of the comparison conditions is less
clear. Prior work has demonstrated that single comparison is
an effective way to promote transfer (Catrambone &
Holyoak, 1989; Gick & Holyoak, 1983), so the lack of an
advantage over baseline is puzzling. The present study used
a novel stimulus set, and the observed transfer performance
is appreciably lower than has been reported with the
convergence materials (Catrambone & Holyoak, 1989; Gick
& Holyoak, 1983). This stimulus set may be more difficult
than commonly used materials, and a single comparison
opportunity might require additional support to remain
effective under more difficult circumstances.
There was no significant difference between single and
double comparison on spontaneous transfer performance,
which suggests that an additional comparison opportunity
might not appreciably improve abstraction. If the present
principle is more difficult than previous materials, an
additional comparison opportunity may also be lacking in
the support needed to remain effective. While singlecomparison did not promote transfer above baseline levels
of performance, double-comparison did. This suggests that
there may be some small benefit to engaging in the second
comparison opportunity.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 was conducted to conceptually replicate the
main findings and clarify some of the outstanding questions
of Experiment 1. The same study conditions were used with
the exception that a baseline condition was not included.
Instead of a problem-solving assessment, a spontaneous
reminding task was used. Participants were given a series of
cue passages that were superficially distinct from, but
contained matching structure with the study materials, and
were asked what each cue reminds them of. Since
participants were given completed cases as a cue, the entire
relational structure of the principle guides the memory
search. This is in contrast to the problem-solving transfer
assessment that provides only the problem statement as a
cue to initiate the memory search. Under less demanding
retrieval circumstances, a double-comparison advantage
might be accrued. Other modifications were made in an
attempt to support the comparison conditions. Both
problem-as-a-solution and convergence (Gick & Holyoak,
1983) materials were used to test if the problem-as-asolution principle was more difficult to retrieve than
convergence, since the difficulty of the principle in the first
experiment may have been a barrier to comparison success.
The instructions for the comparison conditions were
modified to increase the symbolic juxtaposition – invitation

to compare through shared labels (Gentner, 2005) – of the
cases in another attempt to enhance the comparison task.
The main prediction was that category-building will lead
to more structure-based remindings than either comparison
condition. Since the procedure was made less demanding in
an attempt to promote comparison performance, doublecomparison was predicted to have a higher rate of reminding
success than single-comparison. Given the overall low rate
of transfer in the first experiment, it was predicted that cues
for the convergence principle will result in a higher rate of
successful remindings than the cues for the problem-as-asolution principle.

Method
Participants A total of 104 undergraduate students from
Binghamton University participated for course credit. Data
from three participants were excluded due to a failure to
complete the experiment in the allotted time, and another
participant was excluded for failing to follow instructions.
Materials and Design The study materials consisted of
both the problem-as-a-solution and convergence (Gick &
Holyoak, 1983) principles. The study cases for problem-asa-solution were the same as in Experiment 1. The
convergence cases used were as follows: The General, The
Commander, Red Adair, and The Fire Chief (Gick &
Holyoak, 1983). These cases were rewritten to be
comparable in length and grammatical structure to the
problem-as-a-solution materials. The order of principles
remained constant across participants; problem-as-asolution occurred first and convergence occurred second.
The reminding assessment consisted of six cue cases.
Two cues were used that demonstrated the problem-as-asolution principle from Experiment 1. The transfer problem
used in Experiment 1 was rewritten to include the solution
and the other cue involved police infiltrating black markets.
The Radiation Problem (Gick & Holyoak, 1983) and The
Aquarium (Catrambone & Holyoak, 1989) were rewritten as
reminding cues for the convergence principle. Two
distractor cases – The Wine Merchant (Gick & Holyoak,
1980) and The Birthday Party (Gick & Holyoak, 1983) –
were also included in the reminding assessment in an
attempt to disguise the true purpose of the assessment. The
order of the cues was constant across participants: distractor,
problem-as-a-solution, convergence, distractor, problem-asa-solution, convergence.
Procedure The study task procedure was similar to the first
experiment, with only a few differences. Participants in both
comparison conditions received the same task from the first
experiment, then repeated it a second time for the
convergence materials. In addition, the principles were
referred to as separate ‘series’ to connote that they reflected
different principles. In double comparison, the instructions
were modified to clearly connote that the first four passages
shared important commonalties, and the second four
passages also shared important commonalities. The

3218

category-building condition repeated the task for the
convergence principle after completion of the task for the
problem-as-a-solution principle. The only other difference
in the category-building condition was that the category
label was replaced with “Conaway Scenario” for the first
principle and “Rummel Scenario” for the second principle
to clearly reflect the change in principles.
After the study phase all participants were given the
reminding packet, which was introduced as a new
experiment. Participants were told they would be shown a
set of passages, and were supposed to write down anything
that each passage reminded them of in as much detail as
possible. Participants were then presented with each
reminding cue sequentially and made their response.
Reminding performance was scored by the first author and
an undergraduate research assistant. A successful reminding
on the basis of shared structure met at least one of the three
following criteria: 1) used the category label or referred to
solved problems, 2) referenced one of the cases from the
study task, or 3) described the principle from the study task.
Any remindings of another cue from within the assessment
were considered non-scoring. Both raters agreed on scores
for 99.8% of the reminding responses, all disagreements
were resolved through discussion.

Results and Discussion

SE = 1.307, Wald Z = 2.1, p = .036). Collapsing across
condition, convergence cues led to a significantly higher
rate of successful remindings than problem-as-a-solution
cues (β = 1.5, SE = .622, Wald Z = 2.41, p = .016) (see
Figure 1).
The category-building task led to a higher rate of
structurally based remindings to target cues than either
comparison condition. This suggests that category-building
promotes the spontaneous access and retrieval of relevant
structural matches from memory, and that this is driving the
spontaneous transfer differences observed in the first
experiment. These results provide further support for the
category status hypothesis and a successful replication of
the main finding in Experiment 1.
These results also address some of the outstanding
questions from the first experiment. In contrast to the
previous findings, double comparison had a significantly
higher rate of structural remindings to target cues than a
single comparison opportunity. This suggests that additional
comparison opportunities can enhance the retrieval of
structurally relevant information from memory. However,
we cannot identify which changes were responsible for the
observed improvements. Additionally, convergence cues led
to a higher rate of successful structural remindings than
problem-as-a-solution cues, which may suggest that the
convergence materials result in higher rates of transfer than
other materials. However, the convergence study materials
were always presented after problem-as-a-solution, so future
work should explore if this is the result of a practice effect.

General Discussion

Figure 1: Proportion of structural remindings to target cues
by study task and principle. Error bars reflect 95% binomial
confidence intervals (Dorai-Raj, 2014).
Reminding performance was modelled trial-wise via a
mixed-effects logistic regression (Bates et al., 2015) with
the main effect of interest as a predictor and participant
included as a random intercept. The predictions concern
participants’ responses to only the target cues that had
shared structure with the study materials, so only those cues
are considered. Category-building led to a higher rate of
successful remindings than double-comparison (β = 3.436,
SE = 1.671, Wald Z = 2.057, p = .0399) and singlecomparison (β = 6.178, SE = 1.649, Wald Z = 3.746, p <
.001). Double-comparison led to a significantly higher rate
of successful remindings than single comparison (β = 2.741,

When a sequential summarization task was given additional
categorization-based supports (the category-building
condition), it led to better spontaneous transfer performance
than the standard version of the comparison task (single
comparison), but did not significantly differ from a task that
controlled for case exposure (double comparison). The
second experiment replicated the advantage of categorybuilding over single comparison, and found that categorybuilding led to a higher rate of structure-based remindings
than double comparison. This supports the conclusion that
the spontaneous analogical transfer gains in the categorybuilding condition were due to an increase in retrieval based
on matching structure. Taken together, both experiments
provide additional support for the category status hypothesis
as a viable account of spontaneous transfer.
It is possible that the use of category labels in the
category-building condition might confer symbolic
juxtaposition (Gentner, 2005), which may allow for
abstraction to occur in the absence of the temporal and
spatial juxtaposition that is present during comparison.
However, this explanation is unlikely the sole factor driving
the results. The comparison conditions referred to cases as
‘solved problems’ to control for the use of a category label,
and referred to cases from each principle as a coherent
‘series’. The comparison conditions’ controls for the
presence of a label likely conferred some degree of

3219

symbolic juxtaposition. If category-building benefits were
due to symbolic juxtaposition promoting abstraction, it
seems unlikely that a condition which has temporal, spatial,
and symbolic juxtaposition (comparison conditions) would
perform significantly worse.
The benefits of an additional comparison opportunity are
less clear. During the analogical transfer assessment, no
advantage of an additional comparison opportunity was
accrued. However, in the reminding assessment, an extra
comparison opportunity led to a higher rate of retrieval on
the basis of shared structure. The benefits of an additional
comparison opportunity may occur only under less
demanding circumstances, such as being given the full
structure as a retrieval cue and not needing to apply the
knowledge to solve a problem.
The category status hypothesis can provide an alternative
perspective about the success of double-comparison in the
second experiment that is not mutually exclusive with the
abstraction account. The second instance of comparison
provides a chance to build extensional knowledge of the
category, since participants are told that the cases are related
and participants are given a chance to test hypotheses about
why. Further, since some abstraction has likely occurred
during the first comparison, the second comparison may
afford the opportunity for a bi-directional mapping between
generic knowledge of the principle and concrete knowledge
of the cases. Future work should further explore the
conditions required for additional comparison opportunities
to promote spontaneous transfer as well as the role of the
category status hypothesis in improving comparison.
There are two possibilities about why category-building
and double-comparison led to better retrieval of structural
information. First, promoting category status could engage
the use of a different type of retrieval process. This retrieval
process might occur through the mechanism of
categorization as opposed to cue-based reminding.
Alternatively, conferring category status might enhance or
alter the cue-based reminding process described in Forbus et
al. (1995). Future work should try to uncover the
mechanism by which these two pathways to improved
structure-based retrieval operate.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Daria E. Slaby and Ian T. Goodman
for their help scoring data, Garrett Honke for creation of the
problem-as-a-solution stimulus set, and members of the
Learning and Representation in Cognition lab.

References
Alfieri, L., Nokes-Malach, T. J., & Schunn, C. D. (2013).
Learning through case comparisons: A meta-analytic
review. Educational Psychologist, 48, 87-113.
Bates, D., Maechler, M., Bolker, B., Walker, S., (2015).
Fitting linear mixed-effects models using lme4. Journal
of Statistical Software, 67, 1-48.
Catrambone, R., & Holyoak, K. J. (1989). Overcoming
contextual limitations on problem-solving transfer.

Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 15, 1147-1156.
Dorai-Raj, S. (2014). binom: Binomial confidence intervals
for several parameterizations. R package version 1.1-1.
https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=binom
Forbus, K. D., Gentner, D., & Law, K. (1995). MAC/FAC:
A model of similarity-based retrieval. Cognitive Science,
19, 141-205.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Gentner, D. (2005). The development of relational category
knowledge. In L. Gershkoff-Stowe & D. H. Rakison,
(Eds.), Building object categories in developmental time.
(pp. 245-275). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gentner, D., & Kurtz, K. J. (2005). Relational categories. In
W. Ahn, R. Goldstone, B. Love, A. Markman, & P. Wolff
(Eds.), Categorization inside and outside the laboratory
(pp.151-175). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.
Gentner, D., Loewenstein, J., & Thompson, L. (2003).
Learning and transfer: A general role for analogical
encoding. Journal of Educational Psychology, 95, 393408.
Gentner, D., Rattermann, M. J., & Forbus, K. D. (1993).
The roles of similarity in transfer: Separating
retrievability from inferential soundness. Cognitive
Psychology, 25, 524-575.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1980). Analogical problem
solving. Cognitive Psychology, 12, 306-355.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1983). Schema induction
and analogical transfer. Cognitive Psychology, 15, 1-38.
Goldwater, M. B., & Schalk, L. (2016, March 7). Relational
categories as a bridge between cognitive and educational
research. Psychological Bulletin, 142, 729 - 757.
Holyoak, K. J., & Koh, K. (1987) Surface and structural
similarity in analogical transfer. Memory and Cognition,
15, 332-340.
Kurtz, K. J., & Honke, G. (2017). Sorting out the problem of
inert knowledge: Using category construction to promote
spontaneous transfer. Manuscript submitted for
publication.
Markman, A.B., & Gentner, D. (2002) Structure-mapping in
the comparison process. American Journal of Psychology,
113, 501-538.
R Core Team (2016). R: A language and environment for
statistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical
Computing, Vienna, Austria.
Rittle-Johnson, B., & Star, J. R. (2007). Does comparing
solution methods facilitate conceptual and procedural
knowledge? An experimental study on learning to solve
equations. Journal of Educational Psychology, 99, 561574.
Ross, B. H. (1987). This is like that: The use of earlier
problems and the separation of similarity effects. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 13, 629 – 639.

3220

