Promoting Children’s Relational Understanding of Equivalence
Kristen Johannes (kjohann@WestEd.org)
WestEd, 300 Lakeside Dr., Oakland, CA 94612 USA

Jodi Davenport (jdavenp@WestEd.org)
WestEd, 300 Lakeside Dr., Oakland, CA 94612 USA

Yvonne Kao (ykao@WestEd.org)
WestEd, 400 Seaport Court, Redwood City, CA 94063 USA

Caroline Byrd Hornburg (hornburg.1@nd.edu)
University of Notre Dame, 118 Haggar Hall, Notre Dame, IN 46556 USA

Nicole M. McNeil (nmcneil@nd.edu)
University of Notre Dame, 102 Haggar Hall, Notre Dame, IN 46556 USA
Abstract

rather than “two amounts are the same” (e.g., Behr,
Erlwanger, & Nichols, 1980).
Why do so many students lack a relational understanding
of the equal sign? McNeil and Alibali (2005) proposed a
change-resistance account: traditional arithmetic instruction
that focuses on procedures (i.e., solving problems such as
3 + 4 = _) promotes a misconception of the equal sign as a
request for an answer and interferes with the development of
relational understanding. The majority of examples of
arithmetic problems in early elementary math curricula
show operations (e.g., addition and subtraction) on the left
of the equal sign and the “answer” on the right (Seo &
Ginsburg, 2003). Children detect and extract patterns from
these examples and ultimately construct long-term memory
representations. Although default representations typically
speed computation in the problem-solving contexts that
children encounter most frequently, these representations
may lead to difficulties when patterns are mistakenly
transferred to similar, but non-applicable, problem types
(e.g., Bruner, 1957).
McNeil and Alibali characterize the representations that
develop in early mathematics as “operational patterns” as
they reflect an understanding of arithmetic that focuses on
the operators (e.g., +, –, ×, ÷) rather than the relational
nature of mathematical equations. Research has identified
three types of operational patterns that represent a distorted
view of arithmetic and hinder conceptual understanding of
the underlying mathematics. First, children learn to expect
math problems to have all operations on the left side of the
equal sign, with the equal sign immediately before the
answer blank on the right, an “operations = answer”
problem format (McNeil & Alibali, 2004). Second, children
learn to interpret the equal sign operationally as a symbol to
do something (Baroody & Ginsburg, 1983; Behr et al.,
1980). Third, children learn to perform operations on all
given numbers in a math problem (e.g., add up all the
numbers in an addition problem, McNeil & Alibali, 2005).

Deep understanding of mathematical equivalence is critical
for later mathematical understandings. However, research
studies and national test results have repeatedly demonstrated
that many students fail to develop adequate understanding of
equivalence. Recent work from McNeil and colleagues
proposes that this failure is partly due to the format of
traditional instruction and practice with highly similar
problems. Specifically, the change-resistance account
(McNeil & Alibali, 2005) proposes that students struggle with
equivalence because they have developed overgeneralized
“rules” that affect how they process and approach math
problems, (e.g., the operators are always on the left side, the
equal sign means to “do something” or “give the answer”)
and fail to see equations having two separate sides that are
being related to one another. Extensive practice with
problems in a similar format (e.g., those that present all
arithmetic operations on the left side of the equal sign)
encourages students to develop ineffective mental models of
problem types. We replicate and extend prior work that brings
cognitive science research to the classroom. Our findings
indicate that applying research-based design principles to
arithmetic practice improves student understanding of
mathematical equivalence enough to support transfer to novel
problem types.
Keywords:
Mathematical
representations;
relational
reasoning; mathematics education; randomized control trial

Introduction
Can a research-based, early elementary intervention help
students learn key concepts that may prevent later struggles
in algebra? Research suggests that understanding
mathematical equivalence is a critical component of
algebraic reasoning (Carpenter, Franke, & Levi, 2003;
Charles, 2005; Knuth, Stephens, McNeil, & Alibali, 2006).
However, the majority of US students fail to reason with
and apply concepts of equivalence (McNeil & Alibali,
2005), making encoding errors when remembering
mathematical equations (e.g., McNeil & Alibali, 2004), and
interpreting the equal sign to mean “calculate the total”

600

Once entrenched, children rely on these potentially
misleading patterns when encoding, interpreting, and
solving novel mathematics problems. Students that expect
all problems to have operations on the left fail to correctly
encode the problem being asked. For instance, after briefly
viewing the problem “7 + 4 + 5 = 7 + __” many children
rely on their knowledge of the “operations = answer”
problem format and erroneously remember the problem as
“7 + 4 + 5 + 7 = __” (McNeil & Alibali, 2004). Students
also struggle to interpret what a mathematical problem is
asking. When asked to define the equal sign—even in the
context of a mathematical equivalence problem—many
children treat it like an arithmetic operator (like + or –) that
means they should calculate the total (McNeil & Alibali,
2005). Finally, entrenched patterns mislead students to solve
the problem “7 + 4 + 5 = 7 + __” by performing all given
operations on all given numbers and put 23 (instead of 9) in
the blank (McNeil, 2007; Rittle-Johnson, 2006). These
findings support the idea that children’s difficulties with
mathematical equivalence are partially due to inappropriate
knowledge derived from overly narrow experience with
traditional arithmetic.

4.

The Current Study: Improving Children’s
Understanding of Equivalence
A pilot study found the ICUE intervention was successful
in improving student understanding of mathematical
equivalence (Byrd, McNeil et al. 2015; McNeil, Hornburg,
Brletic-Shipley, & Matthews, under review). The current
study sought to replicate the findings with a new population
of students and additionally investigate whether the learning
transferred to the mathematical practice of generating
explanations.
To replicate Byrd et al.’s (2015) pilot study, we compared
the full ICUE intervention to a control condition consisting
solely of non-traditional mathematical practice and
measured students’ ability to encode equations, solve
problems, and define the relational function of the equal
sign.
To test whether the learning transferred to the ability of
students to generate mathematical explanations related to
arithmetic problems, we gave students performance tasks
from the Silicon Valley Mathematics Initiative’s (SVMI)
Mathematics Assessment Collaborative (MAC). MAC
partners with the Mathematics Assessment Resource
Service (MARS) to develop tasks that assess core
mathematical ideas and practices taught in each grade level.
Tasks require students to solve complex math problems as
well as give open-ended explanations of their reasoning. For
each task, MARS provides scoring rubrics and scorer
training procedures, student performance statistics, and
examples of common student errors (Foster & Noyce,
2004).
Our research questions were:
1. Does ICUE promote measurable gains in
children’s understanding of equivalence?
2. Do the benefits of ICUE activities transfer to
generating mathematical explanations?

The ICUE Intervention
Current math practice seems to promote the development
of faulty representations, and the change-resistance
account’s focus on “operational patterns” offers design
principles for instruction to improve students’ understanding
of equivalence. Initially, researchers hypothesized that
greater exposure to “non-traditional” arithmetic practice
(e.g., presenting operations on the right side of the equation,
“__ = 2 + 4,” [McNeil et al., 2011], organizing practice by
equivalent sums [McNeil et al., 2012], and using relational
phrases such as “is equal to” instead of the equal sign in
problems [Chesney, McNeil, Petersen, & Dunwiddie,
2012]). may prevent students from developing operational
patterns. Though practice with non-traditional arithmetic in
a classroom intervention led to improved outcomes over
traditional instruction, a number of students failed to reach
proficiency (McNeil, Fyfe, & Dunwiddie, 2015).
To further promote mastery of equivalence, McNeil and
colleagues added additional design features beyond nontraditional arithmetic practice. The current version of the
materials, dubbed Improving Children’s Understanding of
Equivalence (ICUE), consists of second grade student
activities that reduce reliance on operational patterns and
promote deep understanding of mathematical equivalence
through four key components that have independently been
shown to be effective:
1.
2.

3.

balancing a scale) are gradually faded into the
corresponding abstract mathematical symbols (e.g.,
Fyfe, McNeil, Son, & Goldstone, 2014); and
Activities that require students to compare and
explain different problem formats and problemsolving strategies (e.g., Carpenter et al., 2003; RittleJohnson, 2006).

Method
Design
We used a cluster-randomized control trial design to
examine the efficacy and generalizability of the ICUE
intervention relative to an active control program. Teachers
were randomly assigned to use the either the ICUE
intervention or Active Control materials. The active control
consisted of workbook activities to control for time on task.
The active control contained non-traditional arithmetic
practice but not the additional components present in ICUE,
described above.

Non-traditional arithmetic practice (Chesney et al.,
2012; McNeil et al., 2012, 2015, 2011);
Lessons that first introduce the equal sign outside of
arithmetic contexts (e.g., “28 = 28”) before
introducing arithmetic expressions (e.g., Baroody &
Ginsburg, 1983; McNeil, 2008);
Concreteness fading exercises in which concrete,
real-world, relational contexts (e.g., sharing stickers,

601

Participants. Five second-grade teachers (three treatment,
two control) from three California schools used the
activities in their classrooms. Class sizes ranged from 21 to
32, and we analyzed data from 81 students who completed
the ICUE activities and measures and 49 students who
completed the Active Control activities and measures.

mathematical equivalence before and after the interventions
using similar measures of equation encoding, equation
solving, and defining the equal sign used in previous work
by McNeil and colleagues (Byrd et al., 2015; McNeil &
Alibali, 2005; McNeil et al., 2015).

Procedure and Materials
The procedure for ICUE Treatment and Active Control
conditions were identical, differing only in the content of
the materials used by teachers and students. Each teacher
received training on the study purpose, features of the
activities, and strategies for integrating the activities into
their typical mathematics curriculum.
Prior to starting the study, participating teachers
completed online surveys assessing their mathematics
teaching experience and classroom structure and dynamics.
After administering a pretest, teachers used the study
materials for approximately 15 minutes twice each week for
16 weeks. In both conditions, teachers were asked to use the
study materials to supplement, rather than replace, current
instruction, and to limit session duration to 20 minutes.
After completing the 32 sessions, teachers administered
the same pretest measure of mathematical equivalence, a
proximal transfer measure, two measures of transfer to
mathematical explanations, and the Math Concepts subtest
of the Iowa Test of Basic Skills.

Figure 2. Sample workbook page from the ICUE Treatment
condition materials featuring a concreteness fading exercise.
Equation encoding. The encoding measure consisted of
recalling four mathematical equivalence problems (e.g., 5 +
4 = 3 + __) presented one at a time. Each equation was
visible for five seconds and students were instructed to
remember and write down exactly what they saw after the
equation was hidden from view. Responses were coded as
correct if the student wrote the equation exactly as shown
(i.e., the correct numbers and symbols in the correct order).
Equation solving. The equation solving measure
consisted of eight equations with operations on both sides of
the equal sign (e.g., 3 + 5 + 6 = 3 + __).
Defining the equal sign. The defining the equal sign
measure prompted students to write responses to three
questions about the equal sign symbol (=): 1) What is the
name of this math symbol? 2) What does this math symbol
mean? And, 3) Can it mean anything else? Teachers read
each question aloud and waited for students to write their
responses before moving on to the next question. Responses
were coded as relational if the response defined the equal
sign as relating two sides of the equation (e.g., two amounts
are the same, something is equivalent to another thing).1

Active Control. Teachers in the Active Control condition
received a set of student workbooks (see Figure 1) and a
teacher guide.

Measures of knowledge transfer.
Proximal transfer measure. The proximal transfer
measure, used by Byrd et al. (2015), consisted of nine more
advanced problems of mathematical equivalence, not strictly
aligned with the ICUE intervention. The transfer questions
included equations with operations on both sides of the
equal sign involving subtraction (e.g., 2 + 5 + 3 = 14 – __),

Figure 1. Sample workbook page from the Active Control
condition materials featuring non-traditional math practice.
ICUE. Teachers in the ICUE Treatment condition received
a set of student workbooks (see Figure 2), a teacher guide,
and a set of classroom manipulatives including balance
scales and flashcards.

1

Although many students in this age range have poor spelling,
coders did not have trouble determining what a given child had
written, even when words were misspelled (e.g., “the toltal”, “write
the anser next”). Inter-rater agreement between coders on whether
a given definition was relational ranged from 95-100%.

Measures
Pre- and post-test measures of mathematical
equivalence. We assessed children’s understanding of

602

larger numbers (e.g., 13 + 18 = __ + 19), “word problem”
items featuring story-to-equation translation, and an
“explaining equivalence” problem, which asked students to
decide whether the same number should appear in two
equations and explain their reasoning.
Distal transfer to mathematical explanations. We
selected two MARS items that tested students’
understanding of mathematical equivalence, described
below. Items were scored by project staff following scorer
training, calibration, and reliability procedures established
by MARS (Foster & Noyce, 2004).
Incredible Equations. In this task, students are asked to
fill in the missing parts of equations such as “__ + 8 + __ =
16” and “11 + 5 = __ + 8.” Students are asked to explain
how they know their answer is correct. When 6,305 students
took the task in 2007, the mean score was 6.08 out of 10
with a standard deviation of 2.5 (MARS, 2007).
Agree or Disagree? In this task, students are asked if they
agree or disagree with two number sentences:
“8 + 5 = 5 + 8” and “6 – 4 = 4 – 6”. Students are asked to
explain their answers using words, numbers, or pictures.
MARS administered this task to 4,585 second graders in
2004 and found the mean score was 3.10 out of 6 with a
standard deviation of 1.94 (MARS, 2004).

ICUE Treatment condition to those of students in the Active
Control condition (Figure 3).
There were no reliable differences between pretest scores
for each group, and students in the ICUE Treatment
condition made substantially greater gains during the
intervention than students in the Active Control condition.
The proportion of correct responses for Equation solving
items increased by 0.65 for ICUE students, compared to
only 0.065 for Active Control students (t(119)=48.8,
p<.001; Cohen’s d > 3); the proportion of correct responses
for Equation encoding items increased by 0.34 for ICUE
compared to 0.26 for Active Control (t(52)=5.31, p<.001;
Cohen’s d > 3); and the proportion of correct definitions of
the equal sign increased by 0.38 for ICUE compared to 0.02
for Active Control (t(125)=8.42, p<.001; Cohen’s d > 3).
These results suggest that the ICUE Treatment intervention
leads to systematic and measureable gains in children’s
understanding of and reasoning about mathematical
equivalence.

Iowa Test of Basic Skills. To make sure any gains in
understanding of equivalence do not come at the expense of
problem-solving fluency, students completed the Math
Concepts subtest of Level 8 of the Iowa Tests of Basic
Skills (ITBS), which served as a measure of general
mathematical reasoning. Participation in the ICUE
Treatment neither helped nor hurt students’ performance on
this measure, relative to the Active Control group
(t(83)=1.48, ns), establishing that the intervention does not
improve understanding of equivalence at the expense of
general computational fluency.

Figure 3. Mean performance gains from pre- to post-test for
children in the ICUE and Active Control groups.

Results

Do the benefits of ICUE activities transfer to more
challenging material and generating mathematical
explanations?

Does ICUE promote measurable gains in children’s
understanding of equivalence, relative to an Active
Control?

We explored whether the knowledge that children gained
from the intervention activities transferred to problemsolving tasks that were not strictly aligned with the content
and goals of the ICUE or Active Control interventions. We
first examined performance on a proximal researcherdeveloped measure that included a series of complex
equation solving items, word problem items that required
translating story content into mathematical equations, and
an explaining equivalence item that required students to
justify why two sides of an equation were equal (i.e., “Is the
number that goes in the the same number in the following
two equations? Explain your reasoning.”). We compared the
performance of ICUE and Active Control students on the
measure, which was administered after each group
completed all intervention activities (Figure 4).

We assessed three critical abilities identified by McNeil
and colleagues as necessary for success in reasoning about
equivalence (Byrd et al., 2015; McNeil et al., under review):
1. Equation encoding: the ability to accurately encode
and recreate an equation after seeing it briefly;
2. Equation solving: the ability to solve equations that
feature operations on both sides of the equal sign; and
3. Defining the equal sign (=): the ability to identify “=”
as a symbol that signals a relation between two equal
numbers or quantities.
Specifically, we examined students’ gains in performance
on identical pre-intervention and post-intervention tests that
assessed the three abilities above. For each of the target
abilities, we compared the gains made by students in the

603

Figure 4. Mean ICUE and Active Control group
performance for researcher-developed transfer items.

Figure 5. Mean ICUE and Active Control group
performance for MARS transfer items.

Students in the ICUE condition scored reliably higher, on
average, than students in the Active Control condition on
both complex equation solving items (t(81)=3.44, p<.01;
Cohen’s d = 1.5) and word problem items (t(129)=5.31,
p<.001; Cohen’s d = 2.5). However, the groups did not
differ in their mean performance on the explaining
equivalence item (t(81)=0.15, ns).
We also examined transfer to the MARS items. We
measured post-intervention performance on the “Incredible
Equations” task (scored out of a possible 10 points) and the
“Agree or Disagree?” task (scored out of a possible 6
points). As before, we compared performance by students in
the ICUE and Active Control conditions, shown in Figure 5.
As one teacher from each condition failed to return the
MARS posttest materials, results are reported from two
treatment teachers and one control teacher.
Students in the ICUE condition performed reliably better
than Active Control students on both the Incredible
Equations (t(54)=2.83, p<.05; Cohen’s d = 0.32) and Agree
or Disagree? tasks (t(47)=2.36, p<.05; Cohen’s d = 0.43).

Overall, our findings indicate that applying researchbased design principles in the form of multiple types of
practice improved student understanding of the critical
concept of mathematical equivalence.
Our findings replicate Byrd et al. (2015), who found that
activities that include the use of the equal sign outside of
arithmetic contexts, that start with concrete examples and
fade to extractions, and that explicitly prompt students to
compare and explain different problem formats and
strategies improve student understanding of mathematical
equivalence beyond non-traditional arithmetic practice
alone.
Students receiving the ICUE materials demonstrated
improved performance in equation solving, equation
encoding, and providing relational definitions of the equal
sign. These improvements did not come at the expense of
arithmetic problem-solving fluency, as measured by the
ITBS. Further, the learning in ICUE transferred to greater
student abilities to solve complex equations and word
problems.
Students in both conditions struggled with the researcherdeveloped item that required students to explain
equivalence. Their poor performance may reflect confusion
with equivalence that persists for more complicated
problems with multiple “terms” and different types of
operators (both addition and subtraction), a confusion that
was reflected in students’ explanations of their answers.
The robust improvements on the MARS items supports
the possibility that the lack of transfer in the equivalence
explanation question was due to confusion regarding
multiple terms and operators rather than the ability to
generate the explanation. These established items,
developed externally, also asked students to explain
equivalence, but used blanks, rather than variables, to reflect
the unknown entities. On both items, students in the ICUE
condition outperformed the students in the active control
condition. These findings suggest that the additional
practice comparing and explaining different problem
formats helped students gain a deeper understanding of not
only whether different examples were equivalent, but also
why or why not.

Conclusions
A deep understanding of mathematical equivalence is a
key building block for later mathematical understandings.
However, research studies and national test results have
repeatedly demonstrated that many students fail to develop
this understanding. The change-resistance account suggests
that traditional instruction that relies on extensive practice
with problems in a single format may be contributing to
students’ difficulties by encouraging students to develop
ineffective mental models of problem types.
In the current study, we sought to replicate and extend
prior work that brings research from the lab into the
classroom. The change-resistance account proposes that
students struggle with equivalence because they have
developed overgeneralized “rules” that affect how they
process and approach math problems, (e.g., the operators are
always on the left side, the equal sign means to “do
something” or “give the answer”) and fail to see equations
having two separate sides that are being related to one
another.

604

Why is it important to test the synergistic effect of
research-based design principles? Instructional designers
face a large number of decisions in selecting appropriate
activities and tasks for students. Though much research
seeks to identify how different facets work independently, if
research in cognitive science is to extend meaningfully to
practice the cumulative effects of using multiple strategies
must be tested. Our small-scale cluster-randomized trial
suggests that the multi-component ICUE intervention was
more effective than an active control of non-traditional
arithmetic practice (which in prior work was also more
effective than traditional instruction).
Future work, in progress, will test the efficacy of the
ICUE intervention in a large-scale cluster-randomized trial
with diverse students across the state of California. This
work demonstrates how findings in the lab can be
successfully implemented in authentic classroom settings to
improve student learning outcomes.

(2014). Concreteness fading in mathematics and science
instruction: A systematic review. Educational Psychology
Review, 26, 9-25.
Knuth, E. J., Stephens, A. C., McNeil, N. M., & Alibali, M.
W. (2006). Does understanding the equal sign matter?
Evidence from solving equations. J. for Research in
Mathematics Education, 37, 297-312.
Mathematics Assessment Resource Service. (2004). Tools
for
teachers:
Grade
2.
Retrieved
from
http://www.svmimac.org.
Mathematics Assessment Resource Service. (2007). Tools
for teachers: Grade 2, part 3. Retrieved from
http://www.svmimac.org.
McNeil, N. M. (2007). U-shaped development in math: 7year-olds outperform 9-year-olds on equivalence
problems. Developmental Psychology, 43, 687-695.
McNeil, N. M. (2008). Limitations to teaching children 2 +
2 = 4: Typical arithmetic problems can hinder learning of
mathematical equivalence. Child Development, 79, 15241537.
McNeil, N. M., & Alibali, M. W. (2004). You'll see what
you mean: Students encode equations based on their
knowledge of arithmetic. Cognitive Science, 28, 451-466.
McNeil, N. M., & Alibali, M. W. (2005). Why won’t you
change your mind? Knowledge of operational patterns
hinders learning and performance on equations. Child
Development, 76, 883-899.
McNeil, N. M., Chesney, D. L., et al. (2012). It pays to be
organized:
Organizing
arithmetic
practice
around equivalent values facilitates understanding of math
equivalence. J. of
Educational Psychology, 104, 11091121.
McNeil, N. M., Fyfe, E. R., & Dunwiddie, A. E. (2015).
Arithmetic practice can be modified to promote
understanding of mathematical equivalence. J. of
Educational Psychology, 107, 423-436.
McNeil, N. M., Fyfe, E. R., Petersen, L. A., Dunwiddie, A.
E., & Brletic-Shipley, H. (2011). Benefits of practicing 4 =
2 + 2: Nontraditional problem formats facilitate children’s
understanding of mathematical equivalence. Child
Development, 82, 1620-1633. McNeil, N. M., Hornburg,
C. B., Brletic-Shipley, H., &
Matthews, J. M. (under review). Improving children’s
understanding of math equivalence via an intervention
designed to reduce reliance on knowledge of traditional
arithmetic.
Rittle-Johnson, B. (2006). Promoting transfer: The effects of
self-explanation
and
direct
instruction.
Child
Development, 77, 1-15.
Seo, K.-H., & Ginsburg, H. P. (2003). "You've got to
carefully read the math sentence...": Classroom context
and children's interpretations of the equals sign. In A. J.
Baroody & A. Dowker (Eds.), The development of
arithmetic concepts and skills: Constructing adaptive
expertise (pp. 161-187). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.

Acknowledgments
The research reported here was supported by the Institute
of Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education,
through Grant R305A150088 to WestEd. The opinions
expressed are those of the authors and do not represent
views of the Institute or the U.S. Department of Education.

References
Baroody, A. J., & Ginsburg, H. P. (1983). The effects of
instruction on children’s understanding of the “equals”
sign. Elementary School Journal, 84, 199-212.
Behr, M., Erlwanger, S., & Nichols, E. (1980). How
children view the equal sign. Mathematics Teaching, 92,
13-15.
Bruner, J. S. (1957). On perceptual readiness. Psychological
Review, 2, 123-152.
Byrd, C. E., McNeil, N. M., et al. (2015). Pilot test of a
comprehensive intervention to improve children’s
understanding of math equivalence. In D. I. C. Francis
(Organizer), Explorations in mathematics in the
elementary grades. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting
of the AERA, Chicago, IL.
Carpenter, T. P., Franke, M. L., & Levi, L. (2003). Thinking
mathematically: Integrating arithmetic and algebra in
elementary school. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
Charles, R. I. (2005). Big ideas and understandings as the
foundation for elementary and middle school
mathematics. NCSM: J. of Mathematics Education
Leadership, 7, 9-24.
Chesney, D. L., McNeil, N. M., Petersen, L. A., &
Dunwiddie, A. E. (2012). Arithmetic practice that
includes relational words promotes conceptual
understanding and computational fluency. Poster
presented at the APS Annual Convention, Chicago, IL.
Foster, D. & Noyce, P. (2004). The Mathematics
Assessment Collaborative: Performance testing to
improve instruction. Phi Delta Kappan, 85, 367-374.
Fyfe, E. R., McNeil, N. M., Son, J. Y., & Goldstone, R. L.

605

