Pupil Dilation and Cognitive Reflection as Predictors of Performance on the Iowa
Gambling Task
Boban Simonovic (b.simonovic@derby.ac.uk)
Centre for Psychological Research, University of Derby
Kedleston Road, Derby, DE22 1GB
Edward J. N. Stupple (e.j.n.stupple@derby.ac.uk)
Centre for Psychological Research, University of Derby
Kedleston Road, Derby, DE22 1GB
Maggie Gale (m.gale@derby.ac.uk)
Centre for Psychological Research, University of Derby
Kedleston Road, Derby, DE22 1GB
David Sheffield (d.sheffield@derby.ac.uk)
Centre for Psychological Research, University of Derby
Kedleston Road, Derby, DE22 1GB

Abstract
Risky decisions involve cognitive and emotional factors. As
the primary test for the Somatic Marker Hypothesis (SMH),
the Iowa Gambling Task (IGT) examines these factors. Skin
conductance shows anticipatory physiological responses on
the IGT supporting SMH. Pupil dilation offers an alternative
physiological marker. Predictive effects of anticipatory
pupillary responses to positive and negative decks on IGT
performance were examined in an extended IGT. The
extended Cognitive Reflection Test (CRT) examined the
relationship between reflective thinking and IGT
performance. Data demonstrated correlations between
reflective thinking and performance from the second block
onwards and that task learning continued into the additional
blocks - performance was not optimized even in the final
block. Regression analysis showed both anticipatory pupil
dilation for disadvantageous and advantageous decks, and
reflective thinking were strong predictors of IGT
performance. While both emotional and reflective processes
are implicated in IGT performance, analytic cognition is more
important than traditionally acknowledged.
Keywords: Pupil dilation; Iowa Gambling Task; Cognitive
Refection; Somatic Marker Hypothesis; Dual-process Theory.

Introduction
Learning and decision making in uncertain situations is
an important activity, and it can be challenging to find an
optimal decision even for simple choices. Decisions can be
driven by the desire to maximize expected utility (Quartz,
2009), but information management regarding reward utility
is frequently uncertain. Cognitive and emotional influences
on risky decision making were traditionally regarded as
separate in nature, with emotional factors typically seen as a
hindrance. However, more recent evidence indicates that
there is an interplay between the two, such that cognitive
functions may serve as moderators for emotion-based
learning (e.g. Brevers, Bechara, Cleeremans, & Noel, 2013;
Simonovic, Stupple, Gale & Sheffield, 2016).

Damasio (1994) developed Somatic Marker Hypothesis
(SMH) arguing that emotional processes play a central role
in risky decision-making. SMH postulates that decisions are
guided by subjective ‘gut feelings’ (e.g. bodily
representations) about the inherent goodness or badness of
future choices. These somatic markers direct individuals
towards alternatives that have been positive previously or
guide them away from the negative options. Particularly in
uncertain conditions, response options are marked with an
emotional signal, and only those options that are marked as
favorable are cognitively processed (Damasio, 1994;
Bechara & Damasio 2005). Somatic markers operate
covertly, indicate arousal anticipation and are regarded as
physiological markers of emotion-based learning (Bechara
& Damasio, 2005; Critchley et al., 2001).
A further theoretical framework for investigating risky
decision making is Dual Process which proposes that there
are two types of cognitive process: unconscious, emotional
gut-feelings (Type 1) that contrast with explicit, effortful,
analytic processes (Type 2) (e.g. Kahneman. 2003). This
proposal has been linked with SMH; for example Type 1
processes include a range of intuitive processes such as
emotional responses or gut feelings (Glockner & Witteman
2010) that can be measured through physiological
techniques. There is also evidence of a role for cool
reflective processing (Brevers, Bechara, Cleeremans, &
Noel, 2013; Simonovic et al., 2016) which maps onto Type
2 processing.
The primary paradigm in evaluation of emotion-based
learning is the Iowa Gambling Task (IGT, Bechara,
Damasio, Damasio, & Anderson, 1994). The IGT offers a
means of testing decision preferences and performance and
has become an important experimental tool in evaluation of
emotion-based learning and decision making. It has been
argued that IGT resembles real life decision making as it
involves uncertainty and monitoring of rewards and
punishments (Bechara & Damasio, 2005). Participants are

3180

required to choose cards from four decks (A, B, C, and D),
all of which differ in frequencies of financial rewards and
punishments. Advantageous decks (C and D) offer moderate
rewards and small punishments whereas disadvantageous
decks (A and B) offer larger rewards but substantial
penalties, which result in an overall loss.
During the IGT, participants need to learn from experience
about the ‘goodness’ or ‘badness’ of decks based on the
feedback of learned contingencies. Thus, while participants
experience deck reward properties they also assign affective
values to the decks which implicitly influence decision
making. The standard IGT consists of five blocks of 20
trials and healthy participants are considered to reach ceiling
performance in the final block as the disadvantageous
selections have been extinguished. Optimal IGT
performance rests therefore on monitoring emotional
responses and impulse inhibition related to the rewards and
punishments (e.g., Bechara & Damasio, 2005).
An important finding for SMH is that anticipatory somatic
markers of emotions occur before decisions are made,
indicating that covert anticipatory emotions can guide
decision making (e.g. Bechara, Damasio, Tranel &
Damasio, 1997). Indeed, there is evidence demonstrating
anticipatory Skin Conductance Responses (aSCR) to
rewards and punishments under uncertain conditions (e.g.
Bechara et al., 1997; Wagar & Dixon 2006). Furthermore,
interpretation of these aSCR’s highlight the primary role of
emotions in guiding decision making performance (e.g.
Bechara & Damasio, 2005).
In contrast, there is also evidence that reflective
evaluation of affective choices guides future decisionmaking and occurs relatively early in the decision-making
processes (e.g. Bowman, Evans, & Turnbull, 2005 Brevers
et al., 2013; Simonovic et al., 2016). This evidence is
consistent with an interplay between Type 1 and Type 2
processes in determining the outcome of the decision
making process (cf. Kahneman, 2003). Indeed, Brevers et al.
(2013) argued that anticipation of long-term consequences
in uncertain condition rely on two neural systems: a ‘cool’
and a ‘hot’ systems. The ‘hot’ system is impulsive, laden
with affective ‘gut feelings’ akin to intuition, while the
‘cool’ system is reflective and includes analytic aspects.
Learning and optimal decisions depend on the integration of
both systems whereby, a ‘cool’ reflective process can be
critical in monitoring or inhibiting ‘hot’ processes. It has
also been argued that cool reflective processes should not
play a role until the deck contingencies become explicit and
so there should not be a role for Type 2 processing in the
early blocks. Simonovic et al., (2016), however,
demonstrated that reflective processes play a role earlier
than previously predicted (cf. Schiebener, Zamarian,
Delazer and Brand 2011).
Evidence suggest that aSCRs represent a good example of
anticipatory somatic markers or ‘hot processing’. They are,
however, imperfectly represented because the SCR is not
sufficiently sensitive in discriminating between negative and
positive valence (Dunn et al., 2006). Faster measures of

emotion feedback (e.g. heart rate and blood pressure with an
electrocardiogram or pupil dilation using eye trackers) are
warranted (e.g. Bradley, Codispoti, Cuthbert & Lang, 2001).
Indeed, studies that use faster physiological measurement,
(e.g.
eye-tracking methodology) can better capture
surprised responses to unexpected stimuli (e.g. Lavin, San
Martin, & Jubal, 2014).
Recent studies have also shown pupil dilation can measure
surprise such as when feedback does not meet expectation
(Preuschoff, Hart, & Einhauser, 2011), when negative
feedback occurs during the gambling task (Satterthwaite et
al., 2007), and as evidence of learning (Lavin et al., 2014).
Moreover, there is evidence linking pupillary responses to
Locus Coeruleus (LC) - norepinephrine (NE) activity in the
brain stem in anticipation of a reward, suggesting memory
enhancement (Tully & Bolshakov, 2010), and consolidation
of behavioural decisions (Bouret & Sara, 2005). Some
evidence indicates greater pupillary responses before
selecting negative options (e.g. Bierman, 2004), or after
experiencing unexpected losses (Satterthwaite et al., 2007),
thus indicating that anticipatory pupillary responses can be
related to negative outcomes. However, Lavin et al. (2014)
argue that pupillary responses are associated with positive
feedback. Thus, although anticipatory pupillary responses
serve as affective physiological markers and may offer a
measure of the somatic markers that moderate learning in
uncertain conditions their interpretation is also not
necessarily straightforward.
To our knowledge, only one study has utilised eyetracking methodology during the IGT performance in a
healthy population. Lavin et al. (2014) tested IGT
performance and measured pupil dilation in a sample of 10
participants and demonstrated changes in pupil dilation due
to learned uncertainty. Their results suggest that changes in
pupil dilation reflect learned uncertainty about future
feedback conditions, thus indicating differential processing
of unexpected feedback. However, a non-standard version
of the IGT was used and did not differentiate between
disadvantageous and advantageous deck selection. In the
present study, we extend Lavin et al.’s (2014) findings, with
a larger sample and an alternative approach to measuring
anticipatory pupil dilation.
Our focus was on the period during the IGT where
participants had hypothetically developed somatic markers
but that these were not yet sufficient to extinguish particular
card selection. On this basis we measured pupil dilation in
the 500ms prior to the final selection from each deck and
hypothesized that there should be somatic markers
indicating negative anticipation for disadvantageous decks
and positive anticipation for advantageous decks. We
measured anticipatory pupillary responses for the
advantageous (C + D) and the disadvantageous (A + B) final
options. If anticipatory somatic markers play a role in IGT
performance then these should be evident prior to the final
selection of each type of card.
Moreover, we included a direct measure of deliberative
thinking to replicate previous findings demonstrating that

3181

the CRT was highly predictive of IGT performance
(Simonovic et al., 2016). We used the extended seven-item
Cognitive Reflection Test (CRT1), developed to measure the
ability to resist and override intuitive responses by engaging
analytic ability (Toplak, West, & Stanovich, 2014), this is a
more comprehensive measure than the original three item
CRT used in the Simonovic et al. (2016) study.
It was predicted that the CRT and last anticipatory
pupillary responses for advantageous and disadvantageous
deck picks would predict IGT performance. It was also
predicted that the correlations observed by the Simonovic et
al., (2016) between CRT score and disadvantageous card
selections across blocks would be replicated (such that
strong correlations would be found in blocks 2 – 4, but no
correlation would be observed in the early trials and the
correlation would be reduced in the final blocks). Finally,
the standard analysis of IGT performance across blocks was
extended to test whether performance reached ceiling levels
in the fifth block (the final block in the standard IGT) or
whether performance continued to improve.

The seven-item CRT (Toplak, West & Stanovich, 2014)
score was the total number of correct answers. Higher CRT
scores indicated higher reflective ability. Cronbach’s alpha
was α = .66.
Eye movements were recorded with the Eye-gaze
binocular system Tobii-X2-30 (Inquisit 4 milliseconds
plugins), with a remote binocular sampling rate of 30 Hz
and an accuracy of about 0.45°. The X2 Eye Tracker is a
stand-alone eye tracker, and it was attached to a laptop
(Dell, Precision M6700, 2.70Ghz). Participants were seated
approximately 70 cm from the laptop monitor. The Tobii
measured 184mm (7.2’’) in length and enabled tracking at
close distances (up to 36° gaze angle). The eye-tracker used
both bright and dark pupil illumination setups to calculate
the optimal gaze position. Blinking periods were filtered and
replaced via linear interpolation (e.g. Siegle, Steinhauer
Carter, Ramel, & Thase, 2003). The anticipatory pupil
dilation (aPD) diameter was defined as the mean pupillary
response generated 500ms before card selection. A 500ms
time frame was identified a priori as a period where fixation
occurs, and direction of the information search can be
determined (e.g. Horstmann. Ahlgrimm, & Glockner, 2009).

Method
Analytic Strategy
Design
Predictor variables were: the seven-item CRT (Toplak et
al., 2014) and pupillary responses averaged across the
500ms prior to the final selection for both advantageous (C
+ D) and disadvantageous (A + B) decks. The CRT was
used as a measure of analytic thinking. The dependent
variable was the IGT score. Performance across blocks was
also examined for completeness with (C+D) – (A + B) as
the dependent variable for performance in each block

Initial analyses focused on participants’ performance per
block by using repeated measures ANOVA. Next,
correlations between CRT scores and selection of
disadvantageous cards for each block were calculated.
Finally, regression analysis was used to examine the
independent contributions of CRT scores and pupil dilations
on IGT performance. Analysis was conducted using IBM
SPSS 24 for Windows.

Results

Participants
2

Sixty-nine , healthy students from the University of
Derby, aged 19-29 years, received course credit for
participation. Research was conducted in accordance with
stipulations of the local ethics committee. Participants had
normal or corrected to normal vision.

Materials and Procedure
Participants completed Bechara et al.’s (1994)
computerised version of IGT3. Scoring was derived by
deducting ‘good’ card picks (C + D) from total ‘bad’ picks
(A + B). A positive score indicates a more optimal decisionmaking strategy.

Performance across blocks was tested using a
Greenhouse-Geisser adjusted repeated measures ANOVA.
There was a main effect of Block condition, F(3.86, 239.12)
= 25.21, p < .001, ηp2=.29. Bonferroni adjusted post hoc
tests demonstrated that performance improved significantly
through the blocks of trials (excluding Block 6). Notably the
nonstandard additional blocks 6 and 7 continued to show
changes in performance relative to earlier blocks such that
performance dipped in Block 6 but Block 7 was
significantly better than all but Block 5. Means and standard
deviations are shown in Table 1.

1
Although there is some disagreement about the aspect of
analytic thinking that the CRT measures (e.g. Stupple, Gale, &
Richmond, 2013; Toplak, West, & Stanovich, 2011), it is a useful
tool in measuring analytic ability and reflective processing.
2
Six participants were excluded from the analysis due to
incomplete pupil dilation data (N=4) or extreme outlier pupil
dilation data (N=2)
3
We extended the original IGT to 140 trials to assess the
learning effect (e.g. Bagneux, Font, & Bollon, 2013).

3182

Table 1: Mean (SD) IGT Performance as a function of
Trial Block.

Trial Block
Block 1
Block 2
Block 3
Block 4
Block 5
Block 6
Block 7
Total

Decks, Last Pupil Dilation for Advantageous (CD) decks as
predictors (standardized betas) of IGT performance

IGT Performance
-3.65 (6.29)
-.016 (7.71)
2.76 (8.79)
4.19 (10.45)
7.38 (9.75)
5.86 (11.24)
9.35 (9.63)
26.27 (46.70)

Predictors
Model ‘Enter.'

CRT scores
β=.56, p<.001
Last aPD (A + B)
β= -.46, p=.05
Last aPD (C + D)
β= .52, p=.03
Durbin Watson= 1.93, VIF= 1.042; 4.965; 4.992

Table 2: Correlations between Disadvantageous card
selections and CRT score as a function of Trial Block
Trial Block
Correlation
Block 1
r= -.18, p=.150
Block 2
r= -.41, p=.001
Block 3
r= -.74, p<.001
Block 4
r= -.81, p<.001
Block 5
r= -.70, p<.001
Block 6
r= -.71, p<.001
Block 7
r= -.67, p<.001
Total
r= -.89, p<.001

Discussion

Correlations between CRT score and selection of
disadvantageous cards across blocks were conducted (see
Table 2). These demonstrated a significant negative
relationship between CRT score and disadvantageous card
selections in all but the first block of trials.
A multiple regression (Enter method) tested the relative
predictive strength of last anticipatory pupillary responses
for disadvantageous (A + B) (mean, SD = 3.02, 0.36mm)
and advantageous (C + D) (mean, SD =3.00, 0.38mm) deck
picks and CRT scores (mean, SD = 2.13, 1.76) for
performance on the IGT. Data indicated that the three
predictors combined reliably accounted for 35% of the
variability in IGT scores. The standardized beta for
disadvantageous cards showed a negative correlation with
pupil dilation while the advantageous cards showed a
positive correlation. This indicated that increased pupil
dilation on the last pick of a disadvantageous card predicted
poorer overall performance in contrast with increased pupil
dilation for advantageous cards which was associated with
better overall performance. The CRT score was the
strongest predictor with higher scores on the CRT predicting
better card selections.

Table 3: Multiple Regression Analysis of CRT, Final
Anticipatory Pupil Dilation for Disadvantageous (AB)

R²=.38, R²adj=.35
F(3, 58)= 12.03, p=.001

Consistent with our predictions anticipatory pupillary
responses and reflective thinking were reliable independent
predictors of IGT performance. Importantly, pupillary
responses differ according to the nature of the deck and
incrementally predict performance in addition to cognitive
reflection. Specifically, increased pupil dilation on the last
pick of disadvantageous cards predicted poorer overall
performance, whereas increased pupil dilation for the last
pick of advantageous cards was associated with better
overall performance. This is important because it indicates
that differing somatic markers may develop for
advantageous and disadvantageous decks and that these
predict task performance alongside cognitive reflection.
Correlations between CRT scores and IGT broadly
replicated the findings from the control group in Simonovic
et al., (2016) but with stronger correlations and evidence
that reflective processing is implicated even earlier in the
task. Finally, block by performance analysis demonstrated
that IGT performance did not reach ceiling at block 5 and
significantly improved in block 7 after a (non-significant)
dip in block 6, albeit it was not greater than block 5.
While our data indicate that participants' last aPD
responses predict IGT performance, these somatic markers
require some deciphering. Pupil dilation can be interpreted
in various ways with anticipated threat, anticipated reward
and general cognitive effort all potentially resulting in
dilated pupils. Our data showing increased pupil dilation for
advantageous deck is consistent with participants
anticipating a positive outcome rather than a threat.
However, it is possible that an increased level of cognitive
effort may be in play (which would also be consistent with
the correlations with cognitive reflection). Irrespective of
the precise interpretation these data demonstrate a role for
somatic markers in performance on the IGT, but allow for
the possibility that these somatic markers are of cognitive
effort as well as an indicator of emotional learning.
Pupillary responses data for the IGT contributes to the
understanding of SMH and support a role for anticipatory
physiological mechanisms in successful performance on
risky decision-making tasks. These somatic markers inform
explicit knowledge and facilitate learning of deck
contingencies (e.g. Bechara & Damasio, 2005). However,

3183

our findings are incongruent with the proposition that IGT
performance is primarily dependent on the development of
somatic markers (Bechara et al., 1997; Wagar & Dixon,
2006) and are instead compatible with the dual-process
model where ‘cool’ reflective processes inhibit impulses
that interfere with long-term goals. This is consistent with
the proposition that integrating reflective and emotional
processes is necessary to explain IGT performance and
suggests that the ability to reflect on gut feelings about
decisions may improve performance (Schiebener et al.,
2011; Simonovic et al., 2016).
The CRT was shown to be a stronger predictor of IGT
performance than the pupil dilation measures, with higher
scorers clearly outperforming lower scorers. This is clear
evidence that Type 2 reflective processing plays a salient
role in the task and supports the view of Brevers et el.
(2013) that the IGT is best understood within a dual process
framework. Toplak et al.'s (2014) extended seven item
version of the CRT was used and the more comprehensive
nature of this measure along with the greater variability may
explain the stronger correlations and greater proportion of
variance explained than in Simonovic et al. (2016). The
evidence from the correlations between CRT and
performance across the blocks replicated findings from
Simonovic et al. (2016). These data indicate a consistent
role for analytic ability in determining IGT performance
from the second block onwards. This is inconsistent with the
view that the learning on the task is implicit until the
contingencies are well established and is instead indicative
of a role for explicit monitoring of deck contingencies even
in the early blocks.
These CRT data nonetheless need to be interpreted with
caution. There is debate as to whether the CRT is a measure
of cognitive miserliness or a more general measure of
analytic thinking or numerical ability as it has been
correlated with both working memory (e.g., Stupple et al.,
2013) and risk neutrality (Oechssler, Roider, & Schmitz,
2009), which could impact on performance or task strategy.
Most of our participants began the task by exploring
disadvantageous decks (A + B). Hence it could be argued
that a reduced pupillary reaction for disadvantageous cards
in relation to IGT performance occur because participants
had ‘unlearned’ the initial preferences for big reward. This
is consistent with a suggestion that during the IGT
performance reversal learning, needs to be implemented to
suppress learned preferences that are no longer beneficial
(Dunn, Dalgleish, & Lawrence, 2006). Lavin et al. (2014)
suggest that successful performance on IGT depends on
positive feedback (based on the money gain) and
highlighted pupillary responses to unexpected punishments
on positive decks. This proposal is consistent with as both
are indicative of anticipatory effects, as both are indicative
of anticipatory effects, however, the differing
methodologies of the current study and Lavin et al.’s make
direct comparisons difficult.
Since the SCR has a relatively slow time course, it is
possible that a distinct somatic marker cannot be

distinguished by conventional SCR measurements (Newell
& Shanks, 2014). The use of an eye-tracker allows a
distinction between somatic reactions on different options
before a decision has been made. This is particularly
important because the anticipatory SCR captured during the
IGT performance may represent part of a broader response
such as attentional bias, implicit learning and a risk-taking.
Steingroever et al. (2013), called for greater scrutiny of
IGT performance in healthy populations to bolster the
ecological validity of IGT and demonstrate that IGT scores
measure real-life decision making. The validation of IGT
performance in healthy population is of great importance for
such a widely used clinical tool; our analyses add to this
literature on healthy populations. The prominent role of
cognitive reflection in IGT performance leads us to urge
caution in its application in diagnosing emotional deficits in
populations who may lack the working memory capacity to
perform well on the CRT and, by implication the IGT.
The measures used in the present study are relatively
narrow and further applications of the pupil dilation
methodologies are necessary to more fully explore the
utility of this measure in investigating the IGT and the SMH
more broadly; in particular, extending analysis across the
task to examine how pupillary responses relate to IGT
performance curves may be illuminating. Moreover,
alternative eye-tracking measures such as fixations on
particular decks of cards offer strong potential in
investigating the locus of explicit attention as learning
progresses on the task.
In conclusion, our data demonstrated that a combination
of anticipatory pupil dilation and reflective thinking
predicted IGT performance, such that both emotional and
reflective processes are implicated in IGT performance.
That is, anticipatory pupil dilation may serve as learning
markers particularly for individuals with higher levels of
cognitive reflection. Analytic cognition, moreover, plays a
more salient role than traditionally acknowledged.

Acknowledgments
This research is part of Boban Simonovic’s PhD studies
undertaken at the University of Derby.

References
Bagneux V., Font H., Bollon T. (2013). Incidental
emotions associated with uncertainty appraisals impair
decisions in the Iowa Gambling Task. Motivation and
Emotion, 37, 818–827.
Bechara, A., & Damasio, A. R. (2005). The somatic marker
hypothesis: A neural theory of economic decision. Games
and Economic Behaviour, 52, 336–372.
Bechara, A., Damasio, A. R., Damasio, H., & Anderson, S.
W. (1994). Insensitivity to future consequences following
damage to human prefrontal cortex. Cognition, 50,7–15.
Bechara, A., Damasio, H., Tranel, D., & Damasio, A.
(1997). Deciding advantageously before knowing the
advantageous strategy. Science, 275, 1293-1996.

3184

Bierman, D. (2004). The use of an implicit grammar task
and eye measurements to study the somatic marker
hypothesis. Retrieved on the 26th of January 2016 from:
http://uniamsterdam.nl/D.J.Bierman/PUBS/2004/bial_210_final.pdf
Bouret, S., & Sara, S. (2005). Network reset: a simplified
overarching theory of locus coeruleus noradrenaline
function. Trends in Neuroscience 28, 574–582.
Bowman, C. H., Evans, C., &Turnbull, O. H. (2005).
Artificial time constraints on the Iowa Gambling Task:
The effects on behavioral performance and subjective
experience. Brain and Cognition, 57, 21–5.
Brevers, D., Bechara, A., Cleeremans, A., & Noel, X. (2013).
Iowa Gambling Task (IGT): Twenty years after—Gambling d
disorder and IGT. Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 665.
Critchley, H.D., Mathias, C. J., Dolan, R.J., 2001. Neural
activity in the human brain relating to uncertainty and
arousal during anticipation. Neuron, 29, 537–545.
Damasio, A. R. (1994). Descartes’ error: Emotion, reason,
and the human brain. New York: Putnam Publishing
Dunn, B. D., Dalgleish, T., & Lawrence, A. D. (2006). The
somatic marker hypothesis: a critical evaluation.
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 30, 239–271.
Einhäuser, W., Koch, C., & Carter, O. L. (2010). Pupil
dilation betrays the timing of decisions. Frontiers in
Human Neuroscience, 4, 18.
Elliot, R., Friston, K. J., & Dolan, R. J. (2000). Dissociable
neural responses in human reward systems. Journal of
Neuroscience, 20, 6159–6165.
Frederick, S. (2005). Cognitive reflection and decision
making. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19,25–42.
Glöckner, A. & Witteman, C. (2010) Beyond dual-process
models: A categorisation of processes underlying intuitive
judgement and decision making. Thinking & Reasoning,
16,1–25.
Horstmann, N., Ahlgrimm, A. & Glöckner, A. (2009).
How distinct are intuition and deliberation? An
eye-tracking analysis of instruction-induced decision
modes. Judgment and Decision Making, 4, 335–354.
Jepma, M., & Nieuwenhuis, S. (2011). Pupil diameter
predicts changes in the exploration-exploitation trade-off:
evidence for the adaptive gain theory. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 23, 1587–1596.
Kahneman, D. (2003). A perspective on judgment and
choice. Mapping bounded rationality. American
Psychologist, 58, 697–720.
Krain, A. L., Wilson, A. M., Arbuckle, R., Castellanos, F. X. &
Milham, M. P. (2006). Distinct neural mechanisms of risk and
ambiguity: a meta-analysis of decision-making. Neuroimage, 32
(1), 477–484.
Lavin, C., San Martin, R., & Jubal, E. R. (2014). Pupil
dilation signals uncertainty and surprise in a learning
gambling task. Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience, 7,
218.
Montague, P. R., Hyman, S. E., Cohen, J. D. (2004).
Computational roles for dopamine in behavioral control.
Nature, 411, 760 –767.

Newell, B. R., & Shanks, D. R., (2014). Unconscious
influences on decision making: A critical review.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 37, 1-19.
Oechssler, J., Roider, A., & Schmitz, P. W. (2009).
Cognitive abilities and behavioral biases. Journal of
Economic Behavior & Organization, 72(1), 147-152.
Preuschoff, K., T Hart, B. M., & Einhauser, W. (2011).
Pupil dilation signals surprise: evidence for
noradrenaline’s role in decision making. Frontier
Neuroscience, 5, 115.
Quartz, S. R. (2009). Reason, emotion and decisionmaking: risk and reward computation with feeling. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 13 (5), 209-215.
Satterthwaite, T.D., Green, L., Myerson, J., Parker, J.
Eamaratham, M., & Buckner, R. L. (2007). Dissociable
but inter-realted systems of cognitive control and reward
during decision making: evidence for pupillometry and
event- related fMRI. Neuroimage, 37, 1017–1031.
Schiebener, J., Zamarian, L., Delazer, M., & Brand, M.
(2011). Executive functions, categorization of
probabilities, and learning from feedback: What does
really matter for decision making un- der explicit risk
conditions? Journal of Clinical and Experimental
Neuropsychology, 33, 1025–1039.
Siegle, G. J., Steinhauer, S. R., Carter, C. S., Ramel, W., &
Thase, M. E. (2003). Do the seconds turn into hours?
Relationships between sustained pupil dilation in response
to emotional information and self-reported rumination.
Cognitive Therapy and Research, 27, 365-382.
Simonovic, B., Stupple, E. J. N., Gale, M., Sheffield, D.
(2016). Stress and risky decision making: cognitive
reflection, emotional learning or both. Journal of
Behavioral Decision Making. DOI: 10.1002/bdm.1980
Steingroever, H., Wetzels, R., Horstmann, A., Neumann,
J., & Wagenmakers, E. J. (2013). Performance of healthy
participants on the Iowa Gambling Task. Psychological
Assessment, 25, 180–193.
Stupple, E. J. N., Gale, M., & Richmond, C. (2013).
Working memory, cognitive miserliness and logic as
predictors of performance on the cognitive reflection test.
In M. Knauff, M. Pauen, N. Sebanz, & I. Wachsmuth
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 35th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Cognitive Science Society:
Austin, TX: Cogntive Science Society.
Toplak, M. E., West, R. F., & Stanovich, K. E. (2014).
Assessing miserly information processing: an expansion
of the Cognitive Reflection Test. Thinking and Reasoning
20, 147–168.
Tully, K., & Bolshakov, V. Y. (2010). Emotional
enhancement of memory: how norepinephrine enables
synaptic plasticity. Molecular brain, 3, 15.
Wagar, B., & Dixon, M. (2006). Affective guidance in the
Iowa Gambling Task. Cognitive, Affective, Behavioral
Neuroscience, 6, 277-290.

3185

