Rational use of prosody predicts projection in manner adverb utterances
Jon Scott Stevens, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Shari R. Speer, Judith Tonhauser
{stevens.400,demarneffe.1,speer.21,tonhauser.1}@osu.edu
Department of Linguistics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210 USA
Abstract

b. Did Jo discover that Sam is ILL?
This paper provides conceptual and empirical support for
the question-based analysis of projection from a novel empirical domain: utterances with manner adverbs, like Masha
didn’t run quickly. To formalize the link between prosody,
information structure and projection hypothesized in Simons
et al. 2017, we develop a Rational Speech Act (RSA) model
(Bergen & Goodman, 2015; Frank & Goodman, 2012, and
many others) that predicts the projectivity of the so-called
prejacent (that Masha ran) from the prosodic realization of
manner adverb utterances. The model is evaluated based on
empirical observations about the projectivity of the prejacent.

Speakers can be taken to be committed to utterance content even when that content is contributed in the scope of
an entailment-canceling operator, like negation (e.g., Chierchia & McConnell-Ginet, 1990). We develop a probabilistic
model of this phenomenon, called ‘projection’, that relies on
the prosodic realization of utterances. We synthesize existing theoretical claims about prosody, information structure and
projection into a model that assumes a rational speaker (Frank
& Goodman, 2012) who produces utterances with prosodic
melodies that can signal which utterance content she is committed to. Predictions of the probabilistic model are compared
to the responses of an experiment designed to test the effect of
prosody on projection in manner adverb utterances. Key behaviors of the model are borne out empirically, and the quantitative fit is surprisingly good given that the model has only
one free parameter. Our findings lend support to analyses of
projection that are sensitive to the information structure of utterances (e.g., Simons, Beaver, Roberts, & Tonhauser, 2017).
Keywords: Projection; prosody; information structure; probabilistic pragmatics; rational speech acts; manner adverbs

Projective content in manner adverb utterances

Introduction
Projective content is utterance content that the speaker may be
taken to be committed to even when the content is introduced
by an expression in the scope of an entailment-canceling operator (e.g., Chierchia & McConnell-Ginet, 1990). A speaker
who utters (1a) is taken to be committed to the content φ that
Sam is ill and to the content that Jo discovered φ. A speaker
who utters the negated variant in (1b) or the polar question
in (1c) is not taken to be committed to Jo having discovered
φ (rather, Jo’s discovery is negated or asked about), but the
speaker may still be taken to be committed to φ, that Sam is
ill. Hence, φ is projective content.
(1)

(3)
(4)

a. Jo discovered that Sam is ill.
b. Jo didn’t discover that Sam is ill.
c. Did Jo discover that Sam is ill?

Simons et al. (2017) develop a question-based analysis of
the projection of the content of the complement of predicates
like discover according to which the speaker can be taken to
be committed to the content of the complement if it is entailed
by the Question Under Discussion (Roberts, 2012) that the
utterance is taken to address. This analysis correctly predicts
that whether the speaker is taken to be committed to the content of the complement depends on the prosodic realization of
the utterance (see Tonhauser, 2016, for empirical evidence).
For instance, if (1c) is uttered with prosodic prominence on
discover, as in (2a), where capital letters indicate prosodic
prominence, then the speaker is more likely to be taken to be
committed to the content of the complement than if (1c) is
uttered with prosodic prominence on ill, as in (2b).
(2)

In a manner adverb sentence, e.g., (3), a manner adverb like
quickly, beautifully or easily modifies the activity-denoting
verb. (3) entails that Masha ran (the prejacent). It has been
long observed that the prejacent can project and that the projectivity of the prejacent depends on the prosody of the utterance (e.g., Abrusán, 2013; Simons, 2001). For instance, the
speaker of (4a), with quickly prosodically prominent, may be
taken to be committed to the prejacent even though the sentence is negated. On the other hand, the speaker of (4b),
with Masha prosodically prominent, is not typically taken
to be committed to the prejacent, i.e., the prejacent does not
project. The speaker of (4b) may be committed to a different
content, namely that somebody ran quickly. For reasons of
space we only consider the prejacent here, though the formal
proposal extends to the projectivity of other content.
Masha ran quickly.
a. Masha didn’t run QUICKLY.
b. MASHA didn’t run quickly.

Simons et al.’s (2017) question-based analysis of projection accounts for the dependence of the projectivity of the
prejacent on prosody based on two independently made empirical observations. The first observation is that informationstructural focus can be prosodically indicated in American
English (e.g., Eady & Cooper, 1986). Compared to nonfocused expressions in the same intonational phrase, focused
expressions are more likely to be realized with pitch accents,
a longer duration, an expanded pitch range and/or greater
intensity. Thus, the two manner adverb utterances in (4)
are compatible with different expressions being focused, as
shown in (5), where focus is marked by angle brackets subscripted with ‘F’:
(5)

a. Did Jo DISCOVER that Sam is ill?

1144

a. Masha didn’t run [QUICKLY]F .
b. [MASHA]F didn’t run quickly.

The focused expression is used to calculate the focus alternatives set of an utterance: following Rooth 1992, a focus
alternatives set of (5a) is the set of propositions of the form
‘Masha didn’t run x’, with x a modifier, and a focus alternatives set of (5b) is the set of propositions of the form ‘x didn’t
run quickly’, with x an entity. Following Beaver and Clark
2008, we assume that alternatives can also be calculated under negation: thus, another focus alternatives set of (5a) is the
set of propositions of the form ‘Masha ran x’, with x a modifier, and another focus alternatives set of (5b) is the set of
propositions of the form ‘x ran quickly’, with x an entity.
Importantly, the prosody of utterances merely constrains
what is focused but does not determine it. Thus, although the
prosodic realization of (4a) is not typically compatible with
the focus marking indicated in (5b), it is compatible with a
larger expression of the sentence being focused, as in (6).
(6)

Masha didn’t [run QUICKLY]F .

The second empirical observation is that answer utterances
are congruent with the interrogative utterances they address
(e.g., Paul, 1880; Rooth, 1992; von Stechow, 1990). Consider B’s utterance in (7a), and assume that B’s utterance is
realized with the so-called rise-fall-rise contour, which consists of a rising pitch accent on quickly (L+H* in the ToBI annotation scheme, Beckman & Ayers, 1997) and a rising end
contour (L-H% in ToBI notation). When B’s utterance in (7a)
is realized with the rise-fall-rise contour, it is congruent with,
i.e., judged to be acceptable in response to, A’s interrogative
utterance in (7a). However, because of the placement of the
pitch accent on quickly, it is not congruent with A’s interrogative utterance in (7b). Likewise, when B’s utterance in (7b)
is realized with the rise-fall-rise contour, it is congruent with
A’s utterance in (7b), but not with A’s utterance in (7a).
(7)

a. A:
B:
b. A:
B:

How did Masha run?
Masha didn’t run [QUICKLY]F .
Who ran quickly?
[MASHA]F didn’t run quickly.

When B’s utterances are realized with the rise-fall-rise contour, B indicates that their utterance does not provide a complete answer to the question (see e.g., Wagner, 2012); instead,
B’s utterance only eliminates a possible true answer to the
question. A prosodically motivated model of projection must
take these contributions of contours into account.
In alternative semantics, question-answer congruence is
accounted for by assuming that a focus alternatives set of
a congruent answer includes the denotation of the question,
which is a contextually restricted set of propositions. For instance, B’s answer in (7a) is congruent with A’s interrogative utterance since the focus alternatives set ‘Masha ran x’
includes the set of propositions denoted by A’s utterance (a
subset of propositions of the form ‘Masha ran x’), but B’s answer is not congruent with A’s interrogative utterance in (7b)
since the focus alternatives set ‘Masha ran x’ does not include
the set of propositions denoted by A’s utterance (a subset of
propositions of the form ‘x ran quickly’).

Importantly, in naturally occurring discourse, many utterances are not made in response to an interrogative utterance (an explicit question). Simons et al. (2017) assume that
such utterances address an implicit question: given questionanswer congruence, the focus marking of an utterance that
addresses an implicit question provides a cue to the question that the utterance addresses (e.g., Halliday, 1967; Most
& Saltz, 1979; Roberts, 2012). The potentially implicit question that is addressed by an utterance is called the Question
Under Discussion (QUD). It follows that the prosodic realization of a manner adverb utterance provides listeners with
a cue to the focus of the utterance, which in turn provides a
cue to the QUD that the speaker was intending to address.
Thus, (5a) can be taken to address the QUD ‘How did Masha
run?’ and (5b) can be taken to address the QUD ‘Who ran
quickly?’:
(8) a. Possible QUD of (5a): {Masha ran quickly,
Masha ran slowly, Masha ran clumsily,. . . }
b. Possible QUD of (5b): {Masha ran quickly, Jack
ran quickly, Sue ran quickly,. . . }
To predict projection, Simons et al. (2017) make the following assumption:
(9) Projection under the question-based analysis:
Content φ of utterance U projects if φ is entailed by
each alternative in the QUD addressed by U.
The question-based analysis predicts that the prejacent is
more likely to project from (4a) than from (4b). If a speaker
utters (4a), with prosodic prominence on the manner adverb,
and the utterance is taken to have the focus shown in (5a),
then she can be taken by the listener to intend her utterance
to address the QUD ‘How did Masha run?’ in (8a). Since
each alternative in the QUD has the form ‘Masha ran x’, each
entails that Masha ran and so the prejacent is predicted by
(9) to project. On the other hand, if a speaker utters (4b),
with prosodic prominence on the subject, and the utterance is
taken to have the focus shown in (5b), she can be taken by
the listener to intend her utterance to address the QUD ‘Who
ran quickly?’ in (8b). Since each alternative in the QUD has
the form ‘x ran quickly’, the QUD entails that somebody ran
quickly, but not the prejacent, that Masha ran. Thus, the prejacent is not predicted by (9) to project from (4b). Importantly,
since prosody does not determine focus, but merely provides
listeners with a cue, and since focus does not determine the
QUD, but merely provides listeners with a cue, the questionbased analysis does not predict categorical (non-)projection
of the prejacent from (4a) and (4b), but merely that the prejacent is more likely to project from (4a) than (4b).

Modeling projection
For the purpose of modeling the link between prosody and
projection, we consider an utterance to be a sentence with a
melody. For the utterances considered here, a melody is the
combination of a single pitch accent (L+H*, H*, L*), aligned
with the stressed syllable of the accented word, and an end
contour (L-H%, H-L%, L-L%). Our model considers pitch

1145

accent positions either on the adverb, the verb, the negated
auxiliary or the subject of the sentence. For example, L+H*
L-H%, with the L+H* realized on the first syllable of quickly
may be the melody of the manner adverb utterance in (4a).
We develop a probabilistic model of projection based on the
assumption of a ‘rational speaker’, who chooses a melody
for a given sentence to most effectively signal the identity
of the QUD that an utterance of the sentence is intended to
address. Following the basic framework of the RSA model,
we begin by developing a notion of speaker utility, which is
taken to be the ‘usefulness’ of a melody for a given sentence
as a signal of which QUD is being addressed by the speaker’s
utterance. More concretely, the utility of a melody M for a
given sentence and a target QUD Q, is the probability that
a hearer would randomly select Q, given that the sentence
was uttered with melody M, and given what the hearer knows
about the compatibility between M and possible QUDs. We
define this utility as follows, where QM is the set of possible
QUDs addressed by the given sentence that are compatible
with M:
(10) U(Q, M) =

1
|QM |

speaker, though the maximization is approximate, i.e., there
still remains some probability of choosing a non-rational
(non-utility-maximizing) melody. This is accomplished by
setting the probability PS of the speaker producing a melody
M given a QUD Q equal to a soft max function of U(Q, M).
The soft max function approximates utility maximization using a rationality parameter, λ, where higher values of λ result in lower probability of a non-rational melody being chosen. Thus, in cases where there is a single utility-maximizing
melody, the probability of selecting that melody will approach 1 as λ increases. The formula for PS is given below,
where M 0 is any member of the set of possible melodies the
speaker could use:
(11)

PS (M|Q) =

eλU(Q,M)
0
∑ eλU(Q,M )

M0

We use Bayes’ rule to determine the probability PH of the
hearer deciding that the QUD is Q given that she has heard
the sentence uttered with melody M:
(12)

if Q ∈ QM , else 0

PH (Q|M) =

PS (M|Q)×P(Q)
∑ PS (M|Q0 )×P(Q0 )

Q0

To define what it means for a melody for a given sentence to
be compatible with a QUD, we draw on the following independently motivated sets of assumptions from the prosodypragmatics literature:
• Assumption A – Compatibility of pitch accent with focus:
A pitch accent on expression X is compatible with focus
on X or a constituent that contains X and an immediately
adjacent expression (e.g., Selkirk, 1996).
• Assumption B – Compatibility of focus with QUD:
The QUD that is addressed by the utterance must be congruent with the focus marking of the utterance (Beaver &
Clark, 2008, 45).
• Set of assumptions C – Compatibility of pitch contour with
QUD:
1. Pitch contours that lack a final fall (L-L%) and contain either an L+H* pitch accent or a continuation
rise (L-H%)—H* L-H%, L+H* L-H%, L* L-H% and
L+H* H-L%—are only compatible with incomplete answers to the QUD, i.e., answers that do not pick out a
single true alternative (see e.g. Lai, 2012; Wagner, 2012,
for evidence that L+H* and L-H% signal that the QUD
has not been completely answered).
2. Pitch contours that either (i) have a final fall, or (ii)
have neither an L+H* pitch accent nor continuation rise
to suggest incompleteness—H* L-L%, L+H* L-L%,
L* L-L%, H* H-L% and L* H-L%—are only compatible with complete answers to the QUD.
For any melody-QUD pair hM, Qi for a given sentence, these
assumptions can be used to generate the set QM and therefore
determine the utility of using M to signal Q.
Adopting an RSA-based view, we posit a rational speaker
who chooses melodies to maximize utility, i.e., maximize
the chance that listeners retrieve the QUD intended by the

The denominator in this equation is a sum of probabilities
over all possible QUDs Q0 , i.e., the set of QUDs that are
compatible with any of the melodies we assume could have
been used to utter the sentence. For instance, given the sentence Masha didn’t run quickly, the set of all QUDs compatible with some melody for that sentence includes ‘Who ran
quickly?’, ‘Did Masha run quickly?’, ‘What did Masha do?’,
‘What did Masha do quickly?’ and ‘How did Masha run?’, as
well as the corresponding QUDs with negation (‘Who didn’t
run quickly’, etc.). For current purposes we assume a uniform
prior probability distribution over QUDs.
We use PH to calculate the probability that the prejacent
of a manner adverb sentence uttered with melody M projects,
i.e., that the speaker is taken to be committed to the prejacent.
Recall that under assumption (9) from Simons et al. 2017,
content projects if it is entailed by the QUD. For manner adverb sentences, the only QUD that entails the prejacent is the
set of alternatives obtained by abstracting over the manner adverb (e.g., {Masha ran x | x is a modifier} entails that Masha
ran, as discussed above). We call the prejacent φ, and the
prejacent-entailing QUD Qφ . The probability of φ projecting,
given melody M, is the probability of the hearer assuming Qφ
given M:
(13)

P(PROJECT(φ)|M) = PH (Qφ |M)

The link between Qφ and projection is not probabilistic—it is
a categorical consequence of the theory set forth in Simons
et al. 2017 (see (9)). The probabilistic character of the model
results from the fuzzy link between prosodic melodies and
the implicit questions that utterances with those melodies are
taken to address. The hearer must determine how likely it
is that Qφ is the intended QUD, based on how the speaker
selects melodies to convey the QUD she intends to address.

1146

This model operates over the possible melodies that the
speaker could use and considers those possibilities when calculating the probability of the projection of the prejacent. To
test the model, we examine the model’s predictions for two
particular melodies and compare those predictions to experimental results. The next section provides information on the
two melodies and how their effect on the projection of the
prejacent was assessed experimentally.

Experiment methodology
Using the method of Tonhauser 2016, participants listened
to audio recordings of manner adverb utterances and judged
whether the speaker was certain of the prejacent.

Figure 1: A screenshot of one experimental item.

Participants. We recruited 100 self-reported native speakers of American English on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk platform.
Stimuli. Each participant listened to 16 utterances—10 target
utterances and 6 fillers. The target sentences were all of the
form, “subject didn’t verb adverb”, where each adverb was a
manner adverb, and where each subject was a proper name.
The target sentences were:
(14)

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
j.

Amanda didn’t clap loudly.
Jennifer didn’t drive carelessly.
Elizabeth didn’t leave silently.
Linda didn’t write neatly.
Susan didn’t sing beautifully.
Jerry didn’t knock frantically.
Justin didn’t smile cheerfully.
Alexander didn’t sneeze softly.
Tyler didn’t lie deliberately.
Dennis didn’t win easily.

The filler items were:
(15)

a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.

Sandy wasn’t invited to the party.
Did Mario bring a chocolate cake?
Who knows if Maggie is at the party?
Mike forgot to bring the ketchup.
Paul loves that pie!
Mandy was out gardening in the yard.

Each target sentence was uttered with one of two possible
melodies, L+H* L-H% with the pitch accent on the adverb
(the LH-Adverb condition), or L+H* L-H% with the pitch
accent on the proper name subject (the LH-Name condition).
Fillers were pronounced with pitch accents on words other
than the subject noun, and contained a variety of pitch accent
and end tone types not used in the target utterances.
In addition to exposing participants to melodies other than
the ones used for the target items, filler utterance-question
pairs tested whether participants comprehended direct consequences of an action described by the speaker. For example, the utterance, Mike forgot to bring the ketchup was followed by the question, ‘Is Debby certain that Mike brought
the ketchup?’. Given that Debby’s utterance implies that
Mike forgot the ketchup, participants were expected to rate
the speaker as “not certain”, but to reliably respond in this

way requires attention to the meaning of the utterance as well
as its component words.
Each participant was assigned to one of two lists, where
the two lists contained the same sentences but were counterbalanced for prosodic condition. The same 6 fillers occurred
on both lists.
Procedure. Participants were instructed to imagine themselves at a party, where they overhear Debby, the host, utter various sentences to somebody else. For each of the 16
utterances, the participant was asked to rate on a 7-point Likert scale labeled at 4 points (1/“No, not certain”, 3/“Possibly
not certain”, 5/“Possibly certain”, 7/“Yes, certain”) whether
Debby was certain of some content based on what she said
and how she said it. On each trial, participants were presented
with a display as in Fig. 1, clicked the audio icon, heard an utterance, read the related question, clicked on the radio button
that corresponded to their chosen response, and clicked the
‘continue’ button to proceed to the next trial. For the target
item shown in Fig. 1, the utterance was Amanda didn’t clap
LOUDLY, and the participant was asked to rate the speaker’s
certainty about the prejacent, i.e., ‘Amanda clapped’.
Data exclusion. If participants answered more than one filler
incorrectly (an answer greater than 3 on the Likert scale for
something that Debby would be uncertain about or an answer
smaller than 5 for something that she would be certain about),
their responses were excluded from analysis. We excluded 28
participants on these grounds, leaving 72 participants whose
responses we analyzed. Whether these participants are excluded does not change the main effect of condition on response.

Model predictions
If participants take Debby to be committed to the truth of φ,
we expect them to respond that Debby is certain that φ. If
Debby is not taken to be committed to the truth of φ, we expect participants to respond that Debby is not certain that φ.
However, we do not expect mean responses at the extreme
ends of the 7-point Likert scale, because it is possible for participants to exhibit uncertainty about whether Debby is committed to φ. Participants can therefore give a response in the
mid-range of the scale. To directly compare our model’s predictions to the experimental results, we use the model to pre-

1147

6

Response

Prediction

6

Prosody
LH Adverb

4

LH Name

2

2

2.5

5.0

7.5

10.0

LH Adverb

Lambda

dict participants’ probabilistic evaluation of whether Debby
is certain that φ. The probability P(φ|M) is the probability
that Debby is certain that φ, given M. This is expected to be
1 when the participant takes φ to project based on M—which
occurs with probability P(PROJECT(φ)|M). When the participant does not take φ to project based on M, we expect some
baseline uncertainty about whether Debby is committed to φ,
which we encode as a prior probability P(φ). We thus define
P(φ|M) as follows:
P(φ|M) =P(PROJECT(φ)|M) × 1
+P(¬PROJECT(φ)|M) × P(φ)
To account for the fact that our stimuli do not provide any
prior evidence (i.e., evidence apart from the manipulated
prosody) for whether the speaker is committed to φ, we take
P(φ) to be uniform, i.e., equal to 0.5. Assuming a uniform
prior over φ maintains a model with only one free parameter,
the rationality parameter λ, and makes the model more informative by limiting the range of predictions that it can make.
Fig. 2 shows the model predictions1 as λ increases to 10
(a relatively high value given ones used in the literature).
We see that the modeled participant responses in the two
prosodic conditions LH-Adverb and LH-Name diverge rather
shallowly, predicting significantly higher certainty in the LHAdverb condition, but not by a huge margin. The model
predicts that projection in the LH-Adverb condition, though
higher, will not be at ceiling. This is because utterances in
the LH-Adverb condition are not only compatible with the
prejacent-entailing QUDs but also with QUDs that do not entail the prejacent, and thus the probability of projection never
exceeds fifty percent (4 on the Likert scale), even for high
values of λ.2
1 Model-generated

probabilities are mapped onto a 7-point scale
with the following formula: RATING = 1 + 6 ∗ P(φ|M).
2 The Python code used to implement the model can be downloaded at https://github.com/jonscottstevens/Prosody-Projection.

LH Name

Prosody

Figure 2: Model predictions about the extent to which listeners take the speaker to be certain of the prejacent, given the
two melodies. The x-axis represents the λ-parameter, which
encodes the degree to which the predictions reflect utilitymaximizing reasoning. The y-axis is mapped to a 7-point
scale to parallel the experimental task.

(16)

4

Figure 3: Responses by prosodic condition. Violin plots show
frequency of participant means. Bar plots show overall means
with 95% bootstrap confidence intervals.

Experiment results
The experimental results are shown in Fig. 3. Mean Likert
scale response in the LH-Adverb condition was 5.7, compared to 4.8 in the LH-Name condition. This difference is
in the expected direction: participants rated Debby as being
less certain of the prejacent when the pitch accent was on the
subject than when it was on the manner adverb. A mixedeffects ordinal regression model with random intercepts for
participant and item and random slope for participant shows
responses to be significantly lower in the LH-Name condition than in the LH-Adverb condition (β = −1.13, SE = 0.24,
z = −4.68, p < 0.0001).
The model predictions in Fig. 2 are in line with the experimental results shown in Fig. 3 in three key ways:
1. The model correctly predicts a significant difference in
mean responses between the two conditions, with the LHAdverb items showing higher certainty ratings.
2. The model correctly predicts the magnitude of this difference to be rather small (within about one point on the Likert scale).
3. The model correctly predicts that even in the LH-Adverb
condition, where projection is expected, the ratings are not
at ceiling.
Thus, three qualitative experimental behaviors are accounted
for by our RSA model, which builds on existing theoretical
assumptions about the links between prosody, the QUD and
projection, and incorporates those assumptions into a probabilistic pragmatic model.
The quantitative match with the model’s predictions is
not exact—certainty is a bit higher across the board than
predicted—but as we see in Fig. 4, it is not far off, either.
We would expect a more exact match if we experimentally
obtained priors over the hearer’s evaluation of the speaker’s
certainty for the various sentences used (instead of assuming
a uniform prior of 0.5), a possible task for future research.

Discussion
This paper showed that the question-based analysis of projection developed in Simons et al. 2017 can be extended to
manner adverb utterances and formalized in an RSA model.

1148

7

Lambda

Prediction

10.0

6

7.5
5.0

5

2.5
4
LH Adverb

LH Name

Prosody

Figure 4: Model predictions by λ value (blue), along with the
experimentally observed means (black).
The experimental findings empirically support the predictions
of the model and, hence, the question-based analysis of projection. They also add to the growing empirical evidence that
formal analyses of projection, including conventional triggering analyses (e.g., Heim, 1983; van der Sandt, 1992), need
to be sensitive to information structure (e.g., Beaver, Roberts,
Simons, & Tonhauser, 2017; Tonhauser, 2016). Finally, the
RSA model demonstrates the feasibility of formal pragmatic
analyses of projection.
Future research needs to investigate the predictions of the
model for other projective contents of manner adverb utterances, other prosodic realizations of such utterances, and the
projective contents of other utterances. We also observed that
the influence of prosody on the projectivity of the prejacent
was heterogeneous across items. This observation suggests
enriching the model with information about listeners’ prior
expectations about the prejacent, e.g., about how likely somebody is to smile given that they didn’t smile cheerfully.

Acknowledgments
This work was funded by the American Council of Learned
Societies, the OSU Humanities and Arts Discovery Theme
and NSF grant BCS-1452674 (Roberts & Tonhauser). Special
thanks to members of the OSU pragmatics working group for
their helpful feedback on this work.

References
Abrusán, M. (2013). A note on quasi-presuppositions and
focus. Journal of Semantics, 30, 257-265.
Beaver, D., & Clark, B. (2008). Sense and sensitivity: How
focus determines meaning. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.
Beaver, D., Roberts, C., Simons, M., & Tonhauser, J. (2017).
Questions Under Discussion: Where information structure meets projective content. Annual Review of Linguistics, 3.
Beckman, M. E., & Ayers, G. (1997). Guidelines for ToBI
labelling, version 3.0 [Computer software manual].
Bergen, L., & Goodman, N. D. (2015). The strategic use
of noise in pragmatic reasoning. Topics in Cognitive
Science, 7(2), 336–350.
Chierchia, G., & McConnell-Ginet, S. (1990). Meaning and
grammar. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Eady, S., & Cooper, W. E. (1986). Speech intonation and
focus location in matched statements and questions.
JASA, 80, 402-415.
Frank, M. C., & Goodman, N. D. (2012). Predicting
pragmatic reasoning in language games. Science,
336(6084), 998. doi: 10.1126/science.1218633
Halliday, M. A. K. (1967). Notes on transitivity and theme in
English (part 2). Journal of Linguistics, 3, 177-274.
Heim, I. (1983). On the projection problem for presuppositions. In M. Barlow, D. Flickinger, & M. Westcoat
(Eds.), WCCFL 2 (p. 114-125).
Lai, C. (2012). Rises all the way up: The interpretation of prosody, discourse attitudes and dialogue structure (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University of
Pennsylvania.
Most, R., & Saltz, E. (1979). Information structure in sentences: New information. Language and Speech, 22,
89-95.
Paul, H. (1880). Prinzipien der Sprachgeschichte. Tübingen:
Niemeyer.
Roberts, C. (2012). Information structure in discourse: Towards an integrated formal theory of pragmatics. Semantics & Pragmatics, 5, 1-69.
Rooth, M. (1992). A theory of focus interpretation. Natural
Language Semantics, 1, 75-116.
Selkirk, E. O. (1996). Sentence prosody: Intonation, stress,
and phrasing. In J. Goldsmith (Ed.), The handbook of
phonological theory (p. 550-569). Blackwell.
Simons, M. (2001). On the conversational basis of some
presuppositions. In Proceedings of Semantics and Linguistics Theory (SALT) XI (p. 431-448). Ithaca, NY:
CLC Publications.
Simons, M., Beaver, D., Roberts, C., & Tonhauser, J. (2017).
The Best Question: Explaining the projection behavior
of factive verbs. Discourse Processes, 54, 187-206.
Tonhauser, J. (2016). Prosodic cues to speaker commitment. In Proceedings of Semantics and Linguistic Theory (SALT) XXVI. Ithaca, NY: CLC Publications.
van der Sandt, R. (1992). Presupposition projection as
anaphora resolution. Journal of Semantics, 9, 333-377.
von Stechow, A. (1990). Focusing and backgrounding operators. In W. Abraham (Ed.), Discourse particles (p. 3784). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Wagner, M. (2012). Contrastive topics decomposed. Semantics and Pragmatics, 5(8), 1–54.

1149

