Reasoning ability predicts irrational worldview but not conspiracy belief
Jan Jastrzębski (jastrz.jan@gmail.com)
Institute of Psychology, Jagiellonian University
Grodzka 52, 31-044 Krakow, Poland

Adam Chuderski (adam.chuderski@uj.edu.pl)
Institute of Philosophy, Jagiellonian University
Grodzka 52, 31-044 Krakow, Poland
Abstract
Previous research showed that individual tendency to believe in
conspiracy theories is related to numerous social, personality, and
cognitive variables. Moreover, such a tendency may reflect a
broader trait for epistemic irrationality, which drives other pseudoscientific and paranormal beliefs. However, the relationship
between conspiracy belief and reasoning ability (fluid intelligence;
Gf) was not sufficiently studied to date, even though Gf level
strongly influence the way in which individuals think and reason.
Using confirmatory factor analysis, we found the robust link
between conspiracy belief and other irrational beliefs. All those
irrational beliefs were also substantially related to the closeminded cognitive style. However, even though Gf significantly
predicted other irrational beliefs, it explained less than 2% of
variance in conspiracy belief. This result suggests that effective
reasoning cannot prevent even highly intelligent people from
endorsing conspiracy theories.
Keywords: rationality; intelligence; conspiracy theory;
paranormal beliefs; pseudoscience;

Introduction
Conspiracy theory is an explanation of a significant event,
like the sudden death of famous person, terrorists attack, or
catastrophe, as resulting from some secret plot made by a
powerful organization or a group of powerful individuals.
Although, in principle, such theories may be true (e.g., the
Watergate scandal), usually they are insufficiently supported
by facts, disregarded by experts, and based on pseudoscientific assumptions.
Importantly, the belief in conspiracy theories (henceforth,
conspiracy belief) pertains not only to advocates of extreme
ideologies or to paranoid and delusional individuals, but is
prevalent in diverse cultures and societies (Raab, Ortlieb,
Auer, Guthmann, & Carbon, 2013). Although to date most
of research on the topic was conducted in Western
countries, some studies showed that conspiracy belief is a
widespread phenomenon among people all over the world
(e.g. Raab et.al., 2013; Goertzel, 1994; Swami et al., 2011;
Bruder, Haffke, Neave, Nouripanah, & Imhoff, 2013).
Certain people are more likely to hold conspiracy belief
than others. What is important, this tendency may be a part
of more general mindset, worldview or mentality (Goertzel,
1994; Dagnall, Drinkwater, Parker, Denovan, & Parton,
2015; Imhoff & Bruder, 2014). People who believe in one
conspiracy theory are also more likely to believe in another
one, even if the theories are unrelated (Swami, Chamorro-

Premuzic, & Furnham, 2010), contradictory (Wood,
Douglas, & Sutton, 2012), or the second one is fictional and
encountered for the first time (Swami et al., 2011). Such a
kind of conspiratorial mentality was associated with
numerous socio-psychological variables, including anomie,
powerlessness, feeling of meaninglessness, distrust,
authoritarianism, political cynicism, low self-esteem, and
schizotypy (Goertzel, 1994; Abalakina-Paap, Stephan,
Craig, & Gregory, 1999; Swami et al., 2010; Swami et al.,
2011). Moreover, conspiracy belief is closely related to
other epistemically dubious beliefs, like paranormal and
pseudoscientific claims and theories (Lobato, Mendoza,
Sims, & Chin, 2014). Altogether, paranormal, pseudoscientific, and conspiracy beliefs may result from one and
the same irrational worldview/mindset.
The problem that we investigated was how are various
instances of irrational thought, and particularly conspiracy
belief, related to reasoning ability (fluid intelligence; Gf),
which is defined as the ability to solve novel problems by
means of abstract reasoning. As Gf strongly predicts many
socio-psychological variables (see Deary, 2012), can Gf also
predict individual tendency for irrational beliefs? At least
intuitively, it seemed reasonable to expect that more intelligent people, because of their more powerful reasoning,
would be more sceptical toward dubious, unsupported
beliefs, including conspiracy theories. Besides intuition,
numerous premises can be found in existing literature.
First, positive correlations between intuitive thinking style
and conspiracy belief were reported. Also, experimentally
induced willingness to engage in analytic reasoning reduced
this belief (Swami, Voracek, Stieger, Tran, & Furnham,
2014). Thus, a disposition for reflective thinking may help
to embrace more sceptical stance towards irrational claims
and theories, and may affect one’s worldview even counter
to cultural factors (Pennycook, Fugelsang, & Koehler,
2015). Moreover, tendency for analytic thinking may
prevent people from relying on intuitions and “gut feelings”
that often lead to cognitive biases and heuristics, which
may, at least to some extent, drive conspiracy belief. For
example, Clarke (2002) argued that such a belief may stem
from attribution bias, which consists of overestimating the
influence of personal factors, and ascribing responsibility
primarily to agents, instead of explaining events in terms of
situational factors and coincidence. Likewise, it was argued
that this belief may be related to representativeness
heuristic, which leads people to seek explanations that

2290

possess salience proportional to the very significance of
events (Leman & Cinnirella, 2007). Since major events need
major explanations, people may see ordinary causes of
great-impact events as unsatisfying and thus unlikely, and
thus may embrace conspiracy theories instead. Finally,
Brotherton and French (2014) showed the people displaying
conspiratorial mentality to be more prone to conjunction
fallacy, which is a reasoning error consisting of assessing
the probability of two co-occurring events as being more
likely than the joint probability that these events will occur
alone. As the tendency for analytical thinking is at least
moderately related to intelligence (Pennycook et al., 2015),
a negative relationship between intelligence and conspiracy
belief may also exist.
On the other hand, the relationship between intelligence
and biased/irrational thinking is not straightforward.
Although some biases might be attenuated by higher
reasoning ability, some may not be related to intelligence at
all (Stanovich & West, 2008). High reasoning ability may
not be enough to prevent people from embracing dubious
theories. A research program aimed at understanding the
relationship between intelligence and rationality, started by
Stanovich, put emphasis on the need to distinguish between
these two mental qualities. Although there can be a positive
relationship between the two, what is essential for
rationality may be such thinking dispositions as the
willingness to think reflectively and open-mindedly.
Consistently, the relationship between intelligence and
irrational beliefs might be at least partially mediated by
cognitive style. Although such a possible mediation so far
has never been studied in the context of conspiracy theories,
some supporting evidence comes from studies on paranormal and religious beliefs (Pennycook, 2014).
Finally, studies showed a moderate negative link between
paranormal/pseudoscientific beliefs and intelligence (e.g.,
Rindermann, Falkenhayn, & Baumeister, 2014), but the
relationship between intelligence and conspiracy belief in
conspiracies has not been studied sufficiently enough.
Only one study to date examined this relationship (Swami
et al., 2011). First, it showed a negative, though weak,
correlation between conspiracy belief and self-assessed
intelligence. However, this result does not seem reliable, as
this measure of intelligence had low validity. Second, the
study reported weak negative correlation of conspiracy
belief and crystallized intelligence (Gc) – the ability to use
acquired experience and knowledge. However, Gf may be
even more important for the rejection of conspiracy theories
than Gc, because higher Gf levels allow more effective
processing of relations among objects, events, and facts
(Chuderski, 2014). Such relations can be used to create
counterexamples in a reasoning process (Johnson-Laird,
2006).

Study
The main goal of the study was to fill in the gap in existing
data on the relationship between Gf and conspiracy belief.
We expected reasoning ability to at least weakly predict

belief in conspiracy theories. Furthermore, we intended to
replicate the results that show moderate positive correlations
between different kinds of dubious beliefs: conspiracy,
paranormal, as well as pseudoscientific ones (Labato et al.,
2014; Brotherton & French, 2014; Swami et al., 2011).
In order to test the strength of the conspiracy-reasoning
link as well as to examine the strength of relationship
between conspiracy and paranormal/pseudoscientific belief
we used multiple measures of each belief, as well as we
applied latent variable modelling by means of confirmatory
factor analysis (CFA). Applying more than one measure of
each construct. and calculating latent variables enables a
more valid and reliable measurement of the constructs in
question as well as the relationships between them, as
compared to using single measures (see Kline, 1998).
We applied two measures of conspiracy belief to a large
sample of Polish adults. Because many conspiracy theories
are strongly culture-specific, one scale was created to
measure belief in a particular conspiracy theory pertaining
to political situation in Poland: the theory about catastrophe
in Smolensk. The Smolensk conspiracy is probably the most
distinctive case of conspiracy theory in the Polish society,
and it is similar to conspiratorial themes that are vivid in
other societies (e.g., the death of President Kennedy and
Princess Diana). However, it is possible that some specific
factors may play a crucial role for the Smolensk conspiracy
(e.g. most of its advocates are right-wing/conservative),
which might not drive other conspiracy theories, and which
thus may bias the relationship between reasoning ability and
conspiracy belief. To avoid such a bias, we also applied a
measure of general conspiratorial beliefs and attitudes – The
Generic Conspiracist Beliefs Scale (GCB) (Brotherton et al.,
2014). Importantly, GCB does not concern any particular
conspiracy theory, but deals with common conspiratorial
themes (e.g. governments totally controling the information
flow), that enables broader generalization of the results.
Also, we used one questionnaire to measure paranormal
beliefs, and another for pseudoscientific beliefs.
In addition, we measured open-minded cognitive style,
understood as mental flexibility and openness toward the
alternative views, perspectives, and counter-evidence. To do
so we applied two questionnaires: NEO-openness subscale
and open-minded thinking scale. Open-minded thinking was
previously shown to be negatively (though rather weakly)
related to conspiracy belief (Swami et al., 2014). Finally, Gf
was measured with two visuospatial tests and one numerical
test that involved abstract reasoning.

Method
Participants
A total of 318 voluntary participants (218 women, 100 men)
were recruited via ads in publicly accessible websites. The
participants were paid an equivalent of 20 euros in Polish
currency. The mean age was 24.4 years (SD = 6.02, range
18 - 45). Four participants did not complete all the applied
questionnaires and were excluded from the analysis.

2291

Materials
Smolensk Conspiracy Scale
Conspiracy theories are cultural phenomena. Studying
particular conspiracy theories requires that the participants
are familiar with them and their cultural context. Our choice
of a theme for well-known conspiracy theory was the 2010
catastrophe in Smolensk (the Russian Federation), in which
the Polish President’s plane crashed, and all of the 96 crew
and passengers, including President Lech Kaczynski, died.
The Smolensk catastrophe was judged by official aviation
experts (PCINAA, 2011) to result from the pilot’s error as
well as the improper organization of the flight. The crash
had a specific political context: The death of President
Kaczynski, who travelled across Russian territory, in order
to commemorate Polish officers killed by Soviets during
WWII, despite his tense political relations with the Russian
government of President Vladimir Putin. Furthermore,
President Kaczynski and his conservative camp strongly
opposed the Polish government and its supporting liberal
party, while the presidential campaign in Poland was about
to start. All of this made an excellent context for various
accusations and plot hypotheses, even though the explanation of the catastrophe is straightforward. Consequently,
five years after the catastrophe, a public opinion survey
(CBOS, 2015) showed that about 30% members of the
Polish society considered the hypothesis of assassination of
Lech Kaczynski plausible (among them 8% were convinced
it was true). Thus, the Smolensk catastrophe made a crucial
and interesting case of conspiracy belief (henceforth we call
it the Smolensk conspiracy). So, a twelve-item questionnaire
was developed, with seven items measuring belief in the
Smolensk conspiracy, and five reverse-scored items probing
belief in the official explanation of the catastrophe.
The Generic Conspiracist Beliefs scale
We used the validated 15-item scale of Brotherton et al.
(2014) to measure the general tendency for conspiracy
belief. The scale covers general conspiratorial assumptions
such as beliefs in prevalent government misconduct, secret
groups exerting the control over global events, dangers to
personal health and liberties (e.g., the mind control
experiments), extraterrestrial cover-up, and the full
censorship over information. The sample item was “The
governments are involved in the murder of innocent citizens
and/or well-known public figures, and keep this a secret”.
Pseudoscientific Belief Scale
We created an 18-item questionnaire to measure pseudoscience belief and disapproval of scientific knowledge. The
items covered range of topics (medicine/health, natural
science, evolution, psychology, sexuality), and were mixed
with 9 filler items dealing with general scientific knowledge. Sample test items were “Mercury in vaccines may
increase probability of acquiring autism among small children” and “Crystals possess qualities which protect against
negative influence of electromagnetic radiation”.

Paranormal Belief Scale
Our measure of paranormal belief was based on Revised
Paranormal Belief Scale (Tobacyk, 2004). We removed four
items concerning religious belief, as we applied a separate
religious beliefs questionnaire in the session (not analysed
in the present study). We removed another three items
concerning extra-ordinary life forms (e.g. Loch Ness
monster), as being outdated and possibly unfamiliar to our
participants. The final version contained 20 items such as
“In some cases it is possible to communicate with the dead”.
Fluid intelligence tests
We applied three Gf tests. The classic Gf test – Raven’s
Advanced Matrices (Raven, Court, & Raven, 1983), as well
as Figural Analogies (Chuderski & Necka, 2012), were
administered in shortened versions (18 items each). Each of
the two tests was composed of odd numbered items from
respective standard 36-item versions. Their administration
time was half of the standard one (20 and 15 minutes
respectively). The third test was Number series, in which the
task was to find the rule according to which the number
sequence or the array is constructed, and to complete the
sequence/array with the missing number. Participants were
given 18 minutes to solve the 18 number series problems.
Open-mindedness cognitive style questionnaires
The first questionnaire measuring open-minded thinking
included 14 items from Actively Open-minded Thinking
scale (Stanovich & West, 2007), selected on the basis of our
previous data. All 14 items were scored in such a way that
higher scores represented a larger tendency toward rigid,
dogmatic, categorical thinking, as well as the trend for
sticking to one’s beliefs even in the face of counterevidence
(e.g., “Changing your mind is a sign of weakness”). The
total score on the scale was reversed, so that higher total
scores indicated more open-minded, flexible thinking. The
second questionnaire was an 12-item openness to experience
subscale of the Polish adaptation of the NEO-Five Factor
Inventory (Costa & McCrae, 1992).
In all of the questionnaires except the cognitive style
measures, participants judged whether the given statements
are true or false using a seven-point scale (0 = false for sure,
3 = uncertain, 6 = true for sure). Five-point (1 = definitely
disagree, 5 = definitely agree) and a four-point scale were
used in the Open-minded Thinking and the NEO-openness
scales, respectively.
Procedure
Participants were tested in a psychological laboratory, in
groups of six participants on average. The Gf tests were
applied in the fixed order (Raven APM, Figural Analogy
Test, Number series test). All the questionnaires were
completed via computers at the end of the study session. At
the course of the session participants completed other tasks
(working memory and cognitive control tests, religiosity
questionnaires, etc.) unrelated to the topic of this study.

2292

Results
All the measures applied had at least satisfactory internal
consistency (Cronbach’s alphas > .71), including Smolensk
conspiracy and GCB scales (Cronbach’s alpha = .88, and
.94, respectively), and all of them fitted well the normal
distribution (max. skew = -0.28, max. kurtosis = -0.82).
Firstly, the endorsement of the most extreme form of
conspiracy theory, the assassination theory, was examined.
Answers on the respective item (“The cause of the
catastrophe was an assassination.”) of the Smolensk
Conspiracy scale showed that about 10% (N = 32) of the
participants considered it a possible option (answered “it is
probably true”), 5% (N = 16) answered “it is true”, and 4%
(N = 12) answered “it is true for sure”. Thus, the support for
Smolensk conspiracy in our sample was rather low.
The CFA model (Figure 1) correlated four latent variables: Conspiracy Belief (loading Smolensk Conspiracy scale
and GCB), Irrational Belief (Paranormal and Pseudoscience), Gf (the three reasoning tests), and Openmindedness (NEO-openness and Open-minded Thinking).
The model fit was assessed with three indices (see Kline,
1998): χ2 statistic (its value divided by the number of
degrees of freedom should not exceed χ2/df = 2.0), Bentler’s
comparative fit index (CFI should exceed .92), and the root
mean square error of approximation (RMSEA should be less
than .08). The fit of the model was good: χ2(21) = 36.01,
CFI = .981, RMSEA = .047 (90% CI = [.017, .074]).
All factor loadings (see Table 1) showed satisfactory
validity of the applied measures, except for NEO-openness.
Importantly, belief in Smolensk conspiracy was substantially related to GCB. Thus, Smolensk Conspiracy scale
seems to be a valid measure of conspiracy belief.
In line with our expectations, the correlation between the
Conspiracy Belief and Irrational Belief factors was strong,
r = .72, p < .001. However, the negative link between the
Conspiracy Belief and Gf was very weak (r = –.13), and
despite our large sample it was not statistically significant
(p = .08). Thus, Gf predicted only a negligible amount of
variance (2%) in conspiracy belief. However, as expected,
there was a negative correlation between Gf and Irrational
Belief, r = –.31, p < .001. In addition, the open-minded

cognitive style showed the substantial negative correlation
with Conspiracy Belief and Irrational Beliefs. Thus
cognitive style was a much stronger predictor of conspiracy
and irrational beliefs than Gf.

Discussion
We aimed to test whether conspiracy belief weakens with an
increased reasoning ability (Gf). Contrary to our expectations, results showed that it virtually did not; Gf explained
less than 2% of variance in conspiracy belief, and despite
our large sample the link was not significant. On the other
hand, Gf predicted about 9% of variance in paranormal and
pseudoscience belief. Although the relationship was weaker
than in previous studies, it is in line with these studies
(Rindermann, Falkenhayn, & Baumeister, 2014). Moreover,
irrational beliefs shared half of variance with conspiracy
belief, also replicating similar findings (Lobato et al., 2014;
Brotherton & French, 2014; Swami et al., 2011).
The robust relationship between conspiratorial, paranormal, and pseudoscientific beliefs suggests that they rely
on a common underlying mindset/worldview, which reflects
the tendency to believe in irrational, epistemically dubious
claims and theories. There probably are specific social and
cognitive factors (e.g. anomie, political cynism, distrust,
radicalism) that seem to induce the conspiratorial mindset,
and, to a lesser extent, the other kinds of dubious beliefs.
However, the general tendency to believe in the irrational
most likely stems primarily from interrelated personality
traits and thinking dispositions, such as intuitive thinking
and close-mindedness (the latter shown by the present data).
If so, why is conspiracy belief unrelated to Gf, as compared to paranormal and pseudoscientific beliefs? First,
although more intelligent people more frequently hold to
proper scientific explanations of facts (what makes them
less likely to believe in pseudoscience), most of conspiracies
(also the Smolensk conspiracy) needn’t be inconsistent with
the body of scientific knowledge (though are unsupported
by facts). Plots, evil politicians, and secret organisations
undoubtedly exist, but usually they are not the reasonable

Table 1. Factor loadings from the CFA model (all ps < .001)
Latent variable

Measure
Raven Matrices

Gf

Irrational
Belief
Conspiracy
Belief
Open-mindedness

Factor
loading
0.84

Analogies

0.78

Numbers

0.66

Pseudoscience

0.84

Paranormal

0.74

Generic conpiracist beliefs

0.87

Smolensk conspiracy

0.50

NEO-openness

0.36

Open-minded thinking

0.96

Figure 1. Correlations between four latent variables in the
CFA model. All correlation are significant at ps < .001,
except for the one presented in the dashed line.

2293

explanations of complex phenomena. Thus, even though
intelligent people may easily suppress their intuitions
favouring paranormal/unscientific phenomena as being
unlikely and contradicting the general scientific knowledge,
they may let their intuitions about political/social issues
develop more freely.
Second, endorsing conspiracy theories may be seen as a
process of motivated reasoning (Kunda et al., 1990;
Saunders, State, & Farhart, 2016), which is a kind of biased
reasoning directed by motivation to arrive at the desired
conclusions. In context of conspiracy theories, this process
may satisfy the ideological and psychological needs such as
the loyalty toward ideological groups (Saunders, State, &
Farhart, 2016). Conspiracy belief seems to be strongly
motivated personally as well as engaging, as it touches the
basic political and social opinions and values. Thus, people
may have stronger motivation to rationalize their conspiracy
beliefs, comparing to paranormal or pseudoscientific beliefs.
Importantly, myside/confirmation bias – the tendency to
evaluate and provide arguments in a manner biased towards
our own views – is basically unrelated to intelligence
(Stanovich, West, & Toplak, 2013). Also, the more subjectively important the issue, the more strongly motivated the
reasoning process becomes. Thus, intelligent and curious
individuals may perform better at finding quality arguments
supporting their worldview and prior beliefs, but they are
not more inclined to objectively consider counterevidence
and alternative perspectives, especially in cases of highly
engaging issues. Moreover, more politically knowledgeable
individuals may be even more likely to embrace conspiracy
theories than the less knowledgeable ones (Saunders et al.,
2016). Similarly, although providing relevant scientific
information may change people’s opinion on global
warming (Ranney & Clark, 2016), general scientific
literacy/numeracy is unrelated to differences in opinion on
global warming risk, but is related to a greater opinion
polarization on the issue (Kahan et al., 2012). The opinion is
instead well predicted by different values sets/worldviews.
Also, at least in some cases, a high level of reasoning
ability/reflective thinking may actually lead to more
motivated reasoning (Kahan, 2013), and thus leading to
greater polarization of prior beliefs, rather than alleviating
their influence. To sum up, whether an individual embraces
a conspiracy theory may be primarily dependent on his/her
prior worldview and mindset, which directs the reasoning
process to conclusions consistent with this worldview, and
high intelligence may rather serve this process instead of
hindering it. Consequently, sheer high intelligence may not
be enough to prevent people from endorsing dubious
conspiracy theories. Even some highly intelligent
individuals may believe in conspiracies, as did some of our
participants who scored really high on intelligence tests, but
regardless of their high ability believed in assassination as
the major cause of the Smolensk catastrophe.
More generally, our results serve as another example that
intelligence and rationality should be treated as dissociable
constructs (see Stanovich et al., 2013). Although some

irrationality indices (e.g., paranormal and pseudoscience)
may be moderately related to intelligence, other may be
weakly related, as probably is in the case of at least some
conspiracy beliefs.
On the other hand, we should notice that conspiracy
theories are not homogenous phenomena, and are also not
irrational by definition. In some cases lack of healthy
skepticism toward official information from seemingly
reliable sources may be as harmful as unreflective belief in
dubious conspiracy theories, and thus we do not think the
less ones score on a conspiracy questionnaire the better.
However, confidence in questionable conspiracy beliefs
may be interpreted as irrational, as is confidence in dubious
paranormal or pseudoscientific beliefs. Secondly, although
we think that use of two measures of conspiracy belief
dealing with different conspiratorial attitudes and beliefs
provides a good measure of general conspiratorial mindset,
we cannot exclude that the relation between belief in
conspiracies and cognitive dispositions might be different in
cases of some particular conspiracy theories.
In conclusion, our results make an important contribution
to the conspiracy and rationality research, by showing
conspiracy belief to be virtually unrelated to reasoning
ability. Given the present data as well as numerous other
cognitive, social, and personality variables that play role in
prevalence of such complex socio-cultural phenomena as
conspiracy theories, it seems that intelligence alone cannot
prevent people from believing in conspiracy theories.
Additionally, they provide more evidence for the strong
conspiracy-irrationality relationship, supporting the view
that the individual tendency to think in an irrational/
conspiratorial way may constitute a stable and important
personality trait/cognitive style.

Acknowledgments
This work was sponsored by the Foundation for Polish
Science (the MISTRZ project sponsored to A. Chuderski).

References
Abalakina-Paap, M., Stephan, W. G., Craig, T., & Gregory,
W. L. (1999). Beliefs in conspiracies. Political
Psychology, 20(03), 637–647.
Brotherton, R., & French, C. C. (2014). Belief in conspiracy
theories and susceptibility to the conjunction fallacy.
Applied Cognitive Psychology, 28, 238–248.
Bruder, M., Haffke, P., Neave, N., Nouripanah, N., &
Imhoff, R. (2013). Measuring individual differences in
generic beliefs in conspiracy theories across cultures:
Conspiracy Mentality Questionnaire. Frontiers in
Psychology, 4, 4: 225.
Cacioppo, J. T., Petty, R. E., Feinstein, J., & Jarvis, W.
(1996). Dispositional differences in cognitive
motivation: The life and times of individuals varying in
need for cognition. Psychological Bulletin, 119,
197−253.

2294

CBOS (2015) Survey report. Before the fifth anniversary of
the
Smolensk
catastrophe.
Available
at:
http://cbos.pl/SPISKOM.POL/2015/K_049_15.PDF
Chuderski, A. (2014). The relational integration task
explains fluid reasoning above and beyond other
working memory tasks. Memory & Cognition, 42, 448463.
Clarke, S. (2002). Conspiracy theories and conspiracy
theorizing. Philosophy of the Social Sciences, 32, 131–
150.
Dagnall, N., Drinkwater, K., Parker, A., Denovan, A., &
Parton, M. (2015). Conspiracy theory and cognitive
style: a worldview. Frontiers in Psychology,
6(February), 1–9.
Goertzel, T. (1994). Belief in conspiracy theories. Political
Psychology, 15, 731–742.
Imhoff, R., & Bruder, M. (2014). Speaking (Un-)truth to
power: Conspiracy mentality as a generalised political
attitude. European Journal of Personality, 28, 25–43.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2006). How we reason? Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Kahan, D. M. (2013). Ideology , motivated reasoning , and
cognitive reflection. Judgment and Decision Making,
8(4), 407–424.
Kahan, D. M., Peters, E., Wittlin, M., Slovic, P., Ouellette,
L. L., Braman, D., & Mandel, G. (2012). The polarizing
impact of science literacy and numeracy on perceived
climate change risks. Nature Climate Change, 2(10),
732–735.
Kunda, Z., Dunning, D., Jones, E., Jussim, L., Miller, D.,
Nisbett, R., & Petty, R. (1990). The case for motivated
reasoning, Psychological Bulletin, 108(3), 480–498.
Leman, P. J., & Cinnirella, M. (2007). A major event has a
major cause: Evidence for the role of heuristics in
reasoning
about
conspiracy
theories.
Social
Psychological Review, 9, 18-28.
Lobato, E., Mendoza, J., Sims, V., & Chin, M. (2014).
Examining the relationship between conspiracy theories,
paranormal beliefs, and pseudoscience acceptance
among a university population. Applied Cognitive
Psychology, 625, 617–625.
Newheiser, A. K., Farias, M., & Tausch, N. (2011). The
functional nature of conspiracy beliefs: Examining the
underpinnings of belief in the Da Vinci Code
conspiracy. Personality and Individual Differences, 51,
1007–1011.
Oberauer, K., Süß, H.-M., Wilhelm, O., & Wittman, W. W.
(2008). Which working memory functions predict
intelligence? Intelligence, 36, 641-652.
Pennycook, G. (2014). Evidence that analytic cognitive
style influences religious belief: Comment on Razmyar
and Reeve (2013). Intelligence, 43, 21–26.
Pennycook, G., Cheyne, J. A., Seli, P., Koehler, D. J., &
Fugelsang, J. a. (2012). Analytic cognitive style predicts
religious and paranormal belief. Cognition, 123(3), 335–
346.

Pennycook, G., Fugelsang, J. A., & Koehler, D. J. (2015).
Everyday consequences of analytic thinking. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 24, 425–432.
Polish Committee for Investigation of National Aviation
Accidents (2011). Final report. Available at:
http://komisja.smolensk.gov.pl/kbw/komunikaty/8877,Fi
nal-report-of-the-Committee-for-Investigation-ofNational-Aviation-Accidents-i.html
Raab, M. H., Ortlieb, S. A., Auer, N., Guthmann, K., &
Carbon, C. C. (2013). Thirty shades of truth: Conspiracy
theories as stories of individuation, not of pathological
delusion. Frontiers in Psychology, 4(JUL), 1–10.
Ranney, M. A., & Clark, D. (2016). Climate change
conceptual change: Scientific information can transform
attitudes. Topics in Cognitive Science, 8, 49-75.
Rindermann, H., Falkenhayn, L., & Baumeister, A. E. E.
(2014). Cognitive ability and epistemic rationality: A
study in Nigeria and Germany. Intelligence, 47, 23–33.
Saunders, K. L., State, C., & Farhart, C. E. (2016).
Conspiracy endorsement as motivated reasoning: The
moderating roles of political knowledge and trust,
American Journal of Political Science, 60(4), 824–844.
Stanovich, K. E., & West, R. F. (2008). On the relative
independence of thinking biases and cognitive ability.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 94(4),
672–695.
Stanovich, K. E., West, R. F., & Toplak, M. E. (2013).
Myside bias, rational thinking, and intelligence. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 22, 259–264.
Swami, V., Chamorro-Premuzic, T., & Furnham, A. (2010).
Unanswered questions: A preliminary investigation of
personality and individual difference predictors of
9/11conspiracist beliefs. Applied Cognitive Psychology,
24, 749–761.
Swami, V., Coles, R., Stieger, S., Pietschnig, J., Furnham,
A., Rehim, S., & Voracek, M. (2011). Conspiracist
ideation in Britain and Austria: Evidence of a
monological belief system and associations between
individual psychological differences and real-world and
fictitious conspiracy theories. British Journal of
Psychology, 102, 443–463.
Swami, V., Voracek, M., Stieger, S., Tran, U. S., &
Furnham, A. (2014). Analytic thinking reduces belief in
conspiracy theories. Cognition, 133(3), 572–585.
Tobacyk, J. J. (2004). A Revised Paranormal Belief Scale.
International Journal of Transpersonal Studies, 23, 94–
98.
Wood, M. J., Douglas, K.M., & Sutton, R. M. (2012). Dead
and alive: Beliefs in contradictory conspiracy theories.
Social Psychological and Personality Science, 3, 767–
773.

2295

