Repetition improves memory by strengthening existing traces: Evidence from pairedassociate learning under midazolam
Vencislav Popov (vencislav.popov@gmail.com)
Lynne Reder (reder@cmu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Abstract
Here, we examined how repetition under midazolam, a
benzodiazepine that prevents the storage of novel associations,
affects cued-recall performance of paired-associates. We contrasted
word pairs that were initially studied and tested repeatedly without
any successful recall prior to the midazolam injection, with other
pairs that were studied for the first time after the injection of
midazolam. According to our SAC (Source of Activation
Confusion) memory model, repetition leads to strengthening
existing memory traces rather than creating multiple traces for each
repetition. As such, it predicts that repetition under midazolam
should benefit only pairs that were originally studied prior to the
midazolam injection. This prediction was confirmed. The results
suggest that memory traces for pairs studied prior to the midazolam
injection were strengthened under midazolam. However, word pairs
that had not been studied prior to the injection were not bound in
long-term memory because midazolam prevents the formation of
new associations.
Keywords: memory strength; paired associate learning; episodic
memory; practice; midazolam;

Repetition improves memory performance across the board.
Beneficial effects of repetition have been found on most measures
of explicit memory such as single-item and paired-associates
recognition (e.g., Challis & Sidhu, 1993; Reder et al., 2000), free
recall (e.g., Challis & Sidhu, 1993; Underwood, 1969), and cued
recall tasks (Meltzer & Constable, 2005; Reder et al., 2007; Reder,
Liu, Keinath, & Popov, 2015). However, despite more than a
century of research on repetition effects, there is no consensus
about the mechanism through which practice affects memory
(Criss & Koop, 2015; Hintzman, 2010, 2011; Osth & Dennis,
2015; Pavlik & Anderson, 2005).
Two major types of theories have been proposed to explain
repetition effects. Cumulative-strength models (CSMs) suggest
that memory traces differ in strength or familiarity, and this
strength increases with repetition and decays with time (e.g.,
Murdock, Smith, & Bai, 2001; Pavlik & Anderson, 2005; Reder
et al., 2000; Wickelgren, 1972). In these models, recognition and
recall are a function of strength and greater strength leads to better
memory performance. In contrast, multiple-trace models (MTMs),
usually equated with global matching models (GMMs, Criss &
Koop, 2015), state that each repetition of an item is encoded
separately in memory (Bower, 1967; Brown, Neath, & Chater,
2007; Hintzman, 1984; Lansdale & Baguley, 2008; Osth &
Dennis, 2015). This leads to redundant memory traces, each of
which has some probability of being retrieved during test.
Interestingly, while both CSMs and MTMs co-exist in the current
literature, several proponents of each class believe that certain

empirical findings have conclusively ruled-out the alternative
models (Criss & Koop, 2015; Hintzman, 2011).
When it comes to CSMs, some researchers have argued that
they are incompatible with findings from judgments of frequency
(JOF) and judgments of recency (JOR) tasks (Flexser & Bower,
1974; Hintzman, 2010, 2011 Hintzman & Block, 1971). Many
CSMs in the past have assumed that the estimation of frequency,
recency and duration of events is based on a single strength
dimension (Hintzman, 2011). As a result, these models predict
that, for example, if an event is repeated it should also appear to
be more recent and to have lasted longer. That is not the case –
studies have shown that participants can easily discriminate the
frequency, recency and duration of repeatedly studied items
(Flexser & Bower, 1974; Hintzman, 2010, 2010; Hintzman &
Block, 1971).
This line of work seems to provide strong evidence against
CSMs, and yet, they are still popular in modeling recognition and
recall. Hintzman (2011) refers to this as “the fallacy of cumulative
strength”, and suggests that the CSMs are still popular because
most theorists focus on recognition memory and recall, while
ignoring tasks such as JOR and JOF. However, the same criticism
can be directed at conclusions from JOR and JOF tasks – the fact
that a single strength dimension cannot explain behavioral patterns
in such tasks does not mean that repetition effects on recognition
and recall memory are not due in part to cumulative strengthening
of existing memory traces. It only indicates that memory
representations also include rich contextual information, which is
an assumption shared by most current dual-process CSMs.
Similarly, when it comes to MTMs and GMMs, other
researchers maintain that they cannot account for the divergent
patterns of the list-length effect (LLE) and the list-strength effect
(LSE) on free recall and recognition (Criss & Koop, 2015;
Shiffrin, Ratcliff, & Clark, 1990). The LLE shows that increasing
the number of different items on a study list decreases free recall,
cued recall and recognition performance. Similarly, the LSE
shows that increasing the number of repetitions on some items
leads to worse free recall for the non-repeated items. However, the
LSE generally has no effects on overall performance in
recognition tasks. Critics of GMMs have argued that they are
fundamentally incompatible with this pattern of results (Criss &
Koop, 2015). This is because GMMs assume that the same
mechanism is involved when the number of different items
increases and when some items on a list are repeated. Specifically,
they both lead to the creation of additional memory traces and to
increased global signal variance, which causes interference during
retrieval. As such, GMMs supposedly predict that LSE and LLE
should always occur together.

2913

However, multiple proponents of GMMs have questioned both
the reliability of the pattern of LSE and LLE effects on recognition
(Dennis & Humphreys, 2001; Murdock & Kahana, 1993) and the
inability of GMMs to account for it (Murdock & Kahana, 1993;
Osth & Dennis, 2014, 2015). Furthermore, despite the fact that
most MTMs are also GMMs, a multiple-trace model does not
have to depend on global matching for memory decisions, which
would make it easier to fit the pattern of LSE and LLE results. For
example, even though our Source of Activation Confusion model
(SAC; Reder et al., 2000) is a cumulative-strength model, the dual
processes that allow it to account for the divergent pattern of LLE
and LSE results would allow it to do the same even if each item
repetition created a novel episodic trace (Cary & Reder, 2003;
Diana & Reder, 2005).
In summary, the major problem with contrasting CSMs and
MTMs has been that they make similar predictions when it comes
to most memory tasks. One way to overcome this would be to
attempt to disrupt the mechanism that is responsible for repetition
effects in a specific model such as SAC, to make predictions how
that will affect behavioral performance and to evaluate how well
the model fits the data. To achieve that, we examined how
repetition affects cued-recall under midazolam. Midazolam is a
benzodiazepine that creates temporary anterograde amnesia by
preventing the storage of new associations in LTM (Ghoneim,
2004; Reder et al., 2006), but it does not impair pre-existing
memory traces (Ghoneim, 2004) or their strengthening, as
evidenced by its limited effect on repetition priming (Hirshman,
Passannante, & Arndt, 2001; Hirshman, Passannante, & Henzler,
1999).
We compared cued-recall performance for paired-associates
that were studied for the first time (control pairs) under
midazolam and a subset of the pairs that were studied both before
the midazolam injection and re-studied after the injection (practice
pairs). The subset of interest were those pairs that had not been
recalled on any of the tests that preceded the re-study session under
midazolam. Given that midazolam prevents the storage of new
associations in LTM, SAC predicts that the recall of control pairs
should be at floor levels; performance on practice pairs that were
never recalled correctly was an open question. SAC assumes that
pairs that had never been correctly recalled might still have subthreshold episodic traces in LTM. If repetition of the pair leads to
the strengthening of this sub-threshold episodic trace, as SAC
originally assumes, then we would expect greater recall of practice
pairs compared to control pairs. If, however, repetition leads only
to the creation of additional memory traces, then no advantage
should be observed for practice compared to control pairs under
midazolam, because midazolam will prevent the storage of the
new traces in LTM.

Method
The data of interest involve a subset of conditions from a larger
study previously reported in Reder et al. (2007) and Reder et al.
(2006; study 2). For clarity, we will describe the full design.

Participants
Thirty-one healthy individuals from the Pittsburgh community
participated in this experiment. Each participant was screened by
a doctor and received $150 upon completion.

Procedure, materials and design
The study took place in two sessions on two separate days. We
used a within-subject double-blind cross-over design where the
drug condition (saline vs midazolam) was randomly assigned to
one of the two days for each participant. Each session consisted of
three separate study-test list cycles. The saline/midazolam
injection was administered over a 2-min period between Lists 1
and 2. Participants began the study phase of List 2 immediately
after the injection.
During each list, participants saw all of the 45 high-frequency
word pairs in the following sequence: Study – Test1 and Restudy1
– Test2 and Restudy2. During the initial study phase, each word
pair was presented for 3 seconds preceded by a fixation cross for
1 second. After all 45 pairs were studied, participants completed a
self-paced cued-recall test for all 45 pairs in a different random
presentation order. Test trials began with a 500 ms fixation cross,
followed by the presentation of the first word in a pair and a
question mark prompting participants to respond. Participants
were asked to recall the correct word and type it on a laptop
keyboard or press the return key to move to the next trial.
Regardless of the accuracy of their response, participants saw the
correct answer for 2.5 seconds after each response, which gave
them an opportunity to restudy the pairs again. When all 45 pairs
were tested and restudied the test-restudy phase was repeated one
more time, which concluded the procedure for the first list. This
study-testandrestudy1-testand-restudy2 procedure was repeated
for two more lists, each of which took approximately 17 min. to
complete. On each list, the 45 study pairs were split into 3
conditions with 15 pairs per condition – control pairs, which were
unique for each list, practice pairs, which were the same 15 pairs
on all 3 lists, and interference pairs, which had the same words on
all 3 lists, but the cue words were assigned to different response
words on each new list. The order of word pairs in each list, study
and test sessions was randomly determined.

Data analysis and logic for the current study
Only a small subset of conditions was relevant for this study
(see Figure 1). Specifically, we looked at cued recall performance
on List 2 Test 2 for those control and practice pairs for which
participants had failed to recall the response word on all previous
tests. The control pairs were unique to each list, and as such the
ones we selected were previously studied and tested only once at
the beginning of List 2. The practice pairs were previously studied
and tested twice on List 1 as well. We analyzed only those practice
pairs which participants failed to recall on all three occasions
(L1T1, L1T2 and L2T1).
We focused on the second test of List 2 (L2T2), rather than on
the first test on List 2 for the following reason. Even though the
injection was administered before the beginning of the second list,
practice pairs were restudied immediately after their second test
on List 1 (L1T2). Thus, if we observed improved recall for
practice pairs on L2T1, it might have been due to the restudy

2914

L1T1

L1T2

L2T1

L2T2

Figure 1. Visualization of the procedure for the subset of conditions relevant for this study. Small boxes represent the phases of each list
(study, cued recall, or restudy), and whether the test was successful. Shown are the subsequent phases only for the relevant trials. The first
row shows the procedure for practice pairs; the second shows the procedure for the control pairs. List 1&2 are shown in separate columns.

session that occurred prior to the injection rather than due to
strengthening during the study session of List 2 under midazolam.
In summary, we selected control and practice pairs that showed
no evidence of being learned up until L2T1 in either drug
condition (midazolam or saline). These pairs were then restudied
immediately following that test, and were then tested on L2T2.
For control pairs, 75% qualified for analysis in the saline condition
and 99% in the midazolam condition. For practice pairs, 32%
qualified under saline and 41% under midaz. We analyzed
accuracy on L2T2 as function of pair type (control vs practice) and
drug condition (midazolam vs saline) using a logistic mixed
effects regression with participants and items as random intercept
effects. We compared alternative models with and without each of
the main effects and interactions. A Bonferroni correction was
applied to all post-hoc tests (n=4).

Results and discussion
The overall recall for each list collapsed over the two tests in a
list are presented in Figure 2 and the results for the subset of trials
of interest are presented in Figure 3. Control pairs were recalled
less accurately than practice pairs, ΔAIC = -22, χ2(1) = 24.12, p <
.001. Word pairs were recalled less accurately under midazolam
compared to saline, ΔAIC = -172, χ2(1) = 174.32, p < .001. There
was a significant interaction between drug condition and type of
pair, ΔAIC = -17, χ2(1) = 19.27, p < .001. Post-hoc comparisons
revealed that practice pairs were recalled significantly more
accurately than control pairs in the midazolam condition (z = 6.72,
p < .001), but not in the saline condition (z = 2.30, p = .09). Finally,
both practice and control pairs were recalled more accurately in
the saline compared to the midazolam condition (z = 9.97, p < .001
and z = 4.56, p < .001, respectively for practice and control pairs).
These results are consistent with the view that repetition can
strengthen existing memory traces, because only pairs that were
initially studied prior to a midazolam injection benefited from
additional study under midazolam. These practice pairs were
recalled more often than control pairs, which were studied for the
first time after the midazolam injection, even though both showed
no evidence of learning prior to the final test.

Despite the fact that practice pairs had not been recalled on any
of the 3 previous tests, it is possible that an initial association for
them was stored during List 1. It seems reasonable to conclude
that even though these associations were inaccessible, they must
have been registered in LTM since they were strengthened under
midazolam while the control pairs were not. Midazolam is known
to block the formation of new associations but there is no evidence
that it inhibits strengthening of existing traces. On the contrary,
implicit memory is spared under midazolam (Hirshman et al.,
2001), and the model presented below already assumes that
implicit memory is based on strengthening the same
representations involved in familiarity-based recognition (Reder,
Park & Kieffaber, 2009).
An alternative explanation of these data consistent with
multiple-trace theories might be that even if no traces were
strengthened under midazolam for practice pairs, the pre-existing
sub-threshold traces might be spontaneously recovered in a
probabilistic way (Brown, Neath & Chater, 2007). We believe this
is unlikely, given that each practice pair analyzed here failed to be
recalled on all 3 previous tests. Additionally, we can directly
estimate what is the probability of recovery with a multinomial
processing tree model (Erdfelder et al., 2009), where at each test
there is one of the following possibilities: 1) successful recall of
the target due to study/restudy, r = P(success on test n | fail on test
n-1, or when n=1), 2) failing to recall a previously recalled target,
f = P(failed recall on test n | success on test n-1), 3) spontaneous
recall of a previously unrecalled target regardless of restudy
benefit, u = P’(success on test n | fail on test n-1). We estimated
these probabilities from performance on the control pairs on the
two tests on List 1 (data not used in the previous analyses):
(
(
(
(

1&
1&
1&
1&

2)
2)
2)

2) = ∗ (1 − )
= ∗
= (1 − ) ∗ ( + )
= (1 − ) ∗ (1 − − )

=
=
=
=

0.42
0.04
0.29
0.25

Here, successful recall following a failed recall is a combination
of reencoding benefit r and a spontaneous recovery u. This
analysis showed that the probability of successful recall due to
(re)encoding was r = 0.46, the probability of forgetting a previous
encoding was f = 0.09, and the probability of spontaneous

2915

recovery of a forgotten encoding was u = 0.07 (similar values were
obtained if we consider all sequential pairs tests on all three lists
for practice pairs in the saline condition, u = 0.089). One-tailed ttests showed that the benefit of restudy under midazolam (Fig 3),
was significantly higher for practice pairs, but not for control pairs.
Thus, spontaneous recovery of previously forgotten items cannot
account for our results.

Figure 2. Cued-recall performance during acquisition, collapsed
over the two tests (black points and solid lines) and model fits
(white points and dashed lines) in all lists for control and practice
pairs as a function of drug condition.

Figure 3. Accuracy on L2T2 for control and practice pairs that
were not recalled correctly on any of the previous tests as a
function of whether the L2 items were studied under saline or
under midazolam. Horizontal red line shows the probability of
spontaneous recovery of a forgotten item without strengthening.
To demonstrate that CSMs can fit the data not only verbally, but
quantitatively as well, we fit a SAC model (Reder et al., 2000) on
a trial-by-trial basis separately for each participant. In general,
SAC posits that semantic, episodic and contextual information is
represented as a network of interconnected concepts, event and
context nodes varying in strength. Each node has an activation
value that increases when a node is perceived or when it receives
activation from other nodes. This activation decays with time
according to a power law to a base-level resting activation that also
is strengthened or decays with experience. When new information
is studied, two processes occur. First, the current and the resting
level activation values of the corresponding preexisting concept
nodes are increased. Second, if this is the first occurrence of the

study episode, a new event node is created and it gets associated
with the corresponding concept nodes, as well as with the general
and specific context nodes. If, however, the study event has
occurred previously, the existing event node and its links with the
concept and context nodes are strengthened instead.
Retrieval in SAC is based on the activation of the event and
concept nodes and the process differs slightly between free recall,
cued recall and recognition. During free recall, the general context
node and the list node are activated and they spread activation to
all episode nodes connected to them. During cued-recall or
recognition, the concept node(s) for the cue(s) is also activated and
it spreads activation to all episode nodes connected to it. Spreading
activation is multiplied by the strength of each association, and
divided by the sum total strength of associative links emanating
from the sending node. This represents competition for retrieval.
Finally, if an episode node’s activation passes the retrieval
threshold, an item is recalled (free and cued recall) or recollected
(recognition). For recognition, if no episode node passes the
threshold, the strength of the cue concept node is evaluated. If it
passes its retrieval threshold, a familiarity-based response is made.
The majority of parameters in the model were imported from
previous studies. Consistent with the fact that midazolam prevents
the storage of novel associations in LTM, in the current simulation
we manipulated the probability of encoding an episode node.
During the first presentation of each word pair there is a certain
probability that participants will fail to encode the event node due
to inattention, fatigue or insufficient working memory (see Reder
et al., 2007). In models of other studies, this value has been
constant, but in the current implementation, we allowed it to vary
between the saline and the midazolam conditions. The optimal
value for the saline condition was estimated from the data (p =
0.35), while the encoding probability for the midazolam condition
changed with time elapsed since the injection (see Table 1 for
parameter estimates and descriptions, and Table 2 for full model
specification). Immediately after the midazolam injection the
encoding probability was 0, reflecting the inability to store new
associations at maximum potency, and it gradually increased to
half of the encoding probability in the saline condition in 31
minutes (drug halflife for memorial effects, Albrecht et al., 1999).
The overall model fit for all conditions is presented in Figure 2,
and the fit for the specific subset of interest is overlaid on Figure
3. Importantly, the model was fit by predicting a single value for
each participant – their overall cued-recall performance and by
minimizing the RMSE between the predicted and the observed
value. Given that the model had no information about the
performance in each condition, we obtained a surprisingly good
fit for the split by conditions (16 summary data points per
participant; RMSE = 0.139, R2 = 0.8). The model demonstrates
that the beneficial effect of repetition under midazolam can be
explained entirely by the strengthening of preexisting memory
traces that were previously below the retrieval threshold.
One could question why practice pairs were not recalled better
than control pairs in the saline condition, given that they should
benefit both from strengthening a pre-existing trace as well as
from creating novel associations for pairs that were previously
unlearned, while control pairs benefit only from forming new
associations. Indeed, while the overall fit of the model was quite

2916

good, the model predicts that there should be a repetition
advantage for the subset of analyzed practice pairs even in the
saline condition (Figure 3). The behavioral data showed a small
effect in that direction, which was not significant after correcting
for multiple comparisons (p = .09). One possibility is that this is
due to a selection bias – the practice pairs selected for analysis
were those that showed no evidence of learning in three previous
tests (~32%), thus they were generally hard to learn. Note that the
control pairs we analyzed were those that had not been recalled on
only 1 previous test (~76%) so they were probably not as difficult
to learn. The greater difficulty of the selected practice pairs might
have offset the relative repetition benefits under saline (as seen
from Fig 2, practice pairs do benefit more under saline than under
midazolam). Another possibility is that there were only few
observations per cell, and the resulting noise might have obscured
the effect in the saline condition. Despite this, the key prediction,
namely the comparison between control and practice pairs under
midazolam, was quite robust.
In summary, the current study provides evidence that one
mechanism through which repetition benefits memory is the
strengthening existing memory traces. Despite this result, we do
not wish to argue that no additional information beyond strength
is stored in memory with each repetition of an event. Based on
JOR, JOF, LLE and LSE results reviewed in the introduction, and
the results presented here, it is reasonable to conclude that repeated
experiences affect memory through a multitude of mechanisms
that include both strengthening of previously encoded traces that
match in content, as well as storing novel traces to represent the
unique features of the repeated experience. What part of that
information is accessed likely depends on the nature of the task
being performed. While accurate judgments of recency and
frequency might require accessing and comparing information
across multiple memory traces, recognition and recall can depend
on the strength of any one of those traces.

Table 2 SAC model equation
Equation

Table 1 SAC model parameters
Par
Description
Value
Imported parameters
Value added to current activation when an item is
Aboost
40
perceived
pdecay
Exponential decay constant for current activation
0.8
dnode
Power-law decay constant for base-level activation
0.175
cnode
Power-law growth constant for base-level activation
25
dlink
Power-law decay constant for link strength
0.12
clink
Power-law growth constant for link strength
25
Exponent for Kucera and Francis word frequency
bfreq
norms for estimating pre-existing base-level
0.4
activation
Exponent for Kucera and Francis word frequency
lfreq
0.7
norms for estimating preexisting link fan
Estimated parameters
Baseline probability of encoding an event node for a
Pbaseline
0.35
new word pair
σepisode
Standard deviation of the episode node activation
1
2.9 ±
Τepisode
Retrieval threshold for episode node activation
1.6*
* Parameter was fit individually for each participant (Mean ± SD)

=

=

=

+

,

=

=

+

,

=

∑

= ln( +

=
−

)

∗ (1
×2

)

,
)

Description
Preexisting base-level activation; a
function of Kurcera & Francis
word frequency
Current base-level activation is a
function of preexisting base-level
activation and time since each
presentation of a stimulus. is
the time since the i-th presentation
Current strength of the link from
the cue to the episode node is a
function of time since each
presentation of the stimulus. is
the time since the i-th presentation
Current activation of the cue is a
function of base-level activation
and a perceptual boost
The input to an episode node due
to spreading activation from the
cue is a function of the cue
activation level, the strength
between the cue and the episode
node, and the fan of the cue
Current activation of the episode
node is the natural logarithm of
the sum of the base-level
activation and the received
spreading activation
The probability of encoding the
episode node is a function of the
baseline probability, whether a the
drug was saline (C=0) or
midazolam (C=1), the time since
the injection and the half-life of
the drug.
The probability of retrieval of the
episode node is the area to the left
of the activation value under a
standard normal distribution with
the threshold as the mean.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by Grants 2-R01-MH52808 and R01MH068243 from the National Institute of Mental Health. VP was
supported by a CMU Presidential Fellowship endowed by the
R.K.Mellon Foundation and the Hillman Foundation. We are
thankful to Xiaonan Liu for comments concerning the selection of
trials for the analysis presented herein.

References
Albrecht, S., Ihmsen, H., Hering, W., Geisslinger, G.,
Dingemanse, J., Schwilden, H., & Schüttler, J. (1999). The
effect of age on the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics
of midazolam. Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics, 65(6),
630–639.
Benjamin, A. S., & Tullis, J. (2010). What makes distributed
practice effective? Cognitive Psychology, 61(3), 228–247.
Bower, G. (1967). A multicomponent theory of the memory trace.
Psychology of Learning and Motivation, 1, 229–325.

2917

Brown, G. D., Neath, I., & Chater, N. (2007). A temporal ratio
model of memory. Psychological Review, 114(3), 539.
Cary, M., & Reder, L. (2003). A dual-process account of the listlength and strength-based mirror effects in recognition. Journal
of Memory and Language, 49(2), 231–248.
Challis, B. H., & Sidhu, R. (1993). Dissociative effect of massed
repetition on implicit and explicit measures of memory. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 19(1), 115–127.
Criss, A. H., & Koop, G. J. (2015). Differentiation in episodic
memory. Psychology Press Festschrifts. Cognitive Modeling in
Perception and Memory: A Festschrift for Richard M. Shiffrin,
112–125.
Dennis, S., & Humphreys, M. S. (2001). A context noise model
of episodic word recognition. Psychological Review, 108(2),
452.
Erdfelder, E., Auer, T.-S., Hilbig, B. E., Assfalg, A., Moshagen,
M., & Nadarevic, L. (2009). Multinomial processing tree
models: A review of the literature. Zeitschrift Für
Psychologie/Journal of Psychology, 217(3), 108–124.
Flexser, A. J., & Bower, G. H. (1974). How frequency affects
recency judgments: A model for recency discrimination.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 103(4), 706.
Ghoneim, M. M. (2004). Drugs and Human Memory (Part 1)
Clinical, Theoretical, and Methodologic Issues. The Journal of
the American Society of Anesthesiologists, 100(4), 987–1002.
Hintzman, D. (1970). Effects of repetition and exposure duration
on memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 83(3, Pt.1),
435–444.
Hintzman, D. (1984). MINERVA 2: A simulation model of
human memory. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments,
&amp Computers, 16(2), 96–101.
Hintzman, D. (2010). How does repetition affect memory?
Evidence from judgments of recency. Memory & Cognition,
38(1), 102–115.
Hintzman, D. (2011). Research Strategy in the Study of Memory:
Fads, Fallacies, and the Search for the “Coordinates of Truth.”
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 6(3), 253–271.
Hintzman, D., & Block, R. A. (1971). Repetition and memory:
Evidence for a multiple-trace hypothesis. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 88(3), 297–306.
Hirshman, E., Passannante, A., & Arndt, J. (2001). Midazolam
amnesia and conceptual processing in implicit memory.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 130(3), 453.
Lansdale, M., & Baguley, T. (2008). Dilution as a model of longterm forgetting. Psychological Review, 115(4), 864.
Meltzer, J. A., & Constable, R. T. (2005). Activation of human
hippocampal formation reflects success in both encoding and
cued recall of paired associates. NeuroImage, 24(2), 384–397.
Morton, J. (1968). Repeated items and decay in memory.
Psychonomic Science, 10(6), 219–220.
Murdock, B. B., & Kahana, M. J. (1993). Analysis of the liststrength effect. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 19(3), 689–697.
Murdock, B., Smith, D., & Bai, J. (2001). Judgments of Frequency
and Recency in a Distributed Memory Model. Journal of
Mathematical Psychology, 45(4), 564–602.

Nadel, L., Samsonovich, A., Ryan, L., & Moscovitch, M. (2000).
Multiple trace theory of human memory: computational,
neuroimaging, and neuropsychological results. Hippocampus,
10(4), 352–368.
Osth, A. F., & Dennis, S. (2014). Associative recognition and the
list strength paradigm. Memory & Cognition, 42(4), 583–594.
Osth, A. F., & Dennis, S. (2015). Sources of Interference in Item
and Associative Recognition Memory. Psychological Review.
Pavlik, P. I., & Anderson, J. R. (2005). Practice and Forgetting
Effects on Vocabulary Memory: An Activation-Based Model
of the Spacing Effect. Cognitive Science, 29(4), 559–586.
Peterson, L. R., Johnson, S. T., & Coatney, R. (1969). The effect
of repeated occurrences on judgments of recency. Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 8(5), 591–596.
Raaijmakers, J. G. W. (2003). Spacing and repetition effects in
human memory: application of the SAM model. Cognitive
Science, 27(3), 431–452.
Reder, L. (1988). Strategic control of retrieval strategies.
Psychology of Learning and Motivation, 22, 227–259.
Reder, L., Liu, X., Keinath, A., & Popov, V. (2015). Building
knowledge requires bricks, not sand: The critical role of familiar
constituents in learning. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review.
Reder, L., Nhouyvanisvong, A., Schunn, C. D., Ayers, M. S.,
Angstadt, P., & Hiraki, K. (2000). A mechanistic account of the
mirror effect for word frequency: A computational model of
remember–know judgments in a continuous recognition
paradigm. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 26(2), 294.
Reder, L., Oates, J. M., Dickison, D., Anderson, J. R., Gyulai, F.,
Quinlan, J. J., … Jefferson, B. F. (2007). Retrograde facilitation
under midazolam: The role of general and specific interference.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 14(2), 261–269.
Reder, L., Park, H., & Kieffaber, P. D. (2009). Memory Systems
Do Not Divide on Consciousness: Reinterpreting Memory in
Terms of Activation and Binding. Psychological Bulletin,
135(1), 23–49.
Reder, L., Proctor, I., Anderson, J. R., Gyulai, F., Quinlan, J. J., &
Oates, J. M. (2006). Midazolam does not inhibit association
formation,
just
its
storage
and
strengthening.
Psychopharmacology, 188(4), 462–471.
Schunn, C. D., Reder, L., Nhouyvanisvong, A., Richards, D. R.,
& Stroffolino, P. J. (1997). To calculate or not to calculate: A
source activation confusion model of problem familiarity’s role
in strategy selection. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 23(1), 3.
Shiffrin, R. M., Ratcliff, R., & Clark, S. E. (1990). List-strength
effect: II. Theoretical mechanisms. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 16(2), 179.
Underwood, B. J. (1969). Some correlates of item repetition in
free-recall learning. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 8(1), 83–94.
Waugh, N. C. (1962). The effect of intralist repetition on free
recall. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1(2),
95–99.
Wickelgren, W. (1972). Trace resistance and decay of long-term
memory. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 9(4), 418–455.

2918

