Replacing Language:
Children Use Non-Linguistic Cues and Comparison in Category Formation
Margarita Pavlova (margarita.velinova@gmail.com)
Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology,
New Bulgarian University, 21 Montevideo Street
Sofia, Bulgaria

Abstract
Language is a powerful instrument for extracting relational
information from stimuli. In a label extension task common labels
invite comparison processes that help children focus on the more
subtle relational similarity and away from the readily available
perceptual similarity of the stimuli. The current experiment aims to
explore whether non-linguistic representations of category
membership are sufficient to invite such abstractions of relational
information. Preschool children were asked to extend a category to
either a relational or an object match. When given the opportunity
to compare two instances of the category, and provided with a nonlinguistic cue children extended the category to the relational
match. These results further extend the benefit of comparison in
learning, and suggest that language labels are not the only cue
children can use in category formation.
Keywords: categorization; cognitive development; relational
processing; non-linguistic representations of relations.

Introduction
Analogical reasoning – the ability to see and use relational
similarity between situations and events lies in the core of
human cognition (Hofstadter, 2001). It is what makes
humans so smart and it is potentially what distinguishes us
from other species (Gentner, 2003; 2010). Analogy is
central to many cognitive processes including learning,
reasoning, decision-making, and categorization (Gentner,
1983; Gentner & Markman, 1997; Kokinov, 1998) and it
promotes conceptual development in children (Christie &
Gentner, 2010; Gentner & Namy, 1999; Graham, Namy,
Gentner, & Meagher, 2010; Rattermann & Gentner, 1998).
Thus, analogy is a key process of higher-order cognition
that benefits learning (Gentner, 2010; Kokinov, 1998).
There is evidence that young children show analogical
abilities, if they have knowledge of the relations involved
(Gentner, 1983; 1988; Holyoak, Junn, & Billman, 1984).
However, children tend to focus first on object similarities,
before they start to notice common relational structure,
independent of the objects involved. Gentner defines this
phenomenon as the relational shift hypothesis (Gentner,
1988). She asked children to interpret different kinds of
metaphors and say how they are alike. When children were
asked to interpret the metaphor “A tire is a shoe”, 5-6-yearolds replied based on perceptual similarity (e.g. both are
black), and 9-10-year-olds based their answer on the
specific roles and functions of the two, thus giving a
relational answer [e.g. you can go places with both
(Gentner, 1988)]. When asked to perform a mapping task,

children first base their reasoning on the salience of object
features (e.g. color, shape, etc.) thus failing to map the
relations involved. To have a true relational ability, children
must resist the temptation of the object features, and base
their reasoning on the more subtle common relations
involved (Gentner & Toupin, 1986).
Rattermann & Gentner (1998) provided further support
for the relational shift hypothesis. They gave children a
relational mapping task in which the experimenter and the
child each had a set of three objects. The experimenter hid a
sticker under one of her objects (e.g., the middle one). The
child had to find his sticker in the same place (the middle of
his objects). In some of the conditions, objects were crossmapped, i.e. the middle object in the experimenter’s set was
the same size as the leftmost object in the child’s set. In this
condition, 3-year-old children had a difficulty resisting the
perceptual similarity and instead of searching under the
corresponding relational location, they searched under the
identical object in their set. In contrast, 5-year-olds were
better able to resist the object matches and give relational
matches.
When searching for an interpretation of a given similarity,
people (especially young children and novices) first focus
on the object commonalities (Christie & Gentner, 2010;
Kotovsky & Gentner, 1996). However, interpretations based
on object attributes are not useful in deriving causal
principles. Potential analogs are more difficult to notice
because relations are more subtle and require a deeper
analysis of the information. However, once found, the
analogy is very useful in deriving key principles, since the
structure holds true for both the base and the target (or the
two situations), regardless of the objects involved in it.
There are two factors that contribute to relational reasoning
– relational comparison and relational language.

Relational Language and Learning
The first question is whether providing children with a noun
label would help them learn a novel category. Evidence
suggests that providing children with a count noun may bias
them toward an object-centered interpretation of what kind
of members are to be included into the category, since
labels invite children to group things of like kinds together
(Markman, 1989). Young children often base their
reasoning on the more compelling perceptual similarity, and
thus their intuition of likeness relies on object similarity. On
the other hand, providing a common term could also serve

2870

as an invitation to search for and find a common relation,
thus promoting relational abstraction (Gentner, 2010).
When exploring children’s understanding of categories,
researchers use the word-extension task in which children
are taught a new word and are given an example for it and
then asked to extend the word to another example, thus
showing an understanding of the category membership of
the new item. Common labels invite deep reasoning and
help children focus on like kinds. For example, in a series of
experiments Gentner and Namy (1999) explored children’s
categorization abilities. The results show that children group
items based on shape when they examine them in isolation
(i.e. when they see only one standard). However, providing
a label enhances the likelihood of children engaging in
comparison, prompting children to compare the items
bearing the same label.
Christie and Gentner (2010) extended these findings and
showed that 3- and 4-year-old children successfully learned
a novel label and extended category membership to the
relational match. They explored how children base their
hypotheses for category membership and showed the mutual
benefit of comparison and relational label. When children
had the opportunity to compare two examples of a given
(novel) category, and heard a novel label, they extended the
category to a relational match. This research shows the
mutual bootstrapping between relational language and
analogical abilities in preschool children (Christie &
Gentner, 2010; Gentner, 2010).
Language and analogical comparison interact in the
process of learning. This claim is supported by the language
as a toolkit view, proposed by Gentner (2003; 2010).
According to this view, acquiring a language provides new
resources that support cognitive skills, while not replacing
prelinguistic abilities. Specifically, this view assumes that
structural alignment supports language learning, and that
relational language supports structural alignment and
reasoning. In addition, Gentner discusses four ways in
which language interacts with analogical abilities to foster
learning (Gentner, 2003; 2010). First, common labels invite
comparison and abstractions, thus prompting children to
compare two items that share the same label. Second, a
linguistic label helps to preserve the abstraction derived
from the comparison and makes it more accessible for future
use, thus promoting reification. Next, naming promotes
uniform relational encoding, which ensures the encoding of
the relations in the same manner on different occasions.
Last, the systematic structure of language can invite
conceptual structure. Thus, language and analogical
comparison interact with analogical abilities to foster
learning and development (Gentner, 2010).

Relational Comparison and Learning
Analogical comparison promotes learning via a structural
alignment process that is akin to relational mapping, thus
highlighting the common relational structure and rendering
it more salient (Gentner, 2010; Gentner & Markman, 1994;
1997). Similarity comparison process is one of alignment

and mapping of common relational structure, like the
structure-mapping process of analogy. A result from
carrying out a similarity comparison is that it highlights the
relational structure and makes it more salient, thus enabling
further abstractions and use. The alignment hypothesis
assumes that the process of making a similarity comparison
may lead to change in the representation. This change in
turn will increase the uniformity of the two representations
(Gentner, 1983; Gentner & Markman, 1997). Thus,
alignment makes the relational commonalities more salient
and the representations uniform. This typically increases the
perceived similarity between the paired items. For example,
Gentner and colleagues conducted a series of experiments
that investigated the effects of comparison and common
labels in children’s categorization. The results show that
when preschool children saw only one instance of a
particular category, they extended the category to the
perceptually similar match. In contrast, when children saw
two examples simultaneously and were prompted to
compare them, they were more likely to extend the category
to a new, structurally similar item, than to a perceptually
similar one (Christie & Gentner, 2010; Gentner & Namy,
1999; Graham, et al., 2010).
Gentner and Namy (1999) sought out to investigate how
children form categories. They gave 4-year-olds a novel
label (e.g. a blicket) for a pictured object (e.g. a bicycle) and
asked children to find another blicket between two
alternatives: a perceptually similar, but taxonomically
different object (e.g. eyeglasses) or a perceptually different
object from the same category (e.g. a skateboard). When
children were presented with only one example of the
category (e.g. a bicycle or a tricycle), they tended to choose
the perceptual match. However, when they observed two
examples (a bicycle and a tricycle), they were more likely to
choose the relational match. Interestingly, the obtained
results cannot be accounted to a traditional view in which
comparison is considered a simple feature overlap. Rather, it
seems that comparison selectively highlighted the relational
commonalities (Gentner & Namy, 1999; Gentner, 2010).
Christie and Gentner (2010) followed this procedure and
further extended the findings, showing the benefits of
comparison in learning new relations. They presented 3- and
4-year-olds with animals in a novel spatial orientation and
attached a novel label to it (e.g. a dax). When presented with
only one example, or when two examples were provided but
children were not prompted to compare them, they extended
the category to the object match. However, children who
compared the two examples of the category extended it to a
relational match.
These results show that analogical comparison is useful in
learning new principles, forming new categories, and
retaining material better for transfer. One cannot help but
see a tendency in all experiments discussed above – the
mutual presentation of two (versus one) examples and
providing a common label. It would be interesting to see if
these two factors work mutually or if they could contribute

2871

to category formation separately. This question is of
particular interest in the present study.

Can language be replaced?
The main question we are asking here is whether language
is unique in promoting analogical abstraction. Mutafchieva
& Kokinov (2007) explored the hypothesis that a nonlinguistic representation of specific relations would be
beneficial in a relational mapping task. Following the
procedure of Rattermann & Gentner (1998), they used labels
(e.g. Daddy, Mummy, and Baby), a train analogy, or a
physical representation of the relation pulling in the analogy
(e.g. drawbars). The hypothesis was that the drawbars
should be sufficient for the child to abstract the relation, and
thus solve the mapping task. The results showed no
difference between the various types of presentation (i.e.
language labels, drawbars, or analogy). Interestingly, there
was no evidence that providing labels further benefit
performance on a mapping task. The drawbar condition
seemed to be successful in promoting relational matches,
similar to the labels, and the analogy condition.
Similarly, Gentner and colleagues conducted a series of
experiments on the acquisition of relational categories that
show that for 4-year-olds comparison alone without
relational language is sufficient to invite relational
responding (Gentner, Anggoro, & Klibanoff, 2011). In
addition, Gentner, Namy and colleagues examined the role
of comparison and shared names in categorization of novel
objects. For example, Graham et al. (2010) gave 4-year-olds
novel object sets that consisted of one, or two standards and
two test objects to choose from, a texture match and a shape
match. The results of the study are quite interesting. When
children were presented with one standard, they extended
the category based on shared shape, regardless of whether
the objects were named. When children were presented with
two standards that shared the same texture and the objects
were named with the same noun, they extend category based
on shared texture. Interestingly, the opportunity to compare
in the absence of a shared label, led to an attenuation of the
effect of shape, although not to a significant preference of
texture. Interestingly, the authors found that adding a
common label by itself did not change children’s
responding, however, it seems to augment the effect of
comparison in shifting children toward the texture response
(Graham et al., 2010).
One possible explanation of the obtained results is that in
the No-word condition the authors provided children with a
broad term (e.g. pointing to the standard(s): “This is one!”),
thus limiting the possibility that the child could abstract a
specific category cue. The term used is too general for
children to elicit specific category representations and
abstract common relational features between the two
standards. On the other hand, the interesting fact that even
without labels but with the opportunity to compare, children
still could start to resist the perceptual match (e.g. shape),
leaves a possibility that another type of non-linguistic
representation of the category membership in addition to

comparison could benefit categorization among preschool
children.
Continuing this line of research, the present experiment
aims to explore the possibility that comparison is sufficient
not only to promote abstraction of relational information,
but also to aid category formation. The present study
suggests that a non-linguistic cue in addition to comparison
would successfully promote relational matches in a
categorization task, thus showing that language labels are
not unique in promoting relational categorization.

Experiment
The goal of this study is to explore the possibility that
children can use non-linguistic cues when categorizing
items. If language (a common label) is unique in promoting
relational categorization, then it should be sufficient.
Moreover, when deprived from the opportunity to benefit
from a common label, children should fail to extend
category membership based on relational similarity.
However, if another mechanism (comparison) is present,
and children rely on it during categorization, then it is
possible that a non-linguistic cue will provide sufficient
ground for children to extend the category based on
relational similarity. Specifically, a non-linguistic cue that
represents the category membership of two standards (e.g. a
sticker) could provide enough ground for children to extend
the category membership based on relational similarity.
Bearing in mind that young children typically are tempted
by the perceptual similarity and often fail to notice the
relational similarity between two instances, it is important to
investigate the various strategies children use to group the
things they encounter into categories.
Following the idea that providing a means for category
inclusion (whether the cue is linguistic or not) will further
benefit children in their performance, here we test the roles
of comparison and various types of cues. Comparison
enables children to abstract the interconnected relational
structure and focus on the commonalities between the two
examples, especially shared relations. This helps children to
disambiguate between two working hypothesis: object
match vs. relational match. The specific cue provides further
support and acts to focus their attention to the underlying
common relations. Thus, the highlighted structure will
become more salient and more available to new examples of
the category.
The specific hypothesis of the study was that children in
the Label and Sticker Condition would choose the relational
match more often compared to the children in the NoWord
Condition. In addition, children in the Label and Sticker
Condition will do equally well. This logic follows from the
language as a toolkit view discussed earlier (Gentner, 2003;
2010). Building upon this view, I posit that a non-linguistic
cue will act in the same way as novel language labels do,
prompting children to go beyond the readily available
perceptual commonalities, and focus on the deeper
relational commonalities.

2872

Methods
Participants Forty-three 4-year-olds were recruited from
kindergartens in Sofia area (28 females, Mage = 52 months;
15 in Label Condition, 14 in Sticker Condition, and 14 in
NoWord Condition). Permission to participate was obtained
from their parents prior to the study. Children received a
small gift for their participation.
Materials The study uses the materials from the original
study1. The instructions were translated into Bulgarian.
Children were given a word extension task on a triad of
pictures that depicted animals. The two standards were
labelled with a novel noun, and children were asked to
extend the label to one of two alternatives: a relational
match (new animals in the same configuration) or an object
match (same animal[s] in different configuration).
The stimuli consisted of eight sets of animal pictures, with
two standards, an object match and a relational match. Each
picture depicted two or three animals configured in a novel
spatial relation (e.g., two identical pigs facing each other).
The second standard within a given set showed different
animals in the same spatial configuration (e.g., two identical
fish facing each other). The object match contained an exact
animal match from each standard but in a different relational
pattern (e.g., a pig and a fish turned back on each other).
The relational match was composed of new animals in the
same relational configuration as the two standards (e.g., two
identical turtles facing each other; Figure 1).
In addition, two training sets depicting shapes were
included that aimed to help children become more familiar
with the procedure. Children did not receive feedback
during the training session and the results from it were not
counted in the analyses.
Procedure Children were randomly assigned to one of three
between-subjects conditions: Label, Sticker, or NoWord.
Materials were presented on laminated paper cards.
Children were seated across from an experimenter.
In the Label condition, the experimenter laid the two
standards and labeled them with a novel count noun (e.g.
pointing to the first card, “This is a blicket.” Then, pointing
to the second card, “And this is a blicket, too.”). Next, the
child had to compare the two standards: “Do you see why
these two are both blickets?” The experimenter then placed
the two alternatives side by side below the standards and
asked the child, “Which one of these is also a blicket?”
After the child made a choice, the experimenter continued
with new standards from a new set. Eight unique novel
labels were used, one for each relational pattern.
The NoWord condition began the same way. The
experimenter laid the two standards, but instead of labelling
them with a novel word, she used the same generic term for
all sets: (e.g. “This is one. And this is one, too.”). Then, the
child was prompted to compare the standards, “Do you see
why these two are the same kind of thing?” Last, the two
1

alternatives were presented, and the child was asked:
“Which one of these is the same kind of thing?” This
procedure continued for all eight sets of pictures.
In the Sticker condition, the experimenter laid the two
standards and placed a sticker (a small circle) in the top
middle of each standard. Then, the child had to compare the
standards: “Do you see why these two have stickers?” Then,
the two alternatives were presented and the child was asked:
“On which one of these should we also put a sticker?” After
the child made a choice, the experimenter continued with
the next set. Eight different stickers were used for each of
the sets.

Figure 1: A sample of the sets in the categorization task

Results and Discussion
Mean proportion of relational matches in the category task
were measured. Two different analyses were used to
measure performance. First, a one-way ANOVA was used
to calculate differences between the conditions. The analysis
revealed a significant effect of condition, F(2,40) = 4,867, p
= .013. Bonferroni post-hoc tests showed that children in the
Sticker condition (Mrelational = 0.6, SD = 0.35) made
significantly more relational matches compared to the Label
(Mrelational = 0.23, SD = 0.36) and the NoWord (Mrelational =
0.28, SD = 0.34) conditions. The Label Condition was not
different from the NoWord condition, p = 1.00.
In the second analysis, the means of each group was
compared to chance (50%). The comparisons revealed that
children in the Label and NoWord condition chose object
matches significantly more than chance, t(14) = -2.981, p =
.01 and t(13) = -2.48, p = 0.028, respectively. However, the
Sticker Condition was not significantly different from
chance, t(13) = 1.076, p = .301.
As predicted, children who received a generic label
performed worse than children who received a nonlinguistic cue during category formation. Further, they
showed a strong preference toward the object match,
selecting it significantly more than chance. However,
contrary to prediction, children who heard a novel label also
performed worse than the children who received a nonlinguistic cue, choosing the object match more often and
significantly above chance level. Importantly, children in

The materials were kindly provided by Stella Christie.

2873

the Sticker condition chose the relational match more often,
though not significantly above chance level. The obtained
results provide further insights into the strategies that are
available for children to use during category formation
tasks.

General Discussion
Children improve dramatically in their analogical abilities
over the preschool and early school years. Various factors
contribute to the development of analogical abilities in
young children. General experience (Rattermann & Gentner,
1998), maturation of executive functions (Richland,
Morrison, & Holyoak, 2006; Thibaut, French, & Vezneva,
2010), and processing capacity (Halford, Wilson, &
Phillips, 1998) all contribute to the development of
analogical abilities. However, other mechanisms are also
crucial to relational ability and learning in general –
relational language and comparison (Gentner, 2003; 2010;
Alfieri, Nokes-Malach, & Schunn, 2013).
Comparison is a general learning mechanism that
provides efficient means for learning. In particular, in
relational learning, comparisons provide children with the
opportunity to engage in a process that is akin to relational
mapping. This means that children are able to notice and
abstract the underlying relational structure between the two
standards and thus it becomes more salient and more
available for new examples. Children acquire relational
terms that support relational representation and reasoning
(Christie & Gentner, 2010; Gentner, 2003; 2010; Gentner et
al, 2011). Previous research shows that providing two
examples with a common label prompts children to focus
their attention to the more subtle structural commonalities
(Christie & Gentner, 2010; Gentner & Namy, 1999; Namy
& Gentner, 2002).
In this experiment, we sought to replicate data from the
Christie and Gentner study (2010) and to further the
findings with new conditions. We asked 4-year-olds to
compare two examples of a given category and to extend the
category to either an object match or a relational match. The
results obtained in this study show that when children
received a non-linguistic cue (e.g. a sticker) that represented
category membership, they extended the category to a
relational match. However, when they received either a
specific novel label (e.g. a blicket) or a generic word (e.g.
one), they extended the category to an object match.
Concerning the linguistic cues, there are two possible
explanations for the obtained results. First, it is possible that
providing children with a count noun as a category label
focused them to pay more attention to the objects involved
(Markman, 1989). As mentioned above, children understand
that labels refer to like kinds, but their naïve intuition is to
assume that the likeness refers to the objects and not to other
commonalities. Children often encounter relational nouns
(nouns whose meaning is defined by their relation to other
entities) in everyday speech when interacting with adults.
However, there is some ambiguity between object construal
and relational construal. For example, when children hear a

relational noun (e.g. X is an uncle), they typically focus on
perceptual features (e.g. old man) than relational features
[(e.g. brother of mother); Gentner, 2003; Christie &
Gentner, 2010].
A second possibility is that children in the Label
condition had a difficulty to encode the specific labels used.
It is possible that the labels we used are phonologically very
different from the majority of words in Bulgarian. If
children focused on trying to understand the meaning of an
awkward word, their capacity to process the relational
information for the two standards was limited. In addition,
children in both the Label condition and the NoWord
condition heard a word representing the category
membership, whereas children in the Sticker condition were
able to see the sticker at all times during the categorization
task. It is possible that when children hear a word it is more
difficult to encode and update the cue, but when a cue is
always present and readily available there is no need to store
it in working memory and thus encoding it is easier.
Although such an assumption seems rather unsupported,
having in mind the data from previous research on language
labels and comparison among preschool children, it is worth
investigating further why our experiment failed to replicate
the Label condition in the original study.
Following the main idea of the present study – to explore
the various strategies children use during relational
categorization, further work is needed to see how
comparison supports relational abstraction in preschool
children independent from language. It is worth mentioning
that the experiment presented here is part of a larger
ongoing study. We are currently collecting more data that
will provide further insights into the specific roles of
different types of presentation and cues in category
formation in preschool children.

Acknowledgements
I am grateful to Stella Christie for providing the stimuli used
in this experiment and to Dedre Gentner for the stimulating
discussions and insightful suggestions. I thank the children
who participated in the study, their families, and teachers. I
thank Areta Zumerova for her help with data collection.

References
Alfieri, L., Nokes-Malach, T. J., & Schunn, C. D. (2013).
Learning through case comparisons: A meta-analytic
review. Educational Psychologist, 48(2), 87-113.
Christie, S., & Gentner, D. (2010). Where hypotheses come
from: Learning new relations by structural alignment.
Journal of Cognition and Development, 11(3), 356-373.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Sceince, 7, 155-170.
Gentner, D. (1988). Metaphor as structure mapping: The
relational shift. Child development, 59, 47-59.
Gentner, D. (2003). Why we're so smart? In D. Gentner, &
S. Goldin-Meadow (Eds.), Language in mind: Advances
in the study of language and thought (pp. 195-235).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

2874

Gentner, D. (2010). Bootstrapping the mind: Analogical
processes and symbol systems. Cognitive Science, 34,
752-775.
Gentner, D., & Markman, A. B. (1994). Structural
alignment in comparison: No difference without
similarity. Psychological Science, 5(3), 152-158.
Gentner, D., & Markman, A. B. (1997). Structure mapping
in analogy and similarity. American Psychologist, 52, 4556.
Gentner, D., & Namy, L. L. (1999). Comparison in the
development of categories. Cognitive Development, 14,
487-513.
Gentner, D., & Toupin, C. (1986). Systematicity and surface
similarity in the development of analogy. Cognitive
Science, 10, 277-300.
Gentner, D., Anggoro, F. K., & Klibanoff, R. S. (2011).
Structure mapping and relational language support
children’s learning of relational categories. Child
Development, 82(4), 1173–1188.
Graham, S. A., Namy, L. L., Gentner, D., & Meagher, K.
(2010). The role of comparison in preschoolers' novel
object categorization. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 107, 280-290.
Halford, G. S., Wilson, W. H., & Phillips, S. (1998).
Processing capacity defined by relational complexity:
Implications for comparative, developmental, and
cognitive psychology. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 21,
803-865.
Hofstadter, D. R. (2001). Epilogue: Analogy at the core of
cognition. In D. Gentner, K. J. Holyoak, & B. N. Kokinov
(Eds.), The analogical mind: Perspectives from conitive
science (pp. 499-538). MIT Press.
Holyoak, K. J., Junn, E. N., & Billman, D. O. (1984).
Development of analogical problem-solving skill. Child
Development, 55(6), 2042-2055.
Kokinov, B. (1998). Analogy is like cognition: dynamic,
emergent, and context-sensitive. In K. Holyoak, D.
Gentner, & B. Kokinov (Eds.), Advances in analogy
research: Integration of theory and data from the
cognitive, computational, and neural sciences (pp. 96105). Sofia: NBU Press.
Kotovsky, L., & Gentner, D. (1996). Comparison and
categorization in the development of relational similarity.
Child Development, 67, 2797-2822.
Markman, E. M. (1989). Categorization and naming in
children: Problems of induction. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Mutafchieva, M., & Kokinov, B. (2007). Can language be
replaced? Physical representations of relations instead of
language labels in relational mapping: Do they help
young children? In D. S. McNamara, & J. G. Trafton
(Ed.), Proceedings of the 29th Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 509-514). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Namy, L. L., & Gentner, D. (2002). Making a silk purse out
of two sow's ears: Young children's use of comparison in

category learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 131(1), 5-15.
Rattermann, M. J., & Gentner, D. (1998). The effect of
language on similarity: The use of relational labels
improves young children's performance in a mapping
task. In K. J. Holyoak, D. Gentner, & B. Kokinov (Eds.),
Advances in analogy research: Integration of theory and
data form the cognitive, computational, and neural
sciences (pp. 274-282). Sofia: New Bulgarian University.
Richland, L. E., Morrison, R. G., & Holyoak, K. J. (2006).
Children's development of analogical reasoning: Insights
from scene analogy problems. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 94, 249-273.
Thibaut, J.-P., French, R., & Vezneva, M. (2010). The
development of analogy making in children: Cognitive
load and executive functions. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 106, 1-19.

2875

