Representing time in terms of space: Directions of mental timelines in Norwegian
Andrea Bender1 (andrea.bender@uib.no)
Kristin Sjåfjell1 (kristin.sjafjell@ub.uib.no)
Annelie Rothe-Wulf 2 (annelie.rothe@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
Sieghard Beller1 (sieghard.beller@uib.no)
1

Department of Psychosocial Science, University of Bergen
N-5020 Bergen, Norway
2
Department of Psychology, University of Freiburg
D-79085 Freiburg, Germany

Abstract
People often use spatial vocabulary to describe temporal relations, and this has increasingly motivated attempts to map
spatial frames of reference (FoRs) onto time. How people assign FRONT to time and to temporal entities depends on cultural conventions, and is crucial for diagnosing which temporal FoR a person actually adopts. Here, we report findings
from a survey with speakers of Norwegian that aimed at assessing the cultural conventions involved in FRONT assignment. Data on temporal movements of events, on the temporal
order of events, and on explicit FRONT assignments to events,
time units, and “time itself” suggest that participants use different principles for describing fixed relations (static time)
versus moving events (dynamic time).
Keywords: space; time; space-time mapping; frames of reference; mental timeline.

Introduction
When talking about time, people tend to do so with vocabulary and concepts borrowed from the domain of space. Yet,
while research in the two domains and the acknowledgement of cross-domain transfers do have a venerable tradition
(reviewed in Núñez & Cooperrider, 2013), the challenge of
mapping a taxonomy of spatial representations onto the
domain of time has been taken up only recently, and respective attempts differ considerably in terms of theoretical
conceptualization and subsequent interpretation of data.
Based on a review of advances in this field, we outlined
how such taxonomies may be transferred from space to time
(Bender & Beller, 2014), with a focus on accounts that deal
with frames of reference (FoRs).
Taking Levinson’s (2003) well-established taxonomy of
spatial frames of reference as starting point, the t-FoR account (Bender et al., 2010, 2012; Rothe-Wulf et al., 2015)
derives a set of temporal frames of reference (t-FoRs) following general design principles as described below. Yet,
while these design principles provide an abstract structure
for distinct frames of reference, their concrete specification
depends on cultural conventions involved in how people
assign FRONT to temporal entities per se. Previous accounts
drew on intuitions regarding such conventions for speakers
of English and related languages (such as that FRONT of an
event is considered to be at its beginning). Here, we report
findings from a survey that empirically assessed such conventions.

Spatial and Temporal Frames of Reference
A frame of reference (FoR) is a coordinate system required
to localize a figure F in reference to a ground G from an
observer’s point of view V. Levinson’s (2003) taxonomy
distinguishes three basic types of spatial FoRs, absolute,
intrinsic, and relative, as well as different variants of the
latter. In line with the underlying design principles, these
FoRs can be mapped from space onto time as follows
(Bender & Beller, 2014; and see Table 1):
The absolute FoR is anchored in a superordinate field
outside F, G, and V. As space itself is the superordinate
field in the spatial domain, so is time in the temporal domain. Assignment of orientation to the field follows cultural
conventions and may recruit, for instance, cardinal points,
mountain slopes, rivers, or the land-sea axis on small islands
(in the case of space), and correspondingly the asymmetry
inherent in the ‘arrow of time’ (in the case of time), which is
(presumably) pointing towards the future.
The intrinsic FoR is anchored in the reference or ground
entity G and can thus only be adopted if G is perceived as
being oriented itself (this includes an observer if serving as
ground). Assignment of orientation again follows cultural
conventions and may recruit, for instance, moving directions of objects such as cars (in space) and the beginning
versus end of events (in time).

Table 1: Frames of reference and forward movements (indicated by the tips of the arrows) according to the t-FoR
account (for more details, see Bender & Beller, 2014), based
on assumed cultural conventions for assigning FRONT in
English speakers.
Linear

Point-symmetric

Absolute

Relative-reflection
towards

past

present

future

Intrinsic
beginning
past

1617

event

past

present

future

Relative-translation
away from

end
future

past

present

future

The relative FoR, finally, is anchored in the viewpoint V
of an observer (separate from G). V’s position can be established both in space (as the observer’s location) and in time
(as the observer’s subjective present). In order to still be
able to localize F in reference to G, the coordinate system
primarily anchored in V needs to be shifted into G. This can
be done in several ways, two of which are relevant here: the
reflection variant under which FRONT is assigned to a position or time between G and V, and the translation variant
under which FRONT is assigned to a position or time beyond
G. In either case, FRONT assignments are point-symmetrical
to the present, but have diverging directions (reflection:
towards V; translation: away from V).
Each of these FoRs hinges on cultural conventions: the
absolute FoR on how orientation is assigned to the superordinate field (for variation, see Núñez & Sweetser, 2006), the
intrinsic FoR on how orientation is assigned to the ground
entity, and the relative FoR on which variant is preferred for
shifting the primary coordinate system. So far, assumptions
on these conventions are based more on intuitions than on
data, especially for the domain of time. In the following, we
explicate these for three Germanic languages.

Frames of Reference in Germanic Languages
Empirical research in the spatial domain on three Germanic
languages—English, German, and Swedish, (e.g., Beller et
al., 2015; Grabowski & Weiß, 1996; Majid et al., 2004)—
indicates that speakers of these languages make use of all
basic spatial FoRs for describing locations and movements
in space, with a pronounced preference in small-scale space
for the reflection variant of the relative FoR and, albeit to a
lesser extent, the intrinsic FoR.
In the temporal domain, the metaphorical space-time
mapping emerging in language suggests a set of conventions
for FRONT assignment that appear similar across the three
languages. With regard to time itself (as the superordinate
field in the absolute FoR), FRONT seems to be assigned to
the future, as reflected in the ‘arrow of time’ pointing towards the future or in expressions such as “the future
ahead”, and “olden days passed by”. With regard to events
(as the ground entities in the intrinsic FoR), FRONT seems to
be assigned to that part of time pertinent to the beginning of
events, as reflected in expressions such as “the quiet before
the storm”. When it comes to the subjective viewpoint V of
an observer (as the central point in the relative FoR), it
might be ventured that none of its variants are frequent in
Germanic languages, as the point-symmetric patterns arising
from them have been observed only infrequently (with 2.5%
or less in any of the languages under investigation; see
Rothe-Wulf et al., 2015).
Based on these assumptions, an absolute FoR would be
diagnosed when events “in front of” other events or “moved
forward” from their previous position are localized as further in the future, while an intrinsic FoR would be diagnosed when they are localized as further in the past (Table
1). Interestingly, the latter pattern has been described as
canonical for all three Germanic languages for describing

fixed relations such as “the quiet before the storm” (German: “die Ruhe vor dem Sturm”, Swedish: “lugnet före
stormen”), while patterns in the three languages differ fundamentally when it comes to movement: Moving a meeting
“forward” results in a later date (futurewards movement) for
the vast majority of Swedish speakers, in an earlier date
(pastwards movement) for the vast majority of German
speakers, and in dissent between these variants for English
speakers (Rothe-Wulf et al., 2015; and see Boroditsky &
Ramscar, 2002; McGlone & Harding, 1998).
Whether, however, these diverging patterns can be diagnosed as arising from an absolute or intrinsic FoR, respectively, depends on whether our assumptions regarding the
cultural conventions for FRONT assignment are correct. Data
on this question was collected in the current study for a
fourth Germanic language, namely Norwegian, for which
research on spatial FoRs revealed the same preferences for
references in small scale space (Beller & Bender, 2017) as
in the other three Germanic languages.

Study
The study aimed at assessing whether and how FRONT is
assigned to time itself (relevant for the absolute FoR) and to
temporal entities such as events (relevant for the intrinsic
FoR). We also remained open to the possibility of pointsymmetric response patterns indicative of a relative FoR.

Methods
Participants. 81 volunteers participated in the survey; three
were excluded from further analyses because they indicated
a language other than Norwegian as their mother tongue.
The resulting sample therefore consisted of 78 participants
(59 female; age M = 25.3 years, SD = 7.6, range 19-62, with
5 not indicating their age).
Materials. The tasks described in the following were part of
a larger paper-and-pencil survey, provided in Norwegian
(bokmål). Here, we focus only on those tasks that are relevant for the questions under scrutiny in this paper.
The Event-Moving Task consisted of four items, with an
event to be moved forward (Norwegian: fram) or backward
(bakover) in time. Two items used the time scale days:
• The concert scheduled for Thursday last week was
moved {forward/backward} two days. On which day of
the week did it actually take place?
• The meeting scheduled for Wednesday next week will be
moved {forward/backward} two days. On which day of
the week will it now take place?
The other two items used the time scale hours:
• The departure scheduled for 9 a.m. yesterday was moved
{backward/forward} three hours. At what time did it actually take place?
• The power cut scheduled for 4 p.m. tomorrow will be
moved {backward/forward} three hours. At what time
will it take place now?
For each time scale, a past and a future event was included;

1618

this is necessary to be able to distinguish linear from pointsymmetric t-FoRs (cf. Table 1) that participants might adopt
(Bender et al., 2010). The original scheduling of the events
and the moving span were chosen so as to remain within the
respective time cycle (e.g., for weekdays between Monday
and Saturday), and hence to prevent ambiguous responses.
The items were implemented in four arrangements, crossing between-subjects two orders of time scales with the two
moving directions. The task started either with the time
scale days (first meeting, then concert), followed by hours
(first power cut, then departure), or vice versa, and either
with “forward” as moving direction for the first two events,
followed by “backward” for the other two, or vice versa.
The Order Task consisted of six items that asked for the
order of events, that is, whether a target event (figure F) is
“in front of” (Norwegian: foran) or “behind” (bak) a reference event G. Four items used a forced-choice format:
• Lunch is normally …
□ in front of / □ behind … breakfast.
• Good Friday is two days …
□ in front of / □ behind … Easter Sunday.
• New Year’s Eve is one week …
□ in front of / □ behind … Christmas Eve.
• The Stone Age was …
□ in front of / □ behind … the Middle Ages.
Two further items used an open format:
• The exam is generally nine days
{in front of/behind} the 17th of May.
So, at which date does it take place?
• This year, Peter’s birthday is three months
{in front of/behind} midsummer.
So, in which month is his birthday?
The items were implemented in four arrangements, crossing
between-subjects two orders of items either with two orders
of response options for the items in the forced-choice format
(“in front of” as the first vs. the second option) or with the
two phrasings for the items in the open format (“in front of”
for the birthday item and “behind” for the exam item, or
vice versa). One item order was determined randomly with
the second order being the exact reversal1.
The Front Task consisted of eight items that asked for
indicating whether or not a time segment has a front (Norwegian: forside) or back (bakside), and if so, in which direction FRONT or BACK is pointing. All items followed the same
schema and had four response options, here exemplified for
the item on time in general:
{Front/Back} of time in general …
□ is at the beginning of time.
□ is at the end of time.
□ Something like that does not exist.
□ Something else, namely _______.
As the two last response options were the same for all items,
we explicate only the item-specific options for the remain1

Each set of items also included some non-temporal items,
which are not discussed here.

ing items. Three items referred to the units of time day,
month and year:
• {Front/Back} of today …
□ was early in the morning / □ will be late at night.
• {Front/Back} of August …
□ is the 1st of August / □ is the 31st of August.
• {Front/Back} of the current year …
□ was in January / □ will be in December.
Four other items referred to events:
• {Front/Back} of a meeting …
□ is at the introduction / □ is at the summary.
• {Front/Back} of a dinner …
□ is at the appetizer / □ is at the dessert.
• {Front/Back} of Easter …
□ is on Maundy Thursday / □ is on Easter Monday.
• {Front/Back} of your life …
□ is when you were born / □ is when you will die.
The items were implemented in four arrangements, crossing
between-subjects two phrasings (asking for all items either
for “front of X …” or “back of X …”) with two orders of
items (one random order starting with time in general, and
the exact reversal1).
Design and Procedure. Four versions of questionnaires
were constructed. The various types of tasks were presented
within-subject in a fixed order (i.e., event-moving task followed by order task followed by front task) in line with the
increasingly explicit nature of the task (asking for the
“front” of time highlights the topic of interest more strongly
than asking for the date to which an event is moved). The
four item arrangements of each task were randomly assigned to one of the four versions of questionnaires, and
varied between-subjects as indicated in the Materials section. Participants were instructed to work on all tasks in the
given order.

Results
For each task, we first describe how FRONT assignments
were coded and then report participants’ preferences.
Event-Moving Task. In this task, participants had to move
an event either forward or backward in time. The responses
were coded as whether they indicated that FRONT of the
moving direction pointed towards the future or towards the
past. For the items with “forward”-phrasing, the coding is
obvious: If, for example, Wednesday’s meeting is moved
“forward” to Monday, then the assignment of FRONT and the
moving direction points pastwards. For items with “backward”-phrasing, coding is reversed: If Wednesday’s meeting
is moved “backward” to Monday, then the assignment of
FRONT and the corresponding forward direction point futurewards.
Each single item was tested first for potential influences
of the order of time scales (days first vs. hours first) and the
requested moving direction (forward vs. backward) on the
actually chosen direction (futurewards vs. pastwards). No

1619

Table 2: FRONT assignments (%) in the event-moving task.
Single items
FRONT
pointing
futurewards
pastwards

Concert Meeting Departure Power cut
(N = 77) (N = 77) (N = 77) (N = 76)

63.6
36.4

71.4
28.6

58.4
41.6

68.4
31.6

M
65.5
34.5

Future/past items of time scale
futurewards (abs.)
pastwards
(intr.)
towards V
(refl.)
away from V (trans.)

Days (N = 77)

Hours (N = 76)

63.6
28.6
—
7.8

57.9
31.6
—
10.5

60.8
30.1
—
9.2

significant effects were found (all G2 ≤ 5.88; df = 3;
p ≥ .118). Across items, futurewards movements dominated
(65.5% on average; Table 2, upper half).
Then, we determined for each of the two pairs of items
with the same time scale the pattern of FRONT assignments
that resulted from considering both the future and past event
as pointing futurewards, pastwards, towards V (present), or
away from V (cf. Table 1). We checked whether the distribution of the four patterns for the time scale days differed
from the distribution for the time scale hours, which would
be indicative of an influence of time scale on temporal
movements. According to a marginal homogeneity test for
paired tasks, this was not the case (std. MH statistic = .906,
p = .365), thus justifying an aggregation across the time
scales. Overall, the two linear patterns prevailed by far (Table 2, lower half). The majority of participants (60.8% on
average) made futurewards movements, about one third
(30.1%) made pastwards movements, while of the two
point-symmetric patterns, only the one with moving directions away from V (present) was chosen (9.2%).
Order Task. In this task, participants had to specify whether a target event is “in front of” or “behind” a reference
event. The responses were coded as whether they indicated
that FRONT of the reference event was assigned to the end of
the event, and hence pointing towards the future, or to the
beginning of the event, pointing towards the past. For instance, Good Friday is always earlier in the year than Easter
Sunday. The response “Good Friday is in front of Easter
Sunday” therefore implies that FRONT of Easter Sunday is
assigned to its beginning and points pastwards. With lunch
as target event in reference to breakfast, coding would be
reversed: As lunch is the later event, the response “Lunch is
in front of breakfast” implies that FRONT of breakfast is
assigned to its end and points futurewards.
Each item was tested first for potential effects of two factors on the coded FRONT of the event: the order of items (for
all 6 items) and either the order of response options (for the
4 items with forced-choice format) or the phrasing (for the 2
items with open format). For the forced-choice items, no

significant effects were found (all G2 ≤ 3.77; df = 1;
p ≥ .052). With some variation between events, the majority
of responses indicated that FRONT of an event was assigned
to its beginning and pointed pastwards (83.6% on average;
Table 3, upper half). For the items with open format, main
effects of the phrasing were found (G2 ≥ 12.95; df = 1;
p < .001). Responses indicating that FRONT pointed pastwards were more frequent when participants had to specify
whether the target is “in front of” the reference event
(100%) than when they had to specify whether the target is
“behind” the reference event (76.4% on average; Table 3,
lower half)2.
Finally, we determined how consistently the two possible
FRONT assignments were made across the whole set of
items. To this end, we counted for each participant how
often FRONT pointed futurewards and how often it pointed
pastwards. FRONT assignments were highly consistent. Participants used the same type of assignment on 5.17 (86.1%)
of the 6 items. Overall, 65 participants (83.3%) had a preference for a pastwards directed FRONT and four participants
(5.1%) for a futurewards directed FRONT; the remaining 9
participants (11.5%) had no preference.
Taken together, the results from the order task support the
idea that FRONT of a time segment is at its beginning and
that it points towards the past, at least for most of the participants. While in this task FRONT assignments were assessed
indirectly from the order of events, the next task explicitly
asked participants to indicate the “front” or “back” of
events, time units, and time in general.
Front Task. In this task, participants had to specify whether
“front” (or “back” respectively) of a temporal entity is at its
beginning, at its end, does not exist, or something else.
FRONT assignments were coded in four categories, with
FRONT pointing futurewards, or pointing pastwards, is nonexistent, or something else (“other”). For the items asking to
indicate the “front” of an event, coding is again obvious:

Table 3: FRONT assignments (%) in the order task.
Items with forced-choice format
FRONT
pointing

Lunch Good Friday New Year
(N = 77) (N = 78)
(N = 78)

futurewards
pastwards

14.3
85.7

16.7
83.3

FRONT
pointing

Exam (N = 41, 37)

Stone Age
(N = 78)

M

25.6
74.4

16.4
83.6

9.0
91.0

Items with open format

futurewards
pastwards

Birthday (N = 34, 35)

In front of

Behind

In front of

Behind

—
100.0

21.6
78.4

—
100.0

25.7
74.3

11.6
88.4

2
That references using complementary prepositions (such as “in
front of” vs. “behind”) need not result in perfectly complementary
response patterns was also observed for the spatial domain (e.g.,
Grabowski & Weiß, 1996).

1620

Choosing, for example, the beginning as the “front of the
event” implies that FRONT points towards the past. For the
items asking to indicate the event’s “back”, coding was
reversed: Choosing the beginning as its “back” implies that
FRONT is assigned to the end of the event and points towards the future. Therefore, the response “the back of a
meeting is at the summary” implies that FRONT is assigned
to the beginning of the meeting and hence points towards
the past.
Each item was tested first for potential effects of the
phrasing and the order of items on the coded FRONT. A main
effect phrasing was found in all cases (all G2 > 8.03; df = 3;
p < .046), a main effect order of items in three cases (life,
year, and time; G2 > 9.38; df = 3; p < .025), and an interaction of the two factors in two cases (dinner and Easter;
G2 > 11.15; df = 3; p < .011).
A joint log-linear analysis of the four event items (meeting, dinner, Easter, and life) suggested that the model phrasing × order of items was the simplest model that fitted the
data (G2 = 39.69; df = 36; p = .309), justifying the aggregation across these items. As in the order task, a pastwards
directed FRONT occurred more frequently when participants
had to specify the “front” of an event (as compared to the
“back”), but this was the preferred response only when the
task did not begin with the item on time in general (cf. Table 4). In the other cases, the majority of participants indicated that something like “front” does not exist. Among the
two directions future- and pastwards, pastwards assignments clearly prevailed (87.2%; 129 of 148 responses).
A joint log-linear analysis of the four time and units items
(day, month, year, and time) suggested again that the model
phrasing × order of items was the simplest model that fitted
the data (G2 ≥ 40.903; df = 36; p = .264), justifying to aggregate the data across these items. The results were quite
similar to those from the event items: The pastwards directed FRONT occurred more frequently when participants
had to specify the “front” of an event (as compared to the
“back”), but this was the preferred response only when the

Table 4: FRONT assignments (%) in the front task.
Order of items
Time item first
Time item last
FRONT
(pointing)

Phrasing
Front
Back

futurewards
pastwards
Nonexistent
Other

Event items (meeting, dinner, Easter, life)
—
7.4
2.5
15.2
39.8
30.9
73.8
20.3
51.8
50.0
13.8
53.2
8.4
11.8
10.0
11.4

futurewards
pastwards
Nonexistent
Other

Unit items and time (day, month, year, time)
2.4
13.6
—
20.0
35.7
18.2
81.3
12.5
53.6
51.5
18.7
65.5
8.3
16.7
—
5.0

Phrasing
Front
Back

task did not begin with the item on time in general. In the
other cases, a majority of participants indicated that something like “front” does not exist. Among the two directions
future- and pastwards, pastwards assignments again prevailed (81.3%; 117 of 144 responses). This pattern includes
the item on time in general. Futurewards directed FRONT
assignment, which was the prevailing pattern in the eventmovement task (65.5%) (cf. Table 2), occurred rarely when
asked explicitly, and almost only when “back” had to be
indicated (6 of 37 responses = 16.2%).
Finally, we determined how consistently different responses were given across the whole set of items. To this
end, we counted for each participant how often FRONT
pointed futurewards, how often it pointed pastwards, and
how often it was declared as nonexistent. Responses were
fairly consistent. Participants gave the same type of response on 6.37 (79.6%) of the 8 items. 29 participants
(37.2%) had a preference for a pastwards directed FRONT,
and four participants (5.1%) for a futurewards directed
FRONT; 31 participants (39.7%) were consistent in declaring
that something like “front” or “back” does not exist; the
remaining 14 participants (17.9%) had no preference.
Taken together, the front task yields three results: First,
the high number of participants indicating that something
like FRONT or BACK does not exist for temporal entities is
eye catching. Second, if FRONT was assigned to an entity at
all, then it was assigned to its beginning and pointed towards the past. Finally, this tendency was also found for the
item representing time in general.

Discussion
Summarizing the findings across the three tasks presented
here, the results indicate a preference among speakers of
Norwegian for a futurewards orientation when “moving
forward” an event (about 60%), but a pastwards orientation
when localizing earlier events as “before” later events
(about 80%). The latter is largely in line with the explicit
assignment of FRONT to the beginning (rather than end) of
events and time units—in fact, even to time itself—but
assignments also depended on the order of items to some
extent. These findings are surprising in at least three ways.
First, assignment of FRONT to temporal entities does not
seem to follow the same principles across tasks, even
though they were aimed at tapping the same underlying
concepts. This is not unexpected per se, as people may have
more than one timeline (Miles et al., 2011; and see Bender
& Beller, 2014, for a review of respective data). Here, the
static versus dynamic nature of the tasks seems to make the
difference: While the pastwards orientation prevails for
fixed relations (revolving around the order or orientation of
events), the futurewards orientation takes over when movement is involved. A similar pattern was observed for spatial
referencing, in a task where participants had to pick the
“front” token (from a set of several tokens) and move it
“forward” by a given number of fields. In this case, FRONT
was assigned to the token and the movement in diverging
ways: closer to Ego for the former, and away from Ego for

1621

the latter (Bender et al., 2012). Since movement itself provides orientation, it may serve as a direct source for FRONT
assignment and thereby even override possibly conflicting
orientations of the entities involved (Talmy, 2000). Interestingly, however, in the cases discussed here, the direction of
movement is not specified beforehand, but is a consequence
of FRONT assignment. This suggests that FRONT assignments
follow different a priori preferences, but where these preferences are grounded in remains an open question.
Second, in the front task, time itself is treated similar to
the smaller units year, month, and day, which themselves
are treated similar to events in time. This appears at odds
with the observation that for speakers of most languages
(and especially English and related languages), FRONT is
typically pointing towards the future (evidence summarized
in Bender & Beller, 2014). However, we hesitate to interpret
our current data as strong evidence to the contrary for three
reasons: The high proportion of “does not exist” responses
observed for all items alike hints at the possibility that the
phrasings (i.e., forside and bakside) have been infelicitous.
Even if one were willing to assign a FRONT or BACK to a
virtual, one-dimensional notion as time, assigning a whole
front or back side may seem undue. In addition, the response options “beginning of time” and “end of time” may
have evoked a notion of time that resembles an (excessively
long) event rather than the superordinate field the item was
meant to refer to. And finally, since the time question was
embedded in questions on events and smaller time units, set
effects may have led to an overgeneralization of assignment
patterns that are applied to events.
The third way in which our findings are surprising concerns cross-linguistic patterns. What we found for speakers
of Norwegian is more similar to previous findings on English than on Swedish—despite the fact that Norwegian and
Swedish are much more closely related, and actually mutually understandable. Besides sharing almost identical proportions of the reflective versus translational variant of the
relative FoR in the spatial domain (Beller et al., 2015; Beller & Bender, 2017), speakers of English and Norwegian
also exhibit a mix of preferences in the event-moving task,
whereas speakers of Swedish strongly prefer the futurewards direction (Rothe-Wulf et al., 2015). Only in terms of
relative preferences of the futurewards over the pastwards
direction is Norwegian closer to Swedish.
Two conclusions may be drawn from these patterns. Most
importantly, they indicate that cultural conventions are indeed crucial for establishing concrete frames of reference, as
they determine how FRONT is assigned to temporal entities
such as events or to time itself, both for fixed relations and
for movement. In order to be able to identify which temporal FoRs people actually adopt, these conventions need to
be assessed independently on an empirical basis. Furthermore, while FRONT assignment and FoR selection obviously
differ across languages, it is not the languages themselves
that are decisive here, but rather the agreement among their
speakers, as attested to by the greater similarity of the Norwegian pattern with the English than the Swedish pattern.

This, we propose, renders the observed pattern a matter of
negotiation and consensus, and hence a cultural phenomenon.

Acknowledgments
This work was funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft DFG through a grant for the project Spatial referencing across languages: Cultural preferences and cognitive
implications to AB (Be 2451/13-1) and SB (Be 2178/7-1).
For help with data collection, we thank Marleen Wilms.

References
Beller, S., & Bender, A. (2017). How relative is the relative frame
of reference? Front and back in Norwegian, Farsi, German, and
Japanese. Proceedings of the 39th Annual CogSci Meeting.
Beller, S., Singmann, H., & Hüther, L., & Bender. A. (2015). Turn
around to have a look? Spatial referencing in dorsal versus
frontal settings in cross-linguistic comparison. Frontiers in Psychology, 6:1283, 1–17.
Bender, A., & Beller, S. (2014). Mapping spatial frames of reference onto time: A review of theoretical accounts and empirical
findings. Cognition, 132, 342–382.
Bender, A., Beller, S., & Bennardo, G. (2010). Temporal frames of
reference: Conceptual analysis and empirical evidence from
German, English, Mandarin Chinese, and Tongan. Journal of
Cognition and Culture, 10, 283–307.
Bender, A., Rothe-Wulf, A., Hüther, L., & Beller, S. (2012). Moving forward in space and time: How strong is the conceptual link
between spatial and temporal frames of reference (FoRs)? Frontiers in Psychology, 3:486, 1–11.
Boroditsky, L., & Ramscar, M. (2002). The roles of mind and body
in abstract thought. Psychological Science, 13, 185–188.
Grabowski, J., & Weiß, P. (1996). Determinanten der Interpretation dimensionaler Lokalisationsäußerungen: Experimente
in fünf Sprachen. Sprache & Kognition, 15, 234–250.
Miles, L. K., Tan, L., Noble, G. D., Lumsden, J., & Macrae, C. N.
(2011). Can a mind have two time lines? Exploring space–time
mapping in Mandarin and English speakers. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 18, 598–604.
Núñez, R. E., & Cooperrider, K. (2013). The tangle of space and
time in human cognition. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 17, 220–
229.
Núñez, R. E., & Sweetser, E. (2006). With the future behind them.
Convergent evidence from Aymara language and gesture in the
crosslinguistic comparison of spatial construals of time. Cognitive Science, 30, 401–450.
Levinson, S. C. (2003). Space in language and cognition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Majid, A., Bowerman, M., Kita, S., Haun, D., & Levinson, S. C.
(2004). Can language restructure cognition? The case for space.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8, 108–114.
McGlone, M. S., & Harding, J. L. (1998). Back (or forward?) to
the future: The role of perspective in temporal language comprehension. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 24, 1211–1223.
Rothe-Wulf, A., Beller, S., & Bender, A. (2015). Temporal frames
of reference in three Germanic languages: Individual consistency, cultural consensus, and cross-linguistic variability. The
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 68, 917–939.
Talmy, L. (2000). Toward a cognitive semantics (Vol. 1): Conceptual structuring systems. Cambridge: MIT Press.

1622

