Resolving Two Tensions in 4E Cognition Using Wide Computationalism
Luke Kersten (L.M.Kersten@sms.ed.ac.uk)
School of Philosophy, Psychology, and Language Sciences, University of Edinburgh
3 Charles Street, EH89AD, Edinburgh, UK

Joe Dewhurst (s0819473@sms.ed.ac.uk)
School of Philosophy, Psychology, and Language Sciences, University of Edinburgh
3 Charles Street, EH89AD, Edinburgh, UK

George Deane (s1670299@sms.ed.ac.uk)
School of Philosophy, Psychology, and Language Sciences, University of Edinburgh
3 Charles Street, EH89AD, Edinburgh, UK
Abstract

articulate a common theoretical core for 4E cognition. It is
argued that wide computationalism satisfies the various
demands of the embodied, enactive and extended theorists
in virtue of placing a simultaneous emphasis on abstract
analysis and functional mechanisms.

Recently, some authors have begun to raise questions about the
potential unity of 4E (enactive, embedded, embodied, extended)
cognition as a distinct research programme within cognitive
science. Two tensions, in particular, have been raised: (i) that
the body-centric claims embodied cognition militate against the
distributed tendencies of extended cognition and (ii) that the
body/environment distinction emphasized by enactivism stands
in tension with the world-spanning claims of extended
cognition. The goal of this paper is to resolve tensions (i) and
(ii). The proposal is that a form of ‘wide computationalism’ can
be used to reconcile the two tensions and, in so doing, articulate
a common theoretical core for 4E cognition.

Two Tensions in 4E Cognition

Keywords: 4E cognition, wide computationalism, bodycentrism, extended functionalism, autopoietic theory

Introduction
Enactive, embodied, embedded and extended cognition, or
simply 4E cognition, has often been thought to form a
collective challenge to traditional or classical cognitive
science (Menary, 2010). Common to many of these views is
the idea that cognitive processes are often integrated with
and heavily dependent on bodily and environmental
structures (Varela, Thompson, & Rosch, 1991; Clark &
Chalmers, 1998; Haugeland, 1998; Hutto & Myin, 2013).
More recently, some authors have begun to raise questions
about the potential unity of 4E cognition as a distinct
research programme within cognitive science (Clark, 2008a;
Clark & Kiverstein, 2009; Menary, 2010). Two tensions, in
particular, have been raised: (i) that the body-centric claims
embodied cognition militate against the distributed
tendencies of extended cognition and (ii) that the
body/environment distinction emphasized by enactivism
stands in tension with the world-spanning claims of
extended cognition. These two tensions constitute a problem
for cognitive science insofar as 4E cognition is thought to
form distinct field of study, and not merely a loose set of
alphabetically related approaches (Ward & Stapleton, 2012).
The goal of this paper is to resolve tensions (i) and (ii).
The proposal is that a form of ‘wide computationalism’ can
be used to reconcile the two tensions, and, in so doing,

Following Clark and Kiverstein (2009), three ‘strands’
can be identified as generating the two tensions within 4E
cognition, these include: body-centrism, extended
functionalism, and autopoietic theory.
The first strand is body-centrism. This is the idea that the
body has a non-trivial role in determining mental states and
functioning, that the details of a creature’s embodiment have
a profound affect on the nature and functioning of the mind
(Noë & Reagan, 2001; Noë, 2004; Gallagher, 2005).
Shapiro, for instance, writes: “[P]sychological processes are
incomplete without the body’s contributions. Vision for
human beings is a process that includes features of the
human body. This means that a description of various
perceptual capacities cannot maintain body-neutrality”
(2004, p.190). The body is depicted as ‘intrinsically
special.’ Body-centrists hold that without discussion of the
unique contribution of bodily structures and activities,
cognitive explanations are crucially lacking. The view is
also sometimes called the “constitutive-contribution claim”
(Clark, 2008a).
Support for body-centrism comes from research
highlighting the functional dependences of mental processes
on bodily structures and activities (Clark, 2008a, b). Work
on embodiment and conceptualization, for example,
demonstrates that understanding abstract concepts, such as
love, often depends on the metaphorical expansions of more
familiar concepts, such as up and down or front and back
(Lakoff & Johnson, 1980).
The second strand is extended functionalism. For the
extended functionalist, cognitive systems are functional
wholes distributed across diverse sets of components and
processes. Cognitive activities involve a complex balancing
act between brain, body and world (Harman 1998, Clark &
Chalmers, 1998; Wilson 2004; Wheeler, 2010). The spirit of

2395

extended functionalism is embodied in what Clark and
Chalmer’s (1998) call the ‘parity principle’, which says:
“[i]f, as we confront some task, a part of the world functions
as a process which, were it done in the head, we would have
no hesitation in recognizing as a part of the cognitive
process, then that part of the world is (so we claim) part of
the cognitive process” (p.29). The parity principle stresses
the location neutrality of cognitive analysis. It highlights
abstract, functional analysis in place of detailed
physiological investigations. The view is also sometimes
called the “distributor role” in discussions of embodied
cognition (Wilson & Foglia, 2016).
Support for extended functionalism comes from research
focusing on the way in which cognizers often exploit,
scaffold, and distribute cognitive activates across bodily and
environment structures (Clark, 2005, 2008b). Work on
problem solving, for example, shows that people often
simplify and transform complex problems, such as the
Tower of Hanoi, by manipulating physical environments
(Kirsh & Maglio, 1995; Kirsh, 2009).
The final strand to consider is ‘autopoietic theory.’ The
central claim of autopoietic theory is that cognitive systems
are created by the reciprocal interaction of internal and
external components in the service of some larger function,
such as homeostasis (Weber and Varela, 2002). Autopoietic
theory connects to 4E cognition via the notion of ‘sense
making’.
Autopoietic theory maintains that because living systems,
such as cognition, are autonomous, self-regulating systems,
and sense making is required for maintaining a system’s
boundary, autopoietic systems produce and maintain a
physical boundary between the organism and its physical
environment. Because sense making is a self-regulating act,
organisms often bring forth meaning on the basis of their
autonomy – autonomy in this context means actively
sustaining identity under precarious circumstances. A
system maintains its organization by regulating its
interactions with the environment via sense making
(Thompson, 2007; Wheeler, 2009).
Consider how each of the three strands fit within 4E
cognition. First, enactivism and embodied cognition often
endorse body-centrism in virtue of emphasizing what they
take to be the unique contributions of bodily structures and
activities, such as sensorimotor knowledge. Second,
extended cognition often endorses extended functionalism
by assigning a non-trivial role to environmental elements in
sustaining cognitive activities. Third, enactivism is often
framed in terms of autopoietic theory insofar as sense
making is treated as a constitutive element of demarcating
the organism/environment boundary.
Not every version of enactivism is committed to
autopoietic theory, and not every version of embodied
cognition is committed to body-centrism. There is, at least
in principle, some compatibility between the various views.
Nonetheless, because some versions of each view are, as a
matter of fact, committed to the different strands, the two

tensions do represent a substantial challenge for 4E
cognition.
Consider, then, how the three strands generate the two
tensions. The first tension follows from the fact that if the
body has a non-trivial role in determining mental states,
then cognition cannot also be location neutral; the converse
of which is that if cognition is location neutral, then the
body cannot have a privileged status in cognition. If the
body is simply an instrument through which larger
functional complexes are realized, then bodily structures
cannot form the exclusive realization base of cognitive
activities. Extended functionalism precludes the constitutive
contribution claims of body-centrism, while body-centrism
precludes the possibility of cognitive systems extending
beyond the boundary of the individual.
The second tension emerges from the idea that if extended
functionalism is correct, and cognitive systems can stretch
out into the world, then living systems cannot also be coextensive with cognitive systems, as per enactivism. Here is
Clark and Kiverstein (2009) diagnosing the situation:
If living systems and cognitive systems are identical,
both systems must have boundaries that coincide.
However, the boundaries of the living systems are the
physical boundaries of the organism. If extended
functionalism is correct, the boundaries of cognitive
systems can criss-cross the physical boundaries of the
organism. This is precisely what the enactivists cannot
allow. (p.2).
Extended cognition requires that cognitive systems recruit
resources outside the boundary of the individual.
Enactivism, however, denies this possibility. It therefore
undercuts the identification of cognitive systems with
extended systems by maintaining a sharp distinction
between the physical boundaries of the organism and the
environment, assuming also that each view is taken to be a
global thesis about cognition.
Tensions (i) and (ii) emerge as a function of the opposing
elements within 4E cognition. Tension (i) emerges as a
result of body-centrism’s emphasis on the unique
contribution of the bodily structures, while tension (ii)
follows from the location-neutrality of extended
functionalism. The tensions are important for at least two
reasons. One is that they stand to undermine the collective
thrust of 4E cognition by showcasing fractures within the
larger framework (Clark, 2008a). Another is that they reveal
a lack of ‘deep theoretical core’ within 4E cognition. They
expose a conceptual gap at the centre of an otherwise
vibrant and animated collection of research (Clark &
Kiverstein, 2009).
One constructive proposal that has been offered to resolve
the first of the two tensions is Clark (2008a). Clark’s
suggestion is that the body plays an enabling computational
role within cognitive processes that selectively impacts both
conscious and non-conscious computational strategies.
Clark’s view is that the first tension can be resolved by

2396

viewing bodily structures in terms of enabling different
kinds of information processing. The cognitive significance
of the body resides in the functional role it occupies within
‘intelligent’ organization – this is what explains the intuition
that the body makes a special contribution to cognition.
Clark’s proposal, although not explicitly, also provides a
solution to the ‘deep theoretical core’ problem. This is
because it articulates, at least in principle, a common
‘computational/functional core’ for 4E cognition.
Embedded, embodied, and extended approaches are unified
by a shared emphasis on distributed functional complexes
supporting cognitive activities. What is important is that
bodily or environmental structures are situated within a
larger
computational/functional
framework
during
investigation. Some systems will be individual bound (as
per enactive and embodied cognition), while others will
spread out across brain, body and world (as per extended
cognition).
One problem with Clark’s response, despite its
advantages, is that it fails to specify the relationship
between physical mechanisms and computational systems
finely enough. It fails to cash out what it is that allows the
body to play its ‘enabling role’ in cognitive activities in the
first place. If the body is merely one element within a larger
brain-body-world complex, why should it have such a
constraining and enabling role? The problem is not that
Clark is wrong in proposing that the body has an enabling
computational role, but that the suggestion alone does not
suffice to specify what the role amounts to and why it
should prove important.

Two Tensions Resolved
In what follows, we argue that Clark’s proposal can be
supplemented and further developed by appealing to the
notion of ‘wide computationalism’. We begin by outlining
and motivating wide computationalism and then turn to
showing how the view addresses each of the two tensions.
Wide computationalism is the view that some of the units
of computational cognitive systems reside outside the
individual (Wilson, 1994, 1995, 2004; Hutchins, 1995;
Clark & Wilson, 2009; Kersten, 2016; Kersten & Wilson,
2016). Wide computationalism stakes a claim on the scope
of physical systems, processes, and components that are
capable of supporting computational analysis. A wide
computational perspective opens up the possibility of
exploring computational units that include the brain and
aspects of the beyond-the-head environment.
Wide computationalism gains a theoretical foothold via
the location neutrality of computational individuation. Since
formal systems are indifferent to physical medium and
computation is a formal system, it is possible that at least
some states and processes relevant to a computational
system may reside outside the individual. Nothing in the
method of computational individuation precludes the
possibility of wide computational systems.
Traditionally, wide computationalism has been committed
to what some call “causal mapping accounts” of

computation (Chalmers, 1994; Chrisley, 1995). Causal
mapping accounts maintain that in order for a physical
system to implement an actual computation there must be a
mapping of computational states to physical states such that
transitions between the physical states result in
corresponding transitions between the computational states.
Causal mapping accounts, whether wide or narrow,
articulate the conditions for ascription of computational
implementation in terms of isomorphic mappings between
computational descriptions and physical descriptions via
transitions between physical states.
More recently, some have argued that wide
computationalism should adopt a ‘mechanistic’ approach to
computation
(Kersten,
2016).
Wide
mechanistic
computation differs from causal mapping formulations in
that it frames the conditions of concrete computation in
terms of functional mechanisms (Milkowski, 2013, 2015;
Piccinini, 2015; Dewhurst, 2016). Mechanistic accounts
maintain that concrete computations occur wherever there is
a physical system that has an organization of spatiotemporal
components such that it computes an abstract function in
virtue of manipulating medium-independent vehicles. The
mechanistic approach emphasizes functionally integrated
systems that compute at least one abstract function via
vehicle manipulation.
The wide account of computation extends the mechanistic
reasoning to brain-body-world systems. It maintains that
whether or not functional mechanisms, ones that process
medium-independent vehicles, are constituted by
spatiotemporal components squarely localized within the
individual or crisscrossing into the world is an a posteriori
question. Since the mechanistic conditions on concrete
computations are medium and location neutral, the question
of wide computational systems is an open one – some
physical computing cognitive systems may be ensconced
within the body, while others may be spread out over brain,
body and world.
In addition to its theoretical plausibility, wide
computationalism also gains support from studies in animal
and human psychology. There is a natural set of phenomena
productively studied by wide computationalism.
Research in form perception, for example, shows that
formal primitives in the environment are often relevant to
computationally explaining the construction of complex,
internal representations. Wilson (1994, 1995) takes such
work to be indicative of a wide computational system, as it
acknowledges the unique computational role of states
beyond the individual within perceptual processing.
Research on the spatial navigation of bats has also been
used to support wide computationalism. Kersten (2016), for
instance, argues that bats’ navigation system instantiates a
wide computational system in virtue of employing a
functional mechanism that spans the brain, body and world,
and which processes medium-independent acoustic vehicles.
Bat morphology, acoustic signals and neural processing
conspire to support object detection along vertical planes
using a wide computational system (MacIver, 2009).

2397

Finally, Hutchins (1995) has argued for the presence of
wide computation in the context of ship navigation.
Hutchins’ claim is that members of a navigation team carry
out computational tasks that extend beyond the local actions
of individual team members, which is indicative of a wide
computational system.
The central message is that wide computational systems
are not only theoretically plausible, but they are actually
implemented in a number of cases. Research in human and
animal psychology delivers several examples of concrete
computational systems that extend beyond the boundary of
the individual. In what follows, we adopt the wide
mechanistic account of computation, though, for ease of
exposition, we refer to it simply wide computationalism.
Consider how wide computationalism might address the
first of the two tensions. Noë (2004), for instance, writes:
“If perception is in part constituted by out and out
possession and exercise of bodily skills…then it may also
depend on our possession of the sorts of bodies that can
encompass those skills, for only creatures with such a body
could have those skills” (p.25). Noë and other body-centrists
are at pains to highlight the role and contribution of bodily
actions in cognitive processes. Such considerations motivate
the claim that bodily-structures are constitutive of cognitive
processes.
The wide mechanistic account can accommodate these
types of considerations by focusing on functional
mechanisms. A system is a functional mechanism when it
consists of a set of spatiotemporal components that
contribute to the system’s overall function in virtue of the
organization and interaction of its component parts
(Piccinini, 2015, p.119). For the wide computationalist, the
set of bodily and neural structures responsible for delivering
visual perception are the functional mechanism that carry
out the larger, computational task under investigation. This
means that the claims of the body-centrist can be reframed
in terms of ‘wide’ functional mechanisms; these are
mechanisms whose component parts are spread out over
internal and environmental elements (see Menary, 2007,
ch.2). The constitutively embodied systems, such as in the
case of vision, are the wide functional mechanisms localized
to the body-brain complex. One way to understand bodycentric theorists, then, is as making fine-grained statements
about wide functional mechanisms.
Consider the extended functionalist side of the equation.
In applying the method of computational analysis to worldindividual spanning systems, wide computationalism
maintains a commitment to the location neutrality of
cognition. What matters for the wide computationalist is the
functional capacity being investigated, not the physical
medium through which it is realized. The implication is that
extended
functionalism’s
emphasis
on
medium
independence and abstract analysis is preserved within wide
computationalism. The view retains the abstract form of
analysis crucial to the extended functionalist.
A resolution to the first tension is in sight. By reenvisaging body-centrism in terms of the implementation of

wide computational systems space is opened up for the
tight, causal integration of bodily and neuronal processes in
support of cognitive processes (i.e., wide functional
mechanisms) and the locational neutrality of computational
individuation (i.e., wide computational analysis). The
special status of bodily structures turns out to be species of a
more general class of wide mechanistic systems. The only
difference is that whereas some wide functional mechanisms
are instantiated within individuals (as highlighted by bodycentrism), others are instantiated by the brain, body and
world (as highlighted by extended functionalism).
Consider the second tension. Enactivism, of the
autopoietic variety, was unimpressed by the blurring of the
organism/environment
boundary
within
extended
functionalism. The enactivist claimed that if cognitive
systems were autopoietic systems then it followed that
cognitive systems could not be extended, the underlying
assumption being that autopoietic systems were organism
bound.
One route to reconciling the two views is to show that
autopoietic theory is compatible with computationalism
more generally, assuming also that extended functionalism
is congenial to wide computationalism more generally (see
Wilson, 2004). Insofar as wide computationalism is a
species of computationalism, the compatibility of
computationalism with autopoietic systems theory suffices
to show the compatibility of extended functionalism with
autopoietic theory.
One reason to think that autopoietic theory is compatible
with computationalism is a common emphasis on mechanistic
explanation (Machamer, Darden, & Craver, 2000; Bechtel,
2008). Consider, for instance, what Maturana and Varela
(1980) write about the methodology of autopoietic theory:
An explanation [of autopoietic theory] is always a
reformulation of a phenomenon showing how its
components generate it through their interactions and
relations...the elements used in the explanations are
bodies and their properties…they are relations and
their relations, independently of the nature of the
bodies that satisfy them…This mode of thinking is not
new, and is explicitly related to the very name of
mechanisms. (pp. 75-76).
Autopoietic theory is, at root, a functional or mechanistic
approach to explanation. What matters is that systems are
explained in terms of the interaction of component parts
with each other and the environment, regardless of whether
the systems under investigation are biological or cognitive
in character. There is a functional/mechanistic mode of
explanation underlying autopoietic theory.
Compare this with computationalism. Computational
analysis involves detailing how the arrangement and
interaction of various components conspire to process
information bearing vehicles. The mechanistic account
requires showing how concrete, functional mechanisms
compute medium-independent vehicles in virtue of

2398

processing some portion of their physical structure.
Computational analysis is also a species of mechanistic
explanation (Milkowski, 2013).
There turns out, then, to be little incompatibility between
computationalism and autopoietic theory. Both approaches
employ something like a mechanistic explanatory strategy
when investigating phenomena, although autopoietic theory
is generally pitched at lower-level biological phenomena
than computationalism. The common focus on mechanistic
explanation ensures that there will be an overlapping set of
phenomena productively studied by both approaches.
Why, then, the perceived tension? One reason is that
many of the systems analyzed by autopoietic theory are
located or ensconced within the organism. Most autopoietic
systems are contained within the organism as a matter of
empirical fact. However, this alone does not imply that all
systems must be analyzed so as to localize within the
individual; parts of the environment may still come to be
included within the larger analysis. In principle, autopoietic
theory, similar to computationalism, is location neutral.
Another reason for the perceived tension is that some
within
the
enactivism
literature
assume
that
computationalism implies a commitment to representation
and/or information processing theories (Di Paolo, 2009).
These authors assume that because computationalism entails
a commitment to representation and information processing
theories, and autonomous, self-regulating systems stand in
contrast to these views, enactivism must be opposed to
computationalism.
However, as the previous discussion of mechanistic
computation illustrates, there are a number of viable
accounts of computation that are minimal in their
commitment to representation or information processing
theories (Stich, 1983; Egan, 1995; Piccinini, 2008). There is
little reason to think that an opposition to representation and
information processing commits enactivism to an opposition
to computationalism more generally.
The point to note is that because wide computationalism
places a greater emphasis on the way in in computational
processes are grounded in particular physical mechanisms it
creates a link between the body-centric claims of enactivism
and embodied cognition, on the one hand, and the functional
considerations of extended cognition, on the other. It is in
virtue of analyzing mechanisms from several vantages –
some quite fine-grained, others quite coarse-grained – that
wide computationalism is able to mediate the competing
claims of the three strands. The view offers a philosopher’s
stone of sorts through which to translate the various claims
of the enactivist, embodied and extended theorist.
To be a bit more specific, tension (i) is resolved by the
fact that wide computationalism allows the claims of the
body-centrist to be reframed in terms of wide functional
mechanisms, while tension (ii) is resolved by the fact that
wide computationalism, in virtue of being a species of
computationalism more generally, is theoretically
compatible with the basic methodology of autopoietic
theory. The success of wide computationalism, therefore,

stems from the fact that it retains several of the central
insights and elements that prove important to embodied,
enactive and extended theorists.
One interesting implication of the preceding analysis is
that
it
reveals
what
might
be
called
the
‘computational/mechanistic’ core of 4E cognition. The
discussion of wide computationalism goes some way to
showing that something akin to ‘computational/mechanistic’
explanation may underwrite a fair amount of 4E cognition.
Mechanistic explanations, which are explanations of
systems in terms of the activities and organization of
component parts, turn out to be important not only for
cognitive science and psychology more generally, but for 4E
cognition specifically (Craver, 2006). This point is only
provisional, of course. But it does point to a promising
future line of inquiry. A continued focus on the
‘computational/mechanistic’ underpinnings of 4E cognition
may well serve to further clarify and unify the field as a
whole.

Conclusion
The preceding discussion is only the first step in a larger
analysis. More still needs to be said. Nonetheless, the
discussion is important because it offers one route to
resolving the two tensions troubling 4E cognition. What’s
more, the discussion shows that a renewed focus on
computationalism, particularly of the wide variety, may
have key role to play in illuminating the conceptual
foundations of 4E cognition. This result is both interesting
and novel, as discussions of 4E cognition sometimes eschew
mention of computation. By showing that a form of
computationalism provides a theoretically flexible yet
robust vehicle through which to understand and translate the
various strands of 4E cognition, the current discussion
provides not only a partial vindication of wide
comptuatiaonlism, but also helps to shed light on an
important set of issues facing a growing research
programme within cognitive science.

References
Adams, F., & Aizawa, K. (2008). The bounds of cognition.
Malden: Blackwell.
Bechtel, W. (2008). Mental Mechanisms: Philosophical
Perspectives on Cognitive Neuroscience. London,
Routledge.
Chalmers, D. (1994). On implementing a computation.
Minds and Machines, 4(4), 391–402.
Clark, A. (2005). Intrinsic content, active memory, and the
extended mind. Analysis, 65, 1–11.
Clark, A. (2008a). Pressing the Flesh: A Tension in the
Study of the Embodied, Embedded Mind? Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research, 76(1), 37-59.
Clark, A. (2008b). Supersizing the mind: Embodiment,
action, and cognitive extension. New York: Oxford.
Clark, A., & Chalmers, D. (1998). The Extended Mind.
Analysis, 58, 7-19.

2399

Clark, A., & Kiverstein, J. (2009). Introduction: Mind
Embodied, Embedded, Enacted: One Church or Many?
Topoi, 28, 1-7.
Craver, C. (2006). When Mechanistic Models Explain.
Synthese, 153(3), 355-76.
Chrisley, R.L. (1995). Why everything doesn’t realize every
computation. Minds and Machines 4: 403–430.
Dewhurst, J. (2016). Review of Physical Computation.
Philosophical
Psychology.
DOI:
562
10.1080/09515089.2016.1150450.
Di Paolo, E. A. (2009). Extended Life. Topoi, 28, 9-21.
Egan, F. (1995). Computation and Content. Philosophical
Review, 104, 181-203.
Gallagher, S. (2005). How the body shapes the mind.
Oxford: OUP.
Haugeland, J. (1998). Mind Embodied and Embedded. In J.
Haugeland (ed.), Having Thought: Essays in the
Metaphysics of Mind (pp. 233- 267). Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge: MIT
Press.
Hutto, D. and Myin, E. (2013). Radicalizing Enactivism:
Basic minds without content. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lakoff, G. (1980). The Metaphorical Structure of the
Human Conceptual System. Cognitive Science, 4, 195208.
Machamer, P. K., Darden, L., & Craver, C. (2000). Thinking
about Mechanisms. Philosophy of Science, 67: 1-25.
MacIver, M.A. 2009. Neuroethology: From morphological
computation to planning. In (eds.) P. Robbins and M.
Aydede, The Cambridge Handbook of Situated Cognition
(pp.480–504). New York, Cambridge University Press.
Maturana, H. R., & Varela, F. J. (1980). Autopoiesis and
cognition: the realization of the living. Dordrecht,
Holland: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Menary, R. (2007). Cognitive integration: Mind and
cognition unbounded. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Menary, R. (2010). Introduction to the special issue on 4E
cognition. Phenomenology and Cognitive Science, 9:459–
463.
Machamer, P. K., Darden, L., & Craver, C. (2000). Thinking
about Mechanisms. Philosophy of Science, 67, 1-25.
MacIver, M.A. (2009). Neuroethology: From morphological
computation to planning. In (eds.) P. Robbins and M.
Aydede, The Cambridge Handbook of Situated Cognition
(pp.480–504). New York, Cambridge University Press.
Milkowski, M. (2013). Explaining the Computational Mind.
Cambridge, MA.: MIT Press.
Milkowski, M. (2015). Computational mechanism and models
of cognition. Philosophia Scientiae 18(3): 1–14.
Noë, A. (2004). Action in Perception. MIT Press.
Kersten, L., & Wilson, R.A (2016). The Sound of Music:
Externalist Style. American Philosophical Quarterly, 53(2),
139-154.
Kersten, L. (2016). A Mechanistic Account of Wide
Computationalism. Review of Psychology and Philosophy,
(online), 1-17.

Kirsch, D. (2009). Problem solving and situated cognition.
In (eds.) P. Robbins and M. Aydede, The Cambridge
Handbook of Situated Cognition, (pp. 264–306). New
York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Kirsh, D., & Maglio, P. (1995). On distinguishing epistemic
from pragmatic actions. Cognitive Science, 18, 513-549.
O’Regan, J. & Noë, A. (2001). A sensorimotor account of
vision and visual consciousness. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 25(4), 883–975.
Piccinini, G. (2007). Computing mechanisms. Philosophy of
Science, 74(4): 501–526.
Piccinini, G. (2008). Computation without Representation.
Philosophical Studies, 137(20), 205-241.
Piccinini, G. (2015). Physical Computation: A Mechanistic
Account. Published to Oxford Scholarship Online. doi:
10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199658855.001.0001.
Stich, S. (1983). From folk psychology to cognitive science.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Thompson, E. (2007). Mind in Life: Biology,
phenomenology, and the sciences of mind. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Varela, F., E. Thompson, and E. Rosch. (1991). The
embodied mind: Cognitive science and human experience.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Weber, A., & Varela, F. J. (2002). Life after Kant: Natural
purposes and the autopoietic foundation of individuality.
Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences, 1(2), 97–125.
Wheeler, M. (2009). Reconstructing the Cognitive World.
MIT Press.
Wheeler, M. (2010). In defense of extended functionalism.
In R. Menary (Ed.), The Extended Mind (pp. 245-270).
MIT Press.
Wilson, R. (1994). Wide computationalism. Mind, 103(4),
351–372.
Wilson, R. (1995). Cartesian psychology and physical
minds: Individualism and the sciences of the minds.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wilson, R. (2004). Boundaries of the mind: The individual
in the fragile sciences. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Wilson, R. (2010). Extended vision. In (eds.) N.
Gangopadhyay, M. Madary, and F. Spicer, Perception,
action and consciousness (pp.277–290). New York:
Oxford University Press.
Wilson, R.A., and Clark, A. (2009). How to situate
cognition: Letting nature take its course. In (eds.) M.
Aydede and P. Robbins, The Cambridge handbook of
situated cognition (pp.55–77). New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Wilson, R. A., & Foglia, L. (2016). Embodied cognition. In
E. N. Zalta (Ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy. Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford
University.

2400

