Reverse-engineering the process:
Adults’ and preschoolers’ ability to infer the difficulty of novel tasks
Hyowon Gweon (hyo@stanford.edu)
Mika Asaba (masaba@stanford.edu), Grace Bennett-Pierre (gbp@stanford.edu)
Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305

An intuitive understanding of difficulty

Abstract

Judgments about perceived task difficulty, or task-related
effort, have been mostly studied in terms of its effect on
achievement, motivation, and performance attribution in personality and social psychology (e.g., Atkinson, 1957; Weiner,
1966). Early work has operationalized the notion of difficulty as the subjective probability of success or the introspective assessment of required effort (e,g., Atkinson, 1957; Heider, 1958), allowing the notion of difficulty to be measured
in quantifiable terms. However, these definitions could easily be intertwined with other agent-dependent concepts such
as competence, ability, or intelligence. Prior developmental work has also focused on children’s perception of task
difficulty and its relationship to motivation and performance
in formal educational contexts (Crandall, Katkovsky, & Preston, 1962; Nicholls, 1978; Nicholls & Miller, 1983). These
studies suggest that although children around age six consider task difficulty in selecting their own goals (Heckhausen,
1967) they still have trouble differentiating objective task difficulty from agent ability (Nicholls & Miller, 1983).
Some recent work provides indirect support for the idea
that children ages 5 to 6 can differentiate objective difficulty from subjective competence. Given information about
agents’ decisions to pursue goals that vary in costs (i.e.,
climbing a high hill vs. a low hill) and subjective rewards,
children infer agents’ competence (subjective costs) (JaraEttinger, Gweon, Tenenbaum, & Schulz, 2015). Children
also reason about the expected costs for discovering a causal
mechanism, and prefer to teach someone a toy that would be
harder (i.e., require more trial-and-error) for the person to figure out on her own (Bridgers, Jara-Ettinger, & Gweon, 2016)
even though both toys are equally easy for them. These results suggest that children may be able to use the properties
of the physical environment to estimate the costs of achieving
a goal even without any prior experience.
Indeed, an intuitive understanding of task difficulty does
not guarantee adult-like inferences. Numerous studies report
children’s failure in planning and problem-solving tasks that
require sequential representation of task space (e.g., Tower
of Hanoi; Klahr & Robinson, 1981). While children may
successfully detect explicit, perceptual cues (e.g., height of
hills, number of buttons on toys), average performance of others (Nicholls, 1978), or actual subjective experiences (e.g.,
solving standardized test problems such as Raven’s matrices;
Mueller & Dweck, 1998), they may still fail to infer the difficulty of novel tasks especially when it requires representing
or simulating possible states of the world that are not readily

The ability to reason about the difficulty of novel tasks is critical for many real-world decisions. To decide whether to tackle
a task or how to divide labor across people, we must estimate
the difficulty of the goal in the absence of prior experience.
Here we examine adults’ and preschoolers’ inferences about
the difficulty of simple block-building tasks. Exp.1 first established that building time is a useful proxy for difficulty. Exp.2
asked participants to view the initial and final states of various
block-building tasks and judge their relative difficulty. While
adults were near-ceiling on all trials, children showed varying
levels of performance depending on the nature of the dimensions that varied across structures. Exp. 3 replicated the pattern. These results suggest that children can reverse-engineer
the process of goal-directed actions to infer the relative difficulty of novel tasks, although their ability to incorporate more
nuanced factors may continue to develop.
Keywords: Difficulty; Physical reasoning; Social cognition

Introduction
We often think about how easy or difficult it is to achieve
a goal. From a child trying a new jungle gym to a scientist
building a research team, the ability to reason about task difficulty is critical for many real-world decisions; it informs decisions about the self (e.g., deciding whether to tackle a task or
seek help), about others (e.g., understanding who needs help),
and even about groups (e.g., assigning tasks in a collaborative project). Although these decisions might seem “easy”,
they involve more than simply remembering and retrieving
our past experiences; they often require estimates and predictions about novel tasks. Such sophisticated inferences might
be especially challenging for young children, who frequently
face tasks they have never attempted or completed.
Indeed, having this ability does not mean that our estimates
are always accurate. Even as adults, we often under- or overestimate the difficulty of certain tasks, failing to meet deadlines or suboptimally allocating time and effort. Nevertheless,
our estimates are usually accurate enough to get by, suggesting that even these inaccurate estimates might be generated
in systematic ways. Indeed, our accuracy and precision in
estimating the difficulty of a task might improve with experience and knowledge about the task. However, the ability
to predict the difficulty of a novel task (i.e., prior to the actual experience with the task) is crucial for making effective
decisions about planning, learning, and even interacting with
others. What are the cognitive mechanisms that underlie our
ability to predict and estimate difficulty, and how does this
ability develop in early childhood?

458

Materials 28 photos (14 each for initial and final states) of
various block structures were used for the task. Each structure
had a photo of its initial state (e.g., scattered blocks) and final state (completed structure). Blocks were 1” plain, yellow,
green, red, or blue wooden cubes. We designed seven pairs
of structures that varied in specific dimensions: (1) Number1
(3 blocks forming a triangle vs. 10 blocks forming a circle),
(2) Number2 (5 blocks forming a small cross vs. 13 blocks
forming a larger cross), (3) Stability1 (10 blocks in a horizontal line vs. 10 blocks stacked vertically), (4) Stability2
(two piles of blocks divided by color (yellow and green) vs. a
castle-like structure with levels of yellow and green blocks),
(5) Number&Stability (2 long green blocks stacked vertically
vs. 10 plain blocks stacked vertically, height matched), (6)
Probability (5 red blocks taken out of a transparent box that
contained approximately 85% red and 15% blue, or 15% red
and 85% blue), and (7) Process (2 towers of 5 blocks from an
initial state that was either near-complete or very incomplete).

observable. Despite the importance of effort estimation however, children’s intuitive concept of difficulty has been rarely
studied in its own right. Thus the mechanisms that underlie
our ability to reason about difficulty and how they develop in
early childhood still remain as important open questions.
Current approach Here we explore adults’ and children’s ability to estimate the difficulty of novel tasks.
Given the early-emerging understanding of physical events
(Baillargeon, 2004; Spelke, Breinlinger, Macomber, & Jacobson, 1992), and the costs of simple goal-directed actions (Liu
& Spelke, 2016; Csibra, 2003), our approach is to ground
the basic source of difficulty in agents’ interventions on the
physical world. We designed a novel task that asked participants to estimate the difficulty of simple engineering goals:
building block structures. We explore the idea that humans,
even early in life, can estimate the difficulty of novel tasks by
reasoning about (1) what physical transitions are involved in
the building process, and (2) how an agent might act on the
physical states to cause these transitions.
One challenge with eliciting difficulty estimates is that
there is no standard metric for measuring the actual difficulty.
To establish an objective “ground truth” for our tasks, we used
a variable that is often used to capture the lay notion of difficulty: time needed to complete a task. In Exp.1 we first
establish that people’s intuitive sense of difficulty is tightly
correlated with their estimates of expected time and the actual time. In Experiments 2 and 3, we systematically vary
the physical features of the block structures as well as other
factors that influence properties of agents’ actions in order
to examine adults’ and preschoolers’ ability to judge relative
difficulty of various building tasks.

Procedure Participants in all three tasks viewed the same
initial and final state photos, but responded to different questions depending on the task. In the Difficulty Estimation
task, participants were provided examples of very “easy” and
“hard” structures in the beginning to anchor them appropriately on the scale (0 - 100). In each trial, they viewed the
initial and the final state photos of a given block structure on
the screen (with an arrow pointing from the initial to the final
state photo to indicate the physical transition) and answered
the question “How difficult would it be to do this?” with a
sliding bar. In the Time Estimation task, participants saw the
same example structures (presented as structures that take a
short or a long time to make) to anchor them on the scale
(0 - 100 seconds); the question in each trial was “How long
would it take to make this?”. Two structures within a pair
were presented sequentially, but the order of presentation was
counterbalanced both within each pair and across all pairs.
In the Build task, the experimenter laid out blocks in front
of the subject as in the initial state photo in each trial, and
asked to use the blocks to create the structure shown in the
final state photo. We recorded how long the subject spent
building the block structure from start to finish.

Experiment 1
In Exp.1 we had two basic goals for investigating people’s
ability to estimate task difficulty. First, we wanted to verify that people’s difficulty estimates systematically reflect a
real-world property of the task that can be measured in standard metric (i.e., time). We thus recruited separate groups
of participants to get (1) difficulty estimates and (2) building
time estimates of various block structures, as well as their (3)
actual building times, and explored the relationships among
these variables. Next, we used these estimates to verify that
the pairs of block structures (to be used as stimuli in subsequent experiments) varied in their relative difficulty.

Results
First, we asked whether expected building time can be a good
proxy for estimated task difficulty. Even though separate
groups participated in the Difficulty Estimation and Time Estimation Tasks, these estimates were highly correlated (Fig.2
Right: r = .923,t = 8.296, d f = 12, p < .001). This suggests that people’s intuitive sense of difficulty can be directly mapped onto estimates of time, and that actual building
times may be an approximate “ground truth” for difficulty.
Given this result, we then asked how well people’s estimated
building times reflect actual building times. Although people generally overestimated the building times (Fig.2 Left:
intercept = 13.647,t = 4.227, p = .001), the correlation was
fairly high (r = .780,t = 4.3167, d f = 12, p = .001). Sec-

Methods
Participants Separate groups of adults were recruited for
the Difficulty Estimation task (N=57, Age: 20-56), Time Estimation task (N=60, Age: 21-68), and Build task (N=14, Age:
18-31). The Difficulty Estimation and Time Estimation tasks
were conducted on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk (AMT); we
excluded participants who gave identical responses on all trials (Difficulty, N=3). The Build task was conducted in lab;
one participant was dropped due to technical error.

459

Figure 1: Stimuli used in Expts. 2-3 (final states, except for Process); Exp.1 stimuli did not include agents. Each pair (shown
as columns) had an easier structure and a harder structure. Ratio of difficulty estimates are shown beneath each trial.
Our main goal was to examine how children’s performance
might differ from that of adults. Although adults’ estimates
indicated that all 7 pairs had a clearly “harder” structure, they
varied in why the structures varied in difficulty. In Number and Stability trials, the final structures differed in their
observable perceptual properties (size, height). The Number&Stability trial was matched on these perceptual cues,
making the number of actions needed to complete the task the
only determining factor for difficulty. To succeed in the Probability trial, children had to understand that relative difficulty
is influenced by the availability of the required blocks (thus
the ease of acquiring them) even when the final structures are
identical. Success in the Process trial required an understanding that the overall difficulty of a task is easier when one starts
from a partially complete state.
In light of prior work reviewed above (e.g., Nicholls, 1978,
and Liu & Spelke, 2016), we could consider two extreme possibilities: preschool-aged children might fail to distinguish
relative difficulty across the board, or they might successfully
detect relative difficulty on all trials. However, a more plausible possibility is that children may succeed in some cases,
but selectively fail on other cases. For instance, although it
may be easier to detect the differences when a property of the
block structures are clearly different (e.g., number, stability),
children might struggle in cases where identical structures
were built via different processes. In particular, in Probability
and Process trials, one cannot rely on the number of blocks
used in the structures or their final shapes; one must reason
about the agents’ actions involved in building the structures.
Thus children might struggle selectively in these trials.
Indeed, it is also possible that children have a simple
heuristic that difficulty depends entirely on the structure
alone. Thus in Exp. 2 we added another trial: two identical sets of towers were built, but one was built by two agents
(one tower each) while the other was built by a single agent.
Success on this task might speak against the possibility that
children fail simply because identical structures were built.

ond, we verified that the difficulty of block structures within
a pair was significantly different in all pairs (paired t-tests,
p’s < .002); differences in estimated time and actual building times were also significant (paired t-tests, p’s < .001).
These graded measures of difficulty also allowed us to calculate the degree to which one structure was “harder” than the
other. We calculated the ratio of estimated difficulty between
the two structures (higher value indicates a larger difference)
and report these in Figure 1.
Collectively these results suggest that adults can make reliable difficulty estimates of individual block structures in ways
that systematically reflect some objective, quantifiable aspect
of these tasks (i.e., how long it takes to build the structures).
Furthermore, we were able to verify that within a pair of block
structures, one was clearly more difficult than the other. Despite all pairs having a clear “answer”, the magnitude of the
difference between the structures varied across pairs.

Figure 2: Results from Exp.1. Correlation between Actual
Build Time and Estimated Build Time (left); correlation between Estimated Difficulty and Estimated Build Time (right).

Experiment 2
In Exp. 2, we used the stimuli from Exp. 1 to ask whether
adults and children can infer the relative difficulty of blockbuilding tasks. Given the results from Exp. 1, we expected
adults to show high accuracy in these binary judgments,
choosing the structure that was verified as “easier(harder)”
in both estimated difficulty and the actual building times.

460

Methods
Participants Adults (N=45, Age: 21-59) were recruited
on AMT. An additional 13 adults were excluded because
they failed the warm-up task (N=8) or the attention check
questions (N=5). Twenty-five preschoolers (17 female,
Mage(SD) : 4.8(.4), Range: 4.1-5.4) were recruited from a
laboratory preschool. Seven additional children were excluded due to failure to respond correctly in the warm-up task
(N=6) or experimenter error (N=1).
Materials The materials were almost identical to those in
Exp. 1, except that the photos now showed an agent looking
neutrally at the blocks (initial state) or completed structure
(final state). Children viewed these photos on a 15” Macbook
Pro (using MATLAB and Psychtoolbox) and indicated their
responses by placing their hands on a response pad. Adults
viewed the stimuli on Qualtrics. See Fig.1 for stimuli.

Figure 3: Exp. 2 results. Average % correct for each trial
(error bars indicate 95% confidence intervals; ***p <.001,
**p <.01, *p <.05).
above chance performance on the remaining two, Process
(41.7%, p = .541) and Probability (57.1%, p = .664).
We asked whether children’s chance-level performance
was lower than other trials with similar properties. Performance on Process trial was lower than the Number trials (χ2
= 14.894, d f = 1, p < .001), suggesting that even though the
two structures differed in the overall number of actions, children failed if two identical structures were built from diffrent
starting points. Similarly, children performed significantly
worse in the Probability trial than the Stability trials(χ2 =
20.313, d f = 1, p < .001); even though the two structures
were made of the same number of blocks, children failed
when difficulty judgment relied on the process of sampling.
To examine whether children’s performance improved
with age, we conducted a logistic mixed-effects model with
age and trial as fixed effects and subject as a random effect. Age and the Process trial predicted children’s accuracy (age: β = 1.523, z = 2.463, p = .014; Process: β =
−1.765, z = −2.500, p = .013), suggesting that children’s accuracy improved with age but they struggled in the Process
trial regardless of age. Finally, among trials where children were reliably above chance, children performed worse
than adults in Number2 (χ2 (1) = 6.98,df= 1, p = .008) Process (χ2 (1) = 12.57,df= 1, p < .001) and Probability trials
(χ2 (1) = 17.36,df= 1, p < .001), and marginally for Number1 (χ2 (1) = 3.51,df= 1, p = .061) and Stability1 (χ2 (1) =
3.64,df= 1, p = .057), but not in other trials).
Overall, adults and children were able to judge the relative
difficulty of simple physical tasks from just the initial and the
final states, without any information about the intermediate
processes. It is unlikely that participants had built identical
structures in the past and simply recalled their prior experiences to answer these questions. Furthermore, our results
suggest that participants did not rely on simple heuristics (e.g,
number of blocks, sizes of the structures); their performance
was above-chance even when the number and the shape of
the structures were identical (Stability1) or their shape and
height were matched (Number&Stability). These results suggest that adults and children were able to reason about the
process of the physical transitions between the initial and the

Procedure All children were tested in a quiet room, seated
next to the experimenter. Half of the children were always
asked to indicate the “easier” one, and the other half were
always asked to indicate the “harder” one. A warm-up task
ensured children understood the meaning of the word “easier(harder)”; children were first presented with two identical
boxes, which the experimenter had them first push and then
lift, and were asked “Which one is easier(harder) to push?”
and “Which one is easier(harder) to lift?” In the main task,
children saw photos of green and yellow blocks presented
side by side on the laptop screen. All children were able to
identify the green (yellow) blocks by placing their left (right)
hand on the response pad. In subsequent test trials, children
were told: “Anne and Sally were playing with blocks today.” as two initial state photos were presented on the screen.
The two final state photos were then revealed below the initial state photos; the experimenter pointed to each photo and
said, “This is what Anne made, and this is what Sally made.
One of them was easier(harder) to make. Which one was easier(harder) to make?” Agents differed across trials and unique
names were used for each agent. Trial order and the side of
correct response (L/R) were counterbalanced across trials.
Adults participated in an almost identical task on AMT.
Similarly to children, the initial states were presented first
and then the final states were revealed below these photos.
The only difference was that adults read the questions on the
screen and answered by clicking on the correct answer.

Results
Adults: As expected, adults performed near-ceiling on all trials (p < .001). See Fig.3.
4-5 year-olds: Performance did not differ by question type
(easier/harder) so we collapsed the responses throughout
(χ2 =.784, d f = 1, p = .376). Children showed above-chance
performance in 6 of the 8 trials (Number1 (77.3%, p = .017),
Number2 (73.9%, p = .035), Stability1 (81.0%, p = .007),
Stability2 (90.5%, p < .001), NumStab (80.0%, p = .004),
Cooperation (81.0%, p = .007)), while they did not show

461

final states. Children were less accurate than adults on some
but not on all trials; importantly, they showed a marked diffculty to detect the differences when identical structures were
built and the only determining factor was the quality of the
actions involved in the building process.

cess of building and the property of actions involved. Collectively, adults and children made systematic judgments about
the difficulty of physical tasks from visually observing their
initial and final states, without prior experience with the exact
building activity or explicit information about the intermediate processes. However, children are still developing these
skills throughout the preschool years and possibly beyond.

Experiment 3
Exp.3 replicated Exp. 2 with separate groups of children and
smaller number of trials per child. In addition to successes,
we were interested in replicating the failures in Process and
Probability trials that presumably tested a more nuanced understanding of the building process.

We found that although adults had a tendency to overestimate the building time, it was strongly correlated with
the actual build time, suggesting that these estimates systematically reflected some “ground truth” difficulty of these
tasks. Furthermore, these time estimates were tightly linked
to adults’ difficulty estimates. Indeed, adults’ binary judgments reflected the relative difficulty of pairs of structures, resulting in near-ceiling accuracy. This was in stark contrast to
children’s performance, which was similar to adults in some
trials but at chance on some others.

Participants Thirty-five
preschoolers
(18
female,
Mage(SD) : 4.7(.4), Range: 4.0 - 5.4) participated in
Number, Stability, and Number&Stability trials (Group1).
Another 35 children (15 female, Mage(SD) : 4.2(.7), Range:
4.0 - 5.8) participated in the Sampling, Process and Cooperation trials (Group2). Across groups, 17 additional children
were dropped due to experimenter error (N=7), sibling
interference (N=1), not speaking English (N=2), failing the
warm-up task (N=6) or not finishing the game (N=1).

What develops, and what makes us better? One possibility
is that the accumulated experience of interacting with physical objects might support a more robust understanding of the
underlying physics, increasing the precision of the simulation that might be necessary for generating these intermediate processes (Battaglia, Hamrick, & Tenenbaum, 2013). Another possibility is that experience improves children’s understanding of the dynamics between the physical states and
the actions required to cause appropriate transitions between
these states. These are not mutually exclusive, and both
might lead to more accurate representations of the intermediate processes and the effort (e.g., physical, mental) associated with these transitions. Having self-experience with
objects helps infants understand others’ goal-directed actions
(Sommerville, Woodward, & Needham, 2005); it is possible
that self-experience continues to help adults and children in
making these everyday estimates. Future work may explore
whether direct experience with these building tasks increases
the precision of time and difficulty estimates.

Materials & Procedure The task was almost identical to
Exp. 2, except that in the warm-up task children were presented with simple line drawings and indicated which was
easier(harder) to make, and the photos for Sampling, Process,
Cooperation trials were presented on paper (8.5 x 11”).
Results Children’s performance was highly similar to the
pattern in Exp.2: Again, accuracy was above-chance on the
same 6 of 8 trials (Number1 (77.1%, p = .002), Number2
(68.6%, p = .041), Stability1 (85.7%, p = .001), Stability2
(74.3%, p = .006), Num&Stab (85.7%, p = .001), Cooperation (77.1%, p = .002); children were at chance on Probability (62.9%, p = .176) and Process (57.1%, p = .500) trials.
Although age did not predict performance in each group
(Group 1:β = .583, z = 1.271, p = .204, Group 2:β =
.404, z = .952, p = .341), collapsing across groups (similar in
size to Exp.2), we again saw a trending relationship between
age and accuracy (β = .522, z = 1.676, p = .094; collapsing
across all data, age was a significant predictor of accuracy
(β = .693, z = 2.694, p = .007).

One important question here is how and when children
begin to utilize different dimensions of tasks (e.g., process,
probability) when making judgments about difficulty. Despite recent work showing an early-emerging sensitivity to
statistical distributions of objects (Xu & Garcia, 2008) and
the process by which these objects are sampled by an agent
(Gweon & Schulz, 2011), our results suggest that preschoolers may still fail to incorporate this understanding in reasoning about the relative difficulty of agents’ sampling behaviors.
Children’s failure on Process trials parallels school-aged children’s difficulty understanding the relationship between time,
speed, and distance concepts (Siegler & Richards, 1979);
when one train started to travel ahead of another train (but
they travelled at equal speeds and stopped at the same place),
children fail to answer that this train travelled for a shorter
time. These observations are consistent with the possibility
that children may struggle to discern the differences in difficulty when the tasks are highly similar in their physical properties. While these results suggest the role of a representa-

General Discussion
In order to investigate the development of the intuitive sense
of difficulty, we designed a concrete, manual activity that
even young children enjoy and easily understand: building block structures. Across three experiments, we showed
that (1) adults’ intuitive sense of difficulty accurately reflects actual measures of difficulty (i.e., building time) in
both graded estimates and binary judgments, (2) preschoolers
show above-chance performance when the pair of structures
varied in the expected number of required actions (due to
number of blocks, stability, or the number of agents), but (3)
they fail on trials in which identical trials were built, which
presumably require them to reason specifically about the pro-

462

tional capacity that allows children to simulate multiple intermediate future states sequentially over time, further research
is needed to understand the exact nature of their difficulty.
On the other hand, children’s robust performance on most
trials points to the possibility that the basic inferential ability to estimate difficulty may emerge early. Prior work has
found remarkable sophistication in infants’ understanding of
physical events (e.g., Spelke et al., 1992; Stahl & Feigenson,
2015), as well as their understanding of agents’ actions and
interventions on the physical world, both for others (e.g., Liu
& Spelke, 2016; Newman, Lockhart, & Keil, 2010) and their
own (Upshaw & Sommerville, 2015). Thus it is possible that
even younger children have the necessary inferential and representational prerequisites for an intuitive sense of difficulty
that may manifest not only in their immediate motor plans
but also in their predictions of future events. Due to the verbal demands (e.g., meaning of the words “easy” and “hard”),
the current paradigm is unlikely to be useful for children under age 3. Future work might exploit building time (a proxy
for difficulty in our tasks) in a predictive looking paradigm
to address this possibility. Indeed, a time-consuming task is
not always judged as harder than a less time-consuming task.
Although here we looked at simple cases in which estimated
difficulty directly maps onto time, it would be interesting to
further investigate how objective and subjective aspects of
physical effort (e.g., height of tower and an agent’s building
competence) as well as mental effort (e.g., careful placement
of blocks) may dissociate time and difficulty estimates.
Difficulty is a difficult concept to investigate scientifically.
The current work is a small step to understanding this intuitive yet incredibly complex concept. By first examining how
people reason about simple, concrete tasks we may obtain
clearer insights on how these intuitions arise, and how they
develop into more abstract notions of difficulty that are embedded in people’s lay use of this word.

B Biol Sci, 358(1431), 447–458.
Gweon, H., & Schulz, L. (2011, June). 16-Month-Olds
Rationally Infer Causes of Failed Actions. Science,
332(6037), 1524–1524.
Heckhausen, H. (1967). The anatomy of achievement motivation. Academic Press: New York.
Heider, F. (1958). The psychology of interpersonal relations.
New York: Wiley.
Jara-Ettinger, J., Gweon, H., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Schulz,
L. E. (2015). Children’s understanding of the costs
and rewards underlying rational action. Cognition, 140,
14–23.
Klahr, D., & Robinson, M. (1981). Formal assessment of
problem-solving and planning processes in preschool
children. Cognitive Psychology, 13, 113–148.
Liu, S., & Spelke, E. S. (2016, December). Six-month-old
infants expect agents to minimize the cost of their actions. Cognition, 160, 35–42.
Mueller, C. M., & Dweck, C. S. (1998). Praise for intelligence can undermine children’s motivation and performance. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
75(1), 33–52.
Newman, G. E., Lockhart, K. L., & Keil, F. C. (2010, February). “End-of-life” biases in moral evaluations of others. Cognition, 1–7.
Nicholls, J. G. (1978). The development of the concepts of
effort and ability, perception of academic attainment,
and the understanding that difficult tasks require more
ability. Child Development, 49(3), 800–814.
Nicholls, J. G., & Miller, A. T. (1983). The differentiation
of the concepts of difficulty and ability. Child Development, 54(4), 951-959.
Siegler, R. S., & Richards, D. (1979, February). Development
of Time, Speed, and Distance Concepts. Developmental Psychology, 15(3), 288–298.
Sommerville, J., Woodward, A., & Needham, A. (2005). Action experience alters 3-month-old infants’ perception
of others’ actions. Cognition, 96(1), B1–B11.
Spelke, E., Breinlinger, K., Macomber, J., & Jacobson, K.
(1992, October). Origins of knowledge. Psychological
Review, 99(4), 605–632.
Stahl, A. E., & Feigenson, L. (2015, April). Observing the
unexpected enhances infants’ learning and exploration.
Science, 348(6230), 91–94.
Upshaw, M. B., & Sommerville, J. A. (2015). Twelve-monthold infants anticipatorily plan their actions according to
expected object weight in a novel motor context. Frontiers in public health, 3(1), 32.
Weiner, B. (1966). Role of success and failure in the learning
of easy and complex tasks. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 3(3), 339–344.
Xu, F., & Garcia, V. (2008, April). Intuitive statistics
by 8-month-old infants. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 105(13), 5012–5015.

References
Atkinson, J. W. (1957). Motivational determinants of risktaking behavior. Psychological Review, 64, 359–372.
Baillargeon, R. (2004). Infants’ physical world. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 13(3), 89–94.
Battaglia, P. W., Hamrick, J. B., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2013).
Simulation as an engine of physical scene understanding. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
110(45), 18327–18332.
Bridgers, S., Jara-Ettinger, J., & Gweon, H. (2016). Children
consider others’ expected costs and rewards when deciding what to teach. In Proceedings of the 38th annual
conference of the cognitive science society.
Crandall, V. J., Katkovsky, W., & Preston, A. (1962). Motivational and ability determinants of young children’s intellectual achievement behaviors. Child Development,
33, 643–661.
Csibra, G. (2003, March). Teleological and referential understanding of action in infancy. Philos Trans R Soc Lond

463

