Selective Information Sampling and the In-Group Heterogeneity Effect
Elizaveta Konovalova (elizaveta.konovalova@upf.edu)
Department of Economics and Business,
Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain

Gael Le Mens (gael.le-mens@upf.edu)
Department of Economics and Business,
Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain
Abstract

with members of this group. By contrast, people have to keep
interacting frequently with members of the in-group even if
they had negative experiences with those. Avoidance of the
in-group is thus less likely (there is a large literature on this
differential ‘adaptive sampling’ behavior, see Denrell, 2005;
Fazio, Eiser, & Shook, 2004; Fiedler & Juslin, 2006).
The second premise of our explanation is that the variability of samples of information tends to increase with the size
of the sample. Consider for example the variance of a sample
of k independent standard normal variables (with mean µ = 0
and variance σ = 1 both unknown). This is a random variable
that can be written σ̂k = Q/(k − 1) where Q is a distributed
according to a chi-squared distribution with k − 1 degrees of
freedom χ2k−1 . The mean of Q is k − 1. Two features of chisquared distribution are noteworthy: Q is right-skewed (the
probability that the sample variance is lower than the mean
is higher than 50%) and
p the skewness is decreasing in k (the
skewness is equal to 8/(k − 1)). Overall this means that
the sample variance tends to underestimate the true variance
(σ = 1) and that the extent of the underestimation decreases
as the sample size increases.
These two premises jointly imply that the experienced variability of in-groups will tend to be higher than the experienced variability of out-groups. Under the assumption that
people’s subjective perception of group variability is closely
related to the variance of the sample of information they obtained about this group (Kareev, Arnon, & Horwitz-Zeliger,
2002; Weber, Shafir, & Blais, 2004; see Boldry et al., 2007
for a review), this implies that people will tend to perceive
in-groups as more variable than out-groups.
This explanation for the in-group heterogeneity effect operates at a different level than existing explanations. Whereas
existing explanations focus on how the mind processes information, our explanation focuses on the properties of the samples of information to which the mind has access. We emphasize how the structure of the environment can lead to systematic sampling asymmetries, which in turn imply systematic judgment asymmetries. As such, our explanation fits in
the ‘sampling approach’ to human judgment (Denrell, 2005;
Fazio et al., 2004; Fiedler & Juslin, 2006; Le Mens & Denrell, 2011).

People often perceive their in-groups as more heterogeneous
than their out-groups. We propose an information sampling
explanation for this in-group heterogeneity effect. We analyze
a model in which an agent forms beliefs and attitudes about
social groups from her experience. Consistent with robust evidence from the social sciences, we assume that people are more
likely to interact again with in-group members than with outgroup members. This implies that people obtain larger samples of information about in-groups than about out-groups. Because estimators of variability tend to be right-skewed, but less
so when sample size is large, sampled in-group variability will
tend to be higher than sampled out-group variability. This implies that even agents that process information correctly – even
if they are naive intuitive statisticians – will be subject to the
in-group heterogeneity effect. Our sampling mechanism complements existing explanations that rely on how information
about in-group and out-group members is processed.
Keywords: Information Sampling, Judgment Bias, Perception
of Variability.

Introduction
A large amount of research has shown that people frequently
perceive their groups as more heterogeneous than groups to
which they do not belong (Boldry, Gaertner, & Quinn, 2007;
Rubin & Badea, 2012; Ostrom & Sedikides, 1992). For example, Park and Judd (1990) found that students majoring
in one subject judged students with other major as less variable on such characteristics as extroversion, impulsiveness,
and how analytical and reserved they are. This “in-group
heterogeneity effect” has received several classes of explanations. One class of existing explanations rely on differences in
how information about in-groups and out-groups is processed
(Ostrom & Sedikides, 1992; Ostrom, Carpenter, Sedikides,
& Li, 1993; Park & Rothbart, 1982) or encoded (Linville,
Fischer, & Salovey, 1989; Linville & Fischer, 1998; Judd &
Park, 1988; Park & Judd, 1990). Another explanation takes
as a premise that heterogeneity is seen as a positive feature of
social groups and that people want to have a positive view
of their in-groups (this is the much studied “in-group outgroup bias”, see Hewstone, Rubin, and Willis (2002)). People
would thus be motivated to see in-groups as more heterogeneous than out-groups (Ostrom & Sedikides, 1992; Rubin &
Badea, 2012).
Here, we propose a distinct, sampling-based, explanation
for the in-group heterogeneity effect. We note that people
tend to obtain larger samples of information about in-groups
than about out-groups. For example, people can avoid interacting again with an out-group if they had a bad experience

Model
Consider a setting where one agent forms attitudes and beliefs about two groups (g = in, out). The agent belongs to one

688

of the two groups – the in-group. In this simple model, we assume that the agent observes two dimensions of the groups:
an attitudinal dimension, A and another dimension X. Here
we assume that the dimension X is not stereotypical in the
sense that it does not serve as the basis for categorization. In
each period, the agent samples the group or not. When the
agent samples a group she observes both dimensions A and X
of one of its members.
Belief Updating Let At,g denote attitude of the agent toward group g at the end of period t. If she samples the group
in period t, two things happen.
• She updates are attitude toward the group. Her new attitude
is a weighted average of her previous attitude and the new
observation at,g :
At,g = (1 − b)At−1,g + bat,g ,

Figure 1: Model with unbiased variance estimator: Likelihood that the estimate of in-group variability is higher than
the estimate of out-group variability (P(Vt,in > Vt,out )) as a
function of time. Each point is based on 105 simulations with
b = 0.5, r = 0.5, s = 3.

(1)

where b ∈ [0, 1]. We assume that at,g is normally distributed (with mean 0 and variance 1). This attitude updating rule has been found to provide good fit to experimental
data on sequential choice under uncertainty (see Denrell,
2005 for a review).

dimension X. The probability that the agent samples the ingroup is given by the exponential version of the Luce choice
rule (Denrell, 2005):

• She obtains an observation xt,g of the non-attitudinal dimension. We assume that xt,g is normally distributed (with
mean 0 and variance 1)

Pt+1,in = r + (1 − r)

If the agent does not sample the group, her attitude does not
change (At,g = At−1,g ) and she does not obtain any additional
observation of the X dimension.

t
1
(xk,g − x̄t,g )2 Ik,g ,
∑
nt,g − 1 k=1

(3)

Here s is a parameter that regulates the sensitivity of the
sampling probability to the current attitude, and r ∈ [0, 1] is
a parameter that corresponds to the sampling ‘bias’ in favor
of the in-group. The higher r is, the higher is the baseline
probability that the agent will sample the in-group. When r
is high, the agent is likely to frequently sample the in-group
even if she has a negative attitude toward it (At,in is low). This
sampling ‘bias’ in favor of the in-group implies that the agent
will gather larger samples of information about the in-group
than about the out-group.

Perception of Variability Consistent with the sampling approach tradition, we assume that the agent processes sampled
information correctly. Let Vt,g denote the perceived variability on dimension X at the end of period t. Here, we assume
that this is given by the standard unbiased sample variance
estimator. (In the next section, we consider other estimators
of variability.)
Vt,g =

esAt,in
,
esAt,in + esAt,out

Analysis

(2)

We ran computer simulations of the above model. The parameter values that were used in all simulations are b = 0.5, r =
0.5, s = 3. These values are similar to estimated parameter
values in sequential choice experiments (Denrell, 2005).
Figure 1 displays the likelihood that the estimate of the ingroup variability is higher than the estimate of the out-group
variability, P(Vt,in > Vt,out ), as a function of the number of
periods. It is higher than 0.5 for all periods after period 1. In
other words, the in-group tends to be perceived as more variable than the out-group. The likelihood that the in-group is
perceived as more variable than the out-group first increases
quickly and then decreases very slowly with the number of
periods. It is equal to 0.54 after 50 periods and 0.53 after 100
periods. This suggests that this asymmetry persists even after
many periods.

where Ik,g is an indicator variable equal 1 if group g is sampled in period k (and equal to 0 otherwise), nt,g is the number
of samples (nt,g = ∑k Ik,g ), x̄t,g is the mean of the sampled observations on the X dimension at the end of period t, and xk,g
is the observation in period k.
Sampling Rule To ensure that variability estimates exist for
both groups, we assume that the agent has sampled 2 observations from each group before the first period. In the subsequent periods, the sampling rule follows that used in Denrell
(2005). In each period the agent samples the in-group or the
out-group based on the current attitude towards that group.
Note that sampling rule does not depend on observations on

689

Figure 2: Model with unbiased variance estimator. Distribution of the sample sizes of the two groups after 15 periods.
Based on 105 simulations with b = 0.5, r = 0.5, s = 3.

Figure 3: Model with unbiased variance estimator. Distributions of the variability estimates (according to eq. 2) V15,in
and V15,out after 15 periods. Black vertical line denotes the
true variance on the X dimension (σ = 1). Based on 105 simulations with b = 0.5, r = 0.5, s = 3.

To develop an intuition for this result, we focus on the
end of period 15. First note that the in-group is sampled
more times than the out-group (Figure 2). This is because
of the assumed sampling advantage of the in-group (eq. 3).
Second, note that the distributions of sampled variabilities
for the two groups are right skewed but to a different extent (see Figure 3). The distribution of the sampled variability for the in-group V15,in is less skewed than the distribution of the sampled variability for the out-group, V15,out .
By contrast, the mean sample variabilities are the same:1
E(V15,in ) = E(V15,out ) = σ2 = 1. Overall, this implies that
V15,in tends to be larger than V15,out .

Other Estimators of Variability
A Bayesian Estimator of Variability An alternative implementation of our assumption that information is processed
‘correctly’ is to assume that the agent is a Bayesian processor of information, with correct priors about the true variance.
For simplicity, we assume that the mean on the X dimension
is known and equal to 0.2 The true variance is drawn from
an inverse gamma distribution with parameters α and β. The
inverse gamma distribution is a conjugate distribution: the
posterior also follows an inverse gamma distribution.
∑tk=1 Ik,g
∑t (xk,g − x̄t,g )2 Ik,g 
, β + k=1
(4)
2
2

More generally, the distribution of variability estimates for
a group is skewed, but the skewness decreases with sample
size. If Vt,g is based on n observations, it is a random variable with a χ2 distribution with n − 1 degrees of freedom (the
mean is assumed to be unknown to the agent). The χ2 distribution is skewed to the right, therefore the probability that
the variance estimate is lower than the true variance (σ2 = 1)
is higher than 0.5. Consider the probability mass below 1 for
sample sizes 5, 10, 15, 20 and 50. The probability masses are
0.59, 0.56, 0.55, 0.54, and 0.53, respectively. In all cases, it
is higher than 50%, but it goes down as sample size increases
and converges to 0.50 as the sample size becomes large. Because our assumptions about the sampling process imply that
the sample collected about the in-group tends to be larger than
the sample collected about the out-group, the distribution of
Vt,in is likely less skewed than the distribution of Vt,out . This
implies that Vt,in is likely larger than Vt,out . In other words, an
in-group heterogeneity effect emerges.

We simulated the model by assuming the same attitude updating rule and sampling rule as before, but with the Bayesian
estimator of variability in equation 4. We assumed α = 15/2
and β = α.3
Figure 4 displays the evolution of P(Vt,in > Vt,out ). In this
Bayesian setting as well, the in-group tends to be perceived
as more variable than the out-group. This result is important, because it demonstrates that even a rational processor of
information will tend to perceive the in-group as more variable than the out-group in settings where the in-group is more
likely to be sampled again (i.e. r > 0). A similar pattern
would emerge if the agent were also updating her attitudes
(At,g ) using Bayes’ rule, provided that the sampling rule implies that larger samples are obtained about the in-group than
about the out-group.

1 This is because the variance estimator we used is statistically
unbiased, see eq. 2.

2 Similar results hold if the mean is unknown, but the formulas
are much more complicated.
3 The prior hyperparameters were chosen to match the setup of
the example discussed above (N(0, 1) payoff distribution and t =

2
f (σ̂t,g
) ∼ IG α +

690

planation differs from this prior work (we use a taxonomy
similar to Ostrom and Sedikides (1992)).
Several explanations rely on motivated cognition (Kunda,
1990). The first mechanism invokes people’s desires for positive identities. Those who want a positive social identity
are motivated to view their in-groups more positively than
other groups (Tajfel, 1982). At the same time, heterogeneity
is frequently perceived as a positive feature of social groups
(Ostrom & Sedikides, 1992). Therefore, people are motivated to perceive the in-group as more heterogeneous than
out-groups. A related mechanism invokes people’s desire for
distinct identities. A more heterogeneous in-group allows
people to see themselves as unique within the in-group. Thus,
people are motivated to see their in-groups as heterogeneous
(Pickett & Brewer, 2001). Yet another explanation based on
motivated cognition notes that it is easier to dehumanize more
homogeneous groups (Haslam, 2006; Brewer, 1999). Therefore, if the out-group is perceived as less variable than the ingroup, it is easier to justify negative attitudes and even cruel
actions towards out-group members.
Another explanation notes that people tend to have prior
beliefs that the out-group is more homogeneous. Park and
Hastie (1987) showed that if participants first observed exemplars from a group followed by a description of its general characteristics, they perceived this group as more variable compared to when they observed that information in reversed order. This suggests that the prior about homogeneity
affects how information is encoded. This finding implies an
in-group heterogeneity effect under a (reasonable) assumption that people often learn descriptions of out-groups before
interacting with some of their members (e.g. through stereotypes communicated by others in their environment) whereas
they learn about natural in-groups by direct observations.
A third class of explanations notes that the self is part of
the in-group (Park & Judd, 1990). Since the self is often perceived as particularly differentiated and unique, this would
contribute to an impression that the in-group is more heterogenous than the out-group.
A fourth class of explanations suggests that information
about different groups is encoded and retrieved in different
fashions. For example, Ostrom et al. (1993) found that information about in-group members is stored in categories related
to individual information whereas the information about the
out-group members is stored in categories related to stereotypical attributes. Therefore, when the information is recalled, the in-group tends to be associated with more individuating information compared to stereotype based homogeneous information about the out-group. In terms of recall, Park and Judd (1990) suggested that participants recall more extreme exemplars about in-groups than about outgroups. This suggests that memory search processes might
differ across in-group and out-group.
These four classes of explanations emphasize features of
information processing. By contrast, our explanation focuses
properties of the sample of information on which the mind

Figure 4: Model with Bayesian estimator of variability. Likelihood that the posterior estimate of in-group variability is
higher than the posterior estimate of out-group variability
(P(Vt,in > Vt,out )) as a function of time. Based on 105 simulations with b = 0.5, r = 0.5, s = 3, α = 15/2, β = α.

Sample Variance In the main analysis, we assumed that
the agent estimated the group variabilities using a statistically
unbiased estimator (eq. 2). We did so because we wanted to
demonstrate that an asymmetry in the perception of variability could emerge even in this case. Several papers have assumed that people use the standard sample variance estimator
(e.g. Juslin, Winman, & Hansson, 2007; Kareev et al., 2002):
Vt,g =

1 t
∑ (xk,g − x̄t,g )2 Ik,g ,
nt,g k=1

(5)

This estimator is biased for small samples, and the size of
the bias is stronger for smaller samples. Unsurprisingly, simulations based on this estimator lead to a stronger asymmetry than in the above analyses. For example, after 15 periods, the likelihood that the estimate of in-group variability is higher than the estimate of out-group variability is
P(V15,in > V15,out ) = 0.62. This number was 0.56 when the
unbiased variance estimator was used.
We did not find empirical evidence that suggests that people’s intuitive variability estimates are closer to the unbiased
or the biased estimators. Qualitatively, this is not an issue for
our argument, because the asymmetry in perception of groupvariability emerges in both cases. Further work should investigate this issue. This would allow for quantitative predictions
about the size of the in-group heterogeneity effect.

Relation to Existing Literature on In-group
Heterogeneity
Most prior explanations of the in-group heterogeneity effect
have invoked differences in how information about in-group
and out-group is processed. Here we discuss how our ex15). The interpretation of the parameters is that the prior is based on
a sample of size 2α = 15 with variance β/α = 1.

691

operates. Because our explanation focuses on a different
level than explanations that focus on information processing,
it does not contradict these. Rather, it complements them.
Our analyses and the experimental findings discussed above
suggest that both types of mechanisms likely play a role in
explaining why people see their in-groups as more heterogeneous than their out-groups.
The most closely related paper to ours is a paper by Linville
et al. (1989). It analyzes an exemplar model that describes
how information about groups is encoded, stored and recalled. The authors argue that higher familiarity with the
in-group than with the out-group is the cause of the bias.
Familiarity in this case is the number of exemplars of each
group a person has encountered. They model the encoding,
storage and recall of the information using a set of parameters and show that the strength of the bias depends on the
information processing. They also consider the case of perfect memory (perfect encoding, no forgetting, and perfect recall). They find an asymmetry in expected variability estimates (E(Vin ) > E(Vout )). Their argument is similar to the
logic of our model, but their analysis focuses on the asymmetry produced by reliance on the biased variance estimator we
discussed above (see eq. 5). Our results differ, because they
demonstrate that a systematic tendency to perceive the ingroup as more heterogeneous can emerge even when people
use an unbiased estimator of variability. In some sense, our
result is stronger because the asymmetry in expected variability implied by the biased variance estimator goes down very
quickly with sample size. The asymmetry based on the skewness of the distribution of estimators of variability persists
even as sample size becomes somewhat large (although it disappears for very large samples). Another difference is that our
model focuses on sampling from the environment whereas
this prior paper focused on sampling within the mind.

Figure 5: Model with unbiased variance estimator: Likelihood that the estimate of in-group variability is higher than
the estimate of out-group variability (P(Vt,in > Vt,out )) after 15 periods, as a function of the baseline probability of
sampling the in-group (r). Based on 105 simulations with
b = 0.5, s = 3.

eq. 3) have a positive effect on the strength of the in-group
heterogeneity effect, but the effect is not strong.
A different but related model to ours would not assume an
inherent sampling advantage for the in-group (take r = 0).
In this case, our model does not predict any in-group heterogeneity effect if the groups are equally attractive (i.e., at,in
and at,out are drawn from the same distribution). But suppose
that the in-group is more attractive. It is possible to model
this by assuming that the mean of the distribution of at,in is
higher than the mean of the distribution of at,out (for simplicity, we assume the variances are equal). In this case, the agent
will obtain larger samples about the in-group than about the
out-group and an in-group heterogeneity effect will emerge if
s and b are high enough.

Discussion
Sensitivity Analysis
The magnitude of the in-group heterogeneity effect produced
by our model depends on the model parameters.
The baseline probability of sampling the in-group (r in
eq. 3) has a large effect on the magnitude of the bias. For
r values close to zero, the likelihood that the in-group is perceived as more variable becomes close to 0.5 (e.g., 0.51 for
r = 0.05), but when the advantage of the in-group is high
(r = 0.9), the likelihood that the in-group is perceived as more
variable can be as high as 0.64 (see Figure 5). The baseline
probability of sampling from the in-group reflects the difficulty of obtaining information about the members of the outgroup. Its value depends on the empirical setting. For example, depending on the social group and socioeconomic structure of a country, the probability can range from small values
(for fairly international and integrates societies) to very high
values (in isolated homogeneous societies).
The other parameters, b (the weight of the new attitude,
see eq. 1) and s (the slope parameter in the sampling rule, see

In-Group Homogeneity
Several papers have documented instances of an in-group homogeneity effect that seems to contradict the dominant finding of an in-group heterogeneity effect (Simon & Pettigrew,
1990; Rubin & Badea, 2007). Our sampling mechanism can
acomodate some of these findings.
An in-group homogeneity effect has been found when the
feature under consideration is used as a basis for categorization. That is, the value of that feature defines whether the person is categorized into the in- or out-group (Rubin & Badea,
2007). In this case, the true variability of the in-group might
be smaller than the variability of the out-group on the focal
feature. Our model can be adapted to this setting by relaxing
the assumption that the true variances are the same for the
two groups. We can assume instead σ2in < σ2out . Our model
implies that the variabilities of both groups will tend to be
underestimated, but that the in-group variability will be un-

692

derestimated to a lower extent than the out-group variability.
If the difference in the extent of underestimation is smaller
than the difference in true variabilities, our model implies the
emergence of an in-group homogeneity effect, in line with the
true difference in variabilities. But if the difference in true
variabilities is small, our model can lead to the emergence of
an in-group heterogeneity effect.
Although most prior research conceptualized the ‘ingroup’ and the ‘out-group’ as specific groups, some papers
have conceptualized the out-group as ‘everyone but the ingroup’ (e.g. Alves, Koch, & Unkelbach, 2016). In this case,
the true variability of the out-group is likely much larger than
the true variability of the in-group. This setting is a special
case of the setting discussed in the previous paragraph.
Finally, there is some evidence that when the in-group is
a minority it tends to be judged as more homogeneous than
the out-group (Simon & Pettigrew, 1990). Our model can be
adapted to this setting as well. Consider a situation where the
in-group is smaller than the out-group and, furthermore, the
number of in-group members is smaller than the number of
periods. The agent will sample all the in-group members but
the sample size will remain small (bounded by the number
of members). To illustrate this, let us return to our example
where the number of periods is t = 15 and let us also assume
that the sizes of the in-group and out-group are 5 and at least
10, respectively. Then the sample size for the in-group will
not exceed 5 whereas the size of the out-group members sample will be at least 10. This sample size asymmetry in favor
of the out-group implies an in-group homogeneity effect.

homogeneity. Group Processes & Intergroup Relations, 10(2),
157–178.
Brewer, M. B. (1999). The psychology of prejudice: Ingroup love
and outgroup hate. Journal of social issues, 55(3), 429–444.
Denrell, J. (2005). Why most people disapprove of me: experience
sampling in impression formation. Psychological review, 112(4),
951.
Fazio, R. H., Eiser, J. R., & Shook, N. J. (2004). Attitude formation
through exploration: valence asymmetries. Journal of personality
and social psychology, 87(3), 293.
Fiedler, K., & Juslin, P. (2006). Information sampling and adaptive
cognition. Cambridge University Press.
Haslam, N. (2006). Dehumanization: An integrative review. Personality and social psychology review, 10(3), 252–264.
Hewstone, M., Rubin, M., & Willis, H. (2002). Intergroup bias.
Annual review of psychology, 53(1), 575–604.
Judd, C. M., & Park, B. (1988). Out-group homogeneity: Judgments of variability at the individual and group levels. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 54(5), 778–788.
Juslin, P., Winman, A., & Hansson, P. (2007). The naive intuitive
statistician: a naive sampling model of intuitive confidence intervals. Psychological review, 114(3), 678.
Kareev, Y., Arnon, S., & Horwitz-Zeliger, R. (2002). On the misperception of variability. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 131(2), 287.
Kunda, Z. (1990). The case for motivated reasoning. Psychological
bulletin, 108(3), 480.
Le Mens, G., & Denrell, J. (2011, April). Rational learning and
information sampling: On the ”naivety” assumption in sampling
explanations of judgment biases. Psychological Review, 118(2),
379–392.
Linville, P. W., & Fischer, G. W. (1998). Group variability and
covariation: Effects on intergroup judgment and behavior. Intergroup cognition and intergroup behavior, 123–150.
Linville, P. W., Fischer, G. W., & Salovey, P. (1989). Perceived distributions of the characteristics of in-group and out-group members: empirical evidence and a computer simulation. Journal of
personality and social psychology, 57(2), 165.
Ostrom, T. M., Carpenter, S. L., Sedikides, C., & Li, F. (1993). Differential processing of in-group and out-group information. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 64(1), 21.
Ostrom, T. M., & Sedikides, C. (1992). Out-group homogeneity
effects in natural and minimal groups. Psychological Bulletin,
112(3), 536.
Park, B., & Hastie, R. (1987). Perception of variability in category development: Instance-versus abstraction-based stereotypes.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53(4), 621–635.
Park, B., & Judd, C. M. (1990). Measures and models of perceived
group variability. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
59(2), 173.
Park, B., & Rothbart, M. (1982). Perception of out-group homogeneity and levels of social categorization: Memory for the subordinate attributes of in-group and out-group members. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 42(6), 1051.
Pickett, C. L., & Brewer, M. B. (2001). Assimilation and differentiation needs as motivational determinants of perceived in-group
and out-group homogeneity. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 37(4), 341–348.
Rubin, M., & Badea, C. (2007). Why do people perceive ingroup
homogeneity on ingroup traits and outgroup homogeneity on outgroup traits. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 33(1),
31–42.
Rubin, M., & Badea, C. (2012). They’re all the same... but for several different reasons a review of the multicausal nature of perceived group variability. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 21(6), 367–372.
Simon, B., & Pettigrew, T. F. (1990). Social identity and perceived
group homogeneity evidence for the ingroup homogeneity effect.
European Journal of Social Psychology, 20(4), 269–286.
Tajfel, H. (1982). Social psychology of intergroup relations. Annual
review of psychology, 33(1), 1–39.
Weber, E. U., Shafir, S., & Blais, A.-R. (2004). Predicting risk sensitivity in humans and lower animals: risk as variance or coefficient
of variation. Psychological review, 111(2), 430.

Conclusion
People frequently obtain larger samples of information about
in-groups than about out-groups. Because estimators of variability tend to be more strongly right-skewed when samples
are smaller, this implies that people will be likely to perceive
in-groups as more variable than out-groups. In this paper, we
showed that this in-group heterogeneity effect emerges even
when people process information correctly – even if they are
naive intuitive statisticians. Our theory complements existing
explanations that proposed that information about in-group
and out-group members was processed in different fashions.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful for comments by Jerker Denrell, Robin Hogarth,
participants in the Behavioral and Management Research Breakfast
at UPF and UPF Behavioral Workshop, and the JDM 2016 meeting. This research was funded by grants AEI/FEDER UE-PSI201675353 and RYC-2014-15035 from the Spanish Ministry of Science
and Innovation and grant IN[15] EFG ECO 2281 from the BBVA
Foundation to Gaël Le Mens.

References
Alves, H., Koch, A., & Unkelbach, C. (2016). My friends are all
alike the relation between liking and perceived similarity in person perception. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 62,
103–117.
Boldry, J. G., Gaertner, L., & Quinn, J. (2007). Measuring the measures a meta-analytic investigation of the measures of outgroup

693

