Sequential effects in prediction
Dinis Gökaydin (d.gokaydin@warwick.edu.au)
Warwick Mathematics Institute, University of Warwick, United Kingdom

Anastasia Ejova (anastasia.ejova@mq.edu.au)
Department of Psychology, Maqcuarie University, Australia
Abstract

function of run length (Bertelson, 1961) - since, together, the
findings from the two paradigms paradoxically imply that humans predict more and more that which they predict less and
less. Also, note that, since people react faster when a pattern
is confirmed, they are going with the pattern - i.e. behaving as
if the pattern will continue - whereas, when predicting, they
seem to be going against the perceived pattern.
One possible explanation for the differences observed between prediction and RT is that people might perceive the
sequence to be random in some cases and not random in others (Nickerson, 2002). It stands to reason that if a sequence
is random, then any regular pattern encontered must be shortlived; if, on the other hand, a sequence is judged to be structured, then a pattern might be more likely to continue. Differences in randomness perception might influence results,
but there is evidence that both phenomena - decreasing RT
and increasing proportion of prediction with increase in run
length - occur simultaneously, as both have been observed in
experiments where subjects were made to predict - as well
as react to - each stimulus (Hale, 1967; Perruchet, 1985). At
first sight, this finding does not seem compatible with the randomness perception account, since that account would suggest that whether or not the sequence is percieved as random
changes within the same trial. Thus, while randomness perception cannot be ruled out as a possible explanation for some
results, it is not the full story.
Before a decision can be made to go with or against a pattern, the pattern must be detected in the first place. Parsimony
suggests that the pattern detection mechanism underlying sequential effects in both prediction and reaction is the same,
but that the information it conveys is being used in different
ways, and this forms our first hypothesis. As evidence for this
hypothesis, we will take any similarities in the profiles of sequential effects in prediction and reaction time. For instance,
should the proportion of times people predict the next event
to repeat or alternate (i.e., the prediction probability) be found
to resemble the cost-benefit pattern in Figure 1, this would be
taken as evidence that the same type of sequential effects can
be found in RT and prediction. However, we do not know
beforehand whether humans are going with or against the
pattern in the sequence when making predictions. If going
against the pattern we would expect prediction probability to
be proportional to RT, and negatively proportional if going
with the pattern. In the latter case the profile of sequential
effects in prediction would look like an inverted copy of its
RT counterpart (see Figure 1, right panel). Previous evidence
points to the fact that humans are going against the pattern

We studied a simple binary prediction task and discovered that,
when making predictions, humans display sequential effects
similar to those in reaction time. Moreover, we found that there
are considerable individual differences in sequential effects in
prediction, again similarly to reaction time studies. We discuss
our results in light of the view that sequential effects are the
trace of an attempt at detecting a pattern in the sequence, as
well as the possible influence of randomness perception in our
results. We conclude that the same pattern detection mechanism is likely to underlie sequential effects in reaction time
and prediction.
Keywords: sequential effects; prediction

When responding to a sequence of stimuli, human performance depends on the past sequence of stimuli, often to a
larger extent than on the properties of the stimuli (e.g. Bertelson, 1961; Cho et al., 2002). This phenomenon, known
as ‘sequential effects’, is commonly interpreted as the product of an attempt at detecting a pattern in the sequence of
trials, and in particular whether it is a repeating or alternating sequence. Take for instance a random sequence with two
possible elements: after a repeating run, people tend develop
an expectation that the next event will be the same; similarly,
after an alternating run, an expectation will develop that the
next event will alternate relative to the last one. This is reflected in human reaction times (RTs) which tend to be faster
for those events which are expected and shorter for those that
are not. For instance, let ‘R’ and ‘A’ stand for repetitions
and alternations of stimuli: after seeing RRRR people react
faster if the next event was R, and slower if it was A; conversely, after seeing AAAA they will react faster to another
A and slower to an R. If we plot mean RT for all possible
histories of events we obtain a ‘profile’ of sequential effects.
Figure 1 shows a commonly obtained profile of sequential effects, often referred to as ‘cost-benefit’ in order to highlight
the trade-off in RT after a given sequence.
But what if, instead of reacting to each element, a prediction must be made about what the next one will be? It follows from the expectation-based account expounded above
that those events which are expected should be predicted the
most (i.e,. prediction frequency should be negatively proportional to RT). However, the longer a repeating run is, the more
people have been found to predict that the sequence will alternate (Jarvik, 1951), an effect known as the ‘gambler’s fallacy’ (Oskarsson, Van Boven, McClelland, & Hastie, 2009).
At first sight, results from prediction experiments where the
gambler’s fallacy is observed are incompatible with those of
RT experiments - where it is found that RT decreases as a

397

270

4

100

Perceptual

260

350

80
240

-time (ms)

time (ms)

400

90

250

Prediction probability

Mean RT (ms)

450

Motor

230
220
210
200

Figure 1: Illustration of working hypotheses. Sequences at
the bottom are shown in terms of repetitions (R) and alternations (A) of stimuli and should be read from top to bottom with the last event in bold. Left panel shows reaction
time data of a single individual included in the analyses performed by Gökaydin et al. (2016), illustrating the ideal profile of sequential effects, also known as ‘cost-benefit’. Right
panel illustrates what would be expected if prediction also
displayed sequential effects similar to those observed in RT.
The solid line on the right panel shows what would be expected if humans were going against the pattern in a prediction task, i.e. predicting more often that the pattern will
continue; the dashed line shows what would be expected if
subjects were going with the pattern.

70
60
50

S-LRP

40

LRP-R

Figure 2: Perceptual and motor sequential effects. Both panels show data collected by Jentzsch and Sommer (2002). Left
panel shows the evidence for a perceptual component of sequential effects (S-LRP) and the right panel for a motor component (LRP-R). See main text for an explanation of the
meaning of these two components.
contributions of the two components of sequential effects are
known, and take the form of the profiles shown in Figure 2.
Moreover, sequential effects in reaction time - across different participant and experimental conditions - are known to be
well approximated by a linear combination of the two components, giving us a simplified working model of sequential
effects in reaction time. Applying this model to results from
a prediction task gives us a way of testing whether sequential
effects in reaction time and prediction are similar.
Figure 2 shows the best evidence available about the two
components of sequential effects, from an EEG study conducted by by Jentzsch and Sommer (2002). The authors measured the time between stimulus onset and the occurrence of
the lateralised readiness potential (LRP), termed S-LRP; and
the time between the LRP and the moment a response occurred, or LRP-R. Since the LRP is thought to separate temporally pre-motor from motor processing, S-LRP and LRP-R
are considered to give a measure of pre-motor and motor processing respectively. By measuring both S-LRP and LRP-R
as a function of the sequence of stimuli, Jentzsch and Sommer (2002) sought to capture the pre-motor and motor contributions towards sequential effects (see Figure 2). Further
evidence from other studies shows that what Jentzsch et al.
referred to as pre-motor processing can safely be assumed to
be perceptual in nature and associated with the processing
of stimuli (Maloney et al., 2005; Wilder et al., 2013). For
this reason, we will refer to the two components of sequential effects simply as perceptual and motor, denoting them,
respectively, as P and M.

when predicting, so our second hypothesis is that prediction
probability will be proportional to RT, and that the respective
profile of sequential effects will show the same ‘polarity’ as
that of RT (Jarvik, 1951; Hale, 1967; Perruchet, 1985).

The structure of sequential effects
In order to test our hypotheses we must assess whether sequential effects in reaction and prediction are the same. However, this is not a simple matter of comparing results of two
sets of subjects performing a reaction and a prediction task,
as it is well known from reaction time studies that there is
extensive variation in the profile of sequential effects depending on experimental parameters such as the interval between
the stimuli (Soetens, Boer, & Hueting, 1985; Gökaydin et
al., 2016), as well as for different individuals performing the
same experiment. In fact, the ‘typical’ profile of sequential
effects shown in Figure 2 (left panel) is the exception rather
than the rule (Gökaydin et al., 2016). Therefore, in order to
demonstrate that sequential effects in prediction are the same
as those in reaction time we will try to show they have the
same structure.
There is growing evidence that sequential effects in reaction time can be explained in terms of two separate components, one perceptual and related to the sequence of stimuli
and the other motor in origin and related to the sequence of responses (Jentzsch & Sommer, 2002; Maloney, Dal Martello,
Sahm, & Spillmann, 2005; Wilder, Jones, Ahmed, Curran, &
Mozer, 2013; Gökaydin et al., 2016). Crucially, the relative

Different ways of looking at the data
Sequential effects are usually studied in the context of twoalternative forced-choice tasks (2AFCs) where one has to react to each stimulus as quickly as possible (e.g., pressing one
button if the stimulus appears on the left and another if the
stimulus appears on the right). Error rates in this type of task

398

tend to be quite low, which means that the sequences of stimuli and responses are very similar and that organising results
as a function of one or the other yields the same results. By
contrast, in a prediction task with two equiprobable stimuli,
the error rate is 50% by design, and this means that the sequence of responses and of stimuli become uncoupled. This
raises the question: should the sequence of stimuli or that of
predictions be used in order to study the way in which predictions depend on the sequence? And what information is each
type of analysis conveying? One possibility is that analysing
predictions as a function of the history of predictions - which
involve a motor action - we will recover the motor component
of sequential effects in prediction; conversely, predictions as
a function of the history of stimuli might yield the perceptual
component.

recent work has uncovered that individual differences are not
only substantial but also meaningful in that they reflect different contributions - perceptual and motor - towards sequential
effects (Gökaydin et al., 2016). Thus, average results are not
conclusive with respect to demonstrating that sequential effects in prediction are similar to those in reaction time.
In order to calculate the probability of repeating/alternating
as a function of the history of stimuli for each participant,
each participant’s trials were separated according to five-long
histories of predictions, with prediction probabilities being
calculated simply as the relative frequency with which a repetition or alternation was predicted as the fifth event in each
of the 16 possible five-event-long histories presented on the
x-axis of Figure 1. For instance, denoting frequency by f (.),
the probability of alternating after predicting ARA was calculated as p(ARAA) = f (ARAA)/( f (ARAA) + f (ARAR)).
We will use Xs ,Ys to denote the left/right dots and X p ,Yp
the left/right predictions. In order to calculate the probability
of repeating/alternating as a function of the history of stimuli, sequences such as ARAR consisted of XsYsYs Xs X p and
Ys Xs XsYsYp . Probabilities of repeating/alternating were then
calculated as above.
As discussed above, in order to assess whether sequential
effects in prediction are similar to those in reaction time, we
will use a simple model which is known to provide a good
description of sequential effects in reaction time and apply it
to sequential effects in prediction. Our model will consist of
a simple linear combination of the perceptual elements of sequential effects. Our model then reads as aP + bM, where a
and b are scalar free parameters and P and M are the perceptual and motor components of sequential effects - effectively
just the profiles shown in Figure 2.

Method
Participants
21 subjects (11 female, 10 male) participated in the experiment. Subjects were recruited using Amazons Mechanical
Turk (Mturk) system. Only participants with at least 500
HITS completed on Mturk and with an approval rate of 95%
or above were accepted and paid $5 USD for taking part in
the experiment.

Stimuli
Stimuli consisted of two white dots of radius equal to 30 pixels, horizontally separated by a distance in pixels equal to
20% of the width of the screen. The dots were white and displayed against a grey (RGB 0.5/0.5/0.5) background. During
each trial, the two possible positions of the dots were indicated by two black squares equal in width to the diameter of
the dots.

Results

Procedure

We will look primarily at individual results given that we
know from reaction time studies that individual differences
can be substantial (Gökaydin et al., 2016). Moreover, as
discussed above, looking at averaged results is inconclusive
with respect to assessing whether prediction and reaction time
show the same type of sequential effects. We will discuss
two types of analysis: prediction probability as a function
of the history of predictions - prediction history profiles for
short - and prediction probability as a function of the history of stimuli - or stimulus history profiles. Results from
both types of analysis will be shown in turn. Overall, prediction history profiles emerged as having a larger number of
individuals with a better fit to the combination of the components model: 17/21 prediction history profiles had an R2
greater than 0.5, compared to 8/21 for stimulus history profiles. Note that a clear profile of sequential effects on one
type of analysis was no guarantee that a clear profile emerged
for the other type: several subjects displayed clear sequential
effects on their prediction history profile but not in their stimulus history profile; conversely, one subject displayed strong
sequential effects on the stimulus history profile but not on

Each trial began with a 2000ms-long text display above the
two black squares: ‘Is the next dot on the left or on the right?’.
Predictions were made with the ‘f’ key for ‘left’ and ‘j’ for
‘right’. If a prediction was made during the 2000ms period,
the corresponding black square’s border would thicken and
further key presses had no effect. Once 2000ms elapsed, the
next dot appeared for 600ms, together with feedback (green
tick for a correct prediction or a red cross for incorrect). If
no prediction was made, a warning message ‘Don’t forget to
guess’ was displayed before the appearance of the next dot. If
no prediction was made for five consecutive trials, the experiment stopped, and the message ‘Please remember to respond’
was displayed until the space bar was pressed. Each subject
performed 500 trials separated into five blocks of 100 each,
with an additional 10 practice trials. The sequence of dots
was random, with the constraint that the frequency of left and
right dots was equal for each block.

Data analysis
In the sequential effects literature it has been customary to
show results as an average of a few participants. However,

399

0.3

0.2

2

= 0.71589

Prediction probability

0.5
0.4
0.2
0.1

0.3

= 0.60856

0.8

0.2

0.7

0

2

0.45

0.3

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

= 0.75147

r

Figure 3: Individual sequential effects in prediction as a function of prediction history. Blue solid lines- empirical mean
prediction probability. Red dashed lines - best fitting linear
combination of the form aP + bM where P is represented by
S-LRP and M is represented by LRP-R. Inset bar plots show
coefficients a (P) and b (M). Also shown is the R2 value of
the fits.

2

-0.1

r

2

= 0.90784

1

0
-0.1

0.4

0.1
0

0.1

0.5

2

0.5

= 0.91023

0.7

0.6

r

0.55

0.4
r

0.2
P

0

M

Prediction probability

0.6

0.2

0.4

0.4

0.7

0.3

r

Prediction probability

r

0.2

0.5

0.2

P

= 0.89674

2

0.6

M

r

2

= 0.73698

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.5

0.2

0
-0.5

= 0.76912

P
M

0.4

2

0

P
M

0.5

-0.2

0.7

r

0.6
Prediction probability

-0.2

0.6

0.65

P
M

0

Prediction probability

0.3

0.2

0.8

P
M

0.4

0.9

Prediction probability

0.5

0.7
Prediction probability

-0.2

0.6

P
M

Prediction probability

0.7

0
-0.1
P

0.8

0

M

0.2

0.8

Figure 4: Individual sequential effects in prediction as a function of stimulus history. Blue solid lines- empirical mean
prediction probability. Red dashed lines - best fitting linear
combination of the form aP + bM where P is represented by
S-LRP and M is represented by LRP-R. Inset bar plots show
coefficients a (P) and b (M). Also shown is the R2 value of
the fits.

the prediction profile.
Figure 3 shows a sample of prediction history profiles from
individual participants - chosen on the basis of their goodness of fit to the model, as well as being representative of
different types of profile. The lower-right panel of Figure 3
shows a typical cost-benefit profile, the hallmark of sequential effects in RT, observed here for the first time in prediction. The lower-left panel shows yet another commonly observed type of sequential effects, the result of a stronger motor contribution. The top-left panel shows an example of an
approximately ‘two-tiered’ profile, the product of a positive
perceptual and negative motor coefficient. Finally, the topright panel shows an individual with a negative score on both
components.
Figure 4 shows a selection of individual stimulus hostory
profiles, again chosen on the basis of their good fit and because they illustrate previously known profiles from RT studies. The profile on the top-left corner of Figure 4 is of particular relevance: not only did it occur in several subjects (4)
but it consists of an ‘inverted’ copy of what is thought to be
the motor element of sequential effects. The top-right corner
of Figure 4 shows a profile that is best fit by the perceptual
component of sequential effects in isolation, raising the possibility that it too can also occur ‘inverted’ and in isolation.

The remaining profiles in Figure 4 (bottom two) show two
profiles which are consistent with a mixture of the two components of sequential effects, where the motor component is
inverted but not the perceptual, and vice-versa. These types
of profile, resembling an almost two-tiered dependence on
the last event and whether this was a repetition or an alternation, are common at the individual level in RT studies despite
only recently having been described (Gökaydin et al., 2016).
Interestingly, no single participant exhibited a good fit to a
combination of the two components where both had positive
coefficients. Note that the two sets of subjects shown in figures 4 and 3 are different, with the exception of the lower-left
panel of both figures, which show both types of analysis for
the same individual.
Recall that, based on previous results, we hypothesized
that prediction probability would be proportional to reaction
time, reflecting the fact that humans predict less that to which
they respond the fastest, and vice-versa. In the context of
our model, this would imply that the coefficients of perceptual and motor components have the same sign on average
in reaction time and prediction. Figure 5 shows the coefficient values of both components for all the individuals with
very good fit to the model (R2 > 0.7). At first sight our re-

400

directly proportional to RT, rather than negatively proportional as is more intuitive. Again in this case conclusions
can only be drawn on average, since there is considerable
variation in the sign of the two components in both RT (see
Gökaydin et al. (2016)) and prediction (Figure 5). Despite the
small sample size, one difference did emerge: the sign of the
motor component in prediction profiles ranges from strongly
negative to strongly positive, whereas in RT studies the motor
component seems constrained to be positive. Another interesting observation is that the motor component with a negative sign and in relative isolation - i.e. not in combination
with the perceptual component - occurred in half (4/8) of the
stimulus profiles with an R2 greater than 0.5. In other words,
when analysing results as a function of the history of stimuli,
half of the participants were using only the motor component
of sequential effects. Moreover, when analysing results as a
function of the history of predictions, we obtained clear contributions from both the motor and perceptual components.
At first sight, these results at odds with the interpretation of
the components of sequential effects as associated with the
perceptual and motor systems since - in a task where the sequence of responses and stimuli are de-coupled - we should
recover the motor component when looking at the sequence
of responses and the perceptual component when looking at
the sequence of stimuli. Therefore, our results may force a reinterpretation of the motor/perceptual association of the two
components of sequential effects.
There is some debate regarding the computational nature of
sequential effects. Some authors argue that sequential effects
reflect the tracking different types of statistics in the environment (Wilder, Jones, & Mozer, 2009), whereas others argue
that sequential effects are instead the product of the separate
detection of alternating and repeating patterns (Maloney et
al., 2005). We will use the latter interpretation in order to
guide our discussion, but the different explanations are not
incompatible and the ensuing discussion would hold if we interpret sequential effects as tracking different statistics. In the
context of the pattern-detection interpretation, the perceptual
component is the natural candidate for an alternation detector, whereas the motor component would play the role of a
repetition detector (see (Gökaydin et al., 2016) for an explanation of this mapping). A change in sign of either coefficient would therefore imply a change in whether a particular subject is going for or against the respective pattern. For
instance, when predicting, a positive sign of the motor component would mean that the the participant is going against
a perceived repeating pattern, and the opposite is true for a
negative coefficient.1 In light of this, we can now see that
the variation in the sign of the coefficients of both components of sequential effects (Figure 5) may reflect a differential treatment of repeating and alternating patterns: in some
cases subjects are going against both types of pattern - repeating or alternating - and other times against one but with the

Motor (LRPR)

0.2

0.1

0

-0.1

-0.2

-0.3
-0.3

-0.2

-0.1

0

0.1

0.2

Pre-motor (SLRP)

Figure 5: Coefficients of the best fitting linear combination
aP + bM for those subjects with R2 ≥ 0.7. Blue triangles
show the coefficients of the fit to results as a function of prediction history; red squares show fits to results as a function
of stimulus history. The large blue triangle and red square
show the respective means.
sults differ from RT experiments in one respect: in prediction profiles at least, the motor component often varies from a
strongly positive to a strongly negative sign, whereas in RT it
has almost always a positive sign (see Gökaydin et al. (2016),
supplementary information). With respect to differences between prediction history profiles and stimulus history profiles
- squares and triangles in Figure 5 - there is a hint that perhaps stimulus history shows one or the other component in
isolation, whereas prediction history shows a more balanced
mixture of the two components, but it is too early to draw any
firm conclusions.

Discussion
Our first hypothesis posited that we would find sequential effects in prediction similar to those in reaction time. The evidence presented here - while falling short of demonstrating
that sequential effects in reaction and prediction are the same
- does strongly suggest that sequential effects in prediction
are similar to those in RT insofar as they are well captured
by a combination of the two components of sequential effects
in reaction time - perceptual and motor. That such clear profiles of sequential effects were obtained (Figures 3 and 4) was
somewhat surprising given the smaller number of trials relative to typical RT tasks, as well as the less constrained nature
of the task. Still, results were visibly noisier when compared
to reaction time experiments, and many subjects failed to exhibit any appreciable fit to the two-component model. Nevertheless, we cannot rule out that those individuals who did not
exhibit a good fit to the model exhibit a new type of sequential effect which is meaningful. In order to firmly establish the
nature of sequential effects in prediction an experiment with
larger numbers, followed by latent variable analysis - such as
principal components analysis (PCA) (Gökaydin et al., 2016)
- is necessary. This would allow us to match the structures of
sequential effects in prediction and reaction time, rather than
just a few individual results.
We also hypothesized that prediction probability would be

1 Note that in RT this is the opposite: a positive sign means going
with the pattern, and negative against it.

401

Conclusion

other. The only combination we did not obtain was a negative
sign on both coefficients, which would imply going with both
patterns.

We have shown for the first time that prediction tasks display
sequential effects similar in nature to those observed in reaction time. This work goes some way towards unifying the
areas of prediction and reaction time in binary decision tasks.

Earlier we proposed that the subjective perception of randomness might influence the polarity of sequential effects,
since whether or not a pattern will continue depends on
whether the sequence is random or not. At first sight, the
randomness perception account would seem to imply that humans either go against both types of pattern - repeating and
alternating - or with both. After all, if we perceive the sequence as being random we should bet against both repeating
and alternating sequences continuing, and the opposite if we
believe the sequence to be structured. However, it is conceivable that the perception of randomness has a differential effect
on repeating and alternating patterns or, somewhat equivalently, that individuals give different weight to repetitions and
alternations when judging a sequence to be random. In fact,
it is well known from RT studies that there are substantial individual differences with respect to sensitivity to repetitions
and alternations (Soetens et al., 1985; Gökaydin et al., 2016).
In our experiment we did not bias the participants either way,
and it is therefore natural to assume that individual perception
of the random nature of the sequence would vary depending
on endogenous factors. One way to test the influence randomness perception on sequential effects in prediction would be
to conduct the same experiment giving participants a strong
hint that the sequence is random, and contrasting these results with a situation where it is implied that the sequence has
a pattern.

References
Bertelson, P. (1961). Sequential redundancy and speed in
a serial two-choice responding task. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 13(2), 90–102.
Cho, R. Y., Nystrom, L. E., Brown, E. T., Jones, A. D.,
Braver, T. S., Holmes, P. J., & Cohen, J. D. (2002). Mechanisms underlying dependencies of performance on stimulus
history in a two-alternative forced-choice task. Cognitive,
Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience, 4(2), 283–299.
Gökaydin, D., Navarro, D. J., Ma-Wyatt, A., & Perfors, A.
(2016). The structure of sequential effects. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 145(1), 110–123.
Hale, D. J. (1967). Sequential effects in a two-choice serial reaction task. The Quarterly journal of experimental
psychology, 19(2), 133–141.
Jarvik, M. E. (1951). Probability learning and a negative
recency effect in the serial anticipation of alternative symbols. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 41(4), 291–297.
doi: 10.1037/h0056878
Jentzsch, I., & Sommer, W. (2002). Functional localization
and mechanisms of sequential effects in serial reaction time
tasks. Perception & Psychophysics, 64(7), 1169–1188.
Maloney, L. T., Dal Martello, M. F., Sahm, C., & Spillmann,
L. (2005). Past trials influence perception of ambiguous
motion quartets through pattern completion. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, 102(8), 3164–3169.
Nickerson, R. S. (2002). The production and perception of
randomness. Psychological Review, 109(2), 330–357.
Oskarsson, A. T., Van Boven, L., McClelland, G. H., &
Hastie, R. (2009, March). What’s next? Judging sequences
of binary events. Psychological Bulletin, 135(2), 262–285.
Perruchet, P. (1985). A pitfall for the expectancy theory of
human eyelid conditioning. The Pavlovian Journal of Biological Science, 20(4), 163–170.
Soetens, E., Boer, L. C., & Hueting, J. E. (1985). Expectancy
or Automatic Facilitation? Separating Sequential Effects
in Two-Choice Reaction Time. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 11(5),
598–616.
Wilder, M., Jones, M., Ahmed, A. A., Curran, T., & Mozer,
M. C. (2013). The persistent impact of incidental experience. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review.
Wilder, M., Jones, M., & Mozer, M. C. (2009). Sequential
effects reflect parallel learning of multiple environmental
regularities. In Y. Bengio, D. Schuurmans, J. D. Lafferty,
C. K. I. Williams, & A. Culotta (Eds.), Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 22 (pp. 2053–2061). Curran Associates, Inc.

Some of the participants in our study exhibited a clear prediction history profile, some a clear stimulus history profile,
and some both. The implication is that some humans are
tracking the sequence of predictions, others the sequence of
stimuli, and others both, in order to try and make predictions.
What is it that makes some people more sensitive to one or
the other type of information? The perception of randomness may yet again play a role in this respect, since a belief
that the sequence is random should lead to a dismissal of the
sequence of stimuli as uninformative. If participants believe
the sequence is random they might try to generate the most
random possible sequence of responses by using their repetition and alternation detectors ‘in reverse’ in order to create
a sequence of responses that is poor in repeating and alternating patterns. If this were the case, we should expect to
see a positive coefficient on both components in those participants with a clear prediction history profile (blue triangles
in Figure 5), which seems to be the case for a few subjects,
but not all. Again, we cannot discard the possibility that individual differences in sensitivity to repetitions and alternations
might play a role in this case, and that some individuals might
put more or less emphasis on repetitions or alternations when
generating the most random sequence possible.

402

