Sequential Effects in the Garner Tasks
Deborah J. Lin (djlin@student.unimelb.edu.au)
Daniel R. Little (daniel.little@unimelb.edu.au)
Melbourne School of Psychological Sciences,
University of Melbourne, Australia

Abstract
The distinction between integral and separable dimensions is
of central importance to understanding how humans integrate
information from multiple stimulus sources. One approach to
characterizing stimulus integrality is through a set of speeded
categorization tasks most closely associated with the work of
Wendell Garner. These tasks demonstrate that integral dimensions result in marked speed up or slow down in responding
when there is correlated or irrelevant variation, respectively,
compared with a baseline task. Little, Wang & Nosofsky
(2016) recently found that the slow down or interference can
be largely explained by a reduction in the number of direct repetitions in a modified Garner filtering task. In this paper, we
examine a large sample of subjects tested on either separable or
integral dimensions to determine the extent of and individual
differences in the overall and sequential effects in the standard
Garner tasks.

Figure 1. Garner’s (1974) control, correlated, and filtering
conditions
In the control condition, there are two stimuli which only
vary along the single relevant dimension (i.e., dimension X
in Figure 1). In the correlated condition, there are two stimuli which vary along both the relevant dimension and a second irrelevant dimension. In the filtering condition, there are
four stimuli with all possible combinations of relevant and
irrelevant dimension values. In all conditions, participants
should attend primarily to the relevant dimension while ignoring variation in the irrelevant dimension in order to perform
the categorization task accurately and quickly.
For integral dimensions, a robust finding is that subjects
have shortest response times (RTs) in the correlated task
and the longest RTs in the filtering task. This suggests a
correlated-facilitation and filtering- or Garner-interference effect, respectively (Garner, 1974). However, for separable dimensions, RTs across control, correlated, and filtering tasks
are relatively invariant (Garner, 1974).
These patterns of RTs arise due to a difference in the ability to selectively attend and process information for integral
and separable dimensions (Garner, 1974). When dimensions
are separable, participants are easily able to selectively attend to relevant dimension, and as a result, the psychological representation of the stimulus space in all three conditions are collapsed to the single relevant dimension such that
the correlated and filtering conditions are isomorphic to the
control condition. However, when integral dimensions are
used, participants are unable to selectively attend to the relevant dimension, and thus have different psychological representations of the stimulus space for each condition. For instance, as the stimuli vary along both dimensions in the correlated task, when the information from these dimensions are
pooled and processed in a single channel, psychological discriminability between stimuli may be increased compared to
when the stimuli only vary along one dimension in the control
condition. With increased discriminability between stimuli,
categorization becomes easier and more efficient resulting in

Keywords: Categorization; Response Times; Sequential
Effects

Introduction
In the study of perceptual decision-making, it is fundamental to understand the distinction between integrality and separability, as different processing architectures appear to underlie performance with integral and separable dimensions.
Information from integral dimensions, which cannot easily
be selectively attended to, is best explained as a pooling of
information into a single, coactive processing channel (Little et al., 2013). On the other hand, separable dimensions,
which can be easily selectively attended to, have been shown
to be processed independently in serial or parallel (Fifić et al.,
2010). Hence, the notion of integrality and separability must
be taken into account in the formal model of categorization
and decision making more broadly.

Garner’s (1974) Speeded-Categorization Tasks
One classic approach to understanding integrality is Garner’s
(1974) set of speeded-categorization tasks (see also Algom &
Fitousi, 2016, for a review). In these tasks, participants categorize stimuli into two categories as quickly and accurately as
possible on each trial. Category membership in these tasks is
determined by the stimulus’ value on a single relevant dimension. The three major task conditions –control, correlated,
and filtering – vary in the structure of the stimulus space, as
shown in Figure 1.

748

shorter RTs in the correlated task – the correlated-facilitation
effect. There are several potential explanations for Garner interference. For one, there are more items in the filtering task
than in the control task which may encourage more conservative responding, especially if the stimuli are highly confusable. Alternatively, the increase in the number of items
might increase the perceived variability which would act to
slow RTs (Nosofsky & Palmeri, 1997).
In a recent paper using a modified version of the Garner
task (see Figure 2), Little et al. (2016) showed that one explanation for filtering interference was the reduction of direct
sequential repetitions in the filtering condition. That is, with
more items, the probability of any one item repeating is reduced compared to the control condition. Repetitions have
been show to produce very fast RTs; consequently, the reduction in repetitions results in slower responding (Fletcher
& Rabbitt, 1978; Krueger & Shapiro, 1981). Investigations
of decomposition (i.e., into sequential effects) of the standard Garner effects (Burns, 2016; Dyson & Quinlan, 2010)
have concluded that repetition effects can not be the sole explanation for Garner interference. However, two limitations
of these papers are that only a small number of participants
was tested (N = 16; Dyson & Quinlan (2010); N = 30; Burns
(2016)) and there was no comparison to sequential effects in
separable dimension stimuli in either case. Given that the sequential effects in our modified task were highly pronounced
(Little et al., 2016), were also present for separable dimensions in the same modified task (Lin & Little, 2017), and that
we found considerable individual variability in our modified
task, we sought in the present paper to conduct a larger replication of the standard Garner task to examine this decomposition using both integral and separable dimensions.

Figure 2. Schematic diagram of the modified Garner-task
paradigm using stimuli varying on integral dimensions brightness and saturation - where the relevant dimension is
brightness.
3. Adjacent opposite category pulling effect: When the near
boundary item was preceded by an adjacent item from the
opposite category, RTs were slower and errors higher than
when the near item was preceded by another item.
4. Irrelevant dimension change: Finally, in the filtering task,
the repetition effect was attenuated and the pushing and
pulling effects were enhanced when the irrelevant dimension changed (i.e., when there was only repetition of the
relevant but not the irrelevant dimension value). This effect
emphasizes the role of previous item distance (i.e., from the
current item) in determining the magnitude of the sequential effects. This was also evident in the attenuated pushing
and pulling effects in the correlated condition (i.e., since
the between category items are further apart in that category).

Sequential Effects
We have recently demonstrated with separable dimensions
that the same repetition, pushing, and pulling effects arise
even when there was no overall average RT difference between conditions (Lin & Little, 2017). There is no effect of
changing the irrelevant dimension in the filtering task with
separable dimensions consistent with the notion that attention
acts to collapse the separable conditions across the irrelevant
dimension.
While there have been some investigations of sequential effects in the standard Garner task (Felfoldy, 1974; Lockhead
et al., 1978), there have been few comparisons of sequential
effects between integral and separable dimensions. Additionally, there is value in collecting a large replication sample in
the standard Garner task, as the magnitude and variability of
the standard Garner effects and sequential effect are currently
unclear. For instance, not all subjects showed the standard
Garner ordering (i.e., correlated RT ¡ control RT ¡ filtering
RT) in a modified Garner task. Thus, the present study seeks
to quantify the size and variability of the standard Garner effects and several decompositions of those effects (including
sequential effects; from Dyson & Quinlan, 2010) using a hierarchical Bayesian analysis.

Sequential effects arise due to a reliance on a relative comparison of the current stimulus to the preceding stimulus (or
stimuli). These types of effects have been observed in a large
variety of categorization tasks (Stewart et al., 2002, see e.g.,)
but also in identification (Brown et al., 2007, see e.g.,) and
simple choice tasks (Luce, 1986; Jones et al., 2013). One
such effect that has been widely studied is the repetition effect, where subjects have higher accuracy and shorter RTs
when the current stimulus is identical to the immediately preceding stimulus (Felfoldy, 1974; Lockhead et al., 1978). In
their modified task, using integral dimensions, Little et al.
(2016) showed that there are complex sequential effects that
arise across the control, correlated, and filtering conditions.
1. Repetition Effect: Items which were adjacent to category boundary were categorized faster and more accurately
when preceded by the same item than when preceded by
another item.
2. Far same category pushing effect: When the near boundary
item was preceded by a far item from the same category,
RTs were slower and errors higher than when the near item
was preceded by another item.

749

Method

whether the stimulus belonged to category A or B. Response
choice and response time (RT) were recorded via button press
of a customized RT box Li et al. (2010). The stimulus remained on screen until a button press was made or until
the 5000ms response deadline. Full feedback (i.e., “right”,
“wrong”) was provided for the 24 practice trials; only incorrect response feedback was provided for experimental trials. If a response was not made before the response deadline,
feedback “too slow” was given. The feedback remained on
screen for 2000ms.

Two sets of experiments following the general procedure outlined in Garner (1974) were conducted. Experiment 1 used
integral dimensions; Experiment 2 used separable dimensions.
Participants In Exp 1, 100 University of Melbourne undergraduates were randomly assigned to either the brightness (N
= 50) group or saturation (N=50).1 One saturation participant
was excluded due to an overwritten data file. In Exp 2, 99
students were randomly assigned to either the saturation (N
= 49) or line-position (N = 50) group. All received course
credit for participation.

Data Analysis
We applied two hierarchical Bayesian models. For the first
model, we found the posteriors for a single group distribution
for each of the items in the control, correlated, and filtering
task in each of the integral and separable experiments. For
the second model, we found the posteriors for distributions
of each sequential order for each condition across both experiments. That is, we estimated the posterior for when the
relevant dimension value repeated and the irrelevant dimension value repeated (hereafter, RR), for when the relevant dimension changed but the irrelevant dimension repeated (CR),
when the relevant dimension repeated but the irrelevant dimension change (RC), and for when both the relevant and
irrelevant dimensions changed (CC). The control task only
contains the RR and CR conditions, the correlated task contains the RR and CC conditions, and the filtering task contains
all four conditions.
For each experiment i, each subject j, and each task (or
sequence condition) k, we estimated the rt as a lognormal
distribution, rti jk ⇠ LogN(µik , sik ). The prior over the subject means was a normal distribution, µik ⇠ N(Mk , Sk ), and
the prior over the subject precision (1/sik ) was a gamma
distribution, 1/sik ⇠ Gamma(ak , bk ). Hyperpriors were relatively non-informative, Mk U(0, 7), Sk ⇠ U(0, 500), ak ⇠
U(.5, 100), and bk ⇠ U(.5, 100), where U(x, y) is a uniform
distribution over the range [x, y]. The models were implemented in JAGS (Plummer, 2003) for which we collected
1000 samples after 1000 burn-in samples from two MCMC
chains. Plots of these chains indicated good convergence.

Exp 1: Integral Stimuli Stimuli were color squares (100
⇥ 100 pixels each; Munsell hue 5R) that varied in brightness
(value) and saturation (chroma). The set of four stimuli was
created by combining two levels of brightness (values 5, 6)
and two levels of saturation (chroma 6, 8). The stimuli were
presented on a monitor resolution of 1280 ⇥ 1024.

Exp 2: Separable Stimuli Stimuli were colored rectangles
(170 ⇥ 255 pixels) with a black outline and with a small inset
black vertical line positioned along the base of the rectangle. The color was selected from the Munsell hue 5R with
a brightness value of 5 while the saturation was varied. The
line varied by position along the base of the rectangle from
the left side of the rectangle. The full set of stimuli was created by combining two levels of saturation (chroma 8, 10) and
two line positions (60, 80 pixels from the left). The stimuli
were presented on a monitor resolution of 1280 ⇥ 1024.

General Procedure
In both experiments, participants each completed a one-hour
categorization task. At the outset, participants were presented with an instruction screen with examples of the stimuli
and were told to categorize each stimulus as accurately and
quickly as possible. Participants then completed 5 blocks of
24 practice trials followed by 120 experimental trials, and a
6th block of 120 experimental trials.
The control task and correlated tasks were presented over
two blocks. In both tasks, only two stimuli of the full set were
presented to the participant on each trial. For the subsequent
block of the control task, the irrelevant dimension value was
switched. For the subsequent block of the correlated task, the
relevant and irrelevant dimension values of the two stimuli
were both switched.
The filtering task was presented over two consecutive
blocks without practice trials for the second block. The
blocks of tasks were counterbalanced and the order of presentation of individual stimuli on each trial was randomized
anew within each block.
On each trial, a fixation cross was presented for 1500ms,
followed by the stimulus. The participant then decided

Results
The estimated rt means and variances are on a logarithmic
scale and not the scale of the original RT data. Hence, to
summarize the effects, we converted the posterior group logNormal distribution means, M, and standard deviation, to the
RT scale using the following transformation:
S2
M̃k = exp(Mk + k )
2
q
S˜k = exp(2Mk + Sk2 )exp(Sk2

1)

Overall Condition Analysis

We first analysed the overall difference between condition by
taking the difference between the Control and Correlated posterior estimates (left panel, Figure 3) and between the Control

1A

programming error meant that all participants in Experiment
1 completed the brightness-relevant task.

750

Figure 4. Posterior distributions for the transformed logNormal groups means for the Control condition (RR & CR; Left
panel), Correlated condition (RR & CC; Middle panel), and
Filtering condition (CC, CR, RC, CC; Right panel)

Figure 3. Posterior distributions for the difference between
control and correlated overall mean RTs (left panel), and the
difference between between control and filtering overall mean
RTs (right panel). The solid line shows the distribution for the
integral posterior and the dotted line shows the posterior for
the separable condition.
task and the filtering task (right panel, Figure 3). We note that
there were no strong qualitative individual differences; only
quantitative variation.
For the comparisons to the correlated condition, positive
values would indicate shorter RTs in the correlated condition
than the control condition. Analogously, for the comparison
to the filtering condition, negative values indicate longer RTs
in the filtering condition than in the control condition. As
shown in Figure 3, the posterior distributions for the separable conditions have substantial density over 0 indicating no
overall effect of condition. For the integral conditions, the
distributions had the most density over positive and negative
difference values for the correlated and filtering comparisons,
respectively. Hence, we’ve replicated the standard Garner result and have shown that all subjects in our experiment show
this pattern of results.

Sequential Item Analysis
Figure 4 shows the posterior distributions for each of the item
conditions. For the separable dimensions condition, posterior distributions for item conditions appear to be relatively
invariant across the control, correlated, and filtering tasks, indicating little or no sequential effects. The posterior distributions for the integral dimension condition reveals a more
complex pattern of item condition effects. In the control task,
the posterior distributions for RR and CC indicate no sequential effects. In the correlated task, the posterior distribution
for RR lies slightly lower than CC, suggesting a repetition
effect. In the filtering condition, posterior RTs are markedly
slower for irrelevant dimension changes (i.e., RC and CC),
and quickest when the stimulus is repeated (i.e., RR).
We summarized these distribution by computing several effect decompositions derived by Dyson & Quinlan (2010).

Figure 5. Posteriors distributions for irrelevant feature variation (left panel) and stimulus uncertainty (right panel) components of filtering interference for both integral and separable
dimensions.
which “filt” refers to the filtering condition and “cont” to the
control condition. This overall measure can be further decomposed into the following two components:
1. A measure of irrelevant feature variation, which is positive
if there is a cost when the irrelevant dimension changes:
[RR f ilt + RC f ilt +CR f ilt +CC f ilt ]/4 [RR f ilt +CR f ilt ]/2
2. A measure of stimulus uncertainty, which is positive if
there is a cost associated with having more stimuli in the
filtering condition controlling for changes in the irrelevant
dimension: [RR f ilt +CR f ilt ]/2 [RRcont +CRcont ]/2
These two effects are shown in Figure 5. For these figures,
negative values indicate RT benefits (i.e., shorter RT) while
positive values indicate RT costs (i.e., longer RT) for the respective effect. The posterior distribution for both effects for
separable dimensions have substantial density over zero, indicating no irrelevant feature variation or stimulus uncertainty
effects. In contrast, the posterior distributions for integral dimensions have substantial density over positive values, indicating RT costs as a result of irrelevant variation and stimulus uncertainty. Furthermore, stimulus uncertainty appears to
contribute to filtering interference more than irrelevant variation for the integral dimensions condition.

Filtering interference Note that overall filtering interference can be decomposed into sequential components as:
[RR f ilt + RC f ilt + CR f ilt + CC f ilt ]/4 [RRcont + CRcont ]/2,

Correlated benefit In the correlated condition we conducted a corresponding decomposition (again following

751

Figure 6. Posterior distributions for redundancy repetition
(left panel) and redundancy change (right panel) components
of correlated facilitation for both integral and separable dimensions.

Figure 7. Posterior distributions for the repetition effect in
control, correlated, and filtering tasks for both integral and
separable dimensions.
ing no repetition effect. In the correlated condition, the posterior distributions for both integral and separable dimensions
have a substantial density over negative values, indicating a
slight repetition effect. The repetition effect for integral dimensions also appears to be marginally stronger than for separable dimensions; though even here, both distributions have
95% highest posterior density intervals which overlap 0. In
the filtering condition, the distribution for separable dimensions has substantial density over zero, indicating no repetition effect. However, the distribution for integral dimensions
lies mainly over negative values, indicating the presence of a
strong repetition effect.

Dyson & Quinlan 2010) as: [RRcorr + CRcorr ]/2 [RRcont +
CRcont ]/2.
This overall measure can be further decomposed into:
1. The effect of redundancy repetition, which indexes the effect of changing both dimensions: [RRcorr RRcont ]/2
2. The effect of redundancy change, which indexes the effect of additional irrelevant dimension variation in the
correlated condition compared to the control condition:
[CCcorr CRcont ]/2.
These effects are shown in Figure 6. For separable dimensions, the posterior distributions for both redundancy repetition and redundancy change have substantial density over
zero, indicating no overall correlated facilitation effect. For
integral dimensions, both redundancy repetition and redundancy change have substantial value over negative values, indicating RT benefits. In addition, the components appear to
contribute approximately equally to the overall correlated facilitation effect.

Discussion
Overall, the hierarchical Bayesian approach in the present
study revealed reliably strong standard Garner effects, showing correlated facilitation and filtering interference with integral dimensions but not with separable dimensions. A further decomposition of the Garner effects into sequential item
conditions, following Dyson & Quinlan (2010), provide further insight into the underlying mechanisms of perceptual
decision-making. Notably, we found little evidence for any
individual differences.
One notable finding is that no sequential effects were found
with separable dimensions in the standard Garner task. This
result is in contrast to the sequential effects found with separable dimensions in the modified Garner task (Lin & Little,
2017). One potential explanation could be that the presence
and magnitude of sequential effects depends on task complexity. For example, Bentin & McCarthy (1994) found that immediate repetition provides a relatively larger advantage in
lexical decision and face recognition tasks compared to simpler discrimination tasks, as it eliminated the need for more
complex processes such as accessing semantic memory. Similarly, as the standard Garner task has a much smaller stimulus space compared to the modified Garner task, repetitions
may provide a large benefit for the modified task but a much
smaller or no RT benefit, and as a result, no sequential effects
arise in the standard task. On the other hand, we have only
examined the effects of a single preceding item; in simple RT
tasks (i.e., with two stimuli), there are complex sequential ef-

Repetition Effect Finally, for all three conditions we computed the effect repeating an item compared to switching an
item (i.e., in the control and correlated conditions; in the filtering condition, we compared repetition to the average of the
other three item RTs). 2 This repetition measure is computed
as:
Control Repetition =
Correlated Repetition =
Filtering Repetition =

RRcont CRcont
RRcorr CCcorr
RR f ilt [CR f ilt + RC f ilt +CC f ilt ]/3

This measure can also be interpreted to indicate a repetition
effect (i.e., shorter RTs as a result of repetition in both dimensions). A negative value indicates a repetition effect
In the control condition, the distributions for both integral
and separable dimensions are centered around zero, suggest2 For the correlated condition, this provides an index of the bypass strategy (Dyson & Quinlan, 2010). The bypass strategy describes a strategy whereby participants monitor only the trial-by-trial
sequences making the same response as on the previous trial when
the stimulus is the same as the previous trial and switching responses
when the stimulus changes.

752

fects extending up to five items back reflecting the influence
of repetitions and alternations (Jones et al., 2013).
Another important result is that stimulus uncertainty contributes to filtering-interference more than irrelevant feature
variation. An explanation could be that the lack of interference from irrelevant feature variation can be attributed to
the integrality of dimensions. If dimensions are less integral
and easier to selectively attend to, then the irrelevant variation would not contribute to interference, for example, in the
separable dimensions case. It should also be noted that it is
difficult to isolate stimulus uncertainty and irrelevant feature
variation in the standard Garner task, as an increase in the
number of irrelevant dimensions is associated with a larger
number of stimuli. Even though these measures attempt to
isolate trials where only stimulus uncertainty or irrelevant
variation changes, it is unclear whether the larger context of
the task has no impact. Burns (2016) attempted to disentangle
these two components by introducing a 3-dimensional Garner
task where irrelevant variation could be increased without affecting stimulus uncertainty, and demonstrated that irrelevant
variation alone can increase interference substantially. In order to further evaluate the components underlying filteringinterference, promising avenues for future work might be to
measure these decomposition effects with a variety of different dimensions varying on integrality or to carefully manipulate stimulus uncertainty and irrelevant variation within
Burns’s (2016) 3-dimensional Garner task.

Fifić, M., Little, D. R., & Nosofsky, R. (2010). Logicalrule models of classification response times: A synthesis
of mental-architecture, random-walk, and decision-bound
approaches. [Journal Article]. Psychological Review, 117,
309-348.
Fletcher, B., & Rabbitt, P. M. A. (1978). The changing pattern of perceptual analytic strategies and response selection
with practice in a two-choice reaction time task [Journal
Article]. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 30, 417-427.
Garner, W. R. (1974). The processing of information and
structure [Book]. Psychology Press.
Jones, M., Curran, T., Mozer, M. C., & Wilder, M. H. (2013).
Sequential effects in response time reveal learning mechanisms and event representations. Psychological review,
120(3), 628.
Krueger, L. E., & Shapiro, R. G. (1981). Intertrial effects
of same-different judgements [Journal Article]. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 33, 241265.
Li, X., Liang, Z., Kleiner, M., & Lu, Z.-L. (2010). Rtbox:
A device for highly accurate response time measurements
[Journal Article]. Behavior Research Methods, 42(1), 212225.
Lin, D. J., & Little, D. R. (2017). Further tests of sequential
effects in a modified garner task using separable dimensions [Journal Article]. Manuscript in preparation.
Little, D. R., Nosofsky, R. M., Donkin, C., & Denton, S. E.
(2013). Logical-rules and the classification of integral dimensioned stimuli [Journal Article]. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 39,
801-820.
Little, D. R., Wang, T., & Nosofsky, R. M. (2016).
Sequence-sensitive exemplar and decision-bound accounts
of speeded-classification performance in a modified
garner-tasks paradigm [Journal Article]. Cognitive Psychology, 89, 1-38.
Lockhead, G., Gruenewald, P., & King, M. (1978). Holistic
vs. attribute repetition effects in classifying stimuli. Memory & Cognition, 6(4), 438–445.
Luce, R. D. (1986). Response times: Their role in inferring
elementary mental organization [Book]. New York: Oxford University Press.
Nosofsky, R. M., & Palmeri, T. (1997). Comparing exemplarretrieval and decision-bound models of speeded perceptual classification [Journal Article]. Perception & Psychophysics, 59, 1027-1048.
Plummer, M. (2003). Jags: A program for analysis of
bayesian graphical models using gibbs sampling. In Proceedings of the 3rd international workshop on distributed
statistical computing (p. 125-132).
Stewart, N., Brown, G. D., & Chater, N. (2002). Sequence effects in categorization of simple perceptual stimuli [Journal
Article]. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 28, 3.

Acknowledgments
DL was supported by an ARC Discovery Project grant:
DP160102360.

References
Algom, D., & Fitousi, D. (2016). Half a century of research
on garner interference and the separability-integrality distinction [Journal Article]. Psychological Bulletin.
Bentin, S., & McCarthy, G. (1994). The effects of immediate
stimulus repetition on reaction time and event-related potentials in tasks of different complexity. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
20(1), 130.
Brown, S., Marley, A., & Lacouture, Y. (2007). Is absolute
identification always relative? comment on stewart, brown,
and chater (2005).
Burns, D. M. (2016). Garner interference is not solely driven
by stimulus uncertainty. Psychonomic bulletin & review,
23(6), 1846–1853.
Dyson, B. J., & Quinlan, P. T. (2010). Decomposing the garner interference paradigm: Evidence for dissociations between macrolevel and microlevel performance. Attention,
Perception, & Psychophysics, 72(6), 1676–1691.
Felfoldy, G. L. (1974). Repetition effects in choice reaction
time to multidimensional stimuli. Attention, Perception, &
Psychophysics, 15(3), 453–459.

753

