Sex-Dependent Effects of Emotional Subliminal Visual
Stimuli on a Decision-Making Task
Christopher L. Dancy (christopher.dancy@bucknell.edu)
Department of Computer Science, Bucknell University, Lewisburg, PA 17837

Frank E. Ritter (frank.ritter@psu.edu)
College of IST, Penn State, University Park, PA 16802

Frank G. Hillary (fhillary@psu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Penn State, University Park, PA 16802

Kevin Voller (krvoller@gmail.com)
Senior UX Designer, Dick’s Sporting Goods eCommerce, Pittsburgh, PA
Abstract
How do covert emotional stimuli affect decisionmaking? We investigated this question by exposing participants to subliminal visual stimuli during a computerized version of the Iowa Gambling Task (IGT) to assess
whether different categories of images (negative, neutral,
or positive emotional evaluations) would influence decision-making behavior. Results did show sex-group interactions for IGT scores. In decision learning model simulations, it was found that different models were more appropriate to explain the task performance for different
sex-group pairs. Overall, women showed more of an
ability to integrate the additive negative signals from the
stimuli to make more advantageous decisions than the
men; consequently, this made the men more resilient to
the negative effects of the positive stimuli on taskperformance. When taken with existing research, the results indicate that subliminal emotional stimuli can have
subtle, potentially sex-dependent, effects on behavior
during the decision-making process.
Keywords: Decision-Making, IGT, Emotion, Simulation

Introduction
How do covert emotional stimuli affect decisionmaking and choice behavior? There have been several
studies that have explored the processes involved in,
and the outcomes of, decision-making behavior (e.g.,
see Lerner et al., 2015; Weber & Johnson, 2008), but
relatively few studies that explore decision-making
have also explicitly introduced emotional stimuli
(Phelps & Sokol-Hessner, 2012) and even fewer have
sought to understand the interaction between unconsciously presented emotional stimuli and decisionmaking. One decision-making study by Winkielman et
al. (2005) found that subliminally presented images
(emotional faces) influenced judgment and choice during a series of decisions directly following the masked
image exposure (with happy faces increasing the

amount of a beverage poured and consumed, and the
purchase price a participant would be willing to pay).
These images affected the decision despite not being
consciously perceived or semantically related to the
series of decisions made after the exposure. Subliminal
image presentation can also cause changes in peripheral
physiology that may not be perceived, particularly
measures related to activation of the LC-Noradrenergic
system and amygdala, for example heart-rate and eyeblink response (e.g., Ruiz-Padial et al., 2011). These
effects on peripheral physiology are important, as the
areas of the brain that are shown to respond to these
subliminal stimuli are likely causing these cascades of
changes (Öhman & Mineka, 2001; Tamietto & de
Gelder, 2010).
The Iowa Gambling task (IGT) has been used to better explain links between changes in peripheral physiology and choice behavior, as well as to better understand some of the brain areas key to decision-making
and related physiological behavior during the decisionmaking process (Bechara et al., 1999).
IGT subjects repeatedly chooses cards from 4 decks
of cards. The payoff per card varies, and the subject is
asked to maximize their payoff. The decks differ in the
payoff they give for each card; some decks give better
average payoffs than others, although all have variability. The task is used to study how subjects learn to use
the payoffs in their decision-making. For some cognitive deficits the choices are not learned very quickly.
An important finding from Bechara et al. (1999) is
that normal participants exhibited different skin conductance response (SCR) behavior than clinical patients
with amygdala lesions and those with lesions in the
ventromedial prefrontal cortex (VMPFC). These distinct clinical groups exhibited different SCRs both prior
to selecting a card from a deck and in response to receiving a net gain or loss after selecting a card; this
difference is especially apparent in the disadvantageous

1872

decks (those decks that had a negative average payoff).
The group with amygdala lesions exhibited both a reduced SCR prior to selecting a card from a deck and a
reduced SCR after receiving a reward or loss, while the
VMPFC group showed a more attenuated SCR prior to
the selection of a card from a deck, indicating that
amygdala nuclei may play an important role in giving
affective value to representations in decision-making.
SCR response patterns by those with amygdala lesions
indicated a difficulty with coupling an affective value
with the different decks and the cards from those decks.
We sought to better understand behavioral effects of
this unconscious emotion perception and decisionmaking interaction by exposing study participants to
subliminal emotional stimuli while they completed the
IGT. Behavioral responses to the affective value of objects are mediated by cognitive processes that are modulated by neural processing in the amygdala
(Moscarello & LeDoux, 2013; Panksepp et al., 2011;
Phelps, 2006). Given that the amygdala is also important for the processing of unconsciously presented
emotional stimuli (Tamietto & de Gelder, 2010), the
unconscious perception of emotional stimuli may have
behavioral effects on decision-making even if the stimuli are not integral to the decisions being made (e.g.,
Winkielman et al., 2005).
We expected that decision-making would differ depending on whether the subliminal image presented had
negative, neutral, or positive evaluations. We present a
study to test this hypothesis. Normally, in nonpathological populations, IGT performance is largely
dependent upon learning deck contingencies over-time.
This can be represented somewhat as a reinforcement
learning process (e.g., with the expectance-valence
model or the prospective-valence model; Ahn et al.,
2008). To further explore the potential differences between groups (and, later, participant sex), we developed
decision learning models (e.g., Ahn et al., 2008) that
were run in simulations1; this gave us the opportunity to
understand potential computational processes affected
by the treatment.

Method
97 undergraduate students were recruited as participants for this study (52 males; 45 females). The average
ages of males and females were similar at 20.7 and 19.8
(respectively). Electrodermal Activity (EDA) data were
collected for the final 66 (37 males and 29 females)
participants (data not reported here). All participants
were given college course extra credit.
A filter process that removed participants who completed less than 20% of their trials due to time re1

Software available at gitlab.bucknell.edu/AICogSci-Group/IGT-Open/

strictions (max 3.5s per trial) resulted in the removal of
4 participants’ data from further analysis; data from 93
total participants were analyzed. The negative, neutral,
and positive (image) groups each had 31 participants.
We ceased participant enrollment in the study after we
crossed a 31 per-group threshold for task-related behavioral analysis and all volunteers had the opportunity to
participate.
Participants used a version of the IGT that included a
fixed reward and punishment schedule for each deck
that was the same as the schedule used for the original
IGT by Bechara et al. (2000). A modified computerized
version of the IGT was used that runs in Matlab and
uses the Psychtoolbox Matlab extensions (Brainard,
1997), which were used due to their high timing accuracy, community support, and cross-platform availability. The specific software used has had IGT-specific
timing tests done to confirm timing accuracy (Dancy &
Ritter, 2017).
The visual stimuli presented during the IGT were obtained from the International Affective Picture System
(IAPS; Lang et al., 1997). Table 1 lists the images used
in the image sets used by the groups. Male and female
pictures were matched so that, for each group, they had
similar valence/arousal/dominance ratings and had a
similar content subject; for example, some snake pictures had different ratings between sexes within the
IAPS manual, so those images with lower valence/higher arousal ratings among the same category
were chosen. Given that picture ratings in all categories
differed between sexes, this method allowed more consistency in mean measured quantitative ratings among
participant sexes.
Table 1. The IAPS images used in the experiment.
Picture-Set
NegativeMale
NegativeFemale
NeutralMale
NeutralFemale
PositiveMale
PositiveFemale

Picture Numbers
1050, 1202, 1220, 1304, 1525
1050, 1120, 1201, 1202, 1525
1670, 7006, 7010, 7080, 7175
1670, 7004, 7010, 7012, 7175
4180, 4210, 4232, 4664, 8501
4505, 4525, 4660, 8001, 8501

Procedure
Before participating in the study, all participants read
and signed a consent form approved by the Office of
Research Protections (ORP) at Penn State. After consenting to the form, all participants filled out a Positive
and Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS) questionnaire.
All participants who had their EDA recorded were then
fitted with a Q sensor EDA device (Ming-Zher et al.,
2010).
Each participant was assigned to one of three groups
that determined which set of images they were shown:
(a) a negative image group that consisted of images

1873

provement would also differ between groups. A 3 (image group) x 5 (block) mixed-model ANOVA for score
revealed a statistically significant block factor, showing
that learning occurred (𝐹 4,360 = 13.22, 𝑝 <
.0001, 𝜂4. = .13), but did not show a statistically significant block:group interaction (𝐹(8,360) = 0.40, 𝜂4. =
.01).

Post-hoc Analysis
Additional analysis of the data indicated that participant sex was a behavioral factor. Figure 1 shows mean
cumulative scores by group for both males and females.
The distribution of mean scores on the task among
groups is mirrored between males and females; the
mean cumulative score for the positive group among
females (−2.4) is closer to the negative group mean
cumulative score in male participants (−3.4) than the
positive group mean score in male participants (11.6).
Male

Female

15

10

Cumulative Score

with a low rated valence, and a high arousal; (b) a neutral image group that consisted of images with a medium rated valence and a low arousal (c) a positive image
group that consisted of images with a high rated valence and a high arousal.
In this version of the IGT, participants had a maximum of 3.5 seconds to select a card from one of the
four decks and if they failed to make a selection in the
allotted time on any trial, a random deck was selected
for them. After a card was selected from a deck, a red
or black card was shown for 4 seconds. A (groupdependent) image was shown in place of the background image of the box where the reward and losses
were shown for 17 ms when the participant selected
from deck A or B. If the participant made a selection
from deck C or D, a plain gray background image was
shown for 17 ms. Directly after this 17 ms, the reward
and loss that the participant received in response to
their deck selection was presented in the same box for
3.5 seconds. All images used from the image set, as
well as the background image used throughout the task,
were converted to gray scale. Each intertrial break lasted 3.5 seconds, except every 20th trial, after each of
which the participant was asked two questions to assess
their awareness of the task itself.
After the IGT was completed, participants filled out a
second PANAS questionnaire and then (as needed) had
the EDA device removed. Participants were then asked
“Did you discover anything new by the end of the
game?” and were partially debriefed on the task itself.
Participants then completed the Affective Neuroscience
Personality Scales (ANPS) questionnaire and were fully
debriefed before ending the study session.

Group
Negative
5

Neutral
Positive

0

Results
To understand the results, we used both traditional
statistical techniques (e.g., one-way and repeated measure ANOVAs), as well as results from decision learning
models. While the ANOVAs were useful for understanding general differences between participant
groups, the decision-learning models allowed us to explore potential differences in the computational processes that may govern group differences.

-5
Negative

Positive

Negative

Neutral

Positive

Figure 1 Cumulative score for male (left) and female
(right) participants at the end of the task. (The error
bars represent the standard error means)

Analysis of Initial Hypotheses
We hypothesized that the score would be different
between the negative, neutral, and positive image
groups, and that performance would be highest in the
negative image group and lowest in the positive image
group. A one-way ANOVA for cumulative score (total
score at the end of the IGT) did not show a statistically
significant difference between groups (𝐹(2,90) =
0.81, 𝜂 . = .02). We also hypothesized that score
would improve over the course of the task (indicating a
learning of the advantageous decks) and that this im-

Neutral

A 2 (sex) x 3 (group) ANOVA for cumulative score
showed a marginally statistically significant sex:group
interaction (𝐹 2,87 = 2.77, 𝑝 = .07, 𝜂4. = .06). A
2x3x5 mixed-model ANOVA for score showed a statistically significant block factor (𝐹 4,348 =
13.55, 𝜂4. = .13) and a statistically significant
block:sex:group interaction (𝐹 8,348 = 2.12, 𝑝 =
.034, 𝜂4. = .05) indicating a difference in trends between sex:group pairs.

1874

Thus, we see that the effect of stimuli valence had an
effect on the cumulative score on this task, but that the
positive and negative valence images appear to have
different effects on men and women.

Using Decision-Learning Models
Though using methods such as those used above are
useful for finding differences between groups, simulations of decision-learning models can also be useful as
they allow one to explore theoretical aspects of the
computation leading to learning and decision-making
performance. We ran simulations of decision-learning
models to explore how different groups may have evaluated positive and negative payoffs (utility), how they
learned these utilities after experiencing them (learning
rule), and how these learned expectations may have
influenced participants’ actual choice (choice probability rule). This resulted in simulation parameter sweeps
on 8 total models (2 per category); each model was run
100 times during the parameter sweep using the MindModeling@Home cognitive research system.
Functions Used to Construct the Models The two
utility functions used were the expectancy utility
function (hereinafter referred to as EU) and the prospect
utility function (hereinafter referred to as PU). EU
contains a parameter meant to specify a model’s
attention to loss (𝑤 in eq. 1). Instead of assuming a
subjective utility that is linearly proportional to the
payoff amount, PU uses a non-linear function (e.g.,
Tversky & Kahneman, 1992) to better account for the
gain-loss frequency effect (whereby multiple small
losses have a larger effect on choice behavior than a
single loss equal to the sum of the smaller losses. In
(eq. 2) 𝑛𝑒𝑡(𝑡) represents the net amount gained (or lost)
on trial 𝑡, 𝑤 is a loss-aversion parameter, and γ governs
the shape of the equation.
𝑢 𝑡 = 1 − 𝑤 ∗ 𝑟𝑒𝑤 𝑡 − 𝑤 ∗ 𝑙𝑜𝑠𝑠(𝑡)
𝑢 𝑡 =

𝑛𝑒𝑡(𝑡)

B

– 𝑤 ∗ 𝑛𝑒𝑡 𝑡

∀ 𝑛𝑒𝑡 𝑡 ≥ 0
B

∀ 𝑛𝑒𝑡 𝑡 ≥ 0

(1)

𝐸G 𝑡 = 𝐸G 𝑡 − 1 + 𝛼 ∗ (𝑢 𝑡 − 𝐸G 𝑡 − 1 )

(3)

𝐸G 𝑡 = 𝛼 ∗ 𝐸G 𝑡 − 1 + 𝑢 𝑡

(4)

Finally, every model had one of two choice rules: trial-dependent and trial-independent. These rules define a
parameter that affects the probability of selecting a card
from each deck θ in equation 5. In this case, θ affects
the propensity to explore or exploit the problem space.
When the parameter is low, the model is more likely to
explore and select a random deck, and when it is higher
it will exploit its knowledge and be more likely to select
the decks that have a higher utility. The trial-dependent
rule (eq. 6) is affected by the number of trials which the
model has completed and the consistency parameter c,
while the trial independent rule (eq. 7) is only affected
by the parameter c (and thus static during the task).
𝑃 𝐷G 𝑡 + 1

= 𝑒L

Q
L M ∗ NP M
RST 𝑒

M ∗ NO M

(5)

𝜃 𝑡 = (𝑡 10)V

(6)

𝜃 𝑡 = 3V − 1

(7)

Model Results As one may predict from the human
results reported above, the models that best matched
human behavior differed between sex-group pairs. To
find the best matching models we calculated the R2 for
each model-parameter-set combination using the
proportions of cards selected from each deck during
that particular block (i.e., four proportions adding to 1.0
in each of the five blocks). This measure was chosen
because it allowed us to further specify how different
processes (i.e., models) may explain not only the
overall performance (i.e., score), but the proportions of
cards selected from decks in each block that define the
overall performance. Table 2 lists the top model (and
related parameters) for each sex-group combination.
Table 2. Models and corresponding parameters that best
matched each sex:group pair. Dec = Decay; Del =
Delta; TI = Trial Independent; TD = Trial Dependent.
All R2 (19) p < .01

(2)

For learning, the Rescorla-Wagner, or delta, rule
(Rescorla & Wagner, 1972) and the decay reinforcement rule (Erev & Roth, 1998) were used in separate
decision models. In the Rescorla-Wagner rule (eq. 3) α
represents a learning rate that determines the effect of
the the prediction error (the utility minus the current
expectancy). The same parameter provides a slightly
different representation for the decay reinforcement rule
(shown in e. 4). Here, the rule represents a recency parameter, which determines discount of past expectancy
when updating with the new utility. Both the delta and
decay rules are represented in Table 2 as Del and Dec,
respectively.

Sex:Group

Model

c

𝒘

𝜸

𝜶

R2

Male:Neg
Male:Neu

PU-Dec-TI
PU-Dec-TD

-9.25
-8.25

5.2
4.1

.35
.20

.15
.93

.87
.89

Male:Pos

PU-Del-TI

-1.50

.13

.00

.75

.88

Female:Neg
Female:Neu
Female:Pos

PU-Del-TI

-5.50

PU-De1-TI
PU-Dec-TI

-6.75

2.5
6.8
0.5

.65
.15
.25

.43
.30
.25

.87
.92
.89

-2.50

While there were varying parameters for all models a
variant of the prospect utility (PU) model showed the
greatest match to all of the sex:group pairs. The same
model had the highest R2 for the negative scoring per-

1875

formance group for each sex (females in the positive
group and males in the negative group). The
male:neutral group was the lone group pair to show the
highest R2 with a trial dependent model.

Discussion and Conclusion
These data indicate that the subliminal emotional
stimuli had an effect on decision-making. There appears
to be an important interaction between sex and emotional decision-making. Even though the stimuli were
presented subliminally and were non-integral to the
choices made, participants exposed to affectively
charged stimuli responded differently to the outcomes
of deck selections and performed better or worse on the
task, depending on sex and the valence of the stimuli.
We did not find statistically significant evidence for a
between group (negative, neutral, or positive) difference in IGT scores. However, we did find that there
were significant differences between groups for IGT
scores when factoring in participants’ sex. What’s
more, mean scores among males showed a trend opposite of females across groups. These results seem to
indicate that the stimuli had opposite effects on males
and females.
This may be due to these stimuli affecting portions of
the affect-memory coupling portion of the decisionmaking process that can go unnoticed without conscious reflection by the decision-maker. This seems
likely given the mirrored distributions, but with similar
performance between men and women in the neutral
group. Indeed, the simulation model results showed that
males in the negative group and females in the positive
group were similar to the same class of model.
Similar to the results from a previous study by Aïte et
al. (2013), the image-deck congruency also affected the
participant’s decision-making behavior, albeit differently in men and women. Though females exhibited a pattern similar to Aïte et al. (2013) with the cumulative
score for the negative image group being the highest
and the cumulative score for the positive group being
the lowest, males exhibited the opposite behavior and
the image effect was intensified. Indeed, a more recent
review points to a difference between men and women
in decision-making behavior during the IGT (van den
Bos et al., 2013). In the study presented here, women
perhaps showed more of an ability to integrate the additive negative signals from the stimuli to make more
advantageous decisions than the men; this explanation,
would also apply to men, making them more resilient to
the negative effects of the positive stimuli on taskperformance. The difference in this affective signal
integration may be partially due to the differences in
amygdala activity found in men and women (e.g.,
Cahill, 2006; Hamann et al., 2004). These differences
may have also led to a difference in memory processes

predominantly used to make decisions, as the differences in models (particularly learning processes) may
suggest. A decay-based learning rule would better lend
itself to a more hippocampal/declarative memory, timedependent (e.g., Anderson et al., 1999) emphasized
decision-making process.
While this study yields interesting and worthwhile
results, there were limitations in the study that restricted
the scope of analysis and discussion. Our study is
somewhat limited in that we were unable to compliment
the results with neuroimaging data (e.g., fMRI). Neuroimaging data could allow more comment on the neural process mediated reasons that we found a difference
in decision-making performance between groups that
was dependent on participant sex.
Furthermore, the model analysis could be expanded
in the future. Indeed, it may also be interesting to integrate an affective component into the simulations to
more directly account for the stimuli. This would allow
a finer analysis of the computational processes at work,
albeit with a more complex model.
The aim of this study was to better understand how
non-integral, subliminal stimuli may affect decisionmaking behavior and physiological responses during
decision-making. Though we found some expected
image-deck congruency effects, these were not as prevalent as originally hypothesized and participant sex also
played a role in how decision behavior was unconsciously moderated by the stimuli. More study is necessary to better understand how these unconsciously perceived stimuli are affecting the process of decisionmaking.
Nonetheless, this work provides evidence that nonintegral subliminal stimuli may affect decision-making
behavior at several points in the process depending on
stimuli characteristics relative to the decision-maker,
and reward and punishment contingencies present in the
series of decisions. The work also provides evidence
that methods of affective intervention during decisionmaking (e.g., presentation of an emotionally charged
image to an individual as a part of a decision to purchase an item) should take into consideration the potential effects of the stimulus on males and females. The
stimulus will likely have dissimilar effects and may
have completely contrasting effects on individual
choices based upon the sex of the decision-maker; this
could lead to unintended behavioral consequences.

Acknowledgements
This work was partially funded through support from
the Bunton-Waller Fellowship (CLD), the Alfred P.
Sloan Foundation Graduate Scholarship (CLD), and the
Pennsylvania Space Grant Consortium Graduate
Research Fellowship (CLD). The authors thank Jack

1876

Harris at AFRL (711 HPW) for his advice with regards
to using the MindModeling@Home platform.

References
Ahn, W., Busemeyer, J. R., Wagenmakers, E., & Stout,
J. C. (2008). Comparison of decision learning models
using the generalization criterion method. Cognitive
Science, 32(8), 1376-1402.
Aïte, A., Borst, G., Moutier, S., Varescon, I., Brown, I.,
Houdé, O., & Cassotti, M. (2013). Impact of
emotional context congruency on decision making
under ambiguity. Emotion, 13(2), 177-182.
Anderson, J. R., Fincham, J. M., & Douglass, S. (1999).
Practice and retention: A unifying analysis. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 25(5), 1120-1136.
Bechara, A., Damasio, H., & Damasio, A. R. (2000).
Emotion, decision making and the orbitofrontal
cortex. Cerebral cortex, 10(3), 295.
Bechara, A., Damasio, H., Damasio, A. R., & Lee, G.
P. (1999). Different contributions of the human
amygdala and ventromedial prefrontal cortex to
decision-making. Journal of Neuroscience, 19(13),
5473.
Brainard, D. H. (1997). The Psychophysics Toolbox.
Spatial Vision, 10(4), 433-436.
Cahill, L. (2006). Why sex matters for neuroscience.
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 7(6), 477-484.
Dancy, C. L., & Ritter, F. E. (2017). IGT-Open: An
open-source, computerized version of the Iowa
Gambling Task. Behavior Research Methods, 49(3),
972-978.
Erev, I., & Roth, A. E. (1998). Predicting how people
play games: Reinforcement learning in experimental
games with unique, mixed strategy equilibria. The
American Economic Review, 88(4), 848-881.
Hamann, S., Herman, R. A., Nolan, C. L., & Wallen, K.
(2004). Men and women differ in amygdala response
to visual sexual stimuli. Nat Neurosci, 7(4), 411-416.
Lang, P. J., Bradley, M. M., & Cuthbert, B. N. (1997).
International Affective Picture System (IAPS):
Technical manual and affective ratings. The Center
for Research in Psychophysiology, University of
Florida. Gainesville, FL.
Lerner, J. S., Li, Y., Valdesolo, P., & Kassam, K. S.
(2015). Emotion and decision making. Annual
Review of Psychology, 66(1), 799-823.
Ming-Zher, P., Swenson, N. C., & Picard, R. W.
(2010). A wearable sensor for unobtrusive, long-term
assessment of electrodermal activity. IEEE
Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, 57(5),
1243-1252.
Moscarello, J. M., & LeDoux, J. E. (2013). The
contribution of the amygdala to aversive and

appetitive pavlovian processes. Emotion Review,
5(3), 248-253.
Öhman, A., & Mineka, S. (2001). Fears, phobias, and
preparedness: Toward an evolved module of fear and
fear learning. Psychological Review, 108(3), 483522.
Panksepp, J., Fuchs, T., & Iacobucci, P. (2011). The
basic neuroscience of emotional experiences in
mammals: The case of subcortical FEAR circuitry
and implications for clinical anxiety. Applied Animal
Behaviour Science, 129(1), 1-17.
Phelps, E. A. (2006). Emotion and cognition: Insights
from studies of the human amygdala. Annual Review
of Psychology, 57, 27-53.
Phelps, E. A., & Sokol-Hessner, P. (2012). Social and
emotional factors in decision-making: Appraisal and
value. In R. J. Dolan & T. Sharot (Eds.),
Neuroscience of preference and choice: Cognitive
and neural mechanisms. Waltham, MA: Academic
Press.
Rescorla, R. A., & Wagner, A. R. (1972). A theory of
Pavlovian conditioning: Variations in the
effectiveness of reinforcement and nonreinforcement.
In A. H. Black & W. F. Prokasy (Eds.), Classical
Conditioning II: Current Research and Theory. New
York, NY: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Ruiz-Padial, E., Vila, J., & Thayer, J. F. (2011). The
effect of conscious and non-conscious presentation of
biologically relevant emotion pictures on emotion
modulated startle and phasic heart rate. International
Journal of Psychophysiology, 79(3), 341-346.
Tamietto, M., & de Gelder, B. (2010). Neural bases of
the non-conscious perception of emotional signals.
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 11(10), 697-709.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1992). Advances in
prospect theory: Cumulative representation of
uncertainty. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 5(4),
297-323.
van den Bos, R., Homberg, J., & De Visser, L. (2013).
A critical review of sex differences in decisionmaking tasks: Focus on the Iowa Gambling Task.
Behavioural Brain Research, 238(0), 95-108.
Weber, E. U., & Johnson, E. J. (2008). Mindful
judgment and decision making. Annual Review of
Psychology, 60(1), 53-85.
Winkielman, P., Berridge, K. C., & Wilbarger, J. L.
(2005). Unconscious affective reactions to masked
happy versus angry faces influence consumption
behavior and judgments of value. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 31(1), 121-135.

1877

