Shaping the Dynamics of Category Learning in Infants and Adults
by Varying Learning Context
Jelena Sucevic (jelena.sucevic@psy.ox.ac.uk)
Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, 9 South Parks Road
Oxford, United Kingdom

Nadja Althaus (nadja.althaus@psy.ox.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, University of East Anglia, Norwich Research Park
Norwich, United Kingdom
Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, 9 South Parks Road
Oxford, United Kingdom

Kim Plunkett (kim.plunkett@psy.ox.ac.uk)
Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, 9 South Parks Road
Oxford, United Kingdom

Abstract
During the first year of life, infants develop a remarkable ability to
group objects based on their similarities and differences. This
ability of category formation represents one of the main
mechanisms underlying the organisation of the semantic system.
Early categories are formed spontaneously, in a non-supervised
fashion and this type of category acquisition remains present even
when more sophisticated forms of supervised category learning
emerge. Even though there are various models of categorisation
mechanisms across the lifespan, there is a gap in the research
investigating implicit categorisation at different stages of cognitive
development. Therefore, the aim of the current study was to
compare processes of spontaneous concept formation in infants
and adults using an experimental paradigm based on novelty
preference. We discovered that both infants and adults show
evidence of category learning (Experiment 1), though with
different amount of training being needed to achieve the task.
Adults successfully categorised objects already after a single block
of training. Infants reached a level comparable to that of adults
after twice the amount of training. As these tasks inevitably pose
different cognitive and sensory demands to the two groups, in
Experiments 2 and 3 we explored how varying parameters of the
learning context affect dynamics of category formation.
Decreasing memory demands of the task resulted in an
acceleration of infants’ category formation (Experiment 2),
whereas posing memory load in an implicit category learning task
decelerated adults’ dynamics of category formation (Experiment
3).
Keywords: categorisation, learning context, non-supervised
category acquisition, novelty preference, cognitive load, memory
demands, infants, adults, eye tracking

Introduction
The ability to group objects based on their similarities and
differences represents one of the main mechanisms
underlying the organisation of the semantic system.
Concepts “embody much of our knowledge of the world
telling us what things there are and what properties they
have” (Murphy, 2002, p. 1). Therefore, categorisation

ability is considered to be critical for the organisation and
stability of cognition (Mareshal & Quinn, 2001). The ability
to detect regularities in the environment and form categories
emerges early in development. At the age of 3-4 months,
infants already demonstrate the ability to differentiate
categories of dogs and cats (Eimas & Quinn, 1994), but also
to form abstract perceptual categories (Bomba & Siqueland,
1983). This ability becomes even more refined around ten
months of age when infants become able to shape categories
based on statistical regularities of category members
(Younger & Cohen, 1986).
In the domain of infant research, novelty preference is a
standard method employed to explore categorisation
processes. Typically, a familiarisation phase consisting of a
set of training items (for instance members of two
categories), is followed with a test phase where infants are
presented with two novel items, one belonging to the
familiarised category and one coming from a different
category. Under the assumption of novelty preference, i.e.
that infants look longer at the object that is perceived as less
familiar, differences in looking times are interpreted as an
index of category formation (e.g. Eimas & Quinn, 1994).
For instance, in a study exploring how infants form
categories based on correlational feature structure, two test
items are presented, one of them depicting an average of all
presented items and the second object representing a subcategory average of one of two categories that could be
formed (e.g. Plunkett et al., 2008). Infants who formed two
categories demonstrated preference for the novel out-ofcategory overall average.
Despite the fact that processes of implicit, non-supervised
category formation have been extensively studied in adults
as well as in different patient populations (Reed, Squire,
Patalano, Smith, & Jonides, 1999), there have been few
attempts to directly compare category learning processes in
infants and adults. One recent computational model of
categorisation offered an integrative account for infant and
adult category learning (the SUSTAIN model, Gureckis &

3267

Love, 2004). Initially developed as a model of adult
categorisation, the model proposes that mechanisms
underlying infant and adult categorisation are not
substantially different and assumes a continuous trajectory
of conceptual development. Two explanations are offered to
account for developmental differences – memory limitations
and stimulus encoding limitations (Gureckis & Love, 2004).
In order to empirically test these assumptions, in the present
study we developed an experimental paradigm for adults
providing similar learning conditions as employed in the
infant study. We aimed to address the question whether
there are shared mechanisms of spontaneous conceptual
organisation across the lifespan.
To parallel the visual familiarisation procedure used with
infants, we designed a task to explore implicit category
learning in adults where preferential looking was used as an
index of category learning, and which provided similar
learning conditions as those encountered in the infant study.
As infants were merely presented with a set of objects,
adults did not receive any explicit training or feedback on
category formation. The adult task was also designed to tap
into implicit, unsupervised category learning. As in the
infant experiment, we presented adults with a series of
objects as part of the familiarisation phase, followed by a
test phase in which two test objects were presented and
looking preferences were measured. Several studies using
visual paired-comparison procedure with adults have shown
that novelty preference can be used as an index of visual
recognition in adults (Richmond, Colombo & Hayne, 2007).
As the magnitude of novelty preference increases with
familiarisation time in object recognition (Richmond et al.,
2007), we propose that the same effect can be interpreted as
an index of category formation.
Even though the same type of experimental task was used
with both infants and adults, there are inevitable differences
in the demands to the two groups of participants this task
poses. Task difficulty and memory demands might lead to
differences in performance. One recent study has
demonstrated the importance of learning conditions in
altering categorisation in adult participants. Carvalho and
Goldstone (2014) showed that category structure influences
how efficiently category representations will be formed, and
that this effect is tied to the way in which category members
are presented. The authors conclude that there is categoryspecific attention allocation – simultaneous presentation
promotes attention to commonalities among objects, while
sequential presentation emphasizes differences among
objects. These studies suggest that categorisation cannot be
seen only as an extraction of abstract rules or computation
of feature statistics, but emphasize that the dynamics of
learning have an important role in category formation.
After discovering that adults and infants both showed
categorisation, but at different rates (Experiment 1), we
conducted Experiments 2 and 3 to investigate further which
factors are relevant for categorsation in these cases. In order
to explore how the context of learning affects category
learning, we varied the task difficulty and investigated its

effects on categorisation in infants and adults. Our
hypothesis was that decreasing the task demands will
accelerate category formation in infants (Experiment 2),
whereas adding an additional cognitive load to the task will
delay category formation even in adults (Experiment 3).

Experiment 1
The aim of the first experiment was to compare implicit
category learning processes in infants and adults. In
addition, we were interested in exploring the effects of the
amount of training on forming categories based on statistical
regularities, i.e. features correlations. Thus, three training
blocks were interleaved with three blocks in which category
formation was tested.

Participants
Thirty-two 10-month-old infants took part in this study (two
participants were excluded due to fussiness and refusal to
look at the screen). Participants were recruited at the local
maternity ward and all were full-term babies with no known
health conditions. All participants came from homes where
English was the only language spoken.
In addition, 24 adults took part in the experiment (mean
age = 23.67 years (SD=3.08)). Two participants were
excluded from the analyses (one due to calibration failure
and one due to eye-tracker track loss).

Stimuli
A set of novel objects was designed for the purposes of this
study. Coloured and textured 3D looking objects
represented novel creatures (called Sukis). As illustrated in
Figure 1, each Suki consisted of four features: body,
antennae, hands and legs. Each feature varied systematically
on a scale of seven dimensions (body shape, number of
antennae, hand size, length of legs), (see table 1). A set of
24 Sukis was designed in a way to resemble the structure of
objects used in several categorisation studies (Younger &
Cohen, 1986; Plunkett et al., 2008; Mather & Plunkett,
2011). Values of one feature were predictive for values on
other dimensions, thus inviting participants to form two
categories (defined as the narrow condition in Plunkett et
al., 2008). However, the range of potential dimensions each
feature can take was extended, thus instead of a range of 5
dimensions used in above mentioned studies, we introduced
7 potential variations of each feature.

3268

Figure 1. Examples of the Sukis: Subcategory average
objects

The reason for increasing the variability of the stimuli set
is to have the possibility to create test items made of
completely novel dimensions that have not been presented
in any instance during the familiarisation phase. Four
additional Sukis were designed to be presented as test items:
an overall average object (consisting of mean values on each
dimension, i.e. 4444), two subcategory averages (2222 and
6666). In addition, completely novel, out-of-category
objects which comprised of the same features as all objects,
but organized in a completely different manner were
presented in the final trials of the test phase. All objects
were depicted against a 5% grey background.
Table 1: Stimulus structure (first familiarisation set)
Stimulus
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

Category
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2

Antenna
1
1
3
3
5
5
7
7

Hand
1
3
1
3
5
7
5
7

Body
3
1
3
1
7
5
7
5

Legs
3
3
1
1
7
7
5
5

Procedure
Infants After written consent was obtained from a carer, an
infant was seated on a carer’s lap approximately 50 cm from
a 1920x1080 inch screen in a sound-proof experimental
booth. The parent was asked to keep their eyes closed for
the duration of the experiment. Data was recorded using a
Tobii TX300 Eye Tracker with a 120 Hz sampling
frequency and four point calibration. The study was run
with a custom Matlab stimuli presentation software
PresentMate based on the Psychophysics Toolbox. Infants’
behaviour was monitored via a centrally-located camera
above the screen. Trials were initiated by the experimenter
when the infant was attending the screen. Each
familiarisation block consisted of eight trials. Each trial
started with a presentation of an animated star in the central
location of the screen accompanied by a chiming sound for
the duration of 2000 ms. Following this, one stimulus (500 x
500 pixels) was presented in the central location for 6000
ms. As a previous study has shown that the order in which
stimuli are presented may affect category formation (Mather
& Plunkett, 2011), we calculated mean Euclidean distance
(as an average of seven distances between consecutive
objects) for all possible stimuli sequences (40320
sequences) and selected sequences that fall within the range
between the 40th and 60th percentile (8112 sequences).
Then, for each participant a particular sequence from this
pool was randomly selected. Three test blocks were
interleaved with learning blocks. In each test, after an
attention getter was presented for 2000 ms, two test objects
were presented simultaneously for 10 000 ms. The first two

trials were category formation test trials in which the overall
category average (object 4444) and a subcategory average
object (2222 or 6666) were presented. The positions of the
two objects were counterbalanced across the two trials. The
third test trial was always a novelty preference test in which
one of the learning items from the previous learning phase
was presented along with the novel, previously unseen outof-category object. The purpose of this trial was to check
whether infants were engaging in the task and expressing
the expected novelty preference. The choice of the
subcategory average object (2222 or 6666) presented in a
particular test block was balanced across test blocks. The
third test block was identical to the first test block for half of
the participants, whereas others saw identical items as in the
second test block. Which subcategory average object was
presented first was counterbalanced across participants.
Adults Participants were instructed they would take part in
a free viewing task so their only task would be to look at the
objects presented on the screen. After written consent was
obtained, participants were seated in front of the eye-tracker
and their eye-movements were recorded using 120Hz
tracking frequency. Upon completion of the experiment,
none of the participants reported they were aware what the
purpose of the experiment was. The experimental design
was kept as similar as possible to the infant version.
Participants were presented with 3 blocks of training, each
consisting of 8 trials. Each trial started with a centrally
presented fixation cross for 500 ms followed by a
presentation of a training items for the duration of 2000 ms.
Training blocks were interleaved with test blocks.
Analogous to the infant version, each test consisted of two
categorisation test trials and a novelty preference trial. After
the fixation cross was presented for 500 ms, test trials were
presented on screen for 3000 ms.

Results: Infants
Category Formation Test For category formation test
trials, preference scores were calculated for all trials by
dividing looking at the overall average object by total
looking time to the overall and modal object. A repeatedmeasures ANOVA with factors Block (1, 2 and 3) and Test
(1 and 2) showed no significant effects (all ps>0.05) 1.
Planned comparisons against chance were performed for
each test. Infants expressed a preference for the overall
average object in the second trial of the second test block
(t(25)=1.99, p<0.05), (Figure 2).
Novelty Preference Test To validate that infants’ behaviour
was driven by novelty preference, infants were presented
with the novelty preference test after each category
formation test block. Infants’ looking to the novel object
was divided by the total looking time and a one-way
1
Only participants who contributed to all trials were included in
this analysis

3269

ANOVA with Block as a within-subjects factor revealed no
effect of Block. Planned comparisons showed that infants’
preference for the novel object differed from chance only in
the second block (t(26)=2.58, p<0.05).

performance as adults. The observed differences in the
performance might be due to various factors related to
developmental differences. We hypothesize that one of the
main factors driving these differences are memory demands.
In order to compare an item presented during familiarisation
with a previously presented one, information about the
former items needs to be kept active in the working memory
for comparison with the currently presented item. This
might result in slower category formation in infants as it
takes more resources to perform in this task due to limited
memory abilities.
In order to test this hypothesis, we conducted the second
experiment in which we decreased memory demands of the
task by presenting familiarisation items in pairs. We
hypothesized that, if memory load is reduced, infants will be
faster in extracting category information.

Figure 2: Looking preferences in test

Experiment 2
Results: Adults
Participants
Category Formation Test Looking preference scores were
calculated in the same way as for infants. The proportion of
looking toward the overall average object was divided by
the total looking time to both overall and modal objects. A
repeated measures ANOVA with the within-subject factors
Block and Trial revealed a significant main effect of Block
(F(2,44)=3.07, p=0.05). Planned comparisons against
chance revealed that preference towards overall average was
significant only in the first block (t(22)=2.07, p=0.05),
whereas in the remaining does not significantly differ from
chance (p>0.05; Table 2).
Novelty Preference Test Participants exhibited preference
for the out-of-category object in all three novelty
preferences tests (no difference was found between 3
novelty preference trials).
Table 2: Mean looking preferences on test
(Experiment 1, Adults, SDs provided in brackets)
Block
1
2
3

Test
0.55 (0.17)*
0.51 (0.13)
0.47 (0.17)

Novelty
0.67 (0.22)*
0.67 (0.18)*
0.61 (0.20)*

Twenty-eight 10-months old infants took part in this study
(two infants were excluded from the later analyses due to
failing to reach minimum amount of looking time during
familiarisation).

Stimuli and procedure
The stimuli set used in this experiment was identical to the
one in Experiment 1. As opposed to sequential presentation
in the first experiment, familiarisation items were presented
in pairs. A total of four trials were presented in each
learning block. Following the presentation of an attention
getter, two objects were presented simultaneously for 12
000 ms. Pairs of objects were selected based on sequences
used in the sequential condition. Namely, each sequence
used in Experiment 1 had a corresponding paired sequence
in Experiment 2. It is important to note that despite the
difference in the number of trials in each learning block, the
total duration of learning blocks was identical across the two
experiments.

Results

Experiment 1: Discussion
Results of Experiment 1 have shown that both infants and
adults show evidence of category formation based on
feature correlations in a free viewing task. In addition, this
experiment revealed that paradigms based on novelty
preference might be a useful tool in studying non-supervised
category learning in adults. The results also showed that
infants were slower in forming categories requiring a greater
amount of familiarization to demonstrate similar level of

Category Formation Test For category formation test
trials, preference scores were calculated for all trials by
dividing looking at the overall average object by total
looking time to the overall and sub-category average object.
A repeated measures ANOVA with factors Block (1, 2 and
3) and Test (1 and 2) revealed a main effect of Block (F(2,
36)=3.15, p<0.05) (only participants who contributed to all
trials were included in this analysis, N=19). As there was no
main effect of Trial, we averaged performance in the two
test of the same block and performed planned comparisons.
Performance in each block was compared against chance
and we found that preference for the overall average object
was significantly above the chance in the first block

3270

(t(25)=2.91, p<0.01), whereas in the remaining two blocks
preference did not significantly differ from chance (mean
preference values and dispersion are depicted in Table 3).

All participants were right handed and had normal or
corrected-to-normal vision. Prior to taking part in the
experiment, all participants signed an informed consent and
upon experiment completion received course credits for
their participation.

Novelty Preference Test To validate that infants’ behaviour
in test trials was driven by novelty preference, following
each category formation test block, infants were presented
with the novelty preference test. A one-way ANOVA with
Block as a within-subjects factor revealed a near significant
effect of Block (Greenhouse-Geiser F(2, 38)=0.76, p=0.06).
Planned comparisons revealed that infants’ preference for
the novel object differed from chance only in the first block
(Wilcox signed rank test: V=242, p<0.05).

Stimuli and Procedure

Table 3: Mean looking preferences on test (Experiment 2,
SDs provided in brackets).
Block
Test
Novelty
1
0.57 (0.12)*
0.63 (0.26)*
2
0.46 (0.18)
0.48 (0.29)
3
0.49 (0.14)
0.60 (0.27)

Experiment 2: Discussion
Experiment 2 revealed that the dynamics of infants’
category formation can be shaped by varying the parameters
of the learning context. Decreasing memory demands in the
task leads to a boost in extracting category relevant
information. Infants’ faster learning was also resembled in
the fact that they demonstrated novelty preference already in
the first test. Diminished novelty preference in the following
tests and well as a larger attrition rate suggests that infants
learned faster and then disengaged from the task. We
conducted Experiment 3 to investigate whether increasing
memory demands would lead to a decrease in the speed of
category formation in adult participants. For the purpose of
investigating implicit category learning in adults we adapted
the N-back task, which is typically used in studies of
working memory. Infants in the sequential condition were
presented with one object at a time and had to mentally
compare objects that were presented. Thus, we used a 1back version of the task and investigated whether
participants spontaneously form categories under higher
cognitive load conditions. If this incidental categorisation
occurs, we expect that participants will judge betweencategories pairs faster than they would judge withincategory comparisons. Having perceptual similarity and
semantic distance between to-be-compared items controlled,
we predict that differences in the discrimination speed might
reflect processes of categorisation.

Experiment 3

An identical stimuli set to the one in Experiments 1 and 2
was used in this study. The experiment consisted of seven
blocks. Each block had two parts. A total of 36 learning
trials were presented in the first part, and 10 test trials in the
second part of each block. The order of presentation was
pseudorandomised within each block. In order to balance
the number of “identical” and “different” responses,
participants were instructed to give a response only for
probed trials, where a red dot would appear in the centre of
the screen. In the learning part, there were 16 “different”
comparisons (and an equal number of “identical”), half of
which were within category, whereas the other half crossed
the category boundary. In the test part, there were four
“identical” and four “different” comparisons. While visual
similarity and semantic distance (expressed through
Euclidean distance) between the two compared objects was
identical, some pairs crossed the category boundary (33335555), one pair was on the boundary (4444-6666) and some
pairs were within the same category (1111-3333, 55557777).

Results
In order to explore whether there is a difference in reaction
times for between and within category judgments during the
course of the experiment, growth curve analysis (Mirman,
2014) was used. Mean reaction times in each test block are
presented in the Figure 3. The reaction time in mismatch
trials were modeled using a linear growth curve model with
a fixed effect of mismatch type (within-category and
between-categories comparison) on the intercept and slope
terms and random effects of participants on the intercept and
slope to model individual differences in initial speed and
rate of change. The fixed effect was added to the base model
and its’ effect on model fit was evaluated using model
comparisons. All analyses were carried out in R version
3.3.1 using the lme4 package (version 1.1-12). There was a
significant effect of mismatch type on the intercept
(χ2(1)=4.13, p<0.05) suggesting that participants responded
faster when comparing items from different categories as
opposed to performing within-category comparisons. This
result suggests that participants organised items into two
separate categories which resulted in making members of
the same category look more similar than items belonging to
different categories, even though perceptual similarity for
both types of comparisons was identical.

Participants
Twenty-four participants, students at Oxford University
took part in this study (mean age = 23 years (SD= 2.54)).

3271

References

Figure 3. Mean reaction time across 7 test blocks

General Discussion
Taken together, the results of the experiments reported in
this paper demonstrate how changing parameters of the
learning context affect the dynamics of category learning in
infants and adults. Experiment 1 provided evidence that
both infants and adults can form categories in a free-viewing
task, though it takes a different amount of exposure to
succeed. Infants showed evidence of category formation
after two blocks of familiarisation, whereas adults reached a
similar level already after one training block. In addition,
this experiment suggests that experimental paradigms based
on novelty preference, the standard approach in infant
research, can be used to explore non-supervised category
learning in adult population as well.
Findings obtained in the second and the third experiment
suggest that changing the task difficulty can accelerate
(Experiment 2) or decelerate (Experiment 3) the process of
extracting category relevant information for infants and
adults, respectively. That the task structure can modulate
infants’ learning is further confirmed by the significant
interaction between Experiment (1 and 2) and Block (1, 2
and 3) in a combined analysis (F(2, 66)=4.518, p<0.05). The
finding that paired presentation leads to faster category
formation in infants is consistent with existing literature
suggesting positive effects of comparison on learning and
memory (Oakes & Ribar, 2005). In addition, the results of
Experiment 3 with adults also suggest that increasing the
load impedes category formation. Initially developed to
explain cross-modal effects of labels on categorisation, the
perceptual load hypothesis can also offer a way of
interpreting the obtained results (Plunkett, 2010). This
hypothesis assumes that extraction of statistical information
during category formation is also dependent on the
perceptual load required to process individual stimuli and
not exclusively on the feature correlations alone. Paired
presentation may represent an optimal amount of available
information for category formation in infants. Alternatively,
it might be the case that the invitation to compare stimuli is
contributing to the modulations of category learning. Future
research needs to explore does manipulating load in other
ways would result in a similar modulations of learning
timecourse.

Bomba, P. C., & Siqueland, E. R. (1983). The nature and
structure of infant form categories. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 35, 294–328.
Carvalho, P. & Goldstone, R. (2014). Putting category
learning in order: Category structure and temporal
arrangement affect the benefit of interleaved over
blocked study. Memory and Cognition, 42, 481495.
Eimas, P. D., & Quinn, P. C. (1994). Studies on the
formation of perceptually based basic-level
categories in young infants. Child Development,
65, 903–917.
Gureckis, T. & Love, B. C. (2004). Common Mechanisms
in infant and adult category learning. Infancy, 5,
173-198.
Mareshal, D. & Quinn, P. (2001). Categorization in Infancy.
Trends in Cognitive Science. 5(10), 443-450.
Mather, E. and Plunkett, K. (2011). Same items, different
order: Effects of temporal variability on infant
categorization. Cognition, 119(3), 438 - 447.
Mirman, D. (2014). Growth curve analysis and visualization
using r. Taylor & Francis.
Murphy, G. L. (2002). The Big Book of Concepts.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Oakes L. M., Ribar R. J. (2005). A comparison of infants’
categorization
in
paired
and
successive
presentation familiarization tasks. Infancy 7, 85–
98.
Plunkett, K. (2010). The role of auditory stimuli in infant
categorization. In L. M. Oakes, C. H. Cashon, M.
Casasola, & D. H. Rakison (Eds.),Infant perception
and cognition: Recent advances, emerging
theories, and future directions(pp. 203–221). New
York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Plunkett, K., Hu, J.-F., & Cohen, L. B. (2008). Labels can
override perceptual categories in early infancy.
Cognition, 106, 665–681.
Reed, J., Squire, L., Patalano, A., Smith, E. & Jonides, J.
(1999). Learning about categories that are defined
by object-like stimuli despite impaired declarative
memory. Behavioral Neuroscience, 1, 113, 073507044.
Richmond, J., Colombo, M., & Hayne, H. (2007).
Interpreting performance in the visual pairedcomparison
task. Journal
of
Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 33,
823-831.
R Core Team (2012). R: A language and environment for
statistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical
Computing, Vienna, Austria. ISBN 3-900051-07-0.
Younger, B. A., & Cohen, L. B. (1986). Developmental
change in infants’ perception of correlations among
attributes.Child Development, 57, 803–815.

3272

