The relationship between self-control in intertemporal choices and the control of
egocentric during perspective taking
Garret O’Connell (garret.connell@hu-berlin.de)
Berlin School of Mind & Brain, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin,
Unter den Linden 6, 10099 Berlin, Germany

Bhismadev Chakrabarti (b.chakarbarti@reading.ac.uk)
School of Psychology and Clinical Language Sciences,
University of Reading, Reading RG6 6AL, UK

Chun-Ting Hsu (hsuchunting@gmail.com@reading.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Pennsylvania State University
460 Moore Building, University Park, PA 16802

Anastasia Christakou (a.christakou@reading.ac.uk)
School of Psychology and Clinical Language Sciences,
University of Reading, Reading RG6 6AL, UK

Isabel Dziobek (isabel.dziobek@hu-berlin.de)
Berlin School of Mind & Brain, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin,
Unter den Linden 6, 10099 Berlin, Germany
Abstract
We infer the thoughts and feelings of other people by taking
their perspectives, the accuracy of which depends on abilities
to control egocentric bias. Similar processes could arguably
be used to understand how we would be affected by future
events, such as delayed rewards in intertemporal decisions, by
allowing us to accurately take the perspective of future selves.
In this paper, we test this idea in two studies. In Study 1, we
attempted to lower preferences for delayed rewards to
examine if this redced abilities to control egocentric bias in a
visual perspective-taking task. In Study 2, we examined the
neural overlap in intertemporal decision-making and the
control of egocentric bias in a false-belief theory-of-mind
task. In both studies, a positive relationship was identified
between behavioural and neural markers of egocentric bias
control and preferences for delayed rewards. The overall
pattern of results suggest the overlap in processes of
egocentric bias control and those that determine preferences
in intertemporal choices, and demonstrate for the first time
the effect of sexual arousal on social cognition in reducing
abilities to separate one’s own perspective from others’.
Keywords: intertemporal choice, temporal discounting,
egocentric bias, perspective-taking, temporoparietal junction

Introduction
The ability to see the world from different perspectives,
imagining the thoughts or feelings that might occur in us
and others in a variety of situations, is highly useful. It helps
to take the perspectives of others to understand and interact
effectively with them. This ability is also useful in an
intertemporal context, for instance, when faced with
decisions or events with delayed consequences, we typically
shift our own perspective into the future to assess how these
might impact us later. The relationship between these

capacities for taking the perspectives of others and future
selves has previously been speculated (see Jamison &
Wegener, 2010; Mitchell et al., 2011; Buckner & Carroll,
2007), but it is still unclear if and how they overlap. To
investigate this, we previously laid out an empiricallygrounded framework to make plausible hypotheses of how
these capacities relate to each other (O’Connell et al., 2015),
called the Simulation-based Model of Intertemporal
Preferences (SMIP).
The SMIP uses the phenomenon of temporal discounting
to illustrate how perspective-taking abilities might underlie
the perception of future events. Temporal discounting
describes how when making choices between rewards to be
received now or larger rewards later, the delayed larger
reward decreases in subjective value when its receipt is
delayed further in the future, leading to smaller but
immediate rewards being preferred, and the rate of which is
indexed by the steepness of the “discounting curve”.
One way the accuracy of perspective-taking can become
compromised is through the false presumption that other
people think or feel the same way as we do, an error called
egocentric bias, as measured using false-belief theory-ofmind (ToM) tasks. Neuroimaging studies of psychiatric
patients and children have found that better control of
egocentric bias during ToM judgments corresponds to
stronger coinciding neural activity in the right
temporoparietal junction (rTPJ) (Gweon et al, 2012; Kana et
al., 2009; Dodell-Feder et al, 2013). Further reports indicate
the rTPJ is preferentially activated for false beliefs that
require egocentric bias control, and not true beliefs
(Hartwright et al., 2012; Sommer et al., 2007), specifying

2815

the role of this region in egocentric bias control, and not
general capacities of perspective-taking.
The SMIP hypothesizes that intertemporal choices
situations are analogous to social situations in which
perspective-taking occurs, in how there is a target
perspective to be inferred, and an egocentric perspective
which needs to be controlled for. The SMIP argues that
from one’s current egocentric perspective, delayed rewards
have to be waited for to be received, and therefore incur
costs-of-waiting that diminishes their subjective value. In
contrast, from the perspective of one’s future self, there is
no cost of waiting because they are at the right point in time
to receive the reward instantly. Controlling this egocentric
bias when taking the perspective of the future self should
therefore lead to delayed rewards being preferred more,
leading to less steep temporal discounting. The SMIP
further explicitly predicts the rTPJ as one of the key nodes
for control of egocentric bias during both perspective-taking
and intertemporal choices. Note these are only a few of the
mechanisms and predictions outlined in the SMIP which are
relevant to the current study (for further information see
O’Connell et al., 2015).
A recent paper from Soutschek et al. (2016) provides
direct support for this neural overlap hypothesized by the
SMIP. In two studies, repetitive transcranial magnetic
stimulation (TMS) was administered to participants’ rTPJ
regions to disrupt its function. It was found that both the
degree of egocentric bias exhibited by participants in a
visual perspective-taking task, and preferences for
immediate over delayed reward choices in a temporal
discounting task, were both subsequently increased.
Furthermore, a positive relationship between egocentric bias
and immediate reward preferences was observed across
individuals. By demonstrating a relationship between
egocentric bias and increased temporal discounting, these
two findings can be explained by the SMIP framework.
In this paper, we tested the hypotheses of the SMIP by
examining the relationship between egocentric bias control
and temporal discounting in two studies: 1) examining the
effect on one process when the other is experimentally
manipulated, 2) examining their neural overlap using fMRI.

Study 1: Sexual Arousal Manipulation
In Study 1, instead of brain stimulation as per Soutschek
et al. (2016), we attempted to increase the steepness of
temporal discounting psychologically by inducing sexual
arousal with erotic images, which multiple reports indicate
is reliable means of increasing the steepness of temporal
discounting (Kim & Zauberman, 2013; Van den Bergh,
Dewitte, & Warlop, 2008; Wilson & Daly, 2004). Sexual
arousal is thought to lead to steeper temporal discounting by
causing a generalized state of desire, in which the
immediacy of a reward overshadows its objective value. For
a comparison control, equally arousing sports images were
used, as per Kim & Sauberman (2013). The Director task
was used to index control of egocentric bias.

Methods
Participants and procedure
Heterosexual German speaking males were recruited (n =
90, range 19-59 years, mean 29.3) performed tasks in the
following order: 1) temporal discounting (baseline), 2)
visual perspective-taking Director task, 3) temporal
discounting
(manipulation-check),
4)
Continuous
performance task (CPT). After task 1) the impulsivity
manipulation was initiated, where in separate groups
participants viewed either erotic or arousal-matched sports
images for 8 s, which occurred every trial of the Director
task, 6 trials of the temporal discounting task, 13 trials of
the CPT, for an average of one image every 14 s.

Temporal discounting (baseline)
Participants made intertemporal choices between a
variable amount of money now (< 100€) or 100€ at one of
four randomly selected delays (months: 1, 3, 6, 12). The
amount of immediate options and indifferences-points were
calculated using the double-limits algorithm, and temporal
discounting rates (k) were estimated by fitting a hyperbolic
non-linear model to each participant’s indifference-points

Director task
In the Director task, participants move objects around a
set of shelves as instructed by a “director” standing on the
opposite side, but to take into account that some objects
cannot be seen by the director because they are occluded
from their side of the shelf. This requires the participant to
control for egocentric information from their own viewpoint
when inferring the director’s. The Director task was
computerized with a real person in the role of director, and
the impression of actual shelves was created by positioning
the participant’s screen back-to-back with the director’s. A
previously used eye-gaze metric of egocentric bias was used
- the average dwell time (sum of 100 ms fixations) to
distractor objects, a basic index of how much the distractor
object (the correct object from the participant’s egocentric
viewpoint) was considered as the correct option.
Participants’ heads were placed in a chin-rest positioned
in front of an Eye-tribe 30 Hz eye-tracker. Trials began with
a fixation cross when the experimenter read aloud a scripted
instruction, then pressed a key to present the shelves on
screen. Instructions in experimental trials referred to
distractor objects on dimensions of spatial (e.g. “move the
top ball” could refer to a higher hidden ball), size (e.g.
“move the large ball” could refer to a larger hidden ball), or
semantic (e.g. “move the mouse” could refer to a computer
mouse or a hidden toy mouse). In control trials instructions
referred to objects without competing referent. 30 trials
were performed (24 experimental, 6 control), featuring 9
sets of 6 objects, presented in a fixed randomized order.

Temporal discounting task (manipulation-check)
Participants performed intertemporal choices a second
time to check the sexual arousal manipulation. Immediate

2816

reward options were present from ranges (±10€) around
participants’ baseline indifference points in 32 trials.
Changes in temporal discounting were estimated as valueweighted changes from baseline temporal discounting.

Continuous Performance Task (CPT)
The CPT measures general attention to test possibility
that erotic images affected egocentric bias by merely
distracting attention from task goals. Single digit numbers
were presented for 100 ms (1 s ISI), and participants had to
press one key following a sequence of 3-7 (average every 10
of 130 trials), and another key otherwise.

Results
Effects of sexual arousal manipulation
Note tests of the hypothesis were directional and
conducted at the 1-tailed level. In the Director task, dwell
time to the distractor object was significantly higher
following erotic (M = 317 ms, SE = .18) images versus
sports images (M = 270 ms, SE = .17), t(88) = 1.9, p = .032,
d = .4 (Figure 1B), an effect not observed in control trials,
t(88) = .043, p = .97. Although changes from baseline
temporal discounting were ordinally higher following erotic
(M = 1.5, SE = 3.3) compared to sports (M = -.6, SE = 3.6)
images, this difference was not significant, t(88) = .44, p =
.33. There was no significant difference in error rates in the
CPT task between the erotic (M = 5%, SE = .02) or sports
(M = 2%, SE = .01) image groups, t(88) = 1.3, p = .18.

Relationship between egocentric bias and temporal
discounting
A linear regression was used to model the relationship
between baseline temporal discounting rates and egocentric
bias, controlling for the influence of group. The model
found that after controlling for the group factor (B = -.524, t
= -2.11, p = .038), temporal discounting was a significant
positive predictor of egocentric bias (B = .316, t = 2, p =
.048). Note, data from the second temporal discounting task
could not be used for this form of analysis because in this
task, choice options were pre-determined from baseline, and
not the double-limits algorithm which is required to reliably
estimate new temporal discounting rates (Figure 1A).

Discussion
In support of the hypothesis, it was found that people who
exhibited steeper temporal discounting were also more
susceptible to egocentric bias. Also in line with this view,
egocentric bias was higher following erotic stimuli, which
although previously reported to lead to steeper temporal
discounting, was not specifically observed here.
Contrary to previous findings, sexual arousal from did not
significantly alter temporal discounting here, limiting the
extent to which changes in egocentric bias can be attributed
to changes in self-control. One explanation for this null
finding is that the arousing effects of erotic images had
habituated by the second time the temporal discounting task,
after already 15 mins of repeated exposure to images. It’s
worth noting that in pilot data, where temporal discounting
was the first task performed, steeper temporal discounting
was found following erotic images compared to sports
images (n = 32, p = .05), giving some confidence that full
counterbalancing of tasks in this study would have increased
chances of observing effects of sexual arousal on temporal
discounting. However, this null effect still warrants caution
in interpreting the results.

Study 2: fMRI
In Study 2, we tested the relationship between egocentric
bias and temporal discounting using fMRI. If rTPJ activity
during perspective-taking is a correlate of egocentric bias
control, as hypothesized by the SMIP and suggested by
empirical evidence, then people higher in this marker should
prefer delayed rewards more during intertemporal choices.
To test this hypothesis, we used a false-belief functional
localizer task to extract activity in the rTPJ related to
egocentric bias control from each participant. We further
tested if activity in this rTPJ cluster was higher when
delayed rewards are chosen, as would be expected if
egocentric bias control reduces temporal discounting.

Methods
Participants and procedure
36 English speaking adults (21 female, aged 18-34 years,
mean 22.6) performed the following tasks in order: outside
scanner, 1) temporal discounting task; inside scanner, 2)
temporal discounting task, 3) ToM localizer task.

Temporal discounting (outside scanner)
Same as temporal discounting task (baseline) in Study 1,
except with pounds in place of euros, and using the
following delays (months: 1, 3, 6, 9, 12, 18).

Temporal discounting (in scanner)

Figure 1. A: Scatterplot of temporal discounting and
egocentric bias (residuals partialling out group effects). B:
Group differences in egocentric bias (error-bars: SE).

In the scanner, participants were presented with
intertemporal choices featuring three delays (months: 6, 9,
12). As in the temporal discounting task (manipulationcheck) in Study 1, immediate options were estimated from
participants’ temporal discounting data collected outside

2817

scanner in order to predict how participants would decide
and efficiently balance the number of trials in conditions of
immediate (IMM) and delayed (DEL) choices, this time
from value ranges ±£5-15 indifference-points. Trials
continued until 32 (balanced across delays) were collected
in which each immediate and delayed rewards were chosen
(the IMM and DEL conditions). Options were presented
together for 5 s, followed by a jittered ITI of 7-15 s.

fMRI temporal discounting acquisition and
analysis
25 out of the 36 participants performed the scanner
version of the temporal discounting task. Scanning was
conducted using a Siemens 3T Trio MRI scanner with an
EPI sequence of TR 3 s, TE 30 ms, 2 mm3 voxel size, and
35 interleaved 3 mm slices. Data were preprocessed using a
GLM in SPM8, with slice-timing correction, realignment
for motion correction, field map unwarping, and sequential
co-registration. We contrasted rTPJ activity in DEL > IMM
separately for each individual in their specific rTPJ ROIs
from the ToM task, by first registering individual rTPJ ROIs
to MNI space using FEAT, and the mean contrast values of
DEL and IMM conditions were then extracted.

Results
Data cleaning and sample selection
rTPJ clusters could not be localized for two participants,
and 2 participants were extreme outliers in the DEL vs.
IMM in the rTPJ ROI (Tukey’s interquartile range), This
threshold identified two cases for exclusion.

Correlation between egocentric bias control rTPJ
response and temporal discounting
A significant negative correlation was found between
temporal discounting rates k and rTPJFB, r = -.32, p = .03
(Figure 2) (lTPJFB, r = -.36, p = .02; precuneusFB, r = -.37, p
= .01), an effect still significant in the temporal discounting
scanning session subsample, r = -.36, p = .04.

False-belief ToM localizer task
The false-belief localizer task consisted of 10 stories
about other people’s beliefs (False Belief) or historical facts
(FACT). Each trial started with a blank screen for 12 s,
followed by the story for 10 s, and then a question screen
for 4 s, which required a “True” or “False” response.

Figure 2. Scatterplot of temporal
magnitude of rTPJFB activity.

discounting

and

fMRI temporal discounting results

fMRI ToM localizer data acquisition and analysis
Scanning was conducted with an EPI sequence of TR 2 s,
TE 30 ms, 2 mm3 voxels, and 37 interleaved 3 mm slices.
Using FSL, data were field map unwarped, pre-whitened,
motion corrected, slice-time corrected, and high-pass
filtered at 128 Hz and smoothed at 8 mm FWHM in native
space. False Belief and FACT trials were defined as the 14 s
of the story and question screens. Using FEAT, clusters
from the False Belief > FACT contrast were identified at
height threshold z = 2.3, cluster threshold p < .05, minimum
size 200 voxels, Gaussian Random Field FWER corrected.

A significant difference was found in individual rTPJ
ROIs in DEL > IMM, t = 2.06, p = 0.025 (Figure 3B).

rTPJ ToM localization procedure
An iterative threshold-adjusting procedure was adapted
from Mitchell (2008) to identify individual rTPJ clusters
related to false-belief processing. This procedure involved
increasing the height activation threshold of the False Belief
> FACT contrast in native space in steps of 10-1, starting
from p < 0.01 until a cluster in the rTPJ region was
identified 25-50 voxels in size. Percentage signal change in
participants’ individual clusters, hereafter referred to as
rTPJFB. For thoroughness of reporting, this procedure was
applied to other regions associated with ToM in the left
temporoparietal junction (lTPJ) and precuneus.

Figure 3. A: Overlaid individual rTPJ ROI clusters
(crosshairs at peak). B: Differences between choice
conditions in individual rTPJ ROIs (error bars: SE).

Discussion
In Study 2, we found two pieces of evidence in support of
the hypothesis that better control of egocentric bias reduces
steepness of temporal discounting. First, people exhibiting a
higher rTPJ response during false-belief judgments, a
putative neural marker of egocentric bias control, had less
steep temporal discounting. Second, responding in the same
rTPJ cluster involved in egocentric bias control was higher

2818

when delayed rewards were preferred over immediate
rewards when making intertemporal choices in the scanner.
Evidently, this interpretation of the results relies on a
reverse-inference about the rTPJ’s function of egocentric
bias control. Neural markers of egocentric bias control have
the advantage of being continuous, and more resistant to
ceiling effects that standard measures (e.g. false-belief
tasks) are often prone to, making them better suited for
measuring variability in healthy adults. Increased rTPJ
activity has been repeatedly shown to be associated with
higher ToM accuracy (Gweon et al., 2012; Kana et al.,
2009). Similarly here, despite ceiling effects in accuracy in
the current ToM data, a trending positive correlation was
noted between this accuracy and magnitude of rTPJ activity
(r=.23, p=.09), providing some behavioural support for the
function of rTPJ activity claimed here. Some studies with
children, who do not show the ceiling effects typically seen
in ToM tasks in adults, have shown positive links between
accuracy and preferences for delayed rewards (Launay et
al., 2015; Marchetti et al., 2014).
The exact function of the rTPJ in perspective-taking
remains an open question. Based on reports of the rTPJ’s
importance in focusing attention on distinctions between
self and others (e.g. in terms of preferences; Nicolle et al.,
2012), it has been proposed that this region helps avoid the
perceptual blurring of self and other perspectives that drives
egocentric bias (Brass et al., 2009). More generally, the
rTPJ has been claimed to be involved in orienting attention
towards task goals (Corbetta & Shulman, 2002). In any
form of choice, it could be argued that a goal to maximize
reward outcomes, irrespective of the time of receipt,
becomes activated. In intertemporal choices, delayed
rewards are larger, and hence, most relevant to this goal. In
contrast, immediate rewards could be considered
distractions that draw attention away from this goal, shifting
focus instead to the immediacy of enjoyment. This view of
rTPJ function would account for its observed increased
activation when choosing delayed rewards.

General Discussion
The effects in this paper are modest and mixed, but
support the view that temporal discounting is related to
abilities of perspective-taking, as hypothesized by the
SMIP. To sum up, in both Study 1 and Study 2, individual
differences in perspective-taking corresponded to steepness
of temporal discounting. In Study 1, an experimental
manipulation previously shown to led to steeper temporal
discounting was found to increase egocentric bias. However,
because of the null effect on temporal discounting itself, the
extent to which this egocentric bias can be attributed to
processes overlapping with temporal discounting is limited.
In Study 2, evidence for the SMIP was found in how
individually-localized neural markers of egocentric bias
control were higher when delayed rewards were preferred
over immediate ones. In all, these findings, provide
exploratory first steps in examining potential connections
between intrapersonal and interpersonal forms of cognition.

Such a connections has numerous theoretical and practical
upshots. Linking the fields of social cognition and
intertemproal decision-making would allow the benefits of
one (e.g. conceptual frameworks in social cognition,
mathematical models in decision-making) be transferred to
the other. Practically, it would suggest the potential of
temporal discounting as a continuous and fast index of
perspective-taking abilities in adults, which are currently
required in social cognition research.
To-date, the overwhelming amount of research in
intertemporal decision-making has restricted focus to the
concept of value, and inputs and outputs to its computation.
Increasingly, more concepts about how this value is
psychologically represented have come under study,
including future prospection (Kwan et al., 2015), and
feelings of connectedness with one’s future (Urminsky,
2017). The SMIP aims to extend this line of inquiry by
attempting to provide a mechanism for how these
representations are built, and why they degrade to cause
temporal discounting, parsimoniously based on mechanisms
that already underlie social abilities.
Sexuality is an integral social setting, but its impact on
perspective-taking abilities has not been tested before now.
The present finding thus furthers understanding of how an
everyday social context modulates mentalizing capacities,
which vital information for theories to build sufficiently
detailed descriptions of these processes (for similar work,
(Galinsky, Magee, Ena Inesi, & Gruenfeld, 2006; Kanske,
Böckler, Trautwein, Parianen Lesemann, & Singer, 2016;
Todd, Forstmann, Burgmer, Brooks, & Galinsky, 2015).
The current findings, along with those of Soutschek et al.
(2016), encourage further investigations of the overlap in
intertemporal choice and perspective-taking, but the noted
inconsistencies warn that conclusive evidence could be
challenging to find. One clear example of this is the
difficulty in detecting overlap in capacities that are
measured by tasks with vastly different structures and
demands. The results also flag sexual contexts as influential
to the ability to look past our own perspective to better
understand those of others, calling for further investigations
into this important but little understood topic. Future work
can test the generalizability of these effects in larger
samples, using different measures, especially ones that can
measure these capacities in more closely matched structures.

Acknowledgments
GOC received a scholarship from the University of Reading
and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin.

References
Brass, M., Ruby, P., & Spengler, S. (2009). Inhibition of
imitative behaviour and social cognition. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B,
Biological Sciences, 364(1528), 2359–2367.
Buckner R. L., Carroll D. C. (2007). Self-projection and the
brain. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 11 49–57.

2819

Corbetta, M., & Shulman, G. L. (2002). Control of goaldirected and stimulus-driven attention in the brain. Nature
Reviews Neuroscience, 3(3), 201–205.
Dodell-Feder, D., Tully, L. M., Lincoln, S. H., & Hooker,
C. I. (2013). The neural basis of theory of mind and its
relationship to social functioning and social anhedonia in
individuals with schizophrenia. NeuroImage: Clinical, 4,
154–163.
Galinsky, A. D., Magee, J. C., Ena Inesi, M., & Gruenfeld,
D. H. (2006). Power and Perspectives Not Taken.
Psychological Science, 17(12), 1068–1074.
Gweon, H., Dodell-Feder, D., Bedny, M., & Saxe, R.
(2012). Theory of mind performance in children
correlates with functional specialization of a brain region
for thinking about thoughts: Behavioral and neural
development in theory of mind. Child Development, 83,
1853–1868.
Hartwright, C. E., Apperly, I. A., & Hansen, P. C. (2012).
Multiple roles for executive control in belief–desire
reasoning: Distinct neural networks are recruited for self
perspective inhibition and complexity of reasoning.
NeuroImage, 61(4), 921–930.
Jamison, J., & Wegener, J. (2010). Multiple selves in
intertemporal choice. Journal of Economic Psychology,
31, 832–839.
Kana, R. K., Keller, T. A., Cherkassky, V. L., Minshew, N.
J., & Just, M. A. (2009). Atypical frontal-posterior
synchronization of Theory of Mind regions in autism
during mental state attribution. Social Neuroscience, 4,
135–152.
Kanske, P., Böckler, A., Trautwein, F.-M., Parianen
Lesemann, F. H., & Singer, T. (2016). Are strong
empathizers
better
mentalizers?
Evidence
for
independence and interaction between the routes of social
cognition. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience,
11(9), 1383–1392.
Kim, B. K., & Zauberman, G. (2013). Can Victoria’s Secret
change the future? A subjective time perception account
of sexual-cue effects on impatience. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 142(2), 328–335.
Launay, J., Pearce, E., Wlodarski, R., van Duijn, M.,
Carney, J., & Dunbar, R. I. M. (2015). Higher-order
mentalising and executive functioning. Personality and
Individual Differences, 86, 6–14.
Marchetti, A., Castelli, I., Sanvito, L., & Massaro, D.
(2014). Is a bird in the hand worth two in the future?
Intertemporal choice, attachment and theory of mind in
school-aged children. Frontiers in Psychology, 5.
Mitchell, J. P. (2008). Activity in right temporo-parietal
junction is not selective for theory-of-mind. Cerebral
Cortex, 18(2), 262–271.
Mitchell J. P., Schirmer J., Ames D. L., Gilbert D. T.
(2011). Medial prefrontal cortex predicts intertemporal
choice. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 23, 857–866.
Nicolle, A., Klein-Flügge, M. C., Hunt, L. T., Vlaev, I.,
Dolan, R. J., & Behrens, T. E. J. (2012). An agent

independent axis for executed and modeled choice in
medial prefrontal cortex. Neuron, 75(6), 1114–1121.
O’Connell, G., Christakou, A., & Chakrabarti, B. (2015).
The role of simulation in intertemporal choices. Frontiers
in Neuroscience, 9.
Sommer, M., Döhnel, K., Sodian, B., Meinhardt, J.,
Thoermer, C., & Hajak, G. (2007). Neural correlates of
true and false belief reasoning. NeuroImage, 35(3), 1378–
1384.
Soutschek, A., Ruff, C. C., Strombach, T., Kalenscher, T.,
& Tobler, P. N. (2016). Brain stimulation reveals crucial
role of overcoming self-centeredness in self-control. 2,
e1600992
Todd, A. R., Forstmann, M., Burgmer, P., Brooks, A. W., &
Galinsky, A. D. (2015). Anxious and egocentric: How
specific emotions influence perspective taking. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 144(2), 374–391.
Wilson, M., & Daly, M. (2004). Do pretty women inspire
men to discount the future? Proceedings of the Royal
Society B: Biological Sciences, 271, S177–S179.
Van den Bergh, B., Dewitte, S., & Warlop, L. (2008).
Bikinis instigate generalized impatience in intertemporal
choice. Journal of Consumer Research, 35(1), 85–97.

2820

