Silent gesture and noun phrase universals
Marieke Schouwstra, Simon Kirby, Jennifer Culbertson
Centre for Language Evolution
University of Edinburgh
Abstract
In this paper we investigate a hypothesized cognitive bias for
isomorphic mappings between conceptual structure and linear
order in the noun phrase. This bias has been proposed as a possible explanation for a striking asymmetry in the typology of
the noun phrase–linear orders which place the adjective closest to the noun, then the numeral, then the demonstrative, are
over-represented in the world’s languages. Previous experimental work has provided evidence that an isomorphism bias
affects English-speaking learners’ inferences about the relative
order of modifiers in an artificial language. Here, we use the
silent gesture paradigm to explore whether the isomorphism
bias influences spontaneous gestures innovated by participants
in a modality with which they have relatively little prior experience. We find that gesture string order largely conforms to the
same striking pattern found in noun phrase typology, supporting the role of the isomorphism bias in shaping the emergence
of language (and language-like) systems.
Keywords: silent gesture; noun phrase; word order; linguistic
universals; cognitive biases

Introduction
Linguists studying word order have long noticed striking differences in frequency among possible word order patterns.
Explaining why certain patterns are more common than others is a source of ongoing debate. On the one hand, these
typological differences may reflect evolved properties of human cognition. On the other hand, they may be the result of a
complex interplay between various non-cognitive factors: genetic and areal relationships between languages, social or cultural pressures, and accidents of history (Evans & Levinson,
2009; Dunn, Greenhill, Levinson, & Gray, 2011; Piantadosi
& Gibson, 2014; Ladd, Roberts, & Dediu, 2015).
In this paper we will investigate a well-known pattern in
language typology relating to the structure of the noun phrase,
using a experimental methodology that has not yet been applied in this domain, in which participants must improvise
gestures to communicate pictures or scenes. What we find
is a clear preference for gesture orders which conform to a
structural template that is found in the majority of languages.
These orders do not in general follow the typical linear order of noun phrases in their native language, English. Most
prominently, they often produce adjective gestures following
the noun. We argue that the results of our experiment reflect
the underlying conceptual structure of the noun phrase, suggesting a cognitive explanation for the typological pattern.

Universal 20 and the isomorphism bias
Greenberg (1963) formulated a number of typological ‘universals’, based on the relative frequency of syntactic patterns
in 30 different languages. Universal 20 concerns the Noun
Phrase, in particular the order of the noun and its modifiers.

It states that when any or all of the items (demonstrative, numeral, and descriptive adjective) precede the noun, they are
always found in that order. If they follow, the order is either
the same or the exact opposite (Greenberg, 1963).
In other words, the three most common NP orders according to Greenberg are Dem-Num-Adj-N (‘these five large
houses’), N-Dem-Num-Adj (‘houses these five large’), and
N-Adj-Num-Dem (‘houses large five these’). More recent
analyses, based on a larger set of languages have found that
of the three orders, N-Dem-Num-Adj does occur, but is far less
frequent than the other two (Cinque, 2005; Dryer, 2009).
To explain the difference in frequency between Greenberg’s two post-nominal orders (N-Adj-Num-Dem and
N-Dem-Num-Adj), Culbertson and Adger (2014) appeal to the
notion of isomorphism, present in some form in a number
of theoretical accounts of this universal (Cinque, 2005; Rijkhoff, 2004). In general, isomorphism refers to a transparent relationship between meaning and structure. To see how
this applies to the noun phrase, consider the distinct semantic contributions of the different modifier types (Culbertson
& Adger, 2014). Adjectives modify properties that are inherent to the noun, numerals group together these smaller units,
and demonstratives connect these grouped units to the external discourse.
In a complex noun phrase, the adjective is thus conceptually closest to the noun, followed by the numeral, and finally
the demonstrative. These relations determine constituency,
and can be seen, for example, in semantic scope. A numeral (like ‘five) takes scope over the noun+adjective unit
(like ‘large houses’); the meaning of the numeral applies to
the noun as well as to the adjective. Similarly, a demonstrative takes scope over a noun+adjective+numeral unit (such as
in ‘these five large houses’) to connect it to the discourse.1
These conceptual relations are illustrated in Figure 1.

Dem Num Adj

N

Adj Num Dem

Figure 1: The conceptual structure of the noun and its modifiers: the adjective modifies the meaning of the noun most
closely; the numeral takes scope over this unit; the demonstrative is conceptual most distant, taking widest scope.
1 There is in fact converging evidence from formal semantics,
syntax, and functional linguistics to support this analysis (Partee,
1987; Adger, 2003; Rijkhoff, 2004).

3095

Note that the conceptual structure does not fully determine linear order, rather there are several possible ways to
map structure to order, all of which preserve the underlying
relations between elements. For instance, Dem-Adj-N-Num,
Dem-N-Adj-Num, and Adj-N-Num-Dem can all be ‘read off’
the structure in Figure 1 directly, without perturbing the constituency relations. On the other hand, Adj-Dem-N-Num cannot be read off the structure directly, the only way to get this
order is to move Adj outside of its unit with N. There are in
fact eight ways of forming a structure-preserving string, these
are the isomorphic orders. They make up one third of the 24
possible ways of ordering Dem, Num, Adj and N.
Returning to the two post-nominal orders mentioned
above, N-Adj-Num-Dem and N-Dem-Num-Adj, we can
now see that isomorphism is a possible explanation for
the frequency asymmetry between them: the more frequent N-Adj-Num-Dem is isomorphic, while the infrequent
N-Dem-Num-Adj is not. More generally, isomorphic orders
tend to be more frequent than non-isomorphic ones, as shown
in Figure 2.

non-isomorphic. Participants chose isomorphic structures in
the majority of cases, suggesting that relative order of modifiers was inferred based on an underlying assumption of isomorphism rather than surface similarity to English.

Silent gesture: evidence from improvisation in the
lab
The findings of Culbertson and Adger (2014) are limited in
the extent to which they provide evidence for an isomorphism
bias reflecting a general property of human cognition, since
participants may have learned (through learning their native
language) at a more abstract level that surface order is isomorphic to conceptual structure. Recent work using the ‘silent
gesture’ paradigm offers a potential method for tapping into
biases in word order while bypassing the effects of prior linguistic knowledge. In silent gesture experiments, participants
with no knowledge of sign language are asked to convey information using only their hands and no speech. Existing
work using this method has mainly focused on basic word
order (sequences expressing information about who did what
to whom). This research has found that when participants use
silent gesture to describe simple transitive events, they do not
rely on the dominant order of their native language (GoldinMeadow, So, Özyürek, & Mylander, 2008), but instead take
the semantic properties of the event into account (Gibson et
al., 2013; Hall, Mayberry, & Ferreira, 2013; Schouwstra &
de Swart, 2014; Schouwstra, 2016).

Experiment 1
To investigate the isomorphism bias in a modality distinct
from participants’ previous language experience, we conducted an experiment in which adult participants used silent
gesture to describe pictures of objects modified in various
ways. We hypothesise that the ordering of these gestures will
conform to isomorphism, even when they do not reflect the
linear order of English Noun Phrases.

Materials, participants, and procedure

Figure 2: Frequency of NP structures: isomorphic orders are
all among the most common in this sample (Cysouw, 2010).
To investigate whether a bias for isomorphism plays a role
in language learning, Culbertson and Adger (2014) conducted
a series of experiments in which participants were trained
on an artificial language with simple noun phrases consisting of a noun plus a single modifier (either an adjective, a
numeral or a demonstrative). Participants were then tested on
complex noun phrases with more than one modifier (i.e., an
adjective and a demonstrative), which they had not seen before. For instance, participants who learned N-Adj and N-Dem
strings in the training phase were then prompted to construct a phrase containing all three elements. They could either choose N-Adj-Dem, which is isomorphic, or N-Dem-Adj,
which shares the modifier order of English (Dem-Adj) but is

We created a stimulus set consisting of images of groups of 4
or 5 (Num) shapes, which were either squares or triangles (N),
either striped or spotted (Adj), and appeared in a proximal or
a distal (Dem) location. Locations were represented by two
iPads on which the images could appear–one closer to the
participant, the other further away. Figure 3 provides example
images, and Figure 4 shows the position of the iPads relative
to the participant. The set of 8 different images, presented on
two different iPads, together formed 16 total items.
Participants (N=20, native speakers of English, no experience with sign languages) were seated across the table from
the experimenter, with the two iPads in front of them, as in
Figure 4. They were filmed using a Logitech webcam connected to a MacBook Air. Before starting the silent gesture
part of the experiment, participants were shown the full set
of stimuli as printed pictures. Subsequently, they were asked
to describe each stimulus item using only their hands, so that
someone watching the recording would be able to work out

3096

coded according to whether any isomorphism violations were
present. For this overall measure (contrary to what we did for
the modifier pairs) we did include strings that had modifiers
on different sides of the noun. Strings that excluded any of
the modifiers (such as N-Adj-Num) were excluded.

% Post−nominal

1.00

Figure 3: Example stimuli: ‘five striped squares’ and ‘four
spotted triangles’.

●

0.75
0.50

●

0.25
●

0.00
Adj Num Dem

Modifier type

Figure 5: Results of Experiment 1: Proportion of modifiers
placed post-nominally, by modifier type.
Figure 4: Experiment set-up. Note that the two iPads were
placed on the table, in front of the participant: one close to
the participant, and one further away.

AdjNum AdjDem

% Isomorphic

1.00

which of the images appeared on which screen. The stimuli
were presented twice in random order for each participant,
with a brief break after the first run of the stimuli (32 trials in
total).

Results
The videos were coded by identifying which of the gestures
indicated information associated with N, Adj, Num, or Dem.2
Occasionally, participants specified the spatial layout of the
figures. This information was invariably provided in addition to other gestures referring to the number or the object,
and was ignored for our coding purposes. In addition, some
gestures included combinations of two elements (e.g., N with
Adj). No relative ordering information can be determined for
combined elements, therefore these were excluded from relevant analyses. We focused on two measures in analyzing
this data: how were modifiers ordered relative to the noun
(were they pre- or post-nominal), and how were modifiers ordered relative to each other (were they isomorphic given the
position of the noun, or not). To code for isomorphism we
looked at each modifier pair that appeared on the same side
of the noun. For instance, a string N-Num-Adj-Dem would
be coded as non-isomorphic for Num-Adj, but isomorphic for
Dem-Num and Dem-Adj. Modifier pairs that were on different
sides of the noun were excluded from this part of the analysis as these do not provide information about isomorphism.
Finally, overall isomorphism for each full gesture string was
2 Note that we do not wish to make claims about the nature of the
gestural elements produced by participants, and use the linguistic
terms N, Adj, Num, and Dem for convenience.

NumDem

●

●

●

Post

Post

Post

Overall

●

●

Pre

any

0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00

Modifier position
Figure 6: Results of Experiment 1: Proportion of modifier
pairs conforming to isomorphic order, by modifier pair, in
pre- and post-nominal position, plus overall scope isomorphism (last column). The dotted line represents chance level.
Note that for overall isomorphism, chance level is at 0.33 (8
isomorphic orders/24 possible orders).
The typical order of English noun phrases is
Dem-Num-Adj-N. Analysis of overall rates of pre- vs.
post-nominal placement for each type of modifier reveal that
participants’ gestures deviate from pre-nominal order most
obviously when it comes to the placement of Adj. Indeed,
as shown in Figure 5, there was a strong preference for
post-nominal placement. By contrast for Dem, participants
preferred a pre-nominal position. Num fell in between. This
was confirmed by one sample t-tests comparing average
placement by participant to chance for each modifier type (t
= -0.2717, df = 18, p = 0.79 for Num, and t = -6.9561, df =
15, p <.001 for Dem; because Adj was used post-nominally
without exceptions, a t-test cannot be performed on that

3097

data).3 .
Turning to isomorphism, as Figure 6 shows, participants
had a strong tendency to provide gesture strings which conformed to isomorphic ordering for all modifier pairs. Importantly, this was the case both for pre-nominal and postnominal pairs. A one sample t-test confirms that proportions
of isomorphic word orders are significantly different from
chance (t = 65.1549, df = 15, p <.001).

either big or small (Adj), and appeared on a proximal or a
distal (Dem) location. The adjectives ‘big’ and ‘small’ were
chosen on the basis of their visual properties: when depicted,
the adjective information is not visually inside the object.
Moreover, we expected that these adjectives would lead to
fewer combined gestures, particularly with the noun (since
both likely require difference handshapes).5

Discussion

The procedure of the experiment was identical to that of
experiment 1, except for the number of trials: participants
(N=20, native speakers of English, no experience with sign
languages) described each of the stimuli once (16 trials in
total).
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25

●

●
●

0.00
Adj Num Dem

Modifier type

Figure 8: Results of Experiment 2: Proportion of modifiers
placed post-nominally, by modifier type.

Results

Experiment 2
To address the concerns pointed out above, and to further investigate the prevalence of post-nominal adjectives, we conducted a second silent gesture experiment, using different
stimuli, as described below.

Materials, participants, and procedure
Our stimuli consisted of line drawings of groups of 4 or 5
(Num) objects, which were either toothbrushes or pencils4 (N),
3 Different t-tests have different degrees of freedom. This is due
to the fact that not all data could be included for each test: some
participants produced only incomplete gesture strings.
4 Taken from: http://www.flaticon.com/packs/essential-set-2.

Figure 7: Example stimuli: ‘five large pencils’ and ‘four
small pencils’.

Post−nominal

Participants’ overwhelming preference for isomorphic order
in silent gesture strings provides support for a link between
cognitive biases and this typological tendency. A further surprising finding is that participants very consistently produced
post-nominal adjectives. This pattern is not dominant in the
native language of the participants (English), although it is in
fact more common typologically (Dryer, 2009).
However, two properties of our stimulus items suggest the
possibility that our results may not generalize to other Noun
Phrase types. First, the most common gesture order used by
participants was Dem-Num-N-Adj. This corresponds to the
physical layout of the information in each item: the iPad was
the outermost, largest element, the numeral information was
in some sense the next largest part of the scene, then the object shape itself, and finally, the adjective information (stripes
or spots) which was always inside the object (Figure 3). If
participants were starting from the outermost information and
proceeding in, then, our stimuli could have set participants up
to place the adjective after the noun.
Further, as mentioned above, some responses contained
gestures which combined information for two of the elements
present. For example, participants sometimes conveyed information about the numeral and the adjective simultaneously,
for example by repeatedly drawing spots or stripes (Adj) four
or five (Num) times. Such combinations were much more
likely to involve the adjective, making it impossible to determine either isomorphism (for Adj combined with other modifiers), or position relative to the noun (for Adj combined with
N) in a number of cases.
We therefore conducted an additional experiment using
stimuli in which the adjective is not depicted inside the object, and which discourage the use of combined gestures.

As in Experiment 1, we coded the videos by identifying
which portion of the gesture string indicated N, Adj, Num, or
Dem. From this we determined whether the modifiers were
placed pre- or post-nominally, and obtained isomorphism
scores for modifier-pairs as well as full strings. The results
show that although the proportions follow the pattern found
in experiment 1 (note, however, that the proportion of postnominal adjectives is no longer significantly greater than 0.5;
t = 0.5138, df = 18, p = 0.61). Additionally, there was again
5 Adjectives

can be incorporated in the noun in sign languages
(Sutton-Spence & Woll, 1999), and it is interesting that participants
in Experiment 1 sometimes did this as well, but for the purposes of
our experiment we wanted to discourage it.

3098

an overall preference to produce isomorphic structures: a
one-sample T-test confirms that the proportion of isomorphic
strings differs from chance (t = 5.7149, df = 16, p <0.001).6
However, this tendency was less deterministic than in Experiment 1.
Zooming in on the scores for different modifier pairs,
participants are less likely to produce isomorphic order for
Adj-Num combinations, in contrast to Experiment 1. When
these two modifiers were placed post-nominally, they were
no longer isomorphic (see Figure 9; t = 0.9077, df = 10, p =
0.39).
AdjNum

% Isomorphic

1.00

AdjDem

NumDem

●

Overall

●

●
●

0.75

●

●

0.50
0.25

●

0.00
Post Pre

Post Pre

Post Pre

any

Modifier position
Figure 9: Results of Experiment 2: Proportion isomorphic
orders, by modifier pair, plus overall scope isomorphism (last
column). The dotted line represents chance level. Note that
for overall isomorphism, chance level is at 0.33 (8 isomorphic
orders/24 possible orders).

General discussion
Isomorphism is a hypothesized cognitive principle proposed
to explain the way Noun Phrases tend to be ordered in languages of the world. Languages which obey isomorphism
are much more frequent than those which don’t. However,
given the many other factors likely to influence typological
distributions, evidence which explicitly links isomorphism
to a cognitive bias is needed. Previous experimental studies confirmed that isomorphism appears to play a role in the
kinds of inferences people make when learning an artificial
language with word order that differs from their native language (Culbertson & Adger, 2014). However, the linguistic
systems individual speakers of a given language know have
already solved the problem of going from a multidimensional
conceptual structure (see Figure 1 above) to a linear representation. In this paper, we investigated what happens when
people start ‘from scratch’ and improvise utterances in the
absence of a conventional system, by conveying information
presented as images using only their hands and no speech.
6 Because in this experiment, some participants produced English

orders, we ran a separate T-test on the orders that did not follow
English structure, and found that subset of the data to be significantly
more isomorphic than chance (t = 3.3347, df = 10, p <0.01).

This silent gesture paradigm has been shown to be a fruitful
way of investigating what happens when people are forced to
communicate without being able to use existing word order
conventions. However, previous work using this paradigm
focuses mainly on the order of major sentence constituents.
The structure of the noun phrase has never before been studied using silent gesture.
Our experiments showed that the gestures improvised by
participants to describe pictures with N, Adj, Num, and Dem information, are ordered in a way that is isomorphic to the underlying conceptual structure–adjective property closer to the
noun than numerosity, and distal/proximal location furthest
away. This result, combined with the fact that participants did
not simply use English NP order for their gestures, supports
the claim that a bias for isomorphism affects linear order independently of prior linguistic experience. This general bias
therefore plays a plausible role in explaining the frequency
distribution of NP orders across languages.
The clearest difference between the gesture orders participants provided and their native language experience is
in the placement of the adjective. Experiment 1 showed
an extremely strong preference to place the Adjective postnominally (unlike in English), and in Experiment 2, though
the placement was more variable, there was still no overall preference for pre-nominal adjectives. As mentioned
above, post-nominal adjectives are in fact more common
cross-linguistically, and this may represent a second active
bias. Interestingly, Adj and Num gestures in Experiment 2
showed no isomorphism bias,7 whereas they did in Experiment 1. One possible explanation for this may lie in the nature of the adjectives used in our two experiments. Adjectives
describing a texture were used in Experiment 1, while adjectives for size were used in Experiment 2. Size adjectives are
gradable (Kennedy, 2007), a property which affects the role
of contextual information in their interpretation: for gradable adjectives, context is needed to determine what counts,
e.g., as ‘large’ or ’small’. This closer connection to the context may make the adjectives in the second experiment less
conceptually tied to the noun. Perhaps relatedly, size adjectives are general argued to scope higher, relative to other
adjectives (Kemmerer, 2000), including ‘striped’ and ‘spotted’ (as reflected in their order: e.g., ‘small striped triangle’
sounds more natural than ‘striped small triangle’). An nonisomorphic order of a numeral and a wider-scoping adjectives
may thus be a weaker violation of isomorphism compared
to a lower-scoping adjective. Additional investigating with a
wider range of adjectives is needed to justify these claims.
Note however, that they are related to a similar finding in
Culbertson and Adger (2014), in which non-isomorphic orders were more likely to be chosen for structurally less distant modifier pairs (i.e., Adj with Num, compared to Adj with
Dem).
7 Participants were as likely to produce structures like N-Num-Adj
and Num-Adj-N as the isomorphic variants N-Adj-Num and
Num-Adj-N.

3099

Conclusion
The experiments reported here show that when people improvise gestures corresponding to simple pictures of objects
with different properties, numerosities, and locations, they order their gestures in a way that corresponds to the underlying
conceptual structure of these elements. This same structure
is respected by the majority of languages in the way they order elements in the Noun Phrase (nouns, adjectives, numerals, and demonstratives), suggesting that a cognitive bias for
isomorphism between meaning and linear order might shape
linguistic systems in this domain.
Experiments that use improvised silent gesture, like the
ones presented here, provides a window into the evolution
of linguistic systems. The method gives us an experimental
analog to real world situations in which language rules spontaneously emerge; for example, homesign (Goldin-Meadow
& Brentari, in press), emerging sign languages (Meir et al.,
2017) and early stages in spontaneous second (spoken) language acquisition by adults (Schouwstra, 2016). Accordingly, we believe that a fruitful line for future research will be
an investigation of the structure of the noun phrase in these
systems, providing an invaluable naturalistic complement to
laboratory experiments.

Acknowledgments
MS was funded by the British Academy.

References
Adger, D. (2003). Core syntax. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Cinque, G. (2005). Deriving Greenberg’s Universal 20 and
its exceptions. Linguistic Inquiry, 36(3), 315-332.
Culbertson, J., & Adger, D. (2014). Language learners privilege structured meaning over surface frequency. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 111(16), 5842–
5847.
Cysouw, M. (2010). Dealing with diversity: Towards an explanation of NP-internal word order frequencies. Linguistic
Typology, 14(2), 253–287.
Dryer, M. (2009). On the order of demonstrative, numeral,
adjective and noun: An alternative to Cinque. (Talk presented at Theoretical approaches to disharmonic word orders, Newcastle University, May-June 2009.)
Dunn, M., Greenhill, S. J., Levinson, S. C., & Gray,
R. D. (2011). Evolved structure of language shows
lineage-specific trends in word-order universals. Nature,
473(7345), 79–82.
Evans, N., & Levinson, S. C. (2009). The myth of language
universals: Language diversity and its importance for cognitive science. Behavioral and brain sciences, 32(05), 429–
448.
Gibson, E., Piantadosi, S. T., Brink, K., Bergen, L., Lim,
E., & Saxe, R. (2013). A noisy-channel account of
crosslinguistic word-order variation. Psychological science, 0956797612463705.

Goldin-Meadow, S., & Brentari, D. (in press). Gesture, sign
and language: The coming of age of sign language and gesture studies. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 1–82.
Goldin-Meadow, S., So, W. C., Özyürek, A., & Mylander,
C. (2008). The natural order of events: How speakers of
different languages represent events nonverbally. PNAS,
105(27), 9163–9168.
Greenberg, J. H. (1963). Some universals of grammar with
particular reference to the order of meaningful elements.
In J. H. Greenberg (Ed.), Universals of language (pp. 73–
113). MIT press.
Hall, M. L., Mayberry, R. I., & Ferreira, V. S. (2013).
Cognitive constraints on constituent order: Evidence from
elicited pantomime. Cognition, 129(1), 1–17.
Kemmerer, D. (2000). Selective impairment of knowledge
underlying prenominal adjective order: Evidence for the
autonomy of grammatical semantics. Journal of neurolinguistics, 13(1), 57–82.
Kennedy, C. (2007). Vagueness and grammar: The semantics
of relative and absolute gradable adjectives. Linguistics and
philosophy, 30(1), 1–45.
Ladd, D. R., Roberts, S. G., & Dediu, D. (2015). Correlational studies in typological and historical linguistics.
Annu. Rev. Linguist., 1(1), 221–241.
Meir, I., Aronoff, M., Börstell, C., Hwang, S.-O., Ilkbasaran,
D., Kastner, I., . . . Sandler, W. (2017). The effect of being human and the basis of grammatical word order: Insights from novel communication systems and young sign
languages. Cognition, 158, 189–207.
Partee, B. H. (1987). Noun phrase interpretation and typeshifting principles. In J. Groenendijk, D. de Jongh, &
M. Stokhof (Eds.), Studies in discourse representation theory and the theory of generalized quantifiers (p. 115-143).
Dordrecht: Foris.
Piantadosi, S. T., & Gibson, E. (2014). Quantitative standards
for absolute linguistic universals. Cognitive Science, 38(4),
736–756.
Rijkhoff, J. (2004). The noun phrase. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Schouwstra, M.
(2016).
Temporal structure in
emerging language: From natural data to silent gesture. Cognitive Science, 41(S4), 928–940. Retrieved
from http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/cogs.12441 doi:
10.1111/cogs.12441
Schouwstra, M., & de Swart, H. (2014). The semantic origins
of word order. Cognition, 131(3), 431–436.
Sutton-Spence, R., & Woll, B. (1999). The linguistics of
British Sign Language: an introduction. Cambridge University Press.

3100

