Similarities Between Objects in Analogies Framed by Schema-Governed Categories
Lucía Micaela Tavernini (MICAELATAVERNINI@Gmail.Com)
IPEHCS-CONICET-UNCo. Av. Argentina 1400, 8300 Neuquén
Department of Psychology, University of Comahue

Máximo Trench (MAXIMO.TRENCH@Crub.Uncoma.Edu.Ar)
IPEHCS-CONICET-UNCo, Quintral 1250, 8400 Bariloche.
Department of Psychology, University of Comahue

Valeria Olguín (VALITAO@Yahoo.Es)
Department of Psychology, University of Comahue,
Irigoyen 2000, 8324 Cipolletti

Ricardo A. Minervino (MINERVINOR@Jetband.Com.Ar)
IPEHCS-CONICET-UNCo. Av. Argentina 1400, 8300 Neuquén
Department of Psychology, University of Comahue
Abstract
The present study was aimed at assessing the effect of object
similarities on participants' evaluations of analogical quality.
Results from an experimental condition in which the relations
involved in the compared situations were explicitly
highlighted, showed that general object similarities
(membership to same category) positively affected the
evaluations of analogical quality. In contrast, no such effect
was found under another experimental condition in which the
analogical comparisons between the same situations were
framed by a schema-governed category. An analysis of
participants' justifications revealed that the object similarities
that were taken into account under this second condition were
related to central dimensions of the schema-governed
category that was used to frame the analogies. We explain
these findings within the category assignment approach
developed by Minervino et al., and discuss the implications of
this alternative perspective of analogical reasoning for the role
of similarities between entities playing several thematic roles.
Keywords: analogy; schema-governed category; semantic
similarity.

Introduction
Drawing an analogy consists in recognizing that two
situations are comparable because they share a common
relational structure despite their superficial differences.
Frequently, the purpose of analogical comparisons is to
transfer knowledge from one of those situations (the base
analog) to the other (the target analog) to enhance its
comprehension (Gentner, 1983; Holyoak, 1984).
The structure-mapping theory (Gentner, 1983, 1989;
Gentner & Markman, 1997) and the multiconstraint theory
(Holyoak & Thagard, 1989; Hummel & Holyoak, 1997)
have dominated the discussion about analogical reasoning
since the 1980s. Due to the commonalities between these
two theories we will refer to them as the standard approach.
According to this approach, analogical reasoning involves,
among other subprocesses, a mapping between base and
target elements, and an evaluation of the quality of the

analogy. Both theories agree in that the quality of a match
will be considered higher or lower to the extent that the
alignment satisfies the structural constraints of one-to-one
mapping and parallel connectivity (Gentner, 1989; Holyoak
& Thagard, 1989). Nevertheless, the mentioned theories
differ with respect to the role of semantics in the evaluation
of an analogy. Structure-mapping theory posits that
relational similarity is the only factor that counts when
evaluating an analogy, with object similarities playing no
role at all (Gentner, 1983, 1989). On the other hand, the
multiconstraint theory contends that semantic similarity
between objects is also taken into account during quality
evaluations (Holyoak, 1984; Holyoak & Thagard, 1989).
The mechanisms proposed by these theories for estimating
semantic similarity tend to resort to general knowledge like
the one represented in networks (Minervino, Oberholzer, &
Trench, 2013). The scarce available evidence (Gentner,
Ratterman & Forbus, 1993; Gentner & Kurtz, 2006) is
consistent with structure mapping theory: it shows a clear
relational focus, with only a minimal influence of object
similarities on judgments of analogical relatedness.
To illustrate the implications of the relational focus in a
more concrete way, suppose that people were faced with a
task of rating the quality of the analogies that hold between
the top and bottom scenes of Figure 1. Dismissing the
similarity between the objects computer mouse and laptop
as two members of the entity category computer equipment,
and the semantic differences between a computer mouse and
a pair of socks (two objects lacking a common entity
category), people would probably rate Facts A and B as
equally analogous to the Key fact, because they are three
cases of giving, and what counts in quality evaluations are
relational similarities.
In the present research we present an alternative approach
to standard theories of analogy, with implications on the
role of object similarities during analogical comparisons.
While we tend to agree with the multiconstraint theory in
granting a role to object similarities, we posit that the
computation of object properties that takes place during

3296

Figure 1. One example of an analogy in which the base
(key) and target situations (A and B) have similar relations,
but hold general differences among their objects.
evaluations of analogical quality does not involve assessing
the proximity between base and a target objects within a
hierarchically organized network of concepts. The
proposals of the standard theories may be suitable for
certain kind of analogies like those used by Gentner and
Kurtz (2006). For example, the analogical relatedness
between John bought the candy and John took the lollipop
could be decided considering the similarity between buy
and take in isolation. However, standard proposals might
not be appropriate in those cases in which the interaction
between the propositional elements composing the analogs gives
rise to exemplars of a schema-governed relational category.
Exemplars of a given schema-governed category like
aggression share a common schematic structure (Gentner &
Kurtz, 2005; Goldwater, Markman & Stilwell, 2011;
Markman & Stilwell, 2001), which could be instantiated by
a wide range of exemplars, like the preschooler threw a pen
to his partner, the soccer player broke a leg to his rival and
the girl sank her brother's head into a bucket. The
alternative approach of analogical reasoning that we are
presenting here supposes that two situations would be
considered analogous if they could be assigned to a
common schema-governed category (Minervino et al., 2013;
Oberholzer, Trench & Minervino, 2011). Frequently, in real
communicational scenarios a certain schema-governed
category is explicitly introduced previous to the acts of
comparing and evaluating the analogability of two
situations. For example, a man could tell to a friend: “Hey, I
have seen cheating-like behaviors in my wife: The other day
she hid her cellphone from me”. To express comprehension,
the friend could reply by telling an analogous situation:
“The same thing happened to me! My wife hid her credit

card records from me”. On the other hand, in absence of a
framing schema-governed category, the comparison could
be alternatively focused in the lower-level actions implied in
the compared situations (e.g., the two situations could be
considered analogous just as cases of hide). While standard
theories of analogies seem appropriate to explain the lowerlevel type of analogical processing, the assignment approach
is focused on a higher-level type of analogical reasoning
guided by schema-governed categories.
With respect to the evaluation of analogies, the
assignment approach posits that relational similarity is not
necessary nor sufficient. Note in above examples that the
preschooler threw a pen to his partner and the soccer player
broke a leg to his rival could be considered analogous as
cases of aggression despite not sharing similar relations
(i.e., throw is not semantically similar to brake).
Furthermore, hiding the cellphone from the husband could
be considered as not analogous to hiding the pie from the
husband besides sharing the relation hide, due to the fact
that they could not be assigned to a common schemagoverned category (e.g., cheating-like behavior).
With respect to the role of objects in analogical
relatedness judgments, the assignment approach posits that
object similarities are taken into account to the extent that
they could modify the value that the facts under comparison
displayed on one dimension of the schema-governed
category to which the analogs belong. For example, in
Figure 1, the assignment approach predicts that if the
comparison is framed by the schema-governed category
awarding, people would rate Fact B as more analogous to
the Key fact than Fact A because of the closeness of those
first two situations in the value that they exhibit along the
importance of the awarding. Object properties that count in
evaluating the analogical relatedness of the Key fact with
respect to Facts A and B are those related to the importance
of the awarding, for example, the price of each object. Thus,
as a pair of socks has a similar price than a computer mouse,
the quality of the analogy between the Key fact and the Fact
B would be better rated than the quality of the analogy
between the Key fact and the Fact A, in which the award
consists of a more expensive laptop. This treatment of
semantics differs from the one given by standard theories of
analogy, because it does not consider similarities and
differences between objects like those provided by general
knowledge networks (e.g., the similarity between a
computer mouse and a laptop as members of the category
computer equipment). Instead, the mechanism proposed by
the assignment´s approach for computing semantic
similarities takes into account those aspects of objects that
become relevant as an effect of the schema-governed
category that is framing the comparison. For example, the
price of the objects becomes relevant because it affects the
values that the compared situations exhibit in the dimension
of importance of the awarding.
The objective of this study was to assess whether the
object similarities in properties that affect the value of the
compared situations in a certain dimension of the framing

3297

schema-governed category have an effect on quality
evaluations of the analogy, as opposed to general object
similarities, operationalized as membership to same
category1. With this purpose, we designed an experiment in
which two groups of participants received triplet of images
like the ones displayed in Figure 1, which were framed
either by a relation or by a schema-governed category.
While one of the target objects maintained general
similarities with respect to the base object in terms of their
membership to a same category (e.g., computer mouse and
laptop), the object of the second target did not hold general
similarities with the base object (e.g., computer mouse and
pair of socks). Nevertheless, the second target object could
be considered more similar than the first one with respect to
the base object in terms of a property (e.g., the price of the
awards) that becomes relevant under a schema-governed
category framing (e.g., awarding). In light of existing
evidence regarding the negligible role of objects during
standard analogical comparisons, we predicted that
participants whose analogies were framed by the central
relation (i.e., action represented by a verb) of the compared
situations would rate both targets as being equally
analogous to the base situation. However, the above
considerations about the likely role of schema-governed
categories during analogical comparisons led us to predict
that framing the analogies under a common schema-governed
category would lead participants to give higher scores to target
analogs whose objects were not taxonomically related to those
of the base situation, but which allowed a matching with
respect to the base situation in terms of their value along a
relevant dimension of the framing category.

Method
Participants and design
Forty students of Psychology at the University of Comahue
(mean age = 21.4 years, SD = 2.08) volunteered to
participate in the experiment, and were randomly assigned
to one of two experimental conditions. The experiment has a
2x2 repeated measures design, with the independent
variable framing of the analogies (same relation vs. same
schema-governed category) as a between subject factor, and
general object similarity between base and target (presence
vs. absence), as a within subject factor. The dependent
variable was the quality evaluation of analogies.

Procedure
Participants of the two conditions of the experiment
received a brief instructional text. It anticipated that they
would receive several sets of three drawings in which a first
scene (Key fact) would be followed by two analogous
1

Traditionally, general object similarity was manipulated as the
membership of two objects to a same taxonomic category (e.g.,
Gentner & Kurtz, 2006). However, general object similarities
could also refer to other commonalities between objects taken in
isolation, like, for example, intrinsic and functional properties.

scenes (Fact A and B, respectively), that is, by two
"situations that are analogous to the first one in essential
aspects, despite being different in others". Participants were
told that they should consider whether the Fact A or B
seems to them as more analogous to the Key fact, or if both
could be seen as equally analogous to the Key fact. The
instructional material also anticipated that each set of scenes
would be preceded by a brief description of the actions
involved in the three drawings of the set, and followed by a
prompt to provide ratings for the extent to which Facts A
and B could be considered analogous to the Key fact, and a
verbal justification for their scoring. After reading these
instructions, participants were provided with a set of
practice materials. They did not receive any feedback about
the content of their responses during this practice or
during the experiment itself, but they did receive feedback
about how to carry out the tasks. Upon reading the
instructions and solving the practice trial on a computer
display, all of the participants were asked to analyze each of
the subsequent triplets of visual scenes at their own pace,
typing their responses into the spaces provided in the Word
file, and advancing to the next screen once they had finished
the tasks of each set. Participants of both groups received
six critical sets of scenes interleaved by six filler sets
designed to prevent participants from grasping the response
pattern that was favored by the manipulation in each
condition. Each trial, which appeared on a different screen
of the computer file, displayed a first visual scene (the base
analog, named Key fact) on the uppermost section of the
screen, followed by two alternative visual scenes (the
targets, named respectively Fact A and Fact B) placed one
next to the other (see Figure 1). Participants in the similar
relation framing condition (n = 20) received all triplets
preceded by a brief statement stressing the verb that applied
across the scenes (e.g., "These are three instances of giving").
In contrast, participants in the similar schema-governed
category framing condition (n = 20) received all triplets
preceded by a schema-governed category that could be applied
to all scenes (e.g., "These are three instances of awardings").
First task: Evaluation of the quality of the analogies
Using a 5-point Likert scale (1 = barely analogous; 5 =
completely analogous), participants were asked to rate (1)
the extent to which the Key fact could be considered
analogous to the Fact A, and (2) the extent to which the Key
fact could be considered analogous to the Fact B.
Second task: Verbal justifications of the quality scores
Participants were encouraged to write down a verbal
justification for the previously assigned scores. For this task,
they were presented with three possible kinds of unfulfilled
answers followed by a blank space: (1a) “I have assigned a
higher score to the comparison between Key fact/Fact A
than to the comparison between Key fact/Fact B
because…”, (1b) “I have assigned a higher score to the
comparison between Key fact/Fact B than to the comparison
between Key fact/Fact A because…” or (1c) “I have
assigned the same scores to both comparisons because…”.

3298

Materials

Results

Six critical sets of drawings were built, each one comprising
a base situation and two target situations (see Table 1). The
characters and the actions they were performing were
identical across the three scenes of each set, and could be
framed either as instantiations of a common relation (e.g.,
two cases of giving) or as instantiations of a common
schema-governed category (e.g., two instances of
awarding). In contrast to the characters and their actions,
which were kept constant across the three scenes of each
set, the objects involved in such actions were varied.
The object of one of the targets was similar in general
aspects to its corresponding base object (e.g., a computer
mouse and a laptop are two exemplars of the entity category
computer equipment), but could not be equated to the base
object along a central dimension of the schema-governed
category that could be potentially applied to both scenes
(e.g., if the base and the first target were framed under
the schema-governed category awarding, then the
importance of winning a laptop is not comparable to that of
winning a computer mouse). The objects involved in the
second target were chosen to display the opposite pattern:
they did not maintain general object similarities with respect
to the base object, but could nevertheless be equated to the
base object in certain properties that become relevant under
a schema-governed category framing that could be
potentially applied to both scenes (e.g., while computer
mouse and a pair of socks are not similar, they constitute
awards of comparable importance). The order of
presentation of the critical sets and the right/left position of
their corresponding targets were counterbalanced.
Table 1: Experimental materials
Set Framing SGC/
#
Relation
1
Physical
exercise/
Relocate
2
Bragging/
Point
3
Smuggling/
Load
4
Celebration/
Open
5
Awarding/
Give
6
Electricity
consumption/
Plug

Description of the pictorial situations
A man is relocating big desks (BA)/
tiny stools (TA1)/ truck wheels (TA2)
inside a room
A man is pointing a sports car (BA)/
bicycle (TA1)/big house (TA2) to a woman
A man is loading led TV´s (BA)/
fans (TA1)/ paintings (TA2) into a truck
A woman is opening a bottle of champagne
(BA)/ soda (TA1) / cake box (TA2)
A man is giving a computer mouse (BA) /
laptop (TA1)/ pair of socks (TA2) to a woman
A woman is plugging in a table lamp
(BA)/ floodlight (TA1) / radio (TA2)

Note. SGC: Schema-governed Category; BA: Base Analog;
TA1: Target Analog 1; TA2: Target Analog 2.

A 2x2 ANOVA with Framing condition (same relation vs
same schema governed category) as between-subjects factor
and General object similarity (presence vs absence) as
within-subjects factor was conducted to assess how these
variables impacted the perceived quality of analogies. Main
effects were neither found for condition, F(1,38) = 1.01,
MSe = 0.76, p = .31, nor for general object similarity,
F(1,38) = 3.93, MSe = 0.90 , p = .055). However, there was
a significant interaction between the framing condition and
general object similarity, F(1,38) = 146.32, MSe = 33.58, p
< .01 (see Figure 2). Post-hoc Tukey HSD tests revealed
that in the same relation condition the ratings of the quality
of the analogy were significantly higher for items with
general object similarity (M = 3.77, SD = 0.697) than for
items without general object similarity (M = 2.68, SD =
0.739, p < .01). Against structure mapping, these results
showed that general object similarities affected the
perceived quality of analogies framed by a relation. The
opposite pattern of results was observed across the same
schema-governed framing condition, in which the items
without general object similarity but with similar
dimensional value obtained significantly higher ratings (M =
3.78, SD = 0.549) than items with general object similarities
(M = 2.27, SD = 0.797, p < .01).
A further qualitative analysis of the verbal justifications
was performed in order to explore the principles underlying
the evaluations of the quality of analogies. Two
independent judges, both cognitive psychologists, were
instructed to classify the principles applied by participants
in their justifications into one of three categories: related to
general object similarities, related to a verb, or related to a
dimension of the framing schema-governed category.
Judges should classify the principle as related to general
object similarities if participants´ justifications referred
object similarities and differences that were not related to
the verb or to the schema-governed category used to frame
each triplet of images (i.e., that could be identified and
conceptualized independently of the specific framing verb
or schema-governed category). Judges were told that
responses of this type may include similarities and
differences between intrinsic properties of objects, their
functions or their taxonomic membership, and were
provided with examples (e.g., a computer mouse has the
same color than a laptop). The principle should be
classified as related to a verb if participants mentioned
similarities and differences in object properties that affect
dimensions of the framing relations (e.g., a computer mouse
is easier to give than a laptop). Judges should classify the
principle as related to a dimension of the framing schemagoverned category if participants mentioned similarities
and differences between object properties that are related to
a dimension of the framing schema-governed category
(e.g., receiving a laptop is a more important awarding
compared to receiving a computer mouse). Judges agreed in
86% of the cases, and cases of disagreement were resolved
by discussion. This qualitative analysis showed that in the

3299

Evaluation of the quality of analogies

5,0
4,5
4,0
3,5
3,0
2,5
2,0
1,5
1,0
PRESENCE

ABSENCE

General object similarity

Relation framing
Schema-governed category framing

Figure 2. Interaction between framing condition and
general object similarity in quality evaluations.
condition framed by a relation, participants’ justifications
followed a principle related to general object similarities in
75% of the cases, and a principle based on dimensions of
the verbs in 25% of the cases. In contrast, in the condition
framed by a schema-governed category, participants used
the principle related to general object similarities only in
7% of the cases, whereas in the remaining 93% of the cases
they applied the principle related to a dimension of the
framing schema-governed category. None of the responses
of the schema-governed framing condition referred to a
principle related to the verb. This analysis provides
complementary evidence that general object similarities are
taken into account in the same relation framing condition,
but had almost no influence over quality evaluations of the
schema-governed framing condition. Moreover, justifications´
analysis confirmed that object similarities that count in quality
evaluations of analogies framed by a schema-governed
category are those related to object properties that bear on the
degree to which the facts under comparison match along a
relevant dimension of the framing category.

Discussion
The present study showed that when matched objects belong
to the same category, this similarity positively influences
the perceived quality of a “standard” analogy (i.e., an
analogy not framed by a schema-governed category). One
possible explanation of the inconsistency between this
finding and previous evidence (e.g., Gentner & Kurtz, 2006;
Gentner et al., 1993) could be that in our study participants
were asked to justify their ratings, and there is some
evidence that justifying ratings of analogical relatedness can
lead to poorer discrimination between superficial and
structural aspects of analogies (Sieck, Quinn & Schooler,
1999). In any case, the central finding of the present study
was that when an analogy is framed in terms of a schema-

governed category, the object properties that matter when
assessing analogical comparisons are those that affect the
value of the compared situations along certain dimensions of
the framing schema-governed category, as opposed to the type
of object similarities considered by the standard approach.
A question that may arise from our study refers to
whether the framing of analogical comparisons under
schema-governed categories (as in our schema-governed
condition) represents a frequent or a rare occurrence in daily
real-life scenarios. An example widely discussed by the
multiconstraint theory indeed suggests that schemagoverned analogies are rather frequent, and that the
conceptualization of similarities and differences between
objects has clear implications for the generation of
analogical inferences. In the context of the Vietnam/Persian
Gulf analogy, Holyoak and Thagard (1995) mention that the
contrast between the jungle of Vietnam and the desert sands
of Kuwait was key to predicting whether the army of
Saddam could be defeated by air strikes: As opposed to the
aptness of the Vietnamese jungle for concealing the army,
the desert sands are not of great help. As this example
clearly illustrates, the comparison is framed under the
schema-governed category war, and under this framing
certain properties of the object ground become relevant—
properties that one would not analyze in the absence of such
particular framing. It is our intuition that many analogical
comparisons that take place in everyday contexts are
contextually framed in terms of schema-governed
categories: Is the economic crisis of 2008 analogous to that
of 1930?, Are the terrorist attacks perpetrated by Muslim
fanatics analogous to those of radical independists of
Ireland?, Is the populism led by Donald Trump analogous to
the one led by Cristina Fernández de Kirchner?
The discrimination between analogies that are processed
under a schema-governed category and those that are not is
relevant to designing experimental materials as well as to
interpret results of existing studies on analogical thinking.
Just to illustrate, Figure 3 displays one of the sets of pictures
employed by Markman and Gentner (1996, p. 242) to
determine whether alignable differences count more than
non-alignable differences during similarity judgments. If
forced to decide which of the alternative target scenes is
more analogous to the base situation, readers would
probably choose the one on the left, as did participants of
such study. As posited by the authors, what explains this
preference is the fact that while the replacement of the target
object by a bird represents an alignable difference in the
context of the rightmost scene, such replacement represents
a non alignable difference within the left scene.
Alternatively, one could sensibly argue that while the left scene
has to do with the physical ability of aiming at a target, the
right scene represents a case of the schema-governed
category zoocide. The processing of analogies under
schema-governed categories does not always require the
external provision of a suitable schema-governed category.
As shown by Minervino et al. (2013), schema-governed
categories could be naturally activated in reasoners by the

3300

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Agency for
Scientific and Technical Research (ANPCyT) under Grants
PICT 2352 and PICT 2650, by the University of Comahue
under Grants C123, C134 and B213, and by the National
Council for Scientific and Technical Research (CONICET)
under Grant PIP 0567.

References

Figure 3. Sample of materials used to determine whether
alignable differences or nonalignable differences count
more during similarity evaluations. Adapted from
“Commonalities and differences in similarity
comparisons”, by A.B. Markman & D. Gentner,
1996, Memory & Cognition, 2, p. 242
situations themselves. In fact, during the construction of the
stimuli employed in the present study we found it hard to
devise situations for which the schema-governed categories
that were explicitly presented in the schema-governed
category framing condition would not be automatically
evoked by participants in the same relation condition.
While the present study shows that a schema-governed
category framing leads people to highlight object properties
(e.g., price of the award) that are relevant to analogical
quality evaluations, a question that may arise is whether just
activating those properties without activating the whole
schema will yield the same results. An experiment that
could shed light on this would involve a comparison
between the schema-governed framing condition of the
present experiment and another identical condition in which
the woman (i.e., the patient of the awarding) was replaced
by a billionaire. While the consideration of the price of the
objects under the first condition allowed participants to rate
the Key fact as more analogous to the Fact A than to the
Fact B, we hypothesize that under the other condition
people would rate both facts A and B as almost equally
analogous to the Key fact. This would evidence that in
the schema-governed category framing condition people
are not just taking into account object properties, but are
considering the interaction between object and patient
properties (e.g., object´s price and richness of the patient).
Thus, it seems likely that people take into account the
interaction between the fillers of every thematic-role (e.g.,
object, patient, agent, and instrument) and their relevant
properties to judge the analogability of the compared situations.
Future studies should assess the adequacy of these and other
predictions that stem from the category assignment approach.

Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Gentner, D. (1989). The mechanisms of analogical transfer.
In S. Vosniadou & A. Ortony (Eds.), Similarity and
Analogical Reasoning. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Gentner, D., & Kurtz, K. (2005). Relational categories. In
W. K. Ahn, R. L. Goldstone, B. C. Love, A. B. Markman
& P. W. Wolff (Eds.), Categorization inside and outside
the lab. Washington, DC: APA.
Gentner, D., & Kurtz, K. (2006). Relations, objects, and the
composition of analogies. Cognitive Science, 30, 609-642.
Gentner, D., & Markman, A. B. (1997). Structure mapping
in analogy and similarity. American Psychologist, 52, 45-56.
Gentner, D., Rattermann, M. J., & Forbus, K. D. (1993).
The roles of similarity in transfer: Separating
retrievability from inferential soundness. Cognitive
Psychology, 25, 431-467.
Goldwater, M.B., Markman, A.B., & Stilwell, C.H. (2011).
The empirical case for role-governed categories.
Cognition, 118, 359-376.
Holyoak, K. J. (1984). Analogical thinking and human
intelligence. En R. J. Sternberg (Ed.) Advances in the
psychology of human intelligence. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum.
Holyoak, K. J., & Thagard, P. R. (1989). Analogical mapping by
constraint satisfaction. Cognitive Science, 13, 295-355.
Holyoak, K. J., & Thagard, P. R. (1995). Mental leaps:
Analogy in creative thought. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Hummel, J. E., & Holyoak, K. J. (1997). Distributed
representations of structure: A theory of analogical access
and mapping. Psychological Review, 104, 427-466.
Markman, A. B., & Gentner, D. (1996). Commonalities and
differences in similarity comparisons. Memory &
Cognition, 2, 235-249.
Markman, A. B., & Stilwell, C. H. (2001). Role-governed
categories. Journal of Experimental and Theoretical
Intelligence, 13, 329-358.
Minervino, R., Oberholzer, N., & Trench, M. (2013). Global
Similarity Overrides Element Similarity when Evaluating
the Quality of Analogies. Journal of Cognitive Science 14, 287-317.
Oberholzer, N., Trench, M., & Minervino, R. (2011). When
lighting a candle becomes a superstition: Analogical
recategorization through the application of relational
categories. 33rd Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 568-573). Boston, Massachusetts.
Sieck, W. R., Quinn, C. N., & Schooler, J. W. (1999).
Justification effects on the judgment of analogy. Memory
& cognition, 5, 844-85.

3301

