Simulating performance in unconscious plagiarism
Nicholas Lange (nick.lange@plymouth.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, Portland Square
Drake Circus, Plymouth University, PL4 8AA
United Kingdom

Timothy J. Hollins (thollins@plymouth.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, Portland Square
Drake Circus, Plymouth University, PL4 8AA
United Kingdom
Abstract
Studies of unconscious plagiarism have reported that people
mistakenly include a partner’s responses when trying to recall
their own (recall-own task) and include own responses when
trying to recall their partner’s (recall-partner task). In a simulation, we tested if participants’ memory performance at test, including source errors, can be explained by participants simply
guessing items that come easily to mind. We show that guessing alone cannot account for the pattern of data participants
show at test. Modifying the simulation by including memory
for self-generated items allows us to replicate the pattern of responding in the recall-own but not the recall-partner task, even
when we assume that participants in the recall-partner task
strategically withhold more fluent items from report. This suggests that judgements of items’ memory strength alone cannot
explain performance in the unconscious plagiarism paradigm.
Keywords: source memory; free recall; unconscious plagiarism

Background
In the standard unconscious plagiarism (or cryptomnesia) experiment (Brown & Murphy, 1989), participants in groups
take turns to generate solutions for a task. Following a delay
participants are asked to complete a recall and/or a generatenew task. In the recall task, participants are asked to selectively recall the solutions they generated themselves, avoiding those generated by others in the group. In the generatenew task, participants are asked to generate novel solutions to
the task, avoiding both previously self- and other-generated
ones. Plagiarism errors (or source errors in the recall-own
and generate-new task) are now solutions generated by other
members of the group that participants falsely claim to have
generated themselves, with plagiarism typically at abovechance rates for both the recall-own and generate-new task
(Brown & Murphy, 1989). More recently, Hollins, Lange,
Berry, and Dennis (2016) showed that source errors in recall
tasks are not limited to the recall-own task, but also occur during the recall of partner-generated items in the recall-partner
task. Rather than participants being biased to simply claim
ideas as their own, it appears that participants are simply confused about the source of the ideas they retrieve from memory
(Hollins, Lange, Dennis, & Longmore, 2015; Perfect, Field,
& Jones, 2009).
While source errors are typically treated as an instance of
false memories, an alternative account is that they constitute
accidental errors that occur by chance (Brown & Murphy,

1989; Tenpenny, Keriazakos, Lew, & Phelan, 1998). In the
study phase, participants are asked to take turns generating
responses to cues, such as category exemplars. Without further instruction to generate typical or atypical exemplars, it
is likely that participants will first generate responses that are
readily available to them, i.e. typical exemplars in the category. This would be in line with participants employing a
fluency heuristic (Jacoby, Woloshyn, & Kelley, 1989).
Brown and Murphy (1989) tested this non-memorial guessing account. They presented participants with the test phase
of an unconscious plagiarism experiment without a preceding study phase. When treating this generation at test as recall from a study phase that participants did not participate in,
participants still committed “source errors” to a high degree.
This seems to suggest that reporting items based on fluency
or the frequency or typicality of items could be responsible
for source errors.
Critically, Brown and Murphy (1989) focused only on
source errors, and only on source errors in the recall-own task.
In the present paper, we adapted the unconscious plagiarism
and anti-plagiarism paradigm as used in Hollins et al. (2015,
2016) for actions. We constructed guessing simulations that
builds on Brown and Murphy but attempts to simulate performance across all task measures in both retrieval tasks. If
source errors are in part the result of chance performance, the
same would have to be true for the correct retrieval and the
generation of novel items at test.
We constructed a base guessing model that samples, ignorant to study phase and task, from the possible items per category cue, with sampling weighted by the frequency or typicality of those items. In subsequent simulations, we modified
this base guessing simulation by manipulating the number of
items per cue available to participants at test, the memory for
self-generated and partner-generated items, and the orientation towards self-generated or partner-generated items at test
given the retrieval task.

Experimental work
Unconscious plagiarism has been exclusively studied with
verbalizable stimuli (for reviews see Perfect & Stark, 2008;
Gingerich & Sullivan, 2013). We adapted the unconscious
plagiarism paradigm with two retrieval tasks to motor actions
to produce observed data. In this experiment, we asked par-

2524

ticipants to take turns performing and observed actions with
a partner in the study phase. In the test phase, participants
then were asked to recall performed actions (equivalent to the
Recall-own task for verbal material) or asked to recall observed actions (equivalent to the Recall-partner task).

retrieval was higher in the Recall performed than the Recall observed task, t(34.80) = 2.75, p = .009. There was
no evidence for source errors or intrusion errors being committed more frequently in one than the other retrieval task,
t(31.86) = 1.29, p = .21 and t(35) = .04, p = .97.

Method
Participants 40 members of the public participated for
payment of £12. Three participants did not attend all sessions
and their data were excluded from the analysis.
Procedure Participants were asked to attend two sessions
in total, a day apart. For the first session, participants were
paired and asked to take turns generating and acting out
shapes with any part of their body or combinations of body
parts. They were shown 15 shape cues (=, A, C, F, H, I, J, K,
L, O, P, T, V, X, 4) in total. Participants were cued with a
printed label of each shape. Members of the pair took turns
generating actions for each cue, interleaving performing and
observing actions such that performing an action in response
to a cue was followed by observing the other person perform
an action in response to the same cue. Each participant generated a total of 4 actions per cue, resulting in 60 performed
and 60 observed actions overall. Participants were told to
observe their partners during partner-generation to avoid duplicating exemplars that had already been created for a cue.
Participants observed their partner perform actions under a
secondary task load for two-thirds of the shape cues. The
assignment of shape cues to secondary task conditions was
counterbalanced across participants. The focus of the present
paper is on the control condition only, i.e. the one-third of actions participants performed and observed without secondary
load, for the purposes of simulating guessing performance.
Participants returned the next day individually for a memory test. They were instructed to retrieve and re-perform either the actions they had generated themselves (Recall performed) or those they had observed their partner perform
(Recall observed) the previous day. They were cued with
the shape labels, and asked to re-perform as many actions as
they could remember for each shape (free report). They were
asked to avoid performing actions that did not comply with
their retrieval task.
Preprocessing of observed data In the study phase, participants could commit two types of errors: self-plagiarism,
that is repeating an item they had already generated for
a particular cue, and other-plagiarism, repeating an item
their partner had already generated for a cue. In the control condition, participants self-plagiarised on average 5.13%
(SD=5.75%) of items and plagiarised 9.73% (SD=6.25%) of
partner-generated items. Items that both participants had generated at study for a cue were removed from analysis, since
the source of the item, if retrieved, would be ambiguous.

Results
Participants’ mean performance in both retrieval tasks is
shown by the bars in the figures in this paper. Correct source

Simulating frequency-based guessing
Base guessing simulation
In the base frequency-based guessing simulation we extended
the idea of a test phase without prior study phase tested by
(Brown & Murphy, 1989). We used a Monte Carlo procedure
to simulate how many correct responses, source errors and
intrusion errors participants would make if they were guessing and had just generated potential actions for each shape
“on the fly” during the test phase, rather than genuinely retrieving them from what they had previously either seen or
performed. We simulated the test phase of the experiment
for each participant and each shape separately to take into
account differences between individual participants, differing
frequency profiles for the different shapes, and the typicality
of individual items.
As a first step of the simulation process, we determined
frequency norms for the different actions generated for each
of the 15 shapes used in the experiment. We took into
account all possible shapes all participants had generated
across the experiment. Some actions were produced more
frequently than others across participants, resulting in a frequency profile for each shape. Both self-plagiarised and
partner-plagiarised items at study were included in the creation of these frequency profiles. For each shape, we converted these frequency profiles of the different actions into
probability distributions, reflecting the relative probability
that a particular action was produced for a given shape. For
each shape, the probabilities across the shape cue summed to
1 to represent all possible actions for the shape.
We used these distributions as the basis for participants’
guessing. Partner-plagiarised items were excluded from the
distribution prior to guessing to match the analysis of the
observed data. For each participant we sampled the number of items from each shape distribution that participants reported at test for that particular shape (excluding the partnerplagiarised items again). The sampling was weighted by the
relative probability of the items, to implement that guessing
was not random but biased by the frequency or typicality and
therefore fluency of items. This sampling was done without
replacement to match the experimental procedure of only retrieving an item once. Items were sampled sequentially, with
the distribution re-normed after each draw. We repeated this
for every participant, and ran the simulation over 500 iterations for stable estimates.
In addition to the items participants reported at test (correct
responses, source errors, novel items), we now also have the
same measures if participants were only guessing at test.
Figure 1 shows the results of the base guessing simulation
(the full-length distribution indicated by the stars) relative to

2525

the observed data. In both retrieval tasks, mere guessing may
approximate the number of source errors but cannot account
for the number of correct responses and intrusion errors. It is
therefore unlikely that performance in this paradigm occurs
simply because highly-frequent items are generated both at
study and test, regardless of an influence of memory.
In the next section, we will modify this base guessing simulation by manipulating first the length of the frequency distribution, and then introducing memory and meta-cognition
into the frequency-based guessing.

Recall performed

7

Frequency

6
5
4
3
2
1

In the base guessing simulation we assume that participants’
responses are based entirely on the overall frequency (or typicality) of items. This assumption leads to the following conditions for guessing: a) each participant has the entirety of
each shape distribution available to them at retrieval, b) memory encoding in the study phase does not affect the frequency
of items (i.e., there is no effect of memory) and c) participants’ responding does not change with the instruction to retrieve items from one or the other source. In the next three
steps, we therefore simulated the influences of the length of
the distribution, memory effects and retrieval task orientation
on participants’ guessing. Strictly speaking, only the first
modification still represents participants only guessing, i.e.,
responding without memory. The second modification introduces an effect of memory and the final modification an effect
of metacognitive choices made at retrieval.

0
Correct

Number of items per cue
Mean (SD)
Max Min
23.66 (4.68) 33
16
12.30 (3.19) 19
5
8.18 (2.20)
13
2
5.59 (1.26)
8
1
3.78 (0.88)
6
1

The probabilities associated with the items in the base

Source Error

Novel

Correct

Source Error

Novel

Figure 1: Observed data in bars (correct responses, source
errors, intrusion errors) with 95% confidence intervals and
data predicted by participants guessing with distributions of
varying length relative to the full distribution (points)

Length of the distributions In the base guessing distribution, the simulated participants sample their guesses from all
possible ways a particular shape was produced in the experiment. This assumes that each participant has access to all
possible ways a shape can be represented with the body that
were produced throughout the experiment - this is a strong assumption that may inflate the number of novel items relative
to items generated at study. It is more likely that each participant has only a subset of items for each shape cue available
to draw on. In the first modification of the base guessing simulation, we therefore simulated the pattern of performance in
the task if participants guess from frequency distributions for
each shape that are a shorter, i.e., include fewer possible actions.

Length
Full
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

Length of distribution
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Full

8

Modifying the base guessing simulation

Table 1: Average number of items in the guessing distributions with shortened tails

Recall observed

9

guessing simulation sum to 1, from most frequent items at
higher probabilities to least frequent items with lower probabilities. We created shorter distributions by successively
shortening the tail of each shape distribution, i.e., removing
the least frequent items. This resulted in distributions representing the top 90%, 80%, 70% and 60% of items generated
for each shape across participants in the study phase. The
sampling procedure was otherwise identical to the one described above.
Table 1 shows the average number of items, as well as maximum and minimum number of items, that could be sampled
across shapes for the different lengths of distributions. For
the shorter distributions, in some cases the total number of
guesses to be sampled was longer than the distribution to sample from. In those cases, the total possible number of items,
i.e. all items in the shortened distribution, was sampled as a
guess in lieu of the total number of responses participants in
fact made in that case.
Figure 1 shows participants’ observed performance (bars)
and simulated performance (points and lines) in both the Recall performed and Recall observed task. The stars indicate
the sampling based on the full-length distributions for each
shape, the remaining points the proportionally shorter distributions (relative to the full-length distribution). Comparing
the simulated performance across the different lengths of the
distribution shows that with shorter distributions, the number
of novel items that are sampled during guessing decreases.
There is only a minimal effect on the number of correct responses and source errors that are sampled.
While guessing even based on shorter distributions does
not approximate performance in the Recall performed task,
guessing based on drastically shortened distributions comes
close to replicating the pattern of responding in the Recall
observed task. Though note that the radically shortened dis-

2526

tributions do not contain many items available for guessing.
Naturally, these very short distributions not only contain only
a minimum of novel items (hence the decrease in the sampled novel responses), they also do not contain many items
participants generated in the study phase and hence do not
drastically increase correct and source error responses.
Performance in the Recall-performed task (the original unconscious plagiarism paradigm) cannot be only the result of
frequency-based guessing at test. In the Recall observed task,
this type of guessing could potentially account for the pattern
of responding. In the next step, we modified the distribution
further by adding memory for items that were generated at
study.

Recall performed
9
8
7
6
Frequency

Recall observed

Generation benefit
None
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5

5
4
3
2
1
0
Correct

Memory after generation Pure guessing, here implemented by sampling based on the overall frequency or typicality of items, does not fully approximate performance in
the memory test and therefore is not an explanation for unconscious plagiarism performance (when both correct responses
and intrusions are considered alongside the number of source
errors). In the next step, we tested if adding an effect of memory to the model by boosting the probability of items that
were generated by participants could account for the pattern
of data observed in the experiment.
We used the full-length distribution (rather than shortened
distributions). We implemented memory for items by adding
a second probability term to all items participants generated
themselves (but not to items participants observed their partners perform - we added this modification in the final simulation). The additional probability terms for self-generated
items were 0 (the base guessing simulation), 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4
and 0.5. The final shape distributions were re-normed so all
probabilities summed to 1 after this memory probability term
was added to the prior probability of each item. Beyond the
memory boost, the sampling procedure was identical to the
one described in the previous simulations.
Figure 2 shows the observed data (bars) and the predicted
responses based on the guessing simulation with memory
boost. The memory boost results in good approximation of
performance in the Recall performed task (even with the fulllength distribution used for guessing). This suggests that participants in the Recall performed task may simply successfully employ a fluency heuristic (Jacoby et al., 1989) by reporting items that are strongly represented at test by a combination of their base typicality and some memory.
In the Recall observed task, increasing the likelihood of
generated (here: source error items) to be guessed leads to
grave misfits of the pattern of data observed in the experiment. If participants were still simply reporting the most
fluent exemplars at test, regardless of the task, the number
of source errors (self-generated items with higher memory),
should be higher than the number of correct responses (observed actions). This is clearly not what participants in the
experiment are doing.
In the final modification, we therefore introduced a
metacognitive modification to the simulation that has partici-

Source Error

Novel

Correct

Source Error

Novel

Figure 2: Observed data in bars (correct responses, source errors, intrusion errors) with 95% confidence interval and data
predicted by participants guessing with self-generated items’
probability to be sampled boosted by varying probabilities.
pants orient their report towards their retrieval task, i.e., deliberately withholding fluent items in the Recall observed task.
Orienting towards retrieval task Both the manipulation
of the length of the distribution and boosting memory for
self-generated items assumed that participants use a fluency heuristic in the test phase of an unconscious plagiarism task. Regardless of the the task instruction to retrieve
self-generated or other-generated (here: observed) items, the
fluency heuristic assumes that participants will base their responding entirely on what comes to mind at test. This means
items associated with higher probabilities will be reported
more readily, regardless of the retrieval task.
In a more nuanced approach, it is feasible that participants are able to regulate the memories they report (Marsh &
Bower, 1993; Hollins et al., 2016). In this case, participants in
the Recall observed task could be able to withhold items that
first come to mind from report if they assume that better memory/higher fluency would be indicative of self-generation and
hence represents a source error. This type of source monitoring is based entirely on monitoring the memory strength of
items, rather than any source features.
In the simulation, we implemented a task orientation by
sampling double the total number of items a participant reported from each shape distribution. For the Recall performed
task, we then used the top half of the sampled items as items
guessed in the simulation. In the Recall observed task, we
discarded the first few guesses (this is participants withholding items from report) and instead used the bottom half of
guesses, the relatively less frequent items. The remainder
of the simulation was identical to previous simulations, with
sampling based on the full-length distribution.
Figure 3 shows the results for the frequency-based guessing if self-generated items are boosted in memory and participants in the Recall observed task withhold these items.

2527

Recall performed
9

Recall performed

7
6
5

Recall observed

9
Observation benefit
None
0.075
0.1
0.15
0.3

8
7
6
Frequency

8

Frequency

Recall observed

Generation benefit
None
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5

4

5
4

3

3

2

2

1

1

0

0
Correct

Source Error

Novel

Correct

Source Error

Novel

Correct

Source Error

Novel

Correct

Source Error

Novel

Figure 3: Observed data in bars (correct responses, source errors, intrusion errors) with 95% confidence intervals and data
predicted by participants guessing with self-generated items’
probability to be sampled boosted by varying probabilities.

Figure 4: Observed data in bars (correct responses, source
errors, intrusion errors) wit 95% confidence intervals and data
predicted by participants guessing with self-generated items’
probability to be sampled boosted by varying probabilities.

The results for the Recall performed task are naturally equivalent to the simulation without retrieval task orientation, since
in both cases the most frequent items are reported. For the
Recall observed task, the simulated participants are now less
likely to now report source errors, i.e. they successfully withhold those items. Rather than this boosting the correct retrieval (items they observed their partner perform), this modification only increases the number of novel items. Even
with an orientation towards weaker items, a frequency-based
guessing procedure with memory for self-generated items
does not account for the observed pattern of data in the Recall
observed task.
Remember, we implemented only increased memory for
self-generated but not for observed items. It is possible that
even small increases in memory for observed items could explain the correct responses in the Recall-observed task. In a
final step modification, we therefore manipulated memory for
observed actions. We sampled from distributions slightly limited in length (0.9 distribution from the length modification)
and boosted memory for self-generated actions by 0.3 (the
boost that most closely matches the pattern of responding in
the Recall performed task). We boosted memory for observed
actions by a probability term of 0, 0.3/4, 0.3/3, 0.3/2 and 0.3,
using the assumption that memory for self-generated items is
not likely to be lower than memory for observed actions.
Figure 4 shows the results of the simulation and the observed data. Boosting memory for observed actions does not
lead to a closer approximation of the data in the Recall performed task, in part because the effects of the shortened distribution and memory for observed actions both limit retrieval
of novel items and increase retrieval of observed actions.
In the Recall observed task, with additional memory for
observed actions, the number of correct responses observed
in the experiment cannot be replicated. This may not be sur-

prising given the implementation of the task orientation in
the simulation. We implemented participants’ orientation towards observed actions in the Recall observed task as a withholding of the first few sampled items, in spirit of participants’ performance being based on fluency and the interpretation of fluency alone. Increasing the probability of observed
items now makes it more likely for those items to be sampled first, and therefore withheld. In other words, to replicate
the pattern of observed data using a frequency-based sampling approach, memory for observed actions has to be lower
than memory for self-generated actions, with the items participants observed needing to be of higher strength than novel
items that were not generated. In the simulations, we did not
achieve this balance. It is not clear if memory strength alone
is sufficient to explain performance in the Recall observed
task.

Discussion
We adapted the extended unconscious plagiarism paradigm
(Hollins et al., 2016, 2015) to motor actions. Participants took
turns generating and observing actions in the study phase, and
were asked to retrieve actions they performed themselves or
actions they observed their partner perform in the test phase.
We simulated performance in the task to test if guessing alone
can account for the pattern of data we observed.
We simulated the experiment to test if frequency-based
guessing can account for the observed results. This account is
a variation of a fluency or memory strength account of unconscious plagiarism (Marsh & Bower, 1993; Hoffman, 1997;
Jacoby et al., 1989) and proposes that memory retrieval in
the unconscious plagiarism paradigm is guided by the overall
memory strength or availability of items at test. Items with
higher memory strength are more likely to come to mind and
hence be reported at test. We have shown that this approach

2528

with modifications of length, memory and task orientation
provides a reasonable description of the data in the Recall
performed task. Notably, it does less well in accounting for
the data in the Recall observed task.
Given the framework of this kind of memory strength account, the main difference between the retrieval tasks is that
participants will do better to report highly-frequent items in
one case (Recall performed task) and better to withhold them
in another case (Recall observed task). In the Recall observed task, participants ideally report items of some memory
strength. In our simulations we were not able to replicate that
participants, in fact, are able to make correct responses in the
Recall observed task that exceed source errors and intrusion
errors.
While responding based on memory strength alone could
explain performance in the Recall performed task, it is not
sufficient to explain performance in the Recall observed task
(for a similar conclusion using a signal detection approach,
see Hollins et al., 2016).
There are two possibilities. Participants in the Recall observed task may simply be guessing. In particular if they
can only generate very few items (or only very few items
beyond self-generated items they remember and are potentially withholding from report), guessing without any memory boost may account for performance in the task. We
showed that with very short distributions, performance in the
task was approximated. Arguably, the shortest distributions
that came closest in matching the pattern afford unrealistically few items to participants in the test phase.
Alternatively, performance in the unconscious plagiarism
(and anti-plagiarism paradigm) may not be only based on
the overall strength (fluency, familiarity or item memory)
of items. In line with the source monitoring framework
(Johnson, Hashtroudi, & Lindsay, 1993) used to explain monitoring failures in other false memory paradigms, participants
may judge source memory on a dimension separate to the
overall memory strength. While memory strength alone may
not allow participants to distinguish very typical items that
were not generated from atypical items they observed, retrieving source features from the memory of the observed actions
(visual, cognitive, affective, etc.) would allow them to report
the observed action over the novel action when asked to do so
by the task.
In conclusion, plagiarism errors are not simply the result
of participants guessing and reporting typical exemplars at
study and at test. While performance when asked to retrieve
self-generated items may be explained by participants simply using overall memory strength to guide their responding,
performance when asked to retrieve partner-generated items
cannot. A source memory account that assumes that participants consider qualitative features of their memory alongside
the overall memory strength would be more parsimonious in
accounting for performance in both retrieval tasks.

References
Brown, A. S., & Murphy, D. R. (1989). Cryptomnesia: Delineating inadvertent plagiarism. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 15, 432–
442. doi: 10.1037/0278-7393.15.3.432
Gingerich, A. C., & Sullivan, M. C. (2013). Claiming hidden memories as one’s own: A review of inadvertent plagiarism. Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 25, 903–916.
(00003) doi: 10.1080/20445911.2013.841674
Hoffman, H. G. (1997). Role of memory strength in reality monitoring decisions: Evidence from source attribution
biases. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 23, 371–383. doi: 10.1037/02787393.23.2.371
Hollins, T. J., Lange, N., Berry, C. J., & Dennis, I. (2016).
Giving and stealing ideas in memory: Source errors in
recall are influenced by both early-selection and latecorrection retrieval processes. Journal of Memory and Language, 88, 87–103. doi: 10.1016/j.jml.2016.01.004
Hollins, T. J., Lange, N., Dennis, I., & Longmore,
C. A. (2015). Social influences on unconscious plagiarism and anti-plagiarism.
Memory, 1–19.
doi:
10.1080/09658211.2015.1059857
Jacoby, L. L., Woloshyn, V., & Kelley, C. (1989). Becoming famous without being recognized: Unconscious influences of memory produced by dividing attention. Journal
of experimental psychology: General, 118, 115–125. doi:
10.1037/0096-3445.118.2.115
Johnson, M. K., Hashtroudi, S., & Lindsay, D. S. (1993).
Source monitoring. Psychological Bulletin, 114, 3–28. doi:
10.1037/0033-2909.114.1.3
Marsh, R. L., & Bower, G. H. (1993). Eliciting cryptomnesia:
unconscious plagiarism in a puzzle task. Journal of Experimental Psychology. Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 19,
673–688. doi: 10.1037/0278-7393.19.3.673
Perfect, T. J., Field, I., & Jones, R. (2009). Source credibility
and idea improvement have independent effects on unconscious plagiarism errors in recall and generate-new tasks.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 35, 267–274. doi: 10.1037/a0013936
Perfect, T. J., & Stark, L. J. (2008). Tales from the Crypt...
omnesia. In J. Dunlosky & Bjork (Eds.), A handbook of
metamemory and memory (pp. 285–314). New York: NY:
LEA.
Tenpenny, P. L., Keriazakos, M. S., Lew, G. S., & Phelan, T. P. (1998). In search of inadvertent plagiarism.
The American Journal of Psychology, 111, 529–559. doi:
10.2307/1423550

2529

