Solving the Puzzle to Reach the Summit:
Using Metaphor to Gauge Public Perceptions of Science
Paul H. Thibodeau (pthibode@oberlin.edu)
Department of Psychology, Oberlin College
120 W. Lorain St., Oberlin, OH 44074, USA

Stephen J. Flusberg (stephen.flusberg@purchase.edu)
Department of Psychology, SUNY Purchase College
735 Anderson Hill Road, Purchase, NY 10577, USA

Kevin J. Holmes (kevin.holmes@coloradocollege.edu)
Department of Psychology, Colorado College
14 E. Cache La Poudre St., Colorado Springs, CO 80903, USA
Abstract
Skepticism towards science has risen sharply in recent years.
Cognitive scientists can help address this issue by
illuminating how people conceptualize the scientific process,
paving the way for improved communication with the public.
We recruited a large sample of lay Americans, as well as
academics in the sciences and humanities, to answer a series
of questions assessing their views about science. Because
metaphors have been identified as useful tools for
communicating about complex domains, we asked
participants to choose which of two metaphors––working on a
puzzle or scaling a mountain––best captured their beliefs
about the scientific process. Results revealed substantial
variation in perceptions of science across groups, and we
highlight the ways in which scientists seem to conceptualize
science differently from non-scientists. Importantly, metaphor
preference was associated with particular patterns of thinking,
though not always in our originally hypothesized direction.
We discuss the implications of these findings.
Keywords: metaphor, science, concepts, public perceptions

Introduction
Scientific research requires a variety of skills and involves
a range of tasks and experiences. It can be like piecing
together a puzzle, in which a diverse set of empirical
findings are connected to fill in the details of big-picture
scientific theories. And it can be like climbing a mountain,
in which careful planning and steadfast persistence are
necessary to move projects forward. Both of these
metaphors—working on a puzzle and scaling a mountain—
capture aspects of the scientific process. In this paper, we
use these two metaphors to gauge how people think about
science. We recruited a large sample of the general public,
as well as academics in the sciences and humanities, to
answer a series of questions assessing their views about
science, scientific practices, and the priorities of working
scientists. They also selected which of the two metaphors
(puzzle or mountain) better represented their beliefs about
science, and we explored associations between this choice
and broader patterns of thinking about scientific practice.
Understanding how people conceptualize science is
important given the widespread anxiety about everything
from climate change to vaccines to genetically modified

organisms (Achenbach, 2015). Indeed, recent populist
political movements have been accompanied by an
increasing distrust in science and data. In a recent US poll,
almost half of participants (and over two-thirds of President
Trump’s base) said they did not trust the economic data
being reported by government agencies (Ryssdal, 2016).
There is also concern in the scientific community about the
quality of science education and the lack of public
investment in science: “An overwhelming majority of
scientists [over 75%] see the public’s limited scientific
knowledge as a problem for science,” according to another
recent poll (Funk & Rainie, 2015).
The lack of support for science represents a direct threat
to addressing important real-world situations like climate
change and, potentially, the stability of societal institutions
at large (Otto, 2016). As one recent Washington Post article
concluded, “This is how a democracy crumbles: not with a
bang, but with data trutherism” (Rampell, 2016).
Recent work in the cognitive sciences has explored how
to improve communication with the public for specific
scientific issues like climate change and public health
(Flusberg, Matlock, & Thibodeau, 2017; Thibodeau, Perko,
& Flusberg, 2015). Metaphors have been identified as useful
communication and explanatory tools, as they can help
people make sense of complex issues by relating them to
more familiar domains, leveraging the schematic knowledge
people already have in order to reason about new and
complicated subjects (Thibodeau, Crow, & Flusberg, 2016).
To date, however, little research has investigated the role of
metaphor in thinking about the scientific process itself (but
see Thibodeau, 2016, and Harwood, Reiff, & Phillipson,
2005).
In addition to addressing practical concerns about public
perceptions of science, therefore, the present work also has
theoretical implications, as cognitive scientists (particularly
cognitive linguists) often treat metaphor as a window into
how people think (e.g., Fairclough, 2013; Lakoff &
Johnson, 1980). That is, puzzle and mountain metaphors for
science seem to have different entailments, which may
suggest that people who talk about science as a puzzle think
about the scientific process differently than people who talk
about science as a mountain. On the other hand, some have

3320

questioned this approach because of the assumptions that
are made about the nature of thinking simply from observing
patterns of language use (Keysar & Bly, 1995; McGlone,
2011; Murphy, 1996, 1997).
One of the few studies to address this issue in the context
of reasoning about science involved structured interviews
with scientists aimed at identifying (a) key characteristics of
scientific inquiry and (b) metaphors that scientists use to
conceptualize these issues (Harwood et al., 2005). The goal
was to improve science education by encouraging science
teachers to use metaphors in the classroom more
deliberately. The results indicated that scientists’
descriptions of the scientific process emphasized five key
characteristics: open-mindedness, putting yourself in your
work, utilizing resources, problem solving, and making
connections. These characteristics were then matched to
conceptual metaphors that the scientists used in the
interviews. For example, a puzzle metaphor was often used
to emphasize how scientists seek to make connections; an
artist metaphor was used to stress the importance of being
open-minded; a gardening metaphor was used to talk about
immersing oneself in their work.
One possibility is that these metaphors can encourage
non-scientists to think about the scientific process in a way
that is more consistent with how scientists think about
scientific inquiry (Harwood et al., 2005). However, an
alternative possibility is that the meaning of these metaphors
will be different for scientists and non-scientists. That is, the
knowledge and experience that people have with science
may influence how they interpret metaphors for the
scientific process. A recent investigation into how different
groups of people understand militaristic metaphors in
biology like invasive species suggests support for the latter
possibility (Larson, Nerlich, & Wallis, 2005): a metaphor
that means one thing to scientists can mean something else
to non-scientists.
Therefore, the present study represents an important
empirical step in comparing how different groups of people
interpret metaphors for the scientific process. Do people
actually think about science in a way that is consistent with
the metaphor they would use to talk about it?

Experiment
Methods
Participants A sample of 518 people representing the
general public was recruited from Amazon’s Mechanical
Turk (60% female; Mage = 35). A second sample of
academics was recruited from the faculty listings of college
and university websites in the United States, drawn from a
list of top research and liberal arts institutions. We created a
list of 2,000 academics, roughly half representing the
sciences (i.e. faculty working in Physics, Chemistry, or
Biology Departments), and half representing the humanities
(i.e. faculty working in English, History, or Philosophy
Departments). An email asking for voluntary participation
in the survey, yielded responses from 156 academics (93
from the sciences and 63 from the humanities).

Although we were primarily interested in comparing how
scientists and the general public think about science, we
were also interested in understanding why these groups may
think differently. Including the group of academics from the
humanities helps to address this question. Like scientists,
this sample is highly educated, familiar with working on
projects that can take long periods of time, and conduct their
work in a college or university setting. On the other hand,
like participants from the general public, this sample may
not be as familiar with the day-to-day experience of
conducting scientific work. As a result, including the
humanists allows us to investigate why the general public
might hold views about science that are different from
scientists. For instance, are differences related to more
general factors like education level or related to factors
more directly tied to being immersed in scientific work?
Materials & Design All participants were asked to choose
between two metaphors for science. The instructions for this
judgment read, “We are interested in how people think
about science. Which of the following metaphors best
captures how you view the process of working on a
scientific project?” The order of the two options—Working
on a puzzle or Scaling a mountain—was counterbalanced.1
These two metaphors for science were chosen because of
their use in prior work (Thibodeau, 2016), and because they
are commonly used by scientists to talk about the scientific
process (Harwood et al., 2005). Thibodeau (2016), for
example, found that metaphorically framing a scientist’s
work as a puzzle led people to value “testing completely
novel theories” over “using methods that are simple for
others to follow,” whereas framing the scientist’s work as a
climbing a mountain led people to value using simple
methods over testing novel theories.
All participants were also asked to rank six aspects of the
scientific process in order of importance, three of which
were designed to be more consistent with the entailments of
the puzzle metaphor and three of which were designed to be
more consistent with the entailments of the mountain
climbing metaphor (see Table 1). The relationship between
the entailments and metaphors was based on prior work
(Harwood et al., 2005; Thibodeau, 2016), and experimenter
intuition; one goal of the study is to test whether different
groups of people have similar intuitions about the
relationship between the entailments and metaphors. The
order of the statements was randomized across participants.2
1

In pilot testing we found no effect of subtle wording
differences for these metaphorical phrases (i.e. “Working on
a puzzle” versus “Solving a puzzle”; “Climbing a mountain”
versus “Scaling a mountain”). In every case, about 90% of
participants from the general public chose puzzle.
2
Of note, the order of the metaphor preference judgment
and the entailment ranking tasks was counterbalanced for
the sample from the general public. Since there were no
differences in how people responded on the two orderings,
we did not counterbalance these tasks for the academics.

3321

Table 1. Tasks related to the scientific process that were
ranked by participants.
Actions and Behaviors Related to Science
1. Find creative ways to study important research questions
2. Seek insight from diverse sources
3. Find connections between seemingly unrelated ideas
4. Make a detailed research plan
5. Persist in the face of setbacks
6. Revise theories in light of new data or counter-evidence

Metaphor
Puzzle
Puzzle
Puzzle
Mountain
Mountain
Mountain

Finally, participants were asked to complete the 40-item
Scientific Attitude Inventory II (SAI II), which is designed
to measure attitudes related to science along six dimensions
(Moore & Foy, 1997; see Table 2). This instrument has been
used to measure perceptions of science among students and
the general public, and to predict who is likely to pursue a
career in a STEM field (e.g., Bathgate, Schunn, & Correnti,
2014; Moore & Foy, 1997).
As with the rank order task, we use responses from the
SAI II to compare how the three populations think about
science and to test whether certain dimensions of the scale
map onto the view that science is like working on puzzle
versus scaling a mountain.

political ideology, personality) predicted participants’
choice of metaphor. The only reliable predictor of
participants’ choice was age: older participants were
especially likely to endorse the puzzle metaphor for science,
B = .40, SE = .17, p = .016.
Ranking Priorities We first compare how the three
populations ranked the six statements about science,
focusing on contrasts between scientists and (a) humanists
and (b) participants from the general public. Then we test
for a relationship between participants’ preferred metaphor
and their rankings of the statements. For this second
analysis, we excluded the humanists because of the small
number who preferred the mountain metaphor (n = 3).
First, a mixed-effects linear model was fit to the rankings
with statement (1-6) treated as a within-subjects effect and
sample (public, humanists, scientists) treated as a betweensubjects effect (Bates, Maechler, Bolker, & Walker, 2014).
The model revealed that the samples gave different rankings
to the statements, χ2(5) = 209.91, p < .001.
Less 5
important

Mean Ranking

We compare how the three populations (General Public;
Scientists; Humanists) rank the statements overall, and we
test whether people who prefer the puzzle metaphor for
science rank the puzzle-congruent statements as more
important than the mountain-congruent statements (and vice
versa for the mountain metaphor).

Table 2. Six dimensions of the SAI II and example items..
Dimension
Theory
Limited
Empirical
Goal
Public
Interest

Example Item
Scientific ideas can be changed.
Scientists cannot always find the answers to their questions.
Scientific questions are answered by observing things.
Ideas are the important result of science.
Every citizen should understand science.
I would enjoy studying science.

Connect

4

Results
Metaphor Preference Among participants sampled from
the general public, 89% preferred the puzzle metaphor for
science, χ2(1) = 315.09, p < .001. The puzzle metaphor was
also preferred by 89% of academics, χ2(1) = 92.31, p < .001,
although scientists (84%) were marginally more likely to
choose the mountain metaphor compared to humanists
(95%), χ2(1) = 3.71, p = .054.
For the sample recruited from the general public, we
tested whether any of the individual difference measures
(i.e. gender, age, education level, math/science training,

Persist

Persist
Connect
Diverse
Plan

Revise
Diverse
Creative

Connect
Diverse
Persist
Revise

3

More 2
important

At the end of the survey, participants from the general
public were asked background and demographic questions,
including their gender, age, education level, math/science
training, political ideology (0, Very liberal, to 100, Very
conservative), and personality (the Big Five personality
dimensions; Gosling, Rentfrow, & Swann, 2003).
Academics were asked to identify as working in the
humanities or sciences.

Plan

Plan

Revise

Creative

Public
Public

Humanities
Humanists

Creative

Sciences
Scientists

Figure 1. Mean ranking of six statements about science by
sample: of the general public, academics working in the
humanities, and academics working in the sciences.
Figure 1 illustrates how participants from the three groups
ranked the statements overall. One pattern to note is that
scientists tended to show more agreement on how the
statements were ranked (Kendall’s W = .25) than
participants from the general public (W = .07) or humanists
(W = .21). For instance, “planning” was ranked as the most
important aspect of science by the general public, with 53%
of participants from this sample ranking it first or second. In
contrast, “creativity” was ranked as the most important
aspect of science by scientists, with 76% of participants
from this sample ranking it first or second. On the other end
of the spectrum, “finding connections” was ranked as the
least important aspect of science by the general public (46%
ranked it fifth or sixth), while “planning” was ranked as the
least important aspect of science by scientists (66% ranked
it fifth or sixth). This suggests that scientists, as a group,
have a more consistent conception of the scientific process
than the general public; the humanists showed an
intermediate level of consistency.

3322

Scientists >

Scientists <

to our initial hypothesis, preference for the puzzle metaphor
was associated with prioritizing the mountain-congruent
statements (and vice versa). This pattern was consistent
across both groups of participants (i.e. there was no 3-way
interaction between statement type, metaphor choice, and
sample), χ2(1) = 1.39, p = .239 (see Figure 3). Of note, the
analysis also revealed an interaction between sample and
statement type, χ2(1) = 38.44, p < .001, such that scientists
tended to rank the puzzle-congruent statements as more
important, regardless of preferred metaphor, than
participants from the general public.

Public
Humanists

Creative
Diverse
Connect
Plan
Persist

Mean Ranking

Less
4.2
important

Revise

-1.2

-0.9

-0.6

-0.3

0.0

0.3

0.6

0.9

Cohen’s d

Figure 2. Comparing rankings of scientists to those of
people from the general public and humanists with a
measure of effect size (Cohen’s d). Bars that extend to the
right indicate that scientists ranked the statement as more
important (purple: compared to participants from the general
public; orange: compared to humanists); bars that extend to
the left indicate that scientists ranked the statement as less
important. Stars indicate a statistically significant difference
between scientists and the comparison group.
Figure 2 shows how scientists ranked the statements
compared to the other two groups of participants by plotting
a measure of effect size (Cohen’s d). As shown, scientists
tended to place less emphasis on planning than humanists,
t(154) = 3.69, p < .001, or participants from the general
public, t(609) = 10.21, p < .001. On the other hand,
scientists tended to place more emphasis on persistence than
humanists, t(154) = 2.82, p = .005, or participants from the
general public, t(609) = 2.95, p = .003. The two groups of
academics ranked the other four statements similarly.
Scientists and the sample from the general public ranked
three of the remaining four statements differently: scientists
placed less emphasis on seeking diverse sources of insight,
t(609) = 2.49, p = .013, but more emphasis on finding
connections between seemingly unrelated ideas, t(609) =
2.21, p = .027, and creativity, t(609) = 6.72, p < .001; these
two groups placed similar emphasis on revising theories in
light of new data.
A second analysis tested whether people who considered
science to be more like a puzzle ranked puzzle-congruent
statements as more important than people who considered
science to be more like mountain climbing. A mixed-effects
linear model was fit to the data with predictors for statement
type (puzzle- or mountain-congruent), metaphor choice
(puzzle or mountain), and sample (scientists versus general
public), which revealed an interaction between the statement
type and metaphor choice, χ2(1) = 4.07, p = .044. Contrary

Scientists

Public
4.2

Chose puzzle
Chose mountain

3.8

3.8

3.4

3.4

3.0

3.0

More
important 2.6 Puzzle-congruent

Mountain-congruent

Statement Type

2.6

Puzzle-congruent

Mountain-congruent

Statement Type

Figure 3. Mean ranking of statements by type (puzzle- or
mountain-congruent) and metaphor chosen (puzzle or
mountain) for the two samples analyzed (from the general
public and of scientists).
People who preferred the mountain metaphor were
particularly likely to rank “finding connections” (M = 3.69,
SD = 1.52) as more important than people who preferred the
puzzle metaphor (M = 4.15, SD = 1.53), whereas people who
preferred the puzzle metaphor were particularly likely to
rank “planning” (M = 3.09, SD = 1.91) as more important
than people who preferred the mountain metaphor (M =
3.44, SD = 2.00).
This finding is consistent with the view that the two
metaphors capture structured ways of thinking about the
scientific process that are different from one another. People
who reported thinking science was a puzzle ranked the
statements in a systematically different way than people
who reported thinking science was a mountain. However,
the finding is inconsistent with how we had mapped the
entailments of the metaphors onto the statements,
suggesting that the intuitions of language researchers may
differ from how metaphoric language is used and
understood in the real world.
It is also possible that behaviors on the two tasks—
choosing a metaphor and ranking the statements—were
complementary. People may have had a sense of the
limitations of their preferred metaphor, which they
expressed in the rank-order task (or vice versa). For
instance, a participant may believe that finding connections
and planning are both vital to the scientific process. Such a
belief may lead this participant to choose the puzzle
metaphor as more appropriate (because it captures the value
of finding connections) and also to rank planning highly
(since it is captured less well by the puzzle metaphor). In

3323

other words, participants may consider many aspects of
science to be important, not just those that are consistent
with the entailments of a single metaphor. This may lead
them to express a preference for one metaphor, as required
by our forced-choice task, and then to emphasize
inconsistent entailments in the rank-order task.
Scientific Attitude Inventory A similar set of analyses was
applied to data from the SAI II. First, we found differences
in the extent to which participants endorsed the six
dimensions measured by the survey, χ2(5) = 1637.2, p <
.001: participants agreed most strongly with statements
about the necessity of adopting an empirical mindset,
followed by statements about the importance of public
outreach, about an interest in doing scientific work, that the
scope of science is limited to observable phenomena, and
finally, that the end goal of science is ideas (rather than a
tangible product like technology).

Third, the analysis revealed an interaction between ratings
of the dimensions and the three samples, χ2(10) = 199.57, p
< .001. As shown in Figure 4, scientists endorsed all six
dimensions more strongly than participants from the general
public, ps < .001. Compared to humanists, scientists more
strongly endorsed having an empirical mindset, the view
that public support is important, and were more likely to say
they enjoyed doing scientific work, ps < .01, whereas
humanists were more likely to view science as being limited
to the study of natural phenomena, p < .001. The two groups
of academics expressed similar views about scientific
theorizing and about the end-goal of scientific work.
Mountain > Puzzle

Puzzle > Mountain
Public
Scientists

Theory
Limited

Scientists >

Scientists <

Empirical

Public
Humanists

Theory

Goal

Limited
Public

Empirical
Interest

Goal

-0.9 -0.6 -0.3

0.0

0.3

0.6

0.9

Cohen’s d

Public

Figure 5. Differences in ratings by metaphor chosen for
people from the general public and scientists, illustrated by
a measure of effect size (Cohen’s d). Bars that extend to the
right indicate higher ratings among people who preferred
the puzzle metaphor; bars that extend to the left indicate
higher ratings among people who preferred the mountain
metaphor.

Interest

-0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

Cohen’s d

Figure 4. Comparing ratings of scientists to those of people
from the general public and humanists with a measure of
effect size (Cohen’s d). Bars that extend to the right indicate
that scientists rated the dimension as more important
(purple: compared to participants from the general public;
orange: compared to humanists); bars that extend to the left
indicate that scientists rated the dimension as less important.
Stars indicate a statistically significant difference between
scientists and the comparison group.
Second, the analysis revealed differences in how the three
samples rated the statements, χ2(2) = 196.57, p < .001.
Overall, scientists tended to endorse the statements more
strongly than participants from the general public, B = .45,
SE = .03, p < .001, and humanists, B = .17, SE = .04, p <
.001. Humanists endorsed the statements more strongly than
participants from the general public, B = .28, SE = .04, p <
.001.

Finally, we tested for a relationship between the metaphor
participants preferred and ratings of the dimensions
(excluding data from humanists). As illustrated in Figure 5,
among scientists, preference for the mountain metaphor was
associated more strongly with the view that scientific study
is limited to natural phenomena, t(91) = 2.72, p = .009;
among the general public, preference for the puzzle
metaphor was associated with a more empirical mindset,
t(516) = 2.35, p = .019, the view that public support is
important, t(516) = 2.53, p = .012, and a stronger interest in
doing scientific work, t(516) = 3.46, p < .001. These results
provide further evidence that the two metaphors capture
different ways of thinking about the scientific process, but
also suggest that what exactly is captured by the metaphors
is different for scientists and non-scientists.

3324

Discussion
Skepticism towards scientific research can be found
among the general public as well as politicians on both sides
of the political aisle, raising significant concerns about the
current quality of science education and communication. As
an initial step towards addressing this critical issue, we
aimed to illuminate how people think about the scientific
process itself, contrasting the beliefs of scientists with those
of academics in the humanities and members of the general
public, and exploring the role of metaphor in representing
broad conceptual viewpoints.
We found several notable similarities and differences in
how scientists and non-scientists conceptualized the
scientific process. Of particular interest, scientists tended to
prioritize persistence more than the two samples of nonscientists, who tended to prioritize planning more than the
scientists. This suggests that being immersed in scientific
work makes salient the determination needed to complete
research projects. Simply hearing about scientific findings
in the classroom or the news, on the other hand, may make
it seem like scientists spend most of their time planning. In
line with this distinction, scientists were more likely than
non-scientists to think science was like scaling a mountain,
although all three groups showed an overall preference for
the puzzle metaphor.
Individuals who preferred the puzzle metaphor tended,
counter-intuitively, to value statements about science that
were designed to be congruent with the mountain metaphor
(and vice versa). Preference for the puzzle metaphor was
also associated with a more empirical mindset, the view that
public support is important for scientific progress, and an
interest in doing scientific work—but only among the
general public, not among scientists. These findings imply
that metaphors for science will be interpreted differently
depending on one’s scientific knowledge and expertise. The
findings also highlight the importance of identifying the
systems of knowledge associated with metaphor use rather
than merely assuming them (Keysar & Bly, 1995; McGlone,
2011; Murphy, 1996, 1997).
Future research in this area should explore additional
metaphors for scientific inquiry. For instance, one scientist
in the study suggested that science was more like mapmaking or exploring than it was like working on a puzzle or
scaling a mountain. Future work should also investigate
whether these metaphors can causally influence how people
think about the scientific process.

References
Achenbach, J. (2015). Why do many reasonable people
doubt science? National Geographic, 14.
Bates, D., Maechler, M., Bolker, B., & Walker, S. (2014).
lme4: Linear mixed-effects models using Eigen and S4.
Bathgate, M. E., Schunn, C. D., & Correnti, R. (2014).
Children's motivation toward science across contexts,
manner of interaction, and topic. Science Education, 98,
189-215.

Fairclough, N. (2013). Critical discourse analysis: The
critical study of language. New York: Routledge.
Flusberg, S. J., Matlock, T., & Thibodeau, P. H. (2017).
Metaphors for the war (or race) against climate change.
Environmental
Communication.
doi:10.1080/17524032.2017.1289111
Funk, C., & Rainie, L. (2015). Public and scientists’ views
on science and society. Pew Research Center. Retrieved
January 23, 2017: http://www.pewinternet.org/2015/01/
29/public-and-scientists-views-on-science-and-society/
Gosling, S. D., Rentfrow, P. J., & Swann Jr., W. B. (2003).
A very brief measure of the Big-5 personality domains.
Journal of Research in Personality, 37, 504-528.
Harwood, W. S., Reiff, R. R., & Phillipson, T. (2005).
Putting the puzzle together: Scientists metaphors for
scientific inquiry. Science Educator, 14, 25-30.
Keysar, B., & Bly, B. (1995). Intuitions of the transparency
of idioms: Can one keep a secret by spilling the
beans? Journal of Memory and Language, 34, 89-109.
Larson, B. M., Nerlich, B., & Wallis, P. (2005). Metaphors
and biorisks: The war on infectious diseases and
invasive species. Science Communication, 26, 243-268.
McGlone, M. S. (2011). Hyperbole, homunculi, and
hindsight bias: An alternative evaluation of conceptual
metaphor theory. Discourse Processes, 48, 563-574.
Moore, R. W., & Foy, R. L. H. (1997). The scientific
attitude inventory: A revision (SAI II). Journal of
Research in Science Teaching, 34, 327-336.
Murphy, G. L. (1996). On metaphoric representation.
Cognition, 60, 173-204.
Murphy, G. L. (1997). Reasons to doubt the present
evidence for metaphoric representation. Cognition, 62,
99-108.
Otto, S. L. (2016). The war on science: Who’s waging it,
why it matters, what we can do about it. Minneapolis:
Milkweed Editions.
Rampell, C. (2016). When facts don’t matter, how can
democracy survive? The Washington Post. Retrieved
January 23, 2017: https://www.washingtonpost.com
/opinions/when-the-facts-dont-matter-how-can-demo
cracy-survive/2016/10/17/560ff302-94a5-11e6-9b7c57290af48a49_story.html?utm_term=.35e1a60b4a74
Ryssdal, K. (2016). Poll finds Americans' economic anxiety
reaches new high. Marketplace. Retrieved January 23,
2017: http://www.marketplace.org/2016/10/13/econom
y/americans-economic-anxiety-has-reached-new-high
Thibodeau, P. H. (2016). Extended metaphors are the home
runs of persuasion: Don’t fumble the phrase. Metaphor
and Symbol, 31, 53-72.
Thibodeau, P. H., Crow, L., & Flusberg, S. J. (2016). The
metaphor police: A case study of the role of metaphor
in explanation. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review.
doi:10.3758/s13423-016-1192-5
Thibodeau, P. H., Perko, V. L., & Flusberg, S. J. (2015).
The relationship between narrative classification of
obesity and support for public policy interventions. Social
Science & Medicine, 141, 27-35.

3325

