Spatial language promotes cross-domain associations in early childhood
Ariel Starr (arielstarr@berkeley.edu) & Mahesh Srinivasan (srinivasan@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720

Abstract
Spatial language is often used metaphorically to describe
other domains, including time (a long sound) and pitch (a
high sound). How does experience with these metaphors
shape the associations we make across disparate domains?
Here, we tested 3- to 6-year-old English-speaking children
and adults with a cross-domain matching task that assessed
space-time and space-pitch mappings. We tested spatial
relations that are expressed in English metaphors for time and
pitch, as well as metaphors that are unfamiliar to English
speakers, but expressed in other languages. Participants
performed a perceptual matching task, in which they matched
pictures and sounds, and a linguistic matching task, in which
they matched pictures or sounds to verbal labels. Adults
readily matched between space and time and between space
and pitch, using relations expressed by both familiar and
unfamiliar metaphors. Children showed an advantage for
linguistic matching compared to perceptual matching, but
their performance was similarly unaffected by metaphor
familiarity. Together, these results suggest that spatial
language promotes the development of cross-domain
associations, and that experience with particular spatial
metaphors is not required to produce this benefit.
Keywords: metaphor theory; linguistic relativity; crossmodal matching

Introduction
Across languages and cultures, spatial language is
frequently co-opted to describe other domains. In English,
for example, we describe temporal duration as long or short,
numbers as big or small, and auditory pitch as high or low.
What can the prevalence of these spatial metaphors tell us
about how we represent and reason about these other nonspatial domains? Previous work has demonstrated that
spatial metaphors are not simply a communicative tool.
Instead, they reflect our mental representations of nonspatial domains (Boroditsky, 2001; Casasanto &
Boroditsky, 2008; Dolscheid, Shayan, Majid, & Casasanto,
2013). Here, we test how experience with spatial metaphors
over development influences children’s cross-domain
associations.
Although spatial metaphors are common across
languages, there is also variety in the exact spatial relations
invoked. This cross-linguistic variation can be used to test
hypotheses about the role of linguistic experience in the
development of cross-domain associations. For example, in
English, temporal durations are described in terms of twodimensional length, whereas languages including Greek and
Spanish use three-dimensional spatial terms. Likewise,
though English describes pitch in terms of height, languages
including Turkish and Farsi use terms related to thickness
(i.e., such that thicker sounds are lower in pitch).

Linguistic experience is not required to recognize crossdomain associations. Many studies have demonstrated that
prelinguistic infants are already sensitive to many types of
these correspondences (de Hevia & Spelke, 2010; Lourenco
& Longo, 2010; Mondloch & Maurer, 2004; Srinivasan &
Carey, 2010; Walker et al., 2010). Even neonates, for
example, associate longer spatial lengths with longer
temporal durations and larger numerical magnitudes (de
Hevia, Izard, Coubart, Spelke, & Streri, 2014). With regards
to associations between pitch and space, infants appear to
recognize both height-pitch and thickness-pitch mappings,
even when only one of these associations is encoded in the
language they are learning (Dolscheid, Hunnius, Casasanto,
& Majid, 2014; Walker et al., 2010; but see Lewkowicz &
Minar, 2014).
However, according to one recent study, young children
may be less flexible than infants (Shayan, Ozturk, &
Bowerman, 2014). This study investigated thickness-pitch
mappings in 2- to 5-year-old children who spoke either
German, Farsi, or Turkish, and found that while Turkish and
Farsi speaking children (who speak languages that employ a
thickness metaphor for pitch) can reliably map thickness to
pitch, German-speaking children (who speak a language that
does not employ a thickness-pitch metaphor) cannot. This
finding suggests that maintenance of cross-domain
associations between space and pitch may be dependent on
the type of metaphorical mappings reinforced by language,
at least during childhood.
In explicit matching tasks, adults appear to be more
flexible than children. Adults can match pitch to both
thickness and height, for example, and more generally can
form mappings across innumerable domains, regardless of
whether their language employs the relevant metaphors
(Marks, 1978; Shayan et al., 2014) However, experience
with linguistic metaphors does appear to influence the
automaticity with which cross-domain associations are
processed in adults. In one study, adult speakers of Dutch
readily matched pitch to thickness in an explicit task, but
their representations of pitch were only biased by irrelevant
spatial height information and not by irrelevant thickness
information (Dolscheid et al., 2013). This suggests that
Dutch-speaking adults automatically process a height-pitch
mapping but not a thickness-pitch mapping. The reverse
pattern of results – a biasing effect of thickness but not
height on pitch representations – occurs for Farsi speakers,
consistent with the idea that experience with languagespecific spatial metaphors influences the automaticity with
which cross-domain associations are accessed. A parallel
pattern of results for the case of space-time mappings has
been reported from English and Greek-speaking adults. In

1120

this study, temporal duration judgments in English-speaking
adults were biased by only irrelevant variation in spatial
length (and not irrelevant volumetric information), and
duration judgments in Greek-speaking adults were biased
only by irrelevant volumetric information (and not irrelevant
spatial length; Casasanto, 2008).
In sum, prior research suggests that experience with one’s
own language’s spatial metaphors affects children’s explicit
cross-domain associations, as well as adults’ implicit crossdomain associations. This suggests that experience with
spatial metaphors may have a persistent influence on crossdomain associations throughout the lifespan. Here, we
expand on previous studies of the development of crossdomain associations by testing both space-time and spacepitch associations, and by directly comparing the effects of
familiar versus novel metaphors in the same population. In
addition, we test a large number of children between the
ages of three and six years to gain insight into the finegrained developmental trajectory of cross-domain
associations. We test how children’s experience with spatial
metaphors influences their cross-domain associations by
focusing on three critical factors.
First, we contrast cross-domain associations between
space and time compared to associations between space and
pitch. We focus on associations with time and pitch because
while both time and pitch are frequently described using
spatial language, they have different dimensional structures.
Time, like spatial extent, is a prothetic dimension, meaning
that it can be represented by an ordered continuum of
increasing amount (Stevens, 1957). Differences in temporal
duration and spatial extent are therefore quantitative. Pitch,
on the other hand, is a metathetic dimension, meaning that
differences in pitch are qualitative – pitches vary in
frequency rather than amount. Therefore, it is possible that
the shared ordinal structure of space and time may provide a
specific advantage for cross-domain space-time mappings
that does not extend to space-pitch mappings.
Second, we investigate the effect of experience with
specific spatial metaphors by testing whether Englishspeaking children are better able to match domains in ways
that reflect familiar spatial metaphors compared to
unfamiliar metaphors. For time, we compared children’s
ability to map between sounds that varied in temporal
durations and images that varied in either length (long vs.
short; familiar relation) or in overall size (big vs. small;
unfamiliar relation). For pitch, we compared children’s
ability to map between sounds that varied in auditory pitch
and images that varied in either height (high vs. low;
familiar relation) or thickness (thin vs. thick; unfamiliar
relation). If experience with specific spatial metaphors
constrains children’s cross-domain associations, then
matching performance should be higher for the familiar
relations compared to the unfamiliar relations. In addition,
the difference in performance between familiar and
unfamiliar relations may increase with age, as children gain
more experience with their language-specific spatial
metaphors.

Finally, we probe whether children are better at matching
across domains when the spatial metaphors are verbally
labeled – even when the metaphors are unfamiliar –
compared to when the task is purely perceptual. Previous
research suggests that verbal labels may help children
organize their representations of perceptual domains by
providing cues as to how to align the endpoints of disparate
domains (Smith & Sera, 1992). For example, if children
understand that the word long in a spatial context refers to
greater spatial extent, this may provide a cue for
understanding that long in a temporal context refers to a
greater temporal duration. Therefore, children’s nonlinguistic ability to successfully map across domains (as
measured by a perceptual matching task) may be enhanced
by the presence of verbal spatial labels (as measured by a
linguistic matching task).

Methods
Participants
80 children aged 3 to 6 years (mean age: 4.89 years, range:
3.13-6.98 years) and 16 adults (mean age: 21.25 years,
range: 18.63-27.59 years) participated in this study. All
participants were native English language speakers who
were not regularly exposed to or fluent in a second
language. Data from an additional 17 children and 6 adults
were excluded from analyses due to proficiency with
another language (9 children, 5 adults), failure to complete
the experiment (5 children), inattention (3 children), or
performance more than 3 standard deviations below the
group mean (1 adult).

Materials
Spatial stimuli consisted of pictures of cartoon aliens that
varied in length (familiar space-time metaphor), overall size
(unfamiliar space-time metaphor), vertical position (familiar
space-pitch metaphor), or thickness (unfamiliar space-pitch
metaphor). Temporal stimuli consisted of monotonic tones
that varied in either duration or auditory pitch. Tones that
varied in duration had a constant pitch of 384 Hz and were
either 1 second or 3 seconds in length. Tones that varied in
pitch had a constant duration of 2 seconds and a pitch of
either 256 Hz or 512 Hz. All stimuli were presented using a
laptop computer.

Procedure
Participants’ cross-domain matching ability was tested for
both space-time and space-pitch pairings. Adult participants
completed both the familiar (long/short for space-time and
high/low for space-pitch) and unfamiliar (big/small for
space-time and thin/thick for space-pitch) pairings. The
order of the space-time and space-pitch blocks was
counterbalanced across subjects, and the unfamiliar pairing
always preceded the familiar pairing within each block.
Child participants completed one block of space-time
pairings and one block of space-pitch pairings, with the

1121

order of the blocks and assignment to the familiar versus
unfamiliar pairings counterbalanced across participants.
All experimental sessions began with the familiarization
trials. At the beginning of each block, participants were first
shown pictures of both relevant aliens and listened to both
types of sounds. Within each block, the perceptual matching
task always preceded the linguistic matching task so as to
not bias participants’ responses. Adults performed 8 trials of
each task type, and children performed 4 trials of each task
type.

Familiarization Trials
The familiarization trials were designed to have the same
structure as the test trials and involved matching pictures of
animals to the appropriate sounds. In the first two trials, two
animals were displayed on the screen. An animal sound was
then played, and the participant was instructed to point to
the animal that makes that sound. In the second two trials,
one animal appeared centrally on the screen in front of two
trees. The participant was told that the animal was looking
for another animal just like it that was hiding in the jungle.
The experimenter said that the animal was hiding behind
one of the trees, and played a sound from each tree. The
participant was instructed to point to the side where the
animal sound that matched the visible animal was heard.

alien makes). In the space as target trials, the type of sound
was described and participants chose which of two visually
presented aliens makes that type of sound (e.g., the
experimenter asks the participant which of two aliens makes
a long sound).

Results
Accuracy for all matches was scored as correct if the match
was in the direction reflected by spatial metaphors in
language (e.g., matching the long or big alien to the long
tone and the short or small alien to the short tone).
Children’s performance was analyzed using a repeated
measures ANOVA with match type (perceptual or
linguistic) and match direction (space as source or space as
target) as within-subjects factors and dimension (space-time
or space-pitch), familiarity (familiar or unfamiliar), and age
as between-subjects factors. This model yielded a
significant main effect of age (F(3, 144) = 5.35, p < .005;
Figure 1A) and a significant main effect of match type (F(1,
144) = 17.14, p < .001; Figure 1B). Interestingly, neither the
main effect of dimension nor familiarity was significant,
indicating that overall children were equally proficient at
matching across space and time compared to space and
pitch, and they performed just as well for spatial relations
employed by English-language metaphors compared to
unfamiliar space relations.

Test Trials
Perceptual Matching Task In the perceptual matching
task, participants matched pictures of aliens to the types of
sounds they make. Critically, in these trials verbal labels
were never used to describe the stimuli. There were two trial
types: space as source (the referent is a spatial dimension
and participants chose the sound that matched in pitch or
duration) or space as target (the referent is a sound that
varies in pitch or duration and participants chose the alien
with a matching spatial attribute). For the space as source
trials, a single alien was presented in front of two trees and
the experimenter said that the alien was looking for another
alien just like it. The experimenter said that the alien could
be hiding behind either tree, and pointed to each tree as the
sound of the alien hiding behind it was played. The
participant was asked to point to the tree that had an alien
behind it that was just like the visible alien. For the space as
target trials, two aliens were presented on the screen and a
single sound was played. The participant was instructed to
choose which of the aliens is the one that makes that sound.
Linguistic Matching Task In the linguistic matching task,
a verbal label was used to describe either the appearance of
an alien or the type of sound made by an alien, and the
participant matched this label to one of two exemplars in the
opposite dimension. In the space as source trials, the spatial
dimension was described and participants chose one of two
auditory matches (e.g., the participant is told that a long
alien is looking for another long alien just like it, and the
long alien is hiding behind one of two trees; the two sounds
are played and the participant chooses the sound that a long

Figure 1: Children's cross-domain matching performance by
age group (A) and by match type (B). Error bars indicate
SEM.
Planned post-hoc comparisons revealed that 3-year-olds
performed worse than the older age groups, all of whom
performed at similar levels (3-year-olds: M = 54.08, SEM =
2.67; 4-year-olds: M = 70.24, SEM = 2.68; 5-year-olds: M =
72.70, SEM = 3.16, 6-year-olds = 73.9, SEM = 3.42; all ts
for 3-year-olds vs. older children > 3.9, ps < .001; all ts
between 4-, 5-, and 6-year-olds < .7, ps > .5). In addition,
performance was better for the linguistic matching trials
compared to the perceptual matching trials (linguistic
matching: 72.34, SEM: 2.09; perceptual matching: 61.56,
SEM: 2.13, t = 3.12, p = .002).
This analysis also revealed a significant interaction
between match type and match direction (F(1, 144) = 5.17,

1122

Figure 2: Children’s matching performance on the linguistic and perceptual matching tasks,
grouped by age and match direction. Error bars indicate SEM.

Figure 3. Children’s matching performance for familiar and unfamiliar metaphors, grouped
by age and match direction. Error bars indicate SEM.
p < .05) and significant three-way interactions between age,
match direction, and match type (F(3, 144) = 3.62, p < .05),
and between age, match direction, and familiarity (F(3, 144)
= 3.12, p < .05). We analyzed the three-way interaction
between age, match direction, and match type with separate
ANOVAs for the linguistic and perceptual match trials
(Figure 2). For the linguistic matching trials, the effects of
both age and match direction were significant (Fs > 5.6, ps
< .05). Overall, three-year-olds performed worse than older
children, and performance was higher when space was the
target dimension compared to the when space was the
source dimension. For the perceptual matching trials, the
main effect of age and the interaction between age and
match direction were significant (Fs > 2.8, ps < .05),
indicating that older children outperformed younger
children, and particularly so when space was the target
dimension.
We analyzed the three-way interaction between age,
match direction, and familiarity with separate ANOVAs for
familiar versus unfamiliar metaphors (Figure 3). For
familiar metaphors, there was a significant main effect of
age and a significant interaction between age and match
direction (Fs > 3.6, ps < .05), indicating that older children

performed better than younger children, and the age effect
was particularly pronounced when space was the source
dimensions. For unfamiliar metaphor trials, there were no
significant main effects, but the interaction between age and
match direction was significant (F(3, 54) = 3.11, p < .05),
suggesting that the effect of age was more pronounced when
space was the target dimension.
Adults’ performance across all conditions was near
ceiling (mean = 96.19, SEM = .51). Performance was
analyzed using a repeated measures ANOVA with
dimension (space-time or space-pitch), familiarity (familiar
or unfamiliar), match type (perceptual or linguistic) and
match direction (space as source or space as target) as
within-subject factors. This analysis revealed no significant
effects (Fs < 2.2, ps > .16), nor any significant interactions
(Fs < 3.1, ps > .1). Therefore, adults performed equally well
in all conditions.

General Discussion
The present work explored cross-domain associations
between space and time and between space and pitch, and
the role that experience with spatial metaphors may play in
shaping these representations. English-speaking children

1123

and adults performed perceptual and linguistic cross-domain
matching tasks for pairs of stimuli that varied in spatial
extent and either temporal duration or auditory pitch. For
both types of cross-domain pairings, we assessed matching
performance for pairs that reflected familiar Englishlanguage spatial metaphors (length for time, height for
pitch) or that reflected novel spatial metaphors not used in
English (size for time, thickness for pitch). Consistent with
previous work (e.g., Marks, 1978; Shayan et al., 2014), we
found that adults readily matched time and pitch to both
familiar and unfamiliar spatial attributes. Children’s
matching performance, however, revealed a nuanced
developmental trajectory for
these cross-domain
associations, which we describe below.
Most notably, children’s cross-domain matching
performance was better for the linguistic matching task
compared to the perceptual matching task. In the linguistic
task, participants were provided with a verbal label that
described a stimulus in terms of its spatial attributes,
auditory pitch, or temporal duration, and needed to choose
an exemplar from the other domain to match it. By
comparison, in the perceptual matching task, participants
matched the exemplars in the absence of a verbal label. This
suggests that the presence of a verbal label conferred an
advantage for cross-domain matching above and beyond
matching the exemplars themselves.
Strikingly, we found that the verbal label provided an
advantage even when it labeled a spatial relation not
employed by English-language metaphors. In contrast to
previous work (Shayan et al., 2014; but see Dolscheid,
Hunnius, & Majid, 2015), we found no significant effect of
metaphor familiarity on children’s matching performance.
Children were equally proficient at matching spatial
relations across domains that reflected both familiar and
novel metaphors. Although English-speaking children
presumably have little experience with thickness metaphors
for pitch, they matched thickness onto pitch just as readily
as they matched vertical height onto pitch. Likewise, they
matched overall size onto duration just as readily as they
matched spatial length onto duration. Given that previous
findings have provided mixed results as to whether
familiarity with specific spatial metaphors is required for
children’s success in space-pitch matching tasks, it is
unclear whether these contrasting outcomes should be
ascribed to differences in procedure or population. In
addition, familiarity in the present experiment was defined
based on the presence or absence of specific spatial
metaphors in the English language. Therefore, it is possible
that individual differences in children’s experience with
these metaphors may influence their matching performance.
Regardless, the present results suggest that young children,
like infants and adults, can flexibly map abstract domains
onto multiple spatial reference frames. We also found no
significant effect of dimension on children’s mapping
performance, which indicates that the shared ordinal
structure between space and time did not confer an

advantage for mapping between these dimensions compared
to mapping between space and pitch.
We found that verbal labels were most likely to improve
performance for the youngest children when space was the
target domain. On these trials, children were presented with
two aliens and were asked to choose which one made a
labeled sound (e.g., which alien makes a thick sound).
Therefore, to match correctly, children could simply choose
the alien whose visual appearance matched the label (e.g., a
thick alien), without needing to represent the labeled sound
(e.g., a thick sound). These were the trials on which threeyear-olds performed the best, suggesting that understanding
the spatial meaning of these words precedes understanding
of the metaphorical meaning. Indeed, with regards to spatial
metaphors for time, children typically produce the spatial
meaning of the word earlier than the temporal meaning
(Clark, 1973). However, for older children the performance
benefit for linguistic trials held both when space was the
target domain and when space the source domain.
Therefore, it was not solely the trials on which children
could match a label to a spatial attribute that drive this effect
because there was also improved performance when
children mapped the label to a sound. Instead, it seems that
the presence of labels themselves improves children’s crossdomain matching performance.
The finding that children perform better on the linguistic
matching task compared to the perceptual matching task is
consistent with previous work suggesting that language is a
facilitating factor in the development of cross-domain
associations. This work suggests that children may initially
form mappings between the labels for two domains, such
that the association between the labels then drives the
perceptual mapping. For example, when forming an
association between size and auditory volume, children may
initially map the word big onto the word loud and the word
small onto the word quiet, and this linguistic association
may lead children to think of loud as being more than quiet
and lead to an association between the perceptions of size
and volume (Smith & Sera, 1992). This explanation can be
logically extended to associations between space and time
as well, with the common labels of long and short providing
ordinal cues to children as to how to align and map these
domains. However, it is less clear how this explanation
applies to pitch, as the spatial metaphors used to describe
pitch seemingly ascribe opposite ordinal anchors to the
spectrum of pitch: both thick and low refer to low-frequency
pitches, yet thick typically corresponds to more whereas low
typically corresponds to less. Therefore, it seems that in the
present task, labels must be providing an additional cue
beyond an ordinal reference frame.
Another advantage that labels may provide is by
clarifying what is otherwise an ambiguous task. When
children are initially mapping between the pictures and the
sounds, they may not spontaneously focus on the spatial
attributes that are varying. However, labeling a particular
dimension likely makes that dimension more salient, thus
clarifying the goal of the task. For example, when shown a

1124

thick alien and asked which of two sounds that type of alien
would make, children may not immediately recognize that
they could consider the width of the alien when making
their choice. However, when asked which of two sounds a
thick alien makes, children may perceive thickness as a
relevant attribute. Therefore, the act of labeling itself may
provide an additional cue for mapping that is not present in
the perceptual matching task.
Although our results suggest that children’s matching
performance increases with age, the largest change in
performance occurred between ages three and four. Overall,
three-year-olds performed at chance, whereas four-, five-,
and six-year-olds all performed at similar levels above
chance. From the present data it is difficult to determine
whether this jump in performance reflects improvements in
cross-domain mapping ability, or whether the demands of
our matching task may be too taxing for three-year-olds.
Given that cross-domain associations have been
demonstrated in infants using more implicit tasks, additional
work is needed to trace the development of these
associations between infancy and early childhood. Further,
the present study involved making explicit matches between
domains. Although adults can form explicit mappings across
a multitude of domains (Stevens, 1957), there are
constraints on the types of cross-domain associations that
occur implicitly (e.g., Casasanto, 2008; Dolscheid et al.,
2013; Srinivasan & Carey, 2010). Therefore, it remains an
open question whether children spontaneously associate
space and time and space and pitch, and whether experience
with particular spatial metaphors may influence the
automaticity with which these associations are accessed.
Reaction time measures may be useful for addressing this
question, because implicit matching processes should
proceed more rapidly than explicit matching processes.
Taken together, these findings suggest that spatial
language promotes cross-domain associations in early
childhood. Critically, this process appears to be equally
accessible for spatial metaphors that are both familiar and
novel, suggesting that experience with specific spatial
metaphors is not necessary for forming these associations.
Instead, spatial language may promote the perceptual
organization of other domains by providing a reference
frame for aligning these domains, as well as by highlighting
relevant spatial attributes.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Gillian Schwartz, Alagia Cirolia,
and Leslie Wang for their assistance with data collection.
This research is supported by NIH award F32HD085736 to
AS and NSF award SBE-16302040 to MS.

References
Boroditsky, L. (2001). Does Language Shape Thought?:
Mandarin and English Speakers' Conceptions of Time.
Cognitive Psychology, 43(1), 1–22.
Casasanto, D. (2008). Who’s afraid of the big bad Whorf?
Crosslinguistic differences in temporal language and

thought. Language Learning, 58, 63–79.
Casasanto, D., & Boroditsky, L. (2008). Time in the mind:
Using space to think about time. Cognition, 106(2), 579–
593.
Clark, H. H. (1973). Space, time, semantics, and the child.
In Cognitive Development and the Acquisition of
Language. New York: Academic Press.
de Hevia, M. D., & Spelke, E. S. (2010). Number-space
mapping in human infants. Psychological Science, 21(5),
653–660.
de Hevia, M. D., Izard, V., Coubart, A., Spelke, E. S., &
Streri, A. (2014). Representations of space, time, and
number in neonates. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 111(13), 4809-4813.
Dolscheid, S., Hunnius, S., & Majid, A. (2015). When high
pitches sound low: Children's acquisition of space-pitch
metaphors. Proceedings of the 37th Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.
Dolscheid, S., Hunnius, S., Casasanto, D., & Majid, A.
(2014). Prelinguistic Infants Are Sensitive to Space-Pitch
Associations Found Across Cultures. Psychological
Science, 25(6), 1256–1261.
Dolscheid, S., Shayan, S., Majid, A., & Casasanto, D.
(2013). The Thickness of Musical Pitch: Psychophysical
Evidence for Linguistic Relativity. Psychological Science,
24(5), 613–621.
Lewkowicz, D. J., & Minar, N. J. (2014). Infants Are Not
Sensitive
to
Synesthetic
Cross-Modality
Correspondences: A Comment on Walker et al. (2010).
Psychological Science, 25(3), 832–834.
Lourenco, S. F., & Longo, M. R. (2010). General magnitude
representation in human infants. Psychological Science,
21(6), 873–881.
Marks, L. E. (1978). The unity of the senses: Interrelations
among the modalities. Academic Press.
Mondloch, C., & Maurer, D. (2004). Do small white balls
squeak? Pitch-object correspondences in young children.
Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience, 4(2),
133.
Shayan, S., Ozturk, O., & Bowerman, M. (2014). Spatial
metaphor in language can promote the development of
cross-modal mappings in children. Developmental
Science, 17(4), 636–643.
Smith, L. B., & Sera, M. D. (1992). A developmental
analysis of the polar structure of dimensions. Cognitive
Psychology, 24(1), 99–142.
Srinivasan, M., & Carey, S. (2010). The long and the short
of it: On the nature and origin of functional overlap
between representations of space and time. Cognition,
116(2), 217–241.
Stevens, S. S. (1957). On the psychophysical law.
Psychological Review, 64(3), 153.
Walker, P., Bremner, J. G., Mason, U., Spring, J., Mattock,
K., Slater, A., & Johnson, S. P. (2010). Preverbal Infants'
Sensitivity
to
Synaesthetic
Cross-Modality
Correspondences. Psychological Science, 21(1), 21–25.

1125

