Spatial language: Meaning, use, and lexical choice
Kristen Johannes (kjohann@WestEd.org)
Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics Program, WestEd
300 Lakeside Dr., Oakland, CA 94612 USA

Barbara Landau (landau@cogsci.jhu.edu)
Department of Cognitive Science, Johns Hopkins University,
3400 N Charles St., Baltimore, MD 21218 USA
Abstract
Accounts of spatial language aim to address both the meaning
of a spatial term and its usage patterns across diverse cases,
but do not always clearly distinguish these from one another.
Focusing on the case of English prepositions in and on, we set
out to disentangle spatial language meaning from spatial
language use by comparing judgments on a series of linguistic
tasks designed to tap each aspect of spatial language. We
demonstrate that judgments of truth-conditional meaning and
patterns of naturalistic use show different distributional
signatures, with judgments of meaning giving rise to a more
uniform distribution than use patterns. We explore a third
aspect of spatial language: lexical choice, and propose that
choice is a key factor in shaping the distribution of spatial
expression use. Our analyses reveal that the distribution of
lexical choice judgments is highly correlated with the
distribution of expression use in spatial descriptions for the
same spatial scenes, supporting a model of spatial language
that differs from traditional accounts of meaning and
categorization.

Keywords: Spatial cognition; spatial language; semantics;
language use

Introduction
Spatial terms in languages of the world tend to constitute
a small closed class set (Landau & Jackendoff, 1993;
Talmy, 1985). In English, for example, this set is typically
limited to the spatial prepositions, including in, on, over,
above, etc. To linguistically encode spatial relations with
this limited inventory, a speaker must systematically
abstract over fine-grained properties of objects and
configurations and attend to coarse-grained spatial and/or
mechanical properties of their relations. Modeling the nature
of this abstraction remains a long-standing problem in the
cognitive sciences. The systematic ways in which speakers
encode relations (i.e., generate descriptions) is often
confounded with the ways in which they decode spatial
descriptions (i.e., understand the meaning of descriptions).
This problem has been exacerbated by a lack of
separation between definitional questions about the meaning
of a spatial term like in or on and categorization questions
about the use of a term by a population of speakers –
questions that may ultimately have different answers.
Meaning and use represent distinct and separable aspects of
many semantic domains (Cruse, 2011). In keeping with this
observation, we suggest that the task of formally defining

spatial terms such as in and on is separate from, albeit
related to, the task of specifying the conditions under which
speakers will use a spatial term to describe a location or
configuration. For example, formal accounts of spatial
meaning come under fire when proposed meanings cannot
accommodate peripheral uses (see e.g., Bennett, 1975 for
examples and e.g., Feist, 2000, and Herskovits, 1986 for
commentary), while accounts of spatial categorization based
on language usage patterns often propose all-or-none
category boundaries that mimic binary truth conditional
judgments (Regier, Khetarpahl, & Majid, 2013). In this
paper, we aim to disentangle spatial language meaning from
spatial language use by comparing judgments on a series of
linguistic tasks across the same sets of spatial stimuli,
including a task designed to directly assess speakers’ lexical
choices, which we propose are key in accounting for spatial
term use but are not necessarily active in spatial term
meaning.
Below, we review a selection of research on spatial
language categorization, focusing mainly on the
prepositions in and on. We organize the review into work
that explicates the formal meaning of spatial terms and work
that targets speakers’ use of spatial terms for categorization.
We then introduce recent work that suggests that speakers’
choice of spatial term from among candidates is a critical
variable in reconciling categories of spatial term meaning
with patterns of speakers’ spatial term use. The current
study addresses these relationships – between meaning,
choice, and use – directly for the English prepositions in and
on, evaluating two complementary hypotheses, outlined
below.

Defining spatial terms
Past and present, accounts of spatial meanings have also
had to shoulder the burden of accounting for detailed
patterns of spatial expression use (and, in some cases
abstract uses of spatial expressions, see e.g., Jamrozik &
Gentner, 2015). Traditional simplified accounts of
prepositional meaning such as Bennett (1975)1 attempt to
define spatial prepositions as a function of geometric
1

As just one example, Bennett (1975, p. 71) defines in and on
using the notions of location at the interior of an object (for in),
and location at the surface of an object (for on).

2308

2

We examined the 7 items for which the rate of expression use

properties of configurations as a means of abstracting away
from specific objects. These definitional theories have been
consistently criticized for being, on the one hand, too vague
and allowing unlikely cases into the definition (e.g., an
apple under an upside-down bowl fits Bennett’s denotation
of “in the bowl”) and for failing, on the other hand, to
predict the range of peripheral cases for which in and on can
apply (e.g., an apple on top of other fruit contained by a
bowl, cf. Feist, 2000). These accounts have been replaced
by proposals that incorporate large sets of features in order
to narrow and specify the meaning of in and on based on
usage patterns (see e.g., Feist, 2000; Vandeloise, 2010; Xu
& Kemp, 2012), and by proposals that prioritize world
knowledge and pragmatic inference (Herskovits, 1986), so
as to preserve narrow denotations for in and on while
accounting for peripheral cases that depend on additional
processes such as chaining (Malt, Sloman, Gennari, Shi, &
Wang, 1999). The current study examines whether
accounting for frequent or infrequent uses of a spatial term
is a necessary goal for accounts of spatial meaning.

Spatial categories inferred from language use
Studies of spatial language categorization typically
measure speakers’ usage of spatial terms for different spatial
scenes and, based on these data, one can infer possible
category boundaries for single terms and/or semantic
structure across multiple terms. Many of these accounts do
not start from any initial hypotheses about the semantic
content or meaning of particular spatial terms, and instead
use spatial descriptions to infer systematic groupings of
scenes under spatial terms. One prevailing assumption,
however, is that a given spatial scene will fall “all-or-none”
into only one spatial term category (e.g., the same scene
cannot be categorized as both in and on).
For example, Levinson and colleagues (Levinson et al,
2003) and Regier and colleagues (Regier et al., 2013)
examined spatial descriptions for a diverse set of spatial
scenes from the Topological Relations Picture Series
(Bowerman and Pederson, 1993). Across a large sample of
languages, both groups analyzed the spatial term(s) used by
the majority of speakers in a language group to encode a
given scene – a point we will return to shortly.
Levinson et al. used multidimensional scaling on these
data and proposed underlying spatial categories that are
shaped by a handful of “attractors” – salient spatial scenes
that are encoded in similar ways across languages.
Similarly, Regier et al. employed an inferential (semantic
map) analysis to come to a similar solution. Both studies are
agnostic to the lexical content of particular spatial terms, but
the researchers’ analytical choices reflect a critical
assumption about how spatial language use relates to
underlying spatial categories. Specifically, researchers in
both studies identified the modal term used by the majority
speakers of each language for each scene, treating languageinternal variation as noise. The result of this modal
assumption is binary, all-or-none categorization of a scene
by spatial terms in a language, partitioning spatial scenes

into language-based equivalence classes, reminiscent of
binary truth-conditional meaning.
This all-or-none semantic category structure limits the
inferences that can be made about the relationship between
the meaning of a spatial term and its use in encoding
different spatial scenes. In particular, it ignores the
possibility that spatial terms might overlap in the spatial
scenes they apply to, leading to probabilistic use of multiple
spatial terms, and, in a similar vein, precludes the idea that
spatial terms can compete with one another to encode the
same spatial scene.
Recent work from Johannes and colleagues (Johannes,
Wilson & Landau, 2016; Johannes 2015; Landau, Johannes,
Skordos, & Papafragou, 2016) demonstrates that multiple
spatial terms are used by English speakers to encode the
same spatial scenes. Moreover, they find that tracking the
fine-grained use of a single spatial term across a diverse set
of spatial relation scenes reveals a graded, non-uniform
distribution of expression use across scenes, suggesting that
some terms are a “better fit” to a spatial scene than others.
In this paper, we extend the observations of Johannes and
colleagues, proposing that speakers’ choice of spatial term,
among many candidates, to describe a configuration is a
critical variable in accounting for the non-uniform
distribution found in spatial expression usage patterns.

The Current Study
In the current study, we pursue two related hypotheses
aimed at exploring how speakers evaluate the meanings of
spatial terms and how this process differs from their
decisions to use specific terms in spatial descriptions. We
propose implicit lexical competition – speakers’ choice of a
particular spatial term among viable candidates – as a way
of accounting for differences in speakers’ judgments of
spatial expression meaning and patterns of spatial
expression use.
We test these hypotheses using the spatial terms in and
on as a case study and compare data from three different
linguistic tasks, outlined in Table 1, conducted using the
same diverse sets of containment and support scenes
(originally from Johannes, 2015, and Johannes, Wilson,
Landau, 2016; see Figures 1 and 2). A truth-value judgment
task is used to assess speakers’ binary truth conditions for
different expressions by simply asking whether a given
expression applies to a given spatial scene. A spatial
description task is used to observe speakers’ self-generated
spatial descriptions for each spatial scene. Finally, a forcedchoice judgment task is used to measure speakers’
judgments about which of two (true) spatial expressions is a
better fit to a given spatial scene.
Hypothesis 1: Speakers’ judgments of the truth-conditional
meaning of spatial expressions are subject to different
criteria than their decisions to use these expressions in
spatial descriptions. We predict that tasks that separate these
two types of judgments (see Table 1) will show different
distributional signatures across the same set of diverse

2309

scenes, with usage patterns yielding a more articulated, nonuniform distribution. Moreover, speaker’s truth value
judgments for a given spatial expression are not necessarily
predicted to correlate with their use of the same spatial
expression for the same spatial scenes, as tasks are
hypothesized to engage different linguistic processes.

Participants. A total of 175 adults (mean age = 19.6 years)
participated in the experiment through a series of self-paced
online interfaces in return for course credit. Table 2 shows
the number of participants that provided data for each
linguistic task.
Table 2. Participant breakdown across tasks and stimuli sets.

Hypothesis 2: Speakers’ truth-value judgments and patterns
of spatial descriptions differ due to implicit competition
among felicitous candidates, which at play in spatial
description tasks but not in truth-value judgment tasks. We
predict that the distribution of judgments from a lexical
choice task (Table 1), wherein speakers must choose
between two felicitous spatial terms for diverse spatial
scenes, will align with speakers’ usage pattern in a spatial
description task for those same scenes, but are not predicted
to correlate with truth-value judgments.

Experiment
Methods
Design. The experiment was structured as a betweensubjects design with five separate groups of adult
participants. Each group completed a different pairing of a
linguistic task with a spatial stimulus set (see Table 1).

Stimulus set 1 Tasks
Truth value judgment
Spatial Description
Stimulus set 2 Tasks
Truth value judgment
Spatial Description
Forced-choice judgment

N
50
50
N
25
25
25

Materials. We used two sets of stimuli to elicit linguistic
judgments and descriptions. Stimulus set 1 was developed
by Johannes (2015) and consisted of 64 containment scenes
and 64 support scenes, for a total of 128 items (Figure 1).
Stimulus set 2 came from Johannes, Wilson, and Landau
(2016; adapted from Landau et al., 2016) and consisted of
18 containment scenes and 15 support scenes, for a total of
33 items (Figure 2).

Linguistic tasks. Table 1 provides an example of each of
the linguistic tasks, along with the range of possible
responses.
Table 1. Linguistic tasks used with each stimulus set,
including example prompts and possible responses.
Task

Example Prompt
Is the following sentence true of
the scene?

Responses

Truth value
judgment
(Stimulus
sets 1 & 2)

“The sandwich is on the plate.”

Binary
judgment:
{Yes or No}

Spatial
description
(Stimulus
sets 1 & 2)

Where is object A in relation to
object B in the scene?

[A: strawberries; B: bag]
Which of these two sentences is
a better description of the scene?
Forcedchoice
judgment
(Stimulus
set 1 only)

Figure 1. Example containment (left) and support (right)
scenes from Stimulus set 1.

Natural
language
description:
“The
strawberries are
in the bag.”

Binary
judgment:
{A or B}

Figure 2. Example containment (left) and support (right)
scenes from Stimulus set 2.

A: “The tape is on the box”
B: “The tape is stuck to the box”

2310

Procedure. Participants completed each task using a selfpaced online interface. Tasks included critical trials, which
probed linguistic judgments for the prepositions in and on
for containment and support scenes (see Figures 1 and 2),
respectively, as well as filler trials, which elicited judgments
for other prepositions or descriptions for scenes depicting
other types of spatial relationships (e.g., proximity). The
number of critical trials in each task varied depending on the
stimulus set: tasks employing Stimulus set 1 had 128 critical
trials and 62 filler trials, while tasks that employed Stimulus
set 2 had 33 critical trials and 11 filler trials.

Results
We first examined the relationship between truthconditional meaning and expression use by comparing the
patterns of participants’ truth-value judgments to their
expression usage patterns from the spatial description task,
both carried out using Stimulus set 1. We then explored the
relationship between participants’ truth-value judgments,
spatial descriptions and lexical choice patterns for tasks
carried out with Stimulus set 2. We compared patterns of
spatial expression use, from the spatial description task,
across spatial scenes to patterns of truth-value judgments,
from the truth value judgment task, and patterns of lexical
choice, from the forced-choice task. Although participants
judged, or described, both containment scenes and support
scenes, we present, analyze, and discuss these spatial
categories separately.
Comparing distributions of truth value judgments to
spatial descriptions: Stimulus set 1. Figure 3 presents a
subset of containment and support items side by side and
respectively shows participants’ average rates of use of in or
on (i.e., proportion of descriptions using in or on) in the
spatial description task (top black bars) and average truthvalue acceptance rates (i.e., proportion of “True”
judgments) on the truth-value judgment task (bottom white
bars). Truth-value acceptance rates were greater than or
equal to rates of expression use for all but 5 containment
items and all but 2 support items2.
We tested whether measures of spatial expression
meaning and spatial expression use show similar
distributional signatures across the same spatial scenes. Our
reasoning was as follows: if participants are using the same
knowledge in similar ways to make judgments about spatial
expression meaning and decisions about expression use,
then the resulting pattern of truth-value judgments for in and
on should systematically relate to the pattern of in and on
use in descriptions of the same scenes. That is, scenes that
are frequently described with in or on should also show
higher rates of acceptance on the truth value judgment task,
and scenes for which in and on are used infrequently should
show low rates of truth value acceptance. We tested this
2

We examined the 7 items for which the rate of expression use
exceeded the truth-value acceptance rate and found that, for all but
one item, the absolute difference between use and acceptance was
less than 0.3.

prediction using Pearson correlations, computed separately
for containment and support items, between rates of in and
on use in the spatial description task and rates of in and on
acceptance in the truth value judgment task. The pattern of
spatial descriptions and the pattern of truth-value judgments
for containment items showed a weak, negative, but reliable
correlation (r = -.383, n = 64, p<.01), while support items
showed no reliable correlations between usage and
acceptance judgment patterns (r=.059, n=64, ns). The weak
relationship between participants’ truth-value judgments
and spatial descriptions aligns with the picture in Figure 3,
wherein truth-value judgments show a uniform distribution
across scenes, while spatial expression use in descriptions
shows a more articulated usage profile.
Our analysis supports a disconnect between participants’
judgments about the meaning and felicity of in and on, on
the one hand, and their decision to use the expressions to
describe containment and support scenes, on the other.
While it is clear that meaning and use must be linked in
some way (that is, speakers must have implicit knowledge
of the meaning of a spatial expression in order to
successfully use it to communicate), we suggest that this
link is not direct and explore lexical choice – a speaker’s
decision about which of multiple expressions apply to a
given situation – as an intervening process between meaning
and use.

Figure 3. Patterns of expression use and truth-value
judgments (bottom) of in (left panel) and on (right panel)
across a subset of containment and support items.
Exploring lexical choice as an intervening variable
between truth value judgments and spatial descriptions:
Stimulus set 2. We collected descriptions and judgments
for items in Stimulus set 2 (33 items total). Participants’
responses are displayed separately for containment (Figure

2311

4) and support (Figure 5) items, which present patterns of
responses from the spatial description task, forced-choice
judgment task, and truth-value judgment task. As before,
participants produced descriptions with in and on nonuniformly across containment and support items (top panels
of Figures 4 and 5) and showed near-uniform truth value
judgments across the same items (bottom panels of Figures
4 and 5). Participants’ patterns of responses on the forcedchoice judgment task, like their patterns of spatial
expression use, showed a non-uniform distribution across
items (middle panels of Figures 4 and 5).

but not truth-value judgments. Forced-choice judgments
were not reliably correlated with truth value judgments for
either containment or support. However, forced-choice
judgments were strongly related to patterns of in and on use
for both containment (r=.538, n=18, p<.01) and support
items (r=.736, n=15, p<.01), suggesting similar variation in
speakers’ constrained (forced-choice) decisions about which
of two expressions best applies to a spatial scene and their
unconstrained decisions about how to describe the same
spatial scene.

Figure 5. Patterns of use (top), forced choice judgments
(middle), and truth value judgments (bottom) for on across
support items. Items on the y-axis are presented in the same
order in all three plots.

Figure 4. Patterns of use (top), forced choice judgments
(middle), and truth value judgments (bottom) for in across
containment items. Items on the y-axis are presented in the
same order in all three plots.

Discussion

Following our previous analysis, we first measured the
relationship between participants’ average rates of in and on
use in their spatial descriptions and acceptance rates in their
truth-value judgments. Pearson correlations between
language use and truth value judgments were nonsignificant for both containment items (r=.306, n=18, ns)
and support items (r=.159, n=15, ns).
Next, we explored the hypothesis that lexical choice,
operationalized here as forced-choice judgments, serves as
an implicit process in the generation of spatial descriptions

In this paper, we compared behavior across three
commonly used linguistic tasks in order to examine and
elucidate the relationship between judgments of meaning,
lexical choice and language use as they apply to spatial
terms like in and on. We found that truth-value judgments
of the meaning of in and on are nearly uniform across
diverse containment and support scenes, demonstrating that
these terms are true of the scenes. Speakers’ use of these
terms, however, is not uniform: some scenes are described
more frequently by in and on than others.

2312

Consistent with this distributional difference, we found no
strong reliable statistical relationship between judgments of
meaning vs. use for the same spatial scenes. However, when
we measured judgments of lexical choice (between in and
on and other truth-conditionally feasible alternatives), we
discovered a non-uniform distribution of choices, similar to
the distribution evidenced for spatial expression use. Our
analyses confirmed a strong statistical relationship between
participants’ responses on these tasks across the same set of
containment and support scenes.These results support a
view of spatial expression meaning as partially distinct from
spatial expression use.
Consequences for the possible meanings of spatial
expressions. Early accounts of the meaning of terms like in
and on (e.g., Bennett, 1975) came under fire (and were
subsequently replaced) owing to the underspecified nature
of their proposed denotation. The reasoning behind the
critical reception of these theories was that a useful
definition of a term like in should apply to exactly those
cases that we most often use the term for and should rule out
cases for which the term is rarely used. However, including
a layer of lexical choice in the spatial encoding system, as
we suggest here, allows for underspecified meanings that
may over-extend to cases where the term is rarely used
precisely because other better-suited terms are used in its
place. For example, Johannes (2014, 2015, 2016) suggests
an underspecified account of meaning for spatial terms like
in and on, whereby speakers’ use of these preposition is
blocked by the presence of more informative lexical verbs
(e.g., hang, attach).
Consequences for the study of spatial categorization
through language use. The majority of studies on spatial
categorization start by identifying a single form class – for
example, prepositions in English – that serves as the
primary vehicle for spatial meaning. In contrast to this, the
results of the current study suggest that fine-grained spatial
categorization is a function of speakers’ choices between
multiple felicitous expressions and not only dependent on
the truth-conditional meaning of a single expression. Thus,
future work on spatial categorization should expand the
spatial language inventory (beyond e.g., prepositions, see
Johannes, Wilson, & Landau, 2016) and focus on how
categories carved out by individual spatial terms may
overlap to give rise to a complex graded semantic space for
this domain.

Conclusions
We have demonstrated that, for English, speakers’
judgments of the truth-conditional meanings of a spatial
term are not necessarily aligned with their use of that term
to describe the same spatial scene. We propose that the
process of choosing a spatial term among a set of felicitous
competitors gives rise to speakers’ non-uniform distribution
of spatial expression use.

References
Cruse, A., (2011). Meaning in Language: An Introduction to
Semantics and Pragmatics. Oxford University Press.
Feist, M.I. (2000). On in and on: An investigation into the
linguistic encoding of spatial scenes. Doctoral
dissertation, Northwestern University.
Herskovits, A. (1986). Language and spatial cognition: an
interdisciplinary study of the prepositions in English.
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Jamrozik, A., & Gentner, D. (2015). Well-hidden
regularities: Abstract Uses of in and on retain an aspect of
their spatial meaning. Cognitive Science, 39, 1881-1911.
Johannes, K. (2015). Geometric and functional knowledge
in the acquisition of spatial language. Doctoral
dissertation, Department of Cognitive Science, Johns
Hopkins University.
Johannes, K., Wang, J., Papafragou, A., & Landau, B.
(2015). Systematicity and variation in the distribution of
spatial expressions in three distinct languages.
Proceedings of the 37th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society, 997-1002.
Johannes, K., Wilson, C., & Landau, B. (2016). Systematic
feature variation underlies adults and children’s use of in
and on. Proceedings of the 38th Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society, 2429-2434.
Johannes, K., Wilson, C., & Landau, B. (2016). The
importance of lexical verbs in spatial language
acquisition: The case of in and on. Cognition, 157, 174189.
Landau, B. & Jackendoff, R. (1993). ‘What’ and ‘where’ in
spatial language and spatial cognition. Behavioural and
Brain Sciences, 16(2), 217-265.
Landau, B., Johannes, K., Skordos, D., & Papafragou, A.
(2016). Containment and Support: Core and complexity in
spatial language learning. Cognitive Science, 40, 1-32.
Levinson, S.C., Meira, S, et al. (2003). ‘Natural concepts’ in
the spatial topological domain – adpositional meanings in
cross-linguistic perspective: An exercise in semantic
typolgogy. Language, 79, 485-516.
Malt, B. C., Sloman, S. A., Gennari, S., Shi, M., & Wang,
Y. (1999). Knowing versus naming: Similarity and the
linguistic categorization of artifacts. Journal of Memory
and Language, 40, 230-262.
Regier, T., Khetarpahl, N., & Majid, A. (2013). Inferring
semantic maps. Linguistic Typology, 17, 89-105.
Talmy, L. (1985). Lexicalization patterns: Semantic
structure in lexical forms. In Timothy Shopen (ed.),
Language typology and syntactic description (pp. 57- 149).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Vandeloise, C. (2010). Genesis of spatial terms. In V. Evans
& P. Chilton (Eds.), Language, cognition, and
space: The state of the art and new directions
(pp. 171-192). London: Equinox.
Xu, Y. & Kemp, C. (2010). Constructing spatial concepts
from universal primitives.
Proceedings of the 32nd
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.

2313

