Specificity and entropy reduction in situated referential processing
Elli N. Tourtouri (elli@coli.uni-saarland.de)
Francesca Delogu (delogu@coli.uni-saarland.de)
Matthew W. Crocker (crocker@coli.uni-saarland.de)
Department of Language Science & Technology
Saarland University, Saarbrücken, Germany
Abstract
In situated communication, reference to an entity in the
shared visual context can be established using either an
expression that conveys precise (minimally specified) or
redundant (over-specified) information. There is, however, a
long-lasting debate in psycholinguistics concerning whether
the latter hinders referential processing. We present evidence
from an eye tracking experiment recording fixations as well
as the Index of Cognitive Activity – a novel measure of
cognitive workload – supporting the view that overspecifications facilitate processing. We further present
original evidence that, above and beyond the effect of
specificity, referring expressions that uniformly reduce
referential entropy also benefit processing.
Keywords: referential processing; over-specification; visual
entropy reduction; eye tracking; Index of Cognitive Activity

Introduction
Grice’s maxims of Quantity (Grice, 1975) stipulate that
speakers’ utterances be minimally informative, avoiding
redundancy. In visually situated communication, this
predicts utterances should provide strictly the information
necessary for the identification of a referenced object. For
example, in the context of a blue and a green ball, the
adjective “blue” is necessary to unambiguously establish
reference. When there is only one ball, however, the
adjective becomes superfluous. Such over-specifications –
expressions that convey more information than minimally
required – are, however, produced by adult speakers at an
estimated rate of 10-60% (see Engelhardt, Bailey &
Ferreira, 2006, and references therein).
Even though Grice arguably did not intend to make any
implications about the cognitive processes associated with
the violation of his maxims (cf. Geurts & Rubio-Fernández,
2015), over the past few decades, psycholinguistic research
has tried to test their empirical validity. It remains under
debate, however, whether or not over-specifications are
detrimental to referential processing. A number of studies
have suggested that over-specifications impair listeners’
online processing and lead to slower and less accurate
identification of the target (e.g., Engelhardt, Bailey &
Ferreira, 2006; Engelhardt, Demiral & Ferreira, 2011;
Davies & Katsos, 2013), while others find evidence that
they are as good as minimal descriptions or may even
facilitate processing (e.g., Arts, Maes, Noordman & Jansen,
2011; Tourtouri, Delogu & Crocker, 2015).
In an ERP experiment, Tourtouri, Delogu and Crocker
(2015) presented participants with visual scenes of 6 objects

and audio instructions to locate a target, like “Find the
yellow bowl” (in German). The experiment manipulated the
specificity of the referring expression by combining the
same instruction with different visual displays that rendered
it minimally or over-specified. An attenuated N400 effect
was found on the noun for over- compared to minimallyspecified references. This finding was interpreted as
evidence that over-specifications are in fact beneficial to
referential processing, at least when in the presence of
visual displays where the over-specified adjective identified
exactly one object. That is, at “yellow” the bowl was the
only object that fit the description. Interestingly, both color
and pattern adjectives were used to identify the target, and
the effect was present for both types of adjectives,
suggesting that any facilitation of over-specification is not
merely due to the perceptual salience of color. It can be
argued, however, that the reduced N400 for overspecifications may just reflect the predictability of the noun
as determined by the information on the visual scene in
combination with the linguistic input up to the adjective.
Therefore, it still remains unanswered whether overspecification has a general facilitatory effect, even when
displays allow the adjective to select a second object, which
fits a minimally specified continuation of the referring
expression, i.e., it is part of a contrast pair.
A similar question was addressed by Sedivy, Tanenhaus,
Chambers and Carlson (1999) in a series of experiments that
tested (among other things) whether intersective adjectives
such as color are interpreted contrastively. Participants’ eye
movements were tracked while they heard instructions to
manipulate objects in a workspace in front of them. The
visual scenes consisted of four objects, two that formed a
contrast pair differing in color, e.g. a yellow and a pink
comb, and two singletons: one sharing the color feature with
an object from the pair, e.g. a yellow bowl, and a distractor
object of different color. The critical instruction mentioned
either of the two objects with the shared feature, and was
always heard second, following the instruction referring to
an object from the contrast pair. An effect of referent type
was found, such that if the target was part of the contrast
pair it was looked at faster than if it was not. This result was
taken to indicate that initially, before the noun was heard,
listeners assigned a contrastive meaning to intersective
adjectives, consistent with Grice’s maxim of Quantity. We
believe, however, that this may not be the case, especially
since listeners’ attention was already focused on the contrast
pair, as the immediately preceding instruction always made
reference to one of the contrasting objects (e.g., the pink

3356

A.

B.

C.

D.

Figure 1. Sample visual stimuli for a color item, combined with the instruction "Find the blue ball". The four resulting
conditions were A. Minimally specified – High reduction (MS-HR), B. Minimally specified – Low reduction (MS-LR), C.
Over-specified – High reduction (OS-HR), D. Over-specified – Low reduction (OS-LR)
comb). Similar results were obtained in the subsequent
experiments, where the critical instruction was heard first,
but with the use of scalar adjectives, which inherently
invoke comparisons between entities.
The current study seeks to determine whether and how
over-specifications affect processing of pre-nominally
modified referring expressions, when the visual context
enables both a minimally and an over-specified reading of
intersective adjectives, such as color and pattern. That is,
how is referential processing influenced when the adjective
is redundant (as in the bottom displays of Fig.1) as opposed
to when it is required to uniquely identify the target (as in
the top displays of Fig.1)? Furthermore, as the instruction
sentence unfolds over time, incoming words incrementally
restrict the set of referential candidates. Therefore, in
situated communication, the information conveyed by a
linguistic unit is determined by the extent to which it
reduces the number of potential referents, in addition to the
linguistic information of each word, as determined by its
probability and preceding context (Shannon, 1948; Crocker,
Demberg & Teich, 2016). In other words, the information
on the word “blue” in the sentence “Find the blue ball” is
not defined only in terms of its probability to occur in this
(linguistic and visual) context, but also by the amount of
uncertainty about the target (referential entropy) it reduces.
For example, in the left-hand displays of Figure 1 “blue”
reduces referential entropy by 1.58 bits, while in the righthand displays it only reduces it by 0.58 bits. The noun, then,
eliminates the remaining entropy, reducing it by 1 bit in the

former and by 2 bits in the latter case, resulting in a uniform
and a less uniform entropy reduction profile, respectively.
This study also touches on whether, above and beyond any
effects of specificity, the rate at which the linguistic input
reduces referential entropy also influences processing. To
examine these questions, we recorded participants’ fixations
as they viewed displays such as the ones in Figure 1, while
listening to instructions like “Find the blue ball” in German,
and present results from inspection probabilities to the
objects of interest and the Index of Cognitive Activity
(Marshall, 2000) per region.

The Index of Cognitive Activity
It is well established that fluctuations of the pupil size index
cognitive effort in a variety of tasks, including language
processing (e.g., Just & Carpenter, 1993). However,
changes in the lighting conditions of the environment are
also responsible for pupil dilation. The Index of Cognitive
Activity (Marshall, 2000) is a measure of cognitive
workload that separates variation in pupil size due to
cognitive effort and due to light reflex, while also
accounting for random noise. The small and rapid pupil
dilations that remain are associated with higher cognitive
workload (Marshall, 2002). Demberg and Sayeed (2016)
showed, for example, that the ICA is sensitive to linguistic
manipulations such as ungrammaticality, with conditions
related to higher processing demands resulting in higher
ICA values. They also demonstrated that ICA is particularly
suitable for the Visual World Paradigm, since it is robust to

3357

the change of fixation positions and can thus complement
the standard visual attention metrics in order to assess
cognitive effort during linguistic processing.

Experiment
We used a 2x2 design crossing Specificity (Minimally
specified vs Over-specified) and Entropy Reduction
(Uniform vs Non-uniform). Based on findings that overspecifications are commonly used by adult speakers during
production (cf. Engelhardt et al., 2006; Pechmann, 1989;
Rubio-Fernández, 2016; Tarenskeen, Broersma & Geurts
2015), we hypothesized that over-specification would not
impede referential processing, as rational speakers would
unlikely use them so frequently if they did. We, therefore,
expected that over-specified expressions (OS) would be as
easy as, or easier than their minimally-specified (MS)
counterparts (as found in the ERP study by Tourtouri et al.,
2015). As for the entropy reduction manipulation, we
generally expected a greater processing advantage in the
uniform reduction (UR) compared to the non-uniform
reduction (NR) conditions, as has been proposed for the
related measure of surprisal (UID, Jaeger, 2010). Finally,
we expected that the two factors should interact, namely that
processing would be particularly benefited when the
expression was OS and the redundant adjective contributed
to the uniform reduction of entropy.

Method
Participants Twenty-four students from Saarland
University (mean age 25, 7 male) participated in the
experiment for monetary compensation. They were all
native speakers of German with normal or corrected-tonormal vision and normal color perception.
Materials Pictures of 30 common use objects (e.g., balls,
mugs, etc.) differing in color (blue, green and red) and
pattern (checkered, dotted and striped) were employed to
create the visual stimuli. Both color and pattern were used
as distinguishing features, because they are intrinsic to the
object, as opposed to scalar adjectives such as size that
trigger comparisons to other entities on the display. This
ensured that any looks to objects in contrast pairs would be
driven due to the manipulation and not because of the
adjective type. Furthermore, pattern was the mentioned
property in half of the trials, in order to make sure that any
effect of over-specification would not be merely due to
color salience, but would be attributable to the experimental
manipulation. Color hue and brightness were adjusted using
GIMP (Version 2.8.10). Naming agreement was tested for
the object pictures in an offline picture naming study to
ensure that they were identifiable in all colors and patterns,
and that the names used in the experiment matched
participants' own naming preferences. Twenty-four
independent participants were presented with the object
images in all colors and patterns (distributed over 8 lists),
and were asked to name them while always mentioning their

colors and patterns. Only objects with a naming agreement
of 80% or higher were employed in the visual stimuli.
A set of 120 experimental items was created, each item
comprising one spoken instruction (with either color or
pattern as the target feature) and four visual scenes
(essentially four versions of the same scene). The target
color, pattern and position were counterbalanced throughout
the experiment. Displays for experimental items
accommodated all four conditions for both target features,
so that nothing would reveal the target before the instruction
was heard. To this end, one visual scene contained 6 objects
(two pairs of same-type objects and two singletons) in two
colors and two patterns, such that the pairs made up the two
MS and the singletons the two OS referents for both target
features, as shown in Figure 1. Furthermore, displays never
contained phonetic competitors (e.g., [ʃʏsəl] vs [ʃʏrtsə]),
ensuring that disambiguation of the target would always
occur on noun onset. For the same reason only same-gender
objects were used per display, as German marks determiners
for gender.
In total, 660 visual displays were created, of which 480
were used in experimental items (120 x 4 conditions), and
180 in fillers. Twelve of the fillers served as practice trials
in a familiarization phase. Fillers differed from experimental
items in multiple aspects. First, they differed in terms of
their display structure, with almost half of the fillers
depicting 4 objects (3 of the same type and one singleton)
and the rest containing 6 objects. Six-object fillers either
showed 2 contrast pairs and 2 singletons, where reference
was always made to the contrast pair that was not relevant
in the experimental items (e.g., the two rucksacks in Fig.1),
or they showed a set of 3 same-type objects, a contrast pair
and a singleton. The 3-object sets made a second modifier
also required for target identification, thus adding more
variation not only to the display types that participants
viewed, but also to the referential entropy reduction
possibilities. Secondly, fillers differed in terms of the
specificity of their instructions, that could be minimally,
over-, or under-specified (US), while care was taken so that
throughout the entire experiment, participants would hear
MS expressions to a greater extent than OS – as is the case
in everyday language use – as well as a small portion of US.
A set of fillers without pre-nominal modification was also
used, that were essentially the minimally specified versions
of the OS items, thus assuring that participants would not
always expect to hear an adjective and that they would not
get overly used to reference being redundant.
In experimental items, displays were paired with audio
instructions containing a pre-nominally modified referring
expression like “Finde den blauen Ball” (Find the blue ball)
in Figure 1, that identified the target by mentioning either its
color or its pattern. In fillers, instructions had zero, one or
two modifiers. For the latter the order of mention of color
and pattern adjectives was counterbalanced. Audio stimuli
were recorded with neutral intonation by a young, female
speaker of German, in a soundproof booth using Cubase
AI5. Speech was continuous and no artificial pauses were

3358

inserted in between words. Sentences were then cut and
annotated for adjective and noun onsets using Praat
(Version 5.3). Mean word duration was 481.3ms (SD=32)
for the adjectives and 557.2ms (SD=75.7) for the nouns.
Stimuli were distributed over 4 lists using the Latin
Square design, and were pseudo-randomized for each
participant. At least one filler appeared between consecutive
experimental items, and items of the same condition did not
appear more than two times in a row. Each participant saw
288 stimuli split in 4 blocks, which allowed for breaks in
between blocks. Before the experiment started, a short
practice session of 12 filler trials familiarized participants
with the task. The experiment was implemented and run
using E-prime 2.0 (Psychology Software Tools, Inc.).
Procedure An SMI RED500 eye tracker (SensoMotoric
Instruments) attached to the bottom of a 25inch Dell
monitor was used to track participants’ eye movements at a
rate of 250Hz. After they gave informed consent and read
the instructions, participants were seated at a distance of
approximately 60cm in front of the monitor using a chinrest
to minimize head movements. They then completed a
familiarization phase, during which the experimenter gave
them feedback after each trial, ensuring that the task was
clear before the experiment begun. Calibration was
performed at the beginning of each block.
A trial started with a fixation cross appearing in the
middle of the display for a period controlled by the
experimenter. The objects then appeared while the cross was
still on screen for another 500ms, and 1500ms later the
audio instruction started. The objects stayed on the screen
for another 500ms after the audio offset, and a prompt
screen to the task appeared asking participants to indicate
which side of the screen the target entity was on, or whether
it was not possible to tell (US fillers) by pressing the
corresponding button on a response pad in front of them.
Displays were presented at a 1680×1050 resolution. One
experimental session lasted on average 40min, depending on
whether calibration had to be repeated.
Analysis For the analyses of both measures we considered
the regions of the Adjective (“blauen”), and Noun (“Ball”).
For the analysis of fixations, we compared inspection
probabilities to areas of interest (AOI) across conditions.
First, fixations shorter than 80ms were pooled with the
immediately preceding or following fixation, if the distance
between them was smaller than 12 pixels, otherwise they
were excluded from the analysis. Subsequently, fixations to
an AOI within a region, before a saccade outside the area
was made, were counted as one inspection. For each AOI
and region, we coded trials that contained at least one
inspection to the AOI as 1, and trials that did not as 0.
Therefore, mean values represent inspection probabilities
per AOI and region.
As information about the target became incrementally
available, different objects and different comparisons were
interesting per region. In particular, at the Adjective, the

only available information about the target was its
distinguishing property, so the specificity manipulation is
still irrelevant (it is still unknown whether the target is
minimally or over-specified). We, therefore, compared
inspections to the singleton and contrasting objects that bore
the target property (cf. the blue ball & mitten in A&B,
Fig.1) between UR and NR (collapsing across Specificity).
Finally, at the Noun, when the target is revealed, both
factors become relevant, so we contrasted inspection
probabilities to the target (the blue ball: MS in A&B, OS in
C&D, Fig.1) and to the competitor (the blue mitten: OS in
A&B, MS in C&D, Fig.1) across conditions.
To calculate the ICA we used BeGazeTM with the ICA
Module (SensoMotoric Instruments) and WorkloadRT
(EyeTracking, Inc.). Since the ICA values that the
BeGazeTM software outputs are too coarse-grained for the
type of effects we expect, we used the ICA Coefficients to
compute ICA values per 100ms (see Demberg & Sayeed,
2016 for more details). Data points with a pupil diameter
smaller than 2.5 SD of that participant were eliminated, and
a mean ICA value for both eyes was calculated. As fixation
positions are not relevant for the ICA, we were interested
only in differences between UR and NR (collapsing across
Specificity) for the Adjective, and across conditions for the
Noun. We compared mean ICA values across conditions
within a window of 600ms starting from the middle of each
region. We analyzed inspection probabilities and ICA
values using generalized linear mixed effects models (lme4
package, R Version 3.3.2) with random intercepts for
participants and items, as well as random slopes for the
predictors of interest. For the analysis of the Adjective,
Reduction (UR vs NR) was the predictor of interest. For the
analysis of the Noun, the models included the effects of
Specificity (OS vs MS), Reduction (UR vs NR), and Target
Feature (Color vs Pattern), and their interaction. When the
maximal models did not converge, we simplified the
random effects structure as suggested by Barr, Levy,
Scheepers, and Tily (2013).

Results
Adjective
Singletons bearing the target feature (cf. the mitten in A&B,
and ball in C&D) were inspected equally frequently in UR
and NR (Coeff. = .083, SE = 2.317, Z = .829, p > .05).
Contrast objects (cf. the blue ball in A&B), on the other
hand, were more frequently inspected in UR than in NR
(Coeff. = .329, SE = .0628, Z = 3.107, p = .001).1 The ICA
values (see Fig.2) did not differ significantly between UR
and NR (Coeff. = -.031, SE = .0249, Z = -1.236, p > .05).

1
Since in NR more entities bear the mentioned feature, and
therefore attention is distributed across more objects, we do not
take this difference to reflect any preference for a
gricean/contrastive reading of the adjective.

3359

11

Mean ICA

10

MS − Uniform reduction
MS − Non uniform reduction
OS − Uniform reduction
OS − Non uniform reduction

9

8

7
Finde den

blauen

Ball

Figure 2. Mean ICA values per condition and region.
Error bars represent 95% CI.

Noun
Analyses of inspection probabilities to the target (the blue
ball) and competitor (the blue mitten) objects, including
target feature as a predictor, produced a significant effect of
feature (Coeff. = .205, SE = .104, Z = 1.971, p = .048). We
followed up this effect with separate analyses for color and
pattern items. For target inspections in color items (Fig.3),
we found a main effect of Entropy Reduction with more
inspections in UR than in NR (Coeff. = -.241, SE = .122, Z
= -1.971, p = .048), as well as a marginally significant effect
of Specificity (Coeff. = .237, SE = .127, Z = 1.877, p = .06),
such that the target was inspected more frequently in OS
than in MS. The analysis of inspections to the competitor
resulted in a main effect of Entropy Reduction with the
competitor receiving more inspections in UR than in NR
(Coeff. = .39, SE = .151, Z = 2.583, p = .009), and no effect
of Specificity (p > .05). For pattern items, none of the
comparisons produced significant results (all p > .228).
Interestingly, the ICA analysis produced main effects of
both Entropy Reduction and Specificity for both color and
pattern items (see Fig.2), such that ICA was higher for NR
vs UR (Coeff. = -.07, SE = .024, Z = -2.96, p = .003), and
for MS vs OS (Coeff. = .087, SE = .025, Z = 3.42, p < .001).

General Discussion

color and pattern items OS was indeed easier to process than
MS. This discrepancy between the two measures seems to
suggest that, while pattern is more difficult to perceive than
color, its mention is nevertheless as beneficial to visual
search as that of color. Further research is necessary to
determine the relation between visual attention as measured
by inspection probabilities, and cogntive load as measured
by the ICA.
We further examined if and how processing is influenced
by a more or less uniform reduction of referential entropy,
i.e., of the size of the referential search space. Specifically,
we contrasted conditions where the pre-nominal adjective
reduced entropy from by 1.58 bits (UR) with cases in which
entropy was decreased by only 0.58 bits (NR), to establish
whether what determines efficient entropy reduction is
determined by the more or less uniform decrease of entropy
over the referential expression. Our results seem to provide
evidence that processing is facilitated by the uniform
reduction of referential entropy, though not in the predicted
region. That is, in the Adjective there were no differences
for either inspections (to singleton objects) or for ICA
values between UR and NR. On the Noun, however, we
found indications that the greater reduction of entropy at the
first step contributing to a more uniform entropy reduction
profile was preferred, since in (both MS and OS) UR
conditions the target object collected more inspections
(though only in color items), and, perhaps more
interestingly, ICA values were lower than in NR (for all
types of items). Importantly, this finding demonstrates that
the ICA is sensitive to visual search difficulty, capturing
differences in the cognitive effort expended with different
rates of visual entropy decrease. With respect to our
research question, visual search, and therefore referential
processing, appears to be more efficient when the remaining
set of possible referents at the final step is rather small, as is
the case in UR. Interestingly, however, there is no penalty
for this increased entropy reduction on the adjective.
We acknowledge that these results are open to alternative
interpretations. For example, the absence of an Entropy
Reduction effect on the adjective may be due to our
operationalization of Uniform and Non-uniform Reduction,
and not because the entropy reduction rate only affects the

We investigated the effects of Specificity on situated
language processing comparing listeners’ inspection
patterns and cognitive effort when exposed to minimally or
over-specified reference. In accordance with previous
research (cf. Arts et al., 2011; Tourtouri et al., 2015) we
found a facilitation for OS vs MS on the noun, with the
target object receiving more inspections when the referring
expression included a redundant vs a contrastive adjective.
However, this effect was observed only for color items,
raising the question whether what facilitates processing is in
fact color salience as opposed to over-specificity in general.
The answer is provided by ICA, a novel measure of
cognitive workload based on the count of rapid pupil
dilations, which we used to directly assess the cognitive
effort expended in each condition, showing that in both

3360

Figure 3. Inspection probabilities for the noun region in
color items. Error bars represent 95% CI.

final step. That is, reducing referential entropy by 1.58 bits
vs 0.58 bits may not be sufficient to induce a differential
cost on the adjective. So, if the difference between the
remaining entropy in the two conditions was enhanced, by
using a larger referent set and going from e.g. 12 to 2 versus
to 8 potential referents in Uniform and Non-uniform
Reduction, respectively, might serve to amplify a reductionrelated cost on the adjective in the Uniform condition.
Relevant to this issue, it would be interesting to compare
processing of OS as implemented in this experiment, with
their MS counterparts, i.e. without modification of the noun
(e.g., “Finde den Ball”), as the latter is not only a case of
rapid reduction of entropy, but is also MS. Any facilitation
for OS under this comparison should suggest that processing
ease for OS is due to the insertion of an intermediate step in
reducing visual entropy that makes reduction more uniform.
A final possible explanation that is worth pursuing, as it is
related to the nature of the ICA measurements, is that ICA
may not be sensitive to such modulations of entropy
reduction. In other words, ICA may only be able to capture
whether visual search has been demanding or not. Future
research is of course required to tackle these questions.
In sum, we present eye-tracking evidence confirming that
the use of redundant noun modifiers (over-specification)
facilitates referential processing. In addition, we showed
that listeners rapidly exploit incoming information about the
target to reduce the referential search space in situated
comprehension. Greater reduction in referential entropy on
the adjective – while not associated with any increase in
cognitive load in that region – results in an overall more
uniform entropy reduction profile and in reduced cognitive
effort when processing the noun. This result leads us to
conclude that efficient processing is determined by both the
degree of specificity of the reference, as well as to the
distribution of entropy reduction across the utterance.

Acknowledgments
We thank Mindaugas Mozuraitis and Maria Staudte for
assistance with the eye tracking analyses, and Mirjana
Sekicki, Vera Demberg and Ben Peters for help with the
ICA analyses. This research was supported by
SFB/CRC1102 “Information Density and Linguistic
Encoding” awarded by the German Research Foundation
(DFG).

References
Arts, A., Maes, A., Noordman, L., & Jansen, C. (2011).
Overspecification facilitates object identification. Journal
of Pragmatics, 43, 361-374.
Barr, D. J., Levy, R., Scheepers, C., & Tily, H. J. (2013).
Random-effects structure for confirmatory hypothesis
testing: Keep it maximal. Journal of Memory and
Language, 68, 255–278.
Crocker, Demberg, & Teich (2016). Information Density
and Linguistic Encoding (IDeaL). Künstliche Intelligenz,
30, 77-81.

Davies, C., & Katsos, N. (2013). Are speakers and listeners
'only moderately Gricean'? An empirical response to
Engelhardt et al. (2006). Journal of Pragmatics, 49(1), 78106.
Demberg, V., & Sayeed A. (2016). The Frequency of Rapid
Pupil Dilations as a Measure of Linguistic Processing
Difficulty.
PLoS
ONE,
11(1).
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0146194
Engelhardt, P. E., Bailey, K., & Ferreira, F. (2006). Do
speakers and listeners observe the Gricean Maxim of
Quantity. Journal of Memory and Language, 54, 554-573.
Engelhardt P. E., Demiral, Ş. B., & Ferreira, F. (2011).
Over-specified
referring
expression
impair
comprehension: An ERP study. Brain and Cognition, 77,
304-314.
Geurts, B., & Rubio-Fernández P. (2015). Pragmatics and
Processing, Ratio, 28(4), 446-469.
Grice, P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole & J.
Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and Semantics: Speech Acts
(Vol.III). New York: Academic Press.
Jaeger, T. F. (2010). Redundancy and reduction: Speakers
manage syntactic information density. Cognitive
Psychology, 61, 23–62.
Just, M. A., & Carpenter, P. A. (1993). The intensity
dimension of thought: pupillometric indices of sentence
processing.
Canadian
journal
of
experimental
psychology. 47(2), 310–339.
Marshall, S. P. (2000). Method and apparatus for eye
tracking and monitoring pupil dilation to evaluate
cognitive activity. US Patent 6,090,051.
Marshall, S. P. (2002). The index of cognitive activity:
Measuring cognitive workload. Proceedings of the 2002
IEEE 7th Conference on Human Factors and Power
Plants, (pp. 7.5 – 7.9). New York: IEEE.
Pechmann, T. (1989). Incremental speech production and
referential overspecification. Linguistics 27, 89–110.
Rubio-Fernández P. (2016). How Redundant Are Redundant
Color Adjectives? An Efficiency-Based Analysis of Color
Overspecification. Frontiers in Psychology 7:153. doi:
10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00153
Sedivy, J. C., Tanenhaus, M. K., Chambers, C. G., &
Carlson, G. N. (1999). Achieving incremental semantic
interpretation through contextual interpretation. Cognition, 71, 109–147.
Shannon, C. E. (1948), A Mathematical Theory of
Communication. Bell System Technical Journal, 27: 379–
423. doi:10.1002/j.1538-7305.1948.tb01338.x
Tarenskeen S., Broersma M., & Geurts B. (2015).
Overspecification of color, pattern, and size: salience,
absoluteness, and consistency. Frontiers in Psychology
6:1703. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01703
Tourtouri, E. N., Delogu, F., & Crocker, M. W. (2015). ERP
indices of situated reference in visual contexts.
Proceedings of the 37th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 2422-2427). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.

3361

