Stopping Rules in Information Acquisition at Varying Probabilities and
Consequences: an EEG Study
Roberto Guedes de Nonohay (roberto.nonohay@ufrgs.br)
Cognitive Biosignals Lab - Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Rua Ramiro Barcelos, 2600
Porto Alegre, 90035003, Brazil

Gustavo Gauer (gustavo.gauer@ufrgs.br)
Cognitive Biosignals Lab - Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Rua Ramiro Barcelos, 2600
Porto Alegre, 90035003, Brazil

Richard Gonzalez (gonzo@umich.edu)
Biosocial Methods Collaborative, - University of Michigan, 426 Thompson Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 USA

Guilherme Lanning (guilherme.lannig@gmail.com)
Cognitive Biosignals Lab - Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Rua Ramiro Barcelos, 2600
Porto Alegre, 90035003, Brazil

Abstract
An experiment aiming to assess the use of stopping rules in
information acquisition was performed. Participants were
requested to make a decision in 24 financial scenarios with
the possibility of buying information pieces. Behavioral and
EEG data were recorded for analysis. Results showed that
participants followed Bayesian calculations in order to
determine a stop on information acquisition and decide.
Moreover, the information acquisition strategies were
consistent with prospect theory, in which participants will
weigh information pieces differently and seek more or less
information given different manipulations in scenario
probability and consequences. EEG data suggest Slow
Cortical Potentials at fronto-central electrodes.
Keywords: decision making; information acquisition; EEG;
slow cortical potential.

Introduction
As Taghavifard, Damghani and Moghaddam (2009) discuss,
it is only possible to know the risks inherent in a decision if
the individual has a relatively small degree of uncertainty.
One way to diminish levels of uncertainty is by reducing
residual uncertainty (Courtney, Kirkland & Viguerie, 1997)
through information acquisition. To acquire information is
to search both internally and externally for elements that can
affect the decision process. In their daily lives individuals
receive a considerable amount of information through
various modalities. Auditory, visual, tactile, emotional
stimuli can be sources of new information. Each piece of
information has some importance toward deciding either by
improving the quality and quantity of information or by
impairing an individual´s ability to decide given that the
amount of information is so great that the performance will
be deteriorated (Di Caprio, Santos-Arteaga, & Tavana,
2014). When information reveals itself and is processed by
the decision maker, we find a transition from a situation of
uncertainty to a situation of risk. In other words, the

decision maker now knows enough information about the
problem so that he is able subjectively infer a probability for
each outcome (Di Caprio et al., 2014).
Pretz, Naples, and Sternberg (2003) discuss the role of
experts and the fact that too much information can actually
impair the decision process. They propose that when an
expert (a person that possesses a great deal of knowledge,
acquired by experience and information gathering) in chess
plays with slightly different rules, his performance might
actually be worse than that of a player that is new to chess
and plays the same modified game as the expert. This
suggests that when an otherwise static environment
becomes dynamic, a difficulty in deciding might appear.
Too much information may be suboptimal for a decision
maker (Di Caprio et al., 2014), whereas not enough
information will prevent him from calculating risks properly
and brings the decision process to one of most uncertainty
(Taghavifard, Damghani & Moghaddam, 2009). On the
other hand, Frey, Hertwig and Rieskamp (2014) propose
that there is no way to determine when the right amount of
information is reached and no further acquisition needs to
be done, at least in decisions from experience, although they
also say that there may be benefits in small samples and
frugal search. The question that remains is: how does a
decision maker knows that he/she acquired enough
information to go through with the process?
Many researchers are investigating the subject of
information acquisition and how and when individuals stop
searching for new information and proceed to decide.
Gigerenzer (2000) proposes a fast and frugal way to decide
in environments where both time and knowledge are
restricted. By searching past information and knowledge in
order to recognize elements regarding the decision and cues
about those elements, the Take the Best (TTB) heuristic
searches for the best cue in order to make a choice. In the
experiments by Gigerenzer (2000), when people where

2144

asked which of two German cities was the most populated,
individuals would most likely use TTB in order to decide.
Even so, the individual might seek other cues about each
city from memory (i.e., perhaps if he saw the city on the
news). According to the subjective validity of the cues, the
one with the highest ranking is considered the best and thus
appropriate for a decision. Little information search and
acquisition are performed. Stern, Gonzalez, Welsh, and
Taylor (2010) conducted and experiment in which
individuals were presented with two decks with varying
proportions of red and blue cards. Four draws of cards were
made and at each draw the individual would have to state
from which deck the card had been drawn from. Each draw
represented acquiring a new piece information about the
decision. After all four draws the individual would have to
make a final decision between the decks or they could
decline to choose. It is clear that each new information
presented changed or reaffirmed the decision made by the
individual. When conflicting information was presented
(two draws were red cards and two were blue) individuals
mostly declined to choose, inferring a 50% chance to each
deck. When all draws were the same color, by the third draw
individuals were already 100% confident from which deck
the draws were made. This experiment poses that
information acquisition can update individual beliefs about
the outcome and that searching for information might
improve the decision making process by incrementing it
with a better view about the problem at hand.
Fifić and Buckmann (2013) probed the use of stopping
rules by individuals. Stopping rules might determine the
moment where the decision maker stops, or should stop,
searching for information and actually decide. The authors
reviewed some options of stopping rules that might require
higher or lower cognitive demands. The first one is the socalled optimal stopping rule for evidence accumulation. It is
based on Bayesian inference and implies that there should
be an optimal number of pieces of information that need to
be acquired. In their example the optimal stopping rule is 3.
This number represents that the individual will search for
positive (+1) and negative (-1) pieces of information and
will only stop searching when the sum of the search reaches
either +3 or -3, in which case the individual will choose the
option represented by the positive or negative sum, in their
example to proceed or not with a risky cancer treatment.
There is criticism regarding this rule, in order to calculate
the optimal number there is a need to have a perfect
knowledge of the situation and enough calculating skills to
solve it through Bayesian probability (Fifić & Buckmann,
2013). This option requires great amounts of time,
knowledge and cognitive effort. In most cases in the real
world there are limited amounts of each available to the
decision maker. They then propose a stopping rule selection
theory based on bounded rationality.
Two rules are suggested that do not depend on high
amounts of knowledge about the environment and the
situation. The first one is the fixed sample size. This rule
entails that the decision maker will determine a sample size

before the beginning of the information search process, for
example five. The individual will then search for
information and will make the choice based on the valence
that appears the most (positive or negative). The other rule
is called runs stopping rule. In this case the decision maker
will begin the search for information without determining a
fixed sample. She will stop searching when a streak of
either positive or negative pieces of information is found,
three consecutive positive opinions for example.
The stopping rule selection theory proposes that each
individual might use different stopping rules given time and
cognitive efforts available (Fifić & Buckmann, 2013). That
is because there is no evidence that one single stopping rule
can account for all responses from individuals. According
to Fifić and Buckmann (2013) each individual will search a
decision operative space in which the rules and values are
stored. Given a decision situation the individual will then
retrieve a stopping rule – a process that the authors call castnet retrieval. Much like fishing, each individual will select a
space and a net size to cast and retrieve a stopping rule that
will be applied. What is considered in order to cast a net in
the decision operative space is the level of uncertainty with
the environment, time frame, cognitive demand, and
accuracy expectancy (Fifić & Buckmann, 2013). After the
stopping rule is selected, the individual will then proceed to
collect information and finally decide.
Cognitive demand and the search for a stopping rule might
reflect high levels of task engagement. That is, the
individual is fully focused on solving the problem and
anticipates the outcomes of the decision given each new
information. This situation represents higher use of brain
resources, especially in frontal areas. Few studies focus their
analysis on pre-stimulus ERPs, especially when decision
making is concerned. Böckner, Bass, Kenemans and
Verbaten (2001) studied one form of Slow Cortical Potential
(SCP). They found a Stimulus-Preceding Negativity at
fronto-central electrodes in fear-induced trials. Oswald and
Sailer (2013) found fronto-central SCPs before and after
response in a temporal discounting task.
Other elements also influence the information acquisition
process. Frey, Hertwig and Rieskamp (2014) found that
both a facial expression of fear or the subjective feeling of
fear may cause an individual to search more information.
Söllner, Bröder, Glöckner and Betsch (2014) discovered
that when intruding incompatible information appears,
individuals trained in the TTB heuristic would not stop
searching for information when they were supposed to if
following TTB. Individuals rather adapted their information
search, choice and confidence judgment processes to the
content of such intruding information. It is widely
recognized that the amount of information available and
acquired by each individual will augment complexity levels
in the decision situation, much like what happened with the
intruding information.

2145

Methods
The objective of this study was to probe, based on the
models of Fifić and Buckmann (2013), Stern et al. (2010)
and Söllner et al. (2014), the use of stopping rules in the
information acquisition and evidence accumulation
processes and its electrophysiological correlates. A financial
decision task was devised so that the use of stopping rules
could be measured by the amount of information acquired
by the individuals in each of the scenarios. As with real
world decisions, scenarios were presented with varying
levels of risk, uncertainty and consequences. During the
task, EEG was continuously recorded to investigate
correlates of information acquisition and decision behavior
processes. A total of 47 (mean age: 18.89, SD: 1.68, 33
females) undergraduates from the University of Michigan
Pysch Pool participated. Data was collected from 50
participants, however 3 were discarded because of poor
electrode readings interfering with the EEG data. This study
was approved by the University of Michigan's Institutional
Review Board.

Financial decision task
Each participant was presented with all 24 financial decision
scenarios. The scenarios were presented written in a single
paragraph. In all scenarios participants would have to
choose whether to accept or reject the proposed situation,
but they could also choose not to decide at all (a
procrastination behavior). For every scenario there were 20
information pieces (or advices) that a participant may or
may not buy in order to help them decide. Participants were
instructed to press the “I” key on the keyboard whenever
they wanted to buy information in a scenario. All
information was presented in a crescent and pseudorandom
order. The order of information appearance was made to
resemble the stopping rules tested by Fifić and Buckmann
(2013). Each new information was presented using simply
the words "positive" or "negative", thus diminishing the
probability of bias. The words mean a positive or negative
opinion about accepting or rejecting the proposition in the
scenario. Each information had a price ($1 for the first 10
pieces and $2 for the other 10). There was a fixed fictional
amount of $480 available to any participant to complete the
experiment – this amount was created specifically to refrain
participants from always buying all 20 pieces of
information. They were instructed not to use all the money
available.
Each scenario showed a situation involving aspects of
financial decisions such as investments, purchases, asset
management, losses, etc. After reading the description of the
situation, participants could obtain (buy) information
regarding that scenario. Even if not buying any information,
participants would be required to make a decision for each
scenario. They could decide to buy/invest/pay (Positive), not
to buy/invest/pay (Negative) or to not decide at the moment
(Procrastination). After a decision, there was no feedback on
the success of it, and the next scenario was presented.
Participants did not receive any instructions regarding a

maximum period of time to decide at each scenario. They
were free to use as much time as they wanted to read the
scenario description, seek information and make a decision.
The 24 scenarios were divided as such: 1) 12 scenarios with
stated probabilities (risk scenario) in the description,
composed of 3 scenarios with low negative consequences, 3
with high negative consequences, 3 with low positive
consequences and 3 with high positive consequences; 2) 12
scenarios with unstated probabilities (uncertainty scenario)
in the description, composed of 3 scenarios with low
negative consequences, 3 with high negative consequences,
3 with low positive consequences and 3 with high positive
consequences.
One example of a stated probability, low positive
consequence scenario is: "You are thinking about buying a
bicycle. There is a model that is 35% better than the
alternative. You don't know what the average maintenance
costs might be. You must decide if you: buy the bicycle,
don't buy the bicycle or rather not decide now.", as shown in
Figure 1. The stated probability is the 35% chance depicted,
low consequence is due to the amount (35% is considered a
low chance), positive consequence is the referred chance of
being better than the alternative. Scenarios differ in the
presence or not of the stated probability, consequences and
valences of consequences. That means that the example
above might be presented in another form, representing an
unstated probability, high negative consequence scenario,
like: "... There is a model that is much worse than the
alternative ". Phrasings of probabilities and consequences
were randomized. That means that the object of the scenario
would be the same (bicycle, student loan, car fixing, etc.),
but the probabilities (stated or not), and consequences (high
or low and positive or negative) were randomized across
participants for any given object.
EEG data was recorded through Acknowledge 4.4
software using an ABM B-Alert X10, with a 9 channel
setup (Fz, F3, F4, Cz, C3, C4, Pz, P3 and P4) using linked
mastoid as reference. Data was collected at a sampling rate
of 256 Hz. Electrode scalp impedances were kept below 5
kΩ. Behavioral data and stimulus presentation was made via
PST E-Prime Professional 2.0. The data was analyzed using
ERPLab (Lopez-Calderon & Luck, 2014). Data went
through moving window artifact detection and filtered for
both low and high pass (0.1 Hz and 30 Hz, respectively).
ERP epoch was from -2000 ms before the decision was
made and 200 ms after the decision was made, giving the
possibility of observing variations that occurred in a
window of time before the actual decision. The use of this
epoch is justified given that the information acquisition
process is over before the decision is actually made, so in
order to analyze event related potentials of stopping rules it
is necessary to observe what happens before the decision.
Target electrodes were located at fronto-central sites in
order to search for SCPs (Oswald & Sailer, 2013). Mean
voltage over a specific time epoch was used to analyze the
data.

2146

Figure 1: Example of a scenario.

Results
In order to determine the use of stopping rules and strategies
for information acquisition we focus our analyses on two
measures: information quantity (QTY) and balance (BAL).
Information quantity is the mean amount of information
pieces that each individual bought during each scenario. The
balance is, just as Fifić and Buckmann (2013) proposed, one
of the stopping rules, the Bayesian calculation of the
valences for each information bought. That is, if an
information is positive, then the value considered is +1, if an
information is negative, then the value considered is -1. At
the end of a given scenario, for example, if the pieces of
information acquired were 3 positives and 2 negatives
(independent of order of appearance), the balance will be
+1. The conditions compared to the two measures were:
decision (positive, negative and procrastination), probability
(risk and uncertainty), and the combination of consequences
(high or low) and valence of consequences (positive or
negative) in risky and uncertainty.

Information acquisition
Of the total of possible scenarios, 40.63% were decided
without any kind of information acquisition, thus without
the use of stopping rules. This behavior might emerge given
the objects of the scenarios at hand. In order to better
control the conditions, the objects of decision (car, bicycle,
motorcycle purchase, student financial aid, home and car
repair, investments) were less complicated. That might have
made the decisions easier based on each individual set of
preferences. However, there is no data to back this
hypothesis. Next, there were 44.88% of the scenarios that
were decided using 1 through 5 information pieces. The
14.50% of cases left used 6 through 20 information pieces.

Decision
Regarding the decisions available for the participants, the
mean information quantity gathered when a decision was
positive is 4.11, when a decision was negative also 4.11 and
when participants decided to procrastinate the mean quantity
was 5.04. That shows that, despite the fact that participants
had up to 20 information pieces available they sought only a
small amount. Also it shows that the procrastination
behavior was observed with more acquisition of
information. On the other hand, when the balance is
considered, a positive decision was made with a mean
balance of +1.13, negative decisions -0.73 and

procrastination decisions -0.05. That means that the
information acquisition stopping point behavior is more
influenced by the so called balance of the valences,
regardless of the quantity of information acquired. A oneway ANOVA was conducted to test for differences between
each decision. The test revealed that there is a difference
between the decisions both for QTY and BAL,
F(2,1146)=189.9, p<0.001 and F(2,1149)=6.35, p<0.01,
respectively. Post-hoc analysis using Tukey HSD test
revealed significant differences between all interactions:
positive-negative
(p=0.001),
negative-procrastination
(p<0.001) and positive-procrastination (p<0.001) for the
BAL measure and only negative-procrastination (p<0.05)
and positive-negative (p<0.05) for the QTY measure.

Probability
Analyzing only if the scenario presented risk or uncertainty,
the only significant difference was observed in the BAL
measure, F(1,1150)=4.75, p<0.05. The mean BAL for risk
scenario was 0.031. For uncertainty scenario the mean BAL
was 0.262. As for the QTY measure the mean value for the
risk scenario was 4.263 and 4.100 for the uncertainty
scenario.

Combining the conditions
The conditions were not presented isolated to the
participants. Combining the conditions yielded 8 possible
scenarios, as it was previously explained, that were
randomly presented three times each for the participants. If
all conditions are analyzed there is a significant difference
for the BAL measure (F(7,1128)=8.090, p<0.001). A post
hoc Tukey HSD test revealed significant differences
between several of the possible combinations. However, two
differences between conditions are of particular interest.
The first one is between scenarios with uncertainty, low
positive consequence (M=0.118) and scenarios with
uncertainty, low negative consequence (M=0.326), with
p<0.001. The second one is between scenarios with risk,
high positive consequences (M=0.007) and scenarios with
risk, high negative consequences (M=0.181) with p<0.001.

EEG
EEG analysis focused on risky and uncertain scenarios and
both of the combined conditions highlighted previously. As
was discussed earlier SCP might emerge in a situation
where there might be prolonged use of cognitive control and
resources in fronto-medial electrodes (Oswald & Sailer,
2013). As it was seen, BAL has significant differences in
risky and uncertain scenarios and also in scenarios with
different valences and consequences. That might point to the
fact that prior to a decision individuals may exert more
thought and allocate more cognitive resources to decide
given the conditions presented.
The comparison between risky and uncertain conditions
showed SCP negativity for the uncertain condition and a
positivity for the risky condition in F4 between -950 ms and

2147

-500 ms, with statistically significant
(F(1,98)=5.847, p<0.05) as shown in figure 2.

difference

Figure 2: SCPs in risk x uncertain condition in F4. Black
line represents uncertain condition, red line risk condition.
The ellipsis shows the point of the significant difference. Y
axis represents micro voltages, X axis represents the epoch
in milliseconds.
As for the comparison between risky and uncertain
scenarios in a low consequence condition, we found a SCP
negativity for the uncertain condition and a positivity for the
risky condition in Fz and F4 between -1290 ms and -490
ms, with statistically significant differences for both
electrodes (F(1,98)=3.631, p=0.05 and F(1,98)=4.720,
p<0.05, respectively) as shown in figure 3.

Figure 3: SCPs in risk x uncertain, low consequence
condition. Top part represents Fz electrode. The bottom
panel depicts voltages in the F4 electrode. Black line is
uncertain condition, red line is risk condition. The ellipsis
shows the point of the significant difference. Y axis
represents micro voltages, X axis represents the epoch in
milliseconds.
When high consequences are observed, there is a marginal
statistical significance between a SCP positivity in risky
conditions and a negativity in uncertain conditions in F4
between -920 ms and -500 ms (F(1,98)=3.517, p=0.06) as
shown in figure 4.

Figure 4: SCPs in risk x uncertain, high consequence
condition in F4. Black line represents uncertain condition,
red line risk condition. The ellipsis shows the point of the
significant difference. Y axis represents micro voltages, X
axis represents the epoch in milliseconds.

Discussion
Behavioral data suggests that the balance of acquired
information (BAL), according to Bayesian calculations
(Fifić & Buckmann, 2013), is a preferred stopping rule.
EEG data supports this conclusion given the fact that where
BAL represented significant differences, there was the
emergence of SCPs. According to Oswald and Sailer
(2013), the SCPs are task-related and the negativity might
mean conflict processing and the usage of cognitive
resources to resolve such conflicts. Even though there was
also a significant difference for the quantity of information
bought and the decisions, consciously or not participants
behave according to Bayesian calculation in order to
determine the end of the information acquisition process.
This holds up even if the conditions are considered
(combined or isolated). This means that the participants will
take into account the valences of the information pieces
acquired and when they reach a particular threshold
(depending on the scenario characteristics), the decision is
made. That becomes clearer when the threshold is
approximately +1 for a positive decision, approximately -1
for a negative decision and approximately zero for a
procrastination decision. The procrastination decisions show
that even though there are more pieces of information
acquired, participants often would feel more uncertain and
would rather skip the decision. This means that that
particular scenario and the set of information acquired
would not diminish the residual uncertainty acknowledged
by the participant, thus making it harder to assess which
decision is better given the probabilities and consequences.
Uncertain scenarios needed less QTY and a higher BAL
in order to reach a decision than risk scenarios. The
appearance of the SCP negativity for uncertain scenarios
can reflect a higher conflict in this condition given that,
even though participants seek less information, they need
higher valences to resolve the conflict. This conflict may
arise due to the difficulty to assign a value to the unstated
probability described in the scenarios. As in Stern et al.
(2010) each new information can change the subjective
probability that the participant assigns to the outcome.
These changes can require more BAL and result in more use
of cognitive resources in order to decide.

2148

When conditions were combined, especially the two
highlighted previously, the same effect is also present. In
uncertain low negative consequence conditions there is the
need for more BAL and there is also a SCP negativity
although with higher amplitude than the one described on
the last paragraph. This, according to Oswald and Sailer
(2013), mean that there is an expanded cognitive effort in
resolving the conflict that the valences and the condition
might imply.
Lastly, in high negative consequence conditions, risky
scenarios need more BAL, however, in high consequence
conditions the SCP negativity is seen for uncertain
scenarios. We hypothesize that the lack of stated probability
in a high consequence scenario might mean that the
information has a higher weight for the participants and
therefore there is no need to allocate as much cognitive
effort as with risky conditions. In this case, a stated
probability might introduce some level of ambiguity given
that the risk is apparent and the consequences can be large.

Conclusion
We developed an experiment aiming to observe different
strategies, or stopping rules, that individuals might use in
order to cease information acquisition and make a decision
in a given scenario. Departing from the stopping rules
proposed by Fifić and Buckmann (2013), we manipulated
scenarios in order to show or not show probabilities, high or
low consequences and positive or negative consequences.
The data suggests that individuals do not actually follow a
particular stopping rule, rather they tend to use, consciously
or not, Bayesian calculations in order to consider all the
information that was bought in a scenario, when considering
the decisions participants made. Moreover we found SCP
waves for different conditions in the experiment. That can
mean that for those conditions there was an expanded
allocation of cognitive resources in order to solve conflicts
that emerged from the information acquisition and the
scenario description. Those manipulations showed that the
information acquisition behavior resembled prospect theory
(Tversky & Kahneman, 1992) in that different levels of risk
or
uncertainty
combined
with
high/low
and
positive/negative consequences will directly affect the
quantity of information bought and the weight that the
information will have in order for a participant to feel
satisfied and proceed to a decision.
This was an exploratory experiment in order to study the
moments leading to a decision in an information acquisition
task. Further studies should focus on confirming the
behavior and electrophysiological correlates of each
condition separately. Also, there is an opportunity for the
use of integrated psychophysiological measures in order to
confirm task engagement and cognitive effort in those
conditions (ECG and eyetracking, for example)

Acknowledgments
This work was partially supported by CAPES/Brazil. We
would like to thank Alicia Carmichael, Syed Tahsin, David

Zhang, Lisa Jin, Donna Walter, Karen Nielsen, Jeannette
Jackson and Debra Bourque for help with this study.

References
Böcker, K.B.E, Baas, J.M.P, Kenemans, J.L., & Verbaten,
M.N. (2001). Stimulus-preceding negativity induced be
fear: a manifestation of affective anticipation.
International Journal of Psychophysiology, 43, 77-90.
Courtney, H., Kirkland, J., & Viguerie, P. (1997). Strategy
under
uncertainty.
Harvard
Business
Review,
(December), 81–90.
Di Caprio, D., Santos-Arteaga, F. J., & Tavana, M. (2014).
Information acquisition processes and their continuity:
Transforming uncertainty into risk. Information Sciences,
274, 108–124. doi:10.1016/j.ins.2014.02.144
Fifić, M., & Buckmann, M. (2013). Stopping Rule Selection
(SRS) Theory Applied to Deferred Decision Making. In
Proceedings of the 35th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 2273–2278). Retrieved from
http://mindmodeling.org/cogsci2013/papers/0415/paper04
15.pdf
Frey, R., Hertwig, R., & Rieskamp, J. (2014). Fear shapes
information acquisition in decisions from experience.
Cognition,
132(1),
90–99.
doi:10.1016/j.cognition.2014.03.009
Gigerenzer, G. (2000). Adaptive thinking: Rationality in the
real world. New York: Oxford University Press.
Lopez-Calderon, J., & Luck, S. J. (2014). ERPLAB: An
open-source toolbox for the analysis of event-related
potentials. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8:213. doi:
10.3389/fnhum.2014.00213
Oswald, F., & Sailer, U. (2013). Slow cortical potentials
capture decisions processes during temporal discounting.
European Journal of Neuroscience, 37, 1159-1169.
doi:10.1111/ejn.12108
Pretz, J. E., Naples, A. J., & Sternberg, R. J. (2003).
Recognizing , defining and representing problems. In The
Psychology of Problem Solving. Cambridge University
Press.
Söllner, A., Bröder, A., Glöckner, A., & Betsch, T. (2014).
Single-process versus multiple-strategy models of
decision making: Evidence from an information intrusion
paradigm.
Acta
Psychologica,
146,
84–96.
doi:10.1016/j.actpsy.2013.12.007
Stern, E. R., Gonzalez, R., Welsh, R. C., & Taylor, S. F.
(2010). Updating beliefs for a decision: neural correlates
of uncertainty and underconfidence. The Journal of
Neuroscience,
30(23),
8032–41.
doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4729-09.20104
Taghavifard, M. T., Damghani, K. K., & Moghaddam, R. T.
(2009). Decision Making Under Uncertain and Risky
Situations. In Enterprise Risk Management Symposium
Monograph Society of Actuaries. Chicago, IL.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1992). Advances in prospect
theory: Cumulative representation of uncertainty. Journal
of Risk and Uncertainty, 5(4), 297–323.

2149

