The strategic advantages of micro-targeted campaigning: A proof of principle
Bayesian Agent-Based Model
Jens Koed Madsen (jens.madsen@ouce.ox.ac.uk)
School of Geography and the Environment, University of Oxford
OX1 3QY, South Parks Road, Oxford, United Kingdom
Orcid: 0000-0003-2405-8496

Toby D. Pilditch (t.pilditch@ucl.ac.uk)
Department of Experimental Psychology, University College London
WC1E 6BT, Gower Street, London, United Kingdom
Abstract
Predicting the effect of persuasion campaigns is difficult, as
belief changes may cascade through a network. In recent
years, political campaigns have adopted micro-targeting
strategies that segment voters into fine-grained clusters for
more specific targetting. At present, there is little evidence
that explores the efficiency of this method. Through an
Agent-Based Model, the current paper provides a novel
method for exploring predicted effects of strategic persuasion
campaigns.
The voters in the model are rational and revise their beliefs
in the propositions expounded by the politicians in
accordance with Bayesian belief updating through a source
credibility model.
The model provides a proof of concept and shows strategic
advantages of micro-targeted campaigning. Despite having
only little voter data allowing crude segmentation, the microtargeted campaign consistently beat stochastic campaigns
with the same reach. However, given substantially greater
reach, a positively perceived stochastic candidate can nullify
or beat a strategic persuasion campaigns.
Keywords: Agent-Based Model; Persuasion;
campaigns; Politics; Voting simulation

Strategic

Introduction
Persuasion is paramount in political campaigns, and source
credibility is a key component of a successful campaign. It
influences a range of human cognitive phenomena related to
reasoning, argumentation, and judgement and decisionmaking. It influences the reception of persuasive messages
(Petty & Cacioppo, 1984; Chaiken & Maheswaran, 1994),
plays a vital part in the development of children’s
perception of the world (Harris & Corriveau, 2011), impacts
juror decision making (Lagnado et al., 2012), increases
adherence with persuasion strategies (Cialdini, 2007), and
influences how people are seen in social situations (Fiske et
al., 2007; Cuddy et al., 2011). The specific normative
function of source credibility in argumentation, however, is
still debated. For example, the dual-process-based
Elaboration-Likelihood Model (Petty, 1981) assigns
message source to heuristic rather than analytic cues (Briñol
& Petty, 2009) whilst recent Bayesian models integrate
credibility in revising beliefs when given evidence from a

source (Bovens & Hartmann, 2003; Hahn et al., 2012;
Harris et al., 2015).
Trustworthiness is an important factor in politics. It
increases public policy compliance (Ayres & Braithwaite,
1992), influences candidate choice (Citirin & Muste, 1999),
increases intention of voting (Householder & LaMarre,
2014, though not necessarily actual voting, see Dermody et
al., 2010), increases societal cooperation (Fukuyama, 1995),
and lack of trust may instigate civic participation (see Levi
& Stoker, 2000 for a discussion of this). The current paper
expands upon these findings by showing how source
credibility influences the convincingness of an argument for
a proposed candidate.
In political literature, credibility factors include integrity,
competence, fairness, flip-flopping, honest, equitable, and
being responsiveness to public needs (Citrin & Muste, 1999;
Levi & Stoker, 2000). Collating these, Mayer and
colleagues identify credibility as ability, benevolence, and
integrity (Mayer et al., 1995; Mayer & Davis, 1999).
Empirical exploration of management corroborates such a
definition (Colquitt et al., 2011 for a review) while social
psychology partitions reliability in two main spheres:
warmth and competence (Fiske et al., 2006; 2007; Cuddy et
al., 2011). Further studies in management literature differ in
whether they identify two (Jarvenpaa et al., 1998) or three
credibility traits (Mayer et al., 1995).
The model employed in the paper is in line with the
factors identified in the above studies. Specifically, we
divide credibility into two factors: expertise (the capability
to provide accurate information) and trustworthiness (the
willingness to provide accurate information).

Micro-targeted campaigns
Political campaigns attempt to persuade voters that they
should support and vote for a particular candidate or
political position. Unsurprisingly, the competitive nature of
electoral campaigns has led to the development of strategies
regarding belief updating and behaviour changes, in
particular through the use of data and voter segmentation
(O’Neil, 2016). Typically, an election campaign is divided
into two phases: a persuasion phase that focuses on
changing the minds of the voters and a “get-out-the-vote”
phase that focuses on making sure the voters do indeed turn
out for the election. While the former phase typically lasts

2651

for the duration of the entire campaign, the latter is typically
implemented in the final 3-4 days (see Green & Gerber,
2008). In the current paper, we focus on the element of
political campaigns concerned with changing the minds of
the voters (i.e. the persuasion phase). Specifically, we
explore the potential strategy advantages of knowing the
voters’ attitudes towards the persuader (the politician).
Companies increasingly accrue data on their customers.
Given potential access to and purchase of large-scale data
sets about voters, recent years have seen the development of
specifically targeted political campaigns, known as microtargeted campaigns (MTCs, see Issenberg, 2012). While
traditional campaigns use rough voter segmentation such as
by gender, income, or place of habitation, individual voter
models allow for fine-grained segmentation (e.g., uppermiddle class, Caucasian, suburban, father, Prius-owner,
Seattleite; as well as top-five travel destinations, frequented
news sites, etc.). Such data allows for highly specified
models of the individual voter concerning political leaning,
policy priorities, and voting likelihood. The models allow
for targeted political adverts that address specific political
issues in a way that is tailored to the individual in question.
There is currently little academic research conducted on
the effect and strategic administration of micro-targeted
campaigns in elections. First, micro-targeted models are a
recent element in election campaigns (Issenberg, 2008). As
such, most models actually used in campaigns are subject to
non-disclosure agreements and are kept by the responsible
companies. Second, it is difficult to assess the quality of
campaigns; partly due to the aforementioned secrecy
regarding the exact models, and partly due to the complexity
of campaigns, given the number of free parameters and the
uniqueness of each campaign.
The current paper focuses on changes of electorate beliefs
and not on the likelihood of voting (at the end of the
simulation (i.e. campaign period), all voters vote with a
probability of 1). Election campaigns unfold over time,
where campaigns can contact voters and attempt to persuade
them. As such, the persuasion attempt of the politician is a
successive campaign designed to convince the electorate
that the voters should support the persuader in question.
While we do not test specific campaign models, the
paper provides a proof concerning the potential effect of
micro-targeted campaign strategies through Agent-Based
Model simulation of interactions between politicians and
voters. We stress the exploratory nature of the study, as the
model is necessarily simplified. Rather than testing the
predictive power of a specific voter model, we explore the
strategic potential of MTCs through a Bayesian source
credibility model, which has been developed and tested in
previous studies. In the following, we present Agent-Based
Models as a technique for exploring the development of
aggregate patterns (such as changes in beliefs in a
population) across time. Aside from testing the potential
effectiveness of MTCs, the paper presents Agent-Based
Models (ABMs) as a novel method for simulating the
predicted effect of persuasion campaigns.

A Bayesian source credibility model
Bayesian approaches to reasoning and belief revision take
point of departure in subjective, probabilistic degrees of
beliefs in propositions where Bayes’ theorem captures the
posterior degree of belief given a prior belief in the
hypothesis and some new evidence (Oaksford & Chater,
2007). The approach has been applied to argumentation
theory (Hahn & Oaksford, 2006; 2007) where findings
suggest that Bayesian reasoning may account for crucial
elements of human information integration in practical
reasoning. Most relevant to the current model, researchers
have used Bayesian approaches to describe how humans
integrate uncertain information from more or less reliable
sources (Bovens & Hartmann, 2003). The model has been
tested empirically (Harris et al., 2015; Madsen, 2016) and
enjoys a good fit with observed responses.
Taking point of departure from the Bayesian source
credibility model, credibility is defined as a combination of
trustworthiness and expertise (Hahn et al., 2009; Harris et
al., 2015; see Fig. 1). In order to implement this model and
to facilitate communication between persuaders (politicians)
and persuadees (voters) and to capture the desired belief
updating process, the members of the electorate have
subjectively estimated beliefs about the credibility of each
persuader.

Fig. 1: A Bayesian source credibility model1
Expertise refers to whether or not the persuader is capable
of providing accurate and relevant information. For
example, a politician may know the legislative framework
connected with a policy proposal (thus increasing the
chances of providing legislation that is legal and within
constitutional law), a doctor may be more qualified to
diagnose an illness compared with a layperson and so forth.
Conversely, trustworthiness refers to the intention of
providing accurate information. Regardless of the expertise
of the source, the speaker might wish to misinform, lie, or
otherwise deceive the listener. Expertise and trustworthiness
are orthogonal and independent in the model (see Fig. 1)
such that a person can be inexpert and yet intend to
represent her available information as accurately as possible
or a person can be highly expert within a field, but wish to
misinform the listener. The source credibility model used in
the current paper has previously been tested on appeals to
political authority, which suggests that the model captures
1

P(E) = perceived expertise (0-1); P(T) = perceived trust (0-1);
Rep is the represented statement (e.g., Hypothesis = 1)

2652

part of how voters update their beliefs when politicians
publically endorse or critique a policy (Madsen, 2016).
As explained later, the persuaders in the model contact the
voters and provide either a positive or a negative statement
concerning a hypothesis. To calculate the expected posterior
belief in the likelihood of the hypothesis (e.g. the goodness
of the candidate), we apply the source credibility model.
The equation used to calculate the posterior is an expanded
version of Bayes’ theorem that incorporates trustworthiness
and expertise within the theorem. It is taken from Harris et
al. (2015) and relies on advances made in Bovens and
Hartmann (2003) and Hahn et al. (2009) on the concept of
source reliability (Hahn et al., 2012).

paper, we use this method to simulate a campaign with
interactions between politicians and voters. Each round in
an ABM is called a tick. Here, each tick represents a
campaign day. For the current model, the ABM requires
agents and links between agents.

Agents

where p(h|rep) represents the probability that the hypothesis
is true (h) given a confirming statement (rep). P(h)
represents the prior belief in the hypothesis, and p(rep|h)
and p(rep|¬h) represent the conditional probability that the
source would provide a positive statement if indeed the
hypothesis was true or false. Trustworthiness and expertise
are integrated within p(rep|h) and p(rep|¬h) through the
combination of these conditionals2.
To parameterise the model, p(exp) and p(trust) represent
prior beliefs in expertise and trustworthiness. Conditional
probabilities (see footnote 1) represent the epistemic
relationship between model parameters and the likelihood of
providing true or good advice. For example, p(rep|h, exp,
trust) refers to the likelihood that a speaker declares a
hypothesis to be true when the speaker has complete and
perfect knowledge of the topic and is unequivocally
trustworthy in a world where the hypothesis happens to be
true regardless of the statement of the speaker.
The model allows for parameter-free belief revision such
that the agent makes use of its estimation of the persuader’s
source credibility to update its belief when the persuader
contacts the voter with a persuasive statement.

Agent-Based Modelling
Traditional equation-based models typically take point of
departure in cognitive functionality in isolation (e.g. belief
revision given new information) or in dyads (e.g. prisoners’
dilemma). However, when agents can interact and influence
each other through time, across space and between multiple
agents, behaviour may become dynamic and adaptive. If this
happens, patterns may become computationally intractable,
making predictions difficult or impossible with isolated or
dyadic models, as the system becomes complex (see
Parunak et al., 1998). ABMs allow for simulations of
interactions between agents and their environment and
between multiple agents (Epstein & Axtell, 1996). In the
2

p(rep|h) = p(rep|h, exp, trust) * p(exp) * p(trust) + p(rep|h,
¬exp, trust) * p(¬exp) * p(trust) + p(rep|h, ¬exp, ¬trust) * p(¬exp)
* p(¬trust) + p(rep|h, exp, ¬trust) * p(exp) * p(¬trust), mutatis
mutandis for p(rep|¬h)

Agents are the actors in the simulated model world. The
cognitive make-up of each agent may consist of any rules
constrain or enable relevant behaviours within the simulated
world. By applying the relevant cognitive rules, agents can
revise their beliefs about the model world by interacting
with the environment. Further, agents can have physical
rules such as metabolism, energy consumption, and age.
This allows for simulated life-spans in which agents can
live, learn, generate progeny, and die. The physical and
cognitive rules allow for heterogeneity, as agents may differ
in essential characteristics. This allows for dynamic models
of heterogeneous populations.
In the ABM presented in this paper, there are three types
of agents: voters, strategic persuaders and stochastic
persuaders. The persuaders’ aim to convince the voters to
support them in an election. Politicians engage with voters
by providing a statement, supporting one candidate or the
other (H = 0 or 1). Voters update their belief in the goodness
of each candidate on the basis of the prior beliefs (p(h)) and
their perception of the candidate (using the above Bayesian
source credibility model).

Links
While agents have cognitive rules that apply to agents in
isolation, ABMs allow for interactivity. Links represent
connections between agents that may be encoded with
functional capacities. These can be any and all social links
that inform and influence behaviour. Links can be direct
(e.g., providing information to another agent, fighting with
another agent) or indirect (e.g., some agents might prefer to
be in the vicinity of other types of agents). In the current
model, only direct links are employed, as the persuaders
contact voters directly.
In the current model, politicians establish links by seeking
out voters. Stochastic candidates engage randomly with
voters while MTC candidates only engage with voter that
has a positive attitude towards the candidate (using the
‘signal factor’ described in the following section). There are
no links between voters in the current model. Introducing
social structure will be a natural development in future
work. Indeed, we strongly suspect that MTC candidates
would be more efficient in social structures, as they can
target ‘community leaders’ and important social nodes.

Simulating Micro-targeted campaign strategies
In order to tentatively explore the effect of MTCs, we
simulate the span of an election campaign through an ABM
in which the politicians (the persuaders) can interact with
the voters (the persuadees). Though exploratory in nature,
the model has two aims. First, to our knowledge, although

2653

some models have explored opinion chance in politics (e.g.
Duggins, 2016), ABMs have not been used to directly
explore campaign strategies. The paper consequently
provides a new method for exploring the efficiency of
persuasion campaign strategies. Second, by implementing a
simplified voter and strategy model, the efficiency of
minimal voter knowledge is explored. As the strategic
potential of MTCs increases given higher voter complexity
(e.g. if voters have prioritised political beliefs), the
simplified model explores the efficiency of MTCs in
situations where they are expected to be least effective. As
such, the model explores a conservative modelling scenario.
In the following, we present the Agent-Based Model.
Agents The model consists of three types of agents:
Voters, Micro-target persuader (MTC), and stochastic
persuader (non-MTC). The physical space plays no role in
the current model (as the interactions between the persuader
and the persuadee may be likened to sending out pamphlets
or generating cold-calls). Consequently, voters are randomly
distributed across simulation space. All voters were outfitted
with the Bayesian source credibility model to inform their
belief revision process. To operationalise the model, each
voter generates an expertise and trustworthy score for each
candidate from a normal distribution (as described later, we
manipulate the means in the two simulations, such that
mean = 0.5 or = 0.6, SD = 0.25). To fully parameterize the
model, agents are given conditional probabilities:
H
T, E

H
T, ¬E

H
¬T, E

H
¬T, ¬E

¬H
T, E

¬H
T, ¬E

¬H
¬T, E

¬H
¬T, ¬E

80.38

58.21

34.63

18.04

22.59

42.3

59.90

71.26

Table 1: Conditional probability table
These are taken from Madsen (2016), as this study applies
the model to political belief revision. This allows for belief
revision given persuader statements (with no free
parameters) and further allows for agent heterogeneity, as
some agents will rate one candidate highly while another
will rate the same candidate poorly.
To provide a ‘signaling’ factor for the MTC candidate,
voters average trustworthiness and expertise scores to
generate a ‘credibility score’. Each voter generates a prior
belief from a normal distribution (mean = 0.5, SD = 0.25,
bounded between 0.01 and 1), representing a voter’s initial
(prior) likelihood of voting for either candidate. This
introduces the eventual decision (voting) rule: If a voter has
p(candidate) < 0.5, it favours the non-MTC candidate; if
p(candidate) > 0.5, it favours the MTC candidate. The
campaign runs for 50 days (50 ticks). At the end of the
simulation, voters vote for their favoured candidate. There
are 10,000 voters in the simulation.
Both persuaders’ aim to persuade voters to shift their
p(candidate) towards their own position. In order to do so,
they establish connection with voters and make opposite
claims. In accordance with the source credibility model, the
non-MTC candidate represents p(candidate) = 1 while the
MTC candidate represents p(candidate) = 0. This gives full
implementation of the Bayesian source credibility model

where the voter updates the prior belief given representation
by a (more or less) credible source. After each connection,
the contacted voter takes P(candidate|rep) - i.e. the posterior
- as their new value for p(candidate)3.
For each tick, the candidate can establish contact with X
voters, defined as ‘candidate reach’. In the simulations, the
MTC candidate has a reach of 20 while we manipulate the
reach of the non-MTC candidate to test the efficiency of the
MTC strategy. In Fig. 2 below, the reach ratio is the reach
of the non-MTC divided by the reach of the MTC.
Central to the model, the MTC and non-MTC campaigns
differ in their contact selectivity. The non-MTC is fully
stochastic and thereby corresponds to a blind campaign that
distributes leaflets or conducts cold-calls with no knowledge
of the electorate. The MTC segments voters and will only
contact voters with a favourable impression of the
credibility of the candidate (voters with a signaling factor >
0.5). This selection process does not take into account the
voter’s prior belief in the candidate. As such, the underlying
source credibility factors determine whether the voter is
"open" to the candidate's message (i.e. will update in the
desired manner). Of the sub-group of (desirable) voters who
fit this criterion, a random selection (the amount based on
"reach") are selected for contacting. Both campaigns may
contact the same voter multiple times during the simulation,
but not more than once on a single "day".
In sum, voters entertain prior beliefs about each candidate,
rate each candidate for trustworthiness and expertise, and
have a signaling factor. When a candidate contacts the voter,
the voter updates the belief in p(candidate) in accordance
with the Bayesian source credibility model. Candidates are
either stochastic (non-MTC) or use the signaling factor to
identify favourably disposed voters. Each candidate can
reach a fixed number of voters each click. There are 10.000
voters and 2 candidates, and the campaign lasts for 50 days
(ticks). At the end of each simulation, voters cast their vote
for the candidate they find most favourable.

Main findings
We conduct two main manipulations. First, we manipulate
the mean credibility rating of each candidate by altering
voter perception of candidate trust and expertise (mean = .5
or mean = .6, SD = .25), providing a 2x2 simulation.
Second, for each of the credibility combinations, the reach
ratio of the non-MTC is between 1-10 (1 represents
simulations where the non-MTC and MTC have identical
reach; 10 represents simulations where the non-MTC can
reach 10 times as many voters per tick). The reach of the
MTC candidate is always 20. Fig. 2 illustrates the
percentage of voters who supported the non-MTC on the yaxis and the reach ratio of the non-MTC on the x-axis.
3
While it is not possible in the current model, this enables
negative campaigning, as candidates could provide a negative
representation (e.g., p(candidate|¬rep)) and attacks designed to
undermine the trustworthiness or expertise of the opposing
candidate. Intentionally, the model is built compartmentally to
allow for increasingly complex persuasion campaigns.

2654

Fig. 2: Election outcome (p(cred) = .5; p(cred) = .6)
The simulations point to two main conclusions. First, a nonMTC with mean credibility rating of .5 is inefficient when
run stochastically. As opinions about the candidate are
equally divided, a stochastic strategy will necessarily
engage with an equal number of supporters and adversaries.
As such, blind strategies only work in when the campaign
expect general voter estimation of the candidate to be > .5.
If the candidate is seen as distrustful, a blind campaign will
be ineffective or detrimental and will be beaten by
campaigns with simple winnowing strategies.
Second, though MTCs provide a distinct advantage in
terms of persuasion strategies, the stochastic campaign can
beat the strategic campaign through brute force if the
average p(cred) of the stochastic candidate is > 0.5. If the
reach of the non-MTC is roughly double, the effect of the
MTC is cancelled out. If the reach ratio > 2, the non-MTC
edges out the strategic campaign. This is an interesting
finding, as the MTC is effective, but can be beaten. Given
the possibility of simulating and calculating a tipping point
where a stochastic candidate (with credibility rating > .5
among the voters) beat strategic campaigns, it is possible to
conduct cost-benefit analyses to determine the best available
strategy given a limited campaign budget. In general,
though highly simplified, the simulations show that it is
methodologically possible to estimate the expected effect of
a strategic (or stochastic) persuasion campaign by applying
cognitive rules to the persuaders and persuadees in a
dynamic environment.

Discussion and future developments
The current model provides an important proof of concept
that MTCs have a non-trivial advantage in a limited world
where the voters revise their beliefs in the same manner and
where the candidates can only advocate their position in a
simplified way. We believe the paper provides a novel
method for simulating and analysing electoral strategies
using Agent-Based Models. However, as a proof of concept,
this leaves room for further model developments.
First, real-life voters may exhibit individual differences
concerning moral foundation (Haidt, 2012) or reasoning
strategies (Lodge & Taber, 2013). Voters in the current
model are cognitively homogenous (though epistemically
heterogenous) who revise their beliefs by the same process.
Future work could integrate cognitive voter heterogeneity,

which would allow for exploration of strategic choices.
Adding personality profiles would make the model more
realistic and interesting in terms of testing election strategies
for actual elections. Further, real-life campaigners do not
have a perfect signal from each voter. Consequently, noise
needed to be added to voter signalling.
Second, in the model, voters consider one proposition
whereas elections often consist of a multitude of attitudes,
beliefs, and desires. The present framework may easily be
extended to include multiple policy beliefs, preference
rankings, and multiple candidates.
Third, the MTC only considers the favourability of the
candidate. Given additional data about complex voters (e.g.,
policy preference, personality, etc.), a sophisticated MTC
may target voters more strategically. For example, an MTC
could differentiate between swing and secure voters.
Additionally, some voters are more likely than others to
vote regardless of their political conviction. This is essential
for strategic implementation of get-out-the-vote strategies.
Fourth, in the model, voters cannot communicate with
each other. To allow for greater belief diffusion and for a
more dynamic simulation of an electorate, it is reasonable to
assume voter interaction where voters can share beliefs and
persuade each other through their individual networks.
Models that explore the role of hierarchy in opinion
dynamics would be particularly relevant to explore this
function (see e.g., Quattrociocchi et al 2014; Watts &
Dodds, 2007). Some voters might be communal leaders and
have more impact than others. Given weighted network
structures of the electorate, it would be possible to simulate
complex persuasion strategies. This would simulate the
relative efficiency of MTCs in highly complex, highly
dynamic, and highly adaptive elections.
We predict that models with more complex voter belief
systems, individual voter differences, and with interaction
between voters will yield much higher benefits to MTCs.
That is, we predict a positive correlation between available
electorate data and the efficiency of an MTC. Concurrently,
we also predict a positive correlation between the
complexity of the electorate and the cost of running an
MTC, as complex segmentation requires more data and
sophisticated models.
By applying a cognitive updating rule in an Agent-Based
Model, the paper presents a new methodology for
simulating dynamic persuasion campaigns and for
estimating their expected effect. We show a strategic
advantage of MTCs. In the simulations, non-MTCs require
double reach to cancel out this advantage. Despite having
only simple voter data that allows for crude segmentation
and a very crude selection strategy, the MTC consistently
bested stochastic a candidate with the same reach (even
when the opponent had a greater average credibility).
However, given greater reach, a positively perceived
stochastic candidate can beat a strategic candidate.

2655

References
Ayres, I. & Braithwaite, J. (1992) Responsive Regulation,
Oxford University Press
Bovens, L., & Hartmann, S. (2003). Bayesian epistemology.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Briñol, P., & Petty, R. E. (2009). Source factors in
persuasion: A self-validation approach, European Review
of Social Psychology, 20, 49-96.
Chaiken, S. & Maheswaran, D. (1994) Heuristic Processing
Can Bias Systematic Processing: Effects of Source
Credibility, Argument Ambiguity, and Task Importance
on Attitude Judgement, Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 66 (3), 460-473
Cialdini, R. B. (2007) Influence: The Psychology of
Persuasion, Collins Business
Citrin, J. & Muste, C. (1999) Trust in government, in
Robinson, J. P.. Shaver, P. R., Wrightsman, L. S. (Eds.),
Measures of political attitudes. Measures of social
psychological attitudes, Vol. 2. (pp. 465-532), San Diego,
CA, US: Academic Press
Cuddy, A. J. C., Glick, P. & Beninger, A. (2011) The
dynamics of warmth and competence judgments, and their
outcomes in organizations, Research in Organizational
Behavior 31, 73-98
Dermody, J., Hanmer-Lloyd, S. & Scullion, R. (2010)
Young people and voting behaviour: alienated youth and
(or) an interested and critical citizenry? European Journal
of Marketing 44 (3-4), 421 – 435
Duggins, P. (2016) A Psychologically-Motivated Model of
Opinion Chance with Applications to American Politics,
arXiv:1406.7770
Epstein, J. & Axtell, R. (1996) Growing Artificial Societies:
Social Science from the Bottom Up, MIT Press
Fiske, Susan T., Cuddy, A. J. C. & Click, P. (2007)
Universal dimensions of social cognition: warmth and
competence, Trends in Cognitive Sciences 11 (2), 77-83
Fukuyama, F. (1995) Trust, New York: Basic Books
Green, D. P. & Gerber, A. S. (2008) Get out the vote: How
to increase voter turnout, Brookings Institution Press
Haidt, J. (2012) The Righteous Mind: Why good people are
divided by politics and religion; Allen Lane
Hahn, U., & Oaksford, M. (2006) A normative theory of
argument strength, Informal Logic 26, 1-24
Hahn, U., Oaksford, M., & Harris, A. J. L. (2012).
Testimony and argument: A Bayesian perspective. In F.
Zenker (Ed.), Bayesian Argumentation (pp. 1538). Dordrecht: Springer.
Harris, A. J. L., Hahn, U., Madsen, J. K., & Hsu, A. S.
(2015). The Appeal to Expert Opinion: Quantitative
support for a Bayesian Network Approach, Cognitive
Science 40, 1496-1533
Harris, P. L., & Corriveau, K. H. (2011). Young children’s
selective trust in informants, Philosophical Transactions
of the Royal Society B, 366, 1179-1187
Householder, E. E. & LaMarre, H. L. (2014) Facebook
Politics: Toward a Process Model for Achieving Political

Source Credibility Through Social Medie, Journal of
Information Technology & Politics 11 (4), 368-382
Issenberg, S. (2012) The Victory Lab: The secret science of
winning campaigns, Broadway Books
Jarvenpaa, S. L., Knoll, K., & Leidner, D. E. (1998) Is
anybody out there? Antecedents of trust in global virtual
teams, Journal of Management Information Systems 14,
29–64
Lagnado, D., Fenton, N. & Neil, M. (2012) Legal Idioms: A
framework for evidential reasoning, Argumentation &
Computation 1, 1-18
Levi, M. & Stoker, L. (2000) Political Trust and
Trustworthiness, Annual Review of Political Science 3,
475-507
Lodge, M. & Taber, C. S. (2013) The Rationalizing Voter,
Cambridge University Press
Madsen, J. K. (2016) Trump supported it?! A Bayesian
source credibility model applied to appeals to specific
American presidential candidates’ opinions, Papafragou,
A., Grodner, D., Mirman, D., & Trueswell, J.C. (Eds.)
Proceedings of the 38th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society, 165-170
Mayer, R. C. & Davis, J. H. (1999) The effect of the
performance appraisal system on trust for management: A
field quasi-experiment, Journal of Applied Psychology 84,
123–136
Mayer, R. C., Davis, J. H. & Schoorman, F. D. (1995) An
integrative model of organizational trust, Academy of
Management Review 20, 709–734
Oaksford, M. & Chater, N. (2007) Bayesian Rationality: the
probabilistic approach to human reasoning, Oxford
University Press, Oxford: UK
O’Neil, C. (2016) Weapons of Math Destruction: How big
data increases inequality and threatens democracy, Allen
Lane
Parunak, H. v. D., Savit, R. & Riolo, R. L. (1998) AgentBased Modeling vs. Equation-Based Modeling: A case
study and users’ guide, (pp. 10-25) Proceedings of multiagent systems and agent-based simulation, Springer
Petty, R. E., & Cacioppo, J. T. (1981). Attitudes and
persuasion: Classic and contemporary approaches.
Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Petty, R. E. & Cacioppo, J. T. (1984) The Effects of
Involvement on Responses to Argument Quantity and
Quality: Central and Peripheral Routes to Persuasion,
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 46 (1), pp.
69-81
Quattrociocchi, W., Caldarelli, G. & Scala, A. (2014)
Opinion dynamics on interacting networks: media
competition and social influence, Scientific Reports
4:4938, 1-7
Watts, D. J. & Dodds, P. S. (2007) Influentials, Networks,
and Public Opinion Formation, Journal of Consumer
Research 34 (4), 441-458

2656

