Target-to-distractor similarity can help visual search performance
Vencislav Popov (vencislav.popov@gmail.com)
Lynne Reder (reder@cmu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Abstract

Method

We found an unexpected positive effect of target-to-distractor
similarity (TD) in a visual search task, despite overwhelming
evidence in the literature that TD similarity hurts visual search
performance. Participants with no prior knowledge of Chinese
performed 12 hour-long sessions over 4 weeks, where they had
to find a briefly presented target character among a set of
distractors. At the beginning of the experiment, TD similarity
hurt performance, but the effect reversed during the first
session and remained positive throughout the remaining
sessions. We present a simple connectionist model that
accounts for that reversal of TD similarity effects on visual
search and we discuss possible theoretical explanations.

Participants
Twenty U.S. college students with no prior experience
learning Chinese participated in this experiment.

Materials
The stimuli for the visual search task were 64 Chinese
characters. We grouped the characters based on their visual
similarity in 16 sets of four characters. Characters within a
set had a higher similarity with each other compared to
characters from other sets. This was determined by a native
Chinese speaker and was subsequently confirmed by
analyzing orthographic vector representations of the
characters (Xing et al, 2004; Yang et al 2009)1. We used
highly similar distractors in order to force participants to
encode the entire character rather than a subset of diagnostic
features. For each participant, half of the sets were randomly
assigned to the high-frequency condition and were presented
20 times more often during the visual search task.

Keywords: visual search; learning; similarity; connectionist
model; neural network

Introduction
Intuitively, the more similar two objects are to each other,
the more difficult it should be to say whether they are the
same object or not. Research with the visual search task has
confirmed this intuition repeatedly – when a target is more
similar to distractors in the search array accuracy decreases
and response times (RTs) increase (Treisman & Gormican,
1988; Duncan & Humphreys, 1989; Treisman, 1991), and
more errant saccades are made to the highly similar
distractors (Bichot & Schall, 1999). Despite the ubiquity of
this negative target-to-distractor (TD) similarity effect, in a
recent experiment that explored how frequency of exposure
affects a variety of tasks, including a visual search task, we
discovered by accident a positive TD similarity effect in
visual search (Reder, Xiaonan, Keinath & Popov, 2016). We
found that greater TD similarity eventually lead to greater
accuracy and faster RTs.
The visual search task was performed with Chinese
characters over 12 hour-long sessions and the participants
were US undergraduates with no previous knowledge of
Chinese characters. Interestingly, during the initial stages of
the visual search task we observed a negative TD similarity
effect, as is expected from prior research, but this effect
reversed quickly. After a single training session, higher TD
similarity lead to better performance. Since this result was not
reported in Reder et al. (2016), we will first describe the
experiment and the key results with respect to frequency and
similarity.

1

Procedure
The visual search task was performed over 12 sessions. There
were three session per week and each lasted for about 1 hour.
Each trial began with a sample character presented in the
middle of the screen for 2 seconds. The sample character was
followed by a display of 3 to 5 characters. On half of the
trials, the display included the target character and
participants were to respond whether the target was present.
Three of the characters were from the same similarity set as
the target character. Additionally, 0-2 characters from
different sets of the same frequency class as the target were
also present as distractors. After participants made their
response, they received immediate accuracy feedback.

Results and Discussion
We analyzed the accuracy data via logistic mixed-effects
regressions and RTs via linear mixed-effects regressions,
both with participants and items2 as random intercept effects.
All effects discussed below were significant (p < .05) as
determined by likelihood ratio tests that compared
alternative regression models with and without each effect.
Most results concerned with effects of frequency are
described in Reder et al. (2016; see also Reder et al., 2007);
here we focus primarily on the role of similarity.

2

We thank Xiaonan Liu for pointing us to these representations

968

i.e., trials with the same target regardless of distractors

If that is the correct interpretation, then we expected to see
an analogous effect within this experiment based on the
discriminability (similarity) of the target character to its
distractors in the search array. We should see that greater TD
similarity leads to a better performance over time, because
the increased difficulty in discriminating the target from the
distractors forces people to develop stronger and more stable
representations of each character as a whole unit/chunk. Note
that this prediction is contrary to an intuitive and classic
result in the visual search literature – usually, the more
similar a target to its distractors, the more difficult it is to
perform the task (Duncan & Humphreys, 1989).
TD similarity was calculated based on vector
representations obtained from Yang et al. (2009). Each
character was represented as a vector of 270 binary features
for five dimensions – simple features, shapes, structure,
position and strokes. These vector representations are based
on an orthographic analysis of the characters and prior
behavioral work (Xing et al, 2004). These representations
have been already used successfully to model print-to-sound
mappings in Chinese (Yang et al, 2009) with a connectionist
model similar to those used in modeling English print-tosound mappings (Harm & Seidenberg, 1999). For each
search array, we calculated the mean Euclidean distance
between the target and each distractor. Low and high
similarity groups were defined as being below or above one
SD around the mean similarity of all search arrays.
Figure 2 shows that our prediction was confirmed. During
the first session, initially greater TD similarity lead to slower
RTs. However, by the end of the first session the effect had
reversed and throughout the remaining sessions high
similarity between the target and distractors lead to faster
RTs and greater accuracy.

Fig 1. Accuracy and RTs to search the display as a function
of target presence or absence, week of training and frequency
of exposure.
Figure 1 shows the effect of frequency of exposure on
accuracy and RTs for finding the target character. Overall,
accuracy was greater and RTs faster for characters from high
frequency sets. There was a two-way interaction between
frequency and whether the target was present or absent. For
accuracy, the effect of frequency was evident only when the
target was absent. In Reder et al. (2015), we proposed that
frequent exposure facilitates the development of unitized
representations of each character. That is, a character seen
less often has a weaker chunk representation and is more
likely to be encoded as a configuration of some of its features
rather than as a single higher-level unit. Thus, when a
participant is searching for a LF character the probability of
partially matching some of the target’s features with features
of the distractors is much greater compared to HF characters.
This leads to more false alarms in the absent condition, but
does not affect the present condition. The interaction was
also evident in RTs, although there was still a small effect of
frequency in the present trials, likely reflecting the
differential efficiency of encoding high and low frequency
characters.
A number of previous versions of this experiment had
failed to show the hypothesized frequency effects. In those
experiments, the distractors in each search array were chosen
at random and thus were not very similar to the targets on
each trial. In contrast, in the current experiment we ensured
that targets were paired with highly similar distractors. We
believe that the discrimination required in the prior versions
of our visual search task was too easy and as a result,
participants were able to perform the task by noting and
remembering individual features that distinguish the target
from its distractors. As a result, participants did not have to
develop stable chunks for each character.

Fig 2. Accuracy and RTs for visual search as a function of
similarity of target to distractors within the search array.
Right panel shows performance over time during the first
session. Left panel shows performance over all 12 sessions.

969

Contrary to our findings, visual search tasks usually show
that high TD similarity leads to lower accuracy and slower
response times. Why is it that we found exactly the opposite?
A trivial explanation would be that TD similarity in our study
was confounded with distractor-to-distractor similarity. The
latter consistently shows positive similarity effects. We
discounted this explanation by showing that the positive
effect of target-to-distractor similarity remained even after
controlling for distractor-to-distractor similarity in the
regression model.
A theoretical explanation is that most visual search studies
use simple stimuli that have pre-existing representations in
long-term memory and no additional learning is required. Our
study instead used Chinese characters, which are a complex
configuration of features for participants who do not know
Chinese. Since these characters did not have preexisting
representations, participants had to develop them while doing
the visual search task. We suggest that those representations
were influenced by the demands of the task – to make highly
similar patterns more distinct from one another so as to be
better suited to support future performance. In essence, we
argue that over time when the target is presented along highly
similar distractors, the cognitive system builds more
distinctive and stable representations of these targets.
Additional support from this argument comes from the fact
that (as it was with frequency) the similarity effect is mostly
observed in the absent condition (Figure 3, left panel). That
is, the benefit from gaining more distinct and stable
representations is mostly to prevent the partial matching of
shared features between the target and distractors on absent
trials.

models that represent stimuli as distributed patterns of
activity are well suited for exploring the time-dependent
changes in the structure of conceptual representations that
consist of multiple features. In line with our theoretical
interpretation of the data, we expected that in the beginning
of training, the model will behave similarly to our human
participants and will make more errors for highly similar
distractors. However, since this initial behavior would lead
to more errors, over time the error-dependent learning might
cause the model to alter its internal representations of each
stimulus so as to make them more distinct from one another.
In this way, the problem that a connectionist model of this
task has to solve is akin to the XOR problem. Specifically,
how should the representation of the input patterns be
transformed so that similarity is reversed through the
transformation? One possibility is for our model to have at
least one layer that intervenes between the input layer and a
layer that computes similarity between patterns. After a
number of failed attempts using a single hidden layer we tried
two separate hidden layers, which allowed the network to
more gradually change the similarity structure in the input.
The visual search task here requires that participants are
able to initially encode the sample character and keep it
active in short term memory while comparing it in turn with
each candidate character in the search array. To model the
task as fully as possible, a model was implemented with a
single input layer that can send activation through two
different pathways – either to a working memory (WM)
module (implemented as a kind of a long short-term memory
module), or directly to the comparison layer. This dual
pathway represents two ways to use information coming
through the senses. One pathway can store the representation
of the target in short-term memory and then manipulate it in
the absence of the stimulus itself. The other pathway can
directly use the incoming information (i.e. the candidates for
comparison in the search array).
We assumed that the visual search is performed serially,
because the RTs increased linearly with the search array size,
and because the slope in the absent condition was twice as
large as the slope in the present condition (Treisman &
Gelade, 1980). As a simplification, the model presented
below will deal only with this serial search case.

Architecture

Fig. 3. Effect of TD similarity on visual search accuracy as a
function of training session and whether the target was absent
(left panel) or present (right panel).

The network consisted of the following layers (the
architecture is presented in Figure 4):
 Input: 20 units
 Hidden1: 15 sigmoid units
 Hidden2: 10 sigmoid units
 LSTM module 1
o LSTM_Input: 10 linear units
o LSTM_Buffer: 10 linear units
o LSTM_Context: 10 linear units
o LSTM_Output: 10 linear units
o LSTM_Input_gate: 1 input unit
o LSTM_Context_gate: 1 input unit
o LSTM_Output_gate: 1 input unit

A connectionist model
The reversal of the similarity effect is something of a
challenge from a modeling perspective. How exactly are
more distinct representations built over time and what
mechanism drives that differentiation?
In order to capture the reversal of similarity effects, we
decided to apply a novel connectionist model that will be able
to perform a visual search task while continuously modifying
its internal representations of the stimuli. Connectionist

970






Both the LSTM_output and the direct_output layers were
connected with free random weights with sd 0.1 to the
comparison layer, which integrated the representations of the
sample and the first candidate input. The comparison layer
was connected to the response layer, which consisted of two
units - 1 for responding that the two representations are the
same, and the other for responding that they are different.

Direct_output: 10 linear units
Direct_output_gate: 1 linear unit
Comaprison: 20 units
Response: 2 softmax units (output layer)

The input was connected in a feedforward manner to
hidden1, which in turn was connected to hidden2. We
expected the two hidden layers to progressively extract
higher order features of the input. Initial weights between
these layers were randomized with a mean of 0 and sd of 0.5.
Each unit of the hidden2 layer was connected with the
corresponding unit in the input layer of the LSTM module, as
well as with the direct_output layer with a frozen weight of
1. The same applied to the connections from LSTM_Input to
LSTM_Buffer and from LSTM_Buffer to LSTM_Output.
Thus, the output of the hidden2 layer was copied forward to
the output layer of the LSTM module, and to the
direct_output layer. The LSTM module also had a recurrent
context layer that was connected bi-directionally to the
LSTM_Buffer layer.
The purpose of the four gates was to control the flow of
activation through these two modules. There was a fixed
negative bias of -1 to the LSTM_input and LSTM_output
layers, and a fixed positive connection of 1 with their
corresponding gates. Since they were all linear units that were
cropped at 0 and 1, when a gate was off, no activity was
copied to corresponding and subsequent layers. When a gate
was on, it negated the bias and the layer copied the output of
the preceding layer and passed it forward.

Network functioning
Each example trial was composed of four events (i.e.,
presenting different input patterns):
1. Presentation of the target
2. First candidate from the search array
3. Second candidate from the search array
4. Final candidate from the search array
When the target was presented to the input, only the
LSTM_input gate was on. Thus, the activity in hidden2 layer
that corresponds to the sample input was copied to the
LSTM1_input, LSTM_buffer and LSTM1_context layer. All
other gates were off, thus preventing the sample input from
transferring to the direct_output layer.
When each candidate from the search array appeared, the
LSTM_input gate was off, preventing the candidate
representation from entering LSTM module. All the other
gates were on. This meant several things happened. The
candidate representation on hidden2 was copied to the
direct_output layer. The representation of the sample that was
encoded in the LSTM_context layer on the previous time step
was transfered back on to the LSTM_buffer, and from there
it was transfered to the LSTM_output. At this point, the
network had the hidden2 representation of the sample
instantiated on the LSTM_output layer, while the hidden2
representation of the first candidate was active on the
direct_output layer.

Fig 4. The network architecture. Arrows with stars (*)
represent copy connections, where each unit in the sending
layer is connected with a single connection with fixed
strength 1 to the corresponding unit in the receiving layer.

Training
To mimic the experiment’s stimuli, 64 input patterns of
length 20 were created with binary values that were grouped
into 16 sets, which had greater similarity within sets than
between sets. On average, 50% of the features in each input
vector were “on”. The randomization and conditions were
equivalent to those in the experiment.
Mean similarity in a set was calculated using Euclidean
distance. The groups in the lower 25% quantile of the
distance distribution were designated as “Low distance / High
similarity” sets, while groups in the higher 25% quantile were
designated as “High distance / Low similarity” sets.

971

When a distractor was present, the network was trained to
activate the “mismatch” response unit, while when a target
was present it was trained to activate the “match” response
unit. Therefore, the goal of the network was to discover a
suitable combined representation in the comparison layer
such that it will be able to discriminate when the
LSTM_output and the direct_output layers had the same or
different patterns of activation.
We used a back-propagation training algorithm with a
learning rate of 0.01 and a momentum descent with a
momentum rate of 0.9. The network was trained for 4000
passes through the training set and the weights were updated
at the end of each pass. After every 100 updates, we recorded
the output activation of the hidden1, hidden2 and the
response layer.

possibly be solved by considering the current response layer
to be an internal response, reflecting whether there is a match
or not. Then a secondary motor response layer can be added
which outputs a ‘present’ response if the internal match
response is higher than a threshold, or stays inactive until all
candidates have been compared. If by the last one none of
them had elicited a match response, it produces an ‘absent’
response. In this way the network would reflect the actual
behavior more closely, and weight updating would be
affected only by the final response in each example.
Similarity effects. As can be seen from Figure 6, initially the
network performance is better for input stimuli that are less
similar to their distractors. This is a normal behavior of
connectionist networks, and it is also what is expected by
previous behavioral data from the visual search paradigm
(Duncan & Humphreys, 1989). However, after about 2300
weight updates the effect reverses and stimuli that are closer
to each other in the input space lead to better performance.
Importantly, this reversal happens very shortly after the
behavior of the network starts to approximate the behavioral
result levels (~70% accuracy), which is exactly the pattern we
have seen from the behavioral session - greater similarity
impairs performance during the first session of training, but
the effect reverses by the end of that session. Indeed, if we
limit our attention to the window between updates 2200 and
3000, which is immediately after the pre-training, and before
the performance saturates at ceiling, there is a close
correspondence between the network performance both in
terms of frequency and similarity structure.

Results and discussion
Frequency effects. The main results of the simulation are
presented in Figures 5 and 6, which show the activation of
the “match” response unit over training time. Since the
response layer had softmax units this value can be directly
interpreted as the proportion of “match” responses the
network would give in response to a pattern. In Figure 5 we
can see that the training patterns that were presented more
often lead to greater accuracy.

Fig 5. Activation of the Match output unit as a function of
training time, stimulus type and frequency of the input
pattern.
Fig 6. Activation of the ’Match’ output unit as a function
of training time, type of stimulus and Euclidean distance
between the target and distractor input in each array.

Several things should be noted about this pattern. We can
see that initially the network deactivated the match response
unit for both types of stimuli. We can also see that overall the
effect of frequency was much greater on target stimuli
compared to distractor stimuli, which is exactly the opposite
effect than the one we found in the behavioral data. This was
probably because there were 5 times more distractor items
than target items (3 in absent conditions, 2 in the present
conditions). In the actual experiment, this too was the case,
but participants got feedback only for their final response,
thus they had equal amounts of “present” and “absent”
feedbacks. On the other hand, the network was trained as if
each individual comparison required a response, which
causes the discrepancy between distractor and target stimuli.
Thus, while the network captures the overall effect of
frequency, its training regimen causes it to miss the specific
pattern of frequency for different types of stimuli. This could

What could be causing this reversal of the
distance/similarity effect? A possible answer comes from
examining the input-output mappings, as well as the hidden
representations the network develops during training.
If we split the candidate input patterns into targets, similar
distractors and dissimilar distractors, then the network is
supposed to produce the following outputs. For targets, which
are identical to the sample item (thus 0 distance or perfect
correlation) the network has to produce a match response, but
for distractors that are highly similar as well, it has to produce
mismatch responses. Thus, a major conflict during training
comes from the fact that when distance is high, the network
has to produce only one type of response, but when it is low,

972

it has to either respond with a match or a mismatch. One way
to achieve these contradictory goals would be to develop such
hidden representations of the input that cause highly similar
patterns to be represented as less similar to each other.
To test this explanation we looked at the distance between
the sample item and its distractors in activation patterns in
each of the two hidden layers, split by the distance in the input
layer. In right panel of Figure 7, we can see that in the first
hidden layer the distance structure in the input has been
preserved. In the second hidden layer, however, in the
beginning there is no difference in distance due to the two
layers of random weights and the sigmoid nature of the
stimuli. As training progresses, stimuli that were low in
distance in the input and the first hidden layer become more
distant to one another, compared to stimuli that were highly
distinct to begin with.

effect, because distractors were present 5 times more than
targets and had a greater influence over the weight updates.
The most interesting aspect of the model is that it was able
to successfully capture the reversal of the similarity effect on
visual search performance. It achieved this by transforming
the input through multiple hidden layers, which allowed it to
change the similarity structure in the input so that highly
similar distractors became more and more differentiated in
the second hidden layer as training progressed.
This explanation was further supported by a model that
involved direct connections from the input to the comparison
layer without hidden layer representations (not shown here).
This model did not show the similarity reversal effect. This
model is analogous to performing the task without having to
develop novel representations. One novel prediction from the
comparison of these two models and task versions would be
that people who learned the Chinese characters under a visual
search task would rate highly similar characters as less
similar after the training.
Finally, while we simulated the input patterns in this model
to resemble as closely as possible how our stimuli were
structured, the simulation results might be specific to the
interaction between the model architecture and the generated
stimuli. Initial modeling results using the actual 270-length
vector representations of the Chinese characters show the
same pattern as the simplified model presented here.

Fig 7. Distance between the hidden layers representations
of the target and the distractors in each training set as a
function of training time. Left panel shows distance in the
first hidden layer, right panel shows the second hidden layer.

Bichot, N. P., & Schall, J. D. (1999). Effects of similarity and
history on neural mechanisms of visual selection. Nature
Neuroscience, 2(6), 549–554.
Duncan, J., & Humphreys, G. W. (1989). Visual search and
stimulus similarity. Psychological Review, 96(3), 433–458.
Reder, L. M., Paynter, C., Diana, R. A., Ngiam, J., &
Dickison, D. (2007). In B. Ross & A. S. Benjamin (Eds.),
The Psychology Of Learning And Motivation (pp. 271–
312). New York, NY: Academic Press.
Reder, L. M., Liu, X. L., Keinath, A., & Popov, V. (2016).
Building knowledge requires bricks, not sand: The critical
role of familiar constituents in learning. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 23(1), 271–277.
Treisman, A. (1991). Search, similarity, and integration of
features between and within dimensions. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 17(3), 652–676.
Treisman, A. M., & Gelade, G. (1980). A feature-integration
theory of attention. Cognitive Psychology, 12(1), 97–136.
Treisman, A., & Gormican, S. (1988). Feature analysis in
early vision: Evidence from search asymmetries.
Psychological Review, 95(1), 15–48.
Xing, H. B., & Li, P. (2004). The acquisition of Chinese
characters: Corpus analyses and connectionist simulations.
Journal of Cognitive Science, 5(1), 1–49.
Yang, J., McCandliss, B. D., Shu, H., & Zevin, J. D. (2009).
Simulating Language-specific and Language-general
Effects in a Statistical Learning Model of Chinese Reading.
Journal of Memory and Language, 61(2), 238–257.

References

General Discussion
The current paper present preliminary data on a novel
counter-intuitive finding that the usual target-to-distractor
similarity effect in visual search reverses after a short training
with previously unfamiliar Chinese characters. Namely,
while targets that are highly similar to distractors in a search
array are usually more difficult to detect, when the stimuli are
complex visual objects, this effect reverses after about 20
repetitions of each object as a target. We propose that visual
discrimination and learning interact in such a way that greater
difficulty in discriminating the stimuli causes the
development of more distinct and stable representations.
To test this idea of differentiation in the character
representation over time, we fit a novel connectionist model.
When it comes to frequency, the network successfully
captured the overall effect that more frequently exposed
stimuli led to better performance (although see the preceding
discussion for some limitations). Theoretically, this was
presumably because low frequency made it more likely that
people depend on representing the characters as a
configuration of features, rather than on its weak chunked
representation. This caused them to be more likely to partial
match constituent features and confuse distractors with
targets. In contrast, the network showed exactly the opposite

973

