Text, images and diagrams as information providers
Sara Verbrugge (Sara.Verbrugge@kuleuven.be)
Aurélie Stas (aureliestas8@hotmail.com)
Koen Jaspaert (Koen.Jaspaert@arts.kuleuven.be)
Department of Linguistics, University of Leuven, Blijde Inkomststraat 21, 3000 Leuven, Belgium

Abstract
We studied the effect of adjunct displays on recall in an
expository text (based on McCrudden, Schraw, Lehman, &
Poliquin, 2007) in order to find out which means of display
aided pupils in the last years of secondary school to recall
information. We included four conditions in the experiment:
text only, text and causal diagram, text and images and causal
diagram only. Participants were checked for their recall of
main ideas and causal sequences. Recall for main ideas did
not vary significantly across conditions. Contrary to
McCrudden et al. (2007), our results for the causal sequences
revealed that participants who studied a causal diagram only
could recall more steps from causal sequences than
participants in any of the other conditions. We will interpret
the findings in the light of the literature on redundancy
effects, dual coding theory, and the causal explication
hypothesis.
Keywords: Causal diagram; Text comprehension; Causal
relationships; Visual/spatial display

Introduction
We set up an experiment studying the benefits of adding
causal diagrams and illustrations to expository texts for
recall of information. We will discuss the use of adjunct
displays (i.e. visual representations that complement text
with the purpose of making the information present more
easily understandable and better recalled) in previous
research. After that, we will go into more detail on the
specific advantages of causal diagrams for text
interpretation.

Benefits of adjunct displays
Adding so called “adjunct displays” i.e. powerpoint
presentations, images, causal diagrams, etc. to a spoken or
written text does not always entail the expected benefits for
the reader or listener. When these kinds of adjunct displays
are added to text, they restate the same information of the
text in a new form (such as causal diagrams) or add new
chunks of information (such as images). The audience’s
preexisting knowledge about the topic and the amount of
overlap between the two sources of information are two
variables that need to be considered. When taking these
nuances into account, adding visual displays can promote
recall, provided they are implemented in the right way.
Vekiri (2002) presented an overview of the advantages of
different graphical displays for recall and suggested that
graphics make a valuable contribution to learning only when
readers can interpret and integrate the information without

extra processing demands. The effects of adding graphics
are mediated by variables such as the participants’ preexisting knowledge about the subject of study and
visuospatial ability. Also, graphic displays need to be
adjusted to task demands. E.g. when an important part of
text comprehension is understanding cause-effect relations,
the diagram should explicate these relations and their
interactions (Mayer & Gallini, 1990). When graphs are used
in a right way, they improve understanding. When this is not
the case, they often interfere with learning because they
impose extra processing demands reducing working
memory capacity for learning activities.
Because of the way diagrams organize text and explicate
relations, they make it easier to draw inferences about the
relations that are present (Robinson & Kiewra, 1995).
Precisely because links are provided between information
bits, relations that might otherwise have remained implicit
are now more easily computed (Larkin & Simon, 1987). See
also the causal explication hypothesis (Graesser & Bertus,
1998; McCrudden et al., 2007, p. 372): adding causal
diagrams improves text comprehension because “they
provide an explicit visual representation of a text’s causal
structure that helps the reader understand the text’s causal
structure”. Analyzing causal relationships between text
fragments is cognitively demanding. Presenting a causal
diagram can help readers to construct a mental model of the
text and hence leave more room for inference drawing and
consequently a deeper comprehension of the text.
McCrudden et al. (2009, p. 81) present four reasons why
the use of adjunct displays boosts understanding of causal
relationships. First, a saliency issue: the relevant causal
steps are brought to the fore. Their second reason refers to
the reduction of cognitive effort. Third, a holistic
understanding of the causal structure of the text is more
easily achieved. A last reason is concerned with spreading
the information via different channels: “it is possible that an
adjunct display distributes the information across verbal and
spatial working memory stores, functionally increasing its
capacity” (McCrudden et al., 2009, p. 81).
Apart from causal diagrams, images are also often added
to text. The visual “argument hypothesis” and “picture
superiority effect” state that adding images is effective
because they are more easily processed than text. In that
respect, reference is often made to the “dual coding theory”
(Paivio, 1990) that attributes these benefits to the
assumption that there are two different codes for visual
information (stemming from pictures or words). The dual
coding theory postulates that there are two distinct cognitive

3435

systems for information processing and retrieval. “Imagens”
stores nonverbal information in mental images, whereas
“logogens” stores verbal information in word-like codes
(see also Vekiri, 2002). The dual coding theory had been
called into question by Johnson-Laird (1998) claiming that
information from both verbal and image cues is represented
in a single amodal form (see also Vekiri, 2002). These
challenges have received recent support from neurological
studies. Specifically, recent neural evidence has shown
(Shinkareva, Malave, Mason, Mitchell, & Just, 2011) that
patterns of brain activity when thinking about concrete
objects are independent of the stimulus presentation format
(i.e. words or pictures). Neural states could be identified that
are common to pictorial and verbal input referring to objects
categories. Not only could they find this effect within
participants, but regions of brain activity could also be
predicted across participants. “The category of a noun that a
person reads or thinks about can be identified solely on the
basis of activation patterns obtained from other individuals”
(Shinkareva et al. 2011, p. 2422). This evidence at least
suggests that the dual coding theory and the picture
superiority effect need rethinking.

Influence of causal diagrams on comprehension
In this section, we address the question whether causal
diagrams bring specific advantages for text interpretation.
Several studies with undergraduate students have revealed
the beneficial nature of adding causal diagrams to texts.
McCrudden et al. (2007) present participants with texts
accompanied or unaccompanied by a causal diagram (i.e. a
type of visual display that explicitly represents cause-effect
relationships, McCrudden 2007, p. 367) summarizing the
main ideas and causal sequences of the text. Their results
showed that participants who studied both text and causal
diagram understood better the five causal sequences in the
text. In a second experiment, in which participants studied
either the text or the causal diagram, no differences could be
found for recall of main ideas or causal sequences between
the two conditions. They conclude that causal diagrams are
not merely redundant with text.
McCrudden, Schraw, and Lehman (2009) set up two
experiments in which participants read a text, either
followed by the task to study a causal diagram, to study a
list, or to reread the text. After that, participants were asked
a range of questions focusing on the steps in the causal
sequences and the transitive relationships between causes
and effects. Participants in the reread condition performed
worse than participants in the other conditions. On the basis
of similar results in the two experiments they conducted,
McCrudden, Schraw, and Lehman (2009, p. 80) conclude
that explicating the steps in a causal chain improves
comprehension of the text and learning of causal
relationships.
In another study McCrudden, Magliano and Schraw
(2011) investigated the online reading processes of
participants while they were reading a text or studying a
diagram. In their first experiment participants either studied

the causal diagram before reading the text or did not study
the causal diagram before reading the text. Participants who
studied a diagram before reading the text had faster overall
reading times than participants who did not. Moreover,
participants in the diagram condition recalled more
information than participants in the no-diagram condition.
In a second experiment, participants in the no-diagram
condition had to read the text twice in order to make the
experiment similar for the two groups, and in order to
preclude the fact that the effect from the first experiment
was due to the repetition of content (2011, p. 78). Again
they conclude that “exposure to the diagram had a beneficial
effect on comprehension over and above simple repetition”
(2011, p. 81). Reading time data showed that reading times
of the text of participants who first studied a causal diagram
were longer than those of participants who simply reread the
text. After that they compared text reading times of
participants in the diagram condition with text reading times
of participants (of the first reading of the text) in the reread
condition. No differences could be found between them. In a
third experiment participants were asked to “think aloud”
while studying the texts or diagrams. It was shown that
presence of a diagram improved the participants’
recognition of causal relations.

Experiment: the contributions of text, images
and causal diagrams for recall
We investigate the effects of images and visual displays on
recall of information from expository science texts. As in
McCrudden et al. (2007) we included conditions with text
only, text and diagram, and diagram only. The diagram
consists of key terms of the text; relations and sequences are
expressed by means of arrows.
Our study diverged from the one by McCrudden et al.
(2007) in five important respects. First, we added a
condition with text and images. We wanted to find out
whether visual displays aided recall of ideas and causal
sequences and if they did, which kind of visual display was
most beneficial for a thorough understanding and recall. Do
causal diagrams entail a bigger advantage because they
explicate causal relations? Or do images contribute equally
to the comprehension process because they visually
represent the content? Second, we did not include a reread
condition in our experiment because we think this condition
is not straightforwardly comparable to the other conditions.
Participants who were asked to reread the text probably
invested less effort than participants who received slightly
new materials summarizing the main ideas of the text they
had just read. In our opinion, rereading a text that is exactly
the same as the one you have just read is bound to go a lot
faster. Third, we opted for a direct comparison between all
four conditions in one experiment. Fourth, participants were
given less time to study the causal diagram than in the study
by McCrudden et al. (2007). Less information needs to be
processed and we wanted to find out whether similar results
could be achieved with less studying time. Fifth, we decided

3436

to recruit pupils from secondary schools because the lion’s
share of research has been carried out with university
students and elementary school children, and little attention
has been paid to pupils in the last years of secondary school
(see also: Mason, Tornatora, & Pluchino, 2013). Because
pupils in this age category are studying many different
subjects, are getting acquainted with studying larger chunks
of information and need to make important decisions about
their future study and career orientations, they are a very
interesting group to look into in more detail.
In the experiment participants were allocated to one of
four conditions: study a text combined with images, a text
combined with a causal diagram, only the causal diagram,
or only the text. Participants were tested for their recall of
main ideas and for their recall of steps from a causal chain.
As in McCrudden et al. (2007) we expect no differences for
recall of the main ideas, because their understanding does
not rely on participants’ ability to link information. We do
expect differences for recall of causal sequences because
these require participants to build a mental model of the text
with causal links, which burdens cognitive resources
(Graesser & Bertus, 1998). If the participants in the text
only condition outperform the other conditions, this
provides evidence that accompanying materials are
redundant. If on the other hand, participants in the condition
of text accompanied by causal diagram or causal diagram
alone outperform the other conditions, it provides evidence
in favour of the causal explication hypothesis: explicating
causal relations in a diagram helps processing. If the
condition of text combined with images is better than the
rest, this supports the visual argument hypothesis.
On the basis of the literature, we hypothesize that
participants will perform better in the conditions where text
is accompanied by a visual aid, be it a causal diagram or an
image.

Method
Participants 91 pupils from the fifth and sixth grade
secondary education (mean age=17.05, SD=0.85) took part
in the experiment. The participants’ mother tongue was
Dutch.
Design The materials were manipulated between subjects.
Participants were randomly attributed to one of four
conditions: text and images, text and diagram, text only, or
diagram only.
Materials The materials varied in the four conditions.
Basis in all cases was an explanatory scientific text about
space travel. In the ‘text only’ condition participants read a
text of 1171 words. The text was taken from McCrudden et
al. (2007)1 and translated into Dutch. A few minor
1 “The text was a two-page, 1385-word passage entitled Space
Travel (see Appendix A) that described effects of space travel on
the human body at an introductory level. It was adapted from
several sources including two Web-pages from an educational Web

adaptations were made in order to make the text more easily
readable in Dutch. In the ‘text and images’ condition the
same text was used, but now accompanied by six images.
Every image highlighted a particular step from one of the
five causal sequences. Three images illustrated a step from
the causal sequence (osteoporosis, an excess of bodily fluids
in the upper regions of the body, contradictory signals in the
brain about the body’s orientation). The other three images
illustrated a consequence or danger of the causal sequence
(kidney stones, muscle loss, heart shrink). In the ‘text and
diagram’ condition, the text was accompanied by a causal
diagram. Text and diagram were presented simultaneously.
The causal diagram was taken from McCrudden et al.
(2007) and translated into Dutch. The causal diagram
consists of five cause-consequence relations originating
from a common cause: lack of gravity during space travel.
In the ‘diagram only’ condition participants only studied the
diagram. In the ‘text and diagram’ condition and ‘diagram
only’ condition, the materials were preceded by a few lines
instructing the participants how to read and interpret the
diagram.
Test materials consisted of a questionnaire consisting of
two parts. The first part contained three questions. The first
asked about participants’ prior knowledge about space travel
(1= knew nothing – 6 = already knew everything). The
second question asked participants to write a short text
about their willingness to become a space traveler after
having read about the dangers of space traveling. This
question was inserted in order to create a time buffer
between reading the text and answering recall questions.
The third question enquired about the “main ideas”:
participants were asked to name parts of the body that were
affected by space travel, and the associated risks (e.g. lack
of gravity influenced bone structure, which augmented the
risk of kidney stones). The second part of the questionnaire
focused on the causal sequences. A particular risk was given
(e.g. space travel may cause kidney stones) and participants
were asked to list as many causal steps as they could
remember. They were invited to explain why the risk
existed and to name as many causes and consequences as
possible.
Procedure The experiment was conducted in a large study
room. Participants in the ‘text only’, ‘text and images’, and
‘text and diagram’ conditions were given 8 minutes to study
the materials, participants in the ‘diagram only’ condition
were given 4 minutes to study the materials. (Time needed
was determined on the basis of a small pretest.) The 8
minutes group was told after four minutes that four minutes
remained. All groups were informed one minute before the
end that one minute remained. The materials were collected
site for NASA: When Space Makes You Dizzy (Phillips &
Hullander, 2002) and Mixed up in Space (Phillips & Hullander,
2001), and one Web-page from an educational Web site for the
National Space Biomedical Research Institute: Human Physiology
in Space (Lujan & White, 2002).” (McCrudden et al., 2007, p. 373)

3437

and the first part of the questionnaires was handed out.
When participants had finished the first part of the
questionnaire, they raised their hands, handed in the first
part and received the second part of the questionnaire. No
time limits were imposed to fill in the questionnaires. The
experiment took the participants approximately 45 minutes.

The interaction between text type and causal sequence
almost reached significance level: F(12, 348)=1.66, p=.07.
The causal sequence that was easiest to remember (muscle
loss) did not differ between the different text types. For the
more difficult causal sequences, planned comparisons
revealed that the participants in the “diagram only”
condition
always
scored
best
(motion-sickness
F(1,87)=6.96, p=.009; kidney stones F(1,87)=9.32, p=.003
infections F(1,87)=8.25, p=.005, and heart shrink
F(1,87)=7.59, p=.007).

Results
Preliminary questions: On the question how well
acquainted participants were with the subject of space travel
on a scale from 1 (=knew nothing) to 6 (=knew everything
already), an average of 2.3 was reached (23 participants
chose 1 on the scale, 34 chose 2, 19 chose 3, 12 chose 4, 3
chose 5, none chose 6). Correlations were checked between
overall recall of main ideas and prior knowledge and
between overall recall of causal sequences and prior
knowledge but no significant correlations were found.
Main ideas: An ANOVA was conducted with text type
(causal diagram only – text only – text and diagram – text
and images) as the independent variable and main ideas as
the dependent variable. No main effect of text type could be
found: F(3, 87)=.739, p=.53. Recall of main ideas did not
differ significantly whether participants read the ‘text only’,
‘text and diagram’, ‘text and images’ or the ‘causal diagram
only’.
Causal sequences: As for recall of the causal sequences, we
conducted an ANOVA with text type as between subjects
variable and causal sequence as within subjects variable
(repeated measures). To allow for comparisons across
causal steps, scores were converted to proportions. I.e. per
causal sequence, the number of causal steps remembered
was divided by the total number of causal steps for that
particular sequence.
There was a main effect of text type F(3, 87)=3.93,
p=.011. Causal diagram (M=0.52) led to greater recall than
any of the other text types (text only M=0.34 – text and
diagram M=0.39 – text and images M=0.33). Planned
comparisons revealed that ‘diagram only’ differed
significantly from ‘text and diagram’ F(1, 87)=4.91,
p=.0015, which was the second best condition for recall.
There was a main effect of specific topic of the causal
sequences:
F(4,
348)=18.80,
p=.00001.
Planned
comparisons revealed that the causal sequence of ‘muscle
loss’ was significantly more recalled than the other four
causal sequences (‘muscle loss’ M=0.57 - kidney stones
M=0.43; F(1, 87)=10.66, p=.002). No difference was found
between the causal sequence ‘kidney stones’ and ‘motionsickness’ (M=0.42), but these two causal sequences were
better recalled than the causal sequence ‘infections’
(infections M=0.31 - kidney stones; F(1, 87)=4.61, p=.035),
which was in turn more recalled than the causal sequence
about ‘heart shrink’ (heart shrink M= 0.25 – infections F(1,
87)=3.97, p=.049).

Discussion
As in McCrudden et al. (2007) no differences were found
between the groups for recall of the main ideas.
The results for the causal sequences show that participants
had higher recall rates when they studied a causal diagram
only than any of the other types of materials (text only – text
and diagram – text and images). No differences were found
between the other conditions. Moreover, participants in the
‘diagram only’ condition only had four minutes to study the
diagram, whereas the participants in the other conditions
could study the materials for eight minutes. The fact that
participants were able to achieve better comprehension in a
shorter period of time, is surprising. This result runs counter
to the results obtained in McCrudden et al. (2007) where no
differences in recall of causal sequences between diagram
and text could be found.
A straightforward explanation is the fact that the diagram
only contained information that was relevant for the
questions participants would receive (cf. the saliency issue
discussed in the introduction). The other conditions with
text also contained secondary information. A more in-depth
explanation for these results might reside in the fact that
participants need to invest more processing effort in
understanding the diagram and this leads to deeper
processing and hence a better retention of the studied
materials in the brain. Ainsworth and Loizou (2003) and
Moore and Scevak (1997) show that students make more
inferences in diagrams than in running text. McCrudden,
Magliano, and Schraw (2011) show that studying a diagram
led to higher recall of information compared to text reading.
This experiment provides evidence that studying a
diagram leads to a better retention in memory. When
participants study texts, they may opt for the easy way out:
the text reads smoothly, deep processing is not necessary for
superficial text comprehension. Additional evidence for this
claim can be found in the fact that, similar to the results of
McCrudden et al. (2007), the more complex the causal
sequence, the better participants could recall the causal
sequences when they had studied a diagram compared to the
other conditions. Difficult causal sequences may not have
been understood profoundly enough in the text condition,
whereas the diagram condition made sure the more difficult
causal sequences were studied thoroughly. This fits in with
the finding by Cromley et al. (2010, p. 69) that “students
used a significantly higher proportion of inferences and
high-level strategies and a significantly lower proportion of

3438

low-level strategies in diagrams than in text. (…) diagrams
seemed to promote more high-level, integrative activity and
seemed to discourage low-level superficial strategies.”
An explanation why the ‘text and diagram’ condition did
not have higher recall rates than the ‘text only’ condition, is
to be found in the fact that students often skip diagrams or
skim only parts of the diagram (see e.g. Schmidt-Weigand
et al., 2010). Schmidt-Weigand et al. (2010) also showed
that the time participants took to inspect visualizations of
the text was considerably lower than the time participants
took to read the text. Participants might find the information
in the text sufficient and find the diagrams superfluous.
When their expectations of relevance were met, they did not
take the effort to study the diagrams in detail. This could be
overcome in future research by presenting the diagram
before the text.
Another surprising finding is that our results fail to
support the so called “picture superiority effect” since the
condition in which participants studied text and images had
the lowest averages of all conditions (but not significantly
lower than text only and text and diagram). It has been
suggested that when words are processed meaningfully,
memory for them may be comparable to that of pictures
(Weldon & Coyote, 1996, p. 671). Processing of
information (words, pictures, …) is optimized according to
task requirements (Job & Tenconi, 2002). Once that purpose
is defined, “the processing of information seems to proceed
to levels that satisfy the task requirements” (Miller, 2011, p.
719). So in our experiment, adding pictures did not lead to
better recall because the information present in the text was
sufficient to the participants. Adding pictures did not entail
any additional benefits. Apparently participants thought that
the information was processed satisfactorily for the current
purposes. While Levin & Mayer, 1993 and Marcus et al.,
1996 (as cited in Pike et al. 2010) provided evidence that the
use of illustrations reduces the demands on working
memory and hence leaves more resources for higher order
processing of the text, no evidence for this could be found in
our results.

General Discussion
Here we will situate our results with regard to the causal
explication, verbal redundancy, and picture superiority
hypothesis. We will also discuss the implications for
devising course materials.
Causal explication hypothesis
McCrudden et al. (2007) provided evidence in favour of the
causal explication hypothesis, when text and causal diagram
were presented together, because participants in the
condition text and causal diagram outperformed the ones in
the text only condition. On the basis of our results, we can
say that our results tilt toward a redundancy effect when two
sources of information are presented together. Even though
it is claimed in McCrudden et al. (2007) that causal
diagrams are not merely redundant with texts, this seems to
be the case in our study. When adding a causal diagram to

text, recall rates drop to levels similar to those of text only.
This may be due to the fact that participants only had a look
at the diagrams after having already processed the text and
hence devoted less attention to it than when they first would
have had a look at the causal diagram instead of vice versa.
However, when a causal diagram is presented on its own,
recall for causal sequences improves. These results underpin
the causal explication hypothesis. When implicit causal
relations are made explicit in a causal diagram, recall
significantly improves. Whether the effect is due to the fact
that only the relevant information for the recall questions
was summarized in the causal diagrams or whether it is
actually due to their structure or both factors combined, will
have to be left unresolved for the time being. However,
there can be little doubt as to the role causal diagrams play
in alleviating the strains put on our cognitive capacity. The
resources made available in this way can then be devoted to
storing the information and the links between bits of
information more firmly in memory.
Verbal redundancy
The effect of redundant information has been studied on
various levels. Many studies have been conducted
investigating “verbal redundancy”. When similar
information is simultaneously given via different channels
(i.e. spoken and written information), comprehension and
recall are not necessarily better than when the information is
only given in one form. These studies have often been
carried out in multimedia environments. The overall
conclusion is that when redundant information is given,
learning becomes impaired. Rey and Buchwald (2011),
Sweller (2005a, 2005b) have shown that offering redundant
material often interferes with learning rather than facilitating
it (see Sweller, 2005b, p. 159). This redundancy effect is
attributed to the fact that working memory capacity is
burdened excessively with integrating identical information
received via different sources. The results of the experiment
are in accordance with the aforementioned studies. When
the information is twice presented (causal diagram and text,
or text and pictures) learning does not improve compared to
the text only condition. So the fact that the information is
given in two versions does not hinder learning but neither
does it improve learning.
Picture superiority
As we have argued in the discussion, we fail to find
evidence for the picture superiority effect. When pictures
are added to text, recall does not improve. The positive
effect of a causal diagram cannot be interpreted in terms of
picture superiority, because causal diagrams are not
pictures, but they are small summaries of causal information
in the text.
Suggestions for study materials
In conclusion, we can say that causal diagrams turn out to
be a very convenient study aid, when a deeper
understanding of relations is aimed for. It is even the case

3439

that causal diagrams appear to be the principal matter to
study for students instead of texts when recall of causal
relations is at stake. Participants who studied the causal
diagram alone, outperformed the participants in any of the
other conditions. So, we can recommend students to draw
causal diagrams of the materials they have to study and
authors of school and college books to add causal diagrams
whenever possible summarizing the main ideas and the
relations between them. Making the structure of the text
more insightful is a vital characteristic of causal diagrams.
In short, our findings hints towards the need to elucidate
course material with diagrams in order to boost memory.

References
Ainsworth, S. E., & Loizou, A. T. (2003). The effects of
self-explaining when learning with text or diagrams.
Cognitive Science, 27(4), 669-681.
Cromley, J. G., Snyder-Hogan, L. E., & Luciw-Dubas, U.
A. (2010). Cognitive activities in complex science text
and diagrams. Contemporary Educational Psychology,
35(1), 59-74.
Graesser, A. C., & Bertus, E. L. (1998). The construction of
causal inferences while reading expository texts on
science
and
technology. Scientific
Studies
of
Reading, 2(3), 247-269.
Job, R., & Tenconi, E. L. (2002). Naming pictures at no
cost: Asymmetries in picture and word conditional
naming. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 9, 790-794.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1998). Computer and the Mind: An
Introduction to Cognitive Science. Harvard University
Press.
Larkin, J. & Simon, H. (1987) Why a diagram is
(sometimes) worth ten thousand words. Cognitive
Science, 11, 65-99.
Levin, J. R., and Mayer, R. E. (1993). Understanding
illustrations in text. In B.K. Britton, A. Woodward, & M.
Brinkley (Eds.), Learning from Textbooks (pp. 95–113),
Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ.
Marcus, N., Cooper, M., and Sweller, J. (1996). Understand
instructions. Journal of Educational Psychology, 88, 4963.
Mason, L., Tornatora, M., & Pluchino, P. (2013). Do fourth
graders integrate text and picture in processing and
learning from an illustrated science text? Evidence from
eye-movement patterns. Computers & Education, 60, 95109.
Mayer, R. E., & Gallini, J. K. (1990). When is an
illustration worth ten thousand words? Journal of
Educational Psychology, 82(4), 715-726.
McCrudden, M., Magliano, J., & Schraw, G. (2011). The
effects of diagrams on online reading processes and
memory. Discourse Processes, 48(2), 69-92.
McCrudden, M., Schraw, G., Lehman, S., & Poliquin, A.
(2007). The effects of causal diagrams on text learning.
Contemporary Educational Psychology, 32, 367-388.

McCrudden, M., Schraw, G., & Lehman, S. (2009). The use
of adjunct displays to facilitate comprehension of causal
relationships in expository text. Instructional Science,
37(1), 65-86.
Miller, P. (2011). The processing of pictures and written
words: A perceptual and conceptual perspective.
Psychology, 2, 713-720.
Moore, P. J., & Scevak, J. J. (1997). Learning from texts
and visual aids: A developmental perspective. Journal of
Research in Reading, 20(3), 205-223.
Paivio, A. (1986). Mental representations: A dual-coding
approach. New York: Oxford University Press.
Pike M. M., Barnes M. A., & Barron R. W. (2010). The role
of
illustrations
in
children's
inferential
comprehension. Journal
of
Experimental
Child
Psychology, 105, 243–255.
Rey, G. D., & Buchwald, F. (2011). The expertise reversal
effect:
Cognitive
load
and
motivational
explanations. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Applied, 17, 33-48.
Robinson, D. H., & Kiewra, K. A. (1995). Visual argument:
Graphic organizers are superior to outlines in improving
learning from text. Journal of Educational Psychology,
87, 455-467.
Schmidt-Weigand, F., Kohnert, A., & Glowalla, U. (2010).
A closer look at split visual attention in system- and selfpaced instruction in multimedia learning. Learning and
Instruction, 20, 100-110.
Shinkareva, S., Malave, V., Mason, R., Mitchell, T., & Just,
M. (2011). Commonality of neural representations of
words and pictures. Neuroimage, 54 (3), 2418-2425.
Sweller, J. (2005a). Implications of cognitive load theory for
multimedia learning. In R.E. Mayer (Ed.), The Cambridge
Handbook of Multimedia Learning (pp. 19-30). New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Sweller, J. (2005b). The redundancy principle in multimedia
learning. In R. E. Mayer (Ed.), Cambridge handbook of
multimedia learning (pp. 159–168). New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Vekiri, I. (2002). What Is the Value of Graphical Displays
in Learning? Educational Psychology Review 14 (3), 261312.
Weldon, M. S., & Coyote, K. C. (1996). Failure to ﬁnd the
picture superiority effect in implicit conceptual memory
tests. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 22(3), 670-686.

3440

