The impact of the Digital Age in Moral Judgments
Albert Barque-Duran1, Emmanuel M. Pothos1, James M. Yearsley2 & James A. Hampton1
1

Department of Psychology, City, University of London, London EC1V 0HB, UK.
2
Department of Psychology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37240, USA.
albert.barque-duran@city.ac.uk

Abstract
Nowadays, several of the situations in which we have to make
decisions are in digital form. In a first experiment (N=1010)
we showed that people’s moral judgments depend on the
Digital Context (Smartphone vs. PC) in which a dilemma is
presented, becoming more utilitarian (vs. deontological) when
using Smartphones. To provide additional evidence, we ran a
second (N=250) and a third experiment (N=300), where we
introduced time constraints and we manipulated time
instructions. Our results provide an extended perspective on
Dual-Process Models of Moral Judgment, as we showed that
the use of smartphones, often assumed to be hurried which
would be consistent with gut-feeling decision-making,
increased the likelihood of utilitarian responses and decreased
deontological ones. This is the first study to look at the
impact of the digital age on moral judgments and the results
presented have consequences for understanding moral choice
in our increasingly virtualized world.
Keywords: Moral Judgment; Behavioural Ethics; DecisionMaking, Human-Computer Interaction.

Introduction
In this digital age, we spend a lot of time interacting with
computer screens, smartphones and other digital gadgets.
We buy online, work on the cloud, our social relationships
are sometimes online-based, etc. Thus, the contexts where
we typically face ethical decisions and are asked to engage
in moral behaviour have changed. Nowadays, moral
dilemmas are often presented digitally, that is, relevant
information is presented through and decisions are made on
a technological device.
A key distinction regarding moral judgments concerns
deontological versus utilitarian decisions (Singer, 1991).
Recent dual-process accounts of moral judgment contrast
deontological judgments, which are generally driven by
automatic/unreflective/intuitive responses, prompted by the
emotional content of a given dilemma, with utilitarian
responses,
which
are
the
result
of
unemotional/rational/controlled reflection, driven by
conscious evaluation of the potential outcomes (Greene et
al., 2001; Greene & Haidt, 2002). In this account, an
individual’s ethical mind-set (rule-based vs. outcome-based,
Barque-Duran et al., 2015) can play a central role. A
deontological perspective evaluates an act based on its
conformity to a moral norm (Kant, 1785/1959) or perhaps
just a rule (such a law). By contrast a
consequentialist/utilitarian perspective evaluates an act
depending on its consequences (Mill, 1861/1998).

People often believe that judgments about “right” and
“wrong” should be consistent and unaffected by irrelevant
aspects of a moral dilemma or by its context. However,
studies have shown, for example, that manipulations of the
language (foreign vs. mother tongue) in which a moral
scenario is presented can affect moral judgments through
increasing psychological distance from the situation, and so
inducing utilitarianism (Costa et al, 2014). The choice of
deontological versus utilitarian judgments can vary
depending on the emotional reactivity triggered by the
dilemma (Valdesolo & DeSteno, 2006). As such,
establishing which conditions favor each of these two
influences is fundamental to understanding the psychology
of moral choice.
Construal Level Theory (CLT) provides a framework of
considerable potential relevance by linking mental
representations to moral judgment. Individuals’ judgments,
decisions, and behaviours can differ as a function of
construal levels. CLT proposes that the same event or object
can be represented at multiple levels of abstraction (see
Trope & Liberman, 2010, for a review). More weight is
given to global, abstract features at high-level construal,
whereas local, concrete features are more influential at lowlevel construal. According to CLT, psychological distance is
a major determinant of what level of construal is activated.
Distancing a target on any dimension of psychological
distance (i.e., time, space, social, and hypotheticality) leads
to greater activation of high-level construal (directing
attention to end states) than low-level construal. Crucially,
high-level construal is often assumed to align with more
utilitarian decision-making (Gong, Iliev, & Sachdeva, 2012;
Aguilar, Brussino, & Fernández-Dols, 2013).
The present study explores whether a Digital Context (i.e.
using a different digital device such a Smartphone or a PC,
as hundreds of millions of individuals do every day) can
have a systematic impact on these processes. Could Digital
Contexts induce different construal levels (through
psychological distance)?
There is evidence that people experience a so called
"narrowing effect” when using smartphones in decisionmaking, which means that they channel or tunnel their focus
toward a main task and ignore or filter out certain cues
(Ariely, 2016). A narrowing effect is consistent with the
idea that devices such as smartphones would increase
psychological distance giving rise to an abstract
representation of actions. In other words, the narrowing
effect would seem to be aligned with a more utilitarian/
outcome-based mind-set, instead of a more emotional/

1592

deontological one. For this reason we asked ourselves
whether Digital Context, smartphone vs. PC, might
influence the relation between different levels of construal
(psychological distance), thus affecting the likelihood of
utilitarian vs. deontological judgments.
To summarize, we hypothesize that Smartphones (vs.
PCs) have the effect of channeling or tunneling the focus
toward a main task at the expense of certain cues. This
should induce high construal, increase psychological
distance and give rise to an abstract representation of
actions, thus biasing towards more utilitarian judgments.
We first tested this prediction using three versions of the
well-known Trolley Problem (Switch, Fat Man, Balanced;
Thomson, 1985; see Methods sections). To provide
additional support we also ran a second and a third
experiment where we introduced a Time Constraint (10
seconds vs. Unlimited Time to respond) and where we
manipulated Time Instruction, relating to how participants
were given information about the time constraints for
reaching a decision (Instructing Unlimited Time vs. No
Time Instruction).

Experiment 1
The objective was to explore whether a manipulation of the
Digital Context (Smartphone vs. PC) can have an impact on
moral judgment. Specifically, we wanted to test if making
moral judgments using a Smartphone increased the number
of utilitarian responses in comparison to when using a PC.

Participants
A total of 1010 participants, all US residents, were recruited
on-line and received $1 for doing the task (482 women, 528
men; mean age=31.7 years, SD=9.6). Sample sizes were
based on extant research (Suter & Hertwig, 2011).

Materials and Procedure
The study was designed in Qualtrics, run on Amazon
Mechanical Turk and lasted approximately 10-15 minutes.
Digital Context (Smartphone vs. PC)1 and Version of the
Trolley Problem (Switch vs. Fat Man vs. Balanced) were
manipulated between participants. We used the frequency of
Utilitarian vs. Deontological Responses as the dependent
measure.
Participants were randomly told to switch to a
Smartphone or a PC after reading and agreeing the general
instructions on Amazon Mechanical Turk. Having a
smartphone was a pre-requisite to participate in the
experiment. Participants in the Smartphone condition had to
respond to all questions from their smartphone devices. As a
manipulation check for this condition, we tracked and
verified through Qualtrics that the responses were indeed
1
In the Smartphone condition participants could do the
experiment with the following devices: iPhone, Android, Windows
Mobile Phone and BlackBerry. In the PC condition participants
could use a desktop or a laptop computer. No tablets were allowed.

made from an iPhone, Android, Windows Phone or
Blackberry. Participants were randomly allocated to one of
these six conditions: (1) Smartphone/Switch; (2)
Smartphone/Fat Man; (3) Smartphone/Balanced; (4)
PC/Switch; (5) PC/Fat Man; (6) PC/Balanced. One third of
the participants (327 Participants) on each Digital condition
were presented with the Fat Man version of the Trolley
dilemma, where one imagines standing on a footbridge
overlooking a train track. A small incoming train is about to
kill five people and the only way to stop it is to push a
heavy man off the footbridge in front of the train. This will
kill him, but save the five people. A utilitarian analysis
dictates sacrificing one to save five; but this would violate
the moral prohibition against killing. Imagining physically
pushing the man is emotionally difficult and therefore
people typically avoid this choice (Thomson, 1985).
According to our hypotheses, participants would be more
likely to opt for sacrificing one man to save five when
dealing with such moral dilemma using a smartphone in
comparison to a PC, since this would induce high construal,
increase psychological distance and give rise to an abstract
representation of actions, which is aligned with more
utilitarian judgments under time pressure; or would induce
psychological closeness due to the link between low-level
construal and a focus on means, which is also hypothesized
to align with more utilitarian judgments, under conditions of
no time pressure. Another third of participants (313
Participants) were presented with the Switch dilemma,
where the trolley is headed towards the five men, but you
can switch it with a lever to another track, where it would
kill only one man. People are more willing to sacrifice the
one man by pulling the switch than by pushing him off the
footbridge and the extensively supported explanation is that
pulling the switch is less emotionally aversive. The last third
of participants (314 Participants) were presented with the
Balanced version of the Trolley Problem. The Balanced
dilemma had a setting similar to that in the Fat Man version,
but with a different number of people one could save (15
instead of 5), so that utilitarian choice would increase. All
participants first completed a filler task (10 trivia questions)
before responding to one of the versions of the Trolley
Problem. A “catch question” was introduced in the
experiment, to control for attention during the task (i.e. “If
you are paying attention to this question please select
answer ‘36’ from the options below”). Then, participants
were presented with one of the three moral scenarios
(Switch, Fat Man or Balanced) where they had to choose
between Choice A (utilitarian) or Choice B (deontological).
In all cases the dilemma was presented with both text and an
illustration. Subsequently, participants completed another
filler task (10 trivia questions). Finally, participants were
asked to complete The Big Five Inventory (John et al.,
1991) questionnaire, which is considered a quick (44-items),
reliable, and accurate measure of the five dimensions of
personality. We considered that the impact of digital content
on moral choice could also interact with personality
characteristics (Ozer & Benet-Martínez, 2006) but the

1593

results did not lead to firm conclusions and therefore will
not be reported further.

Results Experiment 1
We excluded participants whose first language was not
English, as Costa et al., (2014) showed that the use of a
foreign language (instead of a mother tongue) in a moral
scenario increases psychological distance and induces
utilitarianism when making moral judgments. We also
excluded those participants who did not answer the catch
question correctly. A total of 56 participants out of 1010
were thus excluded.
We first compared the percentage of Utilitarian Responses
for the two Digital Contexts (Smartphone vs. PC) on each of
the three Versions of the Trolley Problem that were
employed (Switch vs. Fat Man vs. Balanced; Figure 1).

revealed a significant association between the variables, χ2
(1, N=327) = 5.15, p=.023. This result supports our
hypothesis that moral judgments in Smartphones increase
utilitarian decision-making, than when using a PC.
We then analyzed the frequency of Utilitarian vs.
Deontological Responses, across the two Digital Contexts,
in the Switch condition. Slightly more participants decided
to sacrifice one man by pulling the switch than to do
nothing and let five people die (80.9% for the Smartphone
users; 76.9% for the PC users), but there was no evidence
for an association between the two variables, χ2 (1, N=313)
= .741, p=.389. This result supports our expectation that in
less emotional scenarios, such as the Switch dilemma, there
is a reduced effect of Digital Context. That is, there is no
difference in participants’ moral judgments when using a
Smartphone or a PC if the moral scenario is already highly
utilitarian.
Finally, we examined the frequency of Utilitarian vs.
Deontological Responses in the Balanced condition. Note,
this condition was designed so that, in the PC condition at
least, there would be fairly equivalent utilitarian and
deontological influences, and this was approximately the
case. Regarding the manipulation of interest, 40.4% of
participants decided to push the heavy man off the
footbridge in the PC and 36.7% in the Smartphone
conditions. Nevertheless, a chi-square test of independence
showed that the relation between these variables was not
significant, χ2 (1, N=314) = .448, p=.503. The (tentative)
conclusion from this experiment is that using a Smartphone2
rather than a PC has a reliable impact on moral judgments
only when dilemmas or scenarios have high emotional
content.

Experiment 2a and 2b

Figure 1: A) The experimental paradigm used in the
Smartphone condition in Experiment 1. B) The illustrations
used in each of the three moral conditions. C) Percentage of
Utilitarian Responses for both Digital Contexts (Smartphone
vs. PC) on each of the three versions of the Trolley problem
(Switch vs. Fat Man vs. Balanced). Error bars represent
standard errors.
As expected, in the Fat Man dilemma more participants
avoided the act of pushing the heavy man off the footbridge
in front of the train, presumably because of the emotional
burden of this choice. More importantly, participants were
more likely to opt for sacrificing the Fat Man (utilitarian
response) to save five men when using a Smartphone
(33.5%) than when using a PC (22.3%). A 2x2 chi-square
test of independence was performed to examine the
frequency of Utilitarian vs. Deontological Responses
against Digital Context in the Fat Man condition and this

The objective of Experiment 2a was to provide additional
evidence for the increased number of utilitarian responses
using a Smartphone by manipulating the amount of time
available to form a moral judgment. We wanted to explore
Digital Context (Smartphone vs. PC) and Time Constraint
(10 seconds vs. Unlimited time to respond) on moral
judgments. It is possible that the effect of Digital Context is
independent from that of Time Constraint, in which case we
cannot explain the former in terms of (just) the latter.
Alternatively, Time Constraint may provide a bias on moral
decision making opposite to the effect of Digital Context
(e.g., a decrease of utilitarian responses, in the fat man
scenario, when participants are using a Smartphone), which
will create a complex picture regarding how using
Smartphones in everyday moral judgments biases for and
against utilitarian responses. In Experiment 2b, we
addressed the challenge to explain the difference in the Fat
Man condition of Experiment 1 and in the Unlimited Time
2

In the Smartphone condition, 39% of participants used
an iPhone during the experiment, 58.5% an Android, 2.2% a
Windows Mobile Phone and 0.2% a BlackBerry.

1594

condition in Experiment 2a (where the effect of Digital
Context had disappeared) by manipulating directly the Time
Instruction to either specify that there was unlimited time
available for a moral judgment, or not mentioning time at all
(Instructing Unlimited Time vs. No Time Instruction). The
key difference between these two conditions was that in
Experiment 1 participants were not told anything regarding
time, while in Experiment 2a, in the equivalent conditions,
participants were specifically told they had unlimited time.
We also measured participants’ affective reaction with the
Self Assessment Manikin test (Bradley and Lang, 1994).

Participants
A total of 550 participants (250 Exp 2a and 300 Exp 2b), all
of whom were US residents, were recruited on-line and
received $0.80 for doing the task (234 women, 316 men;
mean age=32.5 years, SD=9).

Materials and Procedure
The studies were designed in Qualtrics, run on Amazon
Mechanical Turk and lasted less than 10 minutes. Digital
Context (Smartphone vs. PC), Version of the Trolley
Problem (Switch vs. Fat Man) and Time Constraint (10
seconds vs. Unlimited Time to respond) were manipulated
between participants in Experiment 2a. There were therefore
eight conditions. We used the frequency of Utilitarian vs.
Deontological Responses as the dependent measure.
All participants followed a similar procedure as in
Experiment 1. They first completed a filler task (10 trivia
questions) including a catch question, as in Experiment 1.
Then, participants were presented with one of the two moral
scenarios (Switch or Fat Man). In all cases the dilemma was
presented with both text and an illustration. Participants
were alerted of the available time for responding depending
on their condition (i.e. “You will only have 10 seconds to
answer the question in the next screen” vs. “You will have
unlimited time to answer the question in the next screen”).
After the presentation of the scenario, in the “10 seconds”
condition participants had to choose between Choice A
(utilitarian) or Choice B (deontological), while a countdown
timer appeared at the top of their screen (both Smartphone
and PC). In contrast, in the “Unlimited Time” condition,
participants were explicitly told that they had to make their
judgment taking as much time as they wanted. Finally,
participants were asked to complete the Self Assessment
Manikin test (Bradley and Lang, 1994), which is a
technique that directly measures the pleasure, arousal and
dominance associated with a person’s affective reaction.
In Experiment 2b, Digital Context (Smartphone vs. PC)
and Time Instruction (Instructing Unlimited Time vs. No
Time Instruction) were manipulated between participants,
using the Fat Man scenario. Time Instruction was
manipulated in the following way. Half the participants
were given the instructions as in the Experiment 2a
Unlimited Time condition. The other half did not have any

indication of the time they had to spend making their
judgment (same procedure as in Experiment 1).

Results across all Experiments 1, 2a and 2b
In this section we report the results of Experiment 2a, 2b
and then bring together the results from all experiments
focusing on the Fat Man scenario (Figure 2).
First, we summarize the results from Experiment 2a. We
excluded a total of 10 participants out of 250 following the
same criteria as in Experiment 1. As a manipulation check,
we first examined the amount of time that participants took
to finish the experiment (5min 10s in the Unlimited Time
condition; 4min 32s in the 10s condition).
We examined the differences in the percentage of
Utilitarian Responses for the two Digital Contexts
(Smartphone vs. PC) on each of the two versions of the
Trolley Problem (Switch vs. Fat Man) and with or without
time pressure (10s vs. Unlimited Time).
In the time pressure (10s), Switch condition, slightly more
participants decided to sacrifice one man by pulling the
switch than to do nothing and let five people die, when
using a Smartphone (79.31%) than when using a PC
(66.67%), but this difference was not reliable, χ2 (1, N=65)
= 1.282, p=.257.
Regarding the Unlimited Time condition, in the Switch
condition, Digital Context also did not appear to play a role
in moral judgments (85.71% and 83.87% for Smartphone
and PC, respectively); regardless of Digital Context, we
observed highly utilitarian responses. Thus, as before, the
results in the Switch dilemma indicate that Digital Context
and (as it seems) Time Constraint have a reliable impact on
moral judgments only when dilemmas or scenarios have
high emotional content. This result also supports our
assumption that in less emotional scenarios, such as the
Switch dilemma, any effect of either Digital Context or
Time Constraint does not result in a reliable increase in
utilitarian responding.
In the time pressure (10s), Fat Man condition, participants
were more likely to opt for sacrificing the Fat Man
(utilitarian response) to save five when using a Smartphone
(45.7%) than when using a PC (20.0%), χ2 (1, N=60) =
4.239, p=.04. At face value, these results challenge the
assumption that hurried responses necessarily lead to
deontological moral judgments.
Then, we examined participant’s responses in the
Unlimited Time, Fat Man condition. The results here appear
to conflict with our conclusion from Experiment 1, in that
there was no difference in Utilitarian vs. Deontological
responses, between the Smartphone and PC conditions
(27.58% and 29.63%, respectively, χ2 (1, N=64) = 2.224,
p=.136). In other words, when participants were specifically
told to spend unlimited time to resolve the dilemma
(Unlimited Time condition), the Digital Context effect
vanished. We return to this finding in Experiment 2b.
We also considered whether the impact of Digital Content
on moral choice could interact with the perceived
emotionality of the scenario/context or affective reactions,

1595

but the results did not lead us to firm conclusions and
therefore will not be reported further.
Second, we summarize the results from Experiment 2b. In
this experiment we excluded a total of 141 participants out
of 300 following the same criteria as in Experiment 1 and
2a. One participant was rejected because she/he answered
incorrectly to the catch question and one because English
was not his/her first language. Additionally, 139 participants
were eliminated because they said they had come across a
moral choice in the context of the Trolley Problem before.
The pattern of results does not change qualitatively if these
participants are included, but we decided not to do so.
In this experiment we measured Response Time for the
particular moral judgment, though we note that, as the
experiment was run over the internet, the accuracy of these
measurements is lower than in the lab. Did participants in
the Instructing Unlimited Time condition take longer to
respond than ones in the No Time Instruction one? There
was no evidence that this was the case (2x2 ANOVA with
Digital Context and Time Instruction, F<1 for all effects).
We suggest that the effects from Time Constraint and Time
Instruction seen in Experiments 2a, 2b could result in a
change of the participants’ mind-set and approach to the
problems, without corresponding clear differences in
Response Time.

No Time Instruction condition in Experiment 2b closely
matched the corresponding results in Experiment 1. In
Experiment 2b, as expected, participants were more likely to
opt for sacrificing the Fat Man (utilitarian response) to save
five when using a Smartphone (28.6%) than when using a
PC (19%). Even though the trend was as expected, a 2x2
chi-square test with frequency of Utilitarian vs.
Deontological Responses against Digital Context
(Smartphone vs. PC) was not significant, χ2 (1, N=70) =
0.864, p=.35. However, after collapsing the data (for the
identical Fat Man, No Time Instruction conditions) from
Experiments 1 and 2b, we obtained a significant association
between frequency of Utilitarian vs. Deontological
Responses and Digital Context (Smartphone vs. PC), χ2 (1,
N=397) = 6.27, p=.012. This result supports our hypothesis
that moral judgments in Smartphones increase utilitarian
decision-making, compared to when using a PC, when no
information about time is provided.
Importantly, the results from Experiments 1, 2a and 2b
put together indicate that under conditions of no time
information and time pressure there is indeed a utilitarian
bias. The only Time Instruction in which the utilitarian bias
was eliminated was the Unlimited Time condition, in which
participants were specifically told to take as long as they
needed to respond. This finding has a plausible
interpretation that, in the Unlimited Time condition,
participants took into account the information they have
been ignoring so far (which would include emotional cues)
and this made the utilitarian bias disappear. Thus, the results
so far support the hypothesis that, under most conditions,
smartphones (vs. PC) are associated with more utilitarian
decision-making (vs. deontological). An additional
interesting finding is that utilitarian judgments emerge in
both the No Time Instruction condition and the Time
Pressure condition.

Discussion
Figure 2: Summary of the relevant results from
Experiments 1, 2a and 2b for the Fat Man problem. The
vertical axis shows percentage of utilitarian responses and
the horizontal axis the conditions of interest. Error bars
represent standard errors.
The two leftmost bar clusters in Figure 2 show the results
of Experiment 2b. Interestingly, using the data from
Experiment 2b, we replicated the finding from Experiment
2a, that the mere fact of “nudging” participants to use
unlimited time resulted in utilitarian responses that were not
influenced by Digital Context. A 2x2 chi-square test with
frequency of Utilitarian vs. Deontological Responses
against Time Instruction (Instructing Unlimited Time vs. No
Time Instruction) confirmed this conclusion, χ2 (1) = 5.509,
p = .018.
We next considered whether the results from Experiments
2b replicated the effect from Experiments 1 and 2a
regarding Digital Context. The pattern of results from the

This is the first study to look at the impact of digital context
in moral judgments. We considered whether the increasing
tendency for our judgments to be mediated through the use
of technological gadgets might be changing our approach to
moral dilemmas. We have shown that people’s moral
judgments become more utilitarian (vs. deontological) when
using Smartphones as opposed to PCs, under a variety of
time-related manipulations (but not all). The present work
was motivated by the idea Digital Context might impact the
relation between different levels of construal (psychological
distance) thus affecting utilitarian vs. deontological
judgments. While our results are consistent with such a
view, clearly further research is needed.
We first consider the implications of these results for the
Dual-Process Models of Moral Judgment (Greene et al.,
2001; Greene & Haidt, 2002). A standard assumption is that
moral dilemmas resolved in fast, gut-feeling conditions
engage a deontological mode of responding, while
utilitarian responses are typically the result of longer
consideration and involve cognitive control. Instead, we

1596

showed that participants under time pressure were more
likely to opt for sacrificing the “fat man” to “save five”
(utilitarian response) when using a Smartphone than when
using a PC. That is, some digital contexts (i.e. Smartphones)
can trigger utilitarian decision-making under time pressure,
even though time pressure has traditionally been associated
with deontological responding in moral choice. Dual route
models have received extensive support and no doubt they
are valid under most circumstances. Our results indicate a
need to perhaps augment the available routes for utilitarian
biases in such models.
Other research has provided a more complex picture
regarding the impact of time on deontological vs. utilitarian
judgments. Specifically, Suter and Hertwig (2011) showed
that participants in a time-pressure condition (associated
with fast, gut-feeling conditions), relative to a no-timepressure condition (associated with longer consideration and
higher cognitive control), were more likely to give
deontological responses only in high-conflict dilemmas. By
contrast, in low-conflict and in impersonal dilemmas, the
proportion of deontological responses did not differ between
conditions. The results from the present experiments partly
support these differences between high-low conflict
dilemmas. In less emotional scenarios (Switch), neither
Digital Context nor Time Constraint resulted in a reliable
increase in utilitarian responding. By contrast, in more
emotional scenarios (Fat Man), our results question the
well-established assumption (from Suter & Hertwig, 2011,
amongst others) that hurried decisions enhance deontology,
since we showed that moral judgments under a time
constraint and in a specific Digital context (Smartphones)
seem to make utilitarian judgments more common.
Clearly, more work is required to disentangle possible
explanations for the exact effect of the different instructions
concerning timing, especially regarding the possibility that
keeping track of time may result in reduced cognitive
resources. But the crucial point regarding the present study
is that our conclusion considering Digital Context and moral
judgments appears mostly independent of such
considerations.
Our hypotheses regarding Digital Context and moral
decision-making was largely motivated from the effects and
implications from Construal Level Theory. According to
CLT, psychological distance can vary on at least four
dimensions: temporal, spatial, social and hypotheticality
(i.e. probability for a scenario to become reality; Trope &
Liberman, 2010). Can we localize the particular effect of
distance in considering responding using a smartphone vs. a
PC? In further studies we will attempt to measure
psychological distance directly. More generally, our results
were inconclusive regarding the idea that the psychological
distance elicited by a smartphone decreased the intensity of
people’s affective reactions. It is possible that smartphones
induce a greater distance in other respects. For example, it
might be the case that the use of digital devices interacts
with/mediates the hypotheticality dimension.

Overall, the present work reveals a need for the further
systematic study of how Digital Context affects moral
choice, all the more so given that, increasingly,
governments, charities and other institutions engage in
intense campaigns over digital media to encourage moral
choices for important aspects of our way of life.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by grants AFOSR FA8655-13-13044 and Leverhulme Trust grant RPG-2015-311 and
H2020-MSCA-IF-2015 grant 696331.

References
Aguilar, P., Brussino, S., Fernandez-Dols, JM. (2013).
Psychological distance increases uncompromising
consequentialism. Journal of Experimental Psychology.
449-452.
Ariely, D. (2016). Time Pressure: Behavioral Science
Considerations for Mobile Marketing. Think with Google.
Bradley MM., Lang PJ. (1994). Measuring emotion: the
Self-Assessment Manikin and the Semantic Differential. J
Behav Ther Exp Psychiatry. 25(1): 49-59.
Costa A, Foucart A, Hayakawa S, Aparici M, Apesteguia J,
et al. (2014) Your Morals Depend on Language. PLoS
ONE 9(4): e94842.
Barque-Duran et al., (2015) Patterns and Evolution of Moral
Behavior: Moral Dynamics in Everyday Life. Thinking
and Reasoning. 22, 31-56.
Gong, H., Iliev, R., Sachdeva, S. (2012). Consequences are
far away: Psychological distance affects modes of moral
decision making. Cognition.
Greene, J. D., Sommerville, R., Nystrom, L., Darley, J., &
Cohen, J. (2001). An fMRI investigation of emotional
engagement in moral judgment. Science, 293, 2105–2108.
Greene J, Haidt J. (2002). How (and where) does moral
judgment work? Trends Cognitive Science 6: 517 523.
Kant, I. Foundation of the metaphysics of morals. Beck,
LW., translator. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill; 17851959.
Mill, JS. Utilitarianism. Crisp, R., editor. New York: Oxford
University Press; 18611998.
Ozer, D. J., & Benet-Martínez, V. (2006). Personality and
the prediction of consequential outcomes. Annual Review
of Psychology, 57, 401–421.
Singer, P. (1991). A companion to ethics. Oxford, England:
Blackwell Reference.
Suter, R. & Hertwig, R. (2011). Time and moral judgment.
Cognition. 119 (2011) 454-458.
Thomson, J. (1985). The trolley problem. Yale Law, 94.
Trope, Y., & Liberman, N. (2010). Construal Level Theory
of Psychological Distance, Psychological Review, 117
(April), 440–63.
Valdesolo, P. & DeSteno, D. (2006). Manipulations of
Emotional Context Shape Moral Judgment. Psychological
Science, 17, 476-477.

1597

