The Temporal Cheerleader Effect:
Attractiveness Judgments Depend on Surrounding Faces Through Time
Alexia Toskos Dils (alexia.toskos@purchase.edu)
Scott Niedopytalski (scott.niedopytalski@purchase.edu)
Jeffrey Arroyo (jeffrey.arroyo@purchase.edu)
Stephen J. Flusberg (stephen.flusberg@purchase.edu)
SUNY Purchase College, Department of Psychology
735 Anderson Hill Road, Purchase, NY 10577, USA
Abstract
Previous research has found that people are seen as more
attractive when they appear in a group rather than in isolation.
The present study asks whether faces that surround us in time
also affect how attractive we appear to be. Participants rated
the attractiveness of famous female faces presented in a
sequence of three and in isolation. We found that people do
integrate information about attractiveness over time, but that
temporal context has the opposite effect of static context.
People perceived faces as less attractive in a series than in
isolation. We also varied the attractiveness of surrounding
faces in order to examine how the serial position of contextual
information might figure into people’s judgments. We found
that faces presented earlier in the sequence figured more
heavily into people’s judgment than did faces presented later
in the sequence. These findings highlight the role of temporal
context in perceptions of attractiveness.
Keywords: face perception, attractiveness, serial position
effects, ensemble coding, cheerleader effect

Introduction
th

In a 5 season episode of the American comedy television
series The Office, the employees of Dunder Mifflin paper
company spend an entire day debating whether actress
Hilary Swank is “hot” or not. The office workers are torn on
the issue, battle lines are drawn, and emotions get heated.
Though in part a satirical referendum on the public’s dark
obsession with – and objectification of – celebrity, the
plotline of this episode raises an important question: What
factors influence perceptions of attractiveness?
The intrinsic features of individual faces certainly
contribute to the perception of attractiveness, for both
evolutionary and cultural reasons. Female faces, for
example, are rated as more attractive the more sexually
dimorphic and prototypically “female” they are (Valenzano,
Mennucci, Tartarelli, & Cellerino, 2006), and the more
symmetrical they are (Perret et al., 1999). However, certain
situational factors such as amount of exposure to a face
(Rashidi, Pazhoohi & Hosseinchari, 2012) as well as the
perceived market value of the person making the judgment
(Morgan & Kisley, 2014) can also impact attractiveness
judgments.
Researchers have also examined whether contextual
factors can influence attractiveness ratings. Recent work,
for example, has uncovered a so-called “cheerleader effect”
in which people are rated as more attractive when they

appear in a group than when they appear in isolation
(Walker & Vul, 2013). Walker and Vul explain these
findings as a sort of perceptual averaging phenomenon. The
idea is that people spontaneously extract an ensemble code
when viewing a group of faces, and because average faces
are seen as highly attractive (Langlois, Musseman, &
Roggman, 1994), attractiveness ratings for the faces that
contributed to the ensemble receive a boost. This suggests
that perceptions of attractiveness are in part constructed
online, in the moments we experience another person’s face.
Often the faces we encounter in a crowded place are
processed serially, rather than all at once. For example,
faces come in and out of sight as we walk down the street,
scan a room, or swipe through profile pictures on social
media websites. Interestingly, evidence from studies of
object perception suggests that the visual system is capable
of constructing average representations over time in addition
to space. Albrecht and Scholl (2010) found that people’s
estimates of the average diameter of a growing or shrinking
disc depended on which part of the disc received the most
screen time. Participants overestimated the average when
frames on the larger end of the spectrum hung on the screen
longer than did frames on the smaller end of the spectrum,
and vice versa.
Is information from faces spontaneously integrated over
time in a similar way? The present study asks whether the
cheerleader effect extends to faces that appear near one
another in time in addition to space. Importantly, the study
was also designed to address whether serial position
influences how information about attractiveness is
integrated over time. Do all faces in a sequence figure
equally into the ensemble code, or is the average
representation that people extract weighted more heavily by
faces appearing early or late in the series?
Though research suggests the visual system computes
ensemble codes of information presented close in space and
time, the data is often inconsistent with a simple averaging
account. For example, studies of the perception of serially
presented lines have reported a recency effect in people’s
judgments: Estimates of line length were biased toward
lines that appeared toward the end of the sequence (Weiss &
Anderson, 1969). And while Walker and Vul (2013)
concluded that an averaging effect best captured the data
they observed in their work on the cheerleader effect, not all
of their findings are consistent with this interpretation. For

1925

example, if the cheerleader effect results from simple
averaging, then the more faces that contribute to the
ensemble code, the more attractive the resulting average
should be (i.e., increasing the number of faces in a group
photograph should strengthen the cheerleader effect).
Walker and Vul (2013, Experiment 4) tested this hypothesis
with set sizes ranging from two to 16. Although they found
a cheerleader effect within each set size, the magnitude of
the effect did not increase with the number of faces in the
set.
In light of these findings, the present study was designed
to differentiate between different possible accounts of the
temporal cheerleader effect we investigated. On the one
hand, it is possible that faces appearing at the end of a
sequence bias the perceived attractiveness of faces earlier in
the sequence (i.e., a recency effect). This would be
consistent with the work of Weiss and Anderson (1969) on
line perception. However, it is also possible that the first
face might influence the perceived attractiveness of faces
appearing later in the sequence. There are at least two
reasons we might expect such a primacy effect. First, there
might be a contrast effect (Kenrick & Gutierres, 1980;
Pegors, Mattar, Bryan, & Epstein, 2015), such that seeing a
highly attractive face may make subsequent faces seem less
attractive by contrast, and vice versa. Second, there might
be an anchoring effect, such that subsequent faces appear to
have a similar attractiveness level as a previously presented
face (Pegors, Mattar, Bryan, & Epstein, 2015; Taubert, Van
Der Burg, Alais, 2016; Tversky & Kahneman, 1974).
Both contrast and anchoring effects have been observed in
recent studies examining the effects of the attractiveness of
the previous face on online judgments of serially presented
faces (Pegors et al. 2015; Taubert et al., 2016). Pegors and
colleagues suggest that the contrast effect derives from
perceptual components of the judgment, whereas the
anchoring effect derives from a bias to respond in the same
way as in the previous trial. The present study extends this
work to offline judgments of facial attractiveness. Does the
temporal context in which a face appears affect later
memory of how attractive that face was? Offline judgments
further allow us to examine any serial position effects more
fully. Specifically, this design element allows us to test
whether faces that follow us in time can retroactively
meddle with how attractive we are judged to be.
In order to (a) determine whether or not an offline,
temporal cheerleader effect exists, and (b) understand the
mechanisms underlying such an effect, participants in the
present study rated the attractiveness of a variety of famous
female faces. On each trial, faces were presented either in
isolation or in a series of three faces. Afterward, participants
were cued by the name of each celebrity they saw and asked
to rate how attractive the person looked in the photograph.
Celebrity faces were used (as opposed to non-famous faces)
to allow for offline attractiveness ratings to be collected
after all faces disappeared from view. The celebrity’s name
uniquely picked out which face participants were being
asked to rate.

The stimulus set included two versions of each celebrity:
an “attractive” version where the celebrity was
photographed favorably, and an “unattractive” version
where the celebrity was photographed uncharitably (see
Figure 1 for example stimuli). On trials where faces were
presented in a series, the middle face was always an
attractive face and was either preceded by or followed by an
unattractive face. Therefore, in the unattractive first
condition, participants first saw an unattractive face
followed by two attractive faces. In the unattractive last
condition, participants saw two attractive faces followed by
an unattractive face.
To the extent that people do integrate information about
attractiveness over time, offline judgments of a given face
should depend on whether the face was presented in
isolation or in the middle position of a series of three faces.
If the mechanism by which information is integrated is a
contrast effect, then viewing an unattractive face in the first
position of the sequence should cause the middle face to
seem more attractive than it does in isolation, and vice
versa. Alternatively, if the mechanism is anchoring, then
seeing an unattractive face in the first position of the
sequence should make subsequent faces seem less attractive
than they do in isolation, and vice versa. Finally, if the
mechanism is simple averaging, then all faces should appear
more attractive when they are presented in a sequence, since
research suggests that averaged faces appear more attractive
(Langlois, Musseman, & Roggman, 1994). However, since
there are only three faces being averaged together here and
one was specifically chosen to appear highly unattractive, it
could be the case that the average of this small set would
actually appear less attractive. What’s more, these effects
may depend on where the unattractive face appears in the
sequence. If the averaging effect is subject to primacy
effects, then the first face in the sequence will figure more
heavily into the average. However, if the averaging effect is
subject to recency effects, then later faces in the sequence
will figure more heavily into the average. This study will
help to rule out some of these possibilities.

Experiment
Methods
Participants 50 “master-level” participants were requested
from Amazon’s Mechanical Turk worker pool for this
study.
68 people actually followed the link to the
experiment and began the study, but 17 of those people did
not complete the task. The remaining 51 participants were
included in the study. There were 27 males and 23 females
in the sample, with a mean age of 41.20 (SD = 12.67). One
participant declined to provide demographic information.
Each participant received $1.50 for their time spent on the
study.
Stimuli and Procedure Participants rated the attractiveness
of faces in three within-subjects conditions: isolation (a face
shown by itself), unattractive first (an unattractive face
followed by two attractive faces in sequence), unattractive

1926

last (two attractive faces followed by an unattractive face in
sequence).

across participants. All trial types were interleaved, and
trials were presented to participants in random order.

A.

Figure 1. Example stimuli used in this study. On the left is
the “unattractive” photograph of Debra Messing that
participants saw, and on the right is the “attractive”
photograph of the same celebrity.
Photographs of 75 unique female celebrities made up the
stimulus set for this study. Two photographs were collected
for each celebrity: an “attractive” version in which the
person was made up for an event, and an “unattractive”
version in which the celebrity was captured poorly (i.e.,
photographs found in tabloids claiming to have “shocking”
pictures of the person; see Figure 1 for example stimuli).
Therefore, the final stimulus set consisted of 150 celebrity
photographs. Each participant saw a subset of 75 faces
sampled from this full stimulus set (50 attractive faces and
25 unattractive faces). Participants saw either the attractive
version or the unattractive version of each unique celebrity,
and never both. Whether a celebrity was presented as
attractive or unattractive was counterbalanced across
participants.
The study was conducted using Qualtrics survey building
software. On each trial, participants saw female celebrity
faces presented either in isolation or in a series of three
faces. Each face was presented along with the celebrity’s
name and remained on the screen for one second.
Afterward, participants were instructed to rate the
attractiveness of each face they had just seen, cued only by
the celebrity’s name. Participants entered their responses
using a continuous sliding scale without numbers on it.
This was designed to prevent participants from tracking the
specific ratings they assigned to faces throughout the study.
The scale ranged from “very unattractive” to “very
attractive”. Participants were allowed to take as much time
as they needed to enter their ratings. The order in which
participants were prompted to rate each celebrity was
randomized on each trial. See Figure 2 for a schematic
representation of the trial structure in this task.
Each participant completed 125 trials. 75 trials consisted
of faces presented in isolation, and 50 trials consisted of
faces presented in a series. Of the 50 trials in which the
faces were presented in a group, 25 were unattractive first
trials, and 25 were unattractive last trials. The middle face
in the sequence was always attractive. Which face appeared
in which position in the sequence was counterbalanced

B.

Figure 2. Trial structure for the conditions in which faces
were presented in a sequence (A) and in isolation (B). Part
A depicts an example unattractive first trial.
Participants rated each attractive photograph at two
critical points in the study: once in isolation and once in the
middle position of a series of three faces. We wanted to
know whether attractiveness ratings for each photograph
depended on this contextual manipulation, so we limited our
analyses to the 50 attractive faces each person saw, as well
as to ratings of the face presented only in the middle
position on group trials.
At the end of the study, participants supplied
information about their gender, race/ethnicity, and age. We
also included a manipulation check designed by
Oppenheimer, Meyvis, and Davidenko (2009) to ensure that
all participants in our sample read task instructions
carefully.

Results
All 51 participants in this study correctly answered the
instructions manipulation check, so data from all
participants were analyzed. One participant declined to
provide demographic information and therefore was not
included in analyses that examined effects of gender.
To confirm that our participants found the “attractive”
faces to be more attractive than the “unattractive faces,” we
compared participants’ raw attractiveness ratings between

1927

mean difference in standardized
attractiveness rating
(group - individual)

these two stimulus types. Indeed, participants rated the
attractive faces more favorably on a scale from 1-100 (M =
70.91; SD = 13.12) than they did the unattractive faces, M =
34.46; SD = 16.46; t(50) = 15.83, p < .001.
For each participant, responses on analyzed trials were
converted to z-scores. For each attractive face that a given
subject saw, we subtracted the standardized rating of that
face presented in isolation from the standardized rating of
that same image shown in a group. Therefore, positive
difference scores indicate that faces were rated as more
attractive when presented in a group compared to isolation,
and negative difference scores mean faces were rated as less
attractive when presented in a group compared to isolation.
Overall, participants rated celebrity faces as significantly
less attractive when they were presented in a series than
when they were presented in isolation (Mgroup-isolation = 0.098, SDgroup-isolation = 0.16 ), t(50) = -4.24, p < .051.

"#"'%
"%
!"#"'%
!"#&%
!"#&'%
!"#$%

unattractive unnatractive
first
last
Figure 3: Shift in standardized attractiveness ratings for
faces presented in a sequence from those same faces
presented in isolation. Error bars represent 1 SEM.
The differences in z-scores were submitted to an ANOVA
with one within-subjects factor (order of attractiveness:
unattractive first vs. unattractive last) and one betweensubjects factor (gender of participant: male vs. female). The
ANOVA revealed a significant main effect of order of
attractiveness on the attractiveness deficit for faces
presented in a group relative to isolation. Specifically, the
effect was stronger when participants saw an unattractive
face first in the sequence (M = -0.16, SD = 0.23) than it was
when participants saw an unattractive face last in the
sequence (M = -0.03, SD = 0.23), F(1, 48) = 9.78, p < .005
(see Figure 3). These effects were similar in men and
women: The attractiveness deficit did not depend on the
1
Due to an error in setting up the study, one trial was lost in the
unattractive last condition in one third of participants. Therefore,
only 24 trials instead of 25 went into data analysis for those
participants in that condition.

gender of the participant (F(1, 48) = 0.04, p > .50), and
there was also no interaction between gender and order of
attractiveness, F(1, 48) = 1.97, p > .05.
Post-hoc analyses revealed that seeing an unattractive
face at the beginning of the sequence caused the middle face
to appear less attractive than it did in isolation (Mgroup-isolation
= -0.16, SDgroup-isolation = 0.23), t(50) = -5.07, p < .001. While
the presence of an unattractive face at the end of a sequence
produced a numerical reduction in attractiveness of the
middle face relative to isolation, this shift did not reach
statistical significance (Mgroup-isolation = -0.03, SDgroup-isolation =
0.23), t(50) = -1.03, p > .05.

Discussion
The purpose of this study was to determine whether and
how people integrate information from faces over time
when judging the attractiveness of others. In our
experiment, participants viewed a series of attractive and
unattractive female celebrity faces in isolation and in a
series of three images. They were then asked to rate the
attractiveness of each face (cued only by their name) on a
sliding scale from very unattractive to very attractive. The
results indicate that people do integrate information over
time when judging the attractiveness of faces. Contrary to
the “cheerleader effect,” which suggests that faces are
perceived as more attractive when they are presented in a
group, the results from this experiment suggest that faces
are perceived as less attractive when presented in a series
than when they are presented in isolation. The results further
show that this effect is stronger when an unattractive face is
presented first in the series compared to when it is presented
last.
There are a number of reasons why attractiveness ratings
might be different for faces presented in a series compared
to isolation. For example, seeing faces in a sequence may
lead to a contrast effect, where seeing an attractive face
causes a subsequent face to appear less attractive (and vice
versa). Or there could be an anchoring effect where people
rate subsequent faces to be similarly attractive to the initial
face. Finally, there could be an averaging effect where all
faces in the sequence contribute to an ensemble code that
figures into attractiveness judgments for each face in the
sequence. The results from the present study help to rule out
one of these three possibilities: the contrast effect. Had our
manipulation produced a contrast effect, then seeing an
unattractive face first would have caused the middle face in
the series to seem more attractive. Instead, our results
showed the opposite pattern: viewing an unattractive face
made the subsequent face appear to be less attractive than
when it was viewed in isolation.
The data are partially consistent with an anchoring effect.
An attractive anchor face should cause subsequent faces to
seem more attractive than usual, and an unattractive anchor
should cause subsequent faces to seem less attractive than
usual. Indeed, unattractive faces at the beginning of the
sequence caused subsequent faces to appear less attractive
than usual, but the opposite pattern did not obtain for

1928

attractive faces presented early in the sequence. Therefore
these data are only partly in line with the findings of Taubert
et al. (2016).
Pegors and colleagues (2015) concluded from their study
examining sequential attractiveness judgments that contrast
effects result from stimulus (perceptual) bias, whereas
anchoring effects result from response bias. The present
findings are not consistent with this explanation as the study
design itself rules out response bias as a possible
contributor. On trials in which faces were presented in a
group, participants saw all three faces before responding to
any one of them. They then entered their responses in a
different order than the one in which the faces were
presented. We analyzed the data based on the stimulus
order and not the response order, so the partial anchoring
effect should not necessarily be interpreted as a result of
response bias. Furthermore, the lack of a contrast effect is a
departure from the findings of Pegors and colleagues,
suggesting there may be a qualitative processing difference
between online and offline judgments of serially presented
faces that persists well beyond the presentation of the face.
The findings presented in this paper are perhaps most
consistent with an averaging effect. By including an
unattractive face in the sequence of three, we may have
reduced the attractiveness of the ensemble code participants
extracted from the series, which then biased subsequent
ratings of individual faces in the sequence. Furthermore, it
appears that the serial position of the unattractive face
influenced how the average representation was constructed.
Contrary to the findings of Weiss and Anderson (1969), our
results revealed a primacy effect on perceptual averaging.
Namely, unattractive faces presented at the beginning of the
series figured more heavily into the average than did
unattractive faces presented at the end of the series.
However, because averaging faces together generally
increases perceived attractiveness, this account depends on
the possibility that averaging only a small number of faces
together (three), one of which is especially unattractive, can
sometimes reduce rating attractiveness (perhaps, for
example, when the faces are of familiar people, as in the
present study). Indeed, morphs containing familiar
(celebrity) faces are rated as less attractive than are the
component faces used to generate the morph (Halberstadt,
Pecher, Zeelenberg, Ip Wai, & Winkielman, 2013).
Therefore, using celebrity face may itself have lowered the
attractiveness of the average face people constructed over
time in the present study. Future work is required to confirm
this possibility, however.
In order to preserve the design element in this study that
no participant saw both the attractive and unattractive
versions of the same celebrity, we did not include trials in
which all faces in a sequence were attractive, nor did we
include trials in which all faces were unattractive. Future
work will examine these trial types so as to build a more
complete picture of the way in which attractiveness in faces
is integrated over time.

One ongoing study attempts to further differentiate
between an anchoring and averaging account of our findings
by replicating the present study with unattractive faces in
the target (middle) position on group trials. If our findings
reflect a cheerleader effect, then the results from this new
study should mirror the results in the present study.
Specifically, the middle face in the sequence would be rated
as less attractive than a face presented in isolation, but this
effect would only appear in the unattractive first condition.
However, if our current findings reflect an anchoring effect,
we should predict that the unattractive last condition in this
ongoing study would produce the strongest anchoring effect
– the condition in which an attractive face appears in the
first position of the sequence. After all, this is the condition
where the difference in attractiveness is largest between the
first and middle faces. Therefore, an anchoring effect in this
new version of the task predicts that the middle face would
be rated as more attractive in a series than it is in isolation.
Our judgments about the attractiveness of others factor
into a variety of important decisions we make every day.
For example, whether a candidate would make a good fit for
a job (Dipboye, Fromkin, & Wilback, 1975), or whether to
ask a person out on a date can be influenced by how we
perceive the attractiveness of that individual. This study
highlights one way in which such important decisions might
be influenced by the faces that happen to surround us in the
moments leading up to them.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by undergraduate research
support awards from the School of Natural and Social
Sciences at SUNY Purchase to SN and JA.

References
Albrecht, A. R., & Scholl, B. J. (2010). Perceptually
averaging in a continuous visual world: Extracting
statistical
summary
representations
over
time.
Psychological Science, 21(4), 560-567.
Dipboye, R. L., Fromkin, H. L., & Wilback, K. (1975).
Relative importance of applicant sex, attractiveness, and
scholastic in evaluation of job applicant resumes. Journal
of
Applied
Psychology,
60(1),
39-43.
doi:10.1037/h0076352
Halberstadt, J., Pecher, D., Zeelenberg, R., Ip Wai, L., &
Winkielman, P. (2013). Two faces of attractiveness:
Making beauty in averageness appear and reverse.
Psychological Science, 24(11), 2342-2346.
Kenrick, D. T., Gutierres, S. E. (1980). Contrast effects and
judgments of physical attractiveness: When beauty
becomes a social problem. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 38(1), 131-140.
Langlois, J. H., Musselman, L., Roggman, L. A. (1994).
What is average and what is not average about attractive
faces? Psychological Science,5(4), 214-220.
Morgan, L. K., & Kisley, M. A. (2014). The effects of facial
attractiveness and perceiver's mate value on adaptive

1929

allocation of central processing resources. Evolution and
Human
Behavior,
35(2),
96-102.
doi:10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2013.11.002
Oppenheimer, D. M., Meyvis, T., & Davidenko, N. (2009).
Instructional manipulation check: Detecting satisficing to
increase statistical power. Journal of Experiment Social
Psychology, 45, 867-872. doi:10.1016/j.jesp.2009.03.009
Pegors, T., Mattar, M., Bryan, P., & Epstein, R. (2015).
Simultaneous perceptual and response biases on
sequential attractiveness judgments.
Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 114(3), 664-673.
doi:doi:10.1037/xge0000069
Perrett, D. I., Burt, D. M., Penton-Voak, I., Lee, K. J.,
Rowland, D. A., & Edwards, R. (1999). Symmetry and
human facial attractiveness. Evolution and Human
Behavior,
20,
295-307.
doi:10.1016/S10905138(99)00014-8
Rashidi, M., Pazhoohi, F., & Hosseinchari, M. (2012).
Effect of facial stimuli exposure time on evaluation of
facial attractiveness. Australian Journal of Psychology,
64(3), 164-168. doi:10.1111/j.1742-9536.2011.00050.x
Taubert, J., Van Der Burg, E., Alais, D. (2016). Love at
second sight: Sequential dependence of facial
attractiveness in an online dating paradigm. Scientific
Reports, 6, 22740. doi:10.1038/srep22740
Tversky, A., Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgement under
uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science, 185(4157),
1124-1131.
Valenzano, D. R., Mennucci, A., Tartarelli, G., & Cellerino,
A. (2006). Shape analysis of female facial attractiveness.
Vision
Research,
46(8-9),
1282-1291.
doi:10.1016/j.visres.2005.10.024
Walker, D., & Vul, E. (2013). Hierarchical encoding makes
individuals in a group seem more attractive.
Psychological
Science,
25(1),
230-235.
doi:10.1177/0956797613497969
Weiss, D. J., & Anderson, N. H. (1969). Subjective
averaging of length with serial presentation. Journal of
Experimental
Psychology,
82(1),
52-63.
doi:10.1037/h0028028
	  	  

1930

