        The Cognitive Architecture of Recursion: Behavioral and fMRI Evidence from
                                      the Visual, Musical and Motor Domains
                                Mauricio de Jesus Dias Martins (diasmarm@hu-berlin.de)
                        Berlin School of Mind and Brain, Humboldt Universität zu Berlin, Luisenstrasse 56
                                                       10117 Berlin, Germany
                         Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Stephanstrasse 1a
                                                      04103 Leipzig, Germany
                            Abstract                                  can be no multiple levels of embedding. The same standard
                                                                      has been proposed for the visual-spatial domain (Martins,
 In this manuscript, we summarize the results of our research
 program aiming at describing the cognitive architecture
                                                                      2012).
 underlying the representation of recursive hierarchical                 Complex hierarchical structures occur in language, music
 embedding. After conducting a series of behavioral and fMRI          and action planning (Fitch & Martins, 2014). In these
 experiments in the visual, musical and motor domains, we             domains, it is difficult to establish the empirical boundaries of
 found that, behaviorally, the acquisition of recursive rules         the generative capacity. This is especially true when external
 seems supported by cognitive resources that are general              memory and recording devices are available, as for example,
 across domains. However, when we test well-trained                   in written language or in large scale engineering projects, such
 participants in the fMRI, their representation of recursion          as those involved in building a particle accelerator.
 seems supported by activating schemas stored in (visual,             Independently of how complex a base structure is, it is always
 musical and motor) domain-specific repositories. This
 suggests that the resources necessary to acquire recursive           possible to embed it within a higher-order hierarchy.
 rules are different from those necessary to utilize these               The investigation of these properties of human cognition
 rules after extensive training.                                      pose several challenges, which we tried to address in a
                                                                      systematic 6-year long research program. The first challenge
 Keywords: recursion; hierarchy; embedding; visual; motor;
                                                                      was the definition of a clear theoretical framework to make
 music
                                                                      recursion empirically tractable and consistent with a number
                                                                      of different domains (Martins, 2012; Martins & Fitch, 2014).
   Recursion is a fascinating concept that has inspired
                                                                      Crucially, the availability of recursion must be tested
researchers from many disciplines because of its associations
                                                                      experimentally and neither simply assumed nor deduced from
with language, music and mathematics, which are uniquely
                                                                      pure analytical methods (Martins & Fitch, 2015). The crucial
available to the cognitive repertoire of humans (Hauser,
                                                                      behavioral signature of a computational capacity of recursion
Chomsky, & Fitch, 2002).
                                                                      is the ability to generate muliple new hierarchical levels
   The definition of recursion is much discussed, and the term
                                                                      (Martins, 2014; Berwick & Chomsky, 2016). This relation is
is currently used with many different possible meanings
                                                                      independent of particular algorithmic and biological
(Fitch, 2010). In the original mathematical terminology,
                                                                      implementations (Berwick & Chomsky, 2016).
recursive functions are those that take their own output as
                                                                         Thus, the second challenge was the development of
input for the next iteration, such as the function generating the
                                                                      experimental techniques that could be used to test the ability
natural numbers:
                                                                      to represent recursive hierarchical embedding in different
   N0 = 1
                                                                      domains. Once these two challenges were met, we could start
   Ni = Ni-1 + 1, for i > 0
                                                                      answering two central questions: (1) in which domains of
   One of the properties of these functions is the capacity to
                                                                      cognition recursion is available, and (2) if recursion were
generate an infinite set of outputs.
                                                                      available in more than one domain, would it be instantiated by
   Empirically, this property of infinity is impossible to verify
                                                                      a domain-general capacity, or by multiple domain- specific
(Lobina, 2011). However, there are other properties of
                                                                      abilities?
recursion that make it interesting for empirical cognitive
sciences. For instance, when we combine recursion with
                                                                                   Recursion in the visuo-spatial domain
hierarchical embedding, we can generate complex hierarchies
using simple rules (Martins, 2012). In fact, recursion has been
                                                                         In our previous work, we were able to establish that in
discussed as a necessary condition to generate hierarchical
                                                                      addition to language (Roeper, 2011), the ability to represent
structures of unbounded depth, and the most efficient
                                                                      recursive hierarchical embedding is available in the visual
procedure to generate multiple hierarchical levels (Berwick &
                                                                      domain (Martins, Martins, & Fitch, 2015) (Figure 1). We have
Chomsky, 2016). For instance, in language, even though the
                                                                      shown that both human adults and children (Martins, Martins,
use of recursive computations cannot be directly verified, it is
                                                                      & Fitch, 2015; Martins, Laaha, Freiberger, Choi, & Fitch,
inferred from the ability to generate hierarchical structures, as
                                                                      2014) are able spontaneously acquire a hierarchical self-
it is thought to be the only plausible mechanism to generate
                                                                      similarity rule of the kind A  A [A] and to use it to make
sets of sets (Berwick & Chomsky, 2016), without which there
                                                                      judgments about well-formed visual fractals and violations
                                                                 1920

(Figure 2A). Crucially, this ability differed cognitively from a         As in language (Roeper, 2011), the development path
control, iteration task (Martins, Martins, & Fitch, 2015), in         towards the acquisition of visual recursion requires the
which participants made judgments about similar fractals              induction of simpler iterative (conjunctive) representations
which were not generated via a hierarchical embedding rule            first, before recursive embedding becomes available (Martins,
(Figure 2B). In particular, while visual iteration correlated         Laaha, Freiberger, Choi, & Fitch, 2014). However, we also
strongly with visuo-spatial working memory and non-verbal             found that the representation of visual recursion is
intelligence, recursion correlated weakly with these measures,        independent of verbal resources (Martins, Mursic, Oh, &
correlating instead with performance in the Tower of Hanoi, a         Fitch, 2015) and that it is not instantiated by the classical brain
recursive planning task (Martins, Martins, & Fitch, 2015).            networks supporting language (Martins, Fischmeister, et al.,
                                                                      2014). Using fMRI, we found that the capacity to represent
                                                                      recursion in the visual domain is supported by the visual
                                                                      ventral stream and by structures (e.g. Medial Temporal Lobe)
                                                                      associated with the episodic memory system (Figure 3).
                                                                      Interestingly, we found that in comparison with non-recursive
                                                                      iterative procedures, recursion hinges mostly on top-down,
                                                                      internal representations (Fischmeister, Martins, Beisteiner, &
                                                                      Fitch, 2016), associated with the Default Mode Network and
                                                                      Semantic Memory. These findings provide some cues
                                                                      concerning the basic mechanisms underlying recursive
                                                                      hierarchical embedding and its usefulness for human
                                                                      cognition: by providing strong top-down priors, recursion can
                                                                      facilitate the processing of complex hierarchical structures.
    Figure 1: Examples of both ‘recursive’ and ‘iterative’
   processes generating a visual fractal. While recursive
  hierarchical embedding steps generate new hierarchical
     levels, embedded iteration adds elements to fixed
        hierarchical levels, without generating new.
                                                                         Figure 3: Brain networks supporting the representations
                                                                     of Recursion>Iteration (red) and Iteration>Recursion (blue)
                                                                       in the visiuo-spatial domain (thresholded at a voxel-wise
                                                                       FDR-adjusted p < .05 with a 10-voxel extent threshold).
                                                                                 Recursion in the music and motor domains
                                                                         Recently, we have extended this research to the musical and
                                                                      motor domains, where the availability of recursion has been
                                                                      previously suggested (Corballis, 2014; Jackendoff & Lerdahl,
                                                                      2006). We found that both musicians and non-musicians can
                                                                      acquire rules governing recursive embedding in tonal
 Figure 2: In both tasks participants are exposed to the first        hierarchies (Figure 4A) (Martins, Gingras, Puig-Waldmueller,
three steps generating a fractal (top row) and asked which            & Fitch, 2017), and that this capacity shares resources with
  image from the bottom row is the correct continuation.              visual recursion and with recursive action planning (Tower of
   Despite using the same pairs of test images, the visual            Hanoi). This suggests some degree of domain-generality.
   recursion and iteration tasks correlated with different            However, when we measured the brain activity underlying this
          abilities (Martins, Martins, & Fitch, 2015).
                                                                1921

musical capacity in well-trained participants (using fMRI), we
found little overlap between the musical and visual domains.
   Here, we exposed 15 non-musicians to the first three steps
forming a tonal fractal, either using recursive or iterative rules
(Figure 4B and 4C), then gave them 4 seconds to try to
imagine how the correct continuation (4th step) would sound
like. This 4-second period was the ‘generation phase’. After
the 4 seconds, they were exposed to a test stimulus (‘test
phase’) and asked to judge whether this was a correct
continuation or a foil. Overall, participants performed 4
sessions of 18 trials each (6 trials of Fractal, 6 of Iteration and
6 of Repetition)
                                                                            Figure 5: Brain network supporting the representation of
                                                                        recursive hierarchical embedding in tonal sequences during
                                                                         the “generation phase” (FWE-adjusted pcluster < .05, pvoxel <
                                                                         .001). The Repetition task was a working memory task, in
                                                                         which participants simply had to buffer step 3 (a complete
                                                                        and well-formed fractal) and then determine whether step 4
                                                                               was a repetition of step 3. The opposite contrasts
                                                                        (Iteration>Recursion and Repetition>Recursion) yielded no
                                                                                                    activations.
                                                                             Finally, we tested participants in the motor domain (Figure
                                                                          6). Here we asked 20 (non-musician) participants to execute
                                                                          motor sequences on a 16-keys keyboard as depicted on a
                                                                          computer screen. Similar to the music domain, we exposed
                                                                          participants to the first two steps of a process generating
                                                                          motor fractals, then asked them to plan the next correct step
                                                                          (the “planning phase”) for 6 seconds. After the planning phase
                                                                          they were asked to execute the correct sequence on the
                                                                          keyboard without visual assistance (‘execution phase’).
      Figure 4: (A) Example of music fractal with tonal                   Iteration and Repetition baseline tasks were devised, similar to
 relations between levels, which were identical across all                the music domain. Each participant performed 4 sessions of
levels. (B) Cross-level fractal (recursive) rule, (C) Within-             20 trials each (8 Fractal, 8 Iteration and 4 Repetition trials).
                     level (iterative) rule.
   By contrasting Recursion>Iteration in the “generation
phase” (while controlling for the activations in steps I, II and
III) we found that recursive hierarchical embedding in music
is supported by the primary and secondary Auditory Cortices
in the left hemisphere and by the right Superior Temporal
Gyrus, an area known to encode complex tonal relations
(Figure 5) (Martins, Fischmeister, et al., in prep.).
Interestingly, despite differences in the specific pattern of
activation, we found again evidence that the representation of
recursive embedding is supported by top-down processing:
These activations occur in anticipation to a certain tonal
sequence before it is played (“generation phase”), but only
when the sequence was generated recursively (vs. iteratively).
There were no task differences in the “test phase”, only a main
effect of correctness (i.e. violation>well-formed structures).
                                                                   1922

                                                                      Figure 6: Brain network supporting the representation of
                                                                      recursive hierarchical embedding in the motor domain
                                                                             (FWE-adjusted pcluster < .05, pvoxel < .001).
   Figure 6: A) Example of a recursive process generating                                        Discussion
                                                                       Taken together, these results suggest several things: (1) The
 sequences of (silent) finger movements. Red, Green and
                                                                    acquisition of recursive rules is probably supported by
Blue denote key presses with the thumb, index and middle
                                                                    cognitive resources that are general across domains; (2)
  fingers, respectively. On each step N, each key press is
                                                                    However, when we test participants that are well-trained and
 substituted by a sequence of 3 key presses with less than
                                                                    at ceiling performance in the fMRI, their representation of
  one third of the duration dn. B) Example of an Iterative          recursion is instantiated by domain-specific neural systems;
         process generating the same motor fractal.                 (3) In contrast with other (iterative) rules applied to
                                                                    hierarchies, recursion seems to allow a controlled top-down
                                                                    processing, in both discrimination (visual and tonal) and
   We found that during the planning of hierarchical motor          production (motor) of well-formed hierarchical structures.
sequences using recursive rules, participants activated a           This result is consistent across several domains.
network known to instantiate motor planning and imagining,             The apparent contradiction between points (1) and (2) can
comprising the Somato-Motor and Premotor cortices                   be solved if we surmise that the resources necessary to acquire
bilaterally, Cerebellum and Basal Ganglia (Figure 7) (Martins,      recursive rules are different from those necessary to utilize
Bianco, Sammler, & Villringer, in prep.). Furthermore, we           these rules after extensive training. We hypothesize that
found       that     the     underlying    generating      rule     acquisition requires domain-general resources, which are
(Recursive>Iterative) changed how the execution of identical        perhaps slow and effortful, while expert use is instantiated by
motor sequences were neurally represented: During the               activating schemas stored in domain-specific repositories,
execution of a sequence formed using iterative rules, we found      which are formed after a process of automatization. The
a strong activation in the primary motor hand area (x = -52, y      answer to this question requires novel research investigating
= -18, z = 50, Z = 6.06, FWE pcluster < .05, pvoxel < .001). In     the neural networks supporting the acquisition of recursive
contrast, when the sequence was formed recursively, we did          rules.
not find a direct activation in the motor cortex, but a
modulation of this area from a fronto-striatal cluster (PPI:
Recursion>Iteration: x = -36, y = -24, z = 48, cluster extent =
182 voxels, Z = 3.96, pvoxel = .016).
                                                                                       Acknowledgments
                                                                   I am grateful to my many collaborators, especially Arno
                                                                   Villringer, Roberta Bianco, Daniela Sammler, Florian
                                                                   Fischmeister, Roland Beisteiner, Bruno Gingras, Isabel
                                                                   Pavão Martins and W. Tecumseh Fitch.
                                                               1923

                        References                                 Martins, M.D., Martins, I.P., & Fitch, W.T. (2015). A novel
                                                                    approach to investigate recursion and iteration in visual
Berwick, Robert C. & Noam Chomsky. (2016). Why Only
                                                                    hierarchical processing. Behavioral Research Methods.
  Us: Language and Evolution. Cambridge, MA: MIT
                                                                   Martins, M.D., Mursic, Z., Oh, J., & Fitch, W.T. (2015).
  Press.
                                                                    Representing visual recursion does not require verbal or
Corballis, Michael C. (2014). The recursive mind: The
                                                                    motor resources. Cognitive Psychology, 77, 20-41.
  origins of human language, thought, and civilization:
                                                                   Roeper, T. (2011). The Acquisition of Recursion: How
  Princeton University Press.
                                                                    Formalism Articulates the Child’s Path. Biolinguistics,
Fischmeister, F.P., Martins, M.D., Beisteiner, R., & Fitch,
                                                                    5(1-2), 57-86.
  W.T. (2016). Self-similarity and recursion as default
  modes in human cognition. Cortex.
Fitch, W.T. (2010). Three meanings of "recursion": key
  distinctions for biolinguistics. In Richard K Larson,
  Viviane M Déprez, & Hiroko Yamakido (Eds.), The
  evolution of human language (pp. 73-90). New York:
  Cambridge University Press.
Fitch, W.T., & Martins, M.D. (2014). Hierarchical
  processing in music, language, and action: Lashley
  revisited. Ann N Y Acad Sci, 1316, 87-104.
Hauser, M.D., Chomsky, N., & Fitch, W.T. (2002). The
  Faculty of Language: What Is It, Who Has It, and How
  Did It Evolve? Science, 298, 1569-1579.
Jackendoff, R., & Lerdahl, F. (2006). The capacity for
  music: what is it, and what's special about it? Cognition,
  100(1), 33-72.
Lobina,      D.J.     (2011).     Recursion        and     the
  competence/performance distinction in AGL tasks.
  Language and Cognitive Processes, 26(10), 1563-1586.
Martins, M.D. (2012). Distinctive signatures of recursion.
  Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B:
  Biological Sciences, 367(1598), 2055-2064.
Martins, M.D., Bianco, R., Sammler, D., & Villringer, A.
  (in prep.). Fractals in Action: the Brain on Motor
  Hierarchies.
Martins, M.D., Fischmeister, F.P., Gingras, B., Puig-
  Waldmueller, E., Beisteiner, R., & Fitch, W.T. (in prep.).
  Fractal music elucidates the neural representation of tonal
  hierarchies.
Martins, M.D., Fischmeister, F.P., Puig-Waldmuller, E., Oh,
  J., Geissler, A., Robinson, S., . . . Beisteiner, R. (2014).
  Fractal image perception provides novel insights into
  hierarchical cognition. Neuroimage, 96, 300-308.
Martins, M.D., & Fitch, W.T. (2014). Investigating
  recursion within a domain-specific framework Language
  and Recursion (pp. 15-26): Springer.
Martins, M.D., & Fitch, W.T. (2015). Do we represent
  intentional action as recursively embedded? The answer
  must be empirical. A comment on Vicari and Adenzato
  (2014). Consciousness and Cognition, 38, 16-21.
Martins, M.D., Gingras, B., Puig-Waldmueller, E., & Fitch,
  W. T. (2017). Cognitive representation of "musical
  fractals": Processing hierarchy and recursion in the
  auditory domain. Cognition, 161, 31-45.
Martins, M.D., Laaha, S., Freiberger, E.M., Choi, S., &
  Fitch, W.T. (2014). How children perceive fractals:
  hierarchical self-similarity and cognitive development.
  Cognition, 133(1), 10-24.
                                                               1924

