The Role of Causality in Temporal Binding: Evidence for an Intentional Boost
Daniel A. Shiloh, Peter A. White & Marc J. Buehner ([ShilohDA], [WhitePA],
[BuehnerM]@Cardiff.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, Cardiff University, Tower Building, 70 Park Place
Cardiff, CF10 3AT, UK
Abstract
Temporal binding refers to the subjective contraction in time
between an action and its consequence. Since it was reported
in 2002 the effect has generated much interest, although a
consensus regarding the mechanisms behind it remains
elusive. While multiple theoretical accounts have been
proposed, a key point of contention remains whether the
effect is the result of the perception of intentionality or
causality. We deployed a new apparatus to compare
intentional to mechanical causation. Thirty participants
reported the interval between two events in self-causal,
mechanical-causal and non-causal conditions. The results of a
Bayesian analysis pointed to smaller temporal estimates in the
self-causal condition compared with the mechanical-causal
condition, in addition to smaller estimates in the mechanicalcausal condition compared with the non-causal condition. The
evidence presented here suggests that causality alone may be
sufficient for temporal binding to occur, but that this effect is
boosted by the presence of intentional action.

Introduction
Temporal binding refers to the mutual attraction (in
subjective time) between a causal action and its
consequence, relative to two unrelated events. In a seminal
paper Haggard et al (2002) found evidence for delayed
awareness of the time of action and early awareness of the
time of its consequence. Subsequent research has replicated
this effect with a variety of paradigms, including interval
estimation (Humphreys & Buehner, 2009), stimulus
anticipation (Buehner & Humphreys, 2009) and the method
of constant stimuli (Nolden, Haering & Kiesel, 2012). The
use of various interval estimation methods has demonstrated
that, in addition to shifts in the perceived time of events,
intentional binding also manifests as a shortening of the
overall perceived interval between an action and its
consequence.
Haggard et al. (2002) originally referred to the effect as
intentional binding and proposed that it reflects “a general
linkage through time between representation of action and
effect” (p. 384), and that the subjective shortening of the
interval between them may contribute to our sense of
agency and motor learning through forward models. While
multiple accounts of the mechanisms behind temporal
binding have been proposed since then (Buehner, 2015;
Moore & Obhi, 2012; Eagleman & Holcombe, 2002), the
role of intentionality has been central to much of the work
on the subject. More recently, studies have increasingly
made use of temporal binding as an implicit measure of
sense of agency, for example in studies of mindfulness (Jo,

Whittmann, Hinterberger & Schmidt, 2015; Lush, Parkinson
& Dienes, 2016) narcissism (Hascalovitz & Obhi, 2015) and
Schizophrenia (Voss et al, 2010).
The focus on intentionality in the literature
notwithstanding, Buehner and Humphreys (2009) have
argued that temporal binding is instead driven by awareness
of causality, and should be termed “causal binding”:
Temporal binding reflects a bi-directional interpretation of
David Hume’s (1739/1888) assertion that temporally
contiguous events are more likely to be perceived as
causally related. Specifically, because human time
perception is inherently noisy and uncertain, it is subject to
top-down modulation. From a Bayesian perspective it thus
follows that if contiguous event pairs are likely to be
causally related, then event pairings that are known to be
causally linked are also likely to have occurred
contiguously. Time and causality thus mutually constrain
each other in subjective experience.
While there is a general consensus that a causal
relationship is necessary for temporal binding to occur,
there is less agreement on whether causality on its own is
also sufficient (Moore & Obhi, 2012). However, Buehner
(2015) reported mutual attraction in subjective time between
voluntary actions and their outcomes (i.e. the typical
binding effect) as well as between involuntary, induced,
causal actions and their outcomes. Furthermore, Buehner
(2012) also demonstrated temporal binding between a nonbiological mechanical action (a robot arm pressing a key)
and its outcome (an LED flash). While both studies revealed
evidence for temporal binding in the presence of causality
alone (thus demonstrating its sufficiency to result in
binding), they also found a more pronounced effect when
the cause was an intentional action. Thus, while causal
binding appears to be rooted in causality, it seems to be
subject to an intentional boost.
A limiting factor in this earlier research is that it always
deployed key-presses as intentional causal actions, meaning
that participants had access to precise proprioceptive
feedback about the successful completion of the causal
action, as well as the precise time of the start of the causal
interval (i.e. the moment the key was depressed). In
contrast, this type of feedback was not available in control
conditions. We set out to maximize the perceptual similarity
between experimental conditions. Specifically, we replaced
key-presses with a continuous upwards movement made by
the participant, and created a mechanical causal as well as a
control condition that matched the perceptual experience. In
all three conditions, participants were able to rely purely on

3137

visual information to determine the onset of a two-event
sequence, and we eliminated any tactile or auditory
feedback.
Participants took part in three conditions: self-causal,
mechanical-causal and non-causal control. On each trial,
participants had to reproduce the interval between two
sequential events (which were causally linked in the two
causal conditions). Both the self-causal and mechanicalcausal conditions made use of a laser pointed at a light
sensor. Upon detecting the laser beam (event 1) the light
sensor responded by switching on a red LED after a
randomized delay (event 2). In the self-causal condition
participants allowed the laser to reach the light sensor
manually by moving a wooden paddle out of its way,
whereas in the mechanical-causal condition this was done
mechanically, without input from the participant. In the noncausal control condition the laser was replaced with a small
red LED which was positioned where the laser beam could
be seen in the other two conditions. In this condition, the
two event sequence consisted of deactivating of the small
LED (simulating the perceptual experience of the laser
hitting the light sensor), followed by the switching on of the
red LED as in the other two conditions. This sequence was
controlled by a computer.
According to the intentional binding account, temporal
estimates for the two –event sequences should be smaller in
the self-causal condition than in the other two (self-causal <
mechanical-causal = non-causal control); according to the
causal binding account, temporal estimates should be larger
in the non-causal control condition than in the self-causal
and
mechanical-causal
conditions
(self-causal
=
mechanical-causal < non-causal control). Finally, if
temporal binding is rooted in causality, but subject to an
intentional boost temporal estimates should be lowest in the
self-causal condition, followed by the mechanical-causal
condition, with both being shorter than the non-causal
control condition (self-causal < mechanical-causal < noncausal control).

Methods
Participants
Thirty Cardiff University students and staff (2 male, age
range 18-33) participated in exchange for a payment of £3
or course credits. Participants were recruited through
Cardiff University’s electronic Experiment Management
System and electronic noticeboard. Participants were asked
to report (in writing) whether they felt they knew the
purpose of the experiment prior to debriefing. Of the thirty,
only three responded ‘yes’, and none correctly understood
the purpose of the experiment.

Apparatus
A schematic diagram of the apparatus can be seen in Figure
1. The apparatus was situated on top of a desk and placed on
a platform at a height of 9.8cm, with a gap 18.8cm in length.
The light sensor was positioned opposite the laser module,

both at a height of 14.5cm. Between the laser and light
sensor a wheel (21.5cm diameter) was placed with a round
1cm diameter hole positioned in the location through which
the laser beam passed. The wheel was attached to a motor
which allowed it to spin clockwise at a speed of
approximately one revolution per four seconds.

Figure 1: a schematic diagram of the apparatus. 1 = light
sensor (containing a Raspberry Pi computer) connected to a
red LED bulb; 2 = wheel with 1cm diameter perforation; 3 =
laser module; 4 = a box housing a geared motor able to spin
the wheel clockwise.
The light sensor module consisted of a 7x7x10cm box
housing a raspberry pi computer, with a 10mm LED bulb
mounted at its top and the light sensor on its front (facing
the laser module). A separate, portable, 5mm red LED bulb
was also connected to the computer, but only visible to
participants during the non-causal condition (see design and
procedure). For the self-causal condition (see design and
procedure), a rectangular wooden paddle (6cm in width and
14cm in height, with handle at its centre) with a 1cm
diameter hole was used in place of the wheel.
Participants were placed at a chin rest behind the laser
module. Participant responses were recorded using a
computer mouse on a separate computer. Finally, a debrief
questionnaire was used to measure perceived causality using
a 9-point Likert Scale (see appendix 1). For each condition,
participants were presented with the question “in the
condition where [condition description] did it seem like
[first event] was causing [second event] (1 = definitely yes,
5 = not sure, 9 = definitely no)?” These scores were inverted
for analysis.

Design and Procedure
After completing a consent form, participants were given
safety instructions and were allowed to adjust the height of
their seat. Instructions were presented verbally at the
beginning of the experiment and before each trial.
Throughout the experiment participants kept their head in
the chin rest, ensuring that the light sensor, wheel and laser
beam were visible. Participants were instructed to fixate
their gaze on the laser point during the self-causal and
mechanical-causal conditions, and on the 5mm diameter
LED bulb during the non-causal control condition.
Participants worked through the three conditions, with
order of conditions counterbalanced between participants.
Each condition consisted of 40 trials, during which

3138

participants observed a critical two-event sequence lasting
for an interval between 200 – 400ms (randomized, described
below) and were asked to reproduce this interval by holding
down the left mouse key for their perceived duration. Prior
to each experimental block, participants worked through as
many practice trials as they needed (minimum: three,
regardless of performance) to understand the task. Task
comprehension was assessed by the experimenter by
observing the participants performing the task to ensure that
participants were performing the correct movement (if any)
and reporting time intervals after each trial. Probing
questions were used to ensure that participants were
reporting the correct time intervals and that they did not
have any further questions.
The conditions were as follows (see Figure 2 for a
photographs of each experimental condition):
Self-causal: Participants performed an intentional action
that generated a causal consequence after a short delay. The
wheel was placed with the hole aligned to the laser beam
and light sensor and remained stationary throughout (i.e. the
laser beam could pass through to the light sensor, when
allowed through by the participant. The light sensor
responded to the laser beam by switching on the 10mm red
LED at the top of the housing after a randomised delay of
200-400ms, and switching off after a randomised interval of
200-400ms, if the beam was no longer received. All
randomised delays used in the experiment were drawn from
a uniform distribution. Participants were told that the sensor
responds to the beam after a delay, and this was
demonstrated by the experimenter prior to the practice trials
by using hand movements to either block the laser or allow
it through. Participants were not told any additional
information about these delays. Participants were instructed
to place the paddle at the bottom of the apparatus, with the
hole beneath the laser beam, such that the paddle blocked
the beam. Participants were instructed to keep the paddle
positioned adjacent to the wheel and move it upwards in
front of the laser beam in each trial, such that the laser
would pass through the hole. This was done to keep this
condition as perceptually similar as possible to the
mechanical-causal condition (see below). Participants were
instructed to reproduce the time interval between the laser
beam reaching the light sensor and the LED lighting up
before placing the paddle back for the next trial.
Mechanical-causal: The wheel rotated continuously at a
speed of approximately 4 seconds per revolution and
blocked the laser beam from reaching the sensor, except
when the hole came in line with it (once every 4 seconds).
The light sensor was switched on and functioned in the
same way as in the self-causal condition. This was
demonstrated prior to the practice trials; the experimenter
demonstrated that when the laser beam was blocked the
light sensor did not respond at all, regardless of the position
of the wheel, and that the light sensor always responded
after the laser passed through the hole in the wheel.
Participants were instructed to reproduce the interval
between the laser reaching the sensor and the LED lighting

up as in the self-causal condition. Note that in both the selfcausal and mechanical-causal conditions, the critical causal
event 1 (the laser reaching the light sensor) coincided with
the perceptual experience of the laser spot (temporarily)
being no longer visible against the paddle or wheel.
Non-causal control: Participants reproduced the interval
between two sequential LED flashes. The wheel was
positioned in the same way as in the self-causal condition.
The laser module was switched off, and the 5mm LED was
placed in the hole in the wheel. At the beginning of each
trial, the 5mm LED switched on for one second before
switching off, followed by the 10mm LED at the top of the
housing switching on for 200-400ms. Following this,
participants were asked to reproduce the time interval
between the 5mm LED switching off and the 10mm LED
switching on. Participants were not told any information
about the causal relationship between the two lights, but
only that they turned on and off in a regular sequence. In
order that the switching off of the first light would be
equally predictable as the laser passing through the wheel in
the mechanical-causal condition participants were informed
that the first light will switch off after exactly one second on
each trial. This sequence repeated automatically for the
duration of the condition, with an overall trial length
matching the duration of a single wheel revolution.
Participants were instructed to fixate their gaze on the 5mm
LED bulb throughout.
At the end of the experiment participants were asked to
fill in the debrief questionnaire, where they were asked to
report whether they believed the first event in the interval
they were judging caused the second event to occur, per
condition. These causal ratings were taken as a manipulation
check, to ensure participants correctly perceived the causal
structure of the self-causal and mechanical-causal
conditions (the laser beam causing the light sensor to
respond) and the non-causal control condition (both lights
shared a common cause). Following this participants were
debriefed as to the purpose of this experiment.

Figure 2: Photographs of all experimental conditions from
the participants’ perspective. Self-causal condition (left): the
paddle is set with the hole below the laser beam at the
beginning of a trial. Mechanical-causal condition (centre):
the wheel is rotating clockwise and the laser beam is
obstructed. Non-causal control (right): the laser beam is

3139

replaced with a red LED bulb positioned where the laser
point can be seen in the other two conditions.

Results
Exclusions
Three participants were excluded for failing to follow
instructions (consistently making multiple estimates per
trial, or making estimates during, rather than between,
trials). One further participant was excluded due to a
technical error. For all other participants, individual trials
for which there were two estimates and estimates which
overlapped with the time of the event being judged were
removed from analysis (8 participants with excluded trials,
mean average 4.88 exclusions out of 120 trials).

Causal estimates
A Friedman’s ANOVA was used due to the ordinal nature
of the causal scores. We found a significant main effect of
condition on causal scores (X2(2) = 15.58, p < .001). Posthoc testing using a Bonferroni correction found significantly
lower scores for the non-causal control condition (median =
6) compared with the self-causal condition (median = 8, p <
.05) and the mechanical-causal condition (median = 8, p <
.05). No significant difference was found between the selfcausal and mechanical-causal conditions (p > .05).

Temporal estimates
Transformation A preliminary analysis of the data found
significant variability in the range of reproductions between
participants (see Table 1 for pre-transformation data).
Additionally, a Shapiro-Wilk test found significant
deviations from the normal distribution in two of the three
conditions (p < .05). In order to reduce the influence of
individual differences and reduce the positive skew of the
data, temporal reproductions were converted to z-scores. To
do this, each participant’s grand mean was subtracted from
each of their interval estimates. The difference from the
mean of each score was divided by the standard deviation of
all estimates (per participant). The mean z-score per
condition for each participant was used for the temporal
estimates analysis. Following transformation, the
assumption of normality was met for all conditions (p >
.05). The mean z-scores can be seen in Figure 3.
Table 1: Descriptive Statistics for raw Temporal
Reproductions
Condition
Self-causal
Mechanical-causal
Non-causal Control

Mean
380.26
406.8
501.14

Standard deviation
197.49
134.81
315.39

Figure 3: Mean z scores of Temporal Reproductions by
condition. Error bars represent the 95% confidence interval.
Analysis A one-way ANOVA found a significant main
effect of condition on the z score-transformed estimates,
F(2,50) = 4.46, p < .05, η2 = .15, MSE = 1.57. Planned
simple contrasts were used to investigate the differences
between the mechanical-causal condition and both other
conditions. A significant difference was found between the
mechanical-causal and self-causal conditions (p = .048), but
not between the mechanical-causal and non-causal control
(p = .23). The frequentist analysis, therefore, appears to
favour the intentional binding account.
A Bayesian analysis was carried out using the
BayesFactor package for R statistics (Morey, Rouder, Jamil
& Morey, 2015). A Bayesian repeated-measures ANOVA
(see Rouder, Morey, Speckman & Province, 2012 for
details) found a Bayes factor of 17.23 for the unconstrained
model (self-causal ≠ mechanical-causal ≠ non-causal
control), indicating that the data observed is over 17 times
more likely under the unconstrained model compared with
the null model (intercept only). We also analysed three
further models, as predicted by the intentional binding
account (self-causal < mechanical-causal = non-causal
control), the causal binding account (self-causal =
mechanical-causal < non-causal control) and the ‘intentional
boost’ account (self-causal < mechanical-causal < noncausal control). The highest Bayes factor was found for the
model predicted by the intentional boost account (BF10 =
91.82), and as such it is the preferred model compared with
the models predicted by the intentional binding account
(BF10 = 44.57) and causal binding account (BF10 = 16.22;
denominator = intercept only model for all Bayes factors).

Discussion
We set out to investigate whether the perception of causality
is sufficient for temporal binding to occur. We compared
temporal estimates across three conditions: self-causal,

3140

mechanical-causal and non-causal control. In contrast to the
previous work on this topic, the first and second events in
each sequence were equally predictable and perceived in the
same modality (visual), thus eliminating possible
confounding variables.
The results of the Bayesian analysis suggest that the most
plausible model underlying our data is one of causal binding
with an ‘intentional boost’. It is noteworthy, however, that
evidence of causal binding is only present in the Bayesian
analysis, and cannot be seen in the frequentist planned
contrasts. This apparent discrepancy may be the result of
effect size; in this case there may have been a causal binding
effect which was too small to be detectable under frequentist
statistics, but still contributed the intentional boost model
being the preferred model in the Bayesian analysis.
Our manipulation check (causal ratings) revealed higherthan-expected perceived causality between the two lights in
the non-causal control condition. Although participants
reported significantly weaker causal impressions in the noncausal control condition, the median score was 6 (on a 1-9
scale), indicating that 13 of the 26 participants included in
the analysis perceived some causal relationship between the
two lights. The causal binding view therefore would predict
a reduced binding effect in those participants, due to
reduced distinctiveness of the causal compared to the
control conditions. .Therefore, while the manipulation has
been successful in that the majority of participants reported
weaker causal links between the two lights than the laser
and light sensor, this may not have been sufficiently
consistent across the entire sample to result in an effect size
detectable by a frequentist analysis.
Although two previous studies have reported an
intentional boost to causal binding (Buehner, 2015; 2012), it
is still unclear how causal and intentional binding relate to
each other. The causal ratings obtained here appear to rule
out the possibility that participants perceived stronger causal
relationships between the two events when the cause was
self-initiated, so the intentional boost cannot be attributed to
enhanced causal impressions following self-initiated vs
mechanical causal actions. Instead, our findings suggest
three possibilities. The first is that there may be two,
separate causal and intentional binding effects, of differing
strengths and with different roots, acting independently.
This appears unlikely, however, in light of previous research
suggesting that temporal binding does not occur in the
absence of causality (Moore, Langado, Deal & Haggard,
2009; Buehner & Humphreys, 2009). Such findings indicate
that the temporal binding effect is inextricably linked to
perceived causality; specifically, that causality is necessary
for the binding to occur.
An alternative explanation may be that causal binding and
the intentional boost are a product of the same Bayesian
processes, specifically, Bayesian cue integration. Humans
appear to integrate information from multiple sensory cues
in a manner that is statistically optimal: Ernst & Banks
(2002) found that when judging the height of a stimulus
based on visual and haptic information, participants attached

more weight to the cue that has lower variance. Moore,
Wegner & Haggard (2009) suggested that Bayesian cue
integration may also govern our sense of agency. Just as
multiple sensory cues contribute to our judgment of physical
properties such as size or shape, the perception of
intentionality results from multiple cues, both internal (e.g.
forward model predictions) and external (sensory cues).
Applying this rationale to temporal binding, one could argue
that the size of the effect depends on the noisiness of
perceptual cues – specifically, the (perceived) times of the
action and its consequence. One would expect that if prior
expectation of the time of an effect is determined to some
extent by the time of its cause, increased certainty in the
time of the cause would lead to an increased weight being
attached to it. Specifically, the shift in the perceived time of
the effect (towards the cause) would be greater, the more
certain one was about the time of the cause. While both the
manual and mechanical actions were equally predictable in
this experiment, participants had additional internal cues to
the onset of their own action than to an observed mechanical
event. It would be expected that the combination of these
cues and visual feedback would lead to a more reliable and
less variable percept of the time of the self-cause relative to
the time of the machine-cause. As the expected time of the
second event must be determined by the time of the first
event (the cause is predictive of the effect), a more reliable
percept of the time of the cause would lead to a more
reliable prior for the time of the second event, which would
be weighted more heavily against new cues to the time of
the second event. This in turn would result in a greater
backwards shift of the perceived time of the effect in the
self-causal compared to the mechanical-causal condition. In
line with this idea, Zhao et al. (2016) found greater temporal
binding when participants had tactile cues to the time of the
cause (key-press), compared with an action without tactile
feedback (key release).
However, greater certainty in the time of the first action
would also mean that it is less liable to be biased by the time
of the second event. Altogether, Bayesian cue integration
would thus be expected to lead to a lesser forward shift in
the perceived time of the self- compared to the mechanicalcause, but a greater shift in the perceived time of the
consequence towards a self- compared to a mechanicalcause. Thus, Bayesian cue integration based purely on the
noisiness of the temporal cues leads to two distinct shifts in
event perception working in opposite directions. We would
argue that in addition to perceptual cues, the Bayesian
integration process also takes into account expectations of
cause-effect contiguity, in line with Hume’s (1888)
principles of causal inference. Crucially, that causes are
predictive of their effect forms a key part of how we
perceive causality; we perceive one event as causing another
when it comes before it, when the second event occurs close
in time to the first event and when the second event is
contingent upon the first. The cause is thus more predictive
of the effect than vice versa. These assumptions, however,
do not necessarily accompany the perception of events

3141

which are not causally related (e.g. a non-causal sequence of
events). Furthermore, previous research (e.g. Haggard et al.,
2002) has shown that outcome binding (i.e. shifts in the
awareness of an outcome towards its cause) is typically
greater than action binding (shifts in the awareness of a
causal action towards its consequence). Therefore, the
combined influence of the nature of causal relationships and
the perceptual differences between self-action and
mechanical actions may explain the presence of both causal
binding and an intentional boost in our findings, within a
single model.
More research is needed to determine what underlies the
intentional boost to causal binding. The majority of research
investigating the effect of agency on temporal binding to
date has failed to take account of the potential role of
causality: This is evidenced by failure to include adequate
non-causal control conditions (e.g. Caspar, Christensen,
Cleeremans & Haggard, 2015; Zhao et al, 2016), or to
obtain causal ratings as manipulation checks (e.g. Haggard
et al, 2002). The present findings demonstrate the
importance of control conditions in temporal binding,
without which a reduced magnitude of temporal binding is
indistinguishable from the absence of temporal binding. In
particular, if there is indeed an intentional boost to causal
binding, this calls for a reinterpretation of research
suggesting there is no temporal binding effect in the absence
of intentional action.

Acknowledgements
We thank Dennis Simmonds and Stephen Michael for
constructing the apparatus used in this experiment.

References
Buehner, M. J. (2012). Understanding the past, predicting
the future causation, not intentional action, is the root of
temporal binding. Psychological Science, 23, 1490–1497
Buehner, M. J. (2015). Awareness of voluntary and
involuntary causal actions and their outcomes.
Psychology of Consciousness: Theory, Research, and
Practice, 2(3), 237.
Buehner, M. J., & Humphreys, G. R. (2009). Causal binding
of actions to their effects. Psychological Science, 20(10),
1221-1228.
Caspar, E. A., Christensen, J. F., Cleeremans, A., &
Haggard, P. (2016). Coercion changes the sense of agency
in the human brain. Current biology, 26(5), 585-592.
Eagleman, D. M., & Holcombe, A. O. (2002). Causality
and the perception of time. Trends in cognitive
sciences, 6(8), 323-325.
Ernst, M. O., & Banks, M. S. (2002). Humans integrate
visual and haptic information in a statistically optimal
fashion. Nature, 415(6870), 429-433.
Haggard, P., Clark, S., & Kalogeras, J. (2002). Voluntary
action and conscious awareness. Nature neuroscience,
5(4), 382-385.

Hascalovitz, A. C., & Obhi, S. S. (2015). Personality and
intentional binding: an exploratory study using the
narcissistic personality inventory. Frontiers in human
neuroscience, 9.
Hume, D. (1888). A Treatise of Human Nature: Reprinted
from the Original Edition in Three Volumes. S. L. A.
Selby-Bigge (Ed.). Clarendon Press.
Humphreys, G. R., & Buehner, M. J. (2009). Magnitude
estimation reveals temporal binding at super-second
intervals. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 35(5), 1542.
Jo, H. G., Wittmann, M., Hinterberger, T., & Schmidt, S.
(2014). Brain Correlates of Intentional Binding: An EEG
Study in Mindfulness Meditators. Procedia-Social and
Behavioral Sciences, 126, 240.
Libet, B., Gleason, C. A., Wright, E. W., & Pearl, D. K.
(1983). Time of conscious intention to act in relation to
onset of cerebral activity (readinesspotential). Brain, 106(3), 623-642.
Lush, P., Parkinson, J., & Dienes, Z. (2016). Illusory
Temporal Binding in Meditators. Mindfulness, 1-7.
Moore, J., & Haggard, P. (2008). Awareness of action:
Inference and prediction. Consciousness and
cognition, 17(1), 136-144.
Moore, J. W., Lagnado, D., Deal, D. C., & Haggard, P.
(2009). Feelings of control: contingency determines
experience of action. Cognition, 110(2), 279-283.
Moore, J. W., & Obhi, S. S. (2012). Intentional binding and
the sense of agency: a review. Consciousness and
cognition, 21(1), 546-561.
Moore, J. W., Wegner, D. M., & Haggard, P. (2009).
Modulating the sense of agency with external
cues. Consciousness and cognition, 18(4), 1056-1064.
Morey, R. D., Rouder, J. N., Jamil, T., & Morey, M. R. D.
(2015). Package ‘BayesFactor’. URL http://cran. rproject. org/web/packages/BayesFactor/BayesFactor.
pdf (accessed 10.06. 15).
Nolden, S., Haering, C., & Kiesel, A. (2012). Assessing
intentional binding with the method of constant
stimuli. Consciousness and cognition, 21(3), 1176-1185.
Rouder, J. N., Morey, R. D., Speckman, P. L., & Province,
J. M. (2012). Default Bayes factors for ANOVA
designs. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 56(5), 356374.
Voss, M., Moore, J., Hauser, M., Gallinat, J., Heinz, A., &
Haggard, P. (2010). Altered awareness of action in
schizophrenia: a specific deficit in predicting action
consequences. Brain, 133(10), 3104-3112.
Zhao, K., Hu, L., Qu, F., Cui, Q., Piao, Q., Xu, H., ... & Fu,
X. (2016). Voluntary action and tactile sensory feedback
in the intentional binding effect. Experimental brain
research, 1-10.

3142

