The Facilitatory Effect of Referent Gaze on Cognitive Load in Language Processing
Mirjana Sekicki (mirjana@coli.uni-saarland.de)
Maria Staudte (masta@coli.uni-saarland.de)
Department of Language Science and Technology; Saarland Univeristy, Germany
the relevant object 800 - 1000 ms before mentioning it (e.g.
Griffin & Bock, 2000). But, how does speaker’s gaze add to
the listener’s prediction?

Abstract
This paper considers prediction in language processing by examining the role of the visual context, and specifically, the role
of speaker referent gaze on cognitive load. We inspect the anticipatory visual attention during sentence processing together
with the cognitive load induced at the points of the gaze cue,
and the linguistic referent. Employing a novel measurement
of cognitive load - the Index of Cognitive Activity (Marshall,
2000) allowed us to simultaneously consider both anticipatory
eye-movements and cognitive load. Our results show that the
gaze cue is being followed, and considered as a relevant piece
of information, which subsequently reduces the cognitive load
on the linguistic referent. In addition, we found that considering the gaze cue is in itself not costly, unless it cues an object
mismatching with the previous linguistic context.
Keywords: Gaze; Cognitive Load; Index of Cognitive Activity; Prediction; Eye-tracking

Previous research on gaze and language has established the
gaze cue to be utilized and proven helpful while processing
linguistic material (e.g. Hanna & Brennan, 2007) even when
the speaker is a robot (Staudte & Crocker, 2011) or a virtual
agent (Staudte, Crocker, Heloir, & Kipp, 2014). The conclusions about the effects of gaze following are drawn on the basis
of participants’ eye-movements and responses to the task at
hand. The eye-movement data give insight into the shifts of
visual attention indicating whether the gaze cue was considered. In addition, the effect of considering the gaze cue on
the comprehension of linguistic material is assessed by reaction times, comprehension and production tasks. Importantly
however, no direct effect of speaker gaze on cognitive effort
required for language processing has, to our knowledge, been
examined yet. This paper sets out to investigate just that by
combining eye-movement data with an online pupillary measure of cognitive load, which enabled us to measure this cost
/ benefit directly, and independent of a specific task.

Introduction
A series of investigations in the visual world paradigm (VWP)
have shown how listeners simultaneously combine linguistic
and visual cues to predict upcoming linguistic input (for a
review of the VWP see Huettig, Rommers, & Meyer, 2011).
Based on the idea that prediction is a unifying principle of
the human mind, a large body of psycholinguistic research,
in the VWP, as well as employing EEG, has been examining
the role of prediction in language processing (see Huettig,
2015; Huettig & Mani, 2016). Anticipatory eye-movements
collected in the VWP have reliably shown that people predict
upcoming referents based on the previous linguistic material
(e.g. Altmann & Kamide, 1999; Kamide, Altmann, & Haywood, 2003), as well as based on the visually presented events
(Knoeferle, Crocker, Scheepers, & Pickering, 2005).
Our present work examines the influence of the visual
modality on processing linguistic information by specifically
investigating speaker gaze, as an inseparable part of the visual context in situated communication, and its influence on
prediction making. We hypothesized that speaker gaze to the
upcoming referent helps constrain the set of possible targets
and thus, by increasing the predictability of the cued object
reduces the cognitive load induced by its linguistic referent.
In addition, we examined whether any cost reduction on the
referent would be accompanied by a cost increase on the gaze
cue, effectively spreading the cognitive load across the two
modalities, namely, the gaze cue and the language.
The Gaze Cue Gaze has been shown to play an important
role in situated communication. Listeners inspect objects
they anticipate will be mentioned next (Altmann & Kamide,
1999), and they fixate the mentioned object 200 - 300 ms after
the speaker started referring to it (e.g. Tanenhaus, SpiveyKnowlton, Eberhard, & Sedivy, 1995). Speakers also fixate

We examined both the process of creating and
(dis)confirming predictions in one and the same setting. To
this end we employed a novel measurement of cognitive
load - the Index of Cognitive Activity (ICA; Marshall, 2000)
which allows for an experimental design that combines eyemovements, shedding light on the predictive processes, while
simultaneously measuring cognitive load at different stages of
sentence processing. The results revealed that referent gaze
is followed and that it indeed adds to the predictability of
the upcoming referent such that the spoken reference induces
less cognitive load. Note that whether this effect could also
be induced by arrows or other visual pointers is considered
irrelevant at this point.
The Index of Cognitive Activity (ICA) The two experiments presented in this paper are conducted in the VWP. We
considered the eye-movements and the cognitive load reflected
in pupil size. While the traditional eye-movement analysis
helps reveal any patterns of anticipation of potential target
objects, the ICA allowed us to simultaneously also measure
cognitive load both on the gaze cue and on the referent noun,
i.e. the cognitive load induced by creating and (dis)confirming
one’s predictions.
Pupil dilation happens in consequence of either changes
in light or cognitive activity. Two groups of muscles are responsible for pupil size: circular muscles that make the pupil
contract, and radial muscles that make it dilate. Pupil size

3107

changes due to light and due to cognitive activity employ different activation and inhibition processes, the dilation due to
cognitive load being shorter and more abrupt (Beatty, 1982).
The ICA measurement disentangles the two types of change
in pupil size by performing a wavelet analysis on the pupil dilation record and removing the large oscillations, while considering only the quick pupil jitter that is related to cognitive
activity (Marshall, 2000). Such events of small abrupt changes
in pupil size are referred to as the ICA events.
The ICA has been shown to reflect changes in cognitive
load in a variety of different studies since its appearance (e.g.
Marshall, 2002, 2007). However, only recently has it been examined with cognitive load induced by linguistic processing
(Demberg & Sayeed, 2016). Demberg and Sayeed present a
series of seven experiments showing that the ICA indexes linguistic processing difficulty for both reading and auditory presentation of linguistic stimulus. In addition, the ICA proved
to be robust with respect to eye-movements making it a valid
measure of processing difficulty in the VWP.
Hence, employing the ICA in present experiments allowed
for simultaneous assessment of both visual attention and cognitive load.

Figure 1: A trial timeline example (from Exp.1) - referent
gaze condition (left); and no-gaze condition (right).
is actively considered in language processing, by quantifying
how its existence modifies the cost induced by the linguistic
referent. In addition, we were interested in measuring the
potential cost of gaze perception.

Method

Current Questions and Predictions Two studies were set
out to examine whether gaze is considered as part of the context determining the predictability of the subsequent referent.
We examined if the gaze cue actually helps reduce the cognitive load of a linguistic referent online and whether cognitive
load is in fact spread across gaze and spoken reference such
that the gaze cue itself then induces higher cognitive load.
Experiment 1 made use of the gaze cue that was always
fitting (the previous linguistic context) and congruent (cuing
the object to be referred to linguistically). We manipulated
the existence of the gaze cue in order to answer the following
research questions:
a) Does the gaze cue influence the predictability of a linguistic referent?
b) If so, how does it influence the cognitive load induced
by the referent?
c) Can we measure cognitive load on the gaze cue itself?
Experiment 2 also made use of congruent gaze, while manipulating the fit of the referent (thus, also the fit of the gaze
cue) with the previous linguistic context. This was done in
order to answer the following research questions:
a) Does the gaze cue help reduce the cognitive load on the
linguistic referent even when they both do not fit the previous
linguistic context?
b) Does the gaze cue to a mismatching object itself induce
higher cognitive load?
We expected mismatching gaze to be surprising and thus,
more costly, which would as its consequence have a reduction
in cognitive load on the corresponding linguistic referent.

Experiment 1
This study aimed to examine whether the online measure of
cognitive load also supports previous findings that the gaze cue

The study made use of 2x2x2 mixed factorial design. The
independent variable Gaze was a between subjects variable,
i.e. half the participants were presented with the version of
the experiment where all items included the gaze cue, while
the rest saw the version with items never having the gaze cue.
Fillers balanced the gaze conditions to the ratio of 1:1. In
addition, four linguistic conditions were created with the two
within subjects variables, Constraint and Plausibility. Constraint was manipulated by verb restrictiveness (spill vs. order), and Plausibility by noun fit (spill: water vs. ice-cream).
Participants 64 students of Saarland University took part
in this study (45 women) and were monetarily reimbursed for
their partaking. Their age ranged from 18 to 34 years old (M
= 24.16). Participants were all native speakers of the German
language with normal or corrected to normal vision.
Materials and Design Each participant was presented with
20 items and 30 fillers, both consisting of visual and auditorily
presented linguistic stimulus. In addition, visual displays
included a face-like object forming the gaze cue.
Note that the gaze cue used in our studies, since being
an always congruent visual pointer, is arguably not different
from an arrow. This is true, but, currently irrelevant, since
the differences between a visual pointer and a gaze cue are
potentially to be expected in cases of manipulated congruence.
We made use of simple German sentences (Subject - Verb
- Adverb - Object) that included a restrictive (spill) and a nonrestrictive (order) verb and two object nouns (water vs. icecream) of differing semantic fit in relation to the restrictive
verb. The chosen nouns were controlled for frequency and
two pretests have shown that in the context of order, water
was more predicted (cloze probability of 13.67%; plausibility
rating of 1.12 on a 7-point Likert scale1), than ice-cream (cloze
1The scale ranged from "very plausible" (1), to "not plausible,

3108

Figure 2: (Exp.1) Proportion of fixations in the four linguistic conditions without the gaze cue (left) and with ref. gaze (right).
The verb onset, gaze and noun onset are shown averaged across trials, and aligned to the 100 ms bins within which they fall.
probability of 0.16%; plausibility rating of 2.76). The same
adverb, neutral in meaning (gleich - ENG: soon), was used for
all items and served the purpose of a spillover region.
In addition, visual displays with four concrete objects2 were
presented. Two of the four objects fit the category introduced
by the restrictive verb (spill: water, ice-cream), while all four
fit the non-restrictive verb (order: water, ice-cream, suitcase,
coat). The referent noun was always fitting with the previous
linguistic context and the gaze cue was always congruent, that
is, cuing the object that is about to be mentioned. The main
manipulation of the study was the presence (vs. absence) of
the gaze cue which was presented before the target object was
referred to verbally.
Figure 1 illustrates a trial timeline. The visual scene with
open eyes was presented 1000 ms prior to sentence onset.
The gaze cue (or closed eyes) was introduced 300 ms after the
verb, i.e. from adverb onset to sentence end. Finally, the eyes
would look straight for another 1000 ms.
Fillers Fillers included the same visual setting, but differed
in the structure and complexity of the linguistic stimulus and
the number of objects that fit the verb category. 30 fillers
were used, 25 of which had the opposite and 5 the same gaze
condition as the items (ratio of 1:1 for gaze and no-gaze). 19
fillers were followed by simple yes/no comprehension questions that were answered on a key-press. The questions were
related exclusively to the linguistic content. This was done in
order not to inspire extensive inspection of the visual scene,
but rather so that participants consider it only optionally and
freely in addition to the linguistic information.
Procedure An EyeLink II head-mounted eye-tracker (SR
Research, Ltd; Mississauga, Ont., Canada) was used to track
difficult to imagine" (7).
2Images used (for both experiments) were taken from an open
source database (www.openclipart.org) and pretested for naming.

both eyes at a sampling rate of 250 Hz.3 Participants were
instructed to listen carefully to the sentences while looking
freely at the presented objects. They would advance the experiment on a button press after each trial. Other two buttons
were used to answer the comprehension questions. The experimental session was preceded by a three-trial practice session.
The experiment lasted for approximately 15 minutes.

Results
First, in order to gain insight into the patterns of prediction and
visual attention we consider the proportion of fixations to the
presented objects throughout a trial. Second, we analyse new
inspections. Consecutive fixations to the same interest area
are considered as one inspection. Since we are interested in the
shift of attention inspired by a relevant stimulus, we analyse
new inspections, i.e. the first inspection to an interest area that
started after the linguistic or visual point of interest (as done in
e.g. Staudte & Crocker, 2011). We consider new inspections
from verb onset (showing linguistic predictions) and from
gaze cue onset (showing if the gaze cue influenced visual
attention). Finally, the ICA events are extracted from the pupil
jitter, summed over a duration of a relevant time-window and
statistically analysed. For the ICA analysis, we considered the
gaze time-window and the referent noun window.
Variable Coding and Data Analysis In their VWP experiment, Demberg and Sayeed (2016) establish a time-window
taken 600 - 1200 ms from the onset of the critical word to
be an appropriate window size and timing for the analysis
of the ICA events. Since our critical words differ in length
across items, we correct this potential confound by taking a
time-window that starts from the middle of a word4, and con3This is the required setup for the subsequent extraction of the ICA
events from EyeWorks Workload Module software (version 3.12).
4The middle of the referent noun was calculated by taking the
audio duration of the whole word and using its half as the starting

3109

sider the following 600 ms. In addition, we analyse the gaze
window: 600 ms from the gaze cue onset.
The ICA events are extracted for both eyes separately. Since
there is no clear theoretical reason why differences should be
expected for the two eyes, we combine the two datasets by
summing the ICA events for corresponding time-windows and
conduct the analyses on the combined data.
All independent variables were contrast coded for the statistical analysis. New inspections, a binary dependent variable
required the use of generalized mixed effects models of binomial type. On the other hand, the analysis of the ICA, a count
variable, required the use of generalized mixed effects models
with Poisson distribution. All models included a maximal
converging random structure for both Item and Subject. The
analyses were conducted in R programming environment (R
Core Team, 2013) and using the lme4 package.
Proportion of Fixations Figure 2 illustrates the proportions
of fixations to all presented objects during a trial. The first
dashed line presents verb onset; second line - gaze onset (not
relevant for no-gaze); the third line - referent noun onset. It is
apparent that the restrictive verb (spill) shifts the focus of visual attention to one particular object (water). The less fitting
object (ice-cream) is considered only upon being referred to
linguistically (no-gaze), or earlier, at the point of the gaze cue
(referent gaze), confirming that the visual attention is not only
influenced by linguistic content but also by the gaze cue.
New Inspections We conducted a statistical analysis of new
inspections to an object (water, ice-cream, distractors) from
verb onset (to verb offset). In addition, we consider the new
inspections to both water and ice-cream, from gaze onset (to
adverb offset).
Considering the verb window, three identical models were
run for the inspections to the three relevant objects.5 Looks to
water: A main effect of Constraint ( β = -0.361, SE = 0.124,
z = -2.904, p = 0.004) suggests that more new inspections to
water occurred upon hearing spill (vs. order). Looks to icecream: No effect of Constraint (p = 0.406) suggests ice-cream
was looked at with no significant difference in the contexts
of both verbs. Looks to the distractors: A marginal effect
of Constraint ( β = 0.153, SE = 0.081, z = 1.89, p = 0.059)
suggests that there were somewhat more new inspections to
the two distractors in the non-restrictive context of order.
Considering the gaze window, we analysed new inspections
to both water and ice-cream together as TargetInspections
and considered the effects of gaze on the looks to these two
objects.6 We find a main effect of Gaze ( β = 0.427, SE =
0.141, z = 3.022, p = 0.003) confirming that the objects were
more readily looked at with the gaze cueing them compared to
the absence of gaze, i.e. that the gaze cue caused an immediate
shift in visual attention.
point (for each word individually).
5NewInspections ∼ Constraint + (1 + Constraint | Subject) + (1
+ Constraint | Item), family = "binomial"
6TargetInspections ∼ Gaze + (1 + Gaze | Subject) + (1 + Gaze |
Item), family = "binomial"

Figure 3: (Exp. 1) ICA events at the four time-windows of a
sentence presented for the no-gaze (above) and the ref. gaze
(below) conditions separately. (95% CI error bars)
The Index of Cognitive Activity The analysis of the gaze
time window did not yield significant results.
Considering the referent noun window7, we found a main
effect of Gaze ( β = -0.116, SE = 0.051, z = -2.26, p = 0.024),
suggesting that the presence of the gaze cue led to the reduction
of cognitive load on the subsequent referent. Moreover, we
found a significant Constraint:Plausibility interaction ( β = 0.184, SE = 0.042, z = -4.37, p < 0.001), as well as a main
effect of Plausibility ( β = 0.057, SE = 0.029, z = 2.01, p =
0.045). Further comparisons show a main effect of Plausibility
in the subset of spill ( β = 0.152, SE = 0.035, z = 4.37, p
< 0.001), suggesting that spill water induced less cognitive
load than spill ice-cream. No such effect was found in the
non-constraining subset (p = 0.249), suggesting no difference
between order water and order ice-cream. Figure 3 illustrates
these findings (note: Adverb - gaze window; Object - referent
window). Finally, to rule out an effect of experiment part
found in the second study, experiment Half was included in
the fixed effects structure. We found no Half:Gaze interaction,
but a main effect of experiment Half ( β = -0.047, SE = 0.013,
z = -3.57, p < 0.001), since the second part of the experiment
induced less cognitive load.

Discussion
The results show that the gaze cue inspired fixations to the cued
object even when it was not predicted by the verb. Moreover,
the presence of gaze led to the reduction of cognitive load on
the referent noun in all conditions, while preserving the preference for the item that best matched the verb. Interestingly,
7ICA ∼ Constraint*Plausibility + Half*Gaze + (1 + Constraint*Plausibility || Subject) + (1 + Constraint*Plausibility || Item),
family = poisson (link = "log")

3110

the existence of the gaze cue did not in itself induce additional
cost on cognitive load.
Hence, we saw that the gaze cue influences predictability of
the linguistic referent and subsequently reduces the cognitive
load it induces. Interestingly, on the cue itself, no differences
in cognitive load were induced either by its mere existence, or
by whether it was cuing an object already anticipated based
on the linguistic context.

Experiment 2
The second study aimed at examining, firstly, whether the gaze
cue helps reduce cognitive load on the linguistic referent even
when they are both mismatching with the previous linguistic
context, and, secondly, whether the cue to such an object is in
itself more costly, since unexpected.

Method
Participants 36 students of Saarland University (23 female)
took part in the study and were monetarily reimbursed for their
partaking.8 Their age ranged from 18 to 34 years (M = 23.36).
Two students were excluded from the analysis due to technical
issues, and two because their mother tongue was established
to be Luxemburgish. Thus, 32 participants, German native
speakers, were included in the analysis.
Materials and Design This experiment made use of 2x2
experimental design, combining Gaze (no-gaze/referent gaze)
and referent noun Fit (fitting/mismatching). Only restrictive
verbs were used (spill), combined with either a thematically
fitting (water) or mismatching referent noun (sausage). 20
items were created, half of which were anomalous9. Note that
the gaze cue was, again, always congruent (cuing the object
subsequently referred to linguistically). When the referent
noun did not fit the previous linguistic context, that made the
gaze cue to the object in question mismatching as well. The
same procedure was implemented as in Experiment 1.
Fillers The experiment included presenting 75 trials in total,
55 of which were fillers. 20% of the total number of sentences
were anomalous (10 items, 5 fillers). The gaze cue was present
in 2/3 of all trials (10 items, 40 fillers). Only 16% of all trials
included an anomalous gaze cue, i.e. gaze that was cueing a
mismatching object (5 items, 3 fillers).

Results
The same measures and analyses were conducted as in Experiment 1, except for the new inspections analysis where
only the gaze window was considered, due to the differing
experimental design of Experiment 2.
Proportion of Fixations Figure 4 shows the proportion of
fixations to all presented objects during a trial. As previously,
the first dashed line presents verb onset; the second line 8None of the students were familiar with Experiment 1.
9In order to counterbalance the referent nouns the experiment was
run in two versions. Version a) included a verb fitting to one noun in
the item (spill water vs. sausage), while the verb in version b) fit the
other noun (grill sausage vs. water).

Figure 4: (Exp. 2) Proportion of fixations to presented objects
in the four experimental conditions.
gaze onset (not relevant for no-gaze conditions); and the third
line - referent noun onset. We see that the verb shifts the
focus of visual attention to one particular object (water). The
mismatching object (sausage) is considered only upon being
referred to linguistically (no gaze), or earlier, at the point of the
gaze cue (referent gaze). Thus, we observe the same pattern
as in Experiment 1, namely, of the gaze cue shifting visual
attention, on a par with the linguistic information.
New Inspections Considering the gaze window we combined the new inspections to both water and sausage together
as TargetInspections and examined the effect of gaze on the
looks to these two objects.10 A main effect of Gaze ( β =
0.381, SE = 0.191, z = 1.995, p = 0.046) confirmed that the
gaze was followed, as found in Experiment 1.
The Index of Cognitive Activity We first analysed the referent window11 and found a main effect of Fit ( β = 0.223, SE
= 0.043, z = 5.21, p < 0.001), suggesting that the anomalous
spill sausage required more cognitive load than spill water.
Considering the effect of the gaze cue on the cost of the referent, a significant Gaze:Half interaction was observed ( β =
-0.126, SE = 0.062, z = -2.05, p = 0.040). Further analysis
showed a marginal main effect of Gaze in the second half of
the experiment ( β = -0.091, SE = 0.047, z = -1.93, p = 0.054),
suggesting that the referent gaze reduced the cognitive load on
the referent noun in both linguistic conditions. No such effect
was found in the first half of the experiment (p = 0.392).
Since gaze affected referent processing in each experimental
half differently, we considered cognitive load on the cue itself
(gaze window) for each half separately.12 The first part of the
experiment revealed a Gaze:Fit interaction ( β = 0.179, SE =
10TargetInspections ∼ Gaze + (1 + Gaze | Subject) + (1 + Gaze |
Item), family = "binomial"
11ICA ∼ Gaze*Fit + Half*Gaze + (1 + Gaze*Fit + Half*Gaze ||
Subject) + (1 + Gaze*Fit || Item), family = poisson (link = "log")
12ICA ∼ Gaze*Fit + (1 + Gaze*Fit || Subject) + (1 + Fit | Item),
family = poisson (link = "log")

3111

pointer, regardless if cuing a fitting or mismatching object.
We interpret this as evidence against a spread of cognitive
load between gaze and linguistic reference.
In sum, the gaze cue is exploited to predict the upcoming
referent such that it can be processed with less effort. If
verb selectional features direct visual attention to a particular
object and the gaze cue (alternatively) introduces a different
object, this creates a shift in visual attention but, does not
negate the existing preference. Cognitive load is reduced as
an effect of the gaze cue, but only when the cue is established
as informative and reliable, and regardless of its contextual fit.

Acknowledgments
The reported research is funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) under
grant SFB1102, and by the Cluster of Excellence Multimodal Computing and Interaction
(MMCI). We thank Christine Ankener, Laura Fraedrich and Luigi Palumbo for help and
support throughout the process of working towards this paper.

Figure 5: (Exp.2) ICA events at the four time-windows of a
sentence in the first (above) and the second (below) half of the
experiment. (95% CI error bars)

References

0.084, z = 2.13, p = 0.033). In the second half, a main effect of
Gaze ( β = 0.099, SE = 0.045, z = 2.20, p = 0.028) suggests that
the referent gaze induced higher cognitive load than the nogaze condition. The results are illustrated in Figure 5 (note:
Adverb - gaze window; Object - referent window).

Discussion
The eye-movements data showed evidence of gaze following
even when it was unpredicted, or worse, also mismatching.
Regarding the cost of processing the referent noun, initially,
the existence of gaze did not have an effect; but the cognitive
load induced by the mismatching cue itself was higher than
that induced by both fitting gaze and no gaze cue. However,
in the second half of the experiment, cognitive load on the
referent noun was marginally reduced due to the helpful gaze
cue; while the cue itself (to both fitting and mismatching
object) now induced higher cognitive load. This suggests that
participants gradually adapted to and started relying on the
surprising gaze cue (increasing load on the cue) and started
making use of its informativity (lowering load on the noun).

Conclusions
Referent gaze is actively considered in the process of prediction making, shifting the visual attention to the cued object,
and leading to the reduction of cognitive load on its linguistic
referent. This holds even when the cue (and the corresponding referent) is mismatching with the verb. Gaze perception
proved not to be costly unless mismatching with the verb.
Both studies included conditions with unpredicted but congruent gaze cue (Exp.1: order water, order ice-cream; Exp.2:
spill sausage). Such a condition induced a higher processing
cost on the gaze cue in Exp. 2, but not in Exp. 1. We argue
that in Exp. 1 gaze is still processed naturally, as a gaze cue,
due to its overall fit, while in Exp. 2, due to the mismatch
with the verb, the cue became more salient, treated as a visual

Altmann, G., & Kamide, Y. (1999). Incremental interpretation at
verbs: Restricting the domain of subsequent reference. Cognition,
73, 247-264.
Beatty, J. (1982). Task-evoked pupilary responses, processing load,
and the structure of processing resources. Psychological bulletin,
91(2), 276.
Demberg, V., & Sayeed, A. (2016). The frequency of rapid pupil
dilations as a measure of linguistic processing difficulty. PLoS
ONE, 11, e0146194.
Griffin, Z. M., & Bock, K. (2000). What the eyes say about speaking.
Psychological Science, 11, 274-279.
Hanna, J., & Brennan, S. (2007). Speakers’ eye gaze disambiguates
referring expressions early during face-to-face conversation. Journal of Memory and Language, 57, 596-615.
Huettig, F. (2015). Four central questions about prediction in language processing. Brain Research, 1626, 118-135.
Huettig, F., & Mani, N. (2016). Is prediction necessary to understand
language? probably not. Language, Cognition and Neuroscience,
31(1), 19-31.
Huettig, F., Rommers, J., & Meyer, A. S. (2011). Using the visual world paradigm to study language processing: A review and
critical evaluation. Acta Psychologica, 137, 151-171.
Kamide, Y., Altmann, G., & Haywood, S. (2003). Prediction and thematic information in incremental sentence processing: evidence
from anticipatory eye movements. J. Mem. Lang., 49, 133-156.
Knoeferle, P., Crocker, M., Scheepers, C., & Pickering, M. (2005).
The influence of immediate visual context on incremental thematic role-assignment: evidence from eye-movements in depicted
events. Cognition, 95(1), 95-127.
Marshall, S. P. (2000). Method and apparatus for eye tracking and
monitoring pupil dilation to evaluate cognitive activity. US Patent,
6,090,051.
Marshall, S. P. (2002). The index of cognitive activity: Measuring
cognitive workload. In proceedings of the 7th conference on human
factors and power plants (pp. 7-5–7-9). IEEE.
Marshall, S. P. (2007). Identifying cognitive state from eye metrics.
Aviation, space, and environmental medicine, 78, B165-B175.
R Core Team. (2013). R: A language and environment for statistical computing [Computer software manual]. Vienna, Austria.
Retrieved from http://www.R-project.org/
Staudte, M., & Crocker, M. W. (2011). Investigating joint attention
mechanisms through spoken human-robot interaction. Cognition,
120, 268-291.
Staudte, M., Crocker, M. W., Heloir, A., & Kipp, M. (2014). The
influence of speaker gaze on listener comprehension: Contrasting
visual versus intentional accounts. Cognition, 133, 317-328.
Tanenhaus, M. K., Spivey-Knowlton, M., Eberhard, K., & Sedivy, J.
(1995). Integration of visual and linguistic information in spoken
language comprehension. Science, 268, 1632-1634.

3112

