The Interplay Between Self-evaluation, Goal Orientation, and Self-efficacy on
Performance and Learning
Kit S. Double (kit.double@sydney.edu.au)
Department of Psychology, University of Sydney
Sydney, NSW, Australia

Damian P. Birney (damian.birney@sydney.edu.au)
Department of Psychology, University of Sydney
Sydney, NSW, Australia
Abstract
Objective Self-awareness Theory (Duval & Wicklund,
1972) proposes that self-evaluation increases an individual’s
awareness of any discrepancy between their current
performance and an internal goal. In the current study we
prompted self-evaluation throughout an intelligence test
(Analysis-Synthesis Test – AST) using confidence ratings
(CR). AST performance, the extent to which participants
incidentally learnt task-relevant rules (learning rules was
unnecessary because they were provided), self-efficacy, and
goals, were assessed. The results indicated an effect of
performing CR on both performance and rule learning, but
the effect depended on self-efficacy. Compared to matched
controls (n=45), participants who performed CR (n=41) and
had high self-efficacy performed better on the AST but
learnt fewer rules. Performing CR had no effect on
participants low in self-efficacy. This suggests that selfevaluation interacts with self-efficacy to modify
participants’ goals, specifically CR appear to shift
individuals high in self-efficacy from a mastery goal to a
performance goal.
Keywords: reasoning,
orientation, self-efficacy

intelligence,

reactivity,

goal

The Interplay Between Self-evaluation,
Goal Orientation, and Self-efficacy on
Performance and Learning
Accurate self-knowledge is a highly valued attribute and
important to everyday functioning. Awareness of our own
abilities and past performance facilitates realistic goal
selection and allows us to better direct our future behavior.
There is some evidence that self-evaluation occurs almost
continuously when we perform a demanding cognitive
activity, and this self-evaluation may occur both
spontaneously and unconsciously. Self-evaluation in this
context is often referred to as performance monitoring or
alternatively error detection. Performance monitoring is
vital to learning outcomes as it allows the learner to identify
errors so that they can avoid repeating them in the future
(Yeung & Summerfield, 2012). Performance monitoring is
also important for the effective allocation of cognitive

resources (Carter et al., 1998). Accurate performance
monitoring is central to an individual’s ability to regulate
their own cognitive behavior (Nelson & Dunlosky, 1991)
and, in particular, effectively make decisions about study
time (e.g. Metcalfe & Finn, 2008; Son & Metcalfe, 2000).
Furthermore, learners need to continually evaluate the
effectiveness of different study activities on their learning in
order to select the best possible study behaviors (Flavell,
1979).
Given the importance of accurate self-knowledge,
individuals such as students and employees are often
encouraged to self-reflect and self-evaluate their
performance so that they can better identify their strengths
weaknesses and detect issues or errors (Carver & Scheier,
2001). However, there is little direct evidence that selfevaluation leads to more accurate self-knowledge (Silvia &
Gendolla, 2001). Indeed, self-assessment is often
systematically inaccurate and flawed, which can often lead
to negative outcomes and ineffective decision making
(Dunning, Heath, & Suls, 2004). Objective self-awareness
theory (OST; Duval & Wicklund, 1972, 1973) contends that
self-focused attention does not necessarily lead to accurate
self-knowledge, instead it directs individuals’ attention to
discrepancies between their current performance or behavior
and their internal standards or goals (Silvia & Duval, 2001),
referred to here as goal discrepancies. OST theory argues
that when an individual becomes aware of a goal
discrepancy, they either modify their behavior to bring it in
line with their goal, modify their goal, or disengage from the
activity, which reduces their awareness of the goal
discrepancy (Silvia & Duval, 2001). For example, upon
reflecting on their studying, a student may determine that
they have not been working hard enough to prepare for an
upcoming exam, which may lead them to study more or set
a more modest goal for the exam, alternatively they may try
to distract themselves to avoid thinking about studying for
the exam.
Which of these three strategies an individual adopts is
largely determined by their self-efficacy, if an individual
has high self-efficacy they will believe that they can
improve their performance to match their goal and will act
accordingly, whereas individuals low in self-efficacy may
lower their goals or disengage from the task because they do
not believe they can implement the necessary improvements

1943

in their performance. We can conceptualize these expected
changes in terms of the goals we expect participants to
adopt. We hypothesize that self-evaluation will lead high
self-efficacy participants to focus on improving their
performance, whereas low self-efficacy participants will
either disengage from the task or lower their goal, both of
which are likely to impair their performance on the task.
These hypotheses therefore relate to changes in a
participants goal orientation.
Goal orientation is a well-studied concept that broadly
concerns the distinction between mastery goals that concern
development, improvement, and learning compared with
performance goals which prioritize performing well and
demonstrating ability (VandeWalle, 1997). Generally
speaking mastery goals are considered advantageous for a
range of outcomes including academic engagement (Ames
& Archer, 1988; Pintrich, 2000; Wolters, 2004), job
performance (Janssen & Van Yperen, 2004; VandeWalle,
Brown, Cron, & Slocum Jr, 1999), and cognitive ability
(Eison, 1981). Although some have conceptualized goal
orientation as a trait or at least a quasi-trait like concept
(DeShon & Gillespie, 2005), goal orientation is domain
specific and can equally be considered as state-like
(VandeWalle, Cron, & Slocum Jr, 2001). The goal
orientation that an individual selects for a particular
situation is somewhat determined by an individual’s selfefficacy (Diseth, 2011). Individuals with high self-efficacy
tent to pursue their goals with more effort and endeavor to
develop from the experience of goal pursuit (DeGeest &
Brown, 2011). Given this, a number of studies have
expectedly shown a positive relationship between high selfefficacy and mastery goal orientation (Bell & Kozlowski,
2002; Diseth, 2011).

There is some previous evidence that self-evaluative
prompts lead to such changes in goal orientation. A recent
study by Mitchum, Kelley, and Fox (2016) using a wordpair learning paradigm found that, if the list of word-pairs
participants were learning contained both difficult and easy
items, then performing judgments of learning (i.e. rating
how likely it is that they will recall a word-pair on a later
test) resulted in participants spending more of their study
time on the easier items rather than the difficult items. This
resulted in participants who performed judgments of
learning recalling fewer word-pairs on a subsequent test.
The authors suggested that in the presence of both easy and
hard items, judgments of learning make participants aware
of the fact that they will inevitably fail to remember all of
the words on the list, so they adopt a performance
orientation rather than a mastery orientation and over study
the easier items.
H2: Self-evaluation will result in participants adopting a
performance goal orientation, regardless of their level of
self-efficacy
In the current study we induce self-focused attention by
asking participants to self-evaluate their performance after
each item on an intelligence test, by providing confidence
ratings (CR). CR direct participants’ attention to their
current subjective belief in their performance by require
participants to reflect on, evaluate, and quantify their
performance. A previous study which examined the effects
of eliciting confidence ratings from participants while they
completed an intelligence test found that participants who
provided CR, performed better than participants who
performed the task without providing ratings (Double &
Birney, 2017). Crucially, a subsequent experiment showed
that this effect depended on the confidence/self-efficacy of
participants, with CR facilitating the performance of high
self-confidence participants but hindering the performance
of low self-confidence participants.

H1: In the control group (without self-evaluation), high
self-efficacy participants will display mastery goal
orientated behavior, whereas low self-efficacy participants
will show performance goal orientated behavior.
The rationale behind encouraging self-evaluation in
schools and workplaces has often been that they will elicit
greater effort and goal driven behavior. However, as
previously mentioned, when an individual becomes aware
of a goal discrepancy they can either change their behavior
or alternatively they can modify their standard/goal. With
regards to modifying a goal, this may occur quantitatively
(e.g. changing from a goal of a 75 on an exam to a 65) or
qualitatively changing the nature of the goal (e.g. changing
from try to master the material in a class to focusing on
passing the exam). Based on this OST framework we expect
that self-evaluation will lead participants with high selfefficacy to shift to a performance orientation in order to
improve their performance and reduce the goal discrepancy.
As previously stated, participants with low self-efficacy are
likely to naturally adopt a performance goal-orientation and
therefore self-evaluation should have little effect on the
goal-orientation they adopt.

H3: Performing CR will facilitate performance in highself-efficacy participants and impair performance in low
self-efficacy participants
In the current experiment participants completed a
deliberately difficult task so that they would be likely to
experience a performance discrepancy when they selfevaluated their performance. Of primary interest is whether
this self-evaluation causes participants to improve their
performance and/or change their goal orientation.

Method
Participants
A community sample of 85 participants (80% female) was
recruited using an advertisement placed in a newsletter of
the Australian Broadcasting Corporation as part of a
research partnership with the University of Sydney (Mage =

1944

63.75, SD = 9.83). Participants received no remuneration for
participating in the study. Participants were randomly
allocated to the confidence ratings group (CR group; n = 42)
or a control group that did not provide confidence ratings
(No-CR group; n = 43).

Materials and procedure
Participants completed the following measures online
from their own personal computers using Qualtrics
(Qualtrics, 2015) and Inquisit (Inquisit, 2016). All materials
were programmed to display in a standardized fashion.
Analysis Synthesis Task (AST; Woodcock, McGrew,
Mather, & Schrank, 2001): A modified computerized
version of the AST tasks was performed by participants.
The AST task requires participants to solve problems by
combining a series of tiles using a set of simple rules (e.g. a
red triangle and purple square make blue circle). The rules
are displayed continuously in the form of a key at the top of
the screen. Figure 1 presents a typical question. One tile is
blank and participants must decide which tile correctly fills
the blank. Participants could combine any two tiles that are
next to each other either horizontally or vertically.
As the task was expected to be difficult for a community
sample, participants were given a series of practice items
and were allowed to continue to practice until they felt they
were ready to progress to the test phase (minimum of 12
practice items, maximum 36). The test block consisted of 20
items that were approximately ordered according to their
difficulty. There were 5 rules in each of the practice and test
blocks (different rules/stimuli were used in the practice and
test phases).
Participants in the CR group were asked to rate their
confidence that they answered the previous item correctly
using a scale from 0-100%. In order to reduce any response
time effect on performance, participants in the control group
were shown a blank screen for 2000ms after each trial.

Figure 1: A typical question drawn from the AST task.
that were used in the test block.

Self-efficacy: As self-efficacy is domain specific we used
a particularly proximal measure of self-efficacy by having
participants predict their score on the test block as a
percentage after completing the practice block.
Rule Recall Test: After finishing the test block
participants unexpectedly performed a recall test of the rules
Participants had been given no prior warning that they
would need to recall the rules on the later task and it was not
necessary that participants memorize them as they had been
displayed on the screen continuously during the AST task.
The recall test asked participants questions such as “what
color is the combination of the red triangle and blue
circle?”.

Results
All data analysis was performed using R version 3.2.3 (R
Core Team, 2015). Table 1 presents summary statistics for
key study variables. The number of practice trials performed
did not differ significantly between the CR group and the
No-CR group, F(1,83) = .17, p = .683. Participants’ initial
predictions of their performance did not differ significantly
between the CR group and the No-CR group, F(1,83) =
.002, p = .967.
Table 1: Descriptive statistics for key study variables.
Variable

N

M

SD

Predicted performance

85

31.5

21.7

Number of practice trials

85

23.1

9.7

AST practice score

85

10.6

4.9

AST test score

85

10.3

2.7

Rules recalled

74

2.2

1.7

AST Performance
Performance was analyzed using a linear regression
model with number of correct items as the criterion variable.
Experimental group and self-efficacy were entered as
predictors along with the relevant interaction. In addition, as
we were primarily interested in the moderating effect of
self-efficacy, over and above ability, we included
participants’ practice scores and number of practice trails as
covariates. Overall there was no main effect of experimental
group, β = .08, t(79) = .89, p = .378. Self-efficacy was a
significant negative predictor of performance, β = -.27, t(79)
= 2.02, p = .047. Practice score and practice trial count were
both positive predictors of test performance; β = .68, t(79) =
7.19, p < .001 and β = .35, t(79) = 4.03, p < .001
respectively. Crucially, the group X predicted performance
interaction was a significant predictor of test performance, β
= .27, t(79) = 2.07, p = .042, see Figure 2.
A simple slopes analysis indicated that self-efficacy was a
significant negative predictor for the No-CR group, β = -.18,
t(79) = 2.02, p = .047, but not a significant predictor of
performance for the CR group, β = .06, t(79) = .74, p = .464.

1945

As shown in Figure 2, participants with high self-efficacy
performed better in the CR group than the NO-CR group,
whereas there was no group difference for participants with
low self-efficacy.

Figure 3: Average number of rules recalled as a function
of experimental group and predicted performance. The
values used for high and low predicted performance are 1
standard deviation above and below the mean respectively.
Error bars represent +1 standard error of the mean.

Discussion

Figure 2: Average number of correct items on the analysis
synthesis task as a function of experimental group and
predicted performance. The values used for high and low
predicted performance are 1 standard deviation above and
below the mean respectively. Error bars represent +1
standard error of the mean.

Rule Recall
11 participants did not complete the rule recall test and
were therefore excluded from the analysis. Rule recall was
analyzed using a second linear regression with number of
correctly recalled rules as the criterion variable.
Experimental group, self-efficacy, and the interaction
between the two were entered as predictor variables. In
addition, to control for performance on the analysis
synthesis task, AST test performance was entered as a
covariate. Again there was no significant main effect of
experimental group, β = -.16, t(69) = 1.54, p = .128. Selfefficacy and AST performance were both significant
positive predictors of rule recall performance, β = .47, t(69)
= 2.94, p = .004 and β = .33, t(69) = 3.03, p = .003
respectively. Again the hypothesized group X self-efficacy
interaction was significant, β = -.36, t(69) = 2.25, p = .028,
see Figure 3. Simple slopes analysis indicated that selfefficacy was a significant positive predictor of recall
performance for the No-CR group, β = .31, t(69) = 2.94, p =
.004, but not for the CR group, β = -.01, t(69) = .11, p =
.911. As shown in Figure 3, participants with high selfefficacy in the No-CR group outperformed all other groups
in terms of rule recall.

Self-evaluation is often assumed to be an effective method
to obtain accurate self-knowledge about one’s abilities and
performance. Organizations and educators often pursue
formal and informal opportunities for feedback and
evaluation, such as performance reviews, testing etc. These
procedures may have many benefits such as improving
communication, identifying ongoing issues, and providing
feedback. However, in terms of the effect of self-evaluation
on performance the current results reveal two important
caveats in determining whether there is a benefit to
performance/learning outcomes as a result of selfevaluation. The first is the importance of self-efficacy, our
results show that self-evaluation improved the performance
of participants with high self-efficacy but had no effect on
participants with low self-efficacy. The second finding of
note is that the effect of self-evaluation may depend on the
nature of the outcome you are assessing. For participants
high in self-efficacy, self-evaluation improved performance
but impaired incidental learning, whereas there was no
effect on either outcome for low self-efficacy participants.
According to OST, self-efficacy moderates the way in
which we behave when confronted with goal discrepancies.
The theory suggests that when high self-efficacy
participants are confronted with goal discrepancies they
work to improve their performance, whereas low selfefficacy participants may disengage from the task (thereby
reducing awareness of the goal discrepancy). Our results
conform to this general pattern with high self-efficacy
participants improving their performance in response to CR

1946

and low self-efficacy participants obtaining no benefit. This
is in keeping with the previous finding by Double and
Birney (2017), who demonstrated that performing CR
during Raven’s Progressive Matrices improved the task
performance of high-confidence participants and impaired
the performance of low-confidence participants. Our results
have similarly found an asymmetry in the effect of CR on
performance as a function of self-efficacy. Although we
found no evidence of impaired performance in low selfefficacy participants, our results demonstrated that CR were
beneficial only to participants high in self-efficacy. The
difference in findings between this and Double and Birney
(2017) in terms of low self-efficacy participants needs
further exploration but may be a result of differences in how
self-efficacy/self-confidence was assessed or the nature
/difficulty of the task.
The current results suggest that high self-efficacy
participants ordinarily adopt a mastery goal orientation, but
shifted to a performance orientation when asked to perform
CR. The finding that high self-efficacy participants tend to
adopt a mastery goal is in keeping with the established
relationship between goals and self-efficacy (Bell &
Kozlowski, 2002; DeGeest & Brown, 2011; Diseth, 2011).
Importantly, to our knowledge the results of the current
study are the first to show that self-evaluation prompts high
self-efficacy participants to adopt a performance orientation,
which benefits performance but hinders incidental learning.
When individuals high in self-efficacy are made aware of
goal discrepancies they are likely to be motivated to reduce
that discrepancy by attempting to improve their
performance (Silvia & Duval, 2001). The current results
indicate that this focus on performance may come at the cost
of a shift away from learning in line with the classic goal
orientations paradigm (VandeWalle, 1997). It may be that,
as a result of the evaluative nature of CR, they prompt high
self-efficacy participants to direct attention to task relevant
information and ignore task-irrelevant (rule) information.
This suggests that appropriateness of using self-evaluation
may depend on the outcomes of interest. In classrooms and
workplaces self-evaluation has often become commonplace,
but this may be problematic given the current body of
evidence suggesting that a mastery orientation has many
relative advantages in such settings (Janssen & Van Yperen,
2004; Pintrich, 2000; Wolters, 2004). Although selfevaluation may be beneficial, the current results indicate
that both self-efficacy and whether the valued outcomes are
learning or performance based need to be considered before
advocating self-evaluation.
Metacognitive interventions are often encouraged in the
education literature and have obtained some positive results
(Berardi-Coletta, Buyer, Dominowski, & Rellinger, 1995;
Desoete & Roeyers, 2006). The current results, however,
raise the possibility that such interventions are selectively
benefiting students with high self-efficacy. Metacognitive
prompts encourage individuals to monitor and evaluate their
performance. Although the metacognitive literature has
argued that such behaviors are important for error

monitoring, strategy selection and allocating cognitive
resources, such behaviors also induce self-focused attention
and may have an interactive effect with self-efficacy.
Metacognitive prompts encourage individuals to monitor
and evaluate their performance but do not necessarily
provide a framework for doing so accurately. Although
individuals are generally able to monitor their performance
effectively, there are significant individual differences in the
accuracy of such monitoring. It may be that in the current
study, participants’ evaluations of their own performance
were shaped by their self-efficacy (i.e. high self-efficacy
participants were likely to evaluate their performance
positively and vice versa) and as such self-evaluation may
reinforce existing beliefs in ability and thereby benefit only
those who have a positive view of their own ability.
The current study has provided evidence that selfevaluative practice interact with self-efficacy to affect
performance and incidental learning in an intelligence test.
Given that self-evaluation is widely encouraged in both
schools and workplaces, these results provide much needed
research into the factors that affect the benefits of selfevaluation. The current results suggest that self-evaluation is
beneficial to the performance of high self-efficacy
individuals, but impairs incidental learning, most likely as a
result of encouraging such individuals to adopt a
performance goal orientation. For individuals low in selfefficacy, however, self-evaluation appears to have no effect
on either their performance or learning outcomes.

Acknowledgments
This study was funded by the Australian Research Council
(grant number DP140101147).

References
Ames, C., & Archer, J. (1988). Achievement goals in the
classroom: Students' learning strategies and
motivation processes. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 80(3), 260.
Bell, B. S., & Kozlowski, W. (2002). Goal orientation and
ability: Interactive effects on self-efficacy,
performance, and knowledge. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 87(3), 497.
Berardi-Coletta, B., Buyer, L. S., Dominowski, R. L., &
Rellinger, E. R. (1995). Metacognition and
problem solving: A process-oriented approach.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 21(1), 205.
Carter, C. S., Braver, T. S., Barch, D. M., Botvinick, M. M.,
Noll, D., & Cohen, J. D. (1998). Anterior cingulate
cortex, error detection, and the online monitoring
of performance. Science, 280(5364), 747-749.
Carver, C. S., & Scheier, M. F. (2001). On the selfregulation of behavior. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.

1947

DeGeest, D., & Brown, K. G. (2011). The role of goal
orientation in leadership development. Human
Resource Development Quarterly, 22(2), 157-175.
DeShon, R. P., & Gillespie, J. Z. (2005). A motivated action
theory account of goal orientation. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 90(6), 1096.
Desoete, A., & Roeyers, H. (2006). Metacognitive
macroevaluations in mathematical problem
solving. Learning and Instruction, 16(1), 12-25.
Diseth, Å. (2011). Self-efficacy, goal orientations and
learning strategies as mediators between preceding
and subsequent academic achievement. Learning
and Individual Differences, 21(2), 191-195.
Double, K. S., & Birney, D. P. (2017). Are you sure about
that? Eliciting confidence ratings may influence
performance on Raven’s Progressive Matrices.
Thinking and Reasoning, in press.
Dunning, D., Heath, C., & Suls, J. M. (2004). Flawed selfassessment implications for health, education, and
the workplace. Psychological Science in the Public
Interest, 5(3), 69-106.
Duval, T. S., & Wicklund, R. A. (1972). A theory of
objective self-awareness. New York, NY:
Academic.
Duval, T. S., & Wicklund, R. A. (1973). Effects of objective
self-awareness on attribution of causality. Journal
of Experimental Social Psychology, 9(1), 17-31.
Eison, J. A. (1981). A new instrument for assessing
students' orientations towards grades and learning.
Psychological Reports, 48(3), 919-924.
Flavell, J. H. (1979). Metacognition and cognitive
monitoring: A new area of cognitive–
developmental inquiry. American Psychologist,
34(10), 906.
Inquisit. (2016). Inquisit 5 (Version 5.04). Retrieved from
http://www.millisecond.com
Janssen, O., & Van Yperen, N. W. (2004). Employees' goal
orientations, the quality of leader-member
exchange, and the outcomes of job performance
and job satisfaction. Academy of Management
Journal, 47(3), 368-384.
Metcalfe, J., & Finn, B. (2008). Evidence that judgments of
learning are causally related to study choice.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 15(1), 174-179.
Mitchum, A. L., Kelley, C. M., & Fox, M. C. (2016). When
asking the question changes the ultimate answer:
Metamemory judgments change memory. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 145(2), 200.
Nelson, T. O., & Dunlosky, J. (1991). When people's
judgments of learning (JOLs) are extremely
accurate at predicting subsequent recall: The
“delayed-JOL effect”. Psychological Science, 2(4),
267-270.
Pintrich, P. R. (2000). The role of goal orientation in selfregulated learning. In M. Zeidner, P. R. Pintrich, &
M. Boekaerts (Eds.), Handbook of self-regulation.
San Diego, CA: Academic Press.

Qualtrics. (2015). Qualtrics (Version July, 2015). Provo,
Utah,
USA
Retrieved
from
http://www.qualtrics.com
R Core Team. (2015). R: A Language and Environment for
Statistical Computing (Version 3.2.1) [Computer
software]. Vienna, Austria R Foundation for
Statistical
Computing.
Retrieved
from
ttp://http://www.R-project.org/
Silvia, P. J., & Duval, T. S. (2001). Objective selfawareness theory: Recent progress and enduring
problems. Personality and Social Psychology
Review, 5(3), 230-241.
Silvia, P. J., & Gendolla, G. H. (2001). On introspection and
self-perception: Does self-focused attention enable
accurate self-knowledge? Review of General
Psychology, 5(3), 241.
Son, L. K., & Metcalfe, J. (2000). Metacognitive and
control strategies in study-time allocation. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 26(1), 204.
VandeWalle, D. (1997). Development and validation of a
work domain goal orientation instrument.
Educational and Psychological Measurement,
57(6), 995-1015.
VandeWalle, D., Brown, S. P., Cron, W. L., & Slocum Jr, J.
W. (1999). The influence of goal orientation and
self-regulation tactics on sales performance: A
longitudinal field test. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 84(2), 249.
VandeWalle, D., Cron, W. L., & Slocum Jr, J. W. (2001).
The role of goal orientation following performance
feedback. Journal of Applied Psychology, 86(4),
629.
Wolters, C. A. (2004). Advancing achievement goal theory:
Using goal structures and goal orientations to
predict students' motivation, cognition, and
achievement. Journal of Educational Psychology,
96(2), 236.
Woodcock, R. W., McGrew, K. S., Mather, N., & Schrank,
F. (2001). Woodcock-Johnson III NU tests of
achievement. Rolling Meadows, IL: Riverside
Publishing.
Yeung, N., & Summerfield, C. (2012). Metacognition in
human decision-making: Confidence and error
monitoring. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B, 367(1594),
1310-1321.

1948

