The Lego hands: changing the affording location of graspable objects
Da Silva Fabrice (fabrice.da-silva@univ-montp3.fr) & Brunel Lionel (lionel.brunel@univ-montp3.fr)
Epsylon Laboratory, Paul Valéry University, Montpellier, 34190, France

effects. This interpretation was further supported by
electrophysiological recording such as analyses of
lateralized readiness potentials (LRP) during categorical
judgments (Goslin, Dixon, Fischer, Cangelosi, & Ellis,
2012), or studies about the link between the affordance
perception and the dorsal stream activation through
transcranial mental stimulations (Buccino, Sato, Cattaneo,
Rodà & Riggio, 2009).

Abstract
The present study examined throughout three experiments the
nature of stimulus-response compatibility (SRC) effects
related to affordance perception in situations wherein object
affordances and response effectors are irrelevant to each
other. In the first experiment, using a foot-press response
dispositive, we found a SRC effect between the orientation of
the graspable part of the presented object and the laterality of
the response. In Experiment 2a, we showed that constraining
the subject hands in a given position (i.e., a Lego hand shape)
during the same task interfered with the SRC effect. In
Experiment 2b, participants performed a short training phase
with their hands constrained before performing the
experiment. This resulted in an inversion of the direction of
the SRC effect previously observed. We discuss these results
and provide arguments in favor of a specific motor activation
account.

Specific motor activation versus abstract space
coding

Keywords: Visual Perception; affordances; categorization;
motor constraints

Introduction
In stimulus-response compatibility (SRC) paradigms related
to affordance perception (see Michaels, 1988), participants
are usually faster and more accurate to categorize stimuli
when the response hand and the presented objects are
located on the same side (i.e., compatible) rather than on the
lateral opposite side (i.e., incompatible). The present study
aimed at disentangling between two alternatives
explanations of this specific SRC effect.

The affordances
Stimulus-response compatibility paradigms were first
designed to highlight affordance effects. These affordances
were defined as what a given environment offers the animal,
what it provides or furnishes in terms of action possibilities
(Gibson, 1979). These action possibilities are properties of
the subject-environment system and emerge from the
relation between an object and a subject (Stoffregen, 2003).
For instance, stairs can afford an action of climbing only
when their size does not exceed a certain proportion of the
riser leg height (Warren, 1984). In SRC paradigms,
participants generally performe a perceptual categorization
task using a specific motor response. The critical
manipulation is the compatibility (or congruence) between
the motor response setting and the perceptual configuration
of this object. For instance, Tucker and Ellis (1998) showed
that participants were faster and more accurate to categorize
the orientation (i.e., upright or downright) of daily life
graspable objects when object handles and motor responses
referred to the same side (i.e., compatible) than when they
referred to the opposite side (i.e., incompatible). These
results were interpreted as evidences of the affordance

Despite the multiplication of experimental works
concerning affordance perception for about twenty years,
the nature of affordance-related SRC effects is still debated.
For Tucker and Ellis (1998), SRC effects were observed
because interactions with an object involve a representation
about the range of actions that we can perform with and
thereby, potentiate them. The nature of these representations
was discussed in later works by the same authors including
through micro-affordances (e.g. Tucker & Ellis, 2001).
However, other authors provided evidences that an
alternative explanation of SRC effects might be considered.
(Anderson, Yamagishi, & Karavia, 2002). These authors
interpreted such effects as a consequence of an attentional
bias induced by a stimuli perceptual asymmetry (i.e.,
attention might be oriented to the left or the right depending
on the perceptual configuration of the stimulus). This
attentional orientation could be responsible for spatialrelated motor activations without requiring the potentiation
of action-related properties of an object. This hypothesis is
also in line with location-coding theories (e.g., Cho &
Proctor, 2011). In order to disentangle between specific
motor activations and abstract location coding as
mechanisms responsible for affordance related SRC effects,
Phillips and Ward (2002) developed a method wherein a
prime graspable object and the orientation of its handle were
irrelevant to the participants’ task. In this study, the handle
of the priming object was oriented to the left or to the right
side. Furthermore, the object handle was presented with an
apparent depth towards or away from the participant.
Participants had to respond to a target that appeared in the
center of a computer screen. Authors found a main effect of
the handle orientation congruent with common SRC studies
but no significant effects involving its apparent depth.
Nevertheless, this result could be attributed to
methodological issues. Indeed, such proximity-related
effects have been reported since (see Fischer & Dahl, 2007).
A more interesting point is that Phillips and Ward (2002)
proposed another experiment in which participants had to
respond to the same task pressing using foot switches with
their left or their right foot. Like in the first experiment,

1854

authors found a significant main effect of correspondence.
Therefore, participants were faster to categorize stimuli
when both the foot and the handle of the object were
localized on the same side. The authors concluded that
response facilitation effects arise from an abstract location
coding.
However, if observing SRC effects with feet during the
presentation of graspable objects seem to be inconsistent
with the motor specific activations account, this is not
sufficient to reject it. Indeed, grasping an object does not
imply a single hand gesture but a more global engagement
of the body. It is unclear in what extend the body is engaged
during the perception of graspable objects and further
investigations are necessary to question the implications of
such generalized activations. Therefore, finding SRC effects
while the response effector (i.e., the foot) and the action
associated with the presented object (i.e., hand use) are
seemly not directly related is not sufficient to conclude that
no specific motor activations occurred.

Zuccolotto, 2002). The visual material consisted of pictures
of a common mug disposed sideway on a white background
and centered on the display. The mug dimensions were 340
x 320 pixels. All pictures were realized using the software
Maya 16.0 (Palamar, 2014). The orientation of the initial
picture was manipulated to produce two horizontal and two
vertical orientations of the mug. Additionally, a second filler
picture was presented in order to increase the difficulty of
the task. The two stimuli are depicted in Figure 1.

The current study
In the present study, we aimed at showing that motor
activations could constitute the core mechanism of SRC
effects. For this purpose, we conducted three experiments in
which subjects had to categorize a common graspable object
with foot-press responses. The experimental design was
similar to the one used by Tucker and Ellis (1998) and
consisted in a classical SRC paradigm. In the three
experiments, participants had to categorize with their feet
the orientation (i.e., upright or inverted) of a common mug
displayed on a computer screen. In the first experiment, they
responded while keeping their hands placed on the table in
front of them. In the second experiment, participants were
wearing gloves during the task, constraining their hands in
an opened position (i.e., such as the Lego hand shape).
Finally, in a third experiment, a last group responded while
wearing the same gloves but after performing a short
training phase.

Experiment 1

Figure 1: The two visual stimuli used in all our experiments
(in one orientation condition). The right panel object acted
as a filler object.
As with the realistic mug, we reoriented the original
picture of the filler object to produce four final pictures. The
depicted objects were presented with an apparent size
similar to their real size which is about 11 cm high and 7.5
cm wide and the participants performed the task at a
distance of 45 cm from the screen and a visual angle of
about 15°. All results associated with the filler object were
not included into the analyses. Each of the eight pictures
was presented ten times in the experiment so that a
participant responded to an overall of 80 trials presented
randomly. Trials wherein the object was presented with its
handle oriented on the same side that the response effector
were considered as compatible and incompatible when it
was the reverse situation.
Procedure After filling out a consent form, participants sat
in front of a computer and were asked to rest their hands on
the table in front of them and their foots above the pedals.
Then, they were asked to perform a forced choice
categorization task on a computer by pressing a left or a
right switch of a pedalboard. They had to determine as fast
as possible if the displayed objects were disposed upright or
inverted. Each pedal was attributed to a response category.
This attribution was counterbalanced for the half of the
sample. Each picture was displayed until the response and
preceded by a fixation point which remained on the screen
during 200 milliseconds.

The aim of this experiment was to replicate the SRC
effects observed in Tucker and Ellis (1998) tasks using
Phillips and Ward (2002) response setting.

Method
Participants Twenty undergraduates students (17 women)
from Paul Valéry Montpellier University aged from 18 to 36
years old (M = 23.1, SD = 4.72) took part to this experiment
and received course credits. All had normal or corrected to
normal vision and were naïve to the purpose of the study.
The experiment was realized in accordance with the Code of
Ethics of the World Medical Association (Declaration of
Helsinki).

Results

Apparatus and materials The experiment was performed
using E-Prime 2 software (Schneider, Eschman, &

First, we observed that participants have accurately
performed the categorization task (less than 5% of error
rate). Thus, we only considered latencies for analysis. We

1855

excluded RTs above 1250 milliseconds (This cut-off led to
the exclusion of 11.37% of trials). Thus, We performed a
RT analysis between Compatible and Incompatible
situations for responses exclusively related to the realistic
mug pictures. Mean response times for the Compatible
situations (M = 713 ms, SD = 76.77 ms) were faster than
mean response times for the Incompatible situations (M =
750 ms, SD = 93 ms). Using a bilateral paired t-test, we
found that this difference was significant, t(19) = 2.55, p <
.05, d = .43.

Discussion
The results clearly demonstrated a SRC effect. Indeed the
participants were faster to categorize objects when their
graspable part was oriented on the same side as the response
effector rather than the opposite side. With the same pattern
of results, Phillips and Ward (2002) concluded that such
facilitation effects had to be consecutive to an attentional
shift and could not be associated with premotor activations.
This conclusion is congruent with the fact that the graspable
part of objects like the mug we used constitutes a visual
protrusion that could capture the subject attention.
Furthermore, a foot-press response seems to be not related
to the perception of the affordance of the mug. However, to
conclude that facilitation effects emerging from unsuited
limb responses are not related to specific motor activations,
this experimental design is insufficient. Indeed, contrary to
the experimental context, the tool use in daily life implies a
more global generation of movements and might involve
that perception of graspable objects potentiate a higher
range of muscles that the hand or even the arm. If the
affordance theory is unclear to specify such implications, it
is necessary to control the hand disposition during this kind
of tasks for rejecting this motor hypothesis. If such of a
hand constraint results in an alteration of facilitation effects
as those observed in the experiment 1, this would constitute
evidence that such response facilitations are dependent on
the subject action possibilities.

Experiment 2a
In this experiment, we aimed at constraining subject hands
to a certain position which is incompatible with the usual
grasp of the object used in Experiment 1. The gloves used in
this experiment were conceived to induce a large grasping
position incompatible with the handle of the mug. If SRC
effects such as the ones revealed by Tucker and Ellis (1998,
2001) or Phillips and Ward (2002) arise well from an
abstract representational coding, this manipulation should
not impact the effect. On the contrary, if the previous effect
is a consequence of perceived affordances traduced by more
general potentiations, wearing gloves inducing a particular
grasp should invert the stimulus-response compatibility
effect in the direction of the tank of the mug. This is
precisely our hypothesis: considering that a large hand
position is fitter with the manipulation of the tank of the
mug and not anymore with its handle, the effects will be

inverted regarding Experiment 1 and the incompatible
situation should be facilitating for the subjects.

Method
Participants Twenty undergraduate students (19 women)
from Paul Valéry Montpellier University aged from 18 to 41
years old (M = 22.45, SD = 6.15) took part to this
experiment and received course credits. All had normal or
corrected to normal vision and were naïve to the purpose of
the study. Among them, four left-handed were distributed
into the two groups.
Apparatus and Materials The experimental setup and the
materials remained the same as Experiment 1. The only
change in the experimental design was that participants had
this time to wear specific gloves. We constructed these
gloves with Plaster bands in such a way that the
participant’s hands adopt the form of a large grasping
position (i.e., a necessary position to grasp a mug by its
tank).
Procedure The instructions were the same as Experiment 1.
Nevertheless, participants were asked to wear the gloves and
to place their hands on the table in front of them before
beginning the experiment. Their hands were placed
shoulder-width apart and with palms facing inward. Once
the participants felt comfortable with the gloves and the
pedalboard, they could begin the experiment.

Results
Response errors accounted for 4.62% of the total of trials.
There were no significant differences between error rates in
compatible and incompatible situations. As in experiment 1,
all response times exceeding 1250 milliseconds were
removed from the analysis. Theses exclusions represented
17% of trials. The response time analysis between
Compatible and Incompatible situations showed not
statistically significant differences (p > .05).

Discussion
Apart from the fact that participants were wearing
constraining gloves inducing a large grasp shape during the
task, the second experiment was identical to experiment 1.
This single difference has seemly altered the results in the
way that there was no significant SRC effect anymore.
However, contrary to our hypothesis, the hand constraint did
not reverse the result’s pattern but seemed to have interfered
with the previous effect. This interference could represent
an argument which is not in favor of the abstract coding.
Indeed, if facilitation effects arise from an abstract spatial
coding, there is no rational that a change applied to subject
hands during foot-press responses impacts the facilitation
effect. Nevertheless, this null result cannot be fully
interpreted as it stands and there is a doubt as to whether the
gloves acted on subjects. While the purpose of the gloves
was to potentiate a large grasping position and thus promote

1856

a facilitation effect directed toward the location of the mug
tank, they may have been perceived by the subjects as a
simple immobilization.

tank and performed the training without dropping the mug.
After this training phase, they performed the same
categorization task than the one proposed in the two
previous experiments.

Experiment 2b
Experiment 2a showed that a constraint applied to subject
hands during a categorization task with foot-press responses
seems to have significantly altered the facilitation effect
previously observed in Experiment 1. It is unclear that this
was due to a simple interference or to a conflict between a
specific motor activation of the feet on one side and of
another activation of hands on the other side. This could
stem for an insufficient subject integration of the gloves
possibilities. Indeed, in Experiment 2a, no rationales about
the glove shaped were given to participants. Thus, in the
present experiment, we proposed to new participants to
perform a five minutes training in which they had to move a
real mug along several drawn points on a sheet while
wearing the gloves. The purpose of this training was to
strengthen the potential disposition to grasp the mug tank
with hands during the task. Our hypothesis is that a better
integration of the grasping possibility of the gloves will
produce a facilitation effect in favor of the side of the mug
tank and thus, will facilitate incompatible responses
regarding the handle location.

Method
Participants A new sample of twenty undergraduate
students (12 women) from Paul Valéry Montpellier
University aged from 17 to 29 years old (M = 21.5, SD =
4.32) took part to this experiment and received course
credits. All had normal or corrected to normal vision and
were naïve to the purpose of the study. Among them, two
left-handed were distributed into the two groups.

Figure 2: Plotted course for the training phase

Results
Response errors accounted for 6.25% of the total of trials.
There were no significant differences between error rates in
compatible and incompatible situations. Response times
exceeding 1250 milliseconds were excluded and represented
also 6.25% of trials. Regarding the compatibility between
response feet and handle locations, mean responses for the
Incompatible situations (M = 686 ms.14, SD = 111.44 ms)
were faster than mean responses for the Compatible
situations (M = 713.66 ms, SD = 126.76 ms). A dependent t
test revealed that the difference was statistically significant,
t(19) = 2.64, p < .02, d = .23. This pattern was therefore the
reverse than the one observed in Experiment 1 (see Table 1).

Apparatus and materials The experiment itself remained
unchanged. The participants were preforming the same task
while wearing the same gloves that in Experiment 2a. The
difference was that they had to perform a training phase
during which they had to move a real mug (with the same
appearance that the one modelised for the experiment) on a
sheet plotted course. The plotted course consisted in nine
drawn circles. These circles were numbered from 1 to 9. To
ensure that participants remain focused during this phase,
the mug was filled with water.

Table 1: Summary of the chronometric results in
milliseconds (with the standard deviations in parentheses)
and associated p-values for the three experiments

Procedure To perform the training phase, participants
manipulated the mug while wearing the gloves (see Figure
2). They were told to move the filled mug circles by circles
in the ascending and then in the descending order on the
sheet with the left hand and after that, with the right hand.
They had to put down the mug on each circle before moving
on the next one. This course was repeated two times.
Regarding the shape of the gloves, the participants were
obliged to grasp the mug by its tank. No instructions were
given concerning the better way to grasp the mug in this
situation. The participants spontaneously grasped it by the

Complementary analysis We calculated the mean effect
size differences between Compatible and Incompatible
situations by subtracting the mean response times related to
the Incompatible situation from the ones related to the
Compatible situation for each subject and for each
experiment. This allowed us to produce a value for each
subject (i.e. positive if he was faster to respond in
Compatible situations and negative if he was slower) and
the size of this difference (see Figure 3). Regrouping those
values for each experimental condition, we conducted a oneway between subjects ANOVA to compare the effect of

Experiment 1

Compatible

Incompatible

713 (76.77)

749.96 (93)

p
.02

Experiment 2a 766.41 (105.80) 786.73 (127.22) n.s.
Experiment 2b 713.66 (126.76) 686.14 (111.44) .01

1857

Experiments 1, 2a and 2b on mean effect size differences.
There was a significant effect of the Experimental
Conditions on subject Response times for the three
conditions, F(2, 57) = 7.42, p < .002, η²p = .21.
Post hoc comparisons using the Tukey HSD test indicated
that the mean effect size for the Experiment 1 condition (M
= 36.93, SD = 64.62) was significantly different than the
one of the Experiment 2b condition (M = -27.51, SD =
46.54). The test indicated too that the mean effect size of the
Experiment 2a condition (M = 20.32, SD = 52.07) was
significantly different than the one of the Experiment 2b
condition. However, the mean effect size of the Experiment
1 condition did not significantly differ from the one of the
Experiment 2a.
Finally, considering that in the three experiments, our
samples were quite inhomogeneous with respect to age, we
performed the same analysis while excluding subjects older
than 30 years. The results stayed unchanged.

Figure 3: Mean effect size differences (in milliseconds) as a
function of the experimental conditions. Errors bars depict
standard deviations.

General Discussion
In Experiment 2b, subjects manipulated a real mug with
constraining gloves before performing the categorization
task. The only way to proceed was to grasp the mug by its
tank and not by its handle which is in accordance with the
purpose of the shape applied to the gloves. Results showed
that a facilitation effect emerged from the incompatible
situation regarding the classic stimulus-response
compatibility paradigms. Thus, the training seems to have
strengthened a potential reach to grasp gesture oriented to
the mug tank and facilitated subsequent categorizations in
situations wherein the responses and the mug tank were on
the same side.
Taken together, the results suggest that facilitation effects
observed in stimulus-response compatibility paradigms
could well arise from specific motor activations instead of
abstract coding like Philipps and Ward (2002) suggested it.
Indeed, if the results observed in Experiment 1 were due to
a representational abstract coding, no differences would be
found applying a hand constraint during foot-press
responses. Yet, in experiment 2a, the effect was still in the

right direction but this time, it was not significant
suggesting an interference in the subject disposition to
respond. Furthermore, a real manipulation of a mug with a
specific constraint inverted the location of the effect in
Experiment 2b. This implies that the manipulation seems to
have led to a sensorimotor integration changing the location
of the potentiating part of the object. This result is also
particularly interesting because it seems that no rationales
can be found in the attentional shift hypothesis. Indeed, in
all of our experiments, the stimulus stayed unchanged and
hence, the perceptual asymmetry cannot be taken as the
origin of these results.
Nevertheless, an alternative explanation could be as well
proposed. Indeed, due to the manipulation phase,
participants may have learnt to pay attention to the tank of
the mug which could conduct to an attentional shift in the
direction of this one. For further investigations, it would be
interesting to expound on this by proposing a new
experiment in which participants would realize the training
but then, take off the gloves for the SRC experiment. This
design should allow knowing if the results of the
Experiment 2a and 2b are due to the wearing of the gloves
or by sensorimotor integrations.
Regarding this possibility and considering that only a
short training impacted the SRC effect directions. It is
nevertheless possible that such attention-related effects be
rooted in a sensorimotor process. For instance, a possible
explanation could emerge if we replace our results within
the framework of the premotor theory of attention (see
Craighero, Fadiga, Rizzolatti & Umiltà, 1999). According to
this theory, orienting of attention implies an activation of
basic circuits associated with the action goal. Therefore, the
results of the Experiments 2a and 2b could arise from an
attentional effect determined by the motor preparation
induced by the training phase. This interpretation is in phase
with both the specific motor activation account and the
general ecological approach to perception. In this context,
attentional shifts could be consecutive to premotor
activations and be constitutive parts of the action-perception
coupling.
In conclusion, the present study represents a further
argument in favor of specific motor activations during
perception of graspable objects. Nevertheless, it carries also
some questions about its results and further works will be
necessary to investigate such SRC modulation effects. More
broadly, it underscores some imprecisions about the original
propositions made by Gibson (1979). For instance, how a
specific affordance can be perceived instead of another and
how much the physical disposition to act in a given time
impacts the subject’s tendency to perceive them.

Acknowledgments
Authors want to thank Jean-François Loisel for his help to
design the visual stimuli used in this study.

1858

References
Anderson, S. J., Yamagishi, N., & Karavia, V. (2002).
Attentional processes link perception and action.
Proceedings. Biological Sciences / The Royal Society,
269(1497), 1225–32.
Buccino, G., Sato, M., Cattaneo, L., Rodà, F., & Riggio, L.
(2009). Broken affordances, broken objects: A TMS
study. Neuropsychologia, 47(14), 3074–3078.
Cho, D. T., & Proctor, R. W. (2011). Correspondence
effects for objects with opposing left and right
protrusions. Journal of Experimental Psychology. Human
Perception and Performance, 37(3), 737–49.
Craighero, L., Fadiga, L., Rizzolatti, G., &Umiltá, C.
(1999). Action for perception: A motor-visual attentional
effect.Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception & Performance,25, 1673–1692.
Fischer, M. H., & Dahl, C. D. (2007). The time course of
visuo-motor affordances. Experimental Brain Research.
Experimentelle
Hirnforschung.
Expérimentation
Cérébrale, 176(3), 519–24.
Gibson, J.J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual
perception. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Goslin, J., Dixon, T., Fischer, M. H., Cangelosi, A., & Ellis,
R. (2012). Electrophysiological examination of
embodiment in vision and action. Psychological Science,
23(2), 152–7.
Michaels, C. (1988). SR compatibility between response
position and destination of apparent motion: evidence of
the detection of affordances. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 14(2),
231–40
Palamar, T. (2014). Mastering Autodesk Maya 2015 :
Autodesk Official Press. Indianapolis, Indiana: John
Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Phillips, J. C., & Ward, R. (2002). S-R correspondence
effects of irrelevant visual affordance: Time course and
specificity of response activation. Visual Cognition, 9(4–
5), 540–558.
Stoffregen, T. A. (2003). Affordances as properties of the
animal – environment system. Ecological Psychology.
Tucker, M., & Ellis, R. (1998). On the relations between
seen objects and components of potential actions. Journal
of Experimental Psychology. Human Perception and
Performance, 24(3), 830–46.
Tucker, M., & Ellis, R. (2001). The potentiation of grasp
types during visual object categorization. Visual
Cognition, 8(6), 769–800.
Warren, W. H. (1984). Perceiving affordances: visual
guidance of stair climbing. Journal of Experimental
Psychology. Human Perception and Performance, 10(5),
683–703.

1859

