The elusive oddness of or-introduction
Nicole Cruz1,2 (ncruzd01@mail.bbk.ac.uk), David Over3 (david.over@durham.ac.uk), & Mike Oaksford2
(m.oaksford@bbk.ac.uk)
1

Laboratoire CHArt (EPHE), 4-14, rue Ferrus, 75014 Paris, France
Department of Psychological Sciences, Birkbeck, University of London, Malet Street, London WC1E 7HX, UK
3
Department of Psychology, Durham University, South Rd, Durham DH1 3LE, UK

2

Neilens, & Over, 2007; Evans, Handley, & Over, 2003;
Oberauer, Geiger, Fischer, & Weidenfeld, 2007; Oberauer
& Wilhelm, 2003; Fugard, Pfeifer, Mayerhofer, & Kleiter,
2011; Barrouillet & Geauffroy, 2015).

Abstract
The inference of or-introduction, p, therefore p or q, is
fundamental in classical logic and probability theory. Yet
traditional research in the psychology of reasoning found that
people did not endorse this inference as highly as other onepremise valid inferences. A radical response to this finding is
to claim that or-introduction is in fact invalid. This response is
found in the recent revision of mental model theory (MMT).
We argue that this revision of the theory leads to a number of
logical problems and counterintuitive consequences for valid
inferences, and present an experiment extending recent
studies showing that people readily accept or-introduction
under probabilistic instructions. We argue for a pragmatic
explanation of why the inference is sometimes considered
odd. The inference is not odd when people reason from their
degrees of belief.

Probabilities in earlier MMT
Earlier versions of mental model theory (MMT) proposed
that people reason by creating a mental representation of the
logical possibilities in which the premises of an inference
are true (e. g. p & q is true in one possibility: that in which
both p and q are true; whereas p or q is true in three
possibilities: when p is true and q false, when p is false and
q true, and when p and q are both true). Each of these
possibilities is called a model. People then eliminate any
models of the premises that contradict one another (e. g. if
Premise 1 of an inference is p or q and Premise 2 is not-p,
then people eliminate the two models of Premise 1 in which
p is true). Finally, people formulate an informative
conclusion based on any models remaining after eliminating
inconsistencies. It was further held that people make errors
in reasoning because they tend to represent only what is true
in a model, and to leave implicit what is false, and because
they tend to leave implicit and then forget entire models.
MMT was originally formulated within the binary
approach to reasoning. Hence it focussed on the truth or
falsity of a statement, given the truth of some other
statements, and proposed the core meaning of conditionals
to correspond to the material conditional (Johnson-Laird &
Byrne, 1991, 2002).
However, MMT was early on extended to reasoning with
extensional probabilities, representing these as proportions
of models or numerical "tags" on models (Girotto &
Johnson-Laird, 2004, 2010; Johnson-Laird, Legrenzi,
Girotto, Legrenzi, & Caverni, 1999; c. f. Geiger &
Oberauer, 2010) in a way consistent with the rules of
probability theory.
MMT has also been recently extended to subjective
probabilities (Khemlani, Lotstein, & Johnson-Laird, 2014).
However, a problem with this account is the lack of clarity
in its computational level specification. For example, it
proposes that people intuitively grasp that the "logical
relation" p or not-p has a probability of 1, but also that
people intuitively compute P(p or q) by taking the average
of p and q (cf. Juslin, Nilsson, & Winman, 2009) – even
though the logical connective is the same in both cases. The
account also provides no means for computing correct

Keywords: or-introduction; reasoning; mental models;
probabilistic approach

The New Paradigm and earlier MMT
There has been a paradigm shift in the psychology of
reasoning (Oaksford & Chater, 2013; Over, 2009), from
binary approaches focussed on drawing conclusions from
arbitrary assumptions, to Bayesian and probabilistic
accounts focussed on people's degrees of belief and belief
revision and updating in reasoning.

The probabilistic approach
A central position in the probabilistic approach is that most
reasoning in both everyday life and science takes place
under uncertainty. This uncertainty cannot be captured in
classical binary logic, but it can be in probability theory
(Adams, 1998; Coletti & Scozzafava, 2002).
A basic hypothesis in this new approach is that people's
degree of belief in a conditional statement, P(if p then q),
does not correspond to the probability of the material
conditional of classical logic (which is equivalent to not-p
or q), but instead to the conditional probability, P(q|p). The
proposal is that people arrive at this conditional probability
by performing a Ramsey test, a mental simulation in which
they hypothetically add p to their beliefs, make any changes
necessary to preserve consistency, and judge the probability
of q on this basis (Evans & Over, 2004; Ramsey,
1929/1990; Stalnaker, 1968). The identity P(if p then q) =
P(q|p) is generally called The Equation (Edgington, 1995)
and has received strong empirical support (Evans, Handley,

259

conditional probabilities, and can therefore not account for
their occurrence. This contrasts with the earlier proposal in
MMT of the subset principle for computing extensional
conditional probabilities (Johnson-Laird et al., 1999), which
could account for both errors and normative responses.

the concept of validity is of course difficult to understand
without a clear definition of "possible". But one way of
operationalising it could be as follows. An inference is valid
in new MMT when the models of the premises contain all
the models of the conclusion. This operationalisation
renders the paradoxes invalid. But it leads to
counterintuitive conclusions for other inferences. For
example, it implies that the inference p or q, therefore p is
valid, even though it is counterintuitive and invalid in
classical and probabilistic logics. At the same time, the
account implies that the inference not-p, therefore not-(p &
q) is invalid, but this is an intuitive inference to make, and it
is valid in classical and probabilistic logics.

New MMT
Johnson-Laird and colleagues recently proposed a radical
revision of MMT that claims to integrate logic further with
probability (Johnson-Laird, Khemlani, & Goodwin, 2015).
The revision changes the meanings of conditionals,
conjunctions and disjunctions. These statement types are
still represented using the same models as before, but
whereas in previous versions of MMT a statement was true
when at least one of its models was true, in the new version
of the theory a statement is true when all of its models are
possible (Johnson-Laird et al., 2015).
A positive consequence of this revision, in our view, is
that the paradoxes of the material conditional are now
considered invalid. For example, the inference q, therefore
if p then q is considered invalid because the model for q
does not establish that all three models of the material
conditional are possible. But the revision creates a number
of logical problems and counterintuitive consequences for
other inferences (Baratgin, Douven, Evans, Oaksford, Over,
& Politzer, 2015; Over & Cruz, in press).

Or-introduction
In what follows we focus on the inference of orintroduction, p, therefore p or q. This inference is valid in
classical logic and in the probabilistic approach because it is
incoherent to judge that P(p) > P(p or q). It was also valid in
previous versions of MMT.
Past studies using binary instructions (asking participants
to assume the premises to be true, and then to judge whether
the conclusion also had to be true) found that people accept
the inference less frequently than other valid inferences
(Braine, Reiser, & Rumain, 1984; Orenes & Johnson-Laird,
2012; Rips, 1983). But the probabilistic approach and
previous versions of MMT agreed that the lower acceptance
rate can be explained through pragmatic factors: p is a
stronger, more informative statement than p or q, and so it is
pragmatically infelicitous to assert p or q when one has
enough information to assert p (Grice, 1989). Orenes &
Johnson-Laird (2012) specified this position further,
suggesting that the pragmatic infelicity of the inference
comes from the fact that the conclusion p or q includes a
model in which the premise p is false. We agree with Grice
(1989) that it is potentially misleading to assert p or q in a
conversation, suggesting that p is possibly false, after
inferring p or q from p (Gilio & Over, 2012).
However, in the new version of MMT or-introduction is
considered invalid for the same reason as the paradoxes: the
model for p does not establish that the three models for the
disjunction are possible. This revision does not take into
account the more recent finding that under probabilistic
instructions (asking participants for their degree of belief in
the premise, and for their degree of belief in the conclusion
given their degree of belief in the premise) or-introduction
is accepted to a high degree, indistinguishable from that of
other, uncontroversially valid inferences (Cruz, Baratgin,
Oaksford, & Over, 2015; Politzer & Baratgin, 2016).
According to the probabilistic approach, people accept the
inference under probabilistic instructions because pragmatic
constraints related to what is asserted in a conversation tend
to be eliminated or reduced when people are asked directly
for their subjective beliefs. Conversational principles about
not misleading our hearers (Grice, 1989) do not apply when
we are making inferences from our own beliefs as premises
to further beliefs in a subjective mental process.

Logical problems with new MMT
"Possible", "true", and "valid"
Johnson-Laird et al. (2015) argue that a statement is true
when all of its models are possible. But it is not clear what
is meant by "possible". It cannot be logical possibility,
because logically the four combinations of the truth and
falsity of p and of q (p & q, p & not-q, not-p & q, not-p &
not-q) are always possible unless they contain a
contradiction (Baratgin et al., 2015). Moreover, with logical
possibility the new version of MMT would imply that the
tautology p or not-p is false because the p & not-p model is
not possible (Baratgin et al., 2015).
Yet a narrower notion of possibility does not seem to
work either. This can be seen if we apply the idea that a
statement is true whenever all of its models are possible to
statements that have a single model. The theory then implies
that a statement p is true when it is possible. But it can be
possible, and readily conceivable, for us to sleep a little
longer tomorrow, and yet be false if we wake up early
instead. Truth does not follow from mere possibility, no
matter how it is defined (Over & Cruz, in press).
A further problem arises when the notion of truth in new
MMT is used to assess the validity of an inference. JohnsonLaird et al. (2015) continue to define an inference as
logically valid when its conclusion is true in every case in
which its premises are true. If a statement is true when all of
its models are possible, then by implication an inference is
valid when the truth of the premises establishes that all
models of the conclusion are possible. This formulation of

260

The assumed invalidity of or-introduction also disables
central logical and probabilistic principles. For example, if
or-introduction is invalid, then so is a version of the
inference in which the disjunction is "packed": p, therefore
superset of p. For example, there is tea, therefore there is
tea or coffee can be paraphrased as there is tea, therefore
there is a hot beverage. Or-introduction thus enables us to
establish basic set-subset relations. If people are unable to
establish such relations, then the MMT account of reasoning
with categorical syllogisms breaks down. Or-introduction is
also used in the proofs of many fundamental theorems of
probability theory, such as the theorem of total probability,
P(p) = P((p & q) + P(p & not-q)), which is itself derived
from the fundamental logical principle that p is equivalent
to (p & q) or (p & not-q). MMT cannot integrate logic and
probability theory while implying that such principles are
invalid.
In what follows we analyse in more detail the relation
between or-introduction and two further inferences: andelimination, p & q, therefore p, and or-MP: if p or q then r,
p, therefore r.

then p or q, p, therefore p or q. The first premise is a
tautology, which always holds and does not have to be
assumed, and the rest is explicit or-introduction (c. f. Over
& Cruz, in press).
We conducted an experiment to test people's intuitions
about the validity of or-introduction, and its relation to andelimination and or-MP, using probabilistic instructions.

Method
Participants
A total of 121 participants from English speaking countries
completed the experiment through the online platform
Prolific Academic. After removing cases that failed a test
question or included trial reaction times of 3 sec or less, 112
participants remained for analysis. They had a mean age of
29 years (range: 18-73), and a varied formal-educational
background. All indicated having at least good English
language skills. Participants' percentage rating of task
difficulty was on average 48%.

Design and materials
And-elimination = or-introduction

Participants were shown the 6 inferences of Table 1 (two
further inferences investigating other questions are not
discussed here due to space constraints). Inferences 1 to 5
were presented three times, with three different premise
probabilities (100%, 80%, and 60%). Inference 6 was only
presented with a premise probability of 100% because one
of its premises is a tautology. Premise probability was
varied with the aim of generalising the results to different
premise probabilities, and was not associated with particular
predictions. For each trial, participants' task was to judge
how likely the conclusion of the inference can be, given the
likelihood of the premise.

And-elimination appears to be valid in the new version of
MMT, because the model of the premise contains all the
models of the conclusion. But the validity of andelimination implies the validity of or-introduction, and vice
versa, as follows:
p & q, therefore p
not-p, therefore not-(p & q)
not-p, therefore not-p or not-q
p, therefore p or q

(by reductio ad absurdum)
(by de Morgan)
(by substitution of terms)

Mental model theory could argue that it does not accept this
proof because one or more of the rules used in the derivation
are itself invalid in the theory. But the invalidity of such
elementary logical rules would have counterintuitive
consequences for a wide range of further inferences.

Table 1. The inferences investigated.
Form
p  p or q
p&qp
q  if p then q
not-p  if p then q
if p or q then r, p  r
if p or q then p or q, p
 p or q
Note. "" = "therefore".
1
2
3
4
5
6

Or-MP: or-introduction through the back door
The inference if p or q then r, p, therefore r can be called orMP because it is the short form of a two-step inference, in
which one first uses or-introduction to infer p or q from p,
then then uses p or q together with if p or q then r to infer r
through the inference of modus ponens (MP).
Under binary instructions or-MP is endorsed to a degree
at least as high as MP (Rips, 1983). The inference also
appears to be valid in new MMT because the models of the
premises contain all the models of the conclusion. But as
outlined above, or-MP includes or-introduction as a
component.
Followers of MMT might reply that, in the new version of
the theory, or-MP is valid directly without the intermediate
step of or-introduction. But the validity of or-MP also
implies the validity of or-introduction in a direct way. If we
substitute p or q for r, the resulting inference is if p or q

Name
or-introduction
and-elimination
Paradox 1
Paradox 2
or-MP (a)
or-MP (b)

The experiment involved three comparisons. The first was
between inference 1 (or-introduction) and inference 2 (andelimination). The probabilistic approach predicts people will
give similar ratings to these two inferences because the
validity of one implies the validity of the other, and asking
directly for people's degree of belief in the conclusion is
expected to reduce pragmatic factors that may have led to
lower acceptance rates of or-introduction using binary
instructions (Orenes & Johnson-Laird, 2012; Rips, 1983). In
contrast, new MMT would predict inference 2 to be

261

accepted to a high degree but inference 1 to be rejected,
because inference 2 is valid but inference 1 is invalid in the
new version of the theory.
The second comparison was between inference 1 (orintroduction) and inferences 3 and 4 (the paradoxes of the
material conditional. The probabilistic approach predicts
people will accept inference 1 to a higher degree than
inferences 3 and 4 because the first is valid but the latter two
invalid. In contrast, new MMT would predict that people
will reject all three inferences to a similar degree, because
they are considered invalid for the same reason in the
theory.
The third comparison was between inference 1 (orintroduction) and inferences 5 and 6 (or-MP). The
probabilistic approach predicts people will endorse
inferences 1, 5 and 6 to a similar degree, because they are
all valid. New MMT would predict inference 5 to be
accepted as valid (by assuming it to be computed in a direct
way without the intermediate step of or-introduction), but
inferences 1 and 6 to be rejected because or-introduction is
invalid on their account.
On each trial participants saw an inference embedded in a
pseudo-naturalistic context story. The context stories
changed on every trial, and were randomly allocated to the
inferences for each participant. The order of occurrence of
the inferences was also varied randomly for each
participant. With 8 inferences (two not reported here) and 3
probabilities (and inference 6 only being paired with a
probability of 100%), there were 22 trials overall, plus two
control trials to check whether participants were paying
attention.

significant and non-significant effects. Effect sizes were
calculated using the formulas suggested by Snijders and
Bosker (2012), requiring the use of ML as opposed to reML
as estimation method. The results are displayed in Figure 1.

Analysis 1: Inferences 1 to 5
We first fitted an overall model with inference (1 to 5)
and probability (100%, 80%, 60%) as independent
variables1. Judgments of conclusion probability increased
with increasing premise probability, F(2, 1568) = 118.76, p
< .001, ηp2 = .074. Mean probability judgments differed
between inferences, F(4, 1568) = 269.09, p < .001, ηp2 =
.334. The size of the effect of premise probability also
differed between inferences, F(8, 1568) = 13.06, p < .001,
ηp2 = .055.

Procedure
After going through the instructions and three practice trials
involving different inferences to those in Table 1,
participants worked through the 24 trials of the experiment.
They then provided demographical information and
indicated whether they had taken part seriously. The final
page provided debriefing information. The experiment took
on average 13.2 minutes to complete.

Figure 1. Judgments of conclusion probability for
inferences 1 to 5 as a function of premise probability.
Error bars show 95% CIs.

Results and discussion
To compare the above predictions of the probabilistic
approach and the revised version of MMT, two linear mixed
model analyses were performed. The procedure for model
construction followed the recommendation of Barr, Levy,
Scheepers, & Tily (2013) of implementing the maximum
possible random effects structure justified by the design.
The models included a random intercept for participants, but
random effects for material could not be included because
the random allocation of materials to inferences had as a
consequence that there were not enough repetitions of the
same type of material within each cell of the design.
Predictor variables were centred around their grand mean to
avoid problems of multicollinearity when including
interaction terms. Comparisons of the main F-test results
with likelihood-ratio tests led to the same pattern of

1

Following the notation of Snijders & Bosker (2012), the
equation for measurement i of participant j was given by:
This random coefficients model had 17 parameters: 1 for the
fixed effect of the intercept, 4 for the fixed effect of
inference, 2 for the fixed effect of premise probability, 8 for
the fixed interaction between inference and premise
probability, 1 for the variance of the intercept, and 1 for the
residual variance. The fact that the predictors were centred
is not represented in the equation due to space constraints.
The equations for the other linear mixed models computed
in the analyses followed the same principles, but are not
reported due to limitations of space.

262

Figure 1 suggests that the interaction between inference
and premise probability can be traced back to the lack of an
effect of premise probability for inference 4. Follow-up
analyses showed that there was indeed no effect of premise
probability for inference 4, F(2, 224) = 1.06, p = .35, ηp2 =
.005. However, the size of the effect of premise probability
still varied between inferences 1, 2, 3 and 5, F(2, 1232) =
189.60, p < .001, ηp2 = .017.
Follow-up analyses to the effect of inference showed that
there was no significant difference in probability judgments
for inference 1 (M = 75.14, SE = 1.34) and inference 2 (M =
78.02, SE = .82) (F(1, 560) = 3.23, p = .073, ηp2 = .005).
This is in accordance with the predictions of the
probabilistic approach, because or-introduction and andelimination can be derived from one another as valid
inferences. The result is at odds with new MMT, which
predicts the second to be valid but the first invalid.
Judgments for inference 1 were higher than those for
inference 3 (M = 59.66, SE = 1.77) (F(1, 560) = 70.028, p <
.001, ηp2 = .085) and than those for inference 4 (M = 37.58,
SE = 1.70) (F(1, 560) = 424.164, p < .001, ηp2 = .371). This
is again in accordance with the probabilistic approach, for
which or-introduction is valid, but the paradoxes of the
material conditional are not. It goes counter to new MMT,
in which the three inferences are invalid for the same
reason.
Judgments for inference 5 (M = 83.85, SE = 1.03) were
slightly higher than those for inference 1 (F(1, 560) = 33.47,
p < .001, ηp2 = .044) and than those for inference 2 (F(1,
672) = 14.990, p < .001, ηp2 = .022). Taken by itself this
finding is in accordance with both the probabilistic approach
and new MMT, because both predict the inference to be
valid. Small differences in the acceptance of valid
inferences are not a problem for either theory, as long as the
difference between responses to valid and responses to
invalid inferences is larger, as Figure 1 clearly corroborates.
The slightly higher acceptance of or-MP than of orintroduction and and-elimination is in accordance with the
fact that or-MP includes MP as a component, and MP tends
to be endorsed at ceiling. Responses to inference 5 become
more consequential to the questions investigated here when
compared to those of inference 6.

in accordance with the probabilistic approach, under which
the two inferences are equivalent, but at odds with new
MMT, which would predict version (b) of the inference to
be rejected because or-introduction is invalid in its account.
An interesting, not anticipated finding concerns the
pattern of results for the paradoxes (inferences 3 and 4). For
inference 4 there was no effect of premise probability, and
judgments of conclusion probability were consistently low.
Judgments for inference 3 were also clearly lower than those
for inferences 1, 2, and 5, but they did covary positively
with premise probability.
A first account of this difference could be as follows. In
the case of inference 4, not-p, therefore if p then q, premise
and conclusion contain no elements in common, and so the
fact that the premise is uninformative about the conclusion
is clearly apparent. Without any information about the
conclusion, people assign a low probability to it, expressing
that it does not follow from the premise. In the case of
inference 3, q, therefore if p then q, the premise is also
uninformative about the conclusion, and so any response is
coherent. But in the absence of further information, it is
reasonable to infer that a given probability of q will remain
invariant under the assumption of p. It therefore makes
sense for responses to covary positively with premise
probability.

General discussion
We investigated the inference of or-introduction and its
relation to and-elimination and or-MP. Earlier research
using binary instructions had found or-introduction to be
accepted less frequently than and-elimination (Rips, 1983).
The recent revision of MMT argues that or-introduction is
in fact invalid. But the assumptions of this revision have
inconsistencies and counterintuitive consequences for other
inferences. We extended recent findings (Cruz et al., 2015;
Polizer & Baratgin, 2016) using probabilistic instructions
and found that or-introduction is accepted to a high degree,
indistinguishable from that of and-elimination. People's
responses to or-MP were slightly higher than those for orintroduction and and-elimination, even though or-MP
contains or-introduction as a component. These findings are
in accordance with the predictions of a Bayesian approach
to the study of reasoning, but not with those of new MMT.
With the exception of the paradoxes, the findings could
also have been accounted for in earlier versions of MMT
concerned with extensional probabilities (Girotto &
Johnson-Laird, 2004, 2010; Johnson-Laird et al., 1999; c. f.
Orenes & Johnson-Laird, 2012). These earlier formulations
converged with the probabilistic approach in holding that
or-introduction is valid, but is sometimes odd for pragmatic
reasons. The results of this experiment provide further
evidence for the pragmatic explanation. The findings also
suggest that people tend to reason using or-introduction in a
more logical and less biased way under probabilistic than
under binary instructions. People's inferences from their
own degrees of belief to further degrees of belief do not
seem to be governed by the conventions of conversation for

Analysis 2: Inferences 1, 5, and 6
We next fitted a model with inference (1, 5, 6) as the
independent variable, using responses for a premise
probability of 100%. Judgments for inference 1 (M = 85.60,
SE = 1.98) were again slightly lower than those for
inference 5 (M = 92.63, SE = 1.98) (F(1, 112) = 8.34, p =
.005, ηp2 = .027) and than those for inference 6 (M = 91.32,
SE = 2.03) (F(1, 112) = 4.69, p = .032, ηp2 = .019).
Judgments for inference 5 did not differ from those for
inference 6 (F(1, 112) = .31, p = .58). Thus version (a) of
or-MP (if p or q then r, p, therefore r) and version (b) of the
inference (if p or q then p or q, p, therefore p or q) were
endorsed to the same degree, even though version (b)
explicitly contains or-introduction as a component. This is

263

speakers and hearers in open discussions, but rather by the
Bayesian principles of belief revision and updating, as
proposed in the new paradigm in the psychology of
reasoning.

(Eds.), Cognition and conditionals: Probability and
logic in human thinking (103-116). Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press.
Grice, H. P. (1989). Studies in the Way of Words.
Cambridge, US: Harvard University Press.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. J. (1991). Deduction.
Hillsdale, US: Erlbaum.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. J. (2002).
Conditionals: A theory of meaning, pragmatics, and
inference. Psychological Review, 109(4), 646-678.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., Khemlani, S., & Goodwin, G. P.
(2015). Logic, probability, and human reasoning.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 19(4), 201-214.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., Legrenzi, P., Girotto, V., Legrenzi, M.
S., & Caverni, J. P. (1999). Naive probability: A
mental model theory of extensional reasoning.
Psychological Review, 106, 62-88.
Juslin, P., Nilsson, H., & Winman, A. (2009). Probability
theory, not the very guide of life. Psychological
Review, 116, 856–874.
Khemlani, S. S., Lotstein, M., & Johnson-Laird, P. N.
(2015). Naive probability: Model-based estimates of
unique events. Cognitive Science, 39, 1216-1258.
Oaksford M., & Chater, N. (2013). Dynamic inference and
everyday conditional reasoning in the new paradigm.
Thinking & Reasoning, 19, 346-379.
Oberauer, K., & Wilhelm, O. (2003). The meaning(s) of
conditionals: Conditional probabilities, mental models,
and personal utilities. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 29, 680693.
Orenes, I., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2012). Logic, models,
and paradoxical inferences. Mind & language, 27(4), 357377.
Over, D. E. (2009). New paradigm psychology of reasoning.
Thinking & Reasoning, 15, 431-438.
Over, D. E., & Cruz, N. (in press). Probabilistic accounts of
conditional reasoning. In L. J. Ball, & V. A. Thompson
(Eds.), International handbook of thinking and
reasoning. Hove, UK: Psychology Press.
Politzer, G., & Baratgin, J. (2016). Deductive schemas with
uncertain premises using qualitative probability
expressions. Thinking & Reasoning, 22(1), 78-98.
Ramsey, F. P. (1990). General propositions and causality. In
D. H. Mellor (Ed.), Philosophical papers (pp. 145163). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
(Original work published 1929).
Rips, L. (1983). Cognitive processes in propositional
reasoning. Psychological Review, 90, 38-71.
Snijders, T. A. B., & Bosker, R. J. (2012). Multilevel
analysis: An introduction to basic and advanced
multilevel modeling. Sage Publications.
Stalnaker, R. (1968). A theory of conditionals. In N.
Rescher (Ed.), Studies in logical theory (pp. 98-112).
Oxford, UK: Blackwell.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the Mexican National Council of Science
and Technology (CONACYT) for supporting this research.

References
Adams, E. (1998). A primer of probability logic. Standford,
US: CLSI publications.
Baratgin, J., Douven, I., Evans, J. St. B. T., Oaksford, M.,
Over, D. E., & Politzer, G. (2015).The new paradigm
and mental models. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
19(10), 547-548.
Barr, D. J., Levy, R., Scheepers, C., & Tily, H. J. (2013).
Random effects structure for confirmatory hypothesis
testing: keep it maximal. Journal of Memory and
language, 68, 255-278.
Barrouillet, P., & Gauffroy, C. (2015). Probability in
reasoning: A developmental test on conditionals.
Cognition, 137, 22-39.
Braine, M. D. S., Reiser, B. J., & Rumain, B. (1984). Some
empirical justification for a theory of natural
propositional logic. Psychology of Learnind and
Motivation, 18, 313– 337.
Coletti, G., & Scozzafava, R. (2002). Probabilistic logic in a
coherent setting. Dordrecht, NL: Kluwer.
Cruz, N., Baratgin, J., Oaksford, M., & Over, D. E. (2015).
Bayesian reasoning with ifs and ands and ors.
Frontiers in Psychology, 6, 192.
Edgington, D. (1995). On conditionals. Mind, 104, 235-329.
Evans, J. St. B. T., Handley, S. J., & Over, D. E. (2003).
Conditionals and conditional probability. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 29, 321-335.
Evans, J. St. B. T., & Over, D. E. (2004). If. Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press.
Fugard, A. J. B., Pfeifer, N., Mayerhofer, B., & Kleiter, G.
D. (2011). How people interpret conditionals: Shifts
toward the conditional event. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 37,
635-648.
Geiger, S. M., & Oberauer, K. (2010). Towards a
reconciliation of mental model theory and probabilistic
theories of conditionals. In In M. Oaksford, & N.
Chater (Eds.), Cognition and conditionals: Probability
and logic in human thinking (289-308). Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press.
Gilio, A., & Over, D.E. (2012). The psychology of inferring
conditionals from disjunctions: A probabilistic study.
Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 56, 118-131.
Girotto, V., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2004). The probability
of conditionals. Psychologia, 47, 207-225.
Girotto, V., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2010). Conditionals
and probability. In In M. Oaksford, & N. Chater

264

