The Role of Linguistic Information in Learning Abstract Words:
Evidence from Children with Specific Language Impairment (SLI)
Gabriella Vigliocco (g.vigliocco@ucl.ac.uk)
Experimental Psychology, University College London
Gower Street, London WC1, UK

Marta Ponari (m.ponari@kent.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, University of Kent
Canterbury CT2 9NP, UK

Courtenay F. Norbury (c.norbury@ucl.ac.uk)
Language and Communication, University College London
Gower Street, London WC1, UK
Abstract
Accounts of abstract word learning suggest that learning these
words relies primarily on access to linguistic cues, such as the
statistical co-occurrence of words with similar semantic
properties. Thus, children with language impairment (LI),
who by definition have impoverished access to linguistic
context, should have disproportionate impairments in abstract
word knowledge. Here, we compared verbal definitions and
lexical decisions to both abstract and concrete words of
children with LI (ages 8 to 13) and both age-matched and
vocabulary-matched typically developing (TD) peers. Relative
to age-matched peers, children with LI had significant deficits
in both tasks. Crucially, however, there was not greater
impairment of abstract words. We conclude that that linguistic
knowledge is not a sine qua non to learning abstract words
and concepts and other mechanisms, which are not
specifically impaired in LI, are at play.
Keywords: abstract concepts; semantic representation;
distributional semantics; lexical decision; specific language
impairment (SLI); vocabulary development.

Introduction
Children learn thousands of words quickly and efficiently,
often without any formal training, and even in impoverished
environments. Learning words is hard because even when
the referent is present in the physical environment, rarely it
is isolated in the visual scene (Medina, Snedeker, Trueswell
& Gleitman, 2011). To make the situation worse, referents
are not always present in the physical environment, either
because they are spatially and/or temporally displaced (e.g.,
talk about past or future events), or because they are abstract
and have no tangible referent. Most theories of vocabulary
acquisition focus on the mechanisms by which words
referring to concrete concepts (i.e. objects, actions and other
events that can be experienced with our senses and through
our own actions) can be learnt; it is less clear how a child
learns abstract concepts, which are not perceivable by the
senses.
It has been argued that children learn the meaning of
concrete words such as “cat” or “run” by observing the
statistical contingencies between the words and the objects,

people and actions occurring in the physical environment
(e.g., Yu and Smith, 2007). In addition, such contingencies
could be enhanced by the use of social communicative cues,
such as eye-gaze, or pointing, through which caregiver
directs attention to the correct referent (Baldwin, 1991) or
by infants actively isolating intended referents from the
visual background by picking them up (Morse, Benitez,
Belpaeme, Cangelosi & Smith, 2015).
Word meanings, however, can also be learnt from the
linguistic context in which the words occur (Firth, 1957).
Recent work has demonstrated how models of semantic
memory, based on co-occurrences of words in text (also
called Distributional Semantic Models), can predict a
variety of semantic effects in adults and children (e.g.,
Andrews, Vigliocco & Vinson, 2009; Bruni, Tran & Baroni,
2014; Landauer & Dumais, 1997; Griffiths, Steyvers &
Tenenbaum, 2007). This strategy could complement, at least
for concrete words, other social-cognitive strategies. For
abstract words, distributional information may provide a
powerful, if not the most important, mechanism for learning
(e.g., Andrews et al., 2009; Johns & Jones, 2012).
In line with distributional semantic models, abstract
words are acquired late in development (Kousta, Vigliocco,
Vinson, Andrews & Del Campo, 2011; Ponari, Norbury &
Vigliocco, in press; Schwanenflugel, 1991). Early studies of
children’s language production (Brown, 1957, reported in
Schwanenflugel, 1991) suggested that 75% of the words
most frequently produced by school-aged children (6-12
years of age) were concrete; in contrast, only 28% of the
words used most commonly by adults were concrete.
Schwanenflugel (1991) further reported that, while 6-yearold children have already mastered the majority of concrete
words most frequently used by adults, it is not until
adolescence that children have mastered the majority of
abstract words used by adults. These facts align well with
the idea that a sufficient amount of linguistic input is
necessary to extract meaning for abstract words.
Thus, if the ability to learn meaning from co-occurrences
in the input is critical for learning abstract concepts and
words, abstract words should be especially challenging for

3441

children with developmental language impairments (LI).
Language impairment is a neurodevelopmental disorder
affecting approximately 7.5% of children at school entry
(Norbury et al. 2016, Tomblin et al. 1997). Children with LI
have language abilities significantly below expectations for
age in the absence of obvious social, sensory or
neurodevelopmental explanations. Children with LI
typically present with severe deficits in morphosyntax and
other aspects of grammar (Rice, 2013), accompanied by
vocabulary that is reduced in both breadth and depth relative
to typically-developing peers (McGregor, Oleson, Bahnsen
& Duff, 2013). Unfortunately there is a dearth of empirical
investigation into the acquisition of abstract words by
children with LI.
Here, we investigate implicit and explicit knowledge of
abstract and concrete words in children with Language
Impairment (LI). Target words were selected at different age
of acquisition bands and controlled for variables that are
known to affect adult processing, including frequency,
number of letters and valence. Lexical decision was used to
test implicit knowledge, while verbal definitions were used
to test explicit knowledge.

years of age; 2: words acquired at 6-7 years; 3: words
acquired at 8-9 years; 4: words acquired at 10-11 years).
Within each AoA band, triplets of negative (valence ratings
< 4.0), positive (valence ratings > 6.0) and neutral (valence
ratings of 4.5-5.5) words matched on length (number of
letters), concreteness, log frequency and familiarity were
created. Triplets of abstract words were then paired to
concrete triplets matching for average length, frequency and
familiarity. Among these 72 words, 24 (12 abstract and 12
concrete) were shared between the two tasks; 24 (12 abstract
and 12 concrete) were used for the definitions task only, and
the remaining 24 were used for the lexical decision task
only. Additionally, for the lexical decision task, forty-eight
pronounceable non-words were created by changing one
phoneme from 48 words matched to the experimental words
on length, AoA, valence and concreteness. All words and
non-words were recorded by a native English speaker using
Audacity v. 1.2.2.

Methods
Participants
Eighteen children with an existing diagnosis of Language
Impairment (LI; 14 males; mean age = 10.03, SD = 1.76)
were recruited from schools in Southeast England. Children
in the TD groups were selected from a pool of 73 children
who completed both tasks and were matched to the children
with LI on age and gender (TDage; n = 18, 14 males; mean
age = 10.34, SD = 1.44) or by raw scores on the British
Picture Vocabulary Scale (BPVS; Dunn, Dunn, Whetton, &
Burley, 1997) (TDvocab; n = 18, 14 males; mean age = 8.16,
SD = 2.12). TD children were recruited from local schools
and did not have any reported special educational needs, or
history of language delay. Children’s non-verbal cognitive
abilities were assessed using the Matrix Reasoning test of
the Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence (WASI,
Wechsler, 1999). LI children were also administered the
Recall Sentences subtest of the Clinical Evaluation of
Language Fundamentals: Core Language Scales (CELF;
Semel, Wiig, & Secord, 2006), see Table 1. The same
children participated in both tasks.

Materials
Thirty-six abstract and 36 concrete words were selected
from a pool of 3,505 words for which normative data on a
range of lexical variables could be obtained. These variables
included: Age of Acquisition (AoA; Kuperman,
Stadthagen-Gonzalez & Brysbaert, 2012), concreteness,
familiarity (Coltheart, 1981), valence (Warriner, Kuperman
& Brysbaert, 2013), and frequency (Balota et al., 2007).
AoA ratings were used to ensure the items selected were
appropriate for our participants’ age: words were divided
into Age of Acquisition bands (1: words acquired at 4-5

Procedure
All children were tested in a quiet room in their school
and received stickers for participation. Stimuli were
presented acoustically using E-Prime version 2.0 software
(Psychology Software Tools, Pittsburgh, PA) running on a
Dell Latitude E6320 laptop with a touchscreen display.
Children were presented with short computer games in
which they were asked to help a cartoon alien learn English.
The Definitions task was always presented before the
Lexical Decision task, in a single session.
Definitions. After wearing the headset (which included a
microphone), children were presented with a practice trial
(the concrete noun: “rose”) before the experiment. They
were encouraged to provide an accurate and comprehensive
definition, including as much information as they could on
the meaning of each word. Each trial included the
presentation of the alien in the center of the computer
screen, along with the auditory presentation of an English
word. Children’s responses were audio-recorded using EPrime and then scored off-line. The 48 words were
presented in four blocks of 12-items arranged in AoA blocks
(block 1: words acquired at 4-5; block 2: words acquired at
6-7; block 3: words acquired at 8-9; block 4: words acquired
at 10-11); words within each block were presented in
random order. The task ended when the subject was unable

3442

to define three words within a single AoA block or
responded to all 48 words.
Scoring of definitions We used a 0 to 4 scale. Four
points were awarded if an answer showed complete
semantic understanding of the word; 3 points if an answer
showed a good understanding of the word (e.g., one or more
features of the concept); 2 points if the answer provided
correct but generic information that doesn't help to identify
the element in an unequivocal way (e.g., giraffe = animal;
anger = a feeling); 1 point if the answer was not wrong, but
poor in content (e.g., evening = is when we dine); 0 point if
the answer was wrong; no answer was given; or the concept
was repeated (e.g. Photo = to take a photo). Scoring was
performed by two independent researchers who were blind
to the identity or diagnosis of the children. Interclass
correlation coefficient (ICC) was computed to determine the
level of agreement between the two scorers, yielding a high
degree of reliability, ICC = .86 (95% CI: .845 - .879), p <
.001. A third independent researcher moderated instances in
which the scores differed by more than 1 point (12.6% of all
definitions), and the instances in which only one scorer
awarded a score of 0; all other scores were averaged.
Lexical decision. Children were presented with six practice
trials (three non-words and three words that were not used in
the experiment). In each trial, a cartoon alien was presented
in the middle of the screen for 1000ms, followed by the
auditory presentation of either a real English word or a nonword. Immediately after the offset of the word (average
stimulus duration = 830 ms), two touch screen buttons
appeared at the bottom left (a red thumbs-down icon) or the
bottom right (a green thumbs-up icon) of the screen (see
Figure 1).

Figure 1 – Lexical decision task. Trial timeline.
Children were instructed to press the green button when they
heard a word they knew, or the red button if they heard a
“funny, made-up” word. After the six practice items,
participants completed all 96 items (24 abstract and 24
concrete words, plus 48 non-words) presented in a
randomised order.
Data analysis Separate mixed-design ANOVAs with
concreteness (abstract, concrete) as within-subject factor and

group (LI, TD) as between-subject factor were used to
analyse average rating (in the definition task) and accuracy
(in the lexical decision task), for both age-matched groups
and vocabulary-matched groups.
We further assessed the individual performance of
children with LI on abstract and concrete words against the
difference in those conditions exhibited by matched TD
controls, using the Revised Standardized Difference Test
(RSDT) (Crawford and Garthwaite, 2005a, 2005b). This test
was developed in neuropsychology research to test for
dissociation between patient performance on two or more
tasks. Here, the two concreteness sets (abstract, concrete)
are treated as the two different ‘tasks’, and the difference in
performance between them is evaluated against TD
averages. The RSDT controls for Type I error rates when
there are correlations between the tasks under study; we
entered simple correlations between abstract and concrete
raw scores from the TD groups.

Results
Definitions
Only 13.4% of our TD children could provide any
definition for words of AoA block 4 (words acquired at 1011); therefore, we excluded block 4 from further analyses,
thus reducing the total number of items to 36 words (18
abstract and 18 concrete).
LI vs TDage. Average accuracy ratings for definitions
provided by children with LI and matched TDage children for
concrete and abstract words are shown on Figure 2 (topleft). A mixed ANOVA yielded a significant main effect of
#
concreteness, F(1, 34) = 9.277, p = .004, !" = .214, with
concrete words (1.31) attracting more complete and accurate
definitions than abstract words (0.80). The main effect of
#
group was also significant, F(1, 34) = 20.314, p < .001, !"
= .374; definitions provided by children with LI (0.80) were
rated as significantly poorer in quality than those given by
their age-matched TD peers (1.63). However, the group ×
concreteness interaction was not significant (p = .427),
indicating that poor quality definitions were provided for
both abstract and concrete words by children with LI.
LI vs TDvocab. One TDvocab child did not complete the task
and his definitions were excluded along with data from the
matched child with LI. Average ratings of definitions
provided by LI and matched TDvocab children (n = 17 per
group) for concrete and abstract words are shown on Figure
2 (top-right). Analyses demonstrate a significant main effect
#
of concreteness, F(1, 32) = 21.687, p < .001, !" = .404,
with concrete words (1.31) eliciting more accurate and
detailed definitions than abstract words (0.86). Importantly,
the group × concreteness interaction were not significant (all
p > .170).

Individual LIs vs control group comparisons.
Individual performance of LI children against matched
TDage and TDvocab groups is shown on Figure 2 (bottom). For
all children with the LI group, the abstract vs concrete

3443

comparison was not significantly different from the pattern
shown by both age-matched and vocabulary-matched peers.

LIage vs TDage. Proportion of correct responses of the 14 LI
and matched TDage children for concrete and abstract words
is shown on Figure 3 (top-left). There was no main effect of
concreteness, F(1, 26) = 1.203, p = .283; but the main effect
#
of group was significant, F(1, 26) = 7.971, p = .009, !" =
.235, indicating that TDage children (.85) were more accurate
overall than children with LIage (.72). Crucially, the group ×
concreteness interaction was not significant.
LIvocab vs TDvocab. Two TDvocab children did not complete
the task; therefore they were excluded along with their
matched LI partner. This left 12 children per group for the
LI – TDvocab comparison. The proportion of correct
responses of LI and TDvocab children for concrete and
abstract words is shown on Figure 2 (top-right). In this
analysis, there were no significant main effects of
concreteness, F(1, 22) = 1.234, p = .279, or valence, F(2,
44) =.376, p = .689. Crucially, the main effect of group and
the group × concreteness interaction were also not
significant (all p > .330).

Figure 2 - Top: Average score (on a 0-4 scale) of definitions
to abstract and concrete words, comparing performance of
LI with TDage (N = 18; left), and with TDvocab (N = 17; right)
children. Error bars indicate standard error of the mean.
Bottom: Proportion of errors for individual LI children and
the TDage and TDvocab groups in defining abstract and
concrete words. ^Child LI4 was not included in the
comparison with the TDvocab group. Error bars for the TD
groups data indicate standard error of the mean.

Lexical decision. In order to ensure children attention and
compliance to task instructions, the examiner controlled
stimulus presentation and did not ask the children to respond
quickly, but rather as accurately as possible. Reaction times
are therefore not reliable and our analyses are limited to
accuracy (proportion of correct responses).
Pre-processing. We checked the children’s overall
performance with words and non-words to determine
whether some of the children showed a bias toward either
answering “word” or “non-word”. We computed the
response bias (or criterion, c), calculated by multiplying the
sum of the normalised hit rate (correctly identifying a word)
and the normalised false alarm rate (incorrectly claiming
that a non-word was a word) by -0.5 (e.g., Fox, 2004). The
average criterion bias was -0.002 (SD = 0.33) for TD
children, and -0.02 (SD = 0.50) for children with LI.
Children who showed a criterion bias higher than 1.5
standard deviations above their group mean (indicating a
strong bias toward “non-word” responses) or lower than 1.5
standard deviations below their group mean (indicating a
strong bias toward “word” responses) were excluded from
further analyses. Using these criteria, 3 children were
excluded from the LI group (LI9: c = -0.97; LI12: c = -0.74;
LI17: c = -0.97); to maintain the matching between the LI
and TD groups, we also excluded the corresponding TD
children.

Figure 3 – Top: Proportion of correct responses to abstract
and concrete words, comparing performance of LI with
TDage (N = 14; left), and LI with TDvocab (N = 12; right)
children. Bottom: Proportion of correct responses of
individual LI children and the TDage and TDvocab groups for
recognition of abstract and concrete words. Children LI3
and LI7 were not included in the comparison with the
TDvocab group. The asterisk indicate one child who showed a
greater difference between abstract and concrete words
when compared against TDage data (p < 0.05, two-tailed).
Error bars indicate standard error of the mean.
Individual LIs vs control group comparisons. Individual
performance of LI children against matched TDage and
TDvocab groups is shown on Figure 3 (bottom). In general,
the discrepancy between abstract and concrete words was
not significantly different from the discrepancy pattern
shown by both age-matched and vocabulary-matched TD
children. Only one child with LI (LI8) showed a

3444

significantly larger difference between abstract and concrete
words when compared to TDage peers, t(13) = 3.342, p =
.005. This difference reflected an advantage for concrete
(.79) over abstract (.42) words. In all other children, the
abstract vs concrete comparison was not significantly
different from either TDage or TDvocab matched controls.

Discussion
We compared performance of children with LI to that of
age-matched or vocabulary-matched TD peers on two tasks:
the first, a verbal definitions task, provided an explicit
measure of children’s semantic knowledge of abstract and
concrete words. The second, a lexical decision task, did not
require linguistic output and served as implicit measure of
word processing. Both tasks used concrete and abstract
words that were matched on a number of variables known to
affect word processing in adults, such as frequency, valence,
age of acquisition and length.
In the definition task, we found a significant effect of
concreteness, indicating that concrete words were easier to
define by both children with LI and their age- and
vocabulary-matched peers. This may be because to define
abstract words, children need to retrieve other abstract
words and these latter may be more difficult (not just
because of their abstractness but also because they may be
longer, less familiar etc) than the concrete words they need
to retrieve for defining the concrete stimuli. Importantly, we
found that children with LI were significantly worse than
their age-matched peers in defining all words, both concrete
and abstract. When compared with younger TD children
matched for receptive vocabulary, no difference was found
between the two groups. There were no significant
interactions between concreteness and group, indicating that
even when LI children are worse overall than TD peers in
defining words, they do not have disproportionate
difficulties defining abstract words. By analysing the
performance of individual LI children against the difference
between abstract and concrete words shown by the two TD
comparison groups, we further demonstrated that this is a
finding consistent across the whole sample. No individual
child with LI showed a greater impairment defining abstract
words relative to concrete words.
In the lexical decision task, there was no significant
effect of concreteness, which is consistent with findings in
the adult literature that, when all lexical variables that have
been shown to favour concrete words (such as length and
familiarity) are tightly controlled, the concreteness
advantage disappears (see Kousta et al., 2011). Critically,
we again found that children with LI were significantly less
accurate overall in making decisions about words relative to
their age-matched TD peers, but there was no interaction
between group and concreteness. In other words, even on
this implicit task, children with LI were not
disproportionately impaired in their processing of abstract
words compared to concrete words. The case-series analyses
comparing individual LI children with their age- or
vocabulary-matched controls once again confirmed that

even at an individual level, children with LI responded to
abstract and concrete words in a similar manner to that of
TD children, for all but one child (LI8).
These findings challenge any theory that posits
linguistic competence as a necessary prerequisite for
acquiring abstract words. Children with LI do not have the
same vocabulary competence as typically developing
children (McGregor et al., 2013), moreover it has been
shown that they do not take advantage of correlational
information to the same extent as their typically developing
peers (Evans, Saffran & Robe-Torres, 2009). For all these
reasons, learning abstract words should present an almost
insurmountable challenge for them. However, children with
LI in the current study, despite their language limitations,
did not show any evidence of disproportionate deficits in
abstract word knowledge.
Distributional Semantics models offer a powerful
mechanistic account of how word meanings can be acquired
from language. On the basis of the linguistic contexts in
which a word is used, children could make inferences about
word meaning (e.g., Landauer & Dumais, 1997, Griffiths et
al., 2007; Andrews, Vinson & Vigliocco, 2009). Such a
mechanism would be at play for both concrete and abstract
words, although it could play a greater role for abstract
words. Our results indicate that whereas these mechanisms
can be at play, there is no evidence for them to have a
different role for concrete and abstract words. Our results
may also be considered to be problematic (especially if
replicated with argument bearing verbs) for the “syntactic
bootstrapping hypothesis (e.g., Gleitman et al., 2005),
according to which phrasal and syntactic information is used
to constrain possible word meanings. Gleitman et al. (2005)
specifically discuss how this information may be especially
important in learning verbs (which are more abstract than
nouns). Under the plausible assumption that our children
with LI have a history of problems in processing sentencelevel linguistic structure, our results suggest that such a
strategy may not be the only manner in which children learn
abstract vocabulary.
Thus, other mechanisms are also at play. Ponari,
Norbury, and Vigliocco (in press) presented initial evidence
that learning abstract words could be based on multiple
strategies and, at least in the earlier stages of acquisition,
take advantage of the strong association between
abstractness and emotional valence (Kousta et al., 2011).
Emotional valence could support the establishment of the
distinction between concrete and abstract domains of
knowledge because, while concrete words would refer to
observable entities and actions that we can experience with
our senses and act upon, abstract words would refer to
internal states of self and others that trigger embodied
emotional reactions and experiences. These emotional
reactions could come about from interactions with
caregivers in which children associate words heard with
emotions expressed by the caregivers or by the child
themselves. Such a view posits that communicative social
interaction would play a central role in language acquisition,

3445

along the lines proposed by recent social-cognitive theories
of lexical development (e.g., Tomasello, 2000). To this end,
it is important to note that children with LI do not show
evidence of fundamental socio-cognitive deficits. It is
interesting to note that emotion, however, does not seem to
have a privileged role abstract vocabulary after the age of 9
(cf. Ponari et al., 2017). It is likely that by this age,
strategies grounded in basic socio-cognitive processes (e.g.,
ability to make inferences on others intentions) or emotional
experience become insufficient to differentiate among the
meanings of an increasingly larger number of abstract words
in the child’s vocabulary and language-based strategies may
become more important.
References
Andrews, M., Vigliocco, G., & Vinson, D. (2009). Integrating
experiential and distributional data to learn semantic
representations. Psychological Review, 116(3), 463–98.
Baldwin, D. A. (1991). Infants’ Contribution to the Achievement
of Joint Reference on JSTOR. Child Development, 62(5), 875–
890.
Balota, D. a, Yap, M. J., Cortese, M. J., Hutchison, K. a, Kessler,
B., Loftis, B., … Treiman, R. (2007). The English Lexicon
Project. Behavior Research Methods, 39(3), 445–59.
Bruni, E., Tran, N. K., & Baroni, M. (2014). Multimodal
Distributional Semantics. Journal of Artificial Intelligence
Research, 49, 1–47.
Coltheart, M. (1981). The MRC psycholinguistic database. The
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology Section A,
33(4), 497–505.
Crawford, J. R., & Garthwaite, P. H. (2005). Testing for suspected
impairments and dissociations in single-case studies in
neuropsychology: Evaluation of alternatives using Monte Carlo
simulations and revised tests for dissociations.
Neuropsychology, 19(3), 318-331.
Dunn, L. M., Dunn, L. M., Whetton, C., & Burley, J. (1997).
British Picture Vocabulary Scale, 2nd edition. Windsor, UK:
NFER-Nelson.
Evans, J., Saffran, J. & Robbe-Torres, K. (2009). Statistical
learning in children with specific language impairment.
Journal of Speech, Language and Hearing Research, 52(2),
321-335.
Firth, J. R. (1957). Papers in linguistics, 1934-1951. Oxford
University Press.
Fox, J. R. (2004). A Signal Detection Analysis of Audio/Video
Redundancy Effects in Television News Video.
Communication Research, 31(5), 524–536.
Gleitman, L. R., Cassidy, K., Nappa, R., Papafragou, A., &
Trueswell, J. C. (2005). Hard words. Language Learning and
Development, 1(1), 23–64.
Griffiths, T. L., Steyvers, M., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2007). Topics
in semantic representation. Psychological Review, 114(2), 211–
44.
Johns, B. T., & Jones, M. N. (2012). Perceptual inference through
global lexical similarity. Topics in Cognitive Science, 4(1),
103–20.
Kousta, S.-T., Vigliocco, G., Vinson, D. P., Andrews, M., & Del
Campo, E. (2011). The representation of abstract words: why
emotion matters. Journal of Experimental Psychology.
General, 140(1), 14–34.

Kuperman, V., Stadthagen-Gonzalez, H., & Brysbaert, M. (2012).
Age-of-acquisition ratings for 30,000 English words. Behavior
Research Methods, 44(4), 978–90.
Landauer, T. K., & Dumais, S. T. (1997). A solution to Plato’s
problem: The latent semantic analysis theory of acquisition,
induction, and representation of knowledge. Psychological
Review, 104(2), 211–240.
McGregor, K. K., Oleson, J., Bahnsen, A., & Duff, D. (2013).
Children with developmental language impairment have
vocabulary deficits characterized by limited breadth and depth.
International Journal of Language & Communication
Disorders, 48(3), 307–319.
Medina, T. N., Snedeker, J., Trueswell, J. C., & Gleitman, L. R.
(2011). How words can and cannot be learned by observation.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108(22),
9014–9019.
Morse, A. F., Benitez, V. L., Belpaeme, T., Cangelosi, A., &
Smith, L. B. (2015). Posture Affects How Robots and Infants
Map Words to Objects. PLOS ONE, 10(3), e0116012.
Norbury, C.F. et al. (2016). The impact of non-verbal IQ on
prevalence and clinical presentation of language disorder:
evidence from a population study. Journal of Child Psychology
and Psychiatry, 57(1), 65-73.
Ponari, M, Norbury, C. & Vigliocco, G. (2017). Acquisition of
abstract concepts is influenced by emotional valence.
Developmental Science, DOI: 10.1111/desc.12549
Rice, M. L. (2013). Language growth and genetics of specific
language impairment. International Journal of SpeechLanguage Pathology, 15(3), 223–33.
Schwanenflugel, P. J. (1991). Why are abstract concepts hard to
understand? In P. J. Schwanenflugel (Ed.), The psychology of
word meanings (pp. 223–250). Hillsdale, NJ, England:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Semel, E., Wiig, E. H., & Secord, W. A. (2006). Clinical
Evaluation of Language Fundamentals (4th ed.). San Antonio,
TX: PsychCorp.
Tomasello, M. (2000). The Social-Pragmatic Theory Of Word
Learning. Pragmatics.
Tomblin, J. B., Records, N. L., Buckwalter, P., Zhang, X., Smith,
E., & O’Brien, M. (1997). Prevalence of specific language
impairment in kindergarten children. Journal of Speech,
Language, and Hearing Research: JSLHR, 40(6), 1245–60.
Warriner, A. B., Kuperman, V., & Brysbaert, M. (2013). Norms of
valence, arousal, and dominance for 13,915 English lemmas.
Behavior Research Methods, 45, 1191–207.
Wechsler, D. (1999). Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence
(WASI) - Subject Baseline. New York, NY: The Psychological
Corporation: Harcourt Brace & Company.
Yu, C., & Smith, L. (2007). Rapid Word Learning Under
Uncertainty via Cross-Situational Statistics. Psychological
Science, 18(5), 414–420.

3446

