The Role of Letter Frequency on Eye Movements in Sentential Pseudoword Reading
Cengiz Acartürk
(acarturk@metu.edu.tr)

Özkan Kılıç
(ozkankilic@ybu.edu.tr)

Middle East Technical University
Cognitive Science Program
Ankara, Turkey

Yildirim Beyazit University, Computer Engineering
Middle East Technical University, Cognitive Science
Ankara, Turkey

Bilal Kırkıcı
(bkirkici@metu.edu.tr)

Burcu Can
(burcucan@cs.hacettepe.edu.tr)

Ayşegül Özkan
(oaysegul@metu.edu.tr)

Middle East Technical University,
Foreign Language Education
Ankara, Turkey

Hacettepe University,
Computer Engineering
Ankara, Turkey

Middle East Technical University,
Cognitive Science Program
Ankara, Turkey

Abstract

Stoianov, Sperduti & Zorfib, 2015), neuroimaging of
reading (Mechelli, Gorno-Tempini & Price, 2003), and
dyslexia (Grainger, Bouttevin, Truc, Bastien & Ziegler,
2003; Houpt, Sussman, Townsend & Newman, 2015) have
been among the major topics that have been studied through
the use of pseudowords as experimental stimuli.
Pseudowords have been employed to test models of word
and letter perception, such as the interactive activation
model of context effects in letter perception (McClelland, &
Rumelhart, 1981).

For a language learner, any new word is a pseudoword. A
pseudoword is a string of of letters or phonemes that sounds
like an existing word in a language, though it has no meaning
in the lexicon. On the other hand, speakers are well aware of
permissible phonemes, their frequencies and collocations in
their language due to the phonotactics inherent in the
language. For example, saktal is a pseudoword in Turkish,
whereas szyan is not, due to Turkish phonotactics. This study
investigates the relationship between pseudoword letter
formation and eye movement characteristics in reading. In
particular, we examine the role of Turkish vowel harmony,
middle-word consonant collocation, and word-initial and
word-final consonants on eye movements with adult native
speakers reading sentences that involve predesigned Turkish
pseudowords. The results of an experiment with 34
participants are indicative of the role of pseudoword
formation on a set of eye movement parameters.
Keywords: Consonant collocations; Eye movements,
Pseudowords; Reading; Turkish; Vowel harmony.

Introduction
If native speakers of English are asked to judge the
acceptability of the words, wug, toysion, or craphen, they
are likely to rate them as acceptable. Similarly, Turkish
speakers may judge talar as a possible Turkish word though
they hear it for the first time. These are all pseudowords,
which sound like existing words in a language, without
semantic content.
Pseudowords are commonly used as experiment stimuli in
research in psychology, linguistics, neuroscience, and
cognitive science. They are especially useful when
researchers aim at overcoming likely effects of semantics in
the experiments. Phonological well-formedness of words
(Hammond, 2004), morphological productivity (Anshen &
Aronoff, 1988), language development (Dabrowska, 2006),
judgment of semantic similarity (MacDonald & Ramscar,
2001), vowel harmony (Pycha, Novak, Shosted & Shin,
2003), machine learning for orthography (Testolin,

Previous studies have revealed that native speakers seem to
make their judgments by using a probable combination of
sounds (Hammond, 2004; Shademan, 2007), the cooccurrence of syllables or consonant collocations locally
(Hay, Pierrehumbert & Beckman, 2004), non-locally
(Finley, 2012; Frisch & Zawaydeh, 2001; Koo & Callahan;
2011), or through nucleus-coda combination probabilities
(Treiman, Kessler, Knewasser, Tincoff & Bowman, 2000).
Accordingly, the acceptability judgments of pseudowords
are connected to orthographic neighborhood (e.g., Davis,
2010, see Rayner, Pollatsek, Ashby, Clifton Jr., 2012, for a
review), which takes into account the relative positions of
consonants and vowels (Perea & Lupker, 2004), as well as
letter position coding through adjacent bigrams (Seidenberg
& McClelland, 1989) and open bigrams of letters (Whitney,
2001).
For Turkish, a language with shallow orthography, it has
been shown that some of the properties that characterize
pseudowords can be captured from a written corpus in
parallel to native speakers’ judgment (Kilic, 2014). Against
this background, the present study first employs corpusbased frequencies for the formation of pseudowords
according to a set of criteria, including the relative positions
of consonants and vowels in pseudowords. Then we
investigate pseudoword processing by locating the
pseudowords in sentential contexts and having native
speakers read them in sentential contexts. The underlying
approach is that we capture eye movement characteristics as

1495

an indicator of word processing, which may enrich our
knowledge about word processing by providing data that go
beyond response time (cf. lexical decision tasks). In other
words, we propose that sentential pseudoword reading, as
we name it, has the potential to contribute to our
understanding of word processing through the study of the
relationship
between
subword
characteristics
of
pseudowords and eye movement parameters.

(1)

Three dominant experimental factors that have been found
to influence eye movement characteristics in reading are
word length, frequency and sentential predictability
(Rayner, Sereno & Raney, 1996; Rayner, 1998; Rayner,
Pollatsek, Ashby, Clifton Jr., 2012). In the present study, we
controlled word length by forming pseudowords of six
letters. Using pseudowords allowed us to ignore sentential
predictability and word-level frequency as factors for
experimental control. Instead, we focused on subword
frequencies that are specified by the combinations of the
letters that form six-letter pseudowords. We studied three
specific types of combinations by designing high-frequency
and low-frequency letter bigrams for experimental purposes:
• Vowel combinations that follow vowel harmony
• Middle-word consonant collocation
• Word-beginning and word-end consonants
Silent reading is under the influence of inner speech. If a
pseudoword is hard to speak out loud, it is also hard to read
silently. In this study, we hypothesize that these three
variables will affect pseudoword reading in Turkish as high
frequency ensures easy pronunciation, whereas low
frequency of these variables lead to difficult pronunciation.
It is also expected that adjacent dependencies will have a
strong influence on pseudoword reading. In the following
section, we present an overview of these characteristics of
word structure in Turkish.

The Turkish Language
Turkish is an agglutinating language, read from left-to-right,
with a considerably shallow orthography using 8 vowels and
21 consonants derived from the Roman Alphabet (Göksel &
Kerslake, 2005; Lewis, 2000). The description of Turkish
word structure depends on morphophonological constraints.
The continuation of a morpheme and the selection of the
corresponding morph are determined by the preceding
morph. The final vowel in the preceding morph affects the
form of the vowel in the incoming morpheme (Turkish
vowel harmony). Similarly, the final consonant in the most
recent morph causes some changes on the first consonant of
the next morpheme (Assimilation).
While a morpheme with a vowel is concatenated to a string
in Turkish, its vowel is modified with respect to the
roundedness and backness properties of the most recent
vowel in the string as in (1).

at-lar
horse-Plu
horses

kedi-ler
cat-Plu
cats

okul-lar
school-Plu
schools

This is not an immediate dependency because diphthongs
and consecutive vowel collocations are usually not allowed
in Turkish. When the corpus frequencies are investigated, it
is seen that the frequencies of words containing a…a or e…i
as substrings are higher than the frequencies for the words
with ı…ü or o…e. In other words, frequencies mimic vowel
harmony. Similarly, some immediate consonant collocations
are more frequent than others due to assimilation as shown
in (2) for the ablative case marker -DAn.
(2)

ev-den
house-Abl
from house

et-ten
meat-Abl
from meat

yatak-tan
bed-Abl
from bed

Accordingly, some consonant collocations, such as vd, tt,
and kt, are more frequent than vt, td, and kd. These are
infrequent but not zero frequencies because there are
exceptions to assimilation as well as vowel harmony.
Another salient aspect of Turkish word structure is word
boundary. Some letters, e.g., k, g, d, z and y, are observed
more frequently than, e.g., c, g, r, v, and f in word-initial or
word-final position. Even Turkish words in root forms
mostly follow the regularities briefly exemplified above. In
this study, word-initial and word-final boundaries are
treated as a single variable (either low or high frequency
letters at both boundaries) to keep the stimuli size
manageable and the experiment duration reasonable.
The present study examines the effects of the
aforementioned three major aspect of word formation in
Turkish, namely the frequency of vowel combinations that
follow vowel harmony (henceforth, vowel harmony
collocation), the frequency of middle-word consonant
collocations (henceforth, consonant collocation), and the
frequency of word-beginning and word-end consonants
(henceforth, word boundary collocation) on eye movement
characteristics in sentential reading. These three variables
are assumed to be binary variables with either high
frequency or low frequency in a 2 x 2 x 2 design. A total of
80 pseudowords were created as experimental stimuli. The
letter bigram frequencies were obtained from the METU
Turkish Corpus (Say, Zeyrek, Oflazer & Ozge, 2002). All
pseudowords had the same template of vowels (V) and
consonants (C) shown in (3).
(3) C1V1C2C3V2C4
Low-frequency or high-frequency vowel collocations, i.e.
V1V2, were selected, where high-frequency pairs of V1V2
followed the rules of Turkish vowel harmony. Similarly,
high-frequency and low-frequency pairs were selected for
the consonant collocation C2C3, and for the word boundary

1496

collocation C1C4. Below, we present the experiment, its
methods, materials and the results obtained.

Experiment
Thirty-four university students at Middle East Technical
University (METU), Turkey, participated in the experiment
(18 female and 16 male university students, mean age:
23.59, SD: 5.04). The participants were asked to read
silently 80 single-line sentences displayed separately on a
computer screen while their eye-movements were recorded
by an EyeLink 1000Hz desktop eye tracker. Each sentence
included one pseudoword, which was located around the
middle of the display. The stimuli were shown in random
order. Simple true/false questions were asked randomly
after some screens to ensure active engagement of the reader
with the task. 20 random and simple true/false questions,
which were about words other than the pseudowords in the
sentences, were asked as well in order to ensure that the
participants had been actively reading. The experiment was
conducted in single sessions. Each session took
approximately 40 minutes. The participants were paid 25 TL
(approximately 6$) as an incentive for participation.

Material
A total of 80 pseudowords of the form C1V1C2C3V2C4 were
formed for the eight categories (cf. 2 x 2 x 2 design of highand low-frequency bigrams) by using orthographic
frequencies obtained from the METU Turkish Corpus.
Frequency was specified as a binary variable, with either
high or low values. For example, if the frequency of a
consonant bigram is above the mean of the frequencies of
all possible bigrams, it was assumed to be a high consonant
collocation frequency for selecting C2C3. Otherwise, it was
assumed to be a low frequency consonant collocation.
Similarly, high-frequency and low-frequency bigrams were
selected for the word boundary collocations C1C4, and for
the vowel harmony collocations V1V2. We did not
distinguish between onset and offset frequencies while
studying the bigrams in the corpus to keep the experiment
design simple. Below, we present more detail about the
three types of collocations.
Turkish Vowel Harmony Collocation (V1V2). Since
Turkish has eight vowels, 8 x 8 vowel bigrams were
produced and their frequencies were calculated from the
METU corpus. The vowels might have zero or more
intervening characters in between. For example, while a…a
is a very frequent vowel substring, ı…ü is an unlikely one.
We calculated all available vowel bigrams. The highfrequency bigrams represented Turkish vowel harmony,
whereas the ones with low frequency were due to the words
that were exceptions to vowel harmony.
Consonant Collocation (C2C3). Turkish has 21 consonants.
Therefore, 21 x 21 bigrams from bb to zz were produced by
calculating their bigram frequencies from the corpus. For
example, ml is much above the average of all possible

bigram frequencies while fv is very rare in the corpus.
Accordingly, high-frequency consonant collocations and
low-frequency consonant collocations were identified for
forming the pseudoword consonant collocations of the form
C2C3. In contrast to vowel harmony collocations, only
adjacent bigrams were calculated for consonant collocation
since C2C3 is an adjacent-bigram collocation.
Word Boundary Collocation (C1C4). The frequency values
of the 21x21 bigrams, from b…b to z…z, were produced
from the 21 consonants in Turkish and their word boundary
frequencies were calculated from the corpus. Since C1C4 is
not an adjacent-bigram collocation, we allowed intervening
characters between the first character of words and the last
character when calculating the bigram frequencies. For
example, k is a frequent word-initial boundary while z is a
frequent word-final boundary in Turkish, making k...z a
frequent word boundary pattern, whereas f…b is a very rare
word boundary co-occurrence in Turkish.
Since each of the three independent variables can be either
high or low frequency, eight (2 x 2 x 2) groups, each of
which had ten representative pseudowords, were formed.
Eight samples from the 80-pseudoword set are shown in
Table 1.
Table 1: Pseudoword groups and representative samples
V1V2: Low
C 2C 3:
C 2C 3:
C1C4: Low
C1C4: High

V1V2: High
C 2C 3:
C 2C 3:

Low

High

Low

High

vöfvac
töjkır

nındüd
köndız

lagşav
hupşar

remliv
kadraz

V1V2: Vowel harmony frequency
C2C3: Consonant collocation frequency
C1C4: Word boundary frequency

The pseudowords were located around the center of 80
meaningful and different sentences of similar length (63 to
65 characters). For avoiding likely effects of the
orthographic features of the neighbor words, the pre-target
word was fixed in the sentences: The word “aslında”
(English ‘actually’), which is a very frequent Turkish adverb
was consistently used as the single pre-target word. For
preventing parafoveal information intake from the posttarget word, we used the frequent Turkish bigram bi- such
that all the post-target words started with this same bigram
(cf. Lima & Inhoff, 1985). A sample sentence is shown in
(4), where GEN is the genitive marker, PLU is the plural
marker, NEG is the negative marker, PASS is the passive
marker, and PAST is the past tense marker in Turkish. The
target pseudoword is underlined.
(4) Siz-in

1497

mektuplar aslında köndız bitmez dendiği için

Your-GEN letter-PLU indeed

dağıtılmamış.
distribute-PAST-NEG.

köndız end-NEG say-PASS for

In (4), the target word is the pseudoword köndız. It has a
low-frequency vowel harmony collocation V1V2, in this
case öı; a high-frequency consonant collocation C2C3 nd;
and a high-frequency boundary collocation C1C4 kz. (sample
sentences are provided in the Appendix).

Results & Discussion
We calculated a set of eye movement measures, as listed
below.
• First fixation duration is the duration of the first
fixation on the first-pass reading of the target
pseudoword.
• First pass gaze duration is the sum of individual
fixation durations in the first-pass reading of the
target pseudoword. In other words, the entire word
is an area-of-interest and this value represents the
total time spent by a participant before his/her gaze
left the word for the first time.
• First pass fixation count is the sum of individual
fixations in the first-pass reading of the target
pseudoword. The first-pass reading covers all the
fixations on the word without leaving it. If the eye
shifts from a pseudoword to another word on its
right, the first pass is over. If the eye shifts from a
pseudoword to another word on its left, the first
pass is over, as well.
• Regression in count is the number of regression
fixations that return to the target pseudoword after
the first-pass reading. If the gaze re-fixates on a
previously fixated word, but this time from its
right, this is called Regression-in.
The mean values for those eye movement parameters, for
the eight pseudoword categories are shown in Table 2.
Table 2: Mean values for eye movement parameters on
target pseudowords
V1V2: Low
C 2C 3:
C 2C 3:
Low

C1C4: Low
C1C4: High

V1V2: High
C 2C 3:
C 2C 3:

High
Low
High
First Fixation Duration (ms)

265.97
259.74

253.67
247.01

259.58
274.45

253.72
258.06

First Pass Gaze Duration (ms)

C1C4: Low
C1C4: High

467.97
426.58

C1C4: Low
C1C4: High

1.86
1.76

435.13
360.19

454.60
431.32

390.80
331.75

First Pass Fixation Count

1.86
1.57

1.84
1.71

1.66
1.40

Regression in Count

C1C4: Low
C1C4: High

1.27
1.23

1.29
1.28

1.18
1.28

1.22
1.34

We also calculated the averages for eye movement measures
for the six-letter, legitimate words of the form CVCCVC in
the sentences (excluding the sentence-initial word, the
sentence-end words, and post-target words). We found nine
words as such, in the stimuli sentence set. Table 3 shows the
mean values, which can be taken as a baseline for
comparison with the pseudoword values.
Table 3: Mean values for eye movement parameters on
legitimate words
First Fixation Duration (ms)
First Pass Gaze Duration (ms)
First Pass Fixation Count
Regression in Count

201.65
237.33
1.20
1.20

The data in Table 3 are not sufficiently representative due to
the limited number of words. On the other hand, the values
in Table 3 are close to the average values obtained for sixletter words in another study with a richer data set
(Acartürk, et al., in preparation). Therefore, we believe that
these values can be conceived as close to representative
mean values.

Analyses
Four three-way ANOVAs were run on the data from 34
participants to examine the role of vowel harmony
collocation, consonant collocation and word boundary
collocation on the following eye movement measures in
sentence reading: First Fixation Duration, First Pass
Dwelling Time, First Pass Fixation Count, and Regression
in Count. No significant three-way interaction was observed
between the variables and these measures (F(1,33)=.266,
p=.61,
ƞ2=.001;
F(1,33)=.002,
p=.97,
ƞ2=.000;
2
F(1,33)=.208, p=.65, ƞ =.006; and F(1,33)=.000, p=.99,
ƞ2=.000 respectively). However, there were significant twoway interactions and single effects, as presented below.
First Fixation Duration. Consonant collocation frequency
had a significant effect on the first fixation duration,
F(1,33)=8.428, p<.05, ƞ2=.20. As the frequency of the
collocated consonant bigram decreased, the average
duration of the first fixation on the pseudoword significantly
increased, and vice versa.
First Pass Gaze Duration. A statistically significant
interaction was found between consonant collocation
frequency and word boundary collocation frequency,
F(1,33)=4.608, p<.05, ƞ2=.12. In other words, the effect of
consonant collocation is greater in the high-frequency wordboundary collocation condition than in the low-frequency
word-boundary collocation condition, and the effect of
word-boundary collocation is greater in the high-frequency
consonant collocation condition than in the low-frequency
consonant collocation condition.

1498

First Pass Fixation Count. There was a statistically
significant interaction between consonant collocation
frequency and word boundary collocation frequency,
F(1,33)=4.341, p<.05, ƞ2=.12, similar to the finding
obtained for the gaze duration. This means that if the
frequency of consonant collocation is high, then word
boundary collocation frequency has an effect on the first
pass fixation count, such that if the word boundary
collocation frequency changes from high to low, first pass
fixation count increases. If both the consonant collocation
frequency and the word boundary collocation frequency
change, the effect is stronger.
Regression in Count. A statistically significant interaction
was obtained between vowel harmony collocation frequency
and word boundary collocation frequency, F(1,34)=5.002,
p<.05, ƞ2=.13, without an interaction with consonant
collocation frequency. In particular, when the consonant
collocation frequency is high, pseudowords with high word
boundary collocation frequency gets more re-fixations from
its right if the vowel harmony collocation frequency is also
high. This effect disappears if the dominant variable, the
consonant collocation, becomes infrequent.

influences pseudoword reading in Turkish. We also believe
that the sentential pseudoword reading paradigm has the
potential to enrich our knowledge about word processing
with higher ecological validity compared to alternative
approaches, such as lexical decision tasks and naming tasks.

Acknowledgments
This study has been partially supported by TUBITAK (The
Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey)
113K723, EU H2020 ISCH COST Action IS1404 Evolution
of reading in the age of digitisation (E-READ), and EU FP7
Marie Curie Actions IRIS, 610986, FP7-PEOPLE-2013IAPP. The authors thank Zuhal Ormanoğlu and Irmak
Olcaysoy Ökten for their contribution.

References

Discussion and Conclusion
Our findings revealed mixed results. This indicates the need
for further research on pseudoword reading in Turkish. In
particular, the findings for the first fixation durations
showed that the consonant collocation frequency is the
dominant aspect that influences eye movements in reading,
since low frequency consonant collocations result in longer
fixation durations and vice versa. The frequency of
consonant collocations also significantly interacts with the
frequency of word boundary collocations, according to the
findings obtained for the first pass fixation count and first
pass gaze duration, showing that when they both have low
frequency, a higher number of first pass fixation count and a
longer first pass gaze duration is observed. Finally, the
regression-in-count findings suggest that when the
consonant collocation frequency is already high, regressionin counts increase when the vowel harmony collocation
frequency and the frequency of word boundary collocations
are also high. It is likely that this is because pseudowords
of this type look like real words. This might have caused the
participants to assume misreading a known word, which
was followed by re-fixations after the first pass.
In reading research, the first fixation duration on a word is
usually conceived as the most valuable indicator of word
recognition, since it can be seen as a reflection of the initialstage processes in word recognition (Rayner, 1998). The
second fixation on a word (viz. refixation), further fixations
on the same word and regression fixations reveal more
complex processes than word recognition, such as syntactic
and semantic processes at a sentential-level. Accordingly, at
this stage, our findings indicate the frequency of the middleword consonant allocation as a dominant factor that

Acartürk, C., Kırkıcı, B., Beken, F. (in preparation). Eye
movement characteristics in Turkish reading: A corpusanalytic study.
Anshen, F., & Aronoff, M. (1988). Producing
morphologically complex words. Linguistics, 26, 641–
655.
Dabrowska, E. (2006). Low-level schemas or general rules?
The role of diminutives in the acquisition of Polish case
inflections. Language Sciences, 28, 120–135.
Davis, C. J. (2010). The spatial coding model of visual word
identification. Psychological Review, 117(3), 713.
Finley, S. (2012). Testing the limits of long-distance
learning: learning beyond a three-segment window.
Cognitive Science, 36, 740–756.
Frisch, S. A., & Zawaydeh, B. A. (2001). The psychological
reality of OCP-Place in Arabic. Language, 77, 91–106.
Göksel, A., & Kerslake, C. (2005). Turkish: A
Comprehensive Grammar. Routledge: London and New
York.
Grainger, J., Bouttevin, S., Truc, C., Bastien, M., & Ziegler,
J. (2003), Word superiority, pseudoword superiority, and
learning to read: A comparison of dyslexic and normal
readers. Brain and Language, 87, 432–440.
Hammond, M. (2004). Gradience, phonotactics, and the
lexicon in English phonology. International Journal of
English Studies, 4, 1–24.
Hay, J., Pierrehumbert, J., & Beckman, M. (2004). Speech
perception, well-formedness and the statistics of the
lexicon. In: J. Local, R. Ogden, and R. Temple (Eds.),
Phonetic
Interpretation:
Papersbin
Laboratory
Phonology VI. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Houpt, J. W., Sussman, B. L., Townsend, J. T., & Newman,
S. D. (2015). Dyslexia and configural perception of
character sequences. Frontiers in Psychology, 6, 482.
Kilic, O. (2014). Using corpus statistics to evaluate nonce
words. In M. Colinet, S. Katrenko, R. K. Rendsvig (Ed.s),
Pristine Perspectives on Logic, Language, and
Computation: ESSLLI 2012 and ESSLLI 2013 Student
Sessions, Selected Papers (pp. 26-35). Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer Berlin Heidelberg.

1499

Koo, H., & Callahan, L. (2011). Tier-adjacency is not a
necessary
condition
for
learning
phonotactic
dependencies. Language and Cognitive Processes, 77, 1–
8.
Lewis, G. (2000). Turkish Grammar, Second edition.
Oxford: University Press (2000)
Lima, S. D., & Inhoff, A. W. (1985). Lexical access during
eye fixations in reading: effects of word-initial letter
sequence. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 11(3), 272.
MacDonald, S., & Ramscar, M. (2001). Testing the
distributional hypothesis: The influence of context on
judgements of semantic similarity. Proceedings of the
23rd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(611-616), University of Edinburgh.
Machelli, A., Gorno-Tempini, M. L., & Price, C. J. (2003).
Neuroimaging studies of word and pseudoword reading:
Consistencies, inconsistencies, and limitations. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 15(2), 260-271.
McClelland, J. L., & Rumelhart, D. E. (1981). An
interactive activation model of context effects in letter
perception: I. An account of basic findings. Psychological
Review, 88(5), 375.
Perea, M., & Lupker, S. J. (2004). Can CANISO activate
CASINO? Transposed-letter similarity effects with
nonadjacent letter positions. Journal of Memory and
Language, 51(2), 231-246.
Pycha, A., Novak, P., Shosted, R., & Shin, E. (2003).
Phonological rule-learning and its implications for a
theory of vowel harmony. In G. Garding and M.
Tsujimura (Eds.), Proceedings of the WCCFL 22, (423–
435).
Rayner, K. (1998). Eye movements in reading and
information processing: 20 years of research.
Psychological Bulletin, 124, 372–422.
Rayner, K., Pollatsek, A., Ashby, J., & Clifton Jr, C. (2012).
Psychology of reading (2nd ed.) Psychology Press.
Rayner, K., Sereno, S. C., & Raney, G. E. (1996). Eye
movement control in reading: A comparison of two types
of models. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 22, 1188–1200.
Say, B., Zeyrek, D., Oflazer, K., & Ozge, U. (2002).
Development of a corpus and a treebank for present-day
written Turkish. Proceedings of the Eleventh
International Conference of Turkish Linguistics.
Seidenberg, M. S., & McClelland, J. L. (1989). A
distributed, developmental model of word recognition and
naming. Psychological Review, 96(4), 523.
Shademan, S. (2007). From clusters to words: Grammatical
models of nonce word acceptability. Grammar and
analogy in phonotactic well-formedness Judgments. PhD
Dissertation, University of California, Los Angeles
(2007)
Testolin, A., Stoianov, I., Sperduti, A., & Zorfib, M. (2015).
Learning orthographic structure with sequential
generative neural networks. Cognitive Science, 1-28.

Treiman, R., Kessler, B., Knewasser, S., Tincoff, R., &
Bowman, M. (2000). English speakers’ sensitivity to
phonotactic patterns. In: M. B. Broe and J. Pierrehumbert
(Eds.), Papers in Laboratory Phonology V: Acquisition
and the Lexicon (pp. 269–282). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Whitney, C. (2001). How the brain encodes the order of
letters in a printed word: The SERIOL model and
selective literature review. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 8(2), 221-243.

Appendix
Below we present sample stimuli for each combination of
vowel harmony collocation V1V2, middle-word consonant
collocation C2C3, and boundary word collocation C1C4,
respectively. H is used for high frequency, and L is used for
low frequency. Pseudowords are underlined for
demonstration.
V1V2 is high, C2C3 is high, C1C4 is high

• Kaldırmaya çabalasan aslında biylen birden yere düşüp
kırılmazdı.
• Mirası harcamasaydım aslında sirden binası şimdi çoktan
bitmişti.

V1V2 is high, C2C3 is high, C1C4 is low

• Hasan cebindeki parayı aslında niyled birimi olarak
düşünüyordu.
• Son yılın modası aslında lirdev birası ile karides pişirmekmiş.

V1V2 is low, C2C3 is high, C1C4 is high

• Sizin mektuplar aslında köndız bitmez dendiği için
dağıtılmamış.
• Dün Emine'nin nişanlısı aslında bındül binayı bulamadı
gerçekten.

V1V2 is low, C2C3 is high, C1C4 is low

• Radyonun sesini açarsan aslında nındüd bizden sonuçları
öğrenir.
• Şu kediler sokakta aslında lülrıv birini bulup sürtünüyorlarmış.

V1V2 is high, C2C3 is low, C1C4 is high

• Yarın deniz kenarında aslında bıgvıl birini izleyerek eğlenecek.
• Baharda sigara içmek aslında sagşan binası çevresinde
yasaktır.

V1V2 is high, C2C3 is low, C1C4 is low

• Bu bölgedeki kuşların aslında lagşav birini korkuttuğu
söylenir.
• Fizik dersi haricinde aslında revşev bilimi konusundan
bahsetti.

V1V2 is low, C2C3 is low, C1C4 is high

• İstatistik dersinde aslında söcşun birden bütün verileri bozmuş.
• Hastaneye sabah gelenler aslında töjkır birini görmek
istiyorlar.

V1V2 is low, C2C3 is low, C1C4 is low

1500

• Doğa resimlerinde aslında löcşuv binası betimlemelerini
kullanır.
• Cuma gecesi televizyonda aslında şobçüc birini izleyerek
uyudum.

