The Semantics and Pragmatics of Logical Connectives: Adults’ and Children’s
Interpretations of And and Or in a Guessing Game
Masoud Jasbi

Michael C. Frank

masoudj@stanford.edu
Department of Linguistics
Stanford University

mcfrank@stanford.edu
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

Abstract

to communicate that both animals are in the house. In the
Gricean account, the exclusivity implicature is not part of or’s
meaning, but rather the result of our reasoning on speaker’s
connective choice.
The advent of Gricean pragmatics shifted the focus of research in child language to the differences between adults and
children in semantic vs. pragmatic aspects of interpretation.
In a series of influential studies, Stephen Crain and colleagues
argued that unlike adults who have an implicature-rich exclusive interpretation of or, children as young as three years old,
interpret the meaning of or as inclusive disjunction (Chierchia, Crain, Guasti, Gualmini, & Meroni, 2001; Crain, 2012).
They argued that children develop the semantics of or before its pragmatics: they interpret or as inclusive disjunction
but fail to enrich it with the exclusivity implicature the way
adults do. Therefore, the main difference between children
and adults is that children interpret or as inclusive, but adults
interpret it as exclusive.
Recent investigations have added a new level of complexity to this line of research. Tieu et al. (2017) and Singh et
al. (2016) argued that a large group of children in their studies (30-40% of the participants) interpreted or as logical conjunction. In other words, these children did not differentiate
between and and or. They argue that this conjunctive interpretation of or is due to non-adult-like pragmatic reasoning:
children interpret A or B as A or B or both, but not only A,
and not only B; therefore both A and B.
The current paper seeks to fill two gaps in the current literature. First, previous research has focused on children’s interpretation of and and or in complex sentences – for example
with other logical words such as quantifiers every and none.
In this paper we test children and adults’ understanding of
and and or in simple existential sentences like “There is a cat
or a dog.” Second, previous research has tested children and
adults using the binary truth value judgment task (Crain &
Thornton, 1998). In such tasks participants are asked whether
a puppet’s statement is right or wrong. In this study, we allow
participants to make use of three options: wrong, kinda right,
and right. Katsos & Bishop (2011) argued that ternary judgment tasks are better suited for assessing children’s pragmatic
competence.
This paper addresses two main questions. First, do children interpret or as logical conjunction (similar to and)? Second, do children understand or as inclusive disjunction, or
exclusive disjunction? We conduct two experiments to answer these questions. Experiment 1 tests adults’ interpreta-

The development of the ubiquitous logical connectives and and
or provides a window into the role of semantics and pragmatics in children’s linguistic development. Previous research has
suggested that adults and children might differ in their interpretation of or in two ways. First, unlike adults, children might
interpret or as logical conjunction, akin to and. Second, children might interpret or as inclusive disjunction while adults
interpret it as exclusive. We report experimental studies that
probe interpretations of and and or in adults and children using truth value judgements as well as children’s spontaneous
linguistic feedback. Both truth judgements and linguistic feedback showed that four-year-olds do not interpret or as and.
While children’s truth judgments suggested that they did not
derive exclusivity implicatures, however, their corrective feedback showed signs of sensitivity to the implicature, suggesting
that the truth value judgement task could have underestimated
children’s pragmatic competence. More generally, four-yearolds’ interpretation of logical connectives may not be as different from adults as previously supposed.
Keywords: language development; semantics; pragmatics;
logical connectives; disjunction; conjunction.

Introduction
An airport sign reads “If you see something, say something.”
Taken literally, this is a trivial request, but readers infer an
interpretation that goes far beyond the literal meanings of the
words. How much of what we interpret is due to literal meaning (semantics) and how much due to our general-purpose inferential abilities (pragmatics)? In this paper, we address this
question by investigating adults’ and children’s interpretation
of the logical words and and or.
Despite their simple appearance, and and or have been a
major source of insight into the contributions of semantics
and pragmatics to language interpretation. The meaning of
and has always been unambiguously associated with logical
conjunction. For example, “There is a cat and a dog in the
house.” is true when the house has both a cat and a dog but
false if only one or neither. The meaning of or, however, has
two interpretations: inclusive disjunction and exclusive disjunction. The inclusive interpretation suggests the house has
either a cat, a dog, or both. The exclusive one suggests only
a cat or dog, not both. Until Grice (1975), it was generally
assumed that or is ambiguous between these two meanings.
Grice (1975) argued against this ambiguity account. He
maintained that the core meaning of or is inclusive disjunction but we often derive an exclusive interpretation (exclusivity implicature) by reasoning about what the speaker could
have said. If the speaker meant to communicate that both
a cat and a dog are in the house, s/he could have used the
connective and. S/he chose or instead, so s/he did not mean

576

tions and sets the benchmark for our child study. Experiment
2 investigates children’s truth value judgments in a guessing
game as well as their spontaneous linguistic feedback in the
same task. Considering the first question, neither children’s
truth value judgement nor their linguistic feedback support
the hypothesis that a large group of them interpret or as logical conjunction. For the second question, children’s judgments suggest that unlike adults, they do not derive exclusivity implicatures and interpret or as inclusive disjunction.
However, children’s spontaneous linguistic feedback shows
signs of sensitivity to the exclusivity implicature of or.
The next two sections present experiments 1 and 2 and the
last section discusses the implications of these findings for
theories of semantic and pragmatic development. For further
details of the methods as well as the data and statistical analyses, please visit the paper’s online repository.1
Figure 1: Critical trials with example cards.

Experiment 1: Adults
Methods
Participants We recruited 52 English speaking adults online using Amazon’s Mechanical Turk (MTurk).

Results
Here we focus on the results of the critical trial types, pictured in Figure 1.2 We identify these trials using two features: 1. the connective used for guessing (AND vs. OR) 2.
the number of true conjuncts/disjuncts, which corresponds to
the number of animals on the card. When only one animal
is on the card, only 1 conjunct/disjunct is true (1T) and when
two animals are on the card, both conjunct/disjuncts are true
(2T).
Adult responses differed both by the connective used and
the number of true conjuncts/disjuncts (Figure 2). First, the
response pattern in AND trials is different from the one in
OR trials. For AND, the responses were on the extremes
of right and wrong while for OR, they were distributed on
kinda right and right. This pattern suggests that adults interpret and and or differently. Second, the responses were
different between the trials where one disjunct/conjunct was
true (1T) and those where both disjuncts/conjuncts were true
(2T). This difference was greater for conjunction than disjunction. Adults showed a small preference for the use of
disjunction when only one disjunct was true. This pattern
suggests a small preference for an exclusive interpretation of
or in the guessing game.

Materials and Design The experimental game included
several cards with cartoon images of either one or two animals. The animals included a cat, a dog, and an elephant.
Figure 1 shows two example cards. The game also used three
types of guesses: simple (e.g. There is a cat), conjunctive
(e.g. There is a cat and a dog), and disjunctive (e.g. There is
a cat or a dog). Pairing the cards with the guesses resulted in
6 types of card-guess scenarios. Figure 1 shows examples for
four critical scenarios. Overall, the animal labels used in the
guess and the animal images on the card may have no overlap
(e.g. Image: dog, Guess: There is a cat or an elephant), partial overlap (e.g. Image: Cat, Guess: There is a cat or an elephant), or total overlap (e.g. Image: cat and elephant, Guess:
There is a cat or an elephant). Crossing the number of animals on the card, the type of guess, and the overlap between
the guess and the card resulted in 12 different trial types.
Procedure The experiment had three phases: introduction,
instruction, and test. In the introduction, participants saw six
sample cards and read that they will play a guessing game
with them. Then a blindfolded cartoon character named Bob
appeared on the screen and they were told that in each round
of the game, they will see a card and Bob is going to guess
what animal is on it. We emphasized that Bob cannot see anything. We asked participants to judge whether Bob’s guess is
wrong, kinda right, or right. In the instruction phase, participants saw a card with the image of a dog and were told
that Bob guessed There is a cat on the card. All participants
(correctly) responded with wrong.
In the test phase, participants saw one trial per trial type
for the total of 12 trials. Within each trial type, the specific
card-guess scenario was chosen at random. The order of trial
types was also randomized.

Individual Responses In order to understand how participants interpret disjunction, Tieu et al. (2017) and Singh et
al. (2016) categorized participants as a function of their responses to the disjunctive trials. Here we perform a similar
analysis. In this study, none of the adults considered a disjunctive guess wrong when one or both of the animals were
on the card. However, the participants’ kinda right and right
responses divided them into four categories.
The largest group of participants (23 out of 52) considered
the disjunctive guess right when one animal was on the card
2 For the data, full results including non-critical trials, and statistical analyses visit the paper’s online repository.

1 https://github.com/jasbi/cogsci2017

577

Two Animals

One Animal

Right

Kinda Right

Wrong

Right

Wrong

Right

Kinda Right

Wrong

Right

OR

OR

Kinda Right

AND

AND

Wrong

Two Animals

1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
Kinda Right

One Animal
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00

Figure 2: Adult judgments in critical trials of Experiment 1.
Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals.

Figure 3: Children’s judgments for critical trials in Experiment 2. Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals.

(1T), but kinda right with both animals were present (2T).
This pattern is consistent with an interpretation of “or” with
an exclusivity implicature. The use of disjunction when both
disjuncts are true is not wrong but it is nevertheless infelicitous and not completely right. For these participants, kinda
right captures the violation of such a pragmatic expectation.
The other 29 participants divided almost equally into three
groups. Ten participants rated disjunctive guesses as right in
both scenarios where one or two animals were on the card.
This pattern is consistent with an inclusive interpretation of
or, in which adults do not derive an exclusivity implicature.
It is also compatible with some adults being tolerant towards
violations of the exclusivity implicature.
Nine other participants rated disjunctive guesses as only
kinda right in both one-animal and two-animal trials. In other
words, disjunctive guesses were dispreferred regardless of the
outcome. This response pattern is consistent with the violation of another pragmatic expectation in the context of a
guessing game: the guesser must choose the most specific
guess possible. Under this expectation, guesses that cover
several possible outcomes are punished. A disjunctive guess
never picks a specific outcome and it is possible that for these
participants, kinda right captures the violation of this specificity expectation.
Finally, nine participants (17% of participants) reported a
disjunctive guess as right when both animals were on the
card, but only kinda right when only one of the animals was
on the card. In other words, these participants preferred the
guess when both disjuncts where true rather than only one. It
is possible to interpret such a response profile as some adults
interpreting or as logical conjunction. However, it is also possible that these adults considered the goal of the game to be
choosing the right animals and did not think the choice of
the connective should matter for the purposes of the guessing

game. In other words, they may have interpreted a right guess
as one that picks the correct animals out of the possible set of
animals in the game, regardless of the connective used.
The analysis of individual response profiles shows that
there is a good deal of variability in the response profiles of
adults. However, since we have not systematically manipulated the possible interpretations mentioned above and accounted for noise and chance variation, we remain cautious
in our interpretation of participants’ response profiles here.

Discussion
In this study, we tested adult interpretations of the connective
words and and or in the context of a guessing game. Adult
participants interpreted these words differently and depending on how many disjuncts/conjuncts were satisfied. Overall,
a guess with and was considered right if both conjuncts were
true and wrong if only one was true. A guess with or was not
wrong in either case, yet adults were more likely to consider it
as right when only one of the disjuncts was true. Grouping individuals based on their response profiles, we found that some
participants dispreferred disjunctive guesses whether one or
both disjuncts were true, some considered them better when
both disjuncts where true, and some others considered them
right in either case.
The results are consistent with the dominant view on the
division of labor between semantics and pragmatics in the interpretation of connective words. The semantics of and is
captured by logical conjunction and or by inclusive disjunction. And is true when both conjuncts are true and false when
only one is true. Or is true in both cases but is not the best
option as a connective when both disjuncts are true. In Experiment 2 we examine preschool children’s interpretation of
these connectives in the context of the same guessing game.

578

Experiment 2: Children

that the puppet guessed right and the experimenter invited the
child to give the puppet a big star. In the final trial, the puppet
guessed that there is a cat on the card when the card had a cat
and a dog on it. The experimenter said that the puppet was a
little right and asked the child to give him a little star.
In the test phase, the experimenter removed the three instruction cards and placed a deck of 16 randomized cards
face-down on the table. In all trials of the study, the face
of the card was shown to the child after the puppet’s guess.
The experimenter explained that it was the child’s turn to play
with the puppet.

Methods
Participants We recruited 42 English speaking children
from the Bing Nursery School at Stanford University. Children were between 3;02 and 5;02 years old (Mean = 4;04).
Materials and Design We used the same set of cards and
linguistic stimuli as the ones in Experiment 1. The study
used 8 trial types and 2 trials per trial type for a total of 16
trials. The trials were balanced to include the same number of one-animal and two-animal cards, the same number
of simple and connective guesses, and the same number of
expected true vs. false judgments. However, we made a few
changes to make the design more suitable for children. Instead of Bob, a puppet named Jazzy played the game with
the children. Jazzy wanted to guess what animals were on
the cards without seeing them. So he had a sleeping mask
on his eyes during the game. Children knew that Jazzy likes
guessing but they did not know why Jazzy would choose to
guess the way he does; namely, sometimes with simple sentences and sometimes with conjunctions or disjunctions. To
introduce a three-valued reward scale similar to the verbal responses wrong, kinda right, and right, we placed a set of red
circles, small blue stars, and big blue stars in front of the children. These tokens were used to reward the puppet after each
guess.

Offline Coding of Linguistic Feedback We also coded
children’s spontaneous linguistic feedback to the puppet
when they saw the card. There were four types of feedback:
1. None, 2. Judgments, 3. Descriptions, and 4. Corrections. None refers to cases where children did not provide any
linguistic feedback. Judgments refers to linguistic feedback
such as you are right!, yes, nope, you winned. Such feedback
expresses whether the puppet was right or not. Descriptions
were cases that the child simply mentioned what was on the
card with no added lexical item or prosodic stress: cat!, dog
and elephant!, There is a cat and a dog! etc. Finally, corrections referred to feedback that provided corrections to what
the puppet had said using extra words or prosodic stress. Examples include: cat AND dog (with emphasis placed on and),
Both!, The two are!, Just a cat!, Only cat.

Procedure The experiment was carried out in a quiet room
and the sessions were videotaped. There was a small table
and two chairs in the room. Children sat on one side of the
table and the experimenter and the puppet on the other side
facing the child. The groups of circles, small stars, and big
stars were placed in front of the child from left to right. A
deck of six cards was in front of the experimenter. Similar to
the adult study, participants sat through three phases: introduction, instruction, and test.
The goal of the introduction phase was to show the animal
cards to children and make sure they recognize the animals
and know their names. The experimenter showed the cards to
the children and asked them to label the animals. All children
recognized the animals and could label them correctly. In the
instruction phase, children went through three example trials.
The experimenter explained that he is going to play with the
puppet first so that the child can learn the game. He removed
the six introduction cards and placed a deck of three cards
face-down on the table. From top to bottom (first to last), the
cards had the following images: a cat, an elephant, a cat and a
dog. He put the sleeping mask on Jazzy’s eyes and explained
that Jazzy is going to guess what is on these cards. He then
picked the first card and asked the puppet: “What do you think
is on this card?” Jazzy replied with “There is a dog”. The
experimenter showed the cat-card to the child and explained
that when Jazzy is not right he gets a circle. He then asked
the child to give the puppet a circle. Rewards were collected
by the experimenter and placed under the table to not distract
the child. The second trial followed the same pattern except

Results
Figure 3 shows the results for the critical conditions in Experiment 2. Comparing the AND and OR trials (Figure 3
rows), we see that children distinguish between and and or
in cases where one animal is on the card but not when both
are. Given that the one-animal conjunction trials (top left)
and the one-animal disjunction trials (bottom left) differ in
truth conditions, the difference in response patterns suggests
that children at this age have a different semantic knowledge
for and and or. The two-animal conjunction and two-animal
disjunction trials (top right and bottom right) do not differ in
truth values, and the responses also show no difference.
In the one-animal and two-animal trials, children show different response patterns when the guess contains the conjunction word and (top right vs. top left) but not when or is used
(bottom right vs. bottom left). Since the truth values of oneanimal and two-animal trials differ for conjunctive guesses
but not disjunctive ones, the results suggest that children have
different semantic knowledge for and and or. The similarity
of the disjunctive guesses in one-animal and two-animal trials
(bottom right vs. bottom left) can be interpreted as a lack of
exclusivity implicatures in children.
Statistical Modeling We used the R package {rstan} for
Bayesian statistical modeling. We fit separate ordinal mixedeffects logistic models for children’s and adults’ judgments.
The response variable had three ordered levels: wrong, kinda
right, and right. The trial types One-Animals-OR, Two-

579

Parameter Means

was to find children that demonstrated conjunctive readings
of or. In order to find such children, we adopted a (lenient)
measure: any preference for or when both disjuncts were true
was considered a conjunctive profile. More specifically, either the child responded with wrong when one disjunct was
true but kinda right or right when both were true; or, the child
responded with kinda right when one disjuncts was true but
right when both were true. We found 10 children (24% of participants) that matched this profile. In Experiment 1 we found
nine adults (17% of participants) who matched such a profile. Furthermore, as explained earlier, such a response profile
is also compatible with a different construal of the guessing
game in which the goal is to pick the right animals regardless
of the logical connective. Therefore, we conclude that the
analysis of participants’ response profiles did not provide any
evidence for the hypothesis that a large group of four-year-old
children interpret or as logical conjunction.

or, 1T vs. 2T
and, 1T vs. 2T

Age

2T, and vs. or

adult
1T, and vs. or

child
0

20

40

Figure 4: Coefficients capturing the relevant comparisons
across conditions across the two experiments (see text). Error
bars represent 99% regions of highest posterior density.

Linguistic Feedback We next examined children’s linguistic feedback to the puppet (Figure 5). In all critical trials, we
found similar proportions of None responses: no comment on
the puppet’s guess and only rewarding the puppet. However,
the proportions of other feedback categories differed between
trial types. We performed chi-squared tests of homogeneity
to compare the feedback distributions.
In the AND trials, a comparison of the feedback distribution in one-animal and two-animal conditions was statistically significant (χ(3, 167) = 35.99, p < .0001), indicating
different feedback for true vs. false sentences. In the OR
trials, we find a similar significant difference between oneanimal and two-animal trials, suggesting children’s sensitivity to the exclusivity implicature of or (χ(3, 166) = 11.11, p =
0.01). In both cases, children’s corrective feedback increases
for false (AND - one animal) and infelicitous trials (OR - two
animals). There was no significant difference between these
false and infelicitous trials (χ(3, 166) = 3.19, p = 0.36).
The one-animal disjunctive trials (bottom left) showed the
highest proportion of Descriptions. These are trials in which
the guess is correct but not specific enough: it leaves two
possibilities open. These trials were significantly different
than the one-animal trials for conjunction (χ(3, 166) = 24.29,
p < .0001). Finally, the two-animal conjunctive trials (top
right) showed the highest proportion of Judgments such as
you are right!. This is not surprising given that in these trials
represent the most optimal guessing scenario. These trials
had a significantly different feedback distribution from the
matching disjunction trials (χ(3, 167) = 42.37, p < .0001).

Animals-OR, One-Animal-AND constituted the (dummycoded) fixed effects of the model with Two-Animal-AND set
as the intercept. The model also included by-subject random
intercepts. The priors over trial types and the random intercepts were set to N (0, 10). We also included parameters C1
and C2 , the two cutpoints delimiting the logistic for 1) wrong
and kinda right and 2) kinda right and right responses, drawn
with the prior N (0, 1).3 All four chains converged after 3000
samples (with a burn-in period of 1500 samples)
We make inferences based on the highest-posterior density (HPD) intervals for the coefficients estimated from each
model. Because predictors are dummy-coded, we can examine contrasts of interest by computing the difference between
coefficients for pairs of conditions we wish to contrast (Figure 4). Overall, adults’ and children’s estimated coefficients
are similar in sign to one another, though adults are more extreme. The one notable exception to this pattern is for the contrast or, 1T vs. 2T, which shows the comparison between the
disjunctive trials: both disjuncts are true vs. only one disjunct
is true. On average, children are more positive for disjunction
on two-animal trials, while adults are more negative. These
estimates reflect the exclusivity implicature that adults compute, leading them to judge two-animal trials as more kinda
right.
Individual Responses Children showed a wide variety of
response profiles for disjunction trials. This was partly because each child responded to two trials per trial type: two
one-animal disjunction trials and two two-animal disjunction
trials. The largest group (10 out of 42) responded with right
to all four trials. Six children responded with right to all trials
except one one-animal trial that they responded to with kinda
right. Six other children responded with kinda right to both
one-animal trials and right to both two-animal trials.
However, the main goal of analyzing the response profiles

Discussion
This study did not find evidence for the hypothesis that a large
group of four-year-old children interpret the disjunction word
or similar to its conjunctive counterpart and. To the contrary, both children’s judgments and their linguistic feedback
suggested that they differentiate these two connectives. Instead, children’s judgments largely mirrored those of adults.
We take this as a sign of children’s adult-like semantics for

3 We used a tight prior in this case to decrease posterior correlations between cutpoints and intercept.

580

One Animal

Two Animals

linguistic feedback raises another possibility: while the truth
value judgement task reflected children’s semantic knowledge well, it could have underestimated children’s pragmatic
competence. We would like to explore this possibility more
systematically in a future study.
Overall, our results point to the importance of assessing
the semantics and pragmatics that children assign to connectives across a wide variety of contexts and using different
measures. Although individual experimental trial types can
appear consistent with multiple interpretations, the profile of
responses across trial types can be revealing of the underlying
representations. More broadly, the investigation of how children acquire semantic representations for logical connectives
– and in particular, how they infer an inclusive semantics for
or – is an important puzzle for future investigations of early
word learning.

0.6
AND

0.4
0.2
0.0
0.6

OR

0.4
0.2
Correction

Description

Judgement

None

Correction

Description

Judgement

None

0.0

Acknowledgements

Figure 5: Children’s Linguistic Feedback to Conjunction and
Disjunction Trials. Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals.

We would like to thank Eve V. Clark and Christopher Potts
for their generous help and advice on this project. We would
also like to thank the staff and children at Stanford’s Bing
Nursery School. This work was supported by NSF #1456077
and the Stanford University fellowship to Masoud Jasbi.

and and or. Considering pragmatic inferences with or, children’s truth value judgments did not differentiate between trials where one disjunct was true and those where both were
true. However, their linguistic feedback to the puppet did
differentiate these two trial types. Children provided more
corrective feedback when both disjuncts were true, indicating
sensitivity to the exclusivity implicature of or.

References
Chierchia, G., Crain, S., Guasti, M. T., Gualmini, A., &
Meroni, L. (2001). The acquisition of disjunction: Evidence for a grammatical view of scalar implicatures. In
Proceedings of the 25th Boston University conference on
language development (pp. 157–168). Cascadilla Press
Somerville, MA.
Crain, S. (2012). The emergence of meaning. Cambridge
University Press.
Crain, S., & Thornton, R. (1998). Investigations in universal grammar: A guide to experiments on the acquisition of
syntax and semantics. MIT Press.
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole & J.
Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and semantics (Vol. 3: Speech Acts,
pp. 43–58). Academic Press.
Katsos, N., & Bishop, D. V. (2011). Pragmatic tolerance: Implications for the acquisition of informativeness and implicature.
Cognition, 120(1), 67–
81. Retrieved from http://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0010027711000758
Singh, R., Wexler, K., Astle-Rahim, A., Kamawar, D., &
Fox, D. (2016). Children interpret disjunction as conjunction: Consequences for theories of implicature and child
development. Natural Language Semantics, 24(4), 305–
352. http://doi.org/10.1007/s11050-016-9126-3
Tieu, L., Yatsushiro, K., Cremers, A., Romoli, J., Sauerland,
U., & Chemla, E. (2017). On the role of alternatives in the
acquisition of simple and complex disjunctions in french
and japanese. Journal of Semantics, 34(1), 127. http:
//doi.org/10.1093/jos/ffw010

General Discussion
We began with two questions. First, do adults/children differentiate or from and? Second, do adults/children interpret
or as inclusive disjunction or exclusive disjunction? We presented two studies to address these questions.
For the first question, we reported truth value judgement
results as well as results from children’s linguistic feedback
that suggested both adults and children differentiate or from
and. Crucially, children showed different judgments for false
vs. true guesses, suggesting that they understand the core semantics of these connectives.
For the second question, adult truth value judgments of or
were split between an inclusive and an exclusive interpretation in the guessing game, with a slight advantage for the exclusive interpretation. Children’s judgments suggested that
they interpret or as inclusive disjunction and do not derive
an exclusivity implicature. However, children’s spontaneous
linguistic feedback in the same task showed signs of sensitivity to the exclusivity implicature of or. In other words, when
both disjuncts were true children considered the guess right
but corrected the puppet with utterances such as cat AND dog,
both!, the two are!.
Based on the truth value judgement results, it is possible
to conclude that children, unlike adults, do not derive an exclusivity implicature for or. However, children’s spontaneous

581

