Three-Way Bindings in Associative Recognition
Hyungwook Yim (hyungwook.yim@newcastle.edu.au)
School of Psychology, The University of Newcastle, Australia

Adam F. Osth (adam.osth@unimelb.edu.au)
School of Psychological Sciences, The University of Melbourne, Australia

Vladimir M. Sloutsky (sloutsky.1@osu.edu)
Department of Psychology, The Ohio State University, USA

Simon J. Dennis (simon.dennis@gmail.com)
School of Psychology, The University of Newcastle, Australia
Abstract
To avoid interference among similar memory traces it is required to form complex memory structures that include multiple components of the event, which helps one to distinguish
one event from another. In a laboratory setting, these complex
binding structures have been studied through a paradigm where
one has to form a memory structure that includes two items and
the context together (i.e., three-way binding). However, despite the long history of the theoretical concept, its importance,
and the existence of the laboratory paradigm, three-way binding structures have only been examined in recall paradigms.
Moreover, not all memory models consider the ability to form
three-way binding structures as a default. Therefore, the current study examined the use and formation of three-way binding structures in an associative recognition paradigm. Results
provide evidence that three-way binding structures are used
during recognition, which implies that it is critical for memory models to properly represent them.
Keywords: episodic memory; recognition; three-way binding

Introduction
LeSean McCoy is a running back in the National Football
League (NFL) who started his career with the Philadelphia
Eagles. After receiving several awards, and leading the team
to the conference finals two times, McCoy was traded with
Kiko Alonso, who was Buffalo Bills’ linebacker with an
“NFL Defensive Rookie of the Year” title. Knowing this fact,
how would one later recall which team McCoy was playing before the trade? Even after restricting that there was
a trade between McCoy and Alonso, simply recalling which
team McCoy played for does not solve the answer since McCoy played for both the Eagles, and the Bills. Additionally
retrieving the team that existed in the pre-trade period also
does not help since both team existed before and after the
trade. The only way to correctly retrieve this information is
forming a coherent memory structure of [McCoy]-[Eagles][pre-trade] together, and later using the two cues together at
retrieval (i.e., [McCoy] and [pre-trade]) as a compound cue.
Memory researchers call this kind of memory structure
a three-way binding structure (Humphreys, Bain, & Pike,
1989), and controlled laboratory experiments using recall
paradigms provide evidence that adults robustly form these
memory structures (e.g., Postman, 1964). Binding structures in memory research have been mainly studied using
a paired associate learning paradigm, where participants are

given (usually two) lists of paired words to study, and are later
tested. Especially the three-way binding structure could be
examined when the word pairs in one list are repaired in another list (i.e., ABABr condition; Porter & Duncan, 1953). As
in the notation, in an ABABr condition the words in one list
(i.e., first two letters ‘AB’) are identical in the other list (i.e.,
second two letters ‘AB’) but paired differently (i.e., last letter
‘r’ representing that the words are re-paired). Therefore the
structure creates a strong interference between the two lists
when trying to retrieve a piece of memory as in the NFL trading example. To correctly retrieve which words were paired
in which list, one needs to use a three-way binding structure
that includes the context of a specific list, and the two words
together (e.g., [list 1]-[word 1]-[word 2]).
Correctly retrieving information from an ABABr condition
could be thought as an exclusive or (XOR) problem since the
arrangement of the ABABr condition is similar to the XOR
operation (Wiles & Humphreys, 1993). In the XOR operation, which is expressed by using the symbol Y, when zero
is operated with zero the answer is one (i.e., 0 Y 0 = 1), and
zero operated with one is zero (i.e., 0 Y 1 = 0). When one is
operated with zero the answer is zero (i.e., 1 Y 0 = 0), and one
operated with one is one (i.e., 1 Y 1 = 1). Considering the first
two terms as the cues at test (i.e., first term as the context, and
second term as the item cue), and considering the answer of
the XOR operation as the to-be-retrieved target, the process
of retrieving an answer from the ABABr condition becomes
identical to the XOR problem. The solution of the XOR has
been well known to be impossible within a two dimensional
plane that has independent inputs (e.g., Minsky & Papert,
1969), and could be solved by increasing the dimension of the
inputs such as using multiplicative (configural) coding of the
inputs (Sloman & Rumelhart, 1992). Similarly, the ABABr
condition could not be solved with a two-way binding structure, in fact not even with multiple two-way binding structures (e.g., Humphreys, Bain, & Pike, 1989), and requires a
higher dimensional representation such as three-way binding
structure.
Empirical evidence for the ability to form and use threeway binding structures implies that our memory system
should be able to store three-way binding structures, and use

3590

compound cues when retrieving these structures. However,
not all theoretical accounts of episodic memory, and their
computational models consider three-way binding structures
as a default.
For example, the Search of Associative Memory (SAM;
Gillund & Shiffrin, 1984; Raaijmakers & Shiffrin, 1981) theory does not consider three-way binding structures as a memory representation. The model assumes that memories are
stored as association strengths between two components such
as item and context, or item and item. Because these associations contain only two components, it is not possible to represent three-way bindings. On the retrieval side, SAM is unable
to use compound cues when multiple cues are provided during retrieval. Rather it treats each cue independently and then
combines the retrieved information of each cue by seeking
overlapping information that are retrieved by each cue.
The Temporal Context Model (TCM) and its variants also
do not employ three-way binding structures (Howard & Kahana, 2002; Lohnas, Polyn, & Kahana, 2015; Polyn, Norman, & Kahana, 2009; Sederberg, Howard, & Kahana, 2008).
TCM employs a two-way binding between an item and the
current context representation, which are stored in a matrix
of item-context bindings. In TCM, the context is defined as
a weighted sum of all past items where more recent items
have a stronger weight in representing the current context.
These assumptions even hold when word pairs are studied
in a paired associate learning paradigm (e.g., Howard et al.,
2009). TCM resembles SAM in that the representational
structure is fundamentally restricted to two-way associations,
and therefore cannot represent three-way bindings without
extensive modification.
On the other hand, models that are capable of explaining the use and formation of three-way binding structures
have slightly different assumptions. MINERVA 2 (Hintzman,
1984) encodes events as separate traces, in which context
and item representations are concatenated into a single vector.
Thus, items A (IA ) and B (IB ) in context 1 (C1 ) could be represented as C1 ⊕ IA ⊕ IB . Recognition decisions in the model are
made by matching the cue vector to each memory trace and
summing the similarities to produce a single index of memory
strength that is then compared to a decision criterion.
MINERVA 2 is sensitive to three-way associations by
virtue of a non-linearity at retrieval, where the similarity between a cue and a stored trace vector is raised to the third
power. This enables the model to be more sensitive to conjunctions among studied elements, rather than the individual
elements themselves. Consider if pairs A, B and C, D were
studied in context 1 and pairs A, C, and B, D were studied
in context 2. A foil such as C2 ⊕ IA ⊕ IB contains studied
elements, but these were not all studied together. After the
cubing process (increasing the similarity to the third power),
the target C1 ⊕ IA ⊕ IB receives a stronger match than the sum
of the partial matches to C2 ⊕ IA ⊕ IB . Models in the Retrieving Effectively from Memory (REM; Criss & Shiffrin,
2005; Shiffrin & Steyvers, 1997) framework employ a sim-

ilar idea, where instead of a cubing process at retrieval the
likelihood of feature match is multiplied across each element
in the vector to calculate a likelihood ratio that the trace was
a studied item, producing stronger matches to conjunctions
of studied elements than studied elements distributed across
different memory traces.
The MATRIX model (Humphreys, Bain, & Pike, 1989;
Osth & Dennis, 2015; Pike, 1984) has a slightly different
assumption about its storage representation by using tensor
representations. Items and contexts are represented as vectors and the vectors are bound together using outer products
to form a third-order tensor (i.e., C1 ⊗ IA ⊗ IB ). Rather than
having individual traces for each event, the MATRIX model
sums all representations for each event into a single composite tensor. The tensor representation naturally allows the use
of compound cues during retrieval by forming a second-order
tensor (i.e., an outer product of an item and a context) to represent the compound cue. At retrieval, the cues are combined into a tensor and matched against the memory tensor
using the dot product operation which produces a measure of
memory strength that reflects how similar the combined cues
match the contents of memory.
Interestingly, evidence for the use of three-way binding
structures have only been examined with cued recall tasks
(e.g., Porter & Duncan, 1953; Shimamura, Jurica, Mangels,
Gershberg, & Knight, 1995; Yim, Dennis, & Sloutsky, 2013)
where a context and an item is given at test as a cue to recall the paired item during study (e.g., what was the word
paired with ‘apple’ in ‘the first list’?). To our knowledge, no
recognition paradigm examined the use of three-way binding
structures. A number of studies have examined the role of
inter-item bindings in recognition memory by using an associative recognition task, where participants study pairs of
items such as A-B, C-D, and E-F in a single list. At test, participants have to make discriminations between intact pairs,
which were studied on the list (e.g., A-B), and rearranged
pairs, which are studied items but in a novel arrangement
(e.g., C-F).
Moreover, associative recognition tasks with the ABABr
condition have been used in other studies with different purposes (e.g., Aue, Criss, & Fischetti, 2012; Criss & Shiffrin,
2005; Postman & Stark, 1969). However, the design and goal
of the studies do not focus on the use of three-way binding
structures, mostly by not testing the word pairs from both
lists together. This is especially relevant because the role of
context has been generally neglected in models of associative recognition. For instance, the TODAM2 model of Murdock (1997) did not bind context to inter-item bindings due to
an assumption that context was not employed in associative
recognition as it was not relevant to the goal of the task.
Therefore, the current study examined whether three-way
binding structures are used during recognition using a associative recognition task with the ABABr condition. We constructed an ABABr condition by presenting pairs in different
contexts, such as A-B and C-D in context 1 and A-D and C-B

3591

in context 2. At test, participants are given a pair and a context cue and asked if the pair occurred in the particular context. Successful discrimination in ABABr conditions would
suggest a memory structure that is capable of representing
three-way bindings. Demonstration of such bindings in both
recognition and recall tasks would provide further evidence
that memory models need to consider such representations.

Experiment
The experiment tested whether people use three-way binding
structures in an associative recognition paradigm. In addition
to the ABABr condition, which requires a three-way binding structure for a correct recognition, we used an ABAC,
and ABCD condition. In the ABAC condition, as in the notation, one item from each pair in the first context (i.e., A
in ‘AB’) overlap with an item from each pair in the second
context (i.e., A in ‘AC’) which results in a moderate overlap
between the two contexts compared to the ABABr condition.
At the minimum, it is required to form two two-way binding structures (i.e., item-to-item, and context-to-item) for a
correct retrieval (Humphreys, Bain, & Pike, 1989). Using
the same scheme, in the ABCD condition there are no overlapping items between the contexts which results in two contexts with unique items. Since there is no overlap between the
two contexts, a correct retrieval only requires a single itemto-item binding at the minimum (i.e., item-item, or cue-target
binding). Therefore the level of overlap increases from the
ABCD condition to the ABABr condition. Moreover, a more
complex binding structure is required for a correct retrieval at
test as the level of interference increases. Previous studies using a recall paradigm showed a negative correlation with the
level of interference and performance (e.g., Yim, Dennis, &
Sloutsky, 2013). Therefore, the additional two conditions will
serve as a reference point for the performance on the ABABr
condition.
As part of the design, we defined context as the identity
of the speaker that presents the word pair instead of using the
temporal order of the ’list’ (i.e., first list, and second list) as in
previous studies. Embedding the context in the trial enables
us to intermix different context in the study phase, and prevents the participants from using the temporal cue. A weakness of previous ABABr designs which use two successive
study lists as their contexts is that the first list is naturally expected to have weaker memory strength than the second list.
This enables participants to infer that an item is from the first
list due to its weaker memory strength even with a two-way
binding structure (e.g., Lohnas, Polyn, & Kahana, 2015). By
eliminating the memory strength confound, our design ensures that participants require a three way binding structure
to achieve above chance performance in the task.

Methods
Participants Forty-three undergraduate students at The
University of Newcastle participated for course credit (36 females, M = 25.12 years, SD = 9.87).

Materials The stimuli were video clips of a speaker saying
a word. There were nine female and nine male speakers, and
each speaker had its own unique background scene (see Figure 1A). All words were high frequency words consisting of
54 adjectives, and 63 nouns. Most of the words were selected
from the MacArthur-Bates Communicative Development Inventory through the Wordbank repository (Frank, Braginsky,
Yurovsky, & Marchman, 2016).
Procedure Participants were tested individually in the laboratory. There were nine blocks where each block had a study
phase followed by a retention interval and a test phase. In
the study phase, participants were told that they will be seeing two speakers each presenting different word pairs one at
a time. They were also told to exactly remember who said
which words together since they will be tested later. Each
trial started with a fixation cross for 500 msec followed by a
blank screen of 500 msec and a video clip presenting a word
pair, which lasted for approximately 3400 msec (see Figure
1B). In all blocks, one of the speakers was always a female,
and the other a male. Also, the video clips were presented
on one side of the screen throughout the experiment depending on the speaker’s sex (e.g., female on the left side, male on
the right side), but was randomized across participants. There
were eight trials in each study phase consisting of the ABCD,
ABAC, and ABABr structures (see Table 1 for an example).
The first word was always an adjective and the second word
was always a noun. The presentation order of the eight trials corresponding for each structure were randomized every
block.
Table 1: An example of the eight trials in each study phase.
Each triplet in the Trials column represents the speaker’s sex
(M: male, F: female), first word (adjective), and second word
(noun) in order. There are four trials for the ABABr structure,
two trials each for the ABAC and ABCD structures.
Trials

Condition
ABABr

[M] – green – hand
[M] – hot – toy

[F] – green – toy
[F] – hot – hand

ABAC

[M] – empty – cat

[F] – empty – shoe

ABCD

[M] – tall – rain

[F] – quiet – ball

During the 60 second retention interval participants were
presented with two groups of dots on each side of the screen,
and were told to choose the side that had more dots. After
a 500 msec fixation (+++) the two groups of dots were presented for 250 msec followed by a random color dot mask,
which was presented until a response was made. The number
of dots varied between 10 and 40 where the ratio of the two
numbers were randomly chosen among the following range:

3592

A

B
500 msec

500 msec

≈ 3400 msec

+++

500 msec

≈ 3400 msec

+++

time

…

“hot hand”

“hot hand”

C

500 msec

“hot toy”

≈ 3400 msec

time

OLD

NEW

…

“hot toy”

“hot toy”

<RESPONSE>

Figure 1: Design and stimuli used in the experiment. (A) an example of the videos used in the experiment, (B) an example of
the study phase, (C) an example of the test phase.

1.0991-1.1915, 1.1915-1.2917, 1.3302-1.4421, and 2.29062.4833 (adapted from Halberda & Feigenson, 2008).
In the test phase, participant were presented with a video
clip as in the study phase and were asked whether it was an
old video that they saw during the study phase (i.e., same
speaker saying the exact same word pair), or a new one
(see Figure 1C). Responses were collected using a computer
mouse by clicking the corresponding image on the screen.
There were 18 test trials consisting of eight old videos, eight
new videos that had the speaker swapped (re-arranged pairs),
and two new videos that had a new word pair spoken by the
female speaker and the male speaker (lure pairs). The words
in the lure pair did not appear in the study phase, and the trials
were randomized every block.
Presentation of all stimuli was controlled using MATLAB with Psychtoolbox-3 (Kleiner, Brainard, & Pelli, 2007)
equipped with a 22 inch monitor, and an individual headphone. The combination of the word pairs, and speakers were
randomized across participants.

hoc test only provided evidence for the difference between
the ABAC condition and the other two condition (ABAC ABABr: p < .001; ABAC - ABCD: p = .057; ABCD ABABr: p < .001). Similarly, the FAR measured by the
re-arranged pairs was the highest for the ABABr condition
(M = .40, SD = .15) followed by the ABCD (M = .25, SD
= .16), ABAC (M = .23, SD = .15), and the lures (M = .17,
SD = .16; see Figure 2B). A linear mixed-effects model with
subject as a random factor supported the effect of Condition
(χ2 (2) = 94.62, p < .001), while a Tukey post-hoc test provided evidence for the difference between the ABABr condition and the other conditions (p < .001), and between the
lures and the ABAC (p = .046) and ABCD conditions (p =
.001). There was no evidence for a difference between the
ABCD and ABAC conditions. Unlike previous studies using
a recall paradigm, where the ABCD condition shows a better performance than the ABAC condition, the current results
show a higher HR and lower FAR for the ABAC condition
than the ABCD condition.

Results

We measured discrimination using d 0 by comparing old
0
pairs against rearranged pairs (drearranged
). As shown in Figure 2C the ABABr condition showed the lowest (M = .74,
SD = .64), followed by the ABCD condition (M = 1.30, SD
= .71), and ABAC condition (M = 1.53, SD = .80). Also,
all conditions showed an above chance performance (ts(42)
> 7.60, Bonferroni adjusted ps < .001, Cohen’s d > 1.16),
as evidenced by d 0 scores above zero in each condition. A
linear mixed-effects model with subject as a random factor
supported the effect of Condition (χ2 (2) = 59.12, p < .001),
while a Tukey post-hoc test provided evidence for the difference between the ABABr condition and the other two conditions (ABAC: p < .001; ABCD: p < .001), and between the
ABAC and the ABCD condition (p = .028).

We analyzed and compared each condition regarding hit rate
(HR), false alarm rate (FAR), d 0 , and correct reaction time
(RT). As shown in Figure 2A, HR was the highest for the
ABAC condition (M = .76, SD = .14) followed by the ABCD
condition (M = .71, SD = .15) and ABABr condition (M = .67,
SD = .11). A linear mixed-effects model1 with subject as a
random factor (random intercept model) supported the effect
of Condition (χ2 (2) = 16.70, p < .001), while a Tukey post1 All mixed-effects models here and hereafter were implemented
using the lmer4 package in R (Bates, Mächler, Bolker, & Walker,
2015), and all effects were calculated by a likelihood-ratio test
against the null-model that only had the random effect of subject
(random intercept model).

3593

RT (msec)

1000

1.0
0

500
0

ABABr
ABAC
ABCD

0

0
dlure

1.0

E

ABABr
ABAC
ABCD

0

D 2.0

ABABr
ABAC
ABCD

ABABr
ABAC
ABCD

0

0
dreaggranged

.5

C 2.0

ABABr
ABAC
ABCD
Lure

.5

FAR

B 1.0

HR

A 1.0

Figure 2: Results of the Experiment. (A) hit rate (HR), (B) false alarm rate (FAR), (C) d 0 of distinguishing the re-arranged
0
0 ), and (E) correct reaction time
pairs from studied (old) pairs (drearranged
), (D) d 0 of distinguishing the lures from non-lures (dlure
(RT). Error bars represent ±1 SEM.

Discriminability of lures (new pairs) from intact pairs
0 ) was also calculated (see Figure 2D). The ABABr con(dlure
0
dition showed the lowest dlure
(M = 1.49, SD = .73), followed
by the ABAC condition (M = 1.77, SD = .88), and ABCD
condition (M = 1.60, SD = .79), while all conditions showed
an above chance performance (ts(42) > 13.18, Bonferroni adjusted ps < .001, Cohen’s d > 2.01). A linear mixed-effects
model with subject as a random factor showed supported the
effect of Condition (χ2 (2) = 17.87, p < .001), where evidence for difference was found between the ABAC condition
and the other two conditions (Tukey post-hoc test, ABABr: p
< .001; ABCD: p = .022), but not between the ABABr and
ABCD conditions (p = .198).
RT was first pre-processed by taking the median value of
each condition for each participant. RT was the slowest for
the ABABr condition (M = 988 msec, SD = 299 msec) followed by the ABAC condition (M = 974 msec, SD = 344
msec), and ABCD condition (M = 866 msec, SD = 267 msec;
see Figure 2E). A linear mixed-effects model with subject
as a random effect showed a statistically significant effect of
Condition (χ2 (2) = 9.11, p = .011), where a Tukey post-hoc
test provided evidence for the difference between the ABCD
condition and the other two conditions (ABAC: p = .035;
ABABr: p = .015), but not between the ABAC and ABABr
conditions (p > .25).

General Discussion
In the current study we examined whether three-way binding
structures are formed and used in a recognition task. Even
though three-way binding structures are crucial in everyday
life since items could be easily re-paired in different contexts,
previous studies have only examined the structure with recall
paradigms. The results most importantly showed that participants reliably use three-way binding structures during an
0
associative recognition task. Based on both drearranged
, and
0
dlure measures, participants showed robust above chance level
performance in the ABABr condition, which indicates that
three-way bindings were formed and used. The overall pattern was similar to previous findings using recall tasks (e.g.,
Yim, Dennis, & Sloutsky, 2013) where the ABABr condition

showed above chance accuracy while less accurate than the
other two conditions, and required more time to respond due
to greater interference. Our results also extend on previous
studies by using two contexts that are inter-mixed within a
single list. Past studies which have employed two temporally
separated study lists allow for the possibility that participants
could infer list membership on the basis of a difference in
memory strength between the two lists.
One interesting difference from previous results was the
performance in the ABAC condition. Previous studies show
a better performance in the ABCD structure compared to
the ABAC condition since there are less interference in the
ABCD condition. However, the ABAC condition showed the
best performance in the current results. One possible explanation could be a speed-accuracy trade off since it took longer
to respond in the ABAC condition than in the ABCD condition while the accuracy was higher. However, it will be hard
to disentangle the cause with only relying on the current data
set.
The evidence of using three-way binding structures in both
recall and recognition tasks implicate that models that do not
represent three-way binding structures should be re-examined
(e.g., Gillund & Shiffrin, 1984; Howard & Kahana, 2002;
Lohnas, Polyn, & Kahana, 2015). Our results also cast doubt
on the proposal that the associative recognition task does not
employ a context representation (Murdock, 1997). However,
future work may be needed to discriminate between the existing classes of models that are capable of predicting above
chance ABABr performance. For instance, our results do not
discriminate between multiple trace models such as MINERVA 2 (Hintzman, 1984) and REM (Shiffrin & Steyvers,
1997) which can predict above chance ABABr performance
by virtue of their non-linear similarity metrics at retrieval, and
the class of tensor models (Humphreys, Bain, & Pike, 1989;
Osth & Dennis, 2015) which employ explicit three-way bindings as third-order tensors. Another interesting possibility for
future work concerns the time course of when three way bindings are accessible. Although there are studies showing that
associative information arrives after information (e.g., Gronlund & Ratcliff, 1989), further research should examine these

3594

possibilities with three-way bindings.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported under Australian Research
Council’s Discovery Projects funding scheme to SJD (project
number DP150100272). We thank Emma K. Lindsay and
Emma Kronja for their help on collecting data.

References
Aue, W. R., Criss, A. H., & Fischetti, N. W. (2012). Associative information in memory: Evidence from cued recall.
Journal of Memory and Language, 66(1), 109–122.
Bates, D., Mächler, M., Bolker, B., & Walker, S. (2015). Fitting Linear Mixed-Effects Models Using lme4. Journal
of Statistical Software, 67(1), 1–48.
Criss, A. H., & Shiffrin, R. M. (2005). List Discrimination in
Associative Recognition and Implications for Representation. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 31(6), 1199–212.
Frank, M. C., Braginsky, M., Yurovsky, D., & Marchman,
V. A. (2016). Wordbank: an open repository for developmental vocabulary data. Journal of Child Language,
(pp. 1–18).
Gillund, G., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1984). A retrieval model
for both recognition and recall. Psychological Review,
91(1), 1–67.
Gronlund, S. D., & Ratcliff, R. (1989). Time course of item
and associative information: implications for global
memory models. Journal of Experimental Psychology.
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 15(5), 846–858.
Halberda, J., & Feigenson, L. (2008). Developmental change
in the acuity of the ”Number Sense”: The Approximate
Number System in 3-, 4-, 5-, and 6-year-olds and adults.
Developmental Psychology, 44(5), 1457–65.
Hintzman, D. L. (1984). MINERVA 2: A simulation model
of human memory. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 16(2), 96–101.
Howard, M. W., Jing, B., Rao, V. A., Provyn, J. P., & Datey,
A. V. (2009). Bridging the gap: transitive associations
between items presented in similar temporal contexts.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 35(2), 391–407.
Howard, M. W., & Kahana, M. J. (2002). A distributed representation of temporal context. Journal of Mathematical
Psychology, 46, 269–299.
Humphreys, M. S., Bain, J. D., & Pike, R. (1989). Different
Ways to Cue a Coherent Memory System: A Theory for
Episodic, Semantic, and Procedural Tasks. Psychological Review, 96(2), 208–233.
Kleiner, M., Brainard, D., & Pelli, D. (2007). Whats new in
Psychtoolbox-3? Perception, 36, 14.
Lohnas, L. J., Polyn, S. M., & Kahana, M. J. (2015). Expanding the scope of memory search: Modeling intralist
and interlist effects in free recall. Psychological Review,
122(2), 337–363.

Minsky, M. L., & Papert, S. A. (1969). Perceptrons. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Murdock, B. B. (1997). Context and mediators in a theory of
distributed associative memory (TODAM2). Psychological Review, 104(4), 839–862.
Osth, A. F., & Dennis, S. (2015). Sources of interference in
item and associative recognition memory. Psychological
Review, 122(2), 260–311.
Pike, R. (1984). Comparison of convolution and matrix
distributed memory systems for associative recall and
recognition. Psychological Review, 91(3), 281–294.
Polyn, S. M., Norman, K. a., & Kahana, M. J. (2009). A context maintenance and retrieval model of organizational
processes in free recall. Psychological Review, 116(1),
129–156.
Porter, L. W., & Duncan, C. P. (1953). Negative Transfer in
Verbal Learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology,
46(1), 61–64.
Postman, L. (1964). Studies of Learning to Learn II. Changes
in Transfer as a Function of Practice. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 3, 437–447.
Postman, L., & Stark, K. (1969). Role of Response Availability in Transfer and Interference. Journal Of Experimental Psychology, 79(1P1), 168–&.
Raaijmakers, J. G., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1981). Search of associative memory. Psychological Review, 88(2), 93–134.
Sederberg, P. B., Howard, M. W., & Kahana, M. J. (2008).
A context-based theory of recency and contiguity in free
recall. Psychological Review, 115(4), 893–912.
Shiffrin, R. M., & Steyvers, M. (1997). A model for recognition memory: REM-retrieving effectively from memory.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 4(2), 145–166.
Shimamura, A. P., Jurica, P. J., Mangels, J. A., Gershberg,
F. B., & Knight, R. T. (1995). Susceptibility to Memory Interference Effects following Frontal Lobe Damage: Findings from Tests of Paired-Associate Learning.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 7(2), 144–152.
Sloman, S., & Rumelhart, D. (1992). Reducing Interference
in Distributed Memory Through Episodic Gating. In
A. F. Healy, S. M. Kosslyn, & R. M. Shiffrin (Eds.)
From Learning Theory to Connectionist Theory: Essays
in Honor of William K. Estes, (pp. 227–248). Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Wiles, J., & Humphreys, M. S. (1993). Using Artificial Neural Nets to Model Implicit and Explicit Memory Test
Performance. In P. Graf, & M. E. Masson (Eds.) Implicit Memory: New Directions in Cognition, Development, and Neuropsychology, (pp. 141–166). New York,
New York, USA: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Yim, H., Dennis, S. J., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2013). The Development of Episodic Memory: Items, Contexts, and
Relations. Psychological Science, 24(11), 2163–2172.

3595

