Timing Time: Why Early Vision is Cognitively Impenetrable
Athanassios Raftopoulos (raftop@ucy.ac.cy)
Department of Psychology, University of Cyprus, P.O. Box 20537
Nicosia 1678, Cyprus

Abstract

Here, I concentrate on Newen and Vetter’s arguments from
temporal processing. The main reason is that if it turns out that
this evidence does not support the CP of early vision, the rest
of the arguments against weak CI are moot.
I argue that the evidence Newen and Vetter adduce if
properly examined strongly supports weak CI. The evidence
that emerges from these studies shows that all visual brain
areas at some time are affected by top-down cognitive signals
that usually drive spatial or object/feature based attention.
They also show that within the time frame of early vision
there is a confluence of top-down, lateral, and bottom up
interactions. These interactions, however, do not involve any
cognitive signals. These studies do not show that during the
first 120-140 ms of perceptual processing there are direct
cognitive top-down effects on early vision. What Newen and
Vetter consider as evidence for top-down cognitive effects on
early vision is, in effect, evidence for top-down and bottom up
interactions that do not involve any cognitive effects.
In the first section, I define early vision and examine most
of the studies cited by Newen and Vetter (2016) and argue that
they do not show that early vision is CP. I also take up Newen
and Vetter’s claim that even if a CI stage of visual processing
exists it is too impoverished to be deemed a perceptual stage
and claim that the output of early vision has a rich structure. In
the second section, I examine the rest of the evidence used by
Newen and Vatter and argue that in effect it supports the claim
that early vision is CI. All recurrent processing during early
vision is restricted within the visual areas of the brain and
does not involve any causal influences from cognitive states.

Newen and Vetter (2016) argue that cognitive penetration (CP) of
perceptual experience is the most possible account of the evidence.
They target both the weak impenetrability thesis that only some early
visual processes are cognitively impenetrable (CI), and the strong
impenetrability thesis that all perceptual processes are CI. Since I
agree that perceptual processing as a whole is CP, I will concentrate
on their arguments against the weak CI thesis. In attacking weak CI,
the authors take aim at Raftopoulos’ arguments supporting the CI of
early vision. Their main argument comes from studies that, Newen
and Vetter think, show that early vision is CP by demonstrating the
existence of cognitive effects on early vision. I examine the same
empirical evidence that Newen and Vatter discuss and argue this
same evidence strongly supports the view that early vision is CI.

1. Introduction
Newen and Vetter (2016) argue that the CP of perceptual
experience is the most possible account of the available
evidence. They target both the weak impenetrability thesis that
only some early visual processes are CI, and the strong
impenetrability thesis that all perceptual processes are CI.
Since I agree that perceptual processing, as a whole, is CP, I
concentrate on weak CI. The authors criticize Raftopoulos’
(2001, 2014) arguments in support of the view that early
vision, defined by temporal criteria, is CI. They maintain that
top-down influences from higher-level cognitive areas to early
visual cortex occur very early. Thus, it is unjustified to
conclude from an early timing of a visual process that it is
unaffected by top-down cognitive influences.
The authors’ main argument against weak CI, given that
weak CI holds that during the timing of early vision no direct
cognitive effects modulate the ongoing perceptual processes,
comes from studies that, Newen and Vetter think, demonstrate
the existence of cognitive effects on visual processing that
occur within the time frame of early vision.
Furthermore, Newen & Vetter (2016, 5) argue that even if
it exists a stage of perceptual processing that is unaffected by
cognition, it lasts for so few ms that it could not be a plausible
candidate for a perceptual module and it would be of almost
no importance to philosophical discussions about the CP of
perception. In other words, even if such a CI stage exists, the
information it processes and outputs would be too poor to be
categorized as a properly speaking perceptual content.

2. Early Vision and why it is CI, Part 1.
Early vision includes a feed forward sweep (FFS) in which
signals are transmitted bottom-up. In visual areas (from LGN
to FEF) FFS lasts for about 100ms. Early vision also includes
a stage at which lateral and recurrent processes that are
restricted within the visual areas and do not involve signals
from cognitive centers occur. Recurrent processing starts at
80–100 ms and culminates at 120–150 ms. Lamme (2003)
calls it local recurrent processing (LRP). The unconscious FFS
extracts high-level information that leads to categorization,
and results in some initial feature detection. LRP produces
further binding and segregation. The LRP is needed because,

974

owing to the small receptive fields of the neurons in V1 and
V2, only local information can be coded at this level. The
segmentation and recognition of the objects in a visual scene
requires a more global analysis of the visual scene that can be
achieved in higher areas, such as V4 or MT/V5, where the
neurons’ receptive fields o are larger and integrate information
across longer distances in the visual field.
The feedback projections provide this global analysis that
allows object segmentation, figure/ground separation, and
object recognition. In the case of the MT/V5 feedback to V1,
there is evidence (Pomp et al, 2015) that this feedback
increases the responsiveness of the neurons in V1 especially
for low-salience, small signals, which means that the recurrent
signals from MT/V5 may serve to disambiguate sub-optimal
visual input with respect both to the spatial location and
motion of the sub-optimal signals and to their content. In
addition, the feedback signals may be used to inform V1
where a change has happened in the visual scene. By not
involving signals from the cognitive areas of the brain, FFS
and LRP are cognitively impenetrable since the transmission
of signals within the visual system is not affected by top-down
signals produced in cognitive areas.
The processes of early vision retrieve from the
environment information that allows the perception of a visual
scene with as much accuracy as possible. To do so, early
vision gradually constructs representations of increasing
complexity (from variations in light intensities it extracts
edges, from edges blobs, from blobs it extracts twodimensional surfaces, and from these the 21/2 sketch). The
output of early vision consists in the dynamic structural
description of a visual scene corresponding to Marr’s 21/2
sketch to which one could add the affordances of objects.
Current research on predictive coding sheds light on the
nature of the processes implicated in vision. Applying this to
early vision, one gets the following. The top-down and lateral
effects in early vision aim to test hypotheses concerning the
putative distal causes of the sensory data encoded in the
hierarchically lower neuronal assemblies. In this testing,
predictions made on the basis of hypotheses about the sensory
information that the lower levels should encode assuming that
the hypotheses are correct, are tested against the actual
sensory information encoded at the lower levels. The
hypothesis that best matches the sensory data is selected.
To form hypotheses concerning the probable cause of the
sensory data at a certain level, at a specific spatial, and
temporal scale, the neuronal assembly at the next level uses
information not only about the sensory data at the previous
level (or, to be precise, information regarding its prediction
error) that is transmitted bottom-up, but also higher-level
information that is transmitted either laterally, that is, from
neuronal assemblies at the same level (neurons in V1
processing wave-lengths inform other neurons in V1
processing shape information), or top-down from levels higher

in the hierarchy (neurons in V4 are informed about the color
of incoming information from neurons in IT). This lateral and
top-down processing provides the context in which each
neuronal assembly constructs the most probable hypothesis
that would explain the sensory data at the lower level.
Since 90% of the information transmitted by neurons is
transmitted within the first 100 ms of the neurons’ activation
as a response to a stimulus, information to neurons transmitted
from other assemblies can affect their activity only if it arrives
within the 100 ms time frame (Bullier 2001, 98). In order for
the recurrent signals to modulate the activity at the reentered
sites, they should reenter them during these crucial 100ms.
Thus, for some signal from V4 or MT/V5, which receive
feedforward signals from V1, to reenter V1 in time to
influence the activation of the V1’s neurons, the loop
consisting of feedforward signals from V1 to V4 or MT/V5
and the recurrent signals from V4 or MT/V5 back to V1 must
have been completed in less than 100ms.
To put things into perspective, let us revisit Bullier’s
(2001) ‘reintroinjection’ view as it pertains to early vision and
involves MT/V5 and its interaction with the lower visual areas
V1 and V2. Low spatial frequency (LSF) signals precede high
spatial frequency (HSF) signals. LSF information is
transmitted through fast magnocellular pathways, while HSF
information is transmitted through slower parvocellular
pathways; the information transmitted through M-channels
reaches V1 from LGN 20 ms earlier than the information
transmitted from LGN to V1 through P-channels.
The mean activation latency of the neurons in MT/V5 of
the brain is 75 ms after stimulus presentation respectively.
Signals arrive at these areas at about the same time as, or a bit
later than, they arrive in V1 (50-80 ms) and V2 (85 ms) and
much earlier than they arrive in V4 despite the fact that
MT/V5 is anatomically higher than V4 (Bullier (2001, 98).
MT/V5 (and FEF) are parts of the ‘fast brain’ and belong to
the dorsal system. MT/V5 is situated in the parietal cortex.
Signals from V1 can reach the MT/V5 at about the same time
they reach V2, that is, within 1-2 ms. It takes less than 20 ms
for the recurrent signals from MT/V5 to affect the activation
of neurons in V1 and V2. So, when HSF information
transmitted through the P-channels reaches V1, 20 ms after
LSF information transmitted through M-channels had reached
V1, the responses of the V1 neurons have been modified as a
result of the top-down signals from MT/V5 that had received
earlier LSF information. In addition to the fast transmission of
signals through the M-channels, MT/V5 also receives fast
signals directly from LGN bypassing V1 through the
koniocellular pathway. Thus, under certain conditions, MT/V5
could be activated earlier that V1 (Foxe & Simpson 2002).
Bullier (2001, 100) concludes “the first wave of activity
that invades the visual cortex following a visual stimulus
appearing in the visual scene is carried by the M channel . . .
the characteristics of the M channel are well suited for such a

975

first-pass analysis of the visual scene.” This entails that even
the earliest ERP component, C1, which is elicited between 4060 ms, is not an indice of the activity of V1 alone but also
likely reflects top-down influences to V1 from areas as high as
MT/V5. These bottom-up and top-down interactions take
place within early vision (they have latencies up to 140 ms),
but all these studies bear evidence to the existence of topdown flow of information within early vision that involves
stimulus driven signals reprocessed in higher visual areas and
no evidence for cognitive effects in early vision.
The reason that the picture described thus far bears no
evidence to support the existence of cognitive influences at
these early latencies is that the top-down signals are
transmitted from MT/V5 and are part of the processing along
the dorsal system. The picture presented thus far posits early
latencies of the signals arriving to MT/V5 from LGN either
directly or through V1, that is, it dictates a bottom-up early
activation of MT/V5 that, in turn, sends feedback to V1
affecting the activations of the neurons there. At these
latencies there are no top-down cognitive signals to MT/V5
and, therefore, there are no cognitive signals affecting V1.
This conclusion is reinforced by the results of a study by
Plomp et al (2015). The researchers combined EEG sourceimaging and Granger-causal modeling with high temporal
resolution to “investigate whether recurrent and top-down
interactions between visual and attentional brain areas can be
identified and distinguished at short latencies in humans.”
Their results confirm the fast interaction between V1 and
MT/V5 reported by Bullier (2001). Their results also show
that the C1 ERP waveform (50 ms (onset)-80/90 ms (peak))
reflects both V1 activity and also activity in highly distributed
areas situates at the occipital, parietal, and frontal lobes (FEF
is in the pre-frontal lobe in an area where the dorsal pathway
projects). This activity reflects the early bottom-up and topdown interactions described by Bullier that includes the
V1/MT feedback loop. In contradistinction to this early
recurrent activity, the parietal cortex and FEF (the later cycle
of activity there), which are known to modulate perceptual
processing so as to help adapt behavior to the demands of a
task and context, affect posterior activity around the latency of
N1 (170 ms after stimulus onset). Thus, top-down interactions
that reflect task-specific processing of the stimuli arise at
longer latencies after stimulus onset. Pomp et al. (2015, 4-5)
synopsize their results as follows “at the N1 latency, driving
from MT no longer showed a stimulus effect, indicating that
stimulus-specific driving from MT is confined to earlier
latencies, in line with its fast response properties.”
As Plomp et al., (2016, 1) write “stimulus-evoked
activity at latencies before 100 ms is traditionally considered a
bottom-up process. Even at these short latencies, however,
there is mounting evidence of fast recurrent interactions
between visual areas, obtained from direct recordings of
neural activity in animal models.” This agrees with Bulier’s

conclusion that during the early interaction between MT/V5
and V1 (latencies earlier than 100 ms) the signals are stimulus
driven (since the signals entering MT and processed there
originate from the stimulus only), while only in the later
interactions that involve cognitively driven attention, whose
commands are issued according to the task demands, do
cognitive factors modulate the activation of neurons in V1.
Suppose that early vision is CI. Newen and Vetter could be
right that the perceptual processes within this narrow time
frame produce states with such poor contents that they are not
properly speaking perceptual states; they could be at most
sensory states. As we have seen, however, FFS and local RP
allow, in about 120-140 ms after stimulus onset, the
construction of fairly complex representations of stimuli.
There is some form of perceptual organization, which
certainly includes information regarding the presence of
discrete objects in a scene, their orientations, sizes, shapes or
forms, motions; these features determine the structural
description of objects. Thus, the output of early vision consists
of information about spatio-temporal and surface properties,
3D shape viewed from the perspective of the viewer, color,
texture, orientation, motion, and affordances of objects, in
addition to the representations of objects as bounded, solid
entities that persist in space and time (Raftopoulos 2014). I
disagree, thus, with Newen and Vetter that the content of CI
perceptual states is related to the perception of impoverished
black and white pictures. Early vision retrieves from the visual
scene an extensive range of information.

3. Timing the Cognitive Effects: Why Early
Vision is CI, Part 2
Let us examine the evidence that Newen & Vetter employ to
substantiate their claim.
Time-resolving electrophysiological evidence showed
that visual cortex is activated within 50 ms and prefrontal areas within 80 ms after visual stimulus onset.
This leaves plenty of time for iterative top-down
processing between ‘‘cognitive”, e.g. frontal and
parietal, areas and sensory, e.g. occipital, areas, within
the first 100–200 ms after visual stimulation (Foxe &
Simpson, 2002). Thus, complex high level and
reiterative processing can happen very fast and can
influence visual processing very early on (. . . Plomp,
Hervais-Adelman, Astolfi, & Michel, 2015). (Newen
&Vetter 2016, 4-5)
Newen and Vetter talk about recurrent signals that involve
cognitive activity affecting visual areas at latencies 100-200
ms. Thus, they accept that the available evidence suggests that
cognitive effects on visual areas are registered after 100 ms
post stimulus. We discussed Plomp et al. (2015) work and
their conclusion that the recurrent early activity (before the
elicitation of N1) is restricted within visual areas and only
after that latency does recurrent activity involving cognitive

976

centers register in visual areas. Thus, the early recurrent
activity (up to about 170 ms) does not involve cognitive
signals and this supports the view that the processes of early
vision (that lasts up to about 120-140 ms) are not affected by
cognitive signals. Thus, when Newen and Vetter conclude
“complex high level and reiterative processing can happen
very fast and can influence visual processing very early on”,
this very early on is not early enough to be within early vision.
Indeed, as Foxe and Simpson (2002, 139) state
There is clearly sufficient time for multiple iterations
of interactive processing between sensory, parietal,
and frontal areas during brief (e.g., 200 ms) periods of
information processing preceding motor output . . .
These data strongly suggest that activity represented in
the “early” ERP components such as P1 and N1 (and
possibly even C1) is likely to reflect relatively late
processing, after the initial volley of sensory afference
through the visual system and involving topdown
influences from parietal and frontal regions.
Notice, first, that the reference is to the time frame up to
200ms and that the recurrent interactions at earlier latencies
that Foxe & Simpson report concern interactions within visual
areas. In addition, the top-down signals that are generated in
the higher visual areas and reenter the early visual areas within
these earlier latencies result from the processing of sensory
signals that arrive very quickly, through PM-channels or the
koniocellular pathway, to the higher areas; “The rapid
activation of prefrontal cortex following initial visual
activation (within 30 ms) suggests that this input is mediated
through the faster dorsal visual stream” (Foxe & Simpson
2002,147-148). This is in line with Bullier’s views that we
examined earlier. All these suggest that the higher areas at
these latencies have not received as yet any signals from
cognitive areas and, in this sense the signals that constitute the
feedback loop are bottom-up sensory signals and top-down
reprocessed and modified sensory signals. In fact, it could
hardly be otherwise; since all this very early recurrent activity
involves the dorsal system, there is up to date no evidence to
support the existence of any cognitive effects on the dorsal
system when it functions on line to support fast action.
Furthermore, and in reference to Foxe and Simpson’s
mention of parietal and frontal regions involved in the early
recurrent processing, which may be taken as evidence for the
existence of cognitive influences, MT/V5 is in the parietal
cortex and FEF is in the prefrontal cortex. Our discussion
concerning the role of MT/V5 shows that there are no
cognitive effects in the early latencies we discuss and, as our
examination of the role of FEF will show, neither are such
cognitive effects found in the early activation of FEF and in its
role in the early stages of perceptual processing. Foxe and
Simpson (2002, 146) confirm this analysis by concluding that
“multiple visual areas begin to contribute substantially to the
surface potential and C1 begins to reflect contributions from a

number of visual areas other than, but is likely also to include
V1 (emphasis added).” Moreover, Foxe and Simpson (2002,
147), after their claim that “that sustained activation patterns
within cortical areas are consistent with feedback modulation
of ‘lower’ visual areas by ‘higher’ areas, as well as local
intrinsic processing”, add that their findings conform with the
findings of Lamme (1995) and Lamme et. al. (1998) about the
time frame of feedback modulation in figure-ground
segregation studies with monkeys. It is well known that these
studies confirm that the recurrent processes that occur at early
latencies do not involve cognitive signals.
Newen and Vetter (2016, 5) argue that in the visual system
there is strong evidence for fast top-down processing within
the first 50 ms after stimulus onset, certainly between motion
area V5 and primary visual cortex V1 during motion
perception (Silvanto, et al., 2005). The reference to the
interaction between V5 and V1 during motor perception
brings into mind the foregoing discussion of LRP that is
restricted within the visual areas. Let use examine these
studies to see if this assumption is substantiated.
Silvanto et al., (2005) studied the role of V1 in the visual
awareness of motion. Their experiments show that backprojections from extrastriate cortex influence the activations
of neurons in V1 and that it is the activation in V1 that
determines which information reaches awareness. Since our
interest is in the latencies at which the back projections affect
V1 and the sites of origin of the top-down signals, I will
ignore the findings concerning motion awareness. Silvanto et
al., (2005) applied TMS on V1 and V5 at different times to
examine the perception of phosphenes. When subthreshold
TMS (that is, TMS producing no phosphene on its own) was
applied over V5 followed by a subthreshold pulse to V1,
subjects did not report any phosphene. When a subthreshold
pulse was applied over V5 followed 10–40 ms later by a
suprathreshold pulse over V1, subjects reported a phosphene,
which was not merely the suprathreshold V1 phosphene.
Instead, it acquired features of a suprathreshold V5 phosphene
since subjects reported the perception of movement, and the
shape and size of their percept was a mixture of V1 and V5
phosphenes. This shows that activity in V5, which on its own
is insufficient to induce a moving percept, can produce such a
percept if the level of induced activity in V1 is high enough.
Silvanto et al. (2005, 143) conclude that the fact “that
moving phosphenes are perceived only when suprathreshold
V1 stimulation follows, but not precedes, subthreshold V5
stimulation, together with the gradual increase in motion
perception from the 10–50 ms period, precludes a simple feedforward summation account and points instead to a critical
time of backprojection arrival in V1.” They also note that the
narrow time window for V5–V1 interaction (10–50 ms) is
consistent with previous reports of extrastriate-striate feedback
interactions in motion during this time interval. Indeed, this
accords with Bullier’s (2001) and Plomp et al. (2016) finding

977

that there is an early (up to 100 ms) phase of recurrent activity
between V1 and MT/V5, but as in these studies, so in Silvanto
et al. (2005) report, there is no evidence to suggest top-down
cognitive effects at these early latencies, because the recurrent
signals from MT/V5 are stimulus driven, or, to use Plomp et
al. (2016) term, they are a stimulus-evoked activity.
Next, Newen and Vetter (2016, 5) examine the
interaction between FEF and V1.
[T]he frontal eye fields (FEF), a higher-level area in
frontal cortex involved in motor planning of eye
movements, exerts its influence to V5 within 30 ms
(Silvanto, Lavie, & Walsh, 2006). Therefore, a
feedback loop from a frontal region to an early
occipital region can take as little as 80 ms or less . . .
when the task requires face recognition, FEF signals
are sent to face-sensitive regions and when the task
requires motion discrimination, FEF signals are sent to
motion area V5, both within a time frame of 20–40 ms
after FEF activity (Morishima et al., 2009).
FEF is situated in the prefrontal cortex at a site that is
heavily interconnected with the parietal cortex and is
considered a part of the dorsal system. The mean activation
latency of the neurons in FEF is 70 ms after stimulus
presentation. Signals arrive at FEF with a slight time delay
time with respect to the signals arriving at V1 (50-80 ms) and
V2 (85 ms) and much earlier than they arrive at V4 despite the
fact that FEF is anatomically higher than V4 (Taylor and
Nobre 2007). FEF TMS affects the detection of targets in
arrays of distractors and these effects are apparent when
pulses are applied early (40 and 80 ms) after presentation of
the visual array (O’Shea et al. 2004). HSF signals from V1
can reach FEF in 50-100 ms.
FEF contains visual and movement neurons. Studies (see
O’Shea et al. (2004, 1060) for a discussion) show that there
are two dissociated processing operations in FEF; the target
selection by FEF visual neurons and saccade programming by
movement neurons. Studies (O’Shea et al., 2016; Silvanto et
al., 2006; Taylor & Nobre 2007) show that some FEF
responses are independent of saccades to targets and respond
to the visual stimuli. Some of the FEF feedback signals play a
role in the perception of a visual scene by affecting in a topdown manner the earlier visual areas. FEF plays a crucial role
in visual target discrimination that is independent of saccade
programming, as TMS applied to FEF impairs performance in
target discrimination tasks if applied between 40-80 ms after
stimulus onset (O’Shea et al. 2004). In addition, these visual
neurons of FEF are thought to be associated with top-down or
endogenous attention (Taylor and Nobre 2007).
Accepting O’Shea et al. (2004) early latencies of FEF
neurons in discriminating targets from non targets (100-120
ms), in view of the fact that, as Newen and Vetter (2016, 5)
also accept, FEF exerts its influence to V5 within 30 ms and,
therefore, a feedback loop from FEF to an early occipital

region can take as little as 80 ms or less, the total time it takes
for the FEF neurons that have distinguished the targets from
non targets to affect via top-down feedback projections the
early visual areas is about 180-200 ms, considering that the
target discrimination in FEF reported by O’Shea t al. (2004)
occurs at 100-120 ms. This means that the FEF effects the
activation of the neurons in early visual areas with a latency
that places these effects outside early vision.
Concerning the finding that FEF neurons effectively
discriminate targets from non targets as early as 100-120 ms
after stimulus onset, one could argue that since this
discrimination is task relevant and involves cognitive factors,
cognition affects a visual area, FEF, within the timing of early
vision. O’Shea et al. (2004), think it very likely that the early
latency they report is the result of feature pre cueing, which
means that the early activity in FEF occurs as the result of a
cognitive demand issued before the appearance of the
stimulus. I have argued (Raftopoulos 2014) that the cognitive
effects on perception through pre-cueing are not cases of CP
because they do not affect directly early vision and do not
affect its epistemic role in grounding empirical beliefs.
Silvanto et al., (2006), whose study is cited by Newen and
Vetter (2016) as showing that early vision is CP, found that
stimulation applied to FEF 20-40 ms prior to the stimulation
of MT/V5 decreases the intensity of the MT/V5 stimulation
required to elicit phosphenes, which entails that the activity of
MT/V5 is modulated by the activity in FEF. FEF has also been
found to modulate top-down V4. Silvanto et al (2006, 944)
claim that the content of to-down control may be either spatial
or feature related, which means that they think that FEF
affects the control of top-down attention; “an area involved in
control would be expected to be active early and by
responding to target features, the FEF could increase the
sensitivity of extrastriate neurons to task relevant parameters.”
(Silvanto et al. 206, 944) With regards to how FEF exerts topdown control, it is possible that FEF activity occurs prior to
sensory stimulation as opposed to rapid responses to visual
stimuli since FEF neurons may also play a role in visual
priming (Silvanto et al. 2006, 944). Thus, as Taylor and Nobre
(2007), so Silvanto et al., (2006) think that FEF controls the
allocation of top-down attention prior to stimulus presentation.
The discrimination between targets and non-targets
depends on the task at hand and is cognitively driven. Thus,
the top-down effects that result from this discrimination are
also cognitively-driven and the visual processes that are thus
affected are clearly CP. Accepting O’Shea et al. (2004) early
latencies of FEF neurons in discriminating targets from non
targets, since FEF exerts its influence to V5 within 30 ms and,
therefore, a feedback loop from FEF to an early occipital
region can take as little as 80 ms, the total time it takes for the
FEF neurons that have distinguished the targets from non
targets to affect via top-down feedback projections MT/V5 is
130-150 ms, and the effects on the early visual areas is about

978

References

180-200 ms, considering that the target discrimination in FEF
in O’Shea t al. (2004) occurs at 100-120 ms. All of these are
outside the timing of early vision and do not entail its CP.
Finally, Newen and Vetter (2016, 5), appeal to a study by
Drewes et al. (2016) that shows that object recognition
involves recurrent processing with a time constant of 60 ms.
Drewes et al. (2016) examine the view that since the visual
system extracts from object information, for example, the
shape of objects, very fast this entails that the underlying
cortical processing should be strictly feedforward. Against
this, their study suggests that in shape perception there is a
recurrent circuit, which is not an attentional cueing effect but
reflects “the time course of feedback processing underlying
the rapid organization of shape.” (Drewes et al. 2016, 185)
In their introduction, they mention work by Heinen et al.
(2005) suggesting that the figure-ground segregation requires
two distinct periods of information processing in the early
visual areas, an early one around 130-160 ms and a later one
around 250-280 ms after stimulus onset, and by Wokke et al.
(2012) showings that recurrent processing engages the early
visual areas (V1/V2) to participate in more complex visual
tasks. In an early time window (96–119 msec), detection of
figure stimuli and of neural correlates of figure border
detection and border ownership occurs. Later (236–259 msec)
V1 and V2 participate in surface segregation. Drewes et al.
(2016) accept these latencies as a general framework.
Drewes et al. (2016, 190) claim that “the extent of
facilitation between two shape stimuli depends nonmonotonically on the delay between their presentations,
peaking at a delay of 60 ms.” This suggests a recurrent circuit
underlying shape processing in the cortical object pathway.
They remark that in Wokke’s et al. (2012) study TMS was
applied to the occipital pole to disrupt processing in V1/V2 or
to the lateral occipital lobe to disrupt processing in the LOC.
TMS disrupted performance at both locations but at different
latencies. In LOC, TMS disrupted processing when the pulse
occurred 100–122 ms post stimulus, while in V1/V2,
processing was disrupted when the pulse was applied 160–182
ms post stimulus. This shows a feedback process in the
grouping of contour fragments to form shape with a one-way
feedback time constant (LOC to V1/V2) of 40–80 ms. Given
the 60 ms time constant, the top-down signals reenter V1 and
V2 at latencies outside early vision.

Bullier, J. (2001). Integrated model of visual processing. Brain
Research Reviews, 36, 96-107.
Drewes, J., Goren, G., Zhu, W., & Elder, J/H. (2016).
Recurrent processing in the formation of percept shapes.
The Journal of Neuroscience, 36(1), 185-192.
Heinen, K., Jolij, J., & Lamme, V. (2005). Figure-ground
segregation requires two distinct periods of activity in V1:
a transcranial magnetic study. .Neuroreport, 16(13), 14831487.
Lamme, V. A. F. (1995). The neurophysiology of figureground segregation in primary visual cortex. Journal of
Neuroscience, 15, 1605-1615.
Lamme, V. A. F. (2003). Why visual attention and awareness
are different. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7 (1), 12-18.
Lamme VA, Zipser K, Spekreijse H (1998). Figure-ground
activity in primary visual cortex is suppressed by
anesthesia. Proccedings National Academy Science USA,
95, 3263–3268.
Morishima, Y., Akaishi, R., Yamada, Y., Okuda, J., Toma, K.,
& Sakai, K. (2008). Task-specific signal transmission from
prefrontal cortex in visual selective attention. Nature
Neuroscience, 12(1), 85-90.
Newen, A. & Vetter, P. (2016). Why cognitive penetration of
our perceptual experience is still the most plausible
account.
Consciousness
and
Cognition,
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2016.09.005.
O’Shea, J., Muggleton, N.G., Cowey, A., & Walsh, V. (2004).
Timing of target discrimination in human front eye fields.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 16(6), 1060-1067.
Plomp, G., Hervais-Adelma, A. Astofli, L., & Michel, C. M.
(2015). Early recurrence and ongoing parietal driving
during elementary visual processing. Nature, Scientific
Reports, 5:18733, doi: 10.1038/srep18733.
Raftopoulos, A. (2001). Is perception informationally
encapsulated? The Issue of the Theory-Ladenness of
Perception. Cognitive Science, 25, 423-451.
Raftopoulos, A. (2014). The cognitive impenetrability of the
content of early vision is a necessary and sufficient
condition for purely nonconceptual content. Philosophical
Psychology, 27 (5), 601-620.
Silvanto, J., Cowey, A., Lavie, N., & Walsh, V. (2005). Striate
cortex (V1) activity gates awareness of motion. Nature
Neuroscience, 8(2), 143-144.
Silvanto, J., Lavie, N., & Walsh, V. (2006). Stimulation of the
human frontal eye fields modulates sensitivity of
extrastriate visual cortex. Journal of Neurophysiology,
96(2), 941–945.
Taylor, P.C.J., & Nobre, A. (2007). FEF TMS affects visual
cortical activity. Cerebral Cortex, 17, 391-399.
Wokke, M., Sligte, I., Scholte, H., & Lamme, V.A.F. (2012).
Two critical periods in early visual cortex during figureground segregation. Brain and Behavior, 2(6), 763-777.

4. Conclusion
I examined the evidence Newen and Vetter (2016) adduce to
support the claim that early vision is CP. None of it supports
the existence of direct cognitive effects on early vision.
Finally, concerning the claim that a stage of visual processing
that is CI is so impoverished that it would not be worthy to be
called a stage of perception, I claimed that early vision
delivers a rich structure.

979

