Vanishing the mirror effect:
The influence of prior history & list composition on recognition memory
Melody Dye (meldye@indiana.edu), Michael N. Jones (mnjones@indiana.edu),
& Richard Shiffrin (shiffrin@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychological & Brain Sciences, Indiana University, Bloomington
Abstract

& Shiffrin, 1984) to the match between vectors (Murdock,
1982).
A general assumption is that the distribution of familiarity
values will have a higher mean for studied items than for
unstudied lures. However, interference at retrieval can arise
from two sources: item noise (McClelland & Chappell, 1998;
Shiffrin & Steyvers, 1997) and context noise (Dennis &
Humphreys, 2010). Item noise refers to the probability of a
chance match between an item at test and memory traces for
other studied items. Context noise refers to the probability of a
match between the experimental context and other contexts in
which the tested item has occurred.
To study how noise arises in recognition, designs typically
manipulate one or more variables of interest, such as the
number of items on the list (list length), the number of
repetitions or exposure duration of a particular item at study
(item strength), and the number of repetitions of the list (list
strength). The properties of the items may also be
systematically manipulated: For instance, a list might be
comprised of an equal proportion of randomly selected high
(HF) and low frequency (LF) items (mixed list), or alternately,
contain only items selected from one frequency band (pure
list).
The study presented here was designed to investigate the
extent to which item and context noise affect recognition
processes, by systematically manipulating both the prior
contexts in which critical items had been encountered
(Kinsbourne & George, 1974; Estes & Maddox, 1997), and the
similarity of items within the list (Hintzman, 1988; Shiffrin,
Huber, & Marinelli, 1995). There are a number of reasons to
believe that these manipulations to item and context noise
should differentially affect items as a function of their
frequency, which we shall now review.

In the study of recognition memory, a mirror effect is
commonly observed for word frequency, with low frequency
items yielding both a higher hit rate and lower false alarm rate
than high frequency items. The finding that LF items
consistently outperform HF items in recognition was once
termed the “frequency paradox”, as LF items are less well
represented in memory. However, recognition is known to be
influenced both by ‘context noise’—the prior contexts in
which an item has appeared—and ‘item noise’—interference
from other items present within the list context. In a typical
recognition list, HF items will suffer more interference than
LF items. To illustrate this principle, we deliberately
manipulated both the contexts in which critical items had
been encountered prior to study, and the confusability of
targets and distractors. Our results suggest that when noise
sources are balanced, the mirror effect disappears.
Keywords: recognition memory; context noise; item noise;
prior history; semantic similarity; orthographic similarity; list
length; word frequency; mirror effect; differentiation

Introduction
In a typical episodic memory experiment, subjects are
introduced to a new item or list of items within the
experimental context, and memory is then tested for that set. In
an old-new recognition task, for example, subjects study a list
of words, and then are asked to discriminate words seen at
study (targets) from non-studied words (foils). What is
potentially challenging about the task is that subjects must
identify just those items seen at study from all other words
encountered in everyday life. In other words, they must
discriminate between pre-experimental familiarity with the test
items and familiarity that is specific to the task context.
Performance at test is assessed by the d’ sensitivity index,
common in signal detection, which computes the distance
between the means of the hit-rate distribution (the probability
of correctly identifying a target) and the false alarm-rate
distribution (the probability of misidentifying a lure),
normalized by the common standard deviation.
The study of recognition memory has been dominated by
global matching models, which are variants on signal detection
models. These capture the idea that recognition of a particular
item depends not solely on the properties of the item itself, in
isolation, but also on other items present in memory (for a
review, see Clark & Gronlund, 1996). When a particular item is
tested, the available cues—such as item and context—form a
joint probe of memory, which is accessed in parallel. This
global search yields a numerical value, which prompts an ‘old’response if it exceeds some criterion. The returned value is
variously understood as the global familiarity of the test item,
the match between the test item and the contents of memory,
and the activation strength of memory for that test item. How
the value is calculated also depends on the process specified by
the model, ranging from the sum of retrieval strengths (Gillund

Word Frequency Effects in Recognition
In studies of recognition memory, a mirror effect is
commonly observed in subject performance with regards to
item frequency: Compared to HF items, LF items are better
discriminated, yielding a higher hit rate (HR) and lower false
alarm rate (FAR) (Glanzer & Adam, 1985; Glanzer et al.,
1993). A similar effect is observed in forced-choice recognition
paradigms that include (in addition to the usual old-new pairs)
old-old and new-new pairs, for which there is no ‘correct’
answer. Subjects in these studies preferentially choose LF
words over HF words for target pairs, and HF words over LF
words for foil pairs (Glanzer & Bowles, 1976).
In assessing word frequency effects (WFE), there are a few
wrinkles to consider: For one, the mirror effect is not always
perfectly symmetric; the performance gap is typically smaller
for hits than false alarms, and there may be differences in
criterion as well as sensitivity (Hintzman, Caulton, & Curran,
1994). For another, recognition performance does not vary
monotonically with word frequency. Instead, LF words only
appear to benefit when subjects have some familiarity with
them (Schulman, 1976; Zechmeister, Curt, & Sebastian, 1978).
Further, when frequency is considered as a continuous variable,
!1

325

HR follows a U-shape, with the greatest decrements observable
in the mid-frequency band (Hemmer & Criss, 2013).
Clearly, differences in performance on high and low
frequency items cannot be reduced to their differential
repetition in prior history. Instead, there appear to be multiple,
interacting factors at play in producing differences between
frequency bands. Some of the key factors include: 1) how well
a particular item is differentiated from other items in the
lexicon given prior learning history; 2) how discriminable that
item is from other items on the present list, given the specific
list composition; and 3) the degree to which that item will be
associated with the present task context, which should be
inversely related to the number of distinct contexts in which it
has previously appeared.

contexts, a principle known as encoding specificity (Tulving &
Thomson, 1973). However, similarity between contexts can
also produce interference in tasks, like recognition, that require
discrimination among encoding contexts. In making an
accurate recognition judgment, one of the key challenges is in
distinguishing between familiarity with the item from the study
list and familiarity from previous experiences in everyday life.
The more prior contexts in which an item has occurred, and the
more confusable those contexts with the study list, the harder
the problem.
One way to demonstrate this is by incidentally exposing
subjects to critical targets and lures in a familiarization phase
prior to study, which shares many contextual features with the
recognition task (e.g., the location, time of day, etc).
Recognition for pre-exposed items is reliably impaired
(Kinsbourne & George, 1974; Tulving & Kroll, 1995). Another
method is to select list items that vary in their contextual
diversity (CD)—i.e., the number of different pre-experimental
contexts in which they have appeared. When CD varies, items
with higher diversity scores are less well recognized overall,
with a lower HR and higher FAR (Jones, Johns, & Reccia,
2012; Steyvers & Malmberg, 2003).
These findings establish context noise as an important source
of interference at retrieval. Importantly, context noise is also a
key dimension on which HF and LF items differ. Not only are
HF words experienced more often than LF words, they are
experienced in a more variable set of verbal contexts (Adelman
et al., 2006; Jones, Johns, & Reccia, 2012). Given their high
frequency of occurrence in text and speech, they are also more
likely to have been experienced more recently (Scarborough,
Cortese, & Scarborough 1977; Anderson & Schooler, 1991).
Relative to LF items, the contexts in which HF items are
experienced will thus be more confusable with the study list,
significantly increasing the difficulty of the recognition task for
those items.

Differentiation over Learning
How do these dimensions differ for high and low frequency
items in a standard recognition experiment? A common
theoretical assumption is that greater experience with an item
over learning leaves it better differentiated in memory—the
idea being that repeated exposure acts to increase similarity
between the studied item and its memory trace, while
decreasing the similarity between its trace and all others (Criss,
2006). This view of repetition falls naturally out of
discriminative learning models (Rescorla, 1972; Ramscar et al.,
2010), in which cue weights are tuned to produce ever more
efficient responding. It is also common to the study of
categorization, where it is well known that similarity relations
among items change in systematic ways as a function of
learning (Nosofsky, 1986).
Models of recognition memory formalize this notion in
slightly different ways. In the Retrieving Effectively from
Memory (REM) model, each time an item is encountered
within a given context, its episodic memory trace is updated,
accruing more complete and accurate feature information
(Shiffrin & Steyvers, 1997). Thus, more encoding opportunities
lead to a higher probability of self-match and a lower
probability of matching an unrelated item, leading to
‘differentiation’ of the trace. Likewise, in the subjective
likelihood model (SLiM), initial experience with an item yields
a noisy and underspecified representation of its features, which
is refined over learning (McClelland & Chappell, 1998). A
logical inference from these models is that HF items—by virtue
of having been experienced more often, and in more contexts—
should be better differentiated from one another in long-term
memory than are LF items.
If HF items are better learned, why do they not routinely
outperform LF items in recognition, as they do in other
memory paradigms, like lexical decision and recall? This is
known as the frequency paradox (Gregg, 1976).

Item Noise
Another clue to the “frequency paradox” concerns how
memory for a single item depends on the composition of the
surrounding list. As von Restorff (1933) demonstrated in a
classic experiment, distinct items fare well on tests of
recognition. For example, in a 10 item-list comprised of 9
nonsense syllables and 1 number, the number is recalled with
far greater accuracy than the syllables. However, the extent to
which a particular item benefits from its distinctiveness—i.e.,
its dissimilarity from other items—depends crucially on how
dissimilar the rest of the items on the list are from each other.
To illustrate this idea, von Restorff placed the lone number
on a list with several equally unrelated items, including “a
syllable, a color patch, a single letter, a word, a photograph, a
symbol, an actual button, a punctuation mark, and the name of
a chemical compound” (as reported by Hunt, 1995, p. 109).
Unsurprisingly, once all the items were similarly distinct, no
advantage for the lone number was found. A benefit only
obtained when the other items were clustered in similarity
space relative to the critical item. That is, “similarity must
establish a context in which difference functions” (Hunt, 1995).
The distinctiveness hypothesis proposes that memory for a
given item should vary inversely with its featural overlap with
other items at study (Hunt & Mitchell, 1982). In line with this,
when subjects are asked to remember a list of statements that
are either congruent or incongruent with their expectations,
incongruent-facts tend to be advantaged in recall—but only so
long as they comprise a minority of the list (Hastie & Kumar,
1979). Parallel results have been reported for word recall,
where it has been found that orthographically or semantically

Context Noise
To address this question, it helps to consider how memory
for a word depends on the contexts in which it has been
previously encountered. Events stored in memory are
comprised of both information that was central to processing
(the item itself) and information that was available in the
peripheral environment (the broader context). The contextual
information that is encoded may include aspects of the
temporal or physical context in which an item is presented, the
emotional state of the learner, and so on (Murnane, Phelps, &
Malmberg, 1999; Smith, Glenberg, & Bjork, 1978).
Because contextual information is stored alongside item
information, memory for an item is facilitated when there is a
high degree of match between its encoding and retrieval
!2

326

unusual items only benefit when presented with common ones
(Hunt & Eliott, 1980; see also Zechmeister, 1972). This is
consistent with a surprisal-based account of the von Restorff
effect (Green, 1956).
In recognition, it is clear that distinctiveness matters both at
encoding and at retrieval. Researchers as far back as Postman
(1951) have observed that performance on tests of recognition
memory varies inversely with the similarity of items at study
and at test, and thus, with the choice of distractor (Anisfield &
Knapp, 1968; Bahrick, Clark, & Bahrick, 1967). For example,
in face recognition, distinctive faces are better recognized than
common faces when lures are selected at random, but
recognized more poorly when the similarity of lures to targets
is controlled (Davidenko & Ramscar, 2005).
Importantly, distinctiveness is a feature on which low and
high frequency items are bound to vary. LF words are, on
average, more orthographically distinctive than HF words—
comprised of more rare letters, and more uncommon
combinations of letters (Estes & Maddox, 2002; Malmberg et
al. 2002)—and belong to much sparser orthographic
neighborhoods, with both fewer and rarer neighbors (Landauer
& Streeter, 1973).
In a random selection of words, LF items will also be more
semantically distinctive than their HF counterparts. This is
guaranteed by the distributional properties of the lexicon—
specifically the fact that LF words are drawn from a much
larger sample than their HF counterparts (using a 1 per million
word cutoff, 80% of all words can be classified as low
frequency; van Heuven et al. 2014). As a result, LF items will
be less semantically similar to one another, on average, than HF
items. A variety of measures of semantic richness attest to this:
LF words have fewer closer associates (Deese, 1960; Balota et
al., 2004), fewer close semantic neighbors (Pexman et al.,
2008), and more sparse network connectivity (Steyvers &
Tenenbaum, 2005).
While HF items are better differentiated in memory, they are
also drawn from a much more tightly clustered similarity space,
both in terms of their surface and semantic features. When
presented in a mixed lists of randomly selected items, they
should thus be less distinctive at encoding and more confusable
at test.1

Design In the familiarization phase of the study, subjects
completed a simple reading comprehension test in which they
were incidentally exposed to a set of critical words. Following
a short delay, subjects returned to complete a list recognition
task in which they studied a list of words, and at test, were
asked to distinguish between studied items (targets) and novel
items (foils).
Context noise was manipulated by inserting previously
encountered critical words at study and at test. To assess how
recent exposure affected recognition, the study counterbalanced
both whether a given word was encountered in reading, and
whether it occurred as a target or foil. Item noise was
manipulated by selecting control words for the recognition task
from dense semantic categories (Figure 1). To assess for
frequency effects, both critical and control words were evenly
divided between high and low frequency bands.

Study

Participants 54 undergraduate students at Indiana University
participated in the experiment for course credit. All were native
American English speakers with normal or corrected-to-normal
vision. 3 subjects were excluded from the analysis for
performing at chance on the reading comprehension portion of
the experiment.

Figure 1: The average semantic similarity of targets to distractors in
lists randomly generated from the Exp. 1 control items, as compared to
standard episodic word pools (see Dye et al., 2017 for methodology).
Drawing items from semantic categories disproportionately increases
similarity for LF items.

In standard recognition experiments, there is a significant
imbalance between frequency bands. When item selection is
random, LF words should tend to be more orthographically and
semantically distinctive than HF words, suggesting that they
demand more attentional resources at encoding, and are less
confusable with frequency-matched distractors at test. At the
same time, their occurrence as a list item is less confusable
with other, previous occurrences: LF items have been
experienced in fewer, less diverse contexts, and are less likely
to have been experienced recently.
In this study, our goal is to bring the sources of noise for high
and low frequency items more in balance. To accomplish this
re-balancing act, we manipulated two key variables: (1)
recency of exposure (‘context noise’) and (2) inter-item
similarity (‘item noise’). When these noise sources are
equalized, HF items, which are better represented in memory,
should outperform LF items.

Materials Two word lists were constructed (see Appendix),
each of which comprised 40 critical words: 20 HF (165
occurrences/million) and 20 LF (1 occurrence/million),
frequency matched across lists, using counts drawn from the
Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA: Davies,
2010).
In addition, an inventory of 240 control words was created,
drawn from sixteen semantic categories (such as ‘music’ and
‘time’). Half of these semantic categories were comprised of
HF items, and half LF items. These control items were included
to assess how item noise affects recognition. Introducing

1

This conclusion fits well with the finding that word frequency effects in recognition are closely related to list composition. Systematically varying
the frequency of targets and foils in pure list conditions neatly illustrates this point. While a list of LF targets is similarly well-discriminated when
paired with a set of HF or LF foils, foil-frequency dramatically affects discrimination of HF targets. When paired with LF foils, the error rate is
close to zero; when paired with other HF foils, the error rate far exceeds that of LF targets (Underwood & Freund, 1970). In line with this, raising
the proportion of HF items on a list increases the magnitude of the WFE (Dorfman & Glanzer, 1988; Malmberg & Murnane, 2002).

!3

327

semantic categories should disproportionately amplify item
noise for LF items, by increasing the semantic and orthographic
confusability of targets and distractors (Figure 1).
To create reading materials for the comprehension task, short
passages were excerpted from the collected works of the
notable Columbian author, Gabriel Garcia Marquez.
Specifically, for each word on each of the lists, a passage
containing that word was identified and paired with a true
statement that synthesized the sentence in which the word had
occurred. Affirming the statement as true relied on correct
comprehension of the word. Additionally, 20 control passages,
which contained no critical items, were selected and paired
with a false statement. Each critical word appeared in only one
of all possible paragraphs, and only once in that paragraph.
To gauge how pre-exposure affected recognition accuracy
and response time, four counterbalanced conditions were
created, such that across subjects, each critical item was
presented as both a target and as a foil, and was either preexposed (encountered once previously in reading) or novel
(occurring for the first time in the recognition task).
Study lists comprised 40 critical items and 120 control, and
test lists comprised all 160 targets and an additional 160 foils,
with the same 1:3 distribution between critical and control
items. Here again, controls were evenly split between high and
low frequency items, drawn from the same part of the
frequency distribution as the critical words.

Figure 2: Control item performance for correct RT (right panel) and
p(old) (left panel), shown by frequency and trial type. Error bars are
SEM.

An identical pattern is observable for the critical items with
no prior exposure (Figures 3, 4). However, for these items, the
mirror effect disappears completely following exposure at
reading, and overall performance for HF and LF items draws
even (Figure 3). This is because while p(old) increases overall,
the LF FAR increases sharply, far outstripping that of the HF
foils (Figure 4).

Procedure In the first stage of the experiment, subjects
completed a self-paced reading comprehension task in which
they read a series of short passages and, following each
paragraph, were presented with a short statement and asked to
determine whether it was true or false. Subjects then moved to
a different experiment room to complete a 20-minute distractor
task, in which they solved a series of tangram puzzles. They
then returned to the original room to complete the list
recognition task.
At study, 160 words were presented on a computer monitor
for 1s each, separated by a 100 ms ISI. At test, subjects were
presented with a new set of items, and asked to judge whether a
given item had been presented at study. Testing consisted in
320 self-paced recognition trials, with up to 5s to respond.
Order of presentation for passages and for list items was
randomized.

Figure 3. The effect of prior reading exposure on critical items, as
measured by d’ (using a 1/2N correction).

Results Looking first to the control items, which were drawn
from tightly clustered semantic categories, but did not vary in
their exposure history: Welch two-sample t-tests confirmed that
—consistent with the typical finding—LF targets had a
significantly higher HR than HF targets, both by items
[t(212.63)=-4.12, p<.0001] and by subjects [t(99.34)=-3.20,
p=0.002]. However, the FAR for LF and HF foils was not
significantly different (p>.5), and the speed of correct
rejections was slower for LF foils, both by items
[t(234.24)=-5.85, p<.0001] and (marginally) by subjects
[t(97.82)=-1.70, p<.0.092].
Performance on control items thus shows a marked departure
from the standard mirror effect: The typical FAR advantage for
LF items disappears, and LF foils are more slowly rejected than
HF foils (Figure 2). The trends captured here are robust over
the course of testing (see Figure 6 for contrast). This finding is
consistent with the notion that the introduction of semantic
categories differentially increases item noise for low frequency
items, diminishing the typical LF advantage. However, LF
control items still outperformed HF control items overall—the
increase in FAR was balanced by the sustained HR advantage.

Figure 4: The effect of prior reading exposure on p(old), graphed by
frequency and trial type. Error bars are SEM.

Performance on critical items (Figures 4, 5) can be broken
down as follows: For targets, there was a main effect of item
frequency on accuracy [F(1,50)=28.42, p<0.001], and a main
effect of exposure condition both on accuracy [F(1,50)=3.35,
p=.073] and correct RT [F(1,50)=14.36, p<.0005]. Subjects
were more likely to affirm LF targets overall, and to more
quickly and (marginally more) accurately affirm targets that
had previously been seen in reading.
For foils, the picture was somewhat more complicated, but
no less consistent. For response time, there was a main effect of
!4

328

item frequency on correct RT [F(1,50)=5.87, p<0.02], but no
effect of prior context. For accuracy, there were main effects of
item frequency [F(1,50)=3.98, p=0.052] and prior context
[F(1,50)=14.82, p<.001], modulated by a significant interaction
between frequency and context [F(1,50)=4.66, p<.05]. Post hoc
analyses (Tukey HSD) indicated that previous exposure
significantly increased the FAR for LF items (p<0.001) but not
HF items (p>.5), and that the FAR for pre-exposed LF items
was significantly higher than for pre-exposed HF items
(p<0.005).

the HR for LF items uniformly declined over trials, the pattern
of false alarms diverged depending on prior exposure (Figure
6): Whereas for unexposed items, the FAR showed a steady
downward trend, for previously encountered items, precisely
the opposite was true. This suggests that the ability to
discriminate prior context decreased with continued testing. By
contrast: For HF items, while a similar decline in HR is
observable over testing, the FAR remains constant, and
exposure condition does not appear to interact with these
trends.

General Discussion
This paper investigates the sources and robustness of the
mirror effect for normative word frequency, finding that under
the right set of experimental conditions, it disappears. In
particular, when noise sources for high and low frequency
items are balanced, LF items prove to be more confusable than
better-learned HF items.

Word Frequency Effects
The aim of the present study was to examine how item and
context noise interact with word frequency effects. Item noise
was manipulated by selecting control items from a small set of
semantically cohesive categories, such as ‘music’ and ‘cooking’
(Shiffrin, Huber, & Marinelli, 1995). Context noise was
manipulated by incidentally exposing subjects to critical items
prior to the recognition task (Kinsbourne & George, 1974;
Tulving & Kroll, 1995). Both noise sources have been found to
impair recognition in a similar fashion: While these
manipulations lead to an overall increase in the probability of
responding ‘old’, the increase in hits is slower than the
concomitant increase in false alarms, leading to a general
decline in discriminability. For instance, when categories of
items are present within a recognition list, hits and false alarms
increase monotonically with the number of items within each
semantic category, such that discriminability decreases as a
function of category size (Hintzman, 1988). Similarly, when
items are incidentally exposed prior to study, confusability
increases as a function of the number of prior exposures (Criss
& Shiffrin, 2004; Chalmers & Humphreys, 1998), and as the
delay between the familiarization and recognition phases
decreases (Maddox & Estes, 1997).
While previous research has tended to focus on how noise
affects items from within a single frequency band, our
experiment assessed how items were differentially affected as a
function of their frequency. A close analysis of the mirror effect
for recognition suggests that it derives from the distinctiveness
of LF items relative to their HF counterparts. Specifically—in a
random selection of items, LF targets will be more distinctive
at study, and more distinctive at test compared to foils; in
addition, the contexts in which they have previously occurred
will be less confusable with the present study context.
In our study, these advantages are systematically mitigated.
Introducing verbal categories entails that items will be sampled
from a dense semantic space, rather than randomly from the
lexicon at large. This selects for LF items that are more similar
to each other than HF items, rendering them more confusable at
test. Likewise, pre-exposing critical items guarantees that all
such items, regardless of frequency, will have recently been
experienced in a highly similar, confusable context. If the usual
LF FAR advantage is mediated, at least in part, by the greater
distinctiveness of randomly selected LF targets relative to
potential lures, and by the greater distinctiveness of their prior
contexts of occurrence, then these manipulations should
diminish or reverse that advantage.

Figure 5: The effect of prior reading exposure on response latency,
graphed by frequency and trial type. Error bars are SEM.

Figure 6: P(old) to critical LF items as a function of test position for
hits (top) and false alarms (bottom). Trend lines are generated by the
glm smoothing method in ggplot2.

To summarize: For HF items, the primary effect of prior
exposure was to increase the speed and accuracy of hits. This
effect was also observable for LF targets, and the time to
execute a hit was similar for HF and LF targets. However, with
LF items, the recency manipulation led to an overall bias in
p(old), such that both the HR and the FAR were significantly
higher than that of HF items. The dramatic increase in FAR, as
a result of item and context noise, is mirrored by the finding
that correct rejections were significantly slower for LF foils
across both exposure conditions.
In this study, the magnitude of the performance drop for LF
items is, in part, a function of testing (Annis, Malmberg, Criss,
& Shiffrin, 2013). At the beginning of testing, no effect of prior
history was apparent: the HR for exposed and unexposed
critical items was identical, as was the FAR. However, while
!5

329

Our findings comport well with this proposal. The item noise
manipulation disappeared the LF FAR advantage both for
control items and for critical items with no prior exposures: LF
foils attracted a similar number of false alarms as HF foils and
were rejected significantly more slowly. (A similar result has
been reported when orthographic similarity among items is
controlled, and lures are orthographically matched to targets;
Hall, 1979; Malmberg, Holden, & Shiffrin, 2004).
The context noise manipulation amplified this effect, fully
reversing the FAR advantage in favor of pre-exposed HF items,
a trend that intensified over the course of testing. This occurred
because while pre-exposure dramatically increased the LF
FAR, it had a negligible effect on HF items. These
manipulations thus vanished one half of the standard mirror
effect, equalizing the overall discriminability of HF and LF
items.
Nevertheless, LF items maintained a strong HR advantage.
There are a number of possible theoretical explanations for this
result: LF items may have garnered more attentional resources
at study (Malmberg & Nelson, 2003), been more easily
associable with the present task context (Hirshman, Whelley, &
Palij 1989), or simply been a better match to their own memory
traces at retrieval. All these explanations are potentially
consistent with the results of the present study, but beyond its
scope to establish; further experimental work is needed to
distinguish among these accounts.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by an NSF graduate fellowship to MD.
Many thanks to Michael Ramscar, Brendan Johns, Gregory Cox,
and Rui Cao for insightful comments and discussion.

References
Adelman, J. S., Brown, G. D. A., & Quesada, J. F. (2006). Contextual diversity, not word frequency, determines wordnaming and lexical decision times. Psychological Science, 17(9), 814–823.
Anderson, J.R. & Bower, G.H. (1972). Recognition and retrieval processes in free recall. Psychological Review, 79(2),
97-123.
Anderson, J. R., & Schooler, L. J. (1991). Reflections of the Environment in Memory. Psychological Science, 2(6), 396–
408.
Anisfeld, M., & Knapp, M. (1968). Association, synonymity, and directionality in false recognition. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 77(2), 171–179.
Annis, J., Malmberg, K. J., Criss, A. H., & Shiffrin, R. M. (2013). Sources of interference in recognition testing. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 39(5), 1365–1376.
Bahrick, H. P., Clark, S., & Bahrick, P. (1967). Generalization gradients as indicants of learning and retention of a
recognition task. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 75(4), 464–471.
Balota, D. A., Cortese, M. J., Sergent-Marshall, S. D., Spieler, D. H., & Yap, M. (2004). Visual Word Recognition of
Single-Syllable Words. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 133(2), 283–316.
Chalmers, K. A., & Humphreys, M. S. (1998). Role of generalized and episode specific memories in the word frequency
effect in recognition. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 24(3), 610–632.
Clark, S. E., & Gronlund, S. D. (1996). Global matching models of recognition memory: How the models match the
data. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 3(1), 37–60.
Criss, A. H. (2006). The consequences of differentiation in episodic memory: Similarity and the strength based mirror
effect. Journal of Memory and Language, 55(4), 461–478.
Criss, A. H., & Shiffrin, R. M. (2004). Context Noise and Item Noise Jointly Determine Recognition Memory: A
Comment on Dennis and Humphreys (2001). Psychological Review, 111(3), 800–807.
Davidenko, N. & Ramscar, M. (2005) Distinctiveness effects in face memory vanish with well-controlled distractors.
Proceedings of the 27th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, Mahwah, NJ.
Deese, J. (1960). Frequency Of Usage And Number Of Words In Free Recall: The Role Of Association. Psychological
Reports, 7(2), 337–344.
Dennis, S., & Humphreys, M. S. (2001). A context noise model of episodic word recognition. Psychological Review,
108(2), 452–478.
Dorfman, D., & Glanzer, M. (1988). List composition effects in lexical decisions and recognition memory. Journal of
Memory and Language, 27, 633–648.
Dye, M., Ramscar, M., & Jones, M. (2017). Representing the richness of linguistic structure in models of episodic
memory. Proceedings of the 39th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Estes, W. K., & Maddox, W. T. (2002). On the processes underlying stimulus-familiarity effects in recognition of words
and nonwords. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 28(6), 1003–1018.
Eugene, Z. B. (1972). Orthographic Distinctiveness as a Variable in Word Recognition. The American Journal of
Psychology, 85(3), 425–430.
Gillund, G., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1984). A retrieval model for both recognition and recall. Psychological Review, 91(1), 1–
67.
Glanzer, M., & Adams, J. K. (1985). The mirror effect in recognition memory. Memory & Cognition, 12, 8–20.
Glanzer, M. & Bowles, N. (1976). Analysis of the word-frequency effect in recognition memory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory, 2(1), 21-31.
Glanzer, M., Adams, J. K., Iverson, G. J., & Kim, K. (1993). The regularities of recognition memory. Psychological
Review, 100, 546–567.
Hastie, R., & Kumar, P. A. (1979). Person memory: Personality traits as organizing principles in memory for behaviors.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 37(1), 25–38.
Hemmer, P., & Criss, A. H. (2013). The shape of things to come: Evaluating word frequency as a continuous variable in
recognition memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 39(6), 1947–1952.
Hintzman, D. L. (1988). Judgments of Frequency and Recognition Memory in a Multiple-Trace Memory Model.
Psychological Review, 95(4), 528–551.
Hintzman, D. L., Caulton, D. A., & Curran, T. (1994). Retrieval constraints and the mirror effect. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 20, 275–289.
Hirshman, E., Whelley, M. M., & Palij, M. (1989). An investigation of paradoxical memory effects. Journal of Memory
and Language, 28(5), 594-609.
Hunt, R. R., & Mitchell, D. B. (1982). Independent effects of semantic and nonsemantic distinctiveness. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 8(1), 81–87.
Hunt, R. R., & Eliot, J. M. (1980). The Role of Nonsemantic Information in Memory: Orthographic Distinctiveness
Effects on Retention. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 109(1), 49–74.
Hunt, R. R. (1995). The subtlety of distinctiveness: What von Restorff really did. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 2(1),
105–112.
Johnson, M. K., Hashtroudi, S., & Lindsay, D. S. (1993). Source monitoring. Psychological Bulletin.
Jones, M. N., Dye, M., & Johns, B. T. (2017). Context as an organizing principle of the lexicon. In B. Ross (Ed.), The
Psychology of Learning and Motivation.
Jones, M. N., Johns, B. T., & Recchia, G. (2012). The role of semantic diversity in lexical organization. Canadian
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 66, 115–124.
Kinsbourne, M., & George, J. (1974). The mechanism of the word-frequency effect on recognition memory. Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 13(1), 63–69.
Landauer, T. K., & Streeter, L. A. (1973). Structural differences between common and rare words: Failure of equivalence
assumptions for theories of word recognition. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 12(2), 119–131.
Maddox, W. T., & Estes, W. K. (1997). Direct and indirect stimulus-frequency effects in recognition. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 23(3), 539–559.
Malmberg, K. J., & Murnane, K. (2002). List composition and the word-frequency effect for recognition memory.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 28(4), 616–630.
Malmberg, K.J. & Nelson, T.O. (2003). The word frequency effect for recognition memory and the elevated-attention
hypothesis. Memory & Cognition, 31, 35-43.
Malmberg, K. J., Steyvers, M., Stephens, J. D., & Shiffrin, R. M. (2002). Feature frequency effects in recognition
memory. Memory & Cognition, 30(4), 607–613.
McClelland, J. L., & Chappell, M. (1998). Familiarity breeds differentiation: A subjective-likelihood approach to the
effects of experience in recognition memory, Psychological Review, 105, 724–760.
Murdock, B.B. (1982). A theory for the storage and retrieval of item and associative information. Psychological Review,
89(6), 609-626.
Murnane, K., Phelps, M. P., & Malmberg, K. (1999). Context-dependent recognition memory: the ICE theory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 128(4), 403–415.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1986). Attention, similarity, and the identification-categorization relationship. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 115(1), 39–61.
Pexman, P. M., Hargreaves, I. S., Siakaluk, P. D., Bodner, G. E., & Pope, J. (2008). There are many ways to be rich:
Effects of three measures of semantic richness on visual word recognition. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 15(1),
161–167.
Postman, L. (1951). The generalization gradient in recognition memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 42(4),
231–235.
Ramscar, M., Yarlett, D., Dye, M., Denny, K., & Thorpe, K. (2010). The Effects of Feature-Label-Order and their
implications for symbolic learning. Cognitive Science, 34(6), 909-957.
Rescorla, R. A. (1988). Pavlovian conditioning. It's not what you think it is. The American Psychologist, 43(3), 151–160.
Scarborough, D. L., Cortese, C., & Scarborough, H. S. (1977). Frequency and repetition effects in lexical memory.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 3(1), 1–17.
Schulman, A. I. (1967). Word length and rarity in recognition memory. Psychonomic Science, 9, 47–52.
Shiffrin, R. M., & Steyvers, M. (1997). A model for recognition memory: REM—retrieving effectively from memory.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 4, 145–166.
Shiffrin, R. M., Huber, D. E., & Marinelli, K. (1995). Effects of category length and strength on familiarity in
recognition. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 21(2), 267–287.
Smith, S. M., Glenberg, A., & Bjork, R. A. (1978). Environmental context and human memory. Memory & Cognition,
6(4), 342–353.
Steyvers, M., & Malmberg, K. J. (2003). The effect of normative context variability on recognition memory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 29(5), 760–766.
Steyvers, M., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2005). The large-scale structure of semantic networks: statistical analyses and a
model of semantic growth. Cognitive Science, 29(1), 41–78.
Tulving, E., & Kroll, N. (1995). Novelty assessment in the brain and long-term memory encoding. Psychonomic Bulletin
& Review, 2(3), 387–390.
Underwood, B. J., & Freund, J. S. (1968). Errors in recognition learning and retention. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 78(1), 55–63.
Zaki, S. R., & Nosofsky, R. M. (2001). Exemplar accounts of blending and distinctiveness effects in perceptual old new
recognition. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 27, 1022–1041.
Zechmeister, E. B., Curt, C., & Sebastian, J. A. (1978). Errors in a recognition memory task are a U-shaped function of
word frequency. Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 11(6), 371–373.
von Restorff, H. (1933). Über die Wirkung von Bereichsbildungen im Spurenfeld. Psychologische Forschung, 18,
299-342.

Modeling Accounts
Empirical results like those presented here can provide
important constraints on representational assumptions in
modeling (Criss & Shiffrin, 2004). For example, to account
for the standard mirror effect, the REM model assumes that LF
items possess more rare features than HF items, features that
are more diagnostic (Steyvers & Shiffrin, 1997). This implies
1) that LF targets will be a better match to their own memory
traces than HF targets (resulting in a higher HR), and 2) that LF
foils will be less likely to share features in common with targets
than HF foils, resulting in less spurious matches (resulting in a
lower FAR). REM thus correctly predicts that when targets are
matched with highly similar foils, the FAR for LF items should
substantially increase, diminishing or reversing the standard
mirror effect. REM can also be modified to account for the
finding that increasing the proportion of HF words on a list
decreases the FAR for LF items, by assuming that the
distinctiveness of the LF items at study leads to better encoding
(Malmberg & Murnane, 2002).
Likewise, virtually all models of recognition memory
incorporate the idea that an item’s prior contexts of occurrence
are a critical source of interference (Dennis & Humphreys,
2000). A common assumption is that both item and context
information are stored at encoding and that similarity between
the study context and prior experiences gives rise to
interference at retrieval. What varies is how: In some models,
the item and context on the current trial form a joint probe of
memory (Gillund & Shiffrin, 1984). In others, the context cue
first acts to restrict the subset of activated memory traces to
those that match the current context, prior to comparing the
item cue to the resulting set (Shiffrin & Steyvers, 1997).
In future work, it may be profitable to use item
representations derived directly from the items themselves, by
quantifying the lexical and semantic characteristics of a given
list or word pool (Dye et al., 2017). Models can then be
constructed and tested against the true properties of the
stimulus set, permitting cleaner adjudication between
competing accounts.
!6

330

