Variables Involved in Selective Sustained Attention Development: Advances in
Measurement
Jaeah Kim (jaeahk@andrew.cmu.edu)
Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Psychology, 5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Anna Vande Velde (avandeve@andrew.cmu.edu)
Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Psychology, 5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Erik D. Thiessen (thiessen@andrew.cmu.edu)
Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Psychology, 5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Anna V. Fisher (Fisher49@andrew.cmu.edu)
Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Psychology, 5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
Abstract

mechanisms. Task paradigms that allow simultaneous
investigation of both exogenous and endogenous factors of
SSA have been available for adults and infants but not for
preschool and early primary school children (~3-7 years)
until recently (for review, see Fisher & Kloos, 2016). These
years are particularly important from a research standpoint
because data from infants and adults suggests that SSA
develops significantly during these intermediate years
(Oakes, Kannass, & Shaddy, 2002). TrackIt, a paradigm
developed specifically to fill this measurement gap, is
designed to be appropriately challenging for a range of
developmental years including the preschool years, with
varying parameters for adjustment of difficulty across ages
(Fisher et al., 2013)​.
Prior studies with TrackIt demonstrated that children
improve on the task between 3 and 5 years of age (Fisher et
al., 2013, Erickson et al., 2015), consistent with the overall
developmental pattern of improvement in SSA with age. In
order to investigate this improvement more closely, the
current study looked at 1) what factors tend to drive the
failures (errors), and what, of those, consequently improve
to drive the overall performance improvement (see “Factors
driving improvement” below), and 2) what the behavioral
trajectories representing this improvement look like across
an expanded age range. To delve into this issue, we
manipulated parameters of TrackIt to place varying levels of
demand on children’s selective sustained attention to
achieve a coarse mapping of behavioral performance in
several parameter combinations over ages 3 to 7. In contrast
to prior studies using TrackIt that focused on the analysis of
correct responses (Fisher et al., 2013; Erickson et al., 2015),
this study also examined the patterns of errors as a function
of task difficulty and age.

Selective sustained attention (SSA) is an important
cognitive process that enables everyday functioning and task
performance by allowing us to: 1) choose components of our
environment to process at the exclusion of others and 2)
maintain focus on those components over time. Although
SSA is known to undergo rapid and marked changes during
the preschool and early primary school children years, there
has been a paucity of behavioral data on these years of
development due to a lack of child-appropriate testing
paradigms. TrackIt is a paradigm that was recently developed
to fill the previously existing measurement gap for SSA in
these years. In this study, we analyzed errors that children
(aged 3-7) make when performing TrackIt, to better
understand what factors drive improvement in their
performance over age. In addition, we manipulated
parameters within TrackIt to place varying levels of demand
on children’s SSA, and measured behavioral performance
over age, with the goal of measuring and characterizing
developmental trends during these years. Since TrackIt is still
a recent paradigm, our results also help suggest appropriate
parameter settings for calibrating the task to different age
groups.
Keywords:​ selective sustained attention; TrackIt

Introduction
Selective sustained attention (SSA) is an important
cognitive process that enables everyday functioning and task
performance by allowing us to: 1) choose components of
our environment to process at the exclusion of others and 2)
maintain focus on those components over time. SSA is
known to rely on both endogenous factors (e.g., internal
goals) as well as exogenous factors (e.g., stimulus salience)
(O’Connor & Manley, 2004) -- studying specifically how
these factors interact and work together in guiding attention
contributes to a growing understanding of SSA’s

670

Factors Driving Improvement

different shapes with 9 different color possibilities (81
objects in total).1 See Figure 1 for examples.
At the beginning of each trial, the objects appeared on
the grid, centered in distinct grid cells, and the target object
was indicated by a red circle around it. The initial positions
of the objects were randomized. The experimenter started
each trial with a button press after ensuring the participant
was ready to begin.
Upon starting the trial, the red circle disappeared, and
the objects began to move in linear trajectories from grid
cell to grid cell at a constant speed. At the end of each trial,
all objects disappeared from the screen, and the participants
were asked to indicate with their finger (on the touch
screen) which grid cell the target object was last in before it
disappeared.
The sequence of positions in the path of each objects was
randomized, with one restriction for just the target: the
target had to be in the center of a grid cell at the end of a
trial, to reduce ambiguity for the participant in determining
its final location. Due to this restriction, the length of trials
was not fixed, but varied slightly from trial to trial (to allow
the target to reach the center of a grid cell. The minimum
trial length was set to 10 seconds. The parameters -- grid
size, number of distractors, and speed of objects in pixels
per second -- were determined from prior testing in TrackIt
with a separate group of 3- to 5-year old children (Fisher et
al., 2013), and organized according to participant age and
difficulty level as seen in Table 1. Object motion display
was set to 30 frames per second.

This study introduces a new addition to the TrackIt
program: error analysis. This functionality (a software
update that is now part of the TrackIt program that is freely
available to interested researchers) adds, to the behavioral
output, information on the types of errors that participants
make. Analyzing the types of errors that children make over
development may provide greater insight into what factors
constitute the overall improvements that we see in
children’s SSA performance. For example, some error types
help to distinguish between behavioral errors due to failure
of SSA and those due to insufficient visuo-spatial
resolution. Also, finding that a significant proportion of
errors can be related to failure of SSA would help validate
TrackIt as a task assessing attention. ​Thus, the first goal of
this study was to present preliminary analyses of error type
breakdown over age and difficulty.

Behavioral Trajectories
Mapping out age-related changes in performance within the
multi-dimensional parametric space of variables (i.e.,
number of distractors, grid size, speed of objects, type of
distractors) involved in visual attention serves two important
purposes: 1) it begins to fill in the empirical gap in
characterizing children’s visual SSA development within a
single consistent measurement framework, and 2) it
suggests initial parameter selection ranges for age groups, to
guide researchers using TrackIt (Doebel et al., 2015).
Hence, the second goal of this study is to present
preliminary findings on parameter space mappings.

Table 1: TrackIt parameter combination used in each
difficulty level.

Method
Participants

Age
Group
(years)

Grid
Size

# of
Distractors

Object
Speed
(pix/s)

Level 1

3-5

4x4

4

500

Level 2

4-6

6x6

6

500

Materials and Apparatus

Level 3

7

6x6

8

800

Stimuli were presented on a Lenovo touchscreen laptop with
physical screen dimensions 19.1 cm x 34.2 cm and pixel
dimensions 1920x1080 pixels. Participants were seated at a
desk facing the screen with their heads about 2 feet away
from the screen.

Note: pix/s = pixels/second.

Participants were 144 typically developing children (71
female, ​M​age​= 5.08 years) recruited from local preschools,
day care centers, and elementary schools in Pittsburgh, PA.
See Table 2 below for a breakdown of participant age
statistics.

Difficulty

We assessed three different difficulty levels,
administered to different age groups, as shown in Table 1.
Separate groups of participants were tested in each difficulty
level. The sample size per age and difficulty level is
presented in Table 2. It should be noted that, ultimately, we
aim to obtain a large-scale representative sample of

TrackIt Task
In this task (freely available for download at
http://www.psy.cmu.edu/~trackit/​), participants were asked
to visually track a single target object as it moved on a grid
among moving distractor objects. For each trial, the target
and distractor objects were randomly picked without
replacement from a set of unique objects spanning 9

1

Children also participated in a homogeneous condition, in which
all distractors are identical (but distinct from the target). This
condition is designed to require less SSA because target tracking is
supported exogenously by increased salience of the target. We did
not analyze this condition as distinguishing exogenous vs.
endogenous effects was not of interest for this study.

671

participants at each age and difficulty level; the present
paper reports the initial findings from this study.

Participants completed 11 trials of the task. The first trial
was a practice trial and was completed with assistance from
the experimenter who traced the moving target with their
index finger. The first trial was accordingly omitted from
analysis. Participants were then told that they would need to
complete the rest of the task by themselves, tracking the
target with their eyes only.

Memory Check ​At the conclusion of each trial, children
were presented with 4 shapes that could have served as
target objects in this task (one of which was actually the
target) and asked to point to the shape they had been
tracking (see Figure 1). The responses to memory check
questions were recorded by the children’s touch screen
responses. The memory checks were introduced to help
discriminate between two possible reasons why a participant
may fail to correctly report the location where the target
object disappears. The first possibility is that encoding of
the identity of the target object may be insufficiently strong
to persist through an entire trial – this would indicate an
encoding failure. The second possibility is that a child may
track distractors for a part of the trial despite remembering
which object was supposed to be watched – this would
indicate the failure of selective sustained attention. The
target was colored as in the trial, while the remaining 3
shapes and their colors were sampled without replacement
from the remaining 8 shapes and colors.

Figure 1. The TrackIt task pipeline. A single trial,
followed by smiley face, memory check, and smiley face.
Error Analysis Next, we were interested in better
understanding what types of tracking errors participants
were making. Tracking errors were any answers in the main
TrackIt task that weren’t the correct cell that the target
ended in. Tracking errors were thus further classified based
on the incorrect grid cell response indicated by the
participant, in relation to the final positions of the target and
distractors on the grid. Specifically, in addition to a correct
response, we considered 5 types of errors:
Spatial Resolution: ​The response was a cell adjacent to
the correct grid cell, but was not also adjacent to a
distractor.
Distractor: ​The response was a cell that contained a
distractor.
Distractor Spatial Resolution: ​The response was a cell
that did not contain a distractor, was adjacent to a cell that
contained a distractor, and was not also adjacent to the
correct grid cell.

Design and Procedure
The experimenter administered the TrackIt task to
participants in a quiet room or hallway. At the beginning of
the task, participants were told that: 1) the objects will start
moving around the grid when the experimenter presses a
button; 2) the goal is to follow the target object with their
eyes; 3) at some point the objects will suddenly disappear,
and their job is to point to where the target object was when
it disappeared. Each trial was followed by a baseline screen
displaying a smiley face, a memory check screen, and a
second smiley face baseline (in that order). Participants
were told that the smile did not indicate a correct answer
and rather meant we were happy they were playing our
game. See Figure 1 for a diagram of the task sequence.

672

main effect of age (​F (2, 128)= 32.2, ​p<​0.0001).2 There was
no effect of difficulty and no age-by-difficulty interaction
(both ​F​s<1.34, ​ps​>0.24). Therefore, any differences in
object tracking accuracy between difficulty levels were
unlikely to stem from differences in the strength of encoding
of the target objects.

Uncategorizable: ​The response was a cell that did not
contain a distractor, and was adjacent to both the correct
grid cell and a cell that contained a distractor.
Other: ​None of the above. That is, the response was a
cell that did not contain a distractor, and was adjacent to
neither the correct grid cell, nor a cell that contained a
distractor.
In the above, “adjacent” cells are defined as those within
one horizontal, vertical, or diagonal step of a given cell.
(Cells are not considered adjacent to themselves.) For
example, corner cells have 3 adjacent cells, edge cells have
5 adjacent cells, and other cells have 8 adjacent cells.
Note that finding that a significant proportion of errors
are distractor-related errors (distractor, distractor spatial
resolution, or uncategorizable) would help to validate
TrackIt as a task assessing attention; if we find that kids
make many spatial resolution errors, it may indicate that the
performance is limited by kids’ visuo-spatial acuity. In
contrast, if we find that kids make predominantly “other”
errors, it could suggest that they lose interest in the task
entirely or do not understand the task and respond
randomly.

Error Analysis
For this analysis, we excluded trials in which the participant
failed the memory check, as encoding errors were a separate
type of error that we analyzed separately. We compared the
rate of each error type to chance, assuming that the
participant response was randomly distributed over the
incorrect squares of the grid. Chance was estimated by
simulating final states of 10,000 TrackIt trials for each level.
Chance levels are given in Table 3.
Table 3: Chance probability of each error type
assuming the participant response is uniformly
distributed over the grid.

Results
Memory Check
Responses to individual memory check questions (i.e.,
which object were you supposed to watch?​) were averaged
over the 10 experimental trials to yield a Memory Accuracy
score for each participant. Memory Accuracy data are
presented in Figure 2.

Error Type

Level 1

Level 2

Level 3

Correct

0.0625

0.0278

0.0278

Spatial Resolution

0.0434

0.0426

0.0277

DSR

0.3606

0.1514

0.4814

Distractor

0.2131

0.4449

0.1962

Uncategorizable

0.2114

0.1004

0.1084

Other

0.109

0.2329

0.1585

Note: DSR = Distractor Spatial Resolution.
Given that the participant made a tracking error, the average
portions of error that were distractor errors was consistently
significantly above chance in Level 1 (3-year olds:
one-sample ​t=
​ 3.352, ​p​<0.005; 4-year olds: ​t​=4.117,
p​<0.001; 5-year olds: ​t​=4.756, ​p​<0.0001), Level 2 (4-year
olds: ​t=
​ 4.831, ​p​<0.0001; 5-year olds: ​t​=3.805, ​p​<0.001;
6-year olds: ​t=
​ 9.869, ​p​<0.0001), and Level 3 (7-year olds:
t​=14.065, ​p​<0.0001.
In order to understand how error types change with
increasing age, we regressed each error type proportion over
age. The 𝛽 coefficients and ​F- and ​p​-values for each error
type and difficulty level are given in Table 4. In particular,
note that only the Distractor, Distractor Spatial Resolution,
and Uncategorizable errors in Level 1 show significant
decreases with age.

Figure 2. Tracking accuracies for each age and difficulty
level, both with and without memory-incorrect trials.
In all conditions and age groups Memory Accuracy was
above chance (25% given four response options, all
one-sample ​t​s>6.2, ​p​s<0.0001). To investigate possible
effects of age and difficulty, memory accuracy scores were
submitted to a 2-way ANOVA with both age as difficulty
level as between-subject factors. This analysis indicated a

Tracking Accuracy

2

We omitted difficulty level 3, as only one age group (7 year olds)
completed it.

673

For analyzing tracking accuracy, we included all trials (even
those for which the memory check was failed), because we
are interested in the true performance of subjects in order to
calibrate TrackIt. Furthermore, as shown by a plot of
tracking accuracy both including and excluding incorrect

Figure 3. Tracking accuracies for each age and difficulty
level, both with and without memory-incorrect trials.
For difficulty Level 1, tracking accuracy of 3-year olds
was significantly below that of 4-year olds (two-sample
t​=-5.05, ​p​<0.0001), but tracking accuracy of 4-year olds was
not significantly below that of 5-year olds (two-sample
t​=-1.02, ​p​=0.315). Similarly, for difficulty Level 2, tracking
accuracy of 4-year olds was significantly below that of
5-year olds (two-sample ​t​=-2.18, ​p​<0.033), but tracking
accuracy of 5-year olds was not significantly below that of
6-year olds (two-sample ​t​=-0.88, ​p​=0.382).
In the two age groups that performed two difficulty
levels (4-5 year olds), two-sample t-tests revealed that
performance differences between difficulty levels were not
significant (​ts​<1.11, ​ps​>0.11).

Table 4: Linear regression results from regressing
error type proportions over age
Difficulty Level 1
Error Type
𝛽
F​(1,66)

p

Spatial Resolution

-0.0203

1.33

0.253

DSR

-0.0706

6.96

0.010*

Distractor

-0.0653

7.54

0.0078**

Uncategorizable

4.81
0.0318*
-0.0444
Other
-0.0101
0.977
0.327
Difficulty Level 2
Error Type
𝛽
F(1,65)
p

Spatial Resolution

-0.00915

1.07

0.304

DSR

0.0125

0.185

0.669

Distractor

-0.0229

0.644

0.425

Uncategorizable

-0.0320

1.63

0.206

Other

-0.0142

0.540

0.465

Discussion
The first purpose of this study was to gain insight into the
factors driving improvement by investigating the types of
errors made by children. A second purpose was to explore
the multidimensional parameter space available within
TrackIt, with the goal of identifying both developmental
milestones in terms of TrackIt performance as well as
appropriate settings for use with children.

Memory Accuracy
Memory accuracy results indicate that encoding error is
more prominent in younger children and improves
significantly over age. On the other hand, memory accuracy
did not differ significantly across difficulty levels, nor was
there an age-difficulty interaction effect. Both of these
results are encouraging because they suggest that encoding
error does not become a confound when using TrackIt with
different difficulties across age groups.

Note: DSR = Distractor Spatial Resolution.
* p<0.05. ** p<0.01
memory response trials (see Figure 3), filtering by memory
check had little effect on the tracking accuracy scores. For
all difficulty levels in all age groups, tracking accuracy was
significantly above chance (chance is 1/16 for Level 1 and
1/36 for Levels 2 and 3, ​ts​>3.9, ​ps​<0.0005).
For each of the first two difficulty levels, we saw a
significant upward trend effect by an F-test on linear
regression (𝛽=​0.2302​, ​F​=​38.33​, ​p​<0.0001 for Level 1 and
𝛽=0.1427, ​F​=7.605, ​p​<0.01 for Level 2). We could not
assess a trend for difficulty Level 3 because we only had
one age group for that level.

Error Analysis
As discussed above, the proportion of distractor errors was
consistently significantly above chance in every age group
and difficulty. In Level 1 difficulty, distractor, distractor
spatial resolution, and uncategorizable errors (all
distractor-related errors) significantly decreased over age.
Noting that uncategorizable errors indicate a combination of
spatial and distractor spatial resolution errors, these together
suggest that distractors’ effect on performance decreases
with increasing age.
On the other hand, the reduction in both spatial and
distractor spatial resolution errors may also stem from a
reduction in errors due to visuospatial resolution. While this
was a known confound when analyzing the improvement in
tracking accuracy over age, our analysis enables us to
partially isolate these two sources of improvement by
showing more specifically that ​distractor errors decrease
over time. Since distractor errors are associated only with
SSA, and not spatial resolution, this provides a stronger

674

suggestion (as compared to previous results showing only
improvement in TrackIt performance) that the improvement
in TrackIt performance over age indeed reflects SSA
development.
As with previous analyses, we found greatest
improvements in performance between 3- and 4-year olds
(see Figure 3), which may explain why the significant
change in distractor, spatial resolution, and distractor spatial
resolution errors was observed only in difficulty Level 1, the
only difficulty level at which we tested 3-year olds. We
hypothesize that one possible cause of these results, given
that changes in the proportion of distractor-related errors
occur primarily between ages 3 and 4, is that these ages may
be an especially critical period of rapid SSA development.

improvements over time. Because of its parametric
flexibility, TrackIt can assess SSA across a wide range of
ages ​in the same basic task​, lowering the risk that changes
measured across age are due to different tasks. Additionally,
TrackIt has good psychometric properties in general
(test-retest reliability, predictive validity, and now a
moderate degree of mapping of parametric space). TrackIt
thus provides a practical and novel way of measuring
attention in an age-range where we know rapid changes
occur, but which we haven't had a task to assess with any
degree of sensitivity.

Acknowledgements
We thank the children, parents, and teachers who made this
work possible: CMU Children's School, Sacred Heart
Elementary School, Glenn Ave Preschool, Winchester
Thurston (North Hills Campus), Beth Shalom Early
Learning Center, Mt. Assisi Academy Preschool, and
Campus School of Carlow University. The work reported
here was supported by the National Science Foundation
through a grant awarded to A.V.F. and E.D.T.
(BCS-1451706).

Tracking Accuracy
In our tracking accuracy results, we observed significant
developmental upward trends with age in difficulty Levels 1
and 2, as shown in Figure 3. However, more specific
analyses of each difficulty level revealed ceiling effects.
These suggest that the parameter combinations for Level 1
and Level 2 may be appropriate settings for assessing 3- and
4-year olds, respectively, insofar as they avoid ceiling
effects, but more difficult parameter combinations may be
necessary for sensitive measurement with older children.
Since performance of 4- and 5-year olds did not drop
significantly from Level 1 to Level 2, a linear increase in
number of distractors and grid size with age does not seem
to be enough to preserve difficulty across age groups.

References
Doebel, S., Barker, J. E., Chevalier, N., Michaelson, L., &
Munakata, Y. (2015). Getting ready to use control:
Advances in the measurement of proactive control in
young children. Poster presented at the ​Biennial Meeting
of the Cognitive Development Society​. Columbus, OH.
Erickson, L. C., Thiessen, E. D., Godwin, K. E., Dickerson,
J. P., & Fisher, A. V. (2015). Endogenously and
exogenously driven selective sustained attention:
contributions to learning in kindergarten children.
Journal of experimental child psychology​, ​138​, 126-134.
Fisher, A., & Kloos, H. (2016). Development of selective
sustained attention: The Role of Executive Functions. In
L. Freund, P. McCardle, and J. Griffin (Eds.), ​Executive
Function in Preschool Age Children: Integrating
Measurement, Neurodevelopment and Translational
Research​ (pp. 215-237). Washington, DC: APA Press.
Fisher, A., Thiessen, E., Godwin, K., Kloos, H., &
Dickerson, J. (2013). Assessing selective sustained
attention in 3- to 5-year-old children: Evidence from a
new paradigm. ​Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology​, ​114​(2), 275–294.
Oakes, L., Kannass, N., & Shaddy, J. (2002).
Developmental changes in endogenous control of
attention: The role of target familiarity on infants’
distraction latency. ​Child Development​. 73:1644–1655.
O'Connor, C., Manly, T., Robertson, H., Hevenor, J.,
Levine, B. (2004). An fMRI study of sustained attention
with endogenous and exogenous engagement. ​Brain and
Cognition, 54​(2), 113–135.

Limitations and future directions
Our study did not include 2 year-olds and had limited
samples of 6- and 7-year olds. Since significant
improvement was observed between 3 and 4 years of age, it
may be important to look at 2-year olds also.
The behavioral output of TrackIt is limited in that it
records only the participant’s response at the end of the trial.
In particular, we do not know if participants are
continuously ​attentive to the target throughout the trial (on
correct trials) or when participants cease to attend to the
target (on incorrect trials). Currently, studies are being run
in the lab which combine eye-tracking technology with
TrackIt and make this information accessible, potentially
giving us a more complete picture of how participants
behave during​ ​the TrackIt task.

Conclusion
The findings of this study lay the foundation for further
work using TrackIt to study SSA development over a range
of ages by a) identifying parameter combinations
appropriate for certain age groups, b) discounting reduction
in encoding errors as a confounding source of performance
improvement over age, and c) enriching the behavioral
output of TrackIt with information about the types of errors
children make, and hence the sources of their performance

675

