Viewers’ Sensitivity to Abstract Event Structure
Yue Ji (Jiyue@Udel.Edu)
Department of Linguistics & Cognitive Science, University of Delaware, 125 E. Main Street
Newark, DE 19716 USA

Anna Papafragou (Apapafragou@Udel.Edu)
Department of Psychological & Brain Sciences, University of Delaware, 105 The Green
Newark, DE 19716 USA

event. In a study by Strickland and Keil (2011), after
watching videos of someone launching an object (e.g.
kicking a soccer ball) followed by the object’s directed
motion (e.g. the ball flying into the goal), participants
mistakenly reported that they saw the moment of contact, i.e.
the endpoint of the launching event, even when it was
actually omitted from the display.
Despite the richness of the literature on event
segmentation and the salience of endpoints in event
perception, the nature of event endpoints has been less
discussed. In most event-segmentation studies, the stimuli
are actions by an intentional actor (e.g. a person putting up a
tent) and the endpoint is taken to be obvious and welldefined (e.g. the moment the tent is put up). In studies of
motion events, the endpoint appears similarly self-evident
(and is typically the moment that a moving entity reaches
the goal). However, across a broad range of events, the
notion of endpoint is not always straightforward. Consider
the following situations described by the two sentences in
(1):
(1) a. The child played the Moonlight Sonata.
b. The child played the piano.
There is subtle difference between (1a) and (1b). The event
in (1a) comes to an end when the last note of the sonata was
played. In contrast, it is hard to specify how or when the
situation in (1b) ends — the child could stop playing at any
point. The endpoint is inherent in the former event but is
arbitrary in the latter. Such contrasts have been discussed
extensively in the linguistic literature on aspect (i.e., the
linguistic encoding of the internal temporal profile of
events). In this literature, the distinction between the two
sentences in (1) is captured by assuming that (1a) encodes
an experience as a “bounded” event but (1b) encodes it as an
“unbounded” event (Bach, 1986; Harley, 2003; Jackendoff,
1991). Bounded events have an internal structure with a
“built-in terminal point” (Comrie, 1976), “climax” (Vendler,
1957) or “culmination” (Parsons, 1990), while unbounded
events are homogenous, lacking internal development
(Krifka, 1998). This linguistic distinction presumably has a
non-linguistic counterpart in the way events are perceived
and understood but to date, this connection has not been
explored in detail.
Inspired by the rich linguistic research on how event
endpoints are encoded in language (see Filip, 2004; Krifka,
1998, etc.), one can further identify two major types of
consideration that determine whether an event is bounded or

Abstract
Bounded and unbounded events differ in whether they include
an inherent endpoint (Bach, 1986). Even though this
distinction can be important for the way events are identified
and processed, the literature on event cognition has not
focused on such abstract aspects of event structure. In the
present study, we asked whether viewers are sensitive to the
distinction between bounded and unbounded events in a
category learning task. Our results show that people were
more successful in forming the category of bounded events
than that of unbounded events. We discuss implications of
this finding for event cognition.
Keywords: event structure; endpoint; boundedness

Introduction
Our experience of the world is intrinsically dynamic. To
make sense of the complex flow of changes in our
environment, we break continuous streams of experience
into separate entities and classify such entities into different
types.
Much work has focused on how people segment
continuous experience into discrete units, i.e. events. The
term “event” refers broadly to a temporal segment that has
“a beginning and an ending” (Zacks & Tversky, 2001).
People identify the boundaries of an event through tracking
changes in perceptual features such as direction, location, or
speed of action (e.g. an arrow hitting a target); more
importantly, people encode events based on conceptual
features, especially the goal-directedness or causal structure
of the corresponding experience (e.g. a person on diet
hitting a target; Zacks & Swallow, 2007). Event boundaries
have a privileged status in memory and provide anchors for
later learning and describing (Swallow, Zacks, & Abrams,
2009). In particular, the endpoint is conceptualized as a
critical event component. For instance, when comparing two
events, the resultant state (e.g. whether a ball knocked over
the whole tower or just a few blocks) has more
psychological weight than other perceptual features (e.g. the
moving direction of the ball) (He & Arunachalam, 2016). In
the well-studied domain of motion events, the goal of
motion is more accurately encoded in both language and
memory as opposed to other components such as the source
(Lakusta & Landau, 2005, 2012; Papafragou, 2010; Regier
& Zheng, 2007; Wagner, 2009). In addition, people tend to
fill the gap between successive events within a causal chain
by generating rapid inferences about the endpoint of the first

594

not. First, intuitions about boundedness may be due to the
nature of the action. In particular, some actions lead to a
change of state in the affected object, such that the endpoint
is the resultant state (bounded events); other actions do not
affect the object in a perceptible way or the change lacks a
well-defined resultant state (unbounded events). The
contrast is shown in the following example:
(2) a. The child dressed the teddy bear.
b. The child patted the teddy bear.
(2a) describes a bounded event—the teddy bear was dressed
when the child finished. (2b) describes an unbounded
event—no predictable result followed from the child’s
patting. Although both events involve the same object, the
difference in actions leads to the contrast in boundedness.
Second, intuitions about boundedness may be due to the
nature of the affected object. Sometimes, there is a
homomorphism between the affected object and the time
course of the event (Dowty, 1991; Krifka, 1989), such that
the changes in the object track or “measure out” the way the
event develops (Tenny, 1987). When the object itself is
quantified, the event is bounded. The contrast can be
illustrated by the example below:
(3) a. The child ate a pretzel.
b. The child ate cheerios.
(3a) depicts a bounded event— the event unfolds as the
pretzel changes and it ends at the moment when the pretzel
is gone. (3b) depicts an unbounded event that lacks an
inherent endpoint—the child could stop at any time.
To sum up, bounded and unbounded events differ in
whether they have an inherent endpoint. Two major
components, i.e. the nature of the action and the affected
object, might determine whether an inherent endpoint is
available. So far the literature on event perception has not
explored the role of boundedness in determining event
boundaries, and little is known about whether viewers are
sensitive to such abstract aspects of event cognition. One
suggestive piece of evidence comes from work focusing on
how events are counted. Bounded events are naturally
counted in terms of how many inherent endpoints have been
achieved. Lacking an inherent endpoint, unbounded events
are counted according to spatio-temporal criteria. Returning
to the example in (1), imagine that the child paused for a
break and then resumed her playing in both situations. The
event of playing the Moonlight Sonata still occurred once,
but the child played the piano twice. When counting events
like (1a), adults look for the inherent endpoint regardless of
the pauses (Barner, Wagner & Snedeker, 2008) but 3-to-5year-olds tend to over-generalize spatio-temporal criteria
and count the number of pauses (Wagner, 2006; Wagner &
Carey, 2003).
In the present paper, we explore viewers’ sensitivity to
the distinction between bounded and unbounded events
(defined in terms of the availability of an inherent endpoint,
as in (2) and (3) above). Specifically, we ask whether
viewers can group events into the bounded vs. unbounded
category in a category learning task. Drawing on the
linguistic literature in which the category of unbounded

events is definitionally dependent on the category of
bounded events (such that boundedness and unboundedness
form a positive-negative pair), we ask whether there is an
asymmetric relation between the two types of event in nonlinguistic cognition. If so, the category of bounded events
might be learned by observers more easily compared to that
of unbounded events.

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 was a category learning task. Participants
were exposed to minimal pairs of bounded and unbounded
events (defined by the availability of an inherent endpoint)
and had to extract what was shared by different events of the
same category and extend this information to new events.

Method
Participants Forty adults participated in the experiment. All
were undergraduates at the University of Delaware and
received course credit for participation. Data from an
additional group of 2 adults were collected but excluded
because these adults were color-blind and failed to identify
an important test feature (a red frame) consistently.
Stimuli Twenty pairs of videos were created, such that each
pair showed a bounded and an unbounded event (see Table
1). Within each pair, the videos had the same duration
(range: 4.5s-13s; M = 7.98s) and involved the same actor
but differed minimally from each other in one of two ways
that involved boundedness. For half of the pairs, the
bounded and unbounded events within a pair involved the
same object but differed in terms of the nature of the action
performed on the object: the bounded event displayed an
action that caused a clear and temporally demarcated change
of state in the object (e.g. fold up a handkerchief) while its
unbounded counterpart did not involve such a change (e.g.
wave a handkerchief). For the other half of the pairs, the
bounded and unbounded events within a pair involved the
same action but differed in terms of the nature of the
affected object: the bounded event involved a single object
(e.g. draw a circle) but its unbounded counterpart involved
either an unspecified plurality of objects or a mass quantity
(e.g. draw circles).
To ensure that all video stimuli would illustrate the
contrast in boundedness presented in Table 1, a new group
of 18 adults from the same population was asked to watch a
subset of the clips and describe what happened in a full
English sentence. For this norming task, the events in Table
1 were split into 2 lists, such that each list included only one
member of each pair and an equal number of bounded and
unbounded events. Each of the 18 participants was
randomly assigned to one of the two lists. Their descriptions
were coded for the verb used to describe the action and the
noun phrase used to describe the affected object(s). As
expected, differences in boundedness within a pair that were
due to the nature of the action were reflected in verb choices:
bounded stimuli elicited verbs of change of state (e.g. “dress
a teddy bear”) 98.3% of the time and unbounded stimuli

595

elicited verbs denoting activities (e.g. “pat a teddy bear”)
93.1% of the time. Similarly, differences in boundedness
within a pair that were due to the nature of the object were
reflected in noun phrase choices: bounded events elicited
count nouns with definite or indefinite articles (e.g. “eat
the/a pretzel”) 98% of the time and unbounded events
elicited bare plurals, mass nouns, or related devices (e.g.
“eat cheerios”) 92.4% of the time.
For purposes of Experiment 1, the video stimuli were
arranged into three basic lists corresponding to the three
phases of the experiment (see Table 1). For the initial
learning phase, we selected 8 pairs of events (4 in which
boundedness was due to the Action and 4 in which
boundedness was due to the Affected Object) and arranged
them into a pseudorandomized presentation list in which a
single video was played in the center of the screen and the
two videos within a pair appeared in immediate succession
(the order of bounded-unbounded events within pairs was
counterbalanced within the list).
For the later testing phase, we arranged 8 of the
remaining pairs of videos (see Table 1) into 2 lists. Each list
contained one video from each pair. We counterbalanced
whether the event was bounded or unbounded and whether
source of boundedness was the action or the object across
lists.
For the final (short) surprise testing phase, we used the
last 4 pairs of videos, arranged into 2 lists. The same
counterbalancing was used as in the (main) testing phase.

Procedure Participants were randomly assigned to one of
two conditions. In the Bounded condition, the videos of
bounded events shown in the learning phase were given a
red frame while their unbounded counterparts were given a
black frame. In the Unbounded condition, the reverse
assignment occurred.
In the learning phase for both conditions, participants
were asked to watch a few videos and to pay attention to
those appearing within a red frame. Their task was to figure
out what kind of videos were given the red frame and to
decide whether a new video could have the red frame or not.
In the testing phase, participants saw a new set of videos
and for each one they were asked: “Could the video have a
red frame or not?” (test question) In the surprise testing
phase, participants were unexpectedly asked: “Could the
video have a black frame or not?” (surprise question) This
question was included to probe whether participants formed
any hypothesis about the secondary event category present
within the experiment, even though it was not the target of
the study.
After the end of the session, participants were asked to
write down what kind of videos could have a red frame.
This was used as an additional source of information about
the category that participants had just formed.

Table 1: Videos used in Experiment 1.
Phase

Boundedness Source
Nature of Action

Learning
Nature of Affected
Object

Nature of Action
Testing
Nature of Affected
Object

Surprise
Testing

Nature of Action
Nature of Affected
Object

No.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

Bounded Events
fold up a handkerchief
put up one’s hair
pile up a deck of cards
group pawns based on color
draw a balloon
tie a knot
eat a pretzel
flip a postcard
dress a teddy bear
roll up a towel
fill a glass with milk
scoop up yogurt
peel a banana
blow a balloon
tear a paper towel
paint a star
close a fan
crack an egg
cut a ribbon in half
stick a sticker

596

Unbounded Events
wave a handkerchief
scratch one’s hair
shuffle a deck of cards
mix pawns of two colors
draw circles
tie knots
eat cereal
flip pages
pat a teddy bear
twist a towel
shake a bottle of milk
stir yogurt
crack peanuts
blow bubbles
tear slices off paper towels
paint stuff
use a fan for oneself
beat an egg
cut ribbon from roll (into many pieces)
stick stickers

purpose” while unbounded events were “lacking an end or
purpose”, “random”.

Results
An ANOVA was performed on the proportion of correct
responses to all questions with Source of Boundedness (i.e.
Nature of Action vs. Nature of the Affected Object) as a
within-subjects factor. No significant difference was found
(F (1, 39) = .042, p = .838). Therefore, answers to questions
targeting the two sources of boundedness were collapsed for
further analysis.
Results from Experiment 1 are shown in Figure 1. The
proportion of correct responses to test questions was
significantly higher in the Bounded (M = 92.50%) than in
the Unbounded condition (M = 76.25%) (t (38) = 3.563, p
= .001). No significant difference in the proportion of
correct responses to the surprise questions in the two
conditions was found (t (38) = -.831, p = .411).
An ANOVA was conducted on the proportion of correct
responses with Question Type (Test vs. Surprise) as a
within-subjects factor and Condition (Bounded vs.
Unbounded) as a between-subjects factor. There was a
significant effect of Question Type (F (1, 38) = 19.795, p <
0.0001), no significant effect of Condition (F (1, 38) =
2.247, p = .142), and an interaction between the two factors
(F (1, 38) = 7.833, p = .008). The participants were more
accurate in test questions than in the surprise questions in
the Bounded condition (t (19) = 6.114, p < .00001) but not
in the Unbounded condition (t (19) = 1.022, p = .320).

Discussion
Performance in test questions directly showed that, given
the same contrastive examples in the learning phase, the
participants were better at forming the category of bounded
events compared to that of unbounded events. Furthermore,
in the Bounded condition, learning was focused, with
participants being less successful in the surprise compared
to the test questions; however, no such asymmetry was
found in the Unbounded condition. Further intuitions about
boundedness were found in answers to the last open
question about the nature of the target (red-frame) stimuli.
The most frequent hypotheses referred to the organization of
the stimuli. This suggests that participants attended to the
internal structure of events when forming hypotheses about
the meaning of the to-be-acquired category.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 1, participants might have benefited from the
presentation of paired videos in the learning phase. By
showing 2 successive videos with minimal differences, the
contrast between bounded and unbounded events was
highlighted. Experiment 2 asked whether the category of
bounded or unbounded events could be efficiently extracted
in a less supportive learning context.

Method
Participants A new group of forty undergraduates at the
University of Delaware were recruited. Data from an
additional adult were collected but excluded because he
failed to understand the task and did not finish all the
questions.
Stimuli and Procedure The stimuli and procedure were
identical to those in Experiment 1 with one exception. In the
learning phase, the sequence of the 16 videos was pseudorandomized such that any 2 videos within a pair were
separated by at least 5 other videos. This made it impossible
to detect the contrast between bounded and unbounded
events by simply comparing 2 consecutive videos.

Figure 1: Proportion of correct responses in Experiment 1.
Error bars represent standard error.

Results

Answers to the last open question asking about the target
category focused on 3 aspects of the stimuli—organization,
neatness and intention. Organization was the most frequent
hypothesis (29 out of the 40 answers). Specifically,
modifiers such as “organized”, or “structured” were used to
describe bounded events while “unorganized”, or “lacking
structure” were given for unbounded events. Neatness was
the second most frequent hypothesis (15 out of the 40
answers). Words used for bounded events included “neat”,
“tidy” and “clean” while those for unbounded events
included “messy” and “untidy”. Lastly, intention was
mentioned in 9 out of the 40 answers. Bounded events were
depicted as aiming “to achieve a goal”, or being “on

As in Experiment 1, no difference in the proportion of
correct responses was found between the two sources of
boundedness (F (1, 39) = 1.595, p = .214). The answers
were thus collapsed in the following analysis.
Results from Experiment 2 are shown in Figure 2. Test
questions elicited a significantly higher proportion of
correct responses in the Bounded (M = 84.38%) than in the
Unbounded condition (M = 68.13%) (t (38) = 3.365, p
= .002). There was no significant difference between the
two conditions in the proportion of correct responses to the
surprise questions (t (38) = -1.129, p = .266).

597

An ANOVA conducted with Question Type as a withinsubjects factor and Condition as a between-subjects factor
showed a significant effect of Question Type (F (1, 38) =
7.095, p = .011), no significant effect of Condition (F (1, 38)
= .646, p = .427), and an interaction between Question Type
and Condition (F (1, 38) = 7.839, p = .008). The participants
performed better in test questions than in surprise questions
in the Bounded condition (t (19) = 4.174, p = .001), but not
in the Unbounded condition (t (19) = -.093, p = .927).

Figure 2: Proportion of correct responses in Experiment 2.
Error Bars represent standard error.
Answers to the open question about the nature of the
target category still mainly referred to organization,
neatness and intention. These were mentioned in 16, 8 and 7
out of the 40 answers respectively. In addition, repetition
was used to describe unbounded events in 5 answers.
Completion appeared in 3 answers about bounded events.
As is clear from Figures 1-2, performance on the test
questions was better in Experiment 1 than in Experiment 2.
This was confirmed in an ANOVA that used the proportion
of correct responses on the test questions as the dependent
measure, and included Condition (Bounded vs. Unbounded)
and Experiment (1 vs. 2) as between-subjects factors. The
analysis showed main effects of Condition, (F (1, 76) =
23.940, p < .0001), and Experiment (F (1, 76) = 5.986, p
= .017), and no interaction between the two factors (F (1, 76)
= .000, p = 1.000). (Results were similar when accuracy on
both test and surprise questions was used as the dependent
measure.)

Discussion
Results from Experiment 2 showed a learning advantage for
the category of bounded compared to unbounded events.
This pattern was similar to Experiment 1, even though
performance in Experiment 2 was worse compared to the
earlier study, presumably because of the lack of direct
contrast between bounded and unbounded events during the
learning phase.

General Discussion
Our findings provide direct evidence for viewers’ sensitivity
to the abstract feature of boundedness in event cognition. In
that sense, the present data go beyond prior work on how
bounded and unbounded events are individuated and
counted (Barner, Wagner & Snedeker, 2008; Wagner, 2006;
Wagner & Carey, 2003). Furthermore, our results
demonstrate that there is an asymmetry between bounded
and unbounded events, such that it is easier to form the
category of bounded compared to unbounded events. Our
results raise the possibility that unboundedness is
asymmetrically dependent on boundedness during event
perception and apprehension, and that bounded - but not
unbounded - events form a natural class.
The present data leave several directions open for further
research. An important direction concerns the exact nature
of the conjectures underlying participants’ groupings of
events into boundedness categories. The notion of
boundedness is broad and can be subject to more abstract
considerations than the present discussion has suggested.
For instance, the inherent endpoint that defines bounded
events can provided by a salient intention (Depraetere,
2007). To take an isolated example, even though the action
of warming a soup does not have a clearly defined endpoint,
it is often construed as culminating at the point at which the
soup has reached someone’s favorite temperature. In our
study, it seems unlikely that intentionality was the feature
responsible for participants’ success in the Bounded
condition. We asked a new group of 10 people to rate the
degree of intentionality for all the videos used in the
experiments on a scale from 1 (totally unintentional) to 7
(intentional). There was no significant difference between
scores for bounded events (M = 5.829) and unbounded
events (M = 5.704) (t (9) = 1.059, p = .330).
Finally, a number of researchers has drawn close parallels
between object and event systems from a semantic
perspective, such that the property of boundedness in the
domain of events has been linked to the issue of
quantification in the domain of objects (Bach, 1986;
Jackendoff, 1991). In our study, the quantification of the
affected object served as a cue for distinguishing bounded
events from unbounded ones. It is possible that viewers are
better at forming the category of bounded events because it
is easier to track a single object compared with an
unindividuated substance or objects of a variable number.
An interesting further question is whether there is a
common notion of boundedness underlying cognitive
representations of both events and objects (see Wellwood,
Hespos & Rips, in press) and how distinctions in one
domain might generalize to the other.

Acknowledgments
This material is based upon work supported by the National
Science Foundation under grant no. 1632849.

598

Vendler, Z. (1957). Verbs and times. The Philosophical
Review, 66, 143-160. Reprinted as Chapter 4 of Z. Vendler
(Ed.), Linguistics in Philosophy (1967).
Wagner, L. (2006) Aspectual bootstrapping in language
acquisition: Telicity and transitivity. Language Learning
and Development, 2, 51-76.
Wagner, L. (2009). Manners and goals in pre-linguistic
thought: the origins of aspectual construal. Proceedings of
the 33th Annual BU Conference on Language
Development (pp. 599-610). Somerville: Cascadilla Press.
Wagner, L., & Carey, S. (2003). Individuation of objects and
events: a developmental study. Cognition, 90, 163-191.
Wellwood, A., Hespos, S. J., & Rips, L. (in press). The
object : substance :: event : process analogy. In T.
Lombrozo, S. Nichols, & J. Knobe (Eds.) Oxford Studies
on Experimental Philosophy. New York, NY: OUP.
Zacks, J., & Swallow, M. (2007). Event segmentation.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 16, 80-84.
Zacks, J., & Tversky, B. (2001). Event structure in
perception and conception. Psychological Bulletin, 127,
3-21.

References
Bach, E. (1986). The algebra of events. Linguistics and
Philosophy, 9, 5-16.
Barner, D., Wagner, L. & Snedeker, J. (2008). Events and
the ontology of individuals: Verbs as a source of
individuating mass and count nouns. Cognition, 106, 805832.
Comrie, B. (1976). Aspect: An Introduction to the Study of
Verb Aspect and Related Problems. Cambridge: CUP.
Dowty, D. R. (1991). Thematic proto-roles and argument
selection. Language, 67, 547-619.
Depraetere, I. (2007). (A)telicity and intentionality.
Linguistics, 45, 243-269.
Filip, H. (2004). The telicity parameter revisited. SALT, 14,
92-109.
Harley, H. (2003). How do verbs get their names?
Denominal verbs, manner incorporation and the ontology
of verb roots in English. In N. Erteschik-Shir, & T.
Rapoport (Eds.), The Syntax of Aspect. Oxford: OUP.
He, X., & Arunachalam, S. (2016). How event endstates are
conceptualized [pdf document]. Retrieved from
http://tedlab.mit.edu/~mekline/ELC2016/25_ELC2016He&Arunachalam.pdf
Jackendoff, R. (1991). Parts and boundaries. Cognition, 41,
9-45.
Krifka, M. (1989). Nominal reference, temporal constitution
and quantification in event semantics. In R. Bartsch, J.
van Benthem, & P. van Emde Boas (Eds.), Semantics and
Contextual Expression, Groningen-Amsterdam Studies in
Semantics 11. Dordrecht: Foris Publications.
Krifka, M. (1998). The origins of telicity. In S. Rothstein
(ed.), Events and Grammar. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Lakusta, L., & Landau, B. (2005). Starting at the end: the
importance of goals in spatial language. Cognition, 96, 133.
Lakusta, L., & Landau, B. (2012). Language and memory
for motion events: Origins of the asymmetry between
source and goal. Cognitive Science, 36, 517-544.
Papafragou, A. (2010). Source-goal asymmetries in motion
representation: Implications for language production and
comprehension. Cognitive Science, 34, 1064-1092.
Parsons, T. (1990). Events in the Semantics of English: A
Study in Subatomic Semantics. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Regier, T., & Zheng, M. (2007). Attention to endpoints: A
cross-linguistic constraint on spatial meaning. Cognitive
Science, 31, 705-719.
Strickland, B., & Keil, F. (2011). Event completion: Event
based inferences distorts memory in a matter of seconds.
Cognition, 121, 409-415.
Swallow, K., Zacks, J., & Abrams, R. (2009). Event
boundaries in perception affect memory encoding and
updating. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 138, 236257.
Tenny, C. (1987). Grammaticalizing Aspect and
Affectedness (Doctoral dissertation). MIT, Cambridge,
MA.

599

