Weight matters: The role of physical weight in non-physical language across age
and culture
Tomer D. Ullman (tomeru@mit.edu)

Santiago Alonso-Diaz (salonsod@ur.rochester.edu)

Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT

Brain and Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester

Stephen Ferrigno (sferrigno@rcbi.rochester.edu)
Brain and Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester

Sarina Zahid (szahid@u.rochester.edu)

Celeste Kidd (celestekidd@gmail.com)

Brain and Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester Brain and Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester
Abstract
Languages commonly use physical properties to discuss distinctly non-physical states and events in the world (e.g., “I’m
not a huge fan of licorice”). Here, we investigate the degree
to which associations between physical properties and abstract
concepts are culturally specific constructs. To do this, we
tested three distinct populations—US adults, US children, and
adults from an indigenous group in the lowlands of Bolivia, the
Tsimane’—on their associations between the physical concept
of weight and a variety of abstract attributes (e.g., importance,
emotional state, moral worth). We find a strong relationship
between the associations of US and Tsimane’ adults, but littleto-no relationship between US children and either adult population. These results suggest that the property of weight plays
a similar role in everyday thought across cultures, but that it
takes time to develop. Further, we found that these associations
could not be recovered from a simple semantic embedding
analysis, suggesting that the cross-culturally shared connections between physical and abstract attributes may be learned
through more complex experiences than language alone.
Marty: Are you trying to tell me that my mother has got
the hots for me?
Doc: Precisely!
Marty: Whoa, this is heavy.
Doc: There’s that word again: ”heavy.” Why are things
so heavy in the future? Is there a problem with the Earth’s
gravitational pull?
(Back to the Future. Dir. Robert Zemeckis)

Introduction
Physical notions weigh in on everyday conversation. We say
a person forced herself to meet a deadline, as though she is
pushing a cart uphill. We say a deadline is fast approaching,
as though an actual train hurtling towards our location in time.
Our concepts of force, causality, space, and substance seem
to shape how we talk about the world (Talmy, 1988; Pinker,
2007). Certainly some abstract thoughts rely on a universal
understanding of the physical world. If a friend describes
writing a paper as ‘I’m banging my head against the wall’,
we can understand they are frustrated, and not literally writing a paper on the effects of head-banging (Figure 1, right).
In the reverse direction, our language also shapes how we
think about basic concepts, such space and time (e.g. Boroditsky, 2001; Núñez & Sweetser, 2006). And some thoughts are
culture- and language-dependent in their meaning. If a friend
says writing feels like carrying the day out in a basket, the
thrust would not be universally recognized (Figure 1, left).

Figure 1: Details from Flemish Proverbs by Pieter Bruegel
the Elder, 1559. Left: Carrying the day out in a basket, i.e.
wasting time Right: Banging one’s head against the wall.
The purpose of this paper is not to untangle the knot of development, culture, language, and physical concepts. Rather,
we mean to pick up one strand of thought as it relates to an
understanding of a physical quality, and to tug on it gently.
In particular, we consider the concept of weight (heavy and
light), which has received less attention in terms of its impact
on thought, compared to concepts like force, space, and time
1 . Intuitively, we seem to associate weight with worth: In
2015, a technical teardown of Beats headphones found that
30% of their weight was accounted for by metal objects that
add no function, but make them feel ’solid and valuable’ (Einstein, 2015). When a character in Romeo and Juliet exclaims
‘O heavy day!’, we recognize that as an expression of dismay
at an unfortunate event. But is all this because of the quirks of
the English language, and our own WEIRD makeup (Henrich
et al., 2010), or something deeper about the way weight ties
in with concepts such as worth and sadness?
1 Weight,

mass, and density as physical notions have certainly
been studied in development, across infancy (e.g. Baillargeon,
2004), childhood (e.g. Carey, 1999, 2009), and adulthood (e.g. Hamrick et al., 2016). But there the concern is with questions such as
‘When do infants realize big things move small things’ and ‘When
do children understand weight and density are separate’, and ’Can
adults tell which block is heavy’, not ‘Do children think being
weighed down relates to being sad’.

3411

Important* / Unimportant* [Not Important]
Valuable* / Cheap* ; Old / Young
Serious* / Funny* ; Sad* / Happy*
Ugly* / Pretty* ; Interesting* / Boring*
Mean / Nice ; Smart* / Stupid* [Not Smart]
Good* / Evil* [Bad] ; Angry / Calm
Brave / Coward [Scared]

To examine this question, we asked three groups (US
adults, US children, and adults from the indigenous Tsimane’
of Bolivia) to pick which of two differently weighted, visually identical boxes was better described by various attributes
( external, internal, mental and non-mental). We reasoned
that if the three groups show a systematic bias for some attributes within the group, but no relationship is found between
the judgments of these three groups, then the use of a weight
concept in our everyday thinking outside a strictly physical
context is more likely to be a cultural construct. If the three
groups all show similar judgments, then this is evidence in
favor of an early shared conceptual organization. If the Western adults show similar judgments to Tsimane’ adults, but are
not similar to children, this would suggest a shared conceptual organization, but one that takes time to develop. A final
option is that all groups will show random behavior, failing
to associate any attribute with the boxes in a systematic way,
which would be evidence of certain poor decisions about experiment design or a problem with the fundamental research
question. The authors were agnostic about the most likely
outcome out of the ones just listed.

Table 1: The 24 attributes applied to the boxes in Experiments
1 and 2, grouped into antonyms. Attributes in [parentheses]
indicate a child-friendly replacement for the preceding word,
used in Experiment 2. Asterisks indicate words used in Experiment 3.

(i)

Participants

Materials and methods
Participants were presented with an image of identical boxes
marked A and B (see Figure 2, top), and asked to imagine
that there were two boxes before them, as in the image. Participants were asked to imagine lifting up the boxes and discovering that one of the boxes is much heavier (the identity
of the heavy box was randomized across participants).
Participants read 12 descriptions in succession, choosing
the box that best fit the description. For each description,
participants were reminded which box was heavier, and then
given a prompt as follows: “Which box is [attribute]?”,
where the attribute varied from one question to the next. Participants indicated their response using a radio button. The
12 attribute adjectives were presented in random order, chosen from a list of 24 possible attributes that reflect inner
traits (e.g., good/bad), external qualities (pretty/ugly), emotions (sad/happy), and external evaluation (cheap/expensive,
important/unimportant). For a full list, see Table 1.
Each participant saw only 12 attributes, rather than the
full list of 24, to prevent cognitive fatigue. Participants always saw only one of a possible antonym pair. In total, this
meant there were 50 individual ratings per attribute. Following the attribute questions, the participants supplied basic demographic information, and were invited to share any comments they may have.

B

Which box is important?
Box A
Box B

Experiment 1: US Adults
Participants (N = 100, 42 female, median age 32.0 years)
were recruited through Amazon’s Mechanical Turk service
(Crump et al., 2013) and paid a monetary sum for their participation, equivalent to $9 per hour. Participants were restricted
to those living in the United States.

A

(ii)

Figure 2: (i) Illustration of stimuli shown to participants in
Experiment 1, for a specific attribute (ii) The boxes used in
Experiment 2 with children, and in Experiment 3 with Tsimane’ adults.

Results and analysis
Participants’ ratings for each attribute were converted into
that chose light
the following measure: # participants
. This weight
# total participants
choice fraction (WCF) goes from 0.0 (all participants chose
the heavy box for this attribute) to 1.0 (all participants chose
the light box). The results are shown in Figure 3, with bars
indicating 95% bootstrapped confidence intervals (CI, 1000
samples per attribute) around the WCF measure.

3412

Of the 24 attributes, 15 had WCFs with CIs that do not
overlap 0.5, indicating that participants considered these attributes as statistically significantly associated with heavy or
light. The same result is obtained when using a two-tail binomial test at the p = 0.05 level. Such a result is highly
unlikely to occur by chance: Using an additional bootstrap
analysis that repeats the same procedure from the previous
paragraph (counting the number attributes with WCF CIs
that do not overlap 0.5), the median (and mean) expected
number of attributes with a measure that does not overlap
chance is 2. Also, the empirical distribution of participants’
WCF is statistically significantly different from a distribution drawn from a random sample that assumes the same
participant numbers, but with answers based on an unbiased
coin flip (Kolmogorov-Smirnov two-sided test for 2 samples,
KS = 0.28, p < 0.05).
The attributes significantly associated with heavy and light
seem partially in line with intuition 2 . Heavier boxes are
more likely to be seen as valuable, important, and interesting, as opposed to the cheap, unimportant, and boring lighter
boxes. This is consistent with the marketing-driven decision
by Beats to add superfluous weight to their headphones. This
association makes sense given that more weight may imply
more “stuff”, which could generally be considered more desirable 3 . Participants also associated more personality-type
traits with the boxes, in a way that is not accounted for by
a simple positive-negative spectrum. Heavy boxes are more
good and brave, but also mean and angry. Lighter boxes are
more cowardly, but also more pretty. Presumably participants
were able to anthropomorphize the boxes to some degree, seeing them as agents. For example, on this analysis a light agent
is more likely to run away, and is likely to be younger. However, this does not account for the full pattern of results, such
as seeing heavier boxes as more “good” and less “evil”.
This pattern also cannot be recovered from a semantic embedding analysis. The analysis worked as follows: We embedded the attributes from Table 1, as well as the words heavy
and light, in a high-dimensional semantic vector space, which
was constructed using the co-occurrence statistics of several hundred-thousand words in a large corpus (Pennington
et al., 2014). Specifically, we used 100-dimensional GloVe
word vectors pre-trained on the Wikipedia 2014 + Gigaword
5 datasets. Such semantic embeddings have proved useful
for measuring similarity between words, in the service of
machine-learning applications such as sense-making, translation, and question answering (see for example Vedantam et
al., 2015; Wolf et al., 2014; Yu et al., 2015). Intuitively, a
shorter euclidean distance or larger cosine similarity between
two points in this space indicate a larger degree of similarity
between the words that those points represent. After embed2 That is, with the intuition of the Western adult authors of this
paper.
3 Although, in contrast, consider the value and importance currently associated with slim technology products, or human figures.
By the same logic, slim would imply less “stuff”. Thus, this explanation is insufficient on its own.

Heavy 0.0

0.25

Important
Valuable
Mean
Serious
Brave
Interesting
Good
Angry
Evil
Old
Smart
Happy

0.5

0.75

1.0

Light

Funny
Ugly
Sad
Nice
Calm
Stupid
Pretty
Young
Boring
Unimportant
Cheap
Cowardly
Figure 3: Results of Experiment 1: Participant responses per
attribute are converted into WCF measure running from 0 (all
participants chose the heavy box) to 1 (all participants chose
the light box). Bars indicate 95% bootstrapped confidence
intervals around the mean of this measure. Colors indicate the
degree to which an attribute is associated with heavy (blue) or
light (red). Beige indicates WCFs with CIs overlapping 0.5,
indicating a random response or equal association.
ding our terms, we measured the relative euclidean distance
between the attributes and the terms heavy and light (that is,
distance(heavy, attributei ) − distance(light, attributei )). We
found no correlation between participants’ response and this
distance. A similar analysis with cosine similarity also found
no such relation. This suggests that while useful, basic semantic embedding does not necessarily capture association
that is based in physical properties.

3413

Experiment 2: US Children
Participants
Fifty individuals were recruited from the Rochester Kid Lab
participant pool (28 female, Median 4.0 years, range 3-64 ).

Materials and Methods
Participants were tested in a designated room in the Rochester
Kid Lab. Parents gave their informed consent, and generally
did not accompany their children during the test, unless requested, or children expressed shyness. Parents who accompanied their children were explicitly advised not to encourage
responses from their child. Families were compensated for
their time and child participants were also given a small gift
(a shirt or toy).
In the testing room, participants were asked to sit next to
a table, where two boxes were laid out. The boxes were
3x3x3 inches, made of wood, and covered in blue fabric with
a gold pattern (see Figure 2, bottom). The boxes were hollow,
and inside one of them was a 200 gram metal weight, along
with padding to prevent the weight from bouncing and rattling when the box was handled. The locations of the boxes
with respect to a participant were randomized across children.
Participants were first asked if they noticed a difference
in the boxes, based on visual appearance. Participants were
then asked to hold the boxes, and to indicate if there was a
difference (which they were able to verbally verify).
The participant continued to hold the boxes in each hand,
as they answered the following question: “Which box do you
think is [attribute]?”, for a randomized set of 12 attributes
taken from 24 attributes similar to Experiment 1 (and see Table 1). The study took a maximum of 10 minutes. Participants answered verbally or with a gesture, with the experimenter noting their response. Participants were also asked
to explain their answers, but their reasons were scantly supplied and proved inconsistent across children 5 . Again, to
prevent cognitive fatigue, participants were asked to judge 12
attributes rather than the full 24, with each participant seeing
only one of a possible pair of antonyms. Thus there were 25
individual ratings per attribute.

Results and analysis
Participants’ ratings for each attribute were again converted
into the WCF measure used in Experiment 1 (with 0.0 indicating all participants chose heavy, and 1.0 indicating all
chose light). In this case, however, only 3 attributes were
4 At this age children possess a sufficiently large vocabulary and
can correctly point to a heavier object when prompted, but have not
received much formal education.
5 One participant designated the heavy box ‘The Hulk’ and the
light box ‘Captain America’. Captain America was funny, and The
Hulk was not smart.

different from chance, using a two-tailed binomial test at
the p = 0.05 level). The empirical distribution of children’s
WCFs was also not statistically significant from a distribution
drawn from a random sample, one that assumes the same participant numbers but with answers based on the flip of an unbiased coin (Kolmogorov-Smirnov two-sided test for 2 samples, KS = 0.21, p = 0.22). It is possible to conclude that
children did not understand the task, either because of lowlevel explanations like inappropriate materials and framing,
or because physical weight does not play a similar association role in their general thought as it does for US adults.
When correlating with the responses of adults from Experiment 1, we find there is a weak correlation (rs = 0.4, p = 0.05,
and see Figure 4). Taken in a positive light, this may indicate
a fledgling understanding after all of the full adult association
between the attributes used and physical weight. Still, this relationship is statistically tenuous. A median-split by age does
not show a difference between younger and older children.
Is it possible US adults exhibit a culture-specific pattern of
association with physical weight, one that requires years to
acquire? In the last experiment, we consider a non-WEIRD
adult population, an indigenous people of Bolivia.

rs = 0. 4 (p = 0. 05)

1.0

Calm

US Children

While the pattern shown by US adults is interesting on its
own, the original driving motivation was comparing this pattern to children and non-US cultures. With that, we turn to
children.

0.8

Cheap
Nice Pretty Cowardly
Good
Smart
InterestingFunny
Happy
Important Angry
Stupid
Boring
Unimportant
Serious
Brave
Sad
Young
Old
Mean
Valuable Evil
Ugly

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

US Adults

1.0

Figure 4: Comparison of adult responses from Experiment
1 with child responses from Experiment 2. The x and y axis
both use the same weight-fraction measure, going from heavy
to light. The shaded area indicates a 95% bootstrapped confidence interval on the linear regression model fit.

Experiment 3: Tsimane’ Adults
The Tsimane are a native people of lowland Bolivia, consisting of several thousand individuals, who live in mostly small

3414

communities in the northeastern department of Beni. Traditional Tsimane’ are farming-foragers who subsist off hunting, fishing, and some farming and trade. Members of the
Tsimane’ have highly variable education levels, and own few
artifacts (Huanca, 2006; Reyes-Garcı́a, 2001). As members
of a relatively isolated non-industrial society, Tsimane’ have
been the topic of several previous studies, from market behavior (Reyes-Garcı́a, 2001) to counting (Piantadosi et al., 2014),
to color concepts (Cibelli et al., 2016), to notions of fairness
(Jara-Ettinger et al., 2016).

Participants
Our final sample included fifty-five individuals (33 female,
median age = 28.0 years, range 17-65) from twelve Tsimane’
communities.

Results and analysis
As in Experiments 1 and 2, participants’ ratings for each attribute were transformed into a WCF measure. Four of the
16 attributes were different from chance, using a two-tailed
binomial test at the p = 0.05 level). In addition, the empirical distribution of Tsimane’ WCFs is statistically significant
from that drawn from a random sample that assumes the same
participant numbers, but with answers sampled from an unbiased coin flip (Kolmogorov-Smirnov two-sided test for 2
samples, KS = 0.36, p < 0.05).
We also correlated Tsimane’ responses with those of US
adults in Experiment 1. We found a significant correlation
(rs = 0.8, p < 0.001, and see Figure 5). As a final comparison,
we correlated Tsimane’ responses with those of US children
in Experiment 2, and found no significant correlation (rs =
0.0, p = 0.94). We next consider the general pattern of results.

Materials and methods
Experiments took place in a community classroom, with a
translator reading from a script, and a separate transcriber
recording responses. The experiments were conducted in Tsimane’, translated from a Spanish script. The translation was
confirmed by a second Spanish-Tsimane’ translator. Other
people were present in the room, but could not see participant responses. Participants were compensated with gift bags
equivalent to roughly $10 per hour. Participants completed
other tasks in addition to the one in this study, with a total
testing time of approximately one hour.

rs = 0. 8 (p < 0. 001)

Tsimane' Adults

1.0

boxes on a table. These were same boxes used in Experiment
2, and weighted as in Experiment 2 (see Figure 2, bottom).
Participants were instructed to pick each box up before any
questions were asked. Participants were then asked: “Which
box is [attribute]?”, and were instructed to point to a box.
This was then repeated until all adjectives were covered. The
order of the adjectives was randomized, as was the particular adjective from a given pair was randomized. Participants
were allowed to pick up the boxes at any point. As participants saw only one word out of a possible pair, there were on
average 21 individual ratings per attribute. In general, participants in this experiment went over a subset of 16 of the 24
adjectives in Table 1, due to translation difficulties.

Unimportant
0.8

Stupid Cheap
Boring
0.6

Ugly
Sad
Important
Evil
Good
Serious

Funny
Happy
Interesting
Smart

0.4

0.2

0.0

Pretty

Valuable
0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

US Adults

0.8

1.0

Figure 5: Comparing US adults from Experiment 1 with Tsimane’ adults from Experiment 3. The x and y axis both use
the same WCF measure, going from heavy to light. Shaded
area indicates a 95% bootstrapped confidence interval.
Participants were presented with two identically marked

Discussion
Thoughts weigh nothing, but they can weigh heavily on us.
A man might feel lighthearted after dispensing with a heavy
obligation. We can take matters lightly, but we should not
take them too lightly.
Thoughts, obligations, and matters don’t actually weigh
anything, but we feel their press on us. Our language of
thought cleaves the world into concepts that behave like objects with physical properties, located in space and acted on
by force Pinker (2007). Conversely, our mental concepts can
color our perception of the physical. In this paper we considered the particular physical notion of weight, and its relation
to different non-physical qualities such as value, interest and
seriousness.
We examined people’s associations between weight and
these different qualities in Western adults and children, and
in members of the non-industrial Tsimane’ society. We found
a strong relation between the answers given by Tsimane’ and
Western adults, a tenuous relation between Western adults
and children, and no relation between Tsimane’ adults and
Western children. Taken together, these findings indicate that
weight acts a similar cross-cultural role in everyday thought,
but that it takes time to fully get its act together. So, it may be
language and culture-independent to think of important matters as physically weighing more, for example. However, a

3415

fuller treatment would require relating the attributes to other
measures beyond weight, such as imageability and affect.
Different alternative explanations can be put forward for
why children provided responses that were inconsistent with
one another. First, it is possible that children simply have not
had the life experiences required to form strong, systematic
associations between abstract attributes and physical properties like weight. Alternatively, it is possible they cannot
anthropomorphize the boxes. This seems unlikely, as children can engage in pretend play with inanimate objects, but
attributing metarepresentations may have required a more active signaling of the task as pretend play Lillard (1993). It
may be that young children lack the basic physical skills associated with telling a heavy object from a light object and predicting their different behaviors, but previous research shows
most of the basic intuitions are in place by the lower end of
our age range, with young children predicting the effects of
different masses interacting, and taking weight into account
when planning actions (Baillargeon, 2004; Upshaw & Sommerville, 2015). Under these alternative explanations that
posit children could have experienced confusion about the
task, we would typically expect certain behavioral indicators
of this state, such as failures, resistance or delays in providing
responses. However, in our sample we observed no such indicators. Children were generally swift and willing to select
a particular box for each attribute about which we inquired.
This study does not give a definitive final answer to questions of culture, development, and the constructs of thought,
but it does shed light on a piece of the puzzle, in the form of
weight. Also, it is not hard to think of other physical properties that our methodology could stretch to accommodate,
roughly speaking.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Holly Palmeri for her support recruiting and
scheduling children in the Rochester Kid Lab, to Tomas Huanca
for logistical help with visiting the Tsimane’ villages, to Ted Gibson and Julian Jara-Ettinger for provoding support in Bolivia, and
to Dino Nate Aez, Robertina Nate Aez, and Salomon Hiza Nate for
help translating. We would also like to thank Steve Piantadosi for
doing some of the heavy lifting. This material is based upon work
supported by the Center for Brains, Minds and Machines (CBMM),
funded by NSF STC award CCF-1231216.

References
Baillargeon, R. (2004). Infants’ physical world. Current
Directions in Psychological Science, 13, 89–94.
Boroditsky, L. (2001). Does language shape thought?: Mandarin and english speakers’ conceptions of time. Cognitive
psychology, 43(1), 1–22.
Carey, S. (1999). Knowledge acquisition: Enrichment or
conceptual change. Concepts: core readings, 459–487.
Carey, S. (2009). The Origin of Concepts. Oxford University
Press.
Cibelli, E., Xu, Y., Austerweil, J. L., Griffiths, T. L., &
Regier, T. (2016). The sapir-whorf hypothesis and probabilistic inference: Evidence from the domain of color. PloS
one, 11(7), e0158725.

Crump, M. J. C., McDonnell, J. V., & Gureckis, T. M. (2013,
jan). Evaluating Amazon’s Mechanical Turk as a tool for
experimental behavioral research. PloS one, 8(3), e57410.
Einstein, B. (2015). How its made series: Beats by dre. Retrieved 2015-06-15, from https://blog.bolt.io/how
-it-s-made-series-beats-by-dre-154aae384b36
Hamrick, J. B., Battaglia, P. W., Griffiths, T. L., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2016). Inferring mass in complex physical
scenes via probabilistic simulation. Cognition, 1, 2.
Henrich, J., Heine, S. J., & Norenzayan, A. (2010). The
weirdest people in the world? Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 33(2-3), 61-83.
Huanca, T. (2006). Tsimane’oral tradition, landscape, and
identity in tropical forest. Tomás Huanca L.
Jara-Ettinger, J., Gibson, E., Kidd, C., & Piantadosi, S.
(2016). Native amazonian children forego egalitarianism
in merit-based tasks when they learn to count. Developmental Science, 19(6), 1104–1110.
Lillard, A. S. (1993). Pretend play skills and the child’s
theory of mind. Child development, 64(2), 348–371.
Núñez, R. E., & Sweetser, E. (2006). With the future behind them: Convergent evidence from aymara language
and gesture in the crosslinguistic comparison of spatial
construals of time. Cognitive science, 30(3), 401–450.
Pennington, J., Socher, R., & Manning, C. (2014). Glove:
Global vectors for word representation. EMNLP, 12, 1532–
1543.
Piantadosi, S. T., Jara-Ettinger, J., & Gibson, E. (2014). Children’s learning of number words in an indigenous farmingforaging group. Developmental Science, 17(4), 553–563.
Pinker, S. (2007). The stuff of thought: Language as a window into human nature. Penguin.
Reyes-Garcı́a, V. (2001). Indigenous people, ethnobotanical knowledge, and market economy. a case study of the
tsimaneamerindians in lowland bolivia.
Talmy, L. (1988). Force dynamics in language and cognition.
Cognitive science, 12(1), 49–100.
Upshaw, M. B., & Sommerville, J. A. (2015). Twelve-monthold infants anticipatorily plan their actions according to expected object weight in a novel motor context. Frontiers in
public health, 3.
Vedantam, R., Lin, X., Batra, T., Lawrence Zitnick, C., &
Parikh, D. (2015). Learning common sense through visual abstraction. In Proceedings of the ieee international
conference on computer vision (pp. 2542–2550).
Wolf, L., Hanani, Y., Bar, K., & Dershowitz, N. (2014).
Joint word2vec networks for bilingual semantic representations. International Journal of Computational Linguistics
and Applications, 5(1), 27–44.
Yu, L., Park, E., Berg, A. C., & Berg, T. L. (2015). Visual
madlibs: Fill in the blank description generation and question answering. In Proceedings of the ieee international
conference on computer vision (pp. 2461–2469).

3416

