What counts as math?
Relating conceptions of math with anxiety about math
Ruthe Foushee (foushee@berkeley.edu)
Rachel Jansen (racheljansen@berkeley.edu)
Mahesh Srinivasan (srinivasan@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94704
Abstract
What do people think of when they think of “math?” We propose that individuals may have very different working definitions of the category of math, and that those with broader math
conceptions may have less math anxiety. In Study 1, we introduce a method for indexing the “breadth” of individuals’ math
conceptions, and show that there is an inverse relation between
conception breadth and math anxiety. These results suggest
that math anxiety is related both to how expansive individuals
perceive math to be, and how skillful they feel at the activities
they think it could involve. Study 2 attempts an intervention on
students’ conceptions of math with a sample of middle school
students. We find the same inverse relationship in students between math conception breadth and math anxiety as found in
adults. We discuss ongoing work that further explores qualitative variation in math conceptions, and the lessons this may
hold for intervening on math anxiety.
Keywords: math anxiety, conceptual structure, intervention

Introduction
Recent U.S. initiatives in early science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) highlight the growing importance of
STEM education (e.g., White House Press Briefing, 2016),
as well as the need for professionals in those fields to better represent the population. However, multiple barriers to
an educated and diverse STEM workforce remain. One such
barrier is psychological: an estimated 25–50% of U.S. college students are math anxious (Jones, 2001; Yeager, 2012),
with women disproportionately affected (Hembree, 1990).
Math anxiety refers to the tension or fear associated with
the prospect of doing math (Ashcraft, 2002). In addition to
being associated with lower math performance, math anxiety causes math-anxious individuals to generally avoid math.
Given the national goal of broadening STEM participation,
math avoidance might be the most devastating byproduct of
anxiety about math, as it implies that math-anxious individuals will choose to end their formal math training as soon as
possible.
Here, we are interested in how individuals’ ideas of what
math is–i.e., their math conceptions—might be a factor in
their math anxiety and avoidance. “Math” can be used to refer
to a wide range of activities, involving diverse skill sets and
forms of reasoning. Individuals may differ in how they implicitly define the category of math, however, and properties
of those definitions may be linked to their math anxiety.
Of particular interest in the present studies is what we will
call the “breadth” of an individual’s math conception. Guided
by the idea that category structures can differentially license
inferences (e.g., Ross & Murphy, 1999), our studies test the

hypothesis that having a working math conception that is narrow (i.e., limited to a few branches of the math taxonomy, like
arithmetic operations and numeric notation) might facilitate
generalization of negative associations across the category. If
this makes individuals confident about disliking math, rather
than disliking only arithmetic or algebra, it could make them
wary of future topics labeled as “math” that might have otherwise been appealing. In contrast, anxiety about the math category, and any new topics that are labeled as “math,” might be
harder to maintain if it encompasses many diverse subtopics
and skills, ranging from the concrete (e.g., algebraic notation)
to the abstract (thinking about infinity). In other words, insofar as math anxiety consists of anxiety generalized across the
category of things construed as math, having a “broad” math
conception may serve as a protective factor against the propagation of math anxiety.
As a first test of these ideas, we explore whether adults and
children have different conceptions of what counts as math,
and whether individuals with broader math conceptions may
be less susceptible to math anxiety, such that math conception
breadth and math anxiety will be inversely related.

Origins of Math Anxiety
The origins of math anxiety are unclear. While research on
math anxiety is motivated in large part by its impact on math
performance, there is evidence suggesting the reverse direction of causation, as well. Much of this evidence comes from
longitudinal studies where performance in an earlier year is
more strongly correlated with math anxiety in a later year
than earlier anxiety is with later performance (see Carey, Hill,
Devine, & Szücs, 2016, for a review). The relation between
math anxiety and performance might be most accurately described as reciprocal, with early math difficulty leading to
math anxiety, and math anxiety in turn leading to low performance, via avoidant behavior and increased constraints on
processing (Carey et al., 2016).
In thinking about the relation between math conception and
anxiety, we have thus far focused on a particular direction of
causality, namely that narrow math conceptions might be a
risk factor for developing math anxiety. But one could imagine a reciprocal relationship here, too. A child could acquire a
math conception that is narrow, maybe via their early schooling, and find that they dislike or struggle with the contents of
the category of math, leading them to become math anxious.
Their math anxiety could in turn lead them to avoid engaging
with new aspects of math that they might otherwise like or ex-

2019

cel at, leading them to maintain both their narrow conception
of math and their math anxiety.
In light of recent findings that math anxiety can be transmitted between generations, it is just as important to alleviate
math anxiety in adults (i.e., so that they don’t transmit it to
children) as it is to intervene directly in children. Prior work
has found that teachers’ math anxiety may “spread” to their
students (Beilock, Gunderson, Ramirez, & Levine, 2010).
This is especially problematic because aspiring teachers with
math anxiety tend to gravitate toward teaching earlier grades,
where they will be able to engage less with math (see Hadley
& Dorward, 2011), but where they will also be interacting
with students in the early school years, when children are
most impressionable. Parents’ math anxiety can also affect
their children. In one study, children of math anxious parents
learned less during the school year than did children of non–
math-anxious parents—but only if these parents frequently
gave their children homework help (Maloney, Ramirez, Gunderson, Levine, & Beilock, 2015). Given this evidence for
the intergenerational transmission of math anxiety, our studies focus both on adults and children.

or expertise, and dilute the negative impact of components
of math that individuals have negative associations with. Related to this, we expect self-assessed skill with activities classified as involving “math” to mediate the proposed relation
between conception breadth and math anxiety. Study 1 examines the relation between math conception and math anxiety
in adults, taking subjective skill into account. Study 2 tests for
the same relation in middle-school children, within the context of a intervention study that tests the effect of broadening
math conceptions.

Study 1: Adult Math Conception & Anxiety
Study 1 examined the relation between math conception and
math anxiety in adults via an online survey composed of
seven counterbalanced blocks probing participants’ math attitudes and associations.

Stimuli & Methods

Relating Math Conceptions and Math Anxiety
In principle, individuals could have ‘math conceptions’ that
range from narrow (Math is the symbolic operations one
learns in school) to broad (Math relies on logic, spatial reasoning, and pattern recognition).
Here, we develop a new measure to characterize the
breadth of math conceptions. This measure presents participants with a diverse list of activities or topics, ranging
from “sewing” to “playing soccer” or “physics.” Participants are asked to indicate whether each item “could involve
math,” and, in some cases, to explain why. The idea is that
when asked to answer whether a given activity “could involve
math,” individuals will be encouraged to come up with some
rationale for how it could or could not involve math, and that
their flexibility in categorizing activities as “math” will depend on the breadth of their (implicit) definition of the category. The point here is not that individuals typically construe an activity like “playing soccer” as involving math. Instead, our interest is in whether individuals vary in how flexible they are in categorizing activities that are not conventionally thought of as “math” as involving math. We present a
diversity of activities to math, that can be related to math via
diverse aspects of mathematical reasoning or subtopics, thus
revealing the capacity and/or bounds of an individual’s math
conception. If an individual’s conception of math is itself
broad and diverse, we expect that it will be able to support
explanations for the math-involvement of a wide range of activities. We thus operationalize breadth of math conception
in the following studies as the number of activities that individuals say “could involve math.” In Study 1, we also ask
participants to rate their own skill at these same activities.
We hypothesize that broader math conceptions will relate
to lower math anxiety in that they will afford individuals with
more opportunities to recognize their own math engagement

Participants A total of 62 U.S. adults were recruited via
Amazon’s Mechanical Turk (31 female, 19–74 years, M =
33.24, SD = 10.25). Participants were compensated for their
participation, and the study took approximately 15 minutes to
complete.
Math Conception In one block, participants saw a randomized list of topics and activities (e.g., “architecture,”
“cooking,” “exercising”). Participants were asked to indicate
whether. . . each activity or topic listed involves math or does
not involve math. They responded by dragging each item
into one of three boxes, labeled “Math,” “Not Math,” and
“Not Sure.” The more items categorized as involving math,
the broader we considered their math conception to be (see
above). We included the item “Math” as a control.
Activity Skill In another block, participants saw the same
items in a new randomized order, and rated their skill at each
item (How good would you say you are at each of these
things?). They responded on a five-point Likert scale from
‘Not at all good’ to ‘Very good.’ We included a control item
(For this question, respond ‘Good’), as well as an opt-out
scale option (‘NA’) for participants who had no experience
with the item.
Math Anxiety We assessed participants’ math anxiety using the single item math anxiety scale (SIMA; Núñez-Peña,
Guilera, & Suárez-Pellicioni, 2013). This measure asks simply, On a scale from 1 to 10, how math anxious are you?
The SIMA has been validated on a large sample of U.S. college students. It shows the expected negative correlation with
math achievement measures, high test-retest reliability, and is
consistent with lengthier, established measures of math anxiety, like the Shortened Math Anxiety Rating Scale (sMARS;
Alexander & Martray, 1989, r = .77).
Other Measures We collected several other measures of
participants’ attitudes toward and history with math. One
block assessed participants’ “math mindset:” an analogy

2020

to intelligence mindsets made specific to math (Yeager &
Dweck, 2012). Five items probed participants’ beliefs about
the fixedness of math ability (e.g., Math is a gift: you either
have it or you don’t.), which they responded to using a fivepoint Likert scale of agreement. Two blocks consisted of a
single, open-ended question, one asking participants for an
informal definition of math (Please describe what you think
math is in the space below), and one eliciting their personal
math history (Please write a brief summary of your experience with math from childhood until now). In the final block,
we collected demographic information, including the number
of semesters of college they had completed, and a list of all
math classes they had taken.

Table 1: Descriptive statistics for four blocks in Study 1.
‘Items Categorized as Math’ is out of a total of 32, and was
analyzed as a proxy for the breadth of participants’ math conceptions. ‘Math Anxiety’ is on a 10-point self-report scale.
‘Self-Assessed Skill’ represents the mean skill rating on a 5point Likert scale, across all items for all participants. ‘Math
Mindset’ is coded to be on a 5-point scale indexing how fixed
individuals believe math ability to be, with larger values indicating more fixed mindsets.
Variable
Items Categorized as Math
Math Anxiety
Self-Assessed Skill
Math Mindset

Results & Discussion
Qualtitative Variation in Math Conceptions There was
substantial variation in the activities that participants categorized as involving math (Figure 1). All participants appropriately responded that “Math” involved math, which we took
as confirmation of their attention to the task. Items obviously
involving math were categorized as such by the vast majority
of participants (e.g., finance), while those representing related
disciplines (e.g., biology), daily activities (e.g., cooking), and
abstract, creative and language-related tasks (e.g., composing music, reading) received the fewest math-categorizations.
In a separate study, we elicited explanations for participants’
categorizations of a similar list of items. In that study, both
adults and children frequently used contrast categories (e.g.,
“No, that’s music!”), often from the humanities, to explain
why items could not involve math. This type of explanation
implies that participants perceived the categories of music,
art, and even science as exclusive with math. Such a picture
of what math is (and isn’t) is consistent with the idea of a narrow math conception, and echoes what mathematician Paul
Lockhart famously lamented as the sorry byproduct of American math education:
The first thing to understand is that mathematics is an art.
The difference between math and the other arts, such as
music and painting, is that our culture does not recognize it as such. [. . . ] Nevertheless, the fact is that there
is nothing as dreamy and poetic, nothing as radical, subversive, and psychedelic as mathematics. It is every bit
as mind-blowing as cosmology or physics (mathematicians conceived of black holes long before astronomers
actually found any), and allows for more freedom of expression than poetry, art, or music (which depend heavily on properties of the physical universe). Mathematics
is the purest of arts as well as the most misunderstood.
(Lockhart, 2009).
Math Conception & Anxiety To answer whether breadth
of math conception and math anxiety are related, we conducted a linear regression on individuals’ math anxiety and
the number of items they categorized as math, controlling
for the number of semesters of college they had completed.

M
13.10
4.44
3.28
2.13

SD
5.35
3.04
0.44
0.99

In accordance with our predictions, math anxiety was negatively related to the number of items participants categorized as math, even controlling for education (F(1, 61) = 6.44
p < .05 with an R2 of .082; see Figure 2). This supports the
idea that individuals with broader math conceptions are less
likely to experience math anxiety, and that this relation may
not be attributable to exposure to topics in math alone.
To address whether the relation between math conception
and anxiety is due in part to individuals’ perception of their
own skill at things they think might involve “math,” we analyzed self-assessed skill and anxiety. For each individual, we
took the mean skill of the items they had categorized as involving math and those they had categorized as not involving
math. We dropped items for which participants reported having had no experience. A linear regression on self-reported
skill and math anxiety revealed a significant negative correlation between math anxiety and mean self-assessed skill for
items the individual was able to relate to math (β = −1.98,
SE = 0.60, t = −3.29, p < .01), but no correlation between
math anxiety and self-assessed skill for items judged to not
involve math (β = 0.11, SE = 0.69, t = 0.154, p = .88). This
asymmetry is important because it suggests that it is not just
individuals who are less confident overall who suffer from
math anxiety—if this were the case, we would have expected
to find that lower skill related to higher anxiety for both items
judged to involve math and items judged to not involve math.
In Study 1, both the number of items construed as involving math and participants’ perceived skill at those items were
related to math anxiety. As discussed above, one of the most
dangerous features of math anxiety is its tendency to make individuals avoid math and thus fail to take advantage of opportunities to discover new aspects of mathematics they might
excel at or appreciate. The fact that mean self-assessed skill
at activities categorized as involving math was negatively related to math anxiety lends support to the idea that broad conceptions may be a protective factor in math anxiety, attenuating the impact of negative associations that individuals might
have with activities they think could involve ‘math.’ Having a

2021

between-subjects conditions, BASELINE and B ROAD. Only
participants in the B ROAD condition received an explanation
for the ways in which the activity had involved math before
completing the other assessments.
Participants A total of 80 6th, 7th, and 8th grade students
at a school in Gujarat, India participated (33 6th-graders, 7
girls; 21 7th-graders, 9 girls; 26 8th-graders, 9 girls). All 6thgrade participants were excluded for sharing answers (n =
33), leaving 47 7th-8th grade students in our sample. Participants were tested in groups of 10–15 assigned to the BASE LINE or B ROAD conditions in a classroom at their school.

Figure 1: Number of participants in Study 1 who labeled each
activity as involving math.

Origami Activity Students sat in a circle on the floor
around two experimenters who guided them through folding
an origami crane. A third experimenter circulated to answer
any questions, and students could also refer to printed, diagrammatic instructions distributed before the activity. All experimenters avoided using explicit math language during the
folding instruction (e.g., reference to “angles,” “half,” “diagonal”), opting instead for generically narrated demonstration
(e.g., “fold the paper like this”). Each student folded a paper
crane, which they got to take home.
Construal Following the origami activity, students in both
conditions answered whether the activity they just did could
involve math (Yes/No/Not Sure), and to explain why. In addition, they rated how enjoyable and difficult they had found
the activity, on a five-point Likert scale (from ‘Not at all—’
to ‘Extremely—’).

Figure 2: Plot of linear regression line showing relationship
between breadth of conception and math anxiety in Study 1,
controlling for education (α = 6.93, β = −0.18, p < .05).
broad math conception does not mean that an individual has
to feel confident and have positive associations with all activities that they think involves math, but it could mean that
negative associations with specific topics (like geometry or
algebraic notation) will have less of an impact on their associations with the category as a whole.

Study 2: Middle School Intervention
We were interested in whether students would exhibit the
same qualitative variation in math conceptions and link between breadth and anxiety that we had seen with adults in
Study 2. Additionally, as a first pass at investigating the
causal relation between math conception and anxiety, and potential educational implications, we designed a brief intervention intended to broaden students’ math conceptions.

Stimuli & Methods
Study 2 consisted of an interactive origami activity followed by four measures administered to participants in two

Intervention In the B ROAD condition–but not in the BASE LINE condition–an experimenter then gave a brief explanation
of how the origami activity involved and related to math (e.g.,
. . . you have to think about spatial relations, and things like
measurements of the different sides and angles. When designing new pieces of origami, you have to think creatively
and flexibly, and use what you already know to come to new
conclusions, like you have to do in math).
Avoidance The next measure participants completed was
intended to indirectly access their math avoidance. The survey consisted of 6 items, each asking about a different school
subject (e.g., How excited are you to learn a new topic in
[math/Hindi] class?). Participants responded on a 5-point
scale (from ‘Not at all excited’ to ‘Extremely excited’).1
Math Anxiety We administered a child math anxiety questionnaire adapted from Ramirez, Gunderson, Levine, and
Beilock (2013) by Barner et al. (2016), for use in India. The
questionnaire consisted of 16 questions regarding students’
experiences with math, which students responded to using a
5-point face scale (from ‘Not nervous at all’ to ‘Very, very
nervous’). The experimenter explained the scale and completed three warm-up questions with the students beforehand
1 Because participants were on average enthusiastic to learn new
topics in math (M = 4.29, SD = 0.94), more so even than other topics, we did not further analyze the results of this measure.

2022

Figure 3: Number of participants in Study 2 who answered
“yes” when asked whether each item could involve math.

Figure 4: Linear regression showing relationship between
breadth of conception and math anxiety in Study 2 (α = 2.10,
β = −0.02, p < .05).

Table 2: Means and standard deviations for each condition.
(a)

Condition
BASELINE
B ROAD

Concept
M
SD
20.96 7.24
24.61 5.96

(b)

Anxiety
M
SD
1.78 0.47
1.60 0.36

to ensure understanding of the measure.
Math Conception The math conception measure was a
variant of the one used in Study 1. We included 40 age- and
place-appropriate items, and adjusted the wording used in the
prompt from Study 1. Here, participants answered Could this
activity involve math? (Yes/No/Not Sure), which we anticipated would encourage flexible thinking about the items and
about math.

Figure 5: (a) Boxplot of anxiety scores by condition. (b) Boxplot of conception score by condition.

Results & Discussion
Qualitative Variation in Math Conceptions Participants
indicated that an average of 22.74 out of 40 items could involve math. As in Study 1, there was considerable variation across items in the proportion of participants who judged
them as involving math (Figure 3).
Math Conception & Anxiety Participants received an average math anxiety score of 1.69 (out of 5). We were interested again in whether math anxiety scores were related
to conception breadth, which we examined in our total sample, collapsing across condition. In middle-schoolers, as with
adults, math anxiety was negatively related to the number
of activities students categorized as math, (F(1, 44) = 4.15,
p < .05 with an adjusted R2 of 0.07; see Figure 4).
Conception Intervention We next analyzed math conception and math anxiety for our two conditions separately. If
such a brief intervention were successful, we should expect
conception scores to be higher in the B ROAD condition, and
anxiety scores to be lower. While conception and anxiety

might be slightly different in the anticipated direction between the two conditions (Table 2), the differences between
group means is not significant (as determined by one-way
ANOVAs for math conception: F(1, 45) = 3.54, p = .066,
and anxiety: F(1, 45) = 2.31, p = .14). The trend for math
conceptions in particular is promising (see Figure 5): in
the BASELINE condition, there was more spread in the
magnitude of participants’ conception scores, while those in
the B ROAD condition had generally ‘broader’ conceptions.
Thus, it may be that with a different or merely more sustained
intervention, students’ math conceptions could be broadened.
Influence of Construal Out of the 47 participants analyzed, 36 said that the origami activity could involve math.
Participants on average enjoyed the activity (M = 4.43, SD =
0.62) and did not find it difficult (M = 2.28, SD = 0.71).
This raises the possibility that we may not have found a robust intervention effect because our elicitation of construals
of the origami activity as math itself served as an intervention on breadth of conception. In particular, given that all
participants—including those in the BASELINE condition—

2023

were asked to consider whether an enjoyable and easy activity could involve math before completing any of the surveys,
they may have been primed to think more broadly and favorably of math.

Discussion & Future Directions
The above studies offer preliminary evidence for the intuition that individuals may have substantially different ideas
of what constitutes math. Here, we have introduced the idea
of math conceptions to describe these qualitatively different
definitions of the category of math, and focused especially on
their “breadth” to explain why certain types of math conceptions might make math anxiety more or less likely. Strikingly,
the measure we introduced as a proxy for the breadth of individuals’ math conceptions showed the hypothesized inverse
link to math anxiety, in both adults and children, though it
should be noted that the samples for Studies 1–2 differed in
more than age. We see the remarkable dissimilarity of the two
populations and contexts as adding strength to our results.
While this link between our measure of math conception
breadth and math anxiety is promising, we imagine there is
a great deal of additional variation among math conceptions
that could be captured in future studies. Eliciting and analyzing participants’ explanations for their categorization decisions may be one especially fruitful way to access other qualitative dimensions of math conceptions, alongside canonical
methods to access category structure, like primed similarity
judgments.
Without robust evidence for the efficacy of our intervention (Study 2), we cannot speak to the potential directionality of the math conception-anxiety relationship. Our ongoing
work is exploring this question through an interactive intervention on adults’ math conceptions, as well as an adaptation
of the math conception measure for use with young children
prior to being formally educated in math. Exploring math
conceptions in young children, as well as directly assessing
math skill in future studies with adults, will also address the
heretofore unconsidered possibility that a third variable (like
actual proficiency in math) is responsible for both responses
on our current conception measure and levels of math anxiety.
The ultimate goal of these lines of research is to understand
and describe the character of individuals’ implicit math categories, and leverage this knowledge to inform interventions
aimed at reducing math anxiety in adults and children.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the Amrit Vidlaya school in Gujarat,
India for their generosity and enthusiasm about our project
and Catherine Berner for assistance with data collection.

References
Alexander, L., & Martray, C. (1989). The development of
an abbreviated version of the Mathematics Anxiety Rating
Scale. Measurement and Evaluation in Counseling and Development, 22, 143–150.

Ashcraft, M. H. (2002). Math anxiety: Personal, educational,
and cognitive consequences. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 11(5), 181–185.
Barner, D., Alvarez, G., Sullivan, J., Brooks, N., Srinivasan,
M., & Frank, M. C. (2016). Learning mathematics in a visuospatial format: A randomized, controlled trial of mental
abacus instruction. Child Development, 1–13.
Beilock, S. L., Gunderson, E. A., Ramirez, G., & Levine,
S. C. (2010). Female teachers’ math anxiety affects girls’
math achievement. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America, 107(5), 1860–
1863.
Carey, E., Hill, F., Devine, A., & Szücs, D. (2016). The
chicken or the egg? The direction of the relationship between mathematics anxiety and mathematics performance.
Frontiers in Psychology, 6, 1–6.
Hadley, K. M., & Dorward, J. (2011). The relationship
among elementary teachers’ mathematics anxiety, mathematics instructional practices, and student mathematics
achievement. Journal of Curriculum and Instruction, 5(2),
27–44.
Hembree, R. (1990). The nature, effects, and relief of mathematics anxiety. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 21, 33–46.
Jones, W. G. (2001). Applying psychology to the teaching of
basic math: A case study. Inquiry, 6(2), 60–65.
Lockhart, P. (2009). A mathematician’s lament: How school
cheats us out of our most fascinating and imaginative art
form. Bellevue Literary Press.
Maloney, E. A., Ramirez, G., Gunderson, E. A., Levine,
S. C., & Beilock, S. L. (2015). Intergenerational effects
of parents’ math anxiety on children’s math achievement
and anxiety. Psychological Science, 26(9), 1480–1488.
Núñez-Peña, M. I., Guilera, G., & Suárez-Pellicioni, M.
(2013). The single-item math anxiety scale (SIMA): An
alternative way of measuring mathematical anxiety. Journal of Psychoeducational Assessment, 20(10), 1–12.
Ramirez, G., Gunderson, E. A., Levine, S., & Beilock, S.
(2013). Math anxiety, working memory, and math achievement in early elementary school. Journal of Cognition and
Development, 14, 187–202.
Ross, B. H., & Murphy, G. L. (1999). Food for thought:
Cross-classification and category organization in a complex
real-world domain. Cognitive Psychology, 38, 495–553.
The White House. (2016). STEM for all. Retrieved from
https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/blog/2016/02/11/stemall.
Yeager, D. S. (2012, April). Productive persistence: A practical theory of community college student success. paper
presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association. Vancouver, Canada.
Yeager, D. S., & Dweck, C. S. (2012). Mindsets that promote resilience: When students believe that personal characteristics can be developed. Educational Psychologist, 47,
302–314.

2024

