When is Likely Unlikely: Investigating the Variability of Vagueness
Kimele Persaud (kimele.persaud@rutgers.edu)*
Brian McMahan (brian.mcmahan@rutgers.edu)**
Malihe Alikhani (ma1195@cs.rutgers.edu) **
Kevin Pei (kevin.pei@rutgers.edu) *
Pernille Hemmer (pernille.hemmer@rutgers.edu)*
Matthew Stone (matthew.stone@rutgers.edu)**
Department of Psychology, 152 Frelinghuysen Road, Piscataway, NJ 08854 USA*
Department of Computer Science, 96 Frelinghuysen Road, Piscataway, NJ 08854 USA**
Abstract
An important part of explaining how people communicate is
to understand how people relate language to entities in the
world. In describing measurements, people prefer to use qualitative words like ‘tall’ without precise applicability conditions,
also known as vague words. The use of vague language varies
widely across contexts, individuals, and tasks (single reference
vs. comparisons between targets), but despite this variability, is used quite successfully. A potential strategy for using
vague language is to leverage the set of alternative descriptors to settle on the best option. To determine whether people
use this strategy, we conducted an experiment where participants picked vague words from sets of alternatives to describe
either probability or color values. We varied the set of alternatives from which participants could choose. Empirical evidence supports the hypothesis that people use the set of available options to pick vague descriptors. The theoretical implications of this work are discussed.
Keywords: Vagueness, Alternative sets, Probability, Color

Introduction
An important aspect of human communication is understanding how people use language to describe the world (Quine,
1969). In the simplest case, people use language to refer to
concrete real world objects and categories, such as trees or
humans. More interestingly, people use words such as blue,
tall, and likely to flexibly refer to indefinite ranges of continuous values across different contexts—a phenomenon known
as vagueness. Vague words vary in evoking degrees along
different kinds of dimensions (Kennedy, 2007; Kennedy &
McNally, 2010). This paper explores people’s expectations
for different classes of vague words and how they leverage
these expectations to communicate effectively.

The constrained variability of vague language
Although the use of vague language is ubiquitous in everyday
talk, it varies dramatically across communicative situations
(Budescu & Wallsten, 1987). To start, different people relate
vague words differently to the values they want to describe
(Budescu & Wallsten, 1987; Wallsten, Budescu, Rapoport,
Zwick, & Forsyth, 1986). For example, in comparable contexts, different people may use the same word to describe different values, or different words to describe the same values.

Nevertheless, meanings in context are not random: vague
words seem to always denote bounded, convex regions in the
appropriate property space (Gärdenfors, 2004). For example,
we can appeal to the convexity of color categories to explain
patterns of color naming within and across language communities (Jäger, 2010; Regier, Kay, & Khetarpal, 2007).
At the same time, individuals’ use of vague language varies
as a function of the context. People use vague words differently depending on the specific objects they need to distinguish in a situation (Van Deemter, 2006). They also use
vague words differently depending on the possible alternative
descriptions that would be appropriate (Degen, 2015). For
instance, the presence of numbers in the set of available options (e.g.[‘some’, ‘all’, ‘not all’, ‘4’]), influences the use of
the option ‘some’ (Degen & Tanenhaus, 2015). Again, there
are limits on such effects. For example, absolute terms, such
as ‘empty’, ‘flat’ and ‘straight’, are more constrained in how
they vary in context than terms that signal open-ended comparisons, such as ‘tall’ (e.g. Leffel, Xiang, & Kennedy, 2016).
Finally, vague language varies as a function of speakers’
semantic memory, as revealed by the implicit class to which
comparisons are drawn (Lassiter, 2009; Wallsten et al., 1986;
Kennedy, 2007). In the quintessential example, the word
tall is understood very differently when used to describe
a basketball player versus a toddler, and differently again
when used to describe a skyscraper versus a glass of water
(Schmidt, Goodman, Barner, & Tenenbaum, 2009). Similar
semantic effects are seen in the relationships between different cultures, environments, and their color categories (Regier,
Carstensen, & Kemp, 2016; Stickles, 2014).
Despite this constrained variability, people generally communicate successfully with vague words and prefer to use
vague language in many tasks (Van Deemter, 2012).

Characterizing the variability of vagueness
Bayesian cognitive modeling suggests accounting for these
effects in terms of expectations derived from semantic memory, the communicative context and patterns of individual
variation (Potts, Lassiter, Levy, & Frank, 2016). Conversely,

2876

it suggests we can also characterize people’s semantic and
pragmatic representations through analysis of their interpretation of vague language.
In particular, it’s natural to suppose that language users coordinate on specific interpretations in context by assuming
that speakers have chosen the most informative description
from the available alternatives in light of their expectations.
Although several models predict that interpretations of vague
language will vary in this way (Potts et al., 2016; Wallsten
et al., 1986), empirical evidence supporting this hypothesis is
thin.
To investigate this hypothesis, we conducted a forced
choice experiment where subjects selected one of a small
number of linguistic alternatives to describe a value. Critically, as we varied the number of alternative descriptions, we
provided a reject option (i.e. ‘none of the above’) to measure limits in flexibility of vague terms. Despite a large range
of related work, no previous studies have addressed this issue
explicitly. We compared performance in the forced choice experiment to a free generate task where participants provided
their own words to describe values.
We hypothesize that two possible behaviors may arise.
When presented with different sets of alternative descriptions,
people may flexibly use the same vague word to refer to different ranges of values. In contrast, people may consistently
use vague words to describe the same values regardless of
the alternative set of words, instead choosing rejection when
preferred options are unavailable.
To foreshadow, we find evidence for both patterns, depending on semantic domain. Probability descriptions vary widely
depending on the alternative terms presented to subjects, but
color terms vary much less. These results suggest that, although individuals representations of the meaning of some
vague words are broadly stable, speakers do adjust boundaries within the available range to give the most information
in context. 1 We outline empirical and theoretical consequences of this finding for future work, emphasizing the need
to characterize individual differences and contextual variation
jointly, as well as the need to explicitly contrast speaker models based on strategic and heuristic choice.

Experiment
To assess the role of the set of available terms in constraining
vague language, we elicit labeling behavior in a task where
participants are shown a property value (i.e. probability and
hue), and are asked to either choose a corresponding label
from a given set of options (N-AFC), or freely generate a label that corresponds to the presented value. In the N-AFC
cases, we expect that the distributions will reflect peoples
willingness (or lack of willingness) to “stretch” their category assignment of values based on available terms. In the
1 In

fact, models of informativeness are often operationalized in
terms of ruling out competing referential interpretations (Frank &
Goodman, 2012). The only way to apply such models to our experiment is with the trivial assumption that all true descriptions are
equally informative.

FR3000 wants to talk about whether or not
events will occur!
You will be shown a spinner that is able to land
in one location in the circle. Your job is to help
FR30000 can talk about uncertain situations!
Describe the probability of the spinner landing
in the gray area.

FR3000 wants to talk about colors!
In the next scene, you will be shown a color
patch. Your job is to describe the color so
FR3000 can talk about this color in the future.
Describe the color of the patch.

Help FR3000 answer this question:
How likely is it that the spinner will land in the
dark gray area?
“It is ___that the spinner will land in the area.”

Help FR3000 answer this question:
What color is this square patch?
“The color of this square patch is _________.”
Red
Green
Blue
None of the above

Figure 1: Sample stimuli for the two tasks: Probability (left

two panels) and color (right two panels).
free generate cases, we expect that the distributions will reflect people’s natural tendencies of assigning terms to values.

Methods
Participants Three-hundred and sixty individuals from the
Amazon Mechanical Turk research pool participated in this
study for monetary compensation.
Materials Color. The stimuli for the color condition
consisted of 60 equally spaced values sampled from the
winHSV240 (hue, saturation, and value) color space. The
colors varied along the full range of the hue dimension, while
saturation and value were held constant at 90%.2 The set of
available vague color words included seven of the eleven universal color terms (red, orange, yellow, green, blue, purple,
and pink; Berlin & Kay, 1969). To create different conditions, we incrementally increased the number of color words
available for participants to choose from - starting with three
terms and ending with seven terms. We also included a free
generate (see Table 1) condition resulting in six conditions
for color in total. In addition to the AFCs for each condition, there was also a reject option, indicating that the color
value was not described by any of the available color words.
The color space was stratified into six regions, so that each
participant only saw one stimuli from each region at equal intervals.This design ensured that participants were presented
with values that spanned the entire property range.
Probability. The stimuli for the probability conditions also
consisted of 60 equally spaced probability values on the range
of 0-1. The vague probability words that could be used to describe the values were selected from a norming phase with
a separate set of participants (N=32). The norming participants were simply asked to provide labels for randomly generated probability values. The six most frequently generated
terms were then used here. To match the structure of the color
task, the probability task was also comprised of six condi2 Saturation and value were held constant to reduce the dimensionality of color space and to understand how people use color
words to partition the range of hue values. This procedure is common practice when assessing expectations for basic color categories
(Persaud & Hemmer, 2016; Sims, Ma, Allred, Lerch, & Flombaum,
2016)

2877

Table 1: List of Available Vague Words by Condition

Condition
1
2
3
4
5
6

Probability
[UL] unlikely, likely
[ULV] unlikely, likely, very unlikely, very likely

Color
[3-TERM] red, green, blue
[4-TERM] red, green, blue, yellow

[ULS] unlikely, likely, somewhat unlikely,
somewhat likely
[VS] very unlikely, very likely, somewhat likely,
somewhat unlikely
[ULVS] unlikely, likely, very unlikely, very likely,
somewhat unlikely, somewhat likely
[FG] free generate

tions ranging from two alternative forced choices (AFC) to
six AFCs, and a free generate condition (see Table 1). The
option to reject was present in all conditions. The probability
space was stratified into six regions, so that each participant
only saw one stimuli from each region at equal intervals.

[5-TERM] red, green, blue, yellow, purple
[6-TERM] red, green, blue, yellow, purple, orange
red, green, blue, yellow, purple,
orange, pink
[FG] free generate

[7-TERM]

each probability word, we used a single lme model and compared it to the null. We started with a null model of participants and stimuli order and then added condition as a predictor in the alternate models. The null model predicts no
difference in the assignment of probability words to values
across conditions and the alternate models predict the opposite. Model fit was assessed using a likelihood-ratio test
to compare the hypotheses of the null and alternate models. Condition was significant for probability words:likely
(β = 66.33, SE = 3.01), unlikely (β = 21.03, SE = 2.84), and
somewhat likely (β = 47.67, SE = 4.72). Model comparisons
for each of these words favored the alternate models (likely:
χ2 (4) = 36.77, p < .0001, unlikely: χ2 (4) = 26.89, p <
.0001, and somewhat likely: χ2 (4) = 9.41, p = .02). Planned
pairwise comparisons were conducted to identify the conditions where the probability values differed for each word. For
readability, we use codes to refer to the specific conditions
(See Table 1 for the condition codes and probability terms
available in each condition). Results showed a significant difference in the mean values for likely in the UL and ULV conditions (p < .001); ULV and ULS conditions (p < 0.001);
and ULS and VS conditions (p = 0.02). See Figure 4, left
panel, for a visualization of the cumulative changes in values
for likely across AFC conditions.

Procedure Participants were told that they would be helping a robot to understand the meaning of vague words by
assigning the words to different property values. Participants were first presented with a set of instructions describing the stimuli and the task. For the probability task, they
were shown a pie chart with an arrow called a spinner and
a shaded region denoting a probability value (Figure 1, top
panels). They were informed that their job was to either pick
from a given set of words or generate a word that described
the likelihood of the spinner landing in the shaded region of
the pie. For the color task, participants were presented with a
single color patch and were asked to either choose one of the
given color words or generate a word to describe the color
Figure 1, bottom panels). Each set of instructions was provided immediately before the task that they described. Each
participant described 12 unique property values (6 probability values and 6 hue values). The conditions and presentation
order of values were randomized across participants.

Results
Probability Results We assessed whether or not participants consistently used the probability words to describe the
same probability values across conditions (see Figures 2 and
3, left column), via linear mixed-effects models (lme) using
the lme4 package in R (Bates, Mächler, Bolker, & Walker,
2015). LME models test for significant differences in responses within experimental groups of primary interest (i.e.
condition), while accounting for variability that results from
factors that are experimentally uncontrolled (e.g. subjects).
We followed up the modelling with planned pair-wise comparisons between conditions using a Tukey post hoc analysis, which corrects for family-wise error rates. In the LME
models, subjects and stimuli order were always treated as
random effects, while condition was treated as fixed. Probability and hue values were treated as the dependent measure and condition was treated as an indicator variable. For

Comparisons show that the probability values assigned to
unlikely differed in the ULV and FG conditions (p < 0.01);
UL and ULV conditions (p = 0.01); and ULS and ULV
conditions (p < 0.001). See Figure 4, right panel, for a visualization of the cumulative changes in values for unlikely
across AFC conditions. A difference in mean values for
somewhat likely was observed in the ULVS and VS conditions (p < 0.01); and a marginal difference inULVS and FG
conditions (p = .055). We also calculated the percentage of
reject option responses in each N-AFC probability condition.
In the order of Table 1, the reject option constituted 4%, 1%,
1%, 1%, and 1% of the responses. Taken together, the results
suggest that not only are the assignment of probability words
to values influenced by the set of alternative descriptions that
could have been used, but also that the space of probability
values do not have a strict partitioning. In other words, a
varying number of probability terms can be flexibly used to

2878

UL

3-TERM
blue
green
red
none of
the above

unlikely
likely
none of
the above

ULV

4-TERM

unlikely
likely
very unlikely
very likely
none of
the above

blue
green
yellow
red
none of
the above

ULS

5-TERM
purple
blue
green
yellow
red
none of
the above

unlikely
likely
somewhat unlikely
somewhat likely
none of
the above
unlikely
likely
very unlikely
very likely
somewhat unlikely
somewhat likely
none of
the above
very unlikely
very likely
somewhat unlikely
somewhat likely
none of
the above
0.00

0.25

ULVS

6-TERM

VS

7-TERM

0.50

0.75

1.00 0

Probability Values

60

purple
blue
green
yellow
orange
red
none of
the above

pink
purple
blue
green
yellow
orange
red
none of
120 180 240 300 360 the above

Hue Values

Figure 2: Responses from the N-AFC conditions. Labels on the y-axis were the options available to the participants and the

x-axis shows the stimuli values. L EFT PANEL : For each plot, the probability terms selected vs. probability values presented to
participants. R IGHT PANEL : For each plot, the color terms selected vs. the hue values presented to participants.
describe different values in probability space.
Color Results The most notable difference between the
two domains is that the reject option was selected at a much
higher rate for color than probability. In the order of Table
1, the reject option constituted 36%, 31%, 14%, 9%, and 3%
of the responses for each N-AFC color condition. Like in
the probability analysis, we used linear mixed-effects models

to assess whether participants consistently used color words
to describe hue values across conditions (see Figures 2 and 3,
right column). Interestingly, model comparisons only favored
the alternate model for the color purple. Again for readability, we use codes to refer to the specific conditions (see Table 1). Planned pairwise comparisons revealed the conditions
where hue values for purple were different: 5-TERM and FG
conditions (p < .01) and 5-TERM and 7-TERM conditions

2879

Free Generate (FG)

Free Generate (FG)
magenta
pink
purple
blue
sky blue
light blue
teal
green
lime green
yellow
orange
red

extremely likely
very likely
somewhat likely
possible
somewhat unlikely
likely
not likely
not very likely
unlikely
very unlikely
0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

Probability Values

0.8

1.0

0

60

120

180

Hue Values

240

300

360

Figure 3: Responses from the free generate conditions. The y-axis shows the set of labels freely generated more than 5

Cumulative Normalized Frequency

times and the x-axis show the presented values. Probability responses are presented in the left panel and color responses
are presented on the right.
likely, unlikely

very unlikely, unlikely, likely, very likely

unlikely, somewhat unlikely, somewhat likely, likely

1.0

Likely

Unlikely

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

Probability Stimuli

0.8

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

Probability Stimuli

0.8

1.0

Figure 4: Cumulative frequency curves for likely and unlikely across the AFC conditions. The curves show the relative rates

of people using likely (on the left) and unlikely (on the right) probability terms given the alternative sets of probability words
in each condition.
(p < .01). Importantly, there were no significant differences
in the mean hue values for the remaining colors across conditions (i.e. red, green, blue, yellow, orange, and pink). The
results suggest that, unlike some probability words, the assignment of color words to hue values are inflexible and are
not influenced by the set of alternative descriptions that were
offered to participants. Instead, participants assignments reflect that their preference for color categories already takes
into account an alternative set of other color categories. This
is further supported by the high rates of the reject option use
in the conditions with fewer options for color descriptions.

vealed two interestingly opposing behaviors for probability
and color.

Discussion

For probability, words varied in their assignment to probability values when other vague terms were available. For
example, likely was assigned to a different set of probability
values in the UL condition where only unlikely was available,
relative to the ULV condition where very likely and very unlikely were also available or the ULS condition where somewhat likely was available. In contrast, for color, the assignment of vague words to color values was much more rigid.
In fact, purple was the only color that varied across conditions. Other words had relatively well-defined categories that
did not overlap.

In this paper, we investigated how people assign vague words
to probability and color values as a function of the set of available alternatives. We measured this behavior in two tasks
where participants either selected a vague word from a fixed
set or freely generated a word to describe values. Results re-

The results suggest that for probability, people are adopting the strategy of using the set of available terms to constrain variability. This is consistent with the well-known
framing effect (Tversky & Kahneman, 1986) where decisions/preferences change as a function of how options are

2880

presented. For color, however, they are not adopting this strategy.
There are two potential reasons why this may be. First, the
set of color words used in the task are already constrained to
the basic universal color categories. It is possible that people
are more flexible when the vague color word is not drawn
from the 11 universal terms. For example, teal, which was
a freely generated response might shift in its assignment to
color values depending on the available options. If blue is
present in the set, teal might be selected for more greenish
hues, and if green is in the set, teal might be selected for
bluish hues. Alternatively, it could be that probability words
encode a relative comparison in a way that color words do not
(Leffel et al., 2016), and this semantic difference stabilizes
the interpretations of color words in context. In other words,
color terms come with an intrinsic range of applicability, not
just a prototypical or ideal instance of the term.
A possible limitation of this work is in the finding that the
distributions for most probability terms are very broad and
overlapping (See Figure 2), which might be due to either individual differences or the context provided by the alternative
sets manipulation. The current methodology is insufficient
to distinguish between these. One way we could assess this
would be to build generative statistical models which simulate the behavior of the participants under the two possible
stories and compare the simulations to the empirical data. At
the same time, this work lays the groundwork for examining
future questions such as: how do you represent the applicability of words like likely in ways that explain their constrained
variability? And how do speakers combine their sense of
what would be a good description with factors like their expectations about how a description will be interpreted?

Acknowledgements
This work is based upon a project supported by the National
Science Foundation grant 1526723, the National Science
Foundation Career grant number 1453276, and partially supported by National Science Foundation Graduate Research
Fellowship under Grant Number NSF DGE 0937373.

References
Bates, D., Mächler, M., Bolker, B., & Walker, S. (2015). Fitting linear mixed-effects models using lme4. Journal
of Statistical Software.
Berlin, B., & Kay, P. (1969). Basic color terms: Their university and evolution. California UP.
Budescu, D. V., & Wallsten, T. S. (1987). Subjective estimation of precise and vague uncertainties. Judgmental
forecasting, 63–81.
Degen, J. (2015). Investigating the distribution of some
(but not all) implicatures using corpora and web-based
methods. Semantics and Pragmatics, 1–55.
Degen, J., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (2015). Processing scalar
implicature: A constraint-based approach. Cognitive
Science, 667–710.

Frank, M. C., & Goodman, N. D. (2012). Predicting pragmatic reasoning in language games. Science, 998–998.
Gärdenfors, P. (2004). Conceptual spaces: The geometry of
thought.
Jäger, G. (2010). Natural color categories are convex sets. In
Logic, language and meaning. Springer.
Kennedy, C. (2007). Vagueness and grammar: The semantics
of relative and absolute gradable adjectives. Linguistics
and philosophy, 1–45.
Kennedy, C., & McNally, L. (2010). Color, context, and
compositionality. Synthese, 79–98.
Lassiter, D. (2009). Vagueness as probabilistic linguistic
knowledge. In International workshop on vagueness
in communication.
Leffel, T., Xiang, M., & Kennedy, C. (2016). Imprecision
is pragmatic: Evidence from referential processing. In
(pp. 836–854).
Persaud, K., & Hemmer, P. (2016). The dynamics of fidelity
over the time course of long-term memory. Cognitive
Psychology, 1–21.
Potts, C., Lassiter, D., Levy, R., & Frank, M. C. (2016).
Embedded implicatures as pragmatic inferences under
compositional lexical uncertainty. Journal of Semantics, 755–802.
Quine, W. V. (1969). Word and object. Cambridge, Mass.
Regier, T., Carstensen, A., & Kemp, C. (2016). Languages support efficient communication about the environment: Words for snow revisited. PLOS ONE.
Regier, T., Kay, P., & Khetarpal, N. (2007). Color naming
reflects optimal partitions of color space. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, 1436–1441.
Schmidt, L. A., Goodman, N. D., Barner, D., & Tenenbaum,
J. B. (2009). How tall is tall? compositionality, statistics, and gradable adjectives. In Proceedings of the 31st
annual conference of the cognitive science society.
Sims, C. R., Ma, Z., Allred, S. R., Lerch, R. A., & Flombaum,
J. I. (2016). Exploring the cost function in color perception and memory: An information-theoretic model
of categorical effects in color matching. Proceedings
of the 38th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society.
Stickles, R. T., Elise. (2014). The relation of color naming
and the environment. In Cogsci.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1986). Rational choice and the
framing of decisions. Journal of Business, 251–278.
Van Deemter, K. (2006). Generating referring expressions
that involve gradable properties. Comput. Linguist.,
195–222.
Van Deemter, K. (2012). Not exactly: In praise of vagueness.
Oxford University Press.
Wallsten, T. S., Budescu, D. V., Rapoport, A., Zwick, R., &
Forsyth, B. (1986). Measuring the vague meanings
of probability terms. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 348.

2881

