When does a ‘visual proof by induction’ serve a proof-like function in mathematics?
Josephine Relaford-Doyle (jorelafo@ucsd.edu)
Rafael Núñez (rnunez@ucsd.edu)
Department of Cognitive Science, University of California – San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093 USA
Abstract

Although the status of visual proofs is at the center of a
debate in the philosophy of mathematics (see, e.g., Brown,
2010; Doyle,	   Kutler,	   Miller,	   &	   Schueller,	   2014;	   Folina,	  
1999), they have been largely ignored within Cognitive
Science and little is known about the nature of reasoning
with these images. How do viewers reason with a visual
proof by induction? Do they consider the conclusions to be
certain, as in mathematical induction, or only likely, as in
standard inductive reasoning?	  

A proof by mathematical induction demonstrates that a
general theorem is necessarily true for all natural numbers. It
has been suggested that some theorems may also be proven
by a ‘visual proof by induction’ (Brown, 2010), despite the
fact that the image only displays particular cases of the
general theorem. In this study we examine the nature of the
conclusions drawn from a visual proof by induction. We find
that, while most university-educated viewers demonstrate a
willingness to generalize the statement to nearby cases not
depicted in the image, only viewers who have been trained in
formal proof strategies show significantly higher resistance to
the suggestion of large-magnitude counterexamples to the
theorem. We conclude that for most university-educated
adults without proof-training the image serves as the basis of
a standard inductive generalization and does not provide the
degree of certainty required for mathematical proof.

Induction in Mathematics,
Mathematical Induction, and Visual Proofs

Keywords: mathematical reasoning; proof; mathematical
induction; visual proof; induction; generalization

Introduction
Mathematics has been defined as “the science which draws
necessary conclusions” (Peirce, 1881). To this end, proofs
are indispensible to formal mathematics. A mathematical
proof uses deductive logic to establish the truth of a general
theorem – for instance, that a property holds for all
triangles, or all natural numbers. Relative to the logical
system being used, the conclusion of the proof is certain; if
the premises are true, then the conclusion is necessarily true
as well. The certainty of results obtained through formal,
deductive proof is a defining feature of mathematics.
Mathematical induction, despite what its name suggests,
is a well-established deductive proof method that can be
used to prove that a theorem holds for all natural numbers. It
has been suggested that some general theorems that can be
formally proved using mathematical induction may also be
proved using specially designed images known as ‘visual
proofs’ (Brown, 2010). The claim that a ‘visual proof by
induction’ can prove a general theorem is an interesting one,
since any image is necessarily finite and thus can only
display a particular set of cases of the theorem. Case-based
argumentation falls under the umbrella of inductive
reasoning, which does not provide certain conclusions and
is not accepted in formal mathematical justification.
However, visual proofs contain additional structure that
could be leveraged to demonstrate that a theorem
necessarily holds in all cases, even those not depicted in the
image. Thus, it is possible that a visual proof, despite
displaying only a finite number of cases, could serve a
proof-like function for some viewers.

The distinction between certain, necessary conclusions and
probable or likely conclusions is of central concern in
mathematics. Proofs – deductive arguments which provide
certain conclusions – are exalted. The writing of proofs,
however, comprises only a small part of mathematical
practice, and it is widely acknowledged that inductive
reasoning plays an important role in mathematics (see
Polya, 1954 for an account of induction in mathematics). A
commonly held view is that inductive reasoning is an
essential part of mathematical discovery, while deduction is
required for formal mathematical justification (i.e., proof).
Consider the expressions in Figure 1(a). One might notice
a pattern in these examples, namely, that when one adds
consecutive odd numbers starting at 1, the resulting sum
seems to be the square of the number of terms being added.
We might guess that this pattern holds for other numbers;
for example, we might predict that the sum of the first 8 odd
numbers is 64. However, while these six examples allowed
us to discover a possible relationship, the examples
themselves do not prove that the general theorem is true for
all natural numbers. Without a formal proof, any conjecture
we have is uncertain and remains open to the possibility of
counterexamples. A formal proof of our theorem using
mathematical induction is given in Figure 1(b).
Figure 1(c) shows a visual proof of the same theorem
(from Brown, 1997). In the image, consecutive odd numbers
of dots are arranged in layers, beginning with 1 in the lower
left-hand corner. When the dots in the first n layers are
considered together the resulting array forms a square, and
so the total number of dots in the array is given by n2. While
the image displays only the first six cases of the general
theorem, a viewer might be inclined to guess that the pattern
will continue to hold as more layers are added, and therefore
be convinced that the general theorem is true. Indeed,
images such as these have been described as “rapidly and
deeply convincing” (Doyle et al., 2014).

1004

Theorem: The sum of the first n odd numbers is equal to n2.
(a) Six cases
(b) Proof by mathematical induction
(c) Visual Proof
Theorem: 1 + 3 + … + (2n – 1) = n2
1 = 12
Base case: n = 1 à 1 = 12
2
1+3=4=2
Inductive step: Assume 1 + 3 + …+ (2k – 1) = k2,
2
1+3+5=9=3
for some fixed number k. Adding the next odd
1 + 3 + 5 + 7 = 16 = 42
number 2k + 1 to both sides of the equation, we
1 + 3 + 5 + 7 + 9 = 25 = 52
have: 1 + 3 + … + (2k – 1) + (2k + 1) = k2 + (2k +1)
2
1 + 3 + 5 + 7 + 9 + 11 = 36 = 6
Re-writing the last odd term and factoring the right
side gives us:
1 + 3 + …+ (2k – 1) + [2(k+1) – 1] = (k + 1)2, QED
Figure 1: Varying forms of evidence for a general theorem. (a) Specific cases suggest, but do not prove, the general theorem.
(b) Formal proof of the general theorem by mathematical induction. (c) Visual proof (from Brown, 1997).
It is unclear, however, the exact nature of the conclusions
drawn from the visual proof. As many have pointed out, any
image is necessarily finite and thus can only display
particular cases of a general theorem (Doyle et al., 2014;
Rips & Asmuth, 2007). This would suggest that the image
in Figure 1(c), like the cases presented in 1(a), would serve
as the basis for a standard inductive generalization – the
image might convince the viewer that the theorem likely
holds for all natural numbers, but cannot provide certainty.
On the other hand, the image contains structure that is not
available in the same cases presented numerically, and
which could be exploited in order to demonstrate that the
property would necessarily continue to hold for values not
depicted in the image. Such an argument would need to
demonstrate that the square shape is preserved if and only if
the next layer contains the next consecutive odd number of
dots. For example, if we start with an n x n square, the (n +
1)st layer could be constructed by copying the nth layer and
translating the copy up one unit and right one unit (Figure
2a, b). This results in two vacant positions that must be
filled in order to maintain the square shape (Figure 2c, d).
Thus, every layer must contain exactly two more dots than
its predecessor. Since the difference between any two
consecutive odd numbers is 2, we can conclude that the new
layer must contain the next consecutive odd number of dots.

Though not a traditional deductive proof, it could be
argued that an argument such as this does establish the truth
of the general theorem for all natural numbers, and that this
conclusion meets the level of certainty required for
mathematical proof. It is unknown how accessible such
arguments are to viewers, and, more generally, how closely
the conclusions drawn from the visual proof resemble the
conclusions drawn from a formal proof. In this study we
seek to assess the extent to which a visual proof may serve a
proof-like function. Specifically, we ask two key questions:
(1) Given the visual proof, do viewers generalize the
theorem to cases not depicted in the image? (2) If so, is that
conclusion considered certain, as in mathematical induction,
or only likely, as in standard inductive reasoning?
Finally, to properly address these questions we consider
who is viewing the image and in what context the image is
viewed. In this study we compare two groups of viewers,
one drawn from the general population of university
students and one drawn from a group that has received
university-level training in formal proofs, including
mathematical induction. Additionally, to address the key
theoretical difference in mathematics between discovery (in
which inductive reasoning is acceptable) and justification
(in which it is not), we manipulate the context in which the
image is viewed by varying the amount of information
provided to the viewer.

Method
Participants
(a)

(b)

(c)
(d)
Figure 2: Rigorous image-based argument for the general
theorem

Two groups were drawn from distinct populations. The first
group (n = 25) was recruited through the university subject
pool. None of these participants had taken a university-level
course on mathematical proofs, and so we refer to this group
as “proof-untrained” (PU). The second group (n = 24) was
recruited through the mathematics department and consisted
of individuals who had received at least a B- in
“Mathematical Reasoning”, a university-level mathematics
course on formal proof strategies including mathematical
induction. We refer to this group as “proof-trained” (PT).
PT participants had taken significantly more university-level
math classes than had PU participants (mean PT = 6.67,

1005

mean PU = 2.8, t = 6.58, df = 44.63, p < 0.001). No PU
participants had taken the “Math Reasoning” course on
proofs (but four of the 25 indicated familiarity with
mathematical induction).

Materials
Each participant received one of three tasks. All three tasks
included the visual proof in Figure 1(c), which was designed
to prove the target statement “The sum of the first n odd
numbers is equal to n2”, but varied in the amount of
information that was provided to the reader.
Condition A – Justification: The participant was given the
full target statement and the visual proof. They were asked
to explain how the picture shows that the statement is true.
Condition B – Supported Discovery: The participant was
given the visual proof and a fill-in-the-blank version of the
target statement (“The sum of the first n odd numbers is
equal to ______.”). They were asked to fill in the blank and
explain how they got their answer.
Condition C – Full Discovery: The participant was given the
visual proof and told that a mathematician drew the picture
while trying to prove a statement about the sum of odd
numbers. They were asked to guess what the mathematician
was trying to prove and explain their answer.
Additionally, participants completed a background
questionnaire in which they provided the number and names
of university math courses they had taken and their level of
familiarity with mathematical induction.

Procedure
Each participant received one of the three task sheets, and
the researcher explained that their ultimate task was to
create a short tutorial video in which they would explain
their response as clearly as possible to potential third-party
viewers.
A camera was set up directly above the
participant’s workspace, recording their writing, speech, and
manual gestures (Figure 3). Before filming their video each
participant was given as much time as they needed to think
and plan their response. During this time participants had
access to pencils, highlighters, and blank paper, and were
free to add any markings to the sheet that might be helpful
in explaining their response. The participant indicated they

were ready to start their tutorial video by placing a sign
under the camera, and then filmed their explanation. The
planning and filming were entirely self-paced and occurred
without the researcher present.
When the participant indicated that they had finished their
tutorial video, the researcher returned to the room and
conducted a semi-structured interview with the participant.
To assess whether the participant had generalized the target
statement to cases not depicted in the image, any participant
who demonstrated understanding of the target statement was
asked two questions: “Do you think the statement is true in
all cases?” (Q1) and “What would be the sum of the first 8
odd numbers?” (Q2). If the participant indicated
generalization to nearby cases (by answering “yes” and
“64”, respectively), the researcher raised the possibility that
large-magnitude counterexamples to the statement may exist
and asked the participant what they thought about that
suggestion. Any participant who resisted the suggestion of
counterexamples was asked how they would argue against
such a possibility. After the interview all participants
completed the background questionnaire.

Analysis
Two coders scored each video for six distinct outcomes. The
participant’s tutorial video received three scores:
(a) Mathematical Statement: Rated whether the participant
demonstrated understanding of the target statement.
(b) Explanation Strategy: Rated whether the participant
gave a case-based explanation (using the image to show
particular cases of the statement), or a pattern-based
explanation (describing a general pattern in the image).
(c) Relevant Features of Image: Reflected which features of
the image the participant identified as relevant, including
odd numbers in layers, square shape, possibility of pattern
extension, and necessity of pattern extension.
An additional three scores were given based on the
interview portion of the study.
(d) Generalization: Rated whether the participant
demonstrated generalization of the target statement to
nearby cases as assessed by questions Q1 and Q2.
(e) Resistance to Counterexamples: Rated the participant’s
resistance to the possibility of large-magnitude
counterexamples, ranging from no resistance (0) to
complete rejection (5).
(f) Image-Based Argument: Rated whether the participant
provided a rigorous image-based argument comparable to
the argument represented in Figure 2.
For nominal criteria (a)-(d) and (f), the two coders
showed 96.2% agreement (Cohen’s Kappa=0.96). Criterion
(e) was was scored on 1-5 scale and also showed high
reliability between coders (Krippendorff’s alpha = 0.894).

Results
Figure 3: Screenshot from video footage of a participant’s
workspace

The two groups differed with respect to the ability to
demonstrate understanding of the target statement across
conditions. While proof-trained (PT) participants
systematically demonstrated such understanding, proof-

1006

untrained (PU) participants’ ability to do so varied
significantly across conditions (Fisher Exact test, p = 0.012;
Figure 4). All PU participants showed understanding of the
target statement when it was provided (Condition A), but
only 6/8 participants provided the target response of n2 in
Condition B, and 3/9 participants generated the complete
target statement in Condition C. PT participants, on the
other hand, did not significantly vary in their likelihood to
demonstrate understanding of the target statement across
conditions (Fisher Exact test, p = 0.3; Figure 4).

resistance
to
large-magnitude
counterexamples
(characterized by a resistance score of 4 or higher), and only
one stated that counterexamples were impossible (Figure
6b). Notably, questionnaire responses revealed that three of
the five PU participants who showed high resistance were
familiar with mathematical induction. When asked for an
argument against counterexamples, only two PU
participants were able to generate a rigorous argument based
on the image. PU participants had taken significantly fewer
university-level math courses than had PT participants;
however, number of math courses was not significantly
correlated to any study outcomes for the PU group.

Proof-Trained (PT) Group Across all conditions there
were 22 PT participants who demonstrated understanding of
the target statement. These participants were significantly
more likely than PU participants to provide pattern-based
explanations (Fisher Exact test, p = 0.026), with only 2/22
(9%) relying on case-based strategies (Figure 5). PT
participants were significantly more likely than PU
participants to mention the square shape as a relevant
feature of the image (21/22; Fisher Exact test p < 0.001). In
the interview, all 22 PT participants who demonstrated
understanding of the target statement indicated a willingness
to generalize the statement to nearby cases not depicted in
the image. The likelihood to generalize did not differ
between PT and PU participants (Figure 6a); however, PT
individuals were significantly more likely to indicate a high
degree of resistance to the suggestion of large-magnitude
counterexamples (17/22; Fisher Exact test, p = 0.008; Figure
6b). When considering all participants who demonstrated
understanding of the target statement, PT participants were
significantly more likely to provide a rigorous image-based
argument against counterexamples than PU participants
(8/22; Fisher Exact test, p = 0.035).

Figure 4: Proportion of participants who demonstrated
understanding of target statement.
Of the 17 total PU participants across all conditions who
demonstrated understanding of the target statement, 10
(59%) used case-based explanations in their tutorial video
(Figure 5); notably, none of these 10 participants referred to
the square shape as a relevant feature of the image during
their explanation. Explanation strategy varied significantly
across conditions, with participants in Condition A showing
a stronger preference for case-based strategies, while
participants in Condition C were more likely to generate
pattern-based explanations (Fisher Exact test, p = 0.026) and
more likely to mention the square shape (p = 0.026). As we
found no other significant effects of task context, in the
following analysis we group participants across all
conditions who demonstrated understanding of the target
statement, keeping PU and PT groups separate.

Figure 5: Explanation Strategy: PU participants were
significantly more likely than PT participants to give casebased (rather than pattern-based) explanations.

Proof-Untrained (PU) Group In the interview, 16 of
the 17 (94.1%) PU participants who demonstrated
understanding of the target statement indicated a willingness
to generalize the statement to nearby cases (Figure 6a). Only
5 (31%) of these participants indicated a high degree of

1007

Figure 6: (a) Participants in both groups generalized the
target statement to nearby cases. (b) However, PT
participants showed significantly higher resistance to largemagnitude counterexamples than did PU participants.

Discussion
The present study explored the conditions in which a visual
proof by induction may serve a proof-like function,
characterized by generalization to all natural numbers and a
belief that this conclusion is necessarily true. Our findings
reveal significantly different outcomes for the proof-trained
and proof-untrained participants. Specifically, while both
groups demonstrated a willingness to generalize to nearby
cases, the PU participants showed relatively low resistance
to the suggestion that large-magnitude counterexamples
may exist. This suggests that for these viewers the visual
proof serves as the basis for a standard inductive
generalization, and does not provide certainty. Further
evidence for this analysis comes from the observation that
PU participants were significantly more likely to provide
case-based explanations, using the image to demonstrate
one or more particular cases of the general theorem. PT
participants, on the other hand, showed higher resistance to
counterexamples and were more likely than PU participants
to provide a rigorous argument using the image. Thus, it
seems that the image can serve a proof-like function for
viewers who have been trained in formal proof methods.
The significant differences between the PT and PU groups
contradict claims that visual proofs by induction are equally
convincing to all viewers regardless of their knowledge of
mathematical induction (Brown, 2010), or that interpreting
the image as a proof requires only “basic secondary school
knowledge of mathematics” (Jamnik, 2001).
We were surprised to find that the PU participants –
highly educated adults enrolled at a prestigious university –
often overlooked key features of the visual proof. Less than
60% of the PU participants who demonstrated
understanding of the target statement mentioned the square
shape as a relevant feature of the image. Furthermore, many
participants who re-drew the image during their explanation
did so in a way that violated the row-column structure of the
square array (Figure 7), indicating that they were truly
unaware of its importance. However, failure to notice the
relevance of the square shape does not explain the PU
group’s low resistance to counterexamples, as mentioning
the square shape was not significantly related to high
resistance (Fisher Exact test, p = 0.59) within this group.

Figure 7: Work of PU participants who re-drew the image
in a way that violated the row-column structure and square
shape of the array

There were 5 PU participants who expressed a high
degree of resistance to the suggestion of large-magnitude
counterexamples, two of whom were unfamiliar with
mathematical induction. We cannot conclude, however, that
the image was serving a proof-like function for these
viewers. Prior research has shown that adults do not reliably
distinguish between inductive and deductive mathematical
arguments and often accept case-based arguments as valid
proofs of statements about infinite sets (Eliaser, 2000;
Martin & Harel, 1989). Thus, even if the image functions as
a basis for a standard inductive generalization, we would
nonetheless expect to see a group of participants who find it
highly convincing.
PT participants were more likely than PU participants to
show high resistance to counterexamples, and subsequently
more likely to provide a rigorous image-based argument for
the general theorem. What accounts for these differences?
One possibility is that PT participants had been exposed to
significantly more university-level mathematics than PU
participants. However, the number of university math
classes taken prior to participation in the study was not
related to any outcome for either group. This suggests that
the differences between the two groups cannot be explained
simply based on differing amounts of exposure to general
mathematics. Instead, it seems that training in proof-writing
– a specific and highly technical mathematical practice –
may make viewers more likely to draw certain conclusions
from the image.
Based on our data, exposure to proof-writing could make
certain conclusions more likely in at least three ways (not
mutually exclusive). First, it could be that some aspect of
the task reminds PT participants of the specific proofmethod of mathematical induction (indeed, 75% of PT
participants mentioned mathematical induction at least once
during their video and/or interview). These viewers might
then recognize that they could use mathematical induction
to prove the target statement, and perhaps even complete the
proof (as did 25% of our PT participants). Thus, knowledge
of the formal proof could provide an alternate means of
acquiring certainty about the conclusion; once achieving
this certainty, participants may be more likely to attempt to
generate an alternate argument based on the image.
However, it cannot be the case that knowledge of
mathematical induction is a necessary condition for such an
argument, as we observed one participant who was not
familiar with mathematical induction produce a rigorous
image-based justification of the general theorem.
Second, in addition to gaining familiarity with
mathematical induction, training in proof-writing would
also expose individuals to a set of general mathematical
norms which may lead these participants to demonstrate a
higher degree of certainty. All participants who
demonstrated understanding of the target statement were
asked if they believed the statement to be “true in all cases”;
however, the two groups likely interpreted this question
differently. For PT participants, “all” (when used in a
mathematical context) is a technical term, which by

1008

definition implies the impossibility of counterexamples. PU
participants may have been operating with an everyday use
of “all”, in which the term is considered synonymous to
“generally” or “usually” (e.g., “All Californians love the
beach.”). In this light, the two groups’ differing responses to
the suggestion of counterexamples may be revealing of their
different conceptualizations of the term “all”.
Finally, in the practice of writing proofs one learns
standard ways of representing general mathematical objects,
and these representations may be useful in interpreting
visual proofs. We observed that PT participants often
invoked the fact that odd numbers are of the form (2n + 1)
to explain how they knew that the layers (symmetric legs
extending from a single corner dot) would always contain
an odd number of dots. Fewer PU participants offered this
argument, perhaps because they were not familiar with
algebraic representations of parity. Future studies are
necessary to determine whether knowledge of algebraic
representations of parity allow viewers to exploit structure
available in an image.
We also explored how conclusions drawn from the image
differed between contexts of justification (Condition A) and
discovery (Conditions B/C). We observed only three effects
of task context. First, PU participants’ ability to demonstrate
understanding of the target statement varied significantly
between conditions. Specifically, PU participants – while
perfectly capable of understanding the target statement
when it was provided – were highly unlikely to “discover”
the full target statement based only on the image (with only
25% able to do so in Condition C). These results suggest
that, even for most highly-educated viewers, the image must
be accompanied by the statement it is intended to prove (or
at least a substantial hint, as in Condition B). Next, we
observed that PU participants in contexts of full discovery
(Condition C) who generated the target statement were more
likely to provide pattern-based justifications and more likely
to mention the square shape than PU participants who were
given the full target statement. This is not surprising, since
the target statement was unknown to these participants at
the outset of the task and was only discovered if the
participant noticed a pattern in the image.
We find it interesting that these three results were the only
effects of task context for either group. All participants who
demonstrated understanding of the target statement were
likely to generalize it to nearby cases, regardless of the
justification/discovery context in which they had seen the
visual proof. Subsequent resistance to large-magnitude
counterexamples – relatively low for PU participants, and
high for PT participants – did not vary significantly between
task contexts. This suggests that certainty of the conclusion
has more to do with the viewer’s exposure to mathematical
proof-writing than with the justification/discovery context in
which the image is viewed. The lack of any effect of task
context for PT participants suggests that the sharp
distinction between justification and discovery, of such
theoretical importance in mathematics, is less prevalent in
advanced mathematical practice.

Conclusion
In this study we investigated the reasoning underlying a
visual proof by induction and the nature of the conclusions
drawn from the image. A visual proof by induction displays
a particular set of cases of a general theorem, yet it also
contains structure that could be used to construct a rigorous
argument that the theorem is necessarily true for all natural
numbers. We found that, while most viewers are willing to
generalize the theorem to nearby cases not displayed in the
image, viewers who have been exposed to formal proof
methods (including mathematical induction) show
significantly higher resistance to the suggestion that largemagnitude counterexamples to the theorem are possible, and
are significantly more likely to provide a rigorous imagebased argument against counterexamples. For participants
without proof-training, conclusions drawn from a visual
proof resemble a standard inductive generalization and do
not display the level of certainty associated with
mathematical proof. These results are consistent between
contexts of justification and discovery, indicating that the
certainty of conclusions drawn from a visual proof by
induction are primarily dependent on the viewer’s exposure
to proof-writing, rather than the viewing context.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Lillian Chang and Emmanuel Gygi for
their assistance on this project.

References
Brown, J. R. (1997). Proofs and pictures. The British
Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 48(2), 161-180.
Brown, J. R. (2010). Philosophy of mathematics: A
contemporary introduction to the world of proofs and
pictures. Routledge.
Doyle, T., Kutler, L., Miller, R., & Schueller, A. (2014).
Proofs without words and beyond. Convergence.
Retrieved from http://www.maa.org/press/periodicals/
convergence/proofs-without-words-and-beyond.
Eliaser, N. M. (1998). What constitutes a mathematical
proof? (Doctoral dissertation, Northwestern University).
Folina, J. (1999). Pictures, proofs, and 'mathematical
practice': Reply to James Robert Brown. The British
Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 50(3).
Jamnik, M. (2001). Mathematical reasoning with diagrams.
University of Chicago Press.
Martin, W. G., & Harel, G. (1989). Proof frames of
preservice elementary teachers. Journal for Research in
Mathematics Education, 20(1).
Peirce, B. (1881). Linear associative algebra. American
Journal of Mathematics, 4(1).
Polya, G. (1954). Induction and Analogy in Mathematics.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Rips, L., & Asmuth, J. (2007). Mathematical Induction and
Induction in Mathematics. In A. Feeney & E. Heit (Eds.),
Inductive Reasoning: Experimental, Developmental, and
Computational Approaches. Cambridge University Press.

1009

