When Less Isn’t More: A Real-World Fraction Intervention Study
Tasha Posid (posid.1@osu.edu)
Department of Psychology, The Ohio State University
1835 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210 USA

Vladimir M. Sloutsky (sloutsky.1@osu.edu)
Department of Psychology, The Ohio State University
1835 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210 USA
Abstract

The aim of the present study was to examine
whether the instructional format in which fraction concepts
are taught would affect the learning and transfer of novel
fraction concepts (Core Curriculum; New Common Core
Mathematics Standards, 2000), as well as whether
individual variables such as executive function and prior
math knowledge would moderate any observed effects. On
the one hand, one approach to teaching mathematics to
young children involves the use of concrete instantiations,
such as vibrant, perceptually-rich visual displays or realworld contextualized examples (e.g., Van de Walle, 2007),
presumably because these high-contrast items are attentiongrabbing, motivating, and often found in a child’s natural
environment (NCTM, 2000). Perceptually rich education
materials are abundantly available and often populate
children’s classrooms in an effort to keep children
interested in the materials being taught (Peterson &
McNeil, 2012). Even teachers prefer perceptually rich
materials (Peterson & McNeil, 2012), as they presumably
increase children’s engagement in the task at hand.
On the other hand, much work suggests a “less is
more” approach to teaching children about difficult math
concepts. This work suggests that perceptually rich or
concrete materials may hinder mathematics concept
learning (and perhaps problem solving and computation)
because extraneous perceptual information gets integrated
into representation of the target concept (e.g., Kaminski &
Sloutsky, 2009, 2013; Kaminski, Sloutsky, & Heckler,
2009; McNeil & Fyfe, 2012; Mix, 1999, 2008; Peterson &
McNeil, 2012; Posid & Cordes, 2014). For example, Posid
and Cordes (2014) asked young children (3-6 years) to
decide which of two arrays contained a target number of
items, where half of the arrays were homogenous in makeup (e.g., all of the same kind of animal) and the other half
of the arrays were heterogeneous in make-up (all different
animals). They found that children were less accurate when
arrays were heterogeneous in make-up, particularly when
the task was more difficult (when children were asked to
find a larger target numerosity), and that this homogeneity
advantage remained present across development (Posid &
Cordes, 2014; also see: Mix, 1999, 2008). Similarly,
Kaminski & Sloutsky (2013) taught young children
(kindergarten through second grade) to read bar graphs,
while manipulating whether the graphs contained colorful
and irrelevant information or monochromatic bars. They

Although an understanding of fractions is a critical precursor
for other mathematical concepts, including proportional
reasoning, algebra, and success in STEM fields, surveys of
mathematics education in the United States indicate that
school-age children lack age-appropriate math skills and
proficiency. Thus, understanding the critical precursors of
fraction knowledge is important for the development of
instructional materials. The aim of the present study was to
examine whether instructional format affected children’s
learning and transfer of fraction concepts, and whether
individual variables such as executive function and math
knowledge moderated these effects. Six- to 8-year-old
children participated in a longitudinal, pre/post test design, in
which they received a fraction-training intervention.
Critically, we manipulated the extent to which real-world
instruction was grounded in visual vs. symbolic
representations. We find that 1st and 2nd graders were able to
learn fraction concepts following this intervention, despite
having no formal fraction education. The extent to which the
instructional stimuli were grounded in visual vs. symbolic
representations affected children’s proportional reasoning
knowledge in a transfer task, and condition effects were
moderated my children’s working memory and prior math
knowledge. This work has implications for instructional
design and curriculum development in the classroom.
Keywords: Numerical cognition, fractions, proportional
reasoning, education, learning.

Introduction
An understanding of fractions is a critical precursor for
other mathematical concepts, including probability,
proportional reasoning, algebra, and much of the STEM
fields (Bailey, Hoard, Nugent, & Geary, 2012; Department
of Education, 1997). In fact, early fraction knowledge
predicts the acquisition of algebraic knowledge well into
middle and high school. However, surveys of mathematics
education in the United States indicate that school-age
children lack age-appropriate math skills and proficiency
(NAEP, 2009; NCES, 2010; Siegler et al., 2012; also see
Hurst & Cordes, 2016). Thus, improving students’ math
knowledge and reasoning ability about proportions early in
a child’s education is important. Furthermore,
understanding what instructional format may best lead to
both the learning and transfer of difficult math concepts
(i.e., proportions) should be a fundamental component of
instruction and curriculum development.

2919

Method

found that the children trained on graphs with irrelevant
colorful features often tried to use that extraneous
perceptual information incorrectly, decreasing their overall
accuracy compared to their peers who were trained on
monochromatic bar graphs (Kaminski & Sloutsky, 2013).
Together, these studies suggest that these more
perceptually rich concrete instantiations over-communicate
information to the learner, compared to their generic
counterparts, thereby hindering learning from the relevant
mathematical structure or relations at hand.
The impact of perceptual information when
learning about proportions or fractions is even less known.
In one study, Kaminski and Sloutsky (2009) investigated
kindergarteners’ ability to identity proportions across two
sets of stimuli, which varied in their degree of concreteness
of the instantiations. Children in the concrete condition
failed to compare novel proportions while children in the
generic condition successfully compared novel proportions,
following a sparse training and no instruction. These
findings suggest that simple proportional relations can be
learned following generic instantiations, while concrete
instantiations do not promote this same type of learning.
In this vein, young children’s learning of fractions
may also benefit from more generic instantiations.
Specifically, fractions are traditionally introduced as
symbols (e.g., 1/2), where visual representations may add
extraneous information that could be interpreted
ambiguously or incorrectly. For example, additional visual
information could (a) add a layer of perceptual richness by
conveying concept-irrelevant information and/or distracting
information to the learner from the specific math concept
to-be-learned, (b) add extraneous conceptual information,
such as sharing, when real-world instantiations such as the
use of a pizza pie are used, or (c) add a combination of the
two. Thus, the present study addresses whether symbolic or
visual instantiations in particular provide pre-fraction
learners with a better ability to learn about novel fraction
concepts. Because little work has addressed whether
perceptual or conceptual visual instantiations may be
detrimental to the young learner, the present study utilizes
minimalistic, black-and-white stimuli (perceptually but not
conceptually rich) to begin to address this important
research question.

Participants
Seventy-three 1st and 2nd grade children (MAge=6.9 years)
participated in this study. Children were tested in their own
elementary school during regular school hours. All children
were tested in a quiet room with a single female
experimenter.
Materials
Pre- and Post-Test: Fraction Battery.
The fraction pre- and post-test batteries were
identical and consisted of three fraction-knowledge tasks,
which asked participants to make judgments about either
symbolic or visual fraction information (also see Hurst &
Cordes, 2016; Polinsky, Posid, & Sloutsky, 2017; Posid &
Sloutsky, 2015, 2017). The first task was an Ordinal Task,
in which participants were asked to judge which of two sets
was numerically larger and included visual fraction
comparison (e.g., 2/3 vs. 1/3, represented as black-andwhite circles divided into three equal parts, with two parts
and one part shaded, respectively) and a symbolic fraction
comparison (e.g., 2/3 vs. 1/3). Children next completed a
Matching Task, in which they matched either a symbolic
fraction (e.g., 1/3) to a visual fraction (e.g., a black-andwhite circle divided into three parts with one part shaded)
or vice-versa. Children then completed an Addition and
Subtraction Task, in which they were asked to add visual
fractions (e.g., black-and-white circles) or symbolic
fractions (e.g., 1/4 + 2/4). Due to the difficulty level of the
Matching Task and Addition/Subtraction Task, four answer
choices were offered in a multiple-choice format. For all
fraction tasks in the pre-/post-test battery, only fractions <1
were used (e.g., 2/3 but not 4/3).
Fraction Training:
The fraction training intervention consisted of
three sessions, which were identical in content and
instruction across conditions.
Each training session
consisted of two parts: one-on-one guided instruction
between the child and experimenter followed by a block of
practice problems used to measure immediate learning.
Importantly, although the content and instruction was
consistent across conditions, children participated in one of
three training conditions: (1) Visual Only (black-and-white
circles only; n=22), (2) Symbols Only (symbolic fractions
only; n=25), or (3) Visual + Symbols (both black-andwhite and symbolic fractions shown side-by-side; n=23).
The instruction and practice block were exclusively run in
the child’s randomly assigned condition (see Figure 1).
The first training task was an Ordinal Comparison
task, in which children were instructed on how to compare
two fractions with either the same denominator (e.g., 1/4
vs. 2/4) or same numerator (e.g., 1/4 or 1/8; Figure 1).
Critically, the fraction instruction throughout all three
training tasks was meant to address two concepts prevalent
in the fraction-learning literature to date. First, children
were taught to use counting to identify and manipulate the
numerators and denominators presented, as children
notoriously demonstrate a “whole number bias” when

Overview of the Current Study
The aim of the present study was to examine whether
instructional format affected children’s learning and
transfer of fraction concepts, and whether individual
variables would moderate any observed visual vs. symbolic
instantiation effects. Critically, we manipulated the extent
to which real-world instruction was grounded in visual vs.
symbolic representations, while incorporating actual
educational practices into the training paradigm (material,
context, multi-session lessons). First and second graders
participated in a pre/post-test design in which they received
fraction instruction over several intervention sessions
(Ordinal Comparisons, Addition and Subtraction,
Decomposition), followed by a test of transfer (Fraction
and Proportional Reasoning).

2920

learning about fractions (e.g., DeWolf & Vosniadou, 2014;
Hurst & Cordes, 2016; Ni & Zhou, 2005; Obersteiner, van
Dooren, Van Hoof, & Verschaffel, 2013 Obersteiner, Van
Hoof, Verschaffel, & Van Dooren, 2016; Polinsky et al.,
2017). Second, children were taught about fraction
magnitude knowledge, specifically as it relates to the partwhole concept (e.g., Siegler, Thompson, & Schneider,
2011; Stafylidou & Vosniadou, 2004). This instruction and
feedback was followed by a block of practice trials in
which children continued to compare fractions, but without
scaffolding or feedback from the experimenter.
The second training task was an Addition and
Subtraction task, in which children were taught how to
systematically add or subtract two fractions. Children were
shown a correct strategy for solving this type of fraction
problem. This was followed by a practice block, in which
children continued to add and subtract fractions, but
without the input and feedback from the experimenter.
Finally,
children
completed
a
Fraction
Decomposition task, in which they were asked to add or
decompose a series of fractions (e.g., 1/6 + 2/6 + 1/6;
Figure 2). The instruction was similar to that of the
addition and subtraction task, with step-by-step instructions
on how to identify the fractions, recognize that the
denominator (or total number of pieces) was the same
using counting, and then add the numerators (or shaded
number of pieces) to find the answer. Again, this was
followed by a block of practice trials in which children
continued to decompose fractions, but without the
instruction and feedback of the experimenter.

(e.g., “Can you express the triangles as a fraction of the
entire set?” or “If you were to reach in to one of two fish
tanks, are hoping to pick a fish of a certain color, which
fish tank should you reach into?”).
All tasks were administered on a Macintosh
laptop. These programs were created using RealBasic
software, which also recorded participants’ reaction time
and answers during the tasks.
Procedure
Pre/Post-Test Fraction Battery:
The procedure consisted of three phases: The
Ordinal Task, the Matching Task, and the
Addition/Subtraction Task. The Ordinal Task consisted of
three blocks: natural number comparisons (warm up),
visual fraction comparisons, and symbolic fraction
comparisons. All fractions were <1 so as to match the
visual and symbolic fractions featured in the second and
third blocks. Each block in the Ordinal Task consisted of
32 trials, for a total of 96 trials. The Matching Task
consisted of three blocks of 12 trials each, for a total of 36
trials. The Addition/Subtraction task consisted of four
blocks of 12 trials each, for a total of 48 trials.
Fraction Training:
The procedure consisted of three training sessions:
Ordinal Comparisons, Addition and Subtraction, and
Decomposition. The Ordinal Comparisons training session
consisted of two phases: Same Denominator comparison
training and Same Numerator comparison training. Each
instruction phase consisted of two examples, followed by a
block of 10 test questions (20 total test trials). The Addition
and Subtraction training session consisted of two phases:
Addition and Subtraction. Each instruction phase contained
two examples, followed by a block of 20 test trials (40 total
test trials). The Decomposition training session consisted
of two phases of Decomposition instruction (fractions
whose sum was <1 and fractions whose sum was >1), each
followed by one blocks of test trials, plus a final block of
“intermixed” test trials, for a total of 30 test trials.
Transfer Task:
The transfer task consisted of seven blocks of
proportional reasoning and fraction reasoning picture
problems and included: (1) spinner proportions, (2) dice
rolling, (3) determining the proportions of shapes in a set,
(4) determining the proportion of candy in a bowl, (5)
interpreting a pie graph, (6) representing a set of shapes as
a fraction, and (7) determining the proportion of fish in a
fish tank (for a total of 36 Transfer Task questions). The
transfer task was administered approximately 2 weeks after
post-test. It was also given in multiple-choice format due to
the difficulty of the task itself and for consistency of testing
format across sessions.

Figure 1. Examples of the Stimuli used in the Test portion
of the Training Sessions.
Transfer Task:
The transfer task was used to measure children’s
fraction and proportion knowledge, and consisted of a
series of visual questions. Included questions asked
children to make judgments related to either probability
(e.g., “If you were to roll a dice, what is the probability that
that it would land on a 2?” or “If you were to reach into this
box of candy without looking, what is the probability that
you would randomly pick out a cherry piece?) or fractions

Results
The present study examined three outcome variables of
interest: (1) Learning at Training: Did children perform
above chance on the test trials following each intervention

2921

suggesting that, at least for 1st and 2nd graders, any
instructional format can promote learning of these difficult
math concepts.

session? That is, did they learn the information they had
just practiced with the experimenter? (2) Pre-Post Test
Gains: Did children improve on our Fraction Battery from
Pre-Test to Post-Test? (3) Transfer Task: Did children
perform above chance on our Transfer Task? Critically, we
examined
the
impact
of
Training
Condition
(Visual+Symbol, Visual Only, Symbols Only) on all three
of these variables of interest. Finally, we examined the role
of individual variables as moderators of Condition effects
on our dependent variables.

Transfer Task
Performance accuracy on the Transfer Task was calculated
for questions pertaining to Proportional Reasoning and
Fraction Reasoning. Overall, children performed abovechance on both types of questions in the Transfer Task
(Proportional Reasoning: p<.001, Cohen’s d>.1; Fraction
Reasoning: p<.001, Cohen’s d>2.5; Figure 3). Condition
differences were observed for the Proportional Reasoning
portion of the Transfer Task (F(2, 63)=6.5, p=.003), such
that children in the Visual+Symbol condition outperformed their peers in both the Visual Only and Symbols
Only conditions. Of note, children in the Visual Only and
Symbols Only conditions performed significantly abovechance, and out-performed a secondary sample of untrained
controls whose accuracy did not exceed chance-level
(t(6)=1.7, p=.15, Cohen’s d=1.4). In contrast, no Condition
effects were observed for the Fraction Reasoning questions
(p>.7), mirroring the lack of Condition effects observed in
the
preto
post-test
gains.

Learning at Training
Results indicate that young children were able to learn
fraction concepts despite having no formal instruction in
the classroom, as indicated by their above-chance
performance during each phase of training (vs. chance:
Ordinal: p<.001, Cohen’s d=2.8; Addition/Subtraction:
p<.001, Cohen’s d=2.4; Decomposition: p<.001, Cohen’s
d=4.4; Figure 2). A moderate – but non-significant (p’s<.2)
-- trend demonstrated the impact of children’s experimental
condition across these tasks. That is, children’s
performance in the Symbols-Only and Visual+Symbols
conditions were similar across the three day-of training
tasks; however, children’s accuracy in the visual-only
condition was lower.

Individual Variability
A series of regression analyses were run in order to
investigate whether individual variables predicted
children’s performance across our dependent variables.
Each regression model tested the following independent
variables: pre-fraction knowledge (as assessed through our
pre-test Fraction Battery), prior Math Knowledge (assessed
through a portion of the Woodcock Johnson and a 3-minute
speeded arithmetic test administered at pre-test), Inhibitory
Control (assessed
through a numerical stroop task
administered at pre-test), Working Memory (assessed
through a serial ordering task administered at pre-test), and
the child’s grade in school.
Children’s accuracy during the day-of training
tasks (composite score) was significantly predicted by their
grade in school (Beta=.224, p=.06), prior math knowledge
(Beta=.573, p<.001), and their pre-test fraction knowledge
(Beta=.253, p=.04; Model: R2=.416, p<.001). Children’s
performance at post-test was significantly predicted by
children’s prior math knowledge (Beta=.566, p<.001;
Model: R2=.401, p<.001), while children’s pre- to post-test
gains were significantly predicted by their grade in school
(Beta=.382, p=.009), working memory (Beta=.306,
p=.012), and pre-test fraction knowledge (Beta=.485,
p=.001; Model: R2=.220, p=.014). Additional SEM
modeling was conducted to examine whether our
significant predictors specifically moderated any effects of
Condition on our dependent variables. We find that prior
math knowledge does moderate the effects of Condition on
children’s day-of training accuracy (p=.02) and post-test
fraction performance (p=.002), while working memory
moderated children’s gains from pre- to post-test (p<.001).
Finally, regression and SEM modeling were
conducted for children’s performance on the Transfer Task.
Specifically, children’s accuracy on the proportional

Figure 2. Accuracy on the test trials of each Fraction
Training Session by Condition. Error bars reflect Standard
Error of the Mean.
Pre- to Post-Test Gains
We also assessed whether children made substantial gains
from pre- to post-test within our Fraction Battery. For the
purposes of this analysis, difference scores were created for
each participant (post – pre) for each portion of the
Fraction
Battery
(Ordinal,
Matching,
and
Addition/Subtraction; pre-test: no effect of Condition:
p>.1), such that each participant had a single difference
score for each task representative of any gains made. Then,
an average of these difference scores was created to
identify children’s total gains across the training tasks. A
significantly positive difference score (versus zero) would
indicate significant gains made by that participant.
Children demonstrated significant gains between
pre- and post-test (t(69)=10.6, p<.001, Cohen’s d=2.6).
Notably, condition differences were not observed in any of
our three tasks within the Fraction Battery (p’s>.1),

2922

reasoning portion of the Transfer Task was significantly
predicted by their grade in school (Beta=.227, p=.059),
Condition (Beta=.222, p=.064), inhibitory control
(Beta=.250, p=.038), and pre-test fraction knowledge
(Beta=.257, p=.086). Again, secondary SEM models
indicated that both math knowledge and working memory
individually and significantly moderated performance on
the Transfer Task. Specifically, children with High
working memory did not show Condition differences,
while those with low working memory did (Low WM: F(2,
28)=9.0, p=.001; High WM: F(2, 27)=1.7, p=.206). These
children benefited most from Visual+Symbol.
Like
working memory, children with high math knowledge did
not show Condition differences on the Transfer Task,
whereas children with low math knowledge did. These
children benefited most from Visual+Symbol (Low Math:
F(2, 26)=4.7, p=.019; High Math: F(2, 29)=1.7, p=.1).

2016), the present study suggests that current curriculum is
utilizing content that may help close this gap in years to
come.
Second, and more importantly, the present study
finds that the instructional format in which the to-belearned concepts are presented to children is important.
Specifically, those children in the Visual+Symbol
condition faired best both during immediate learning within
our intervention sessions and in our test of transfer two
weeks following post-test. Of note, children in the Visual
only condition never out-performed their peers in either of
the other two conditions, suggesting that less is not
necessarily more when teaching children about new and
conceptually challenging fraction concepts. Moreover,
children who were low in math knowledge and low in
working memory at pre-test benefited most from the
Visual+Symbol condition, suggesting that the redundant
perceptual information was particularly helpful.
The findings from the present study suggesting
that “less” is not “more” when teaching children about new
fraction concepts is interesting given much work
suggesting that extraneous perceptual information may
interfere with children’s ability to learn mathematical
concepts or make mathematical reasoning judgments (e.g.,
Kaminski & Sloutsky, 2009, 2013; Kaminski et al., 2009;
McNeil & Fyfe, 2012; Mix, 1999, 2008; Peterson &
McNeil, 2012; Posid & Cordes, 2014). This pattern of
findings could be accounted for by two explanations. First,
perhaps either fractions themselves or novel fraction
concepts are a stand-alone category. That is, perhaps “less
is more” when children are learning about whole numbers
or non-fraction numerical concepts. However, this is
unlikely given ample research to suggest that both children
and adults demonstrate a whole number bias, especially
when learning about or solving fraction problems that are
novel or difficult (e.g., see DeWolf & Vosniadou, 2014;
Hurst & Cordes, 2016; Ni & Zhou, 2005; Obersteiner et al.,
2013; Obersteiner et al., 2016; Polinsky et al., 2017). That
is, when solving fraction or proportion problems, children
often apply their intuitions about whole numbers to fraction
concepts (for example, they might say that 1/4 + 1/4 = 2/8,
as they incorrectly assume that you should add the
numerators and the denominators, as you would if you
were adding whole numbers).
Another explanation for the seemingly divergent
pattern of findings observed in the present study comes
from the nature of the stimuli used in the study itself.
Although condition differences emerged, the stimuli were
more perceptually impoverished than those used in
previous work reporting “less is more” during
mathematical learning and reasoning (Kaminski &
Sloutsky, 2009, 2013; Kaminski et al., 2009; McNeil &
Fyfe, 2012; Mix, 1999, 2008; Peterson & McNeil, 2012;
Posid & Cordes, 2014). Specifically, the conditions in this
study varied by whether the instantiations contained visual
vs. symbolic vs. visual + symbolic information. However,
the visual stimuli were always black-and-white circles,
while the symbolic stimuli were a single monotone color
(e.g., black). In contrast, real-world mathematics education

Figure 3. Accuracy on the Transfer Task by Condition.
Error bars reflect Standard Error of the Mean.

Discussion
The aim of the present study was to examine whether
instructional format affected children’s learning and
transfer of fraction concepts, as well as to investigate
whether individual variables such as executive function and
math knowledge moderated any effects of visual vs.
symbolic instantiations. Results indicate two important
patterns of performance. First, using real-world
instructional stimuli from the current Core Curriculum
(Core Curriculum; New Common Core Mathematics
Standards, 2000), children as young as 1st and 2nd grade
successfully learned new fraction concepts, as indicated by
their above-chance performance on day-of training, in their
gains observed from pre- to post-test on our Fraction
Battery, and their above-chance performance on the
Transfer Task. Because an understanding of fractions is an
important precursor for other mathematical concepts,
including probability, proportional reasoning, algebra, and
much of the STEM fields (Bailey, Hoard, Nugent, &
Geary, 2012; Department of Education, 1997), it is critical
that elementary school children are involved in a
curriculum that employs these critical foundations in
fraction education. Although previous surveys of
mathematics education in the United States suggest that
children lack age-appropriate math skills (NAEP, 2009;
NCES, 2010; Siegler et al., 2012; also see Hurst & Cordes,

2923

includes much more diverse and vibrant displays, the use of
2D and 3D objects, the use of “interesting” pictures and
colors (e.g., a pizza pie to represent a pie graph or visual
fraction; Peterson & McNeil, 2012), and so on. Therefore,
perhaps the “perceptually impoverished” framework
employed in the present study muted the real-world effects
of varying concrete vs. generic instantiations when
teaching children about fractions and proportions.
Currently, work from our laboratory is exploring this
variation to visual vs. symbolic instantiations, through the
use of a perceptually rich training paradigm. We are
currently exploring whether similar Condition effects and
individual moderators will emerge when perceptually rich
(e.g., pizza pies rather than black-and-white circles,
Sesame Street-like numbers with colors and eyes, etc.)
stimuli are used in a similar training intervention.

Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance,
42(2), 281-293.
Kaminski, J.A., & Sloutsky, V.M. (2009). The effect of concreteness on
children’s ability to detect common proportion. IN N. Taatgen & H.
van Rijn (Eds.), Proceedings of the XXXI Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 335-340). Mahwah, NH: Erlbaum.
Kaminski, J.A., & Sloutsky, V.M. (2013). Extraneous Perceptual
Information Interferes with Children’s Acquisition of Mathematical
Knowledge. Journal of Educational Psychology, 105(2), 351-363.
Kaminski, J.A., Sloutsky, V.M., & Heckler, A. (2009). Transfer of
mathematical knowledge: The portability of generic instantiations.
Child Development Perspectives, 3(3), 151-155.
McNeil, N.M., & Fyfe, E.R. (2012). “Concreteness fading” promotes
transfer of mathematical knowledge. Learning and Instruction, 22,
440-448.
Mix, K.S. (1999). Similarity and numerical equivalence: Appearances
count. Cognitive Development, 14, 269-297.
Mix, K. S. (2008a). Children’s equivalence judgments: Cross-mapping
effects. Cognitive Development, 23, 191–203.
Mix, K. S. (2008b). Surface similarity and label knowledge impact early
numerical comparisons. British Journal of Developmental
Psychology, 26, 13–32.
National Center for Education Statistics (2010). The Nation’s Report
Card: Mathematics 2009: National Assessment of Educational
Progress at Grades 4 and 8. (NCES 2010-451). Institute of
Education Sciences, U.S. Department of Education, Washington,
D.C.
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (2000). Principles and
standards for school mathematics. Reston, VA.
National Governors Association Center for Best Practices, Council of
Chief State School Officers. Common Core State Standards for
Mathematics.
Retrieved
from
http://www.corestandars/org/assets/CCSSI_Math%20Standards.pdf.
Ni, Y., & Zhou, Y.D. (2005). Teaching and learning fraction and rational
numbers: The origins and implications of whole number bias.
Educational Psychologist, 40(1), 27-52.
Obersteiner, A., Van Dooren, W., Van Hoof, J., & Verschaffel, L. (2013).
The natural number bias and magnitude representation in fraction
comparison by expert mathematicians. Learning and Instruction, 28,
64-72.
Obersteiner, A., Van Hoof, J., Verschaffel, L., & Van Dooren, W. (2016).
Who can escape the natural number bias in rational number tasks? A
study involving students and experts. British Journal of Psychology,
107, 537-555.
Peterson, L.A., & McNeil, N.M. (2012). Effects of Perceptually Rich
Manipulatives on Preschoolers’ Counting Performance: Established
Knowledge Counts. Child Development, 84(3), 1020-1033.
Polinsky, N., Posid, T., & Sloutsky, V.M. (2017). Training aids children’s
ability to solve a proportional equivalence task: Evidence from an
eye-tracking study. Manuscript in preparation.
Posid, T., & Cordes, S. (2014). Verbal counting moderates perceptual
biases found in children’s cardinality judgments. Journal of
Cognition
and
Development,
16(4),
621-637.
doi:
10.1080/15248372.2014.934372.
Posid, T., & Sloutsky, V.M. (2016). Kindergarteners and adults learn
fraction-rules in a categorization task. Poster presented at the
Proceedings of the 38th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society. Philadelphia, PA: Cognitive Science Society.
Posid, T., & Sloutsky, V.M. (2017). Is less really more: How and when
kindergarteners and adults learn fraction-rules in a categorization
task. Manuscript in preparation.
Siegler, R.S., Duncan, G.J., Davis-Kean, P.E., Duckworth, K., Claessens,
A., Engel, M., Susperreguy, M.I., & Chen, M. (2012). Early
predictors of high school mathematics achievement. Psychological
Science, 23.
Siegler, R.S., Thompson, C.A., & Schneider, M. (2011). An integrated
theory of whole number and fractions development. Cognitive
Psychology, 62(4), 273-296.
Stafylidou, S., & Vosniadou, S. (2004). The development of students’
understanding of the numerical value of fractions. Learning and
Instruction, 14(5), 503-518.
Van de Walle, J.A. (2007). Elementary and Middle School Mathematics:
Teaching Developmentally. New York: Pearson.

Figure 4. Perceptually rich instantiations of the stimuli
used in the present study.
In conclusion, the present study utilized a realworld fraction training intervention and finds that children
can learn fraction information prior to formal education,
using instructional material from the current Core
Curriculum.
Importantly,
although
all
children
demonstrated gains following training, those who received
redundant perceptual information tended to out-perform
their peers following immediate learning and in a transfer
test of proportional reasoning. Additionally, children’s
prior math knowledge and working memory moderated our
observed effects, indicating these should be taken into
consideration when children are taught novel or difficult
fraction concepts. This work has implications for
instructional design and curriculum development in the
classroom.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Sydney Clark, Abigail Mills, Emily
Neer, Naomi Polinksy, Alicia Scimeca, and Emily Thieroff
of the OSU Cognitive Development Lab, as well as all of
the children, teachers, and schools who participated in this
study. Funding: IES grant R305A140214 to VS.

References
Bailey, D.H., Hoard, M.K., Nugent, L., & Geary, D.C. (2012).
Competence with fractions predicts gains in mathematics
achievement. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 113, 447455.
Department of Education (1997). Mathematics equals opportunity. White
Paper prepared for US Secretary of Education Richard W. Riley.
DeWolf, M., & Vosniadou, S. (2015). The representation of fraction
magnitudes and the whole number bias reconsidered. Learning and
Instruction, 37, 39-49.
Hurst, M., and Cordes, S (2016). Rational-number comparison across
notation: Fractions, decimals, and whole numbers. Journal of

2924

