Why Teach How Things Work?
Tracking the Evolution of Children’s Intuitions about Complexity
Emmanuel Trouche (Emmanuel.Trouche@yale.edu)
Department of Psychology, Yale University,
New Haven, CT 06520 USA

Aaron Chuey (Aaron.Chuey@yale.edu)
Department of Psychology, Yale University,
New Haven, CT 06520 USA

Kristi L. Lockhart (Kristi.Lockhart@yale.edu)
Department of Psychology, Yale University,
New Haven, CT 06520 USA

Frank C. Keil (Frank.Keil@yale.edu)
Department of Psychology, Yale University,
New Haven, CT 06520 USA
Abstract
Mechanistic information can be characterized as the
interacting causal components underlying a phenomenon - in
short, how something works. Children and adults are
notoriously poor at learning, remembering, and applying
mechanistic information, so it comes as no surprise that the
wisdom of teaching mechanism has come under increasing
scrutiny in science education. However, while a rich memory
for mechanistic details may be out of the average student’s
grasp, we argue that exposure to mechanism does not leave
students empty-handed. Instead, it refines their intuitions
about science and the world in significant ways. For the
current study, we focused on one kind of intuition in
particular: beliefs about causal complexity. Children ages 611 rated the complexity of a heart and a lock and were then
given either mechanistic or non-mechanistic information
about them. Afterwards, they were asked if their intuitions
about complexity had changed and if so by how much. Three
weeks later, children were asked again about their intuitions
about complexity. Crucially, children who were given
mechanistic information demonstrated a significantly greater
shift in their assessments of complexity for both the heart and
door lock compared to their counterparts who were given
non-mechanistic information. This contradicts the notion that
mechanism provides learners with few benefits while also
demonstrating how mechanism can be a powerful force in
shaping children’s intuitions.
Keywords: causal mechanisms; explanation; complexity
intuitions; meta-knowledge; cognitive development

Introduction
Humans possess cognitive systems that enable them to
grasp causal relations around them. As early as eight
months, children are able to predict outcomes of novel
causal events (Sobel & Kirkham, 2006) and less than a year
later, they are capable of making successful causal
interventions (Gopnik et al., 2004; Gopnik, Sobel, Schulz,

& Glymour, 2001), even for causal relationships defined by
abstract relational properties (Walker & Gopnik, 2014).
However, given the rapid growth of human knowledge
and technology in the modern era, many of the known
causal relations in the world are becoming increasingly
complex and inaccessible (Arbersman, 2016). Except for
relevant experts, this burgeoning set of causal patterns
presents a challenge for how laypeople grasp the causal
structure of the world around them. Most adults, for
example, are unable to give even a basic explanation of the
mechanisms underlying everyday objects like a door lock or
a clock, let alone more complicated objects like a car engine
or a computer. Similarly, we have a surprisingly poor
understanding of the mechanisms underlying the
functioning of living things and even how our own bodies
work. To make matters worse, laypeople often believe they
possess detailed mechanistic knowledge about the world
despite having next to none, a phenomenon known as the
Illusion of Explanatory Depth (IOED) (Alter, Oppenheimer,
& Zemla, 2010; Rozenblit & Keil, 2002). These major gaps
in adult causal knowledge occur not just in recall but also in
recognition. For example, many adults fail to recognize the
difference between a schematic of a functional bicycle and
one that is completely inoperable (Lawson, 2006). In
children, this illusion is present to an even greater degree
(Mills & Keil, 2004).
Our cognitive mechanisms dealing with causality seem to
fall short in keeping vivid representations of somewhat
complex causal patterns. Despite this tendency to forget
mechanistic information, humans however show a certain
curiosity about how things work. Children ask for
mechanistic information about things they encounter,
usually phrased as ubiquitous “why” and “how” questions,
starting around three years of age (Callanan & Oakes,
1992), and they are often relentless in their questioning until

3368

they receive a mechanism-oriented response (Chouinard,
2007; Frazier, Gelman, & Wellman, 2009). This preference
for mechanistic explanation persists into adulthood (e.g.,
Ahn et al., 1995; Johnson & Ahn, 2015). In short, despite
our poor ability to learn, retain, or recall mechanistic
information, people of all ages often show considerable
interest, and at times an outright preference, for mechanistic
information.

Mechanisms in the Classroom
A natural reaction to the massive decay in our retention of
mechanism is to downplay the need to learn it at all and
refocus science education on topics such as the nature of
science, epistemological stances, and methodology
(Osborne et al, 2003). After all, even if students enjoy
learning information about how things work, they fail to
retain it; shouldn’t we focus on teaching them things they
can actually remember? Without denying the importance of
topics like epistemology, we argue there are insidious costs
in failing to expose children to rich mechanistic details. At
root, the benefits of mechanism lie not with the details
learned, but with the higher order intuitions acquired and
sharpened as a result of teaching mechanism.
More precisely, we argue the bulk of cognitive gain from
exposure to mechanism occurs at the “meta-knowledge”
level (Kominsky, Zamm & Keil, in press). Even if we have
no idea how a car engine actually works, we do have some
intuitions about the underlying mechanisms: for example,
we might think it involves metal and plastic components as
opposed to organic parts, that it is extremely complex and
difficult to learn about, and more crucially, we may also be
able to tell apart experts from laypeople when hearing them
talk about the mechanism. Thus, even if we do not know the
details of how an object works, we often have surprisingly
accurate intuitions about how much “stuff” is in a
mechanism, how complicated a mechanism is, and whose
expertise we can rely on.
Indeed, despite the decay of knowledge about the
mechanism itself, some kind of mechanistic information
seems to persist: mechanistic information influences causal
reasoning (Ahn et al., 1995; Schlottmann, 1999), and
mechanism may constrain Bayesian causal learning by
reshaping priors about what causal links exist or how strong
they are (Griffiths & Tenenbaum, 2005, 2009). Thus, some
aspects of mechanistic information are preserved, but are
neither detailed nor complete (e.g., DiSessa, Gillespie, &
Esterly, 2004; Straatemeier, van der Maas, & Jansen, 2008;
Vosniadou, 2002). If most individuals do not retain deep,
integrated understandings of “how things work”, what kind
of mechanistic knowledge does persist?
The current study pursues the beginnings of an answer to
this broad question by focusing on intuitions about
complexity. Intuition about causal complexity is a good
candidate for a kind of meta-knowledge that would persist
after memory decay. For instance, one may have a strong
feeling that the mechanisms underlying the human ear or a

clock are highly complex without being able to give any
accurate descriptions of the mechanism itself.
To summarize, we argue that mechanism instruction is
essential to STEM learning as long as we acknowledge what
is actually retained over time and what is not. Expecting
children to retain fine-grained mechanistic details is simply
an unrealistic goal. Instead, focusing mechanistic exposure
on building richer meta-mechanistic knowledge establishes
both achievable and useful goals. In particular, we argue
that exposure to mechanism is a necessary pathway to other
forms of more enduring representations such as intuitions
about causal complexity, the focus of the current study.

Experiment
Stimuli
We chose a heart and a door lock as stimuli because they
look quite simple from the outside while having a somewhat
rich causal mechanism on the inside. In order to control for
a potential reaction of surprise to hidden complexity in the
mechanistic condition, the verbal information provided in
the non-mechanistic condition included, both for the heart
and the door lock, some surprising facts such as “people
think that the heart is red but actually the heart itself is dark
brown”.
The number of words of verbal information presented to
the children was matched between the mechanistic (212
words) and non-mechanistic condition (208 words). We also
created the text stimuli so that the non-mechanistic
information was more superficially complex than the
mechanistic information (e.g., Flesh Reading Ease: 79.97
for the non-mechanistic text and 91.53 for the mechanistic
text).

Predictions
We had no predictions about the age of children in this
study but included this variable in our analysis as
exploratory.
H1) Exposure to mechanistic information should shift
children’s intuitions of complexity.
H2) The children who underestimate complexity should
move towards higher complexity judgments once provided
with mechanistic information.
H3) This shift towards higher complexity should still be
observable three weeks later.

Methods
Participants We recruited 144 children from an elementary
school in the New Haven, CT area. Our sample was
somewhat atypical in two ways: the elementary school is
situated in a low SES neighborhood and the elementary
school has a strong focus on science (classified as a STEM
school). Our sample consisted of 20 Kindergarteners, 15
first graders, 15 second graders, 41 third graders, 34 fourth
graders and 18 fifth graders. The experimenters interviewed
child participants individually for about ten minutes in a

3369

quiet spot in the school. All participants were rewarded with
a small toy.
Training Phase Children were told they would be presented
with pictures of things and would be asked if they thought
the thing is simple or complicated. Participants were
explicitly told both at the very beginning and just after the
training phase “there are no right or wrong answers, I just
want to know what you think”.
The two training questions were designed to introduce
children to our complexity scale and to have a clear criterion
of exclusion. The training consisted in showing children
black and white drawings of an hourglass and grandfather
clock. In order to prevent children’s intuitions about
complexity being driven only by the ease of use - as
previous pilot experiments suggested - children were told
that “both these two things are easy to use but the way they
work is really different”, followed by a short justification of
why the hourglass is simple (“It’s just sand going down”)
and why a grandfather clock is more complicated (“It has
many gears and pendulums inside that all work together to
move the hands on the clock”).
Children were then presented with black and white
drawings of a bicycle and a motorcycle. For each, they were
asked whether they thought it was simple or complicated.
Depending of their first answer, they were asked if they
thought it was “really” simple/complicated or “kind of”
simple/complicated. Children’s answers on each entity can
thus be coded on a 2 point scale (simple or complicated) or
on a 4 point scale: really simple (0), kind of simple (1), kind
of complicated (2) and really complicated (3).
Test Phase Just after the training phase, children were
presented with a black and white drawing of a heart or a
door lock (order of presentation was counterbalanced). They
were asked whether they thought the entity was simple or
complicated in the same way as in the training phase. All
participants were then told that some information about the
entity would be presented to them. Half the participants
were randomly assigned to the mechanistic condition and
the other half were assigned to the non-mechanistic
condition. Participants in the mechanistic condition were
presented with pictures of the inside of a heart and of a door
lock, along with some verbal information about how it
works. Participants in the non-mechanistic condition were
presented with pictures illustrating some facts about the
heart or door locks along with corresponding verbal
information matched in length to the mechanistic condition.
After hearing the information, all participants were
reminded of their initial complexity judgment and asked if
they wanted to keep their answer or if they thought a heart /
a lock was more complicated/simple than they had
previously thought. Depending on their answer, they were
then asked if it is much more complicated/simple than what
they though before or a little bit more complicated/simple
than what they though before. Their shifts in complexity
judgments were coded with a 5 point scale: much more

simple (-2), a little more simple (-1), still what I think (0), a
little bit more complicated (+1) and much more complicated
(+ 2). The exact same procedure was repeated with the
second entity.
Retention Test, Just after the complexity judgments, all
children were asked a series of questions about the
information (mechanistic or non-mechanistic) that had been
given to them. This test was used to assess the children’s
retention of the information that was just presented to them
in order to measure retention scores on the exact same test
three weeks later. Questions were either “yes – no”
questions (0.5 point); questions about quantity or colors (1
point) or open-ended (2 points). In the mechanistic
condition, scores could range from 0 to 12.5; in the nonmechanistic condition, scores ranged from 0 to 18.5. All the
scores were normalized to range between 0 and 1. Based on
the Yes/No questions, we calculated the chance level for
each condition: 0.10 in the mechanistic condition and 0.04
in the non-mechanistic condition.
Exclusion The 24 children (17%) who, during the training
phase judged a bicycle as more complex than a motorcycle
were excluded from the analysis. In addition, since 50% (9)
of the kindergarteners failed to judge a motorcycle as more
complex than a bike, all the kindergarteners were excluded
from the analyses. The following analyses apply to a sample
of 111 children.

Results
Analysis Children were grouped into three age groups: 1st
and 2nd graders (N = 26), 3rd graders (N =37), 4th and 5th
graders (N = 48).
Our analyses focus on three dependent variables, the
absolute value of shift, the raw value – direction -- of shift,
and the direction of long-term shift three weeks after the
initial measure. We looked at the effect of three independent
variables. Two variables were linked to our hypotheses,
condition (mechanistic and non-mechanistic) and initial
rating (which we grouped in two levels - simple or
complicated - instead of the 4 measured ones - kind of /
really - in order to increase our statistical power). The third
variable was age group (1st and 2nd graders, 3rd graders, and
4th and 5th graders), which was exploratory. Only the
interactions with condition were tested.
Initial complexity judgments were significantly higher for
the heart (M = 1.7, SD = 1.14) than for the lock (M = 0.96,
SD = 1.03), paired t-test t(110) = 4.79, p < .001. In the
following analyses the two entities were analyzed
separately.
Absolute value of shift For both the heart and the lock, we
performed a 2 (condition) x 2 (initial rating) x 3 (age
groups) fully between-subjects Analysis of Variance
(ANOVA) with the absolute value of shift as DV. For both
entities, the ANOVAs revealed a main effect of condition
(Heart: F(1,103) = 4.13, p = .04, ηp2 = .04; Lock: F(1,103)

3370

= 17.78, p < .001, ηp2 = .14). Those main effects of
condition came from a larger absolute value of shift for
children in the mechanistic condition both for the heart (M =
1.14, SD = 0.67 versus M = 0.87, SD = 0.75) and the lock
(M = 1.22, SD = 0.60 versus M = 0.69, SD = 0.77).
A main effect of initial ratings was also found for both
entities (Heart: (F(1,103) = 4.10, p = .05, ηp2 = .04; Lock:
F(1,103) = 4.07, p = .05, ηp2 = .03) corresponding to a
larger absolute value of shift for participants initially
judging an entity as simple. No other main effects or
interactions were significant for either entity.

Despite having our sample size cut in half, results on the
direction of the shift and on the final ratings were even more
in line with our initial hypotheses.
With respect to the direction of the shift for the heart, the
ANOVA revealed a significant interaction between
condition and initial rating (Heart: F(1,56) = 9.92, p = .01,
ηp2 = .10). For the lock, as opposed to the same analysis
with the entire population, the interaction between condition
and initial rating was at trend level (F(1,62) = 3.97, p = .09,
ηp2 = .04). A main effect of initial judgment was also found
for the lock (F(1,62) = 4.5, p = .04, ηp2 = .06) but not for the
heart (F(1,56) = 2.2, p = .14, ηp2 = .04). As displayed in
Figure 1, one pattern seems similar for both entities:
children who start by judging the entity as simple in the
mechanistic condition tend to increase their complexity
rating to a greater extent compared to both children in the
non-mechanistic condition as well as children who start by
judging the entity as complicated.

Direction of shift For each entity, we performed a 2
(condition) x 2 (initial rating) x 3 (age groups) fully
between-subjects ANOVA with the shift in complexity
judgment measured just after children were exposed to some
information as a DV (from -2 to +2) (see Fig. 1).
For the heart, a significant interaction between the initial
rating and the condition was found (F(1,103) = 5.56, p =
.02, ηp2 = .05). To further explore this interaction, two posthoc two sample t-tests with Bonferroni adjusted alpha levels
of .025 per test (.05/2) showed that for the children who
initially judged the heart as simple, being exposed to
mechanistic information resulted in an average shift towards
higher complexity (M = 0.70, SD = 1.36) compared to
children exposed to non-mechanistic information (M = 0.21, SD = 1.23; t(39.7) = 2.26, p = .02). As for children
who initially judged the heart as complex, there was no
difference in complexity shift between the mechanistic (M =
-0.09, SD = 0.14) and non-mechanistic condition (M = 0.14,
SD = 1.12; t(66.4) = -0.83, p = .41).
For the lock, the same analysis did not show any
significant effect or interaction.
Analyses of High Initial Retention Participants Median
scores were calculated on the retention task for each
condition, entity, and crucially for each of the three age
groups in order to avoid having mostly older children in the
high retention group. In order to explore the possibility that
some participants were not paying sufficient attention to the
task or had difficulty understanding the material presented
to them, children scoring lower than the median in each of
the groups were dropped from the sample. All the following
analyses are similar to the analyses presented before but
includes only the high retention half of our sample (for the
heart, N = 35 in the mechanistic condition and N = 29 in the
non-mechanistic condition; for the lock N = 39 and N = 31
respectively).
In terms of absolute value of shift, results for the high
retention group were similar to those of the entire sample
with a significantly larger shift in the mechanistic condition
(main effect of condition. heart: F(1,56) = 5.5, p = .02, ηp2
= .08; lock: F(1,62) = 6.1, p = .01, ηp2 = .09). As before, a
main effect of initial judgment was found only for the heart
(F(1,56) = 4.2, p = .05, ηp2 = .06) but not for the lock
(F(1,62) = 2.6, p = .11, ηp2 = .04) ), likely due to a lack of
power.

Figure 1: Average value of shift (y-axis) with standard
errors bars for the high initial retention group, in the
mechanistic (grey) and non-mechanistic condition (white) as
a function of initial complexity judgment (x-axis). Results
for the heart and lock are presented on the left and right
panels respectively.
Shift in complexity three weeks later We again asked
children about their intuitions of complexity three weeks
later using the same methodology. Twelve children (11%)
had changed schools or were absent during the times we
were testing. Therefore, the following analyses apply to a
sample of 99 children.
For each entity, we performed the same 2 (condition) x 3
(age group) x 2 (initial rating) with the shift between
children’s initial rating and their rating three weeks later as
a dependent variable (long-term shift).
For both the heart and the lock, we found main effects of
initial rating (heart: F(1,91) = 44.9, p < .001, ηp2 = .31;
lock: F(1,91) = 33.6, p < .001, ηp2 = .27). A main effect of

3371

condition was found at trend level for the heart (F(1,91) =
3.0, p = .08, ηp2 = .02), but not for the lock.
When performing the same analysis on the high initial
retention group, ANOVAs continued to show a main effect
of initial rating for both entities (heart: F(1,52) = 31.7, p <
.001, ηp2 = .33; lock: F(1,56) = 31.2, p < .001, ηp2 = .34).
This was the only significant effect for the lock. For the
heart, there was also a significant interaction between
condition and initial rating for the heart (F(1,52) = 6.42, p =
.01, ηp2 = .07) as well as a main effect of condition at trend
level ((F(1,52) = 3.46, p = .07, ηp2 = .04). As displayed in
Figure 2, the interaction between condition and initial rating
was driven by children initially judging the heart as simple,
who moved towards higher complexity in the mechanistic
condition (M = 1.46, SD = 0.97) compared to the nonmechanistic condition (M = 0.25, SD = 0.88; Post-hoc t-test
with Bonferroni adjusted alpha levels of .025 per test
(.05/2), t(16.0) = 2.93, p = .009). For children initially
judging the heart as complex, there was no significant effect
of condition (mechanistic: M = -0.75, SD = 1.16; nonmechanistic: M = -0.44, SD = 1.04; t(36) = -0.85, p = .40).

Figure 2: For the high retention group, average value of long
term shift (y-axis) with standard errors bars in the
mechanistic (grey) and non-mechanistic condition (white) as
a function of initial complexity judgment (x-axis). Results
for the heart and lock are presented on the left and right
panels respectively.
Retention Tests Three weeks later, children’s retention
scores had significantly dropped significantly by 0.20 in the
non-mechanistic condition (from 0.64 to 0.44, paired t-test:
t(95) = 9.30, p < .001) and by 0.11 in the mechanistic
condition (from 0.44 to 0.33, t(101) = 4.67, p < .001)
When dividing our population between high versus low
initial retention, the low initial retention group did not show
any decay in the mechanistic condition (from 0.19 to 0.25).
By contrast, the high retention group had a decay of 0.20
(from 0.57 to 0.37, t(64) = 7.33, p < .001). In the nonmechanistic condition, both groups showed significant

decay (low retention group had a decay of 0.17, from 0.48
to 0.31, t(41) = 5.84, p < .001; high retention group had a
decay of 0.24, from 0.76 to 0.53, t(53) = 7.40, p < .001 ).

Discussion
Our first hypothesis H1 is well supported by the data with
an absolute value of shift significantly larger in the
mechanistic condition than in the non-mechanistic condition
for the two entities. In short, mechanistic information
influences children’s intuitions about complexity more than
non-mechanistic information.
Hypothesis H2 is supported with respect to the heart: both
when analyzing the full population and the high retention
group, children in the mechanistic condition who initially
judged the heart as simple moved toward higher complexity
ratings more than children in the non-mechanistic condition.
With respect to the lock, the same hypothesis was only
supported by the high retention group. This pattern suggests
that the influence of mechanistic information prompts more
than unpredictable shifts in children’s intuitions. The
influence of retention group also suggests that the quality of
mechanistic exposure has a discernable impact on children’s
ultimate intuitions. The finding that the low retention group
slightly increased their retention score three weeks later
likely means they were near floor from the start, indicating
they had encoded and understood little to no mechanistic
details presented to them.
For both entities, we also found significant main effects of
initial rating in the following direction: children initially
judging an entity as simple move toward higher complexity
and children initially judging an entity as complex tend to
decrease their complexity judgments. This pattern raises a
question: to what extent were the shifts simple regressions
to the mean? At least in the cases of the heart, a tendency
towards the mean is not the only significant influence on
children’s complexity judgments, even if the influence of
mechanistic information works in the same direction.
Indeed, mechanistic information shifted initially low
complexity judgments higher than the overall tendency to
regress towards the mean can explain.
Hypothesis H3 was only weakly supported in the case of
the heart, with a main effect of condition at trend level.
However, this modest effect fits with our hypothesis, since
it is driven by children in the mechanistic condition initially
judging the heart as simple who showed, three weeks later, a
greater increase in their complexity judgments compared to
the non-mechanistic condition. The size of this effect
illustrates the challenge of trying to shift children’s longterm intuitions about the world with less than 10 minutes of
instruction.
Participants’ SES, background, and attendance at a school
having a strong science and engineering focus may also
have diminished the hypothesized effects in two ways: first,
low SES children often face increased attentional challenges
in school settings (Mezzacappa, 2004; NICHD Early Child
Care Research Network, 2003). These challenges may also
help explain why our main hypotheses were supported more

3372

by the high retention half of our sample. Second, the STEM
focus of the school may have diminished the strength of the
main effect of mechanism on the size of the shift by giving
children more previous exposure to mechanism than is
typical, in turn providing less room for intuitions about
complexity to shift in a mere 5-10 minute span.

Conclusion
Our results have shown that even very short “mechanistic
interventions” can lead to immediate and sizable changes in
children’s intuitions about complexity. Crucially, when
those changes happened, they were still observable three
weeks later. These results suggest that teaching mechanism
early in school can directly influence students’ intuitions
about science and the world more broadly, even in the long
term when the details are long forgotten.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Grace Nathman, the
Principal of the Quinnipiac Real World Math STEM
Elementary School, as well as the teachers and all the
members of the school community; with a special thanks to
science teacher Stephanie White who helped us at every step
of the study.
The authors also thank the National Science Foundation
which funded this research (proposal DRL 1561143 to F.
Keil).
Finally the authors thank all the members of the Yale
Cognition and Development Lab for their helpful feedback.

References
Ahn, W. K., Kalish, C. W., Medin, D. L., & Gelman, S.
A. (1995). The role of covariation versus mechanism
information in causal attribution. Cognition, 54(3), 299-352.
Alter, A. L., Oppenheimer, D. M., & Zemla, J. C. (2010).
Missing the trees for the forest: a construal level account of
the illusion of explanatory depth. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 99(3), 436.
Arbesman, S. (2016). Overcomplicated: Technology at
the Limits of Comprehension. Penguin, New York.
Callanan, M. A., & Oakes, L. M. (1992). Preschoolers'
questions and parents' explanations: Causal thinking in
everyday activity. Cognitive Development, 7(2), 213-233.
Chouinard, M. M., Harris, P. L., & Maratsos, M. P.
(2007). Children's questions: A mechanism for cognitive
development. Monographs of the Society for Research in
Child Development, i-129.
Frazier, B. N., Gelman, S. A., & Wellman, H. M. (2009).
Preschoolers’ search for explanatory information within
adult–child conversation. Child Development, 80(6), 15921611.
Gillespie, N. M., & Esterly, J. B. (2004). Coherence
versus fragmentation in the development of the concept of
force. Cognitive Science, 28(6), 843-900.
Gopnik, A., Glymour, C., Sobel, D. M., Schulz, L. E.,
Kushnir, T., & Danks, D. (2004). A theory of causal

learning in children: causal maps and Bayes
nets. Psychological Review, 111(1), 3.
Gopnik, A., Sobel, D. M., Schulz, L. E., & Glymour, C.
(2001). Causal learning mechanisms in very young children:
two-, three-, and four-year-olds infer causal relations from
patterns of variation and covariation. Developmental
Psychology, 37(5), 620.
Griffiths, T. L., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2005). Structure and
strength in causal induction. Cognitive Psychology, 51(4),
334-384.
Griffiths, T. L., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2009). Theorybased causal induction. Psychological Review, 116(4), 661.
Johnson, S. G., & Ahn, W. K. (2015). Causal networks or
causal islands? The representation of mechanisms and the
transitivity of causal judgment. Cognitive Science, 39(7),
1468-1503.
Kominsky, J. F., Zamm, A. P., & Keil, F. C. (In press).
Knowing when help is needed: A developing sense of causal
complexity.
Lee, V. E., & Burkam, D. T. (2002). Inequality at the
starting gate: Social background differences in achievement
as children begin school. Washington, DC: Economic
Policy Institute.
Mezzacappa, E. (2004). Alerting, orienting, and executive
attention: Developmental properties and sociodemographic
correlates in an epidemiological sample of young, urban
children. Child Development, 75(5), 1373-1386.
National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development
Early
Child
Care
Research
Network (2003). Do children's attention processes mediate
the link between family predictors and school
readiness? Developmental Psychology, 39, 581–593
Osborne, J., Simon, S., & Collins, S. (2003). Attitudes
towards science: A review of the literature and its
implications. International
Journal
of
Science
Education, 25(9), 1049-1079.
Rozenblit, L., & Keil, F. (2002). The misunderstood
limits of folk science: An illusion of explanatory
depth. Cognitive Science, 26(5), 521-562.
Schlottmann, A. (1999). Seeing it happen and knowing
how it works: how children understand the relation between
perceptual
causality
and
underlying
mechanism. Developmental Psychology, 35(1), 303.
Sobel, D. M., & Kirkham, N. Z. (2006). Blickets and
babies: the development of causal reasoning in toddlers and
infants. Developmental Psychology, 42(6), 1103.
Straatemeier, M., van der Maas, H. L., & Jansen, B. R.
(2008). Children’s knowledge of the earth: A new
methodological and statistical approach. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 100(4), 276-296.
Vosniadou, S. (2002). Mental models in conceptual
development. In Model-based Reasoning (pp. 353-368).
Springer US.
Walker, C. M., & Gopnik, A. (2014). Toddlers infer
higher-order
relational
principles
in
causal
learning. Psychological Science, 25(1), 161-169.

3373

