UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
24-Month-Olds Engage in Relational Causal Reasoning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6j16k8hs

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Walker, Caren M.
Gopnik, Alison

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

24-Month-Olds Engage in Relational Causal Reasoning
Caren M. Walker (caren.walker@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley,
3210 Tolman Hall, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA

Alison Gopnik (gopnik@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley
3210 Tolman Hall, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA

Abstract
Children make inductive inferences about the causal properties of
individual objects from a very young age. When can they infer
higher-order relational properties - a task that has proven difficult
for non-human primates? In two experiments, we examined 1824-month-old infants’ relational inferences using a causal version
of a relational match-to-sample task. Results suggest that by 21-24
months of age, infants are able to infer a relational causal principle
from just a few observations and use this inference to guide their
own subsequent actions and bring about a novel causal outcome.
Findings are considered in light of recent discussion about the
nature of relational and causal reasoning, and their evolutionary
origins.
Keywords: Cognitive development; infancy; relational
reasoning; causal learning; inference

Introduction
Learning about causal relationships is one of the most
important and challenging problems young humans face.
Causal knowledge allows you to act on the world – if you
know A causes B, you can act on A to bring about B.
Recent research shows that children as young as 19 to 24
months of age can quickly learn causal properties of objects
from patterns of statistical contingency and can act on that
knowledge to bring about effects (Gopnik, 2012; Gopnik &
Wellman, 2012; Sobel & Kirkham, 2006; Meltzoff,
Waismeyer & Gopnik, 2012). At 20 months, children can
infer the desires of others from sampling patterns (Kushnir,
Xu & Wellman, 2010) and at 16 months, they can use
contingency information to determine whether an effect was
caused by their own actions (Gweon & Schulz, 2011).
Other lines of research suggest that infants can infer abstract
linguistic structure from statistical data (e.g. Saffran,
Newport & Aslin, 1996; Lany & Gomez, 2008).
However, little is known about the development of
children’s ability to infer higher-order relational causal
principles from data. In particular, an effect might be
caused by an object property (e.g., red blocks activate a toy)
or by a higher-order relationship between properties (e.g.
two blocks that are the same, regardless of their color,
activate a toy). Inferring higher-order relations is essential
for building abstract knowledge (Kemp, Perfors &
Tenenbaum, 2007; Dewar & Xu, 2010) and reasoning about
concepts that are not tied to perceptual properties. The
ability to form generalizations about higher-order relations

from limited data allows children to make principled
abstractions that go beyond the particular properties they
have observed.
To investigate this, we used a causal version of
Premack’s (1983) match-to-sample task. In this task,
animals observe an abstract relational pattern – AA’, BB’,
and CC’ all lead to a reward. Then they are given a choice
between AB (object match) and DD’ (relational match).
Although A and B have each individually been associated
with the reward, an animal who has inferred the more
abstract relational pattern (“same”) should choose DD’.
Premack found that chimpanzees could not solve this
relational task without hundreds of trials (Premack, 1988) or
explicit training to use linguistic symbols for “same”
(Premack, 1983; Premack & Premack, 1983; 2002).
Additional comparative studies have confirmed this pattern
for non-human primates and other animals (Penn, Holyoak,
& Povinelli, 2008). These observations have led some
researchers to conclude that abstract relational reasoning
may be uniquely human.
Research examining the origins of relational reasoning
using looking-time measures suggests that human infants,
like primates, may be able to recognize relational patterns of
data (Dewar & Xu, 2010; Tyrell, Stauffer & Snowman,
1991; Ferry, Hespos & Gentner, 2012). However, there is
no evidence that infants can use those patterns to make
causal inferences or guide actions. In fact, earlier studies
have concluded that even preschoolers have difficulty with
relational tasks (Christie & Gentner, 2010; Gentner, 2010).
Not unlike chimpanzees, children succeeded only when
given linguistic coaching to point out the pattern of
similarity between two simultaneously presented cases.
Even when explicitly instructed to compare objects, 3-yearolds’ performance on these relational tasks was rather
tenuous, dropping significantly below chance when the test
items were presented sequentially, rather than
simultaneously (Christie & Gentner, 2010). This might lead
to the conclusion that, even in humans, learning higherorder relations and using them to guide actions is a
relatively late-developing ability, which depends on direct
instruction, language, and cultural scaffolding.
However, the striking success of young children on
causal tasks suggests that placing these problems in a causal
context might enhance performance. For example, recent
evidence suggests that by 24 months, toddlers readily learn

1564

novel causal relations by observing others acting causally on
the world, and use this information to fashion their own
actions to achieve the same causal outcomes (Meltzoff,
Waismeyer, & Gopnik, 2012). In the current study, we used
a similar observational learning paradigm to examine
whether infants as young as 18- to 24-months could abstract
a relational property from their observations in a manual
causal task. If infants succeed, this would suggest that the
human ability to learn abstract relations is in place earlier
than previously thought. It would also suggest that these
abilities might be responsible for the impressive learning of
very young children. Could infants solve these relational
problems spontaneously, and without linguistic cues or
explicit directives to compare, if evidence for the existence
of a relational property were provided in a causal context?

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, the experimenter introduced 18- to 24month-old infants to a novel toy that played music when
“activated,” and 3 unique pairs of identical blocks AA’,
BB’, and CC’. Infants observed as the experimenter placed
blocks on the toy, one at the time. In 3 demonstrations,
infants observed that while individual blocks failed to
activate the toy alone, pairs of identical blocks did produce
the effect. Immediately after this brief training, we
examined whether these infants learned the novel relational
property (i.e., pairs of identical objects make the toy play
music) by placing a novel block on the machine, asking the
infants to generate the effect on their own and observing
their first selection.

Methods
Participants A total of 46 18- to 24-month-old infants
participated in Experiment 1 (M = 20.9 months; SD = 2.0
months; range = 18.0-24.4 months; 22 girls).
Five
additional children were tested but excluded for fussiness
during the training phase or for failing to respond to the
experimenter during test trials. Children were recruited
from daycare centers and museums, and a range of
ethnicities resembling the diversity of the population was
represented.
Materials The toy was designed to be similar to the “blicket
detectors” used in past research (see Gopnik & Sobel,
2000). The toy consisted of a 10” x 6” x 4” opaque box
constructed from cardboard and painted white with blue
borders. The box contained a wireless doorbell that was not
visible to the participant. When a block “activated” the toy,
the doorbell played a novel melody. The toy was in fact
surrepticiously activated by a remote control that was held
out of view by the experimenter. Six painted wooden
blocks in assorted colors and shapes (3 unique pairs of 2
identical blocks) were placed on the toy during the training
phase in Experiment 1. Six additional blocks were used
during the test phase in Experiments 1 and 2, including 2
novel pairs of identical blocks and 2 unique individual
blocks.

Procedure The procedure for Experiment 1 is illustrated in
Figure 1. Following a warm-up period in which the child
was familiarized with the experimenter, the toy was placed
on the table. The experimenter said, “This is my toy. Some
things make my toy play music and some things do not
make my toy play music.” Children then observed while the
experimenter placed 6 blocks (3 unique pairs: AA’, BB’,
CC’) on the table in front of the toy. The experimenter said,
“Let’s try!”, selected a block (A), and placed it on top of the
toy. No effect was produced. After a brief pause, the
experimenter again said, “Let’s try!” and selected the paired
block (A’) and placed it next to the first block (A) on top of
the toy. This pair of objects (AA’) activated the toy, which
played a novel melody. The experimenter smiled and said,
“Music!” Both blocks were removed from the toy and
returned to the pile of 6 blocks. This procedure was
repeated with the two remaining pairs (BB’ and CC’). The
order of the pairs was randomized. Following all three
demonstrations, the 6 training blocks were removed from
view. Blocks were placed on the toy one at a time due to
the causal nature of the task: In order to provide evidence
for the conjunctive causal relation (that both blocks were
necessary to activate the toy), infants must observe a single
block fail to activate the toy on its own.
Immediately following the training phase, the
experimenter produced 3 test blocks (1 novel paired block
(D), 1 familiar block (A), and 1 novel distractor block (E)
and placed them in a row on the table. The order of
presentation was randomized. The experimenter said,
“Let’s try!”, produced the target block (D’), and placed it on
top of the toy. No effect was produced. The experimenter
then pushed the toy and a tray with all 3 test blocks towards
the child, and asked, “Can you pick one of these (pointing to
the row of test blocks) to make my toy play music?” The
first test block that the child placed on the toy was recorded.
The toy activated if the child correctly selected the novel
paired block (D). If the child selected the familiar block (A)
or the novel distractor block (E), the toy failed to activate.
After this feedback was provided, this procedure was
repeated a second test trial with a new set of test blocks.
If infants were acting based upon the previous
association between the block and the effect, they should
choose the familiar block (A). If they simply preferred to
try novel blocks they should pick the novel distractor block
(E) as often as the novel paired block (D). However, if
infants were able to learn the relational causal property, then
they should select the novel paired block (D) to produce the
effect.
Coding Children received 1 point for selecting the novel
paired block and 0 points for selecting either of the other
two blocks. Therefore, children in the Experiment 1 could
receive up to 2 points for their performance across the two
test trials. Children’s responses were recorded by a second
researcher during the testing session, and all sessions were
video recorded for independent coding by a third researcher
who was naïve to the the hypotheses of the experiment.

1565

Interrater reliability was very high; the two coders agreed on
99% of the children’s responses to the test questions. Two
minor discrepancies were resolved by a third party.

Figure 1: Schematic representation of training and test trials
in Experiment 1. On each training trial, the experimenter
first placed a single block on the toy (no activation) and then
added an identical block, activating the toy. The procedure
was repeated for all 3 training pairs. On each test trial, 3
test blocks (novel distractor block [ND], familiar block [F],
novel paired block [NP]) were presented. The experimenter
then placed the target block on the toy, yielding no effect.
The child was asked to select one test block to activate the
toy.

Results & Discussion
Across the two test trials, infants inferred the relational
property and selected the novel paired block (D) more often
than expected by chance (M = .91, SD = .69; chance = .66),
t(45) = 2.47, p<.02 (Fischer exact test revealed no order
effects for test trials, p = .39).
Linear regression revealed a significant developmental
change in performance on test trials between 18 and 24

months of age, F(1, 44) = 8.23, p < .01. The regression
model predicts that while the youngest children in our
sample (18-month-olds) perform just above chance values
(chance = .66), by 21 months, children select the novel
paired block on at least half of the test trials.
To further investigate this change, we divided infants
into two age bins: 18-21 months and 21-24 months. Older
infants performed significantly better than chance, (M =
1.13, SD = .82), t(22) = 2.77, p < .02, and significantly
better than younger infants, F(1, 44) = 4.91, p < .05 who
performed at chance, (M = .70, SD = .47), t(22) = .36, p =
.72. Older infants chose the novel paired block significantly
more often than the novel distractor block (binomial, p < .05
for both trials 1 and 2) and the familiar block (binomial, p <
.01 for both trials 1 and 2) .
Previous proposals have suggested that children are
unable to reason relationally because they tend to focus on
the individual objects which have been previously
associated with the outcome, thus interfering with their
ability to detect the relation (e.g., Gentner, 2010). We show
no evidence of this. In fact, only 33% of infants who
answered incorrectly on a given trial selected the familiar
block over the novel distractor block. This is particularly
surprising, given that this block had been associated with
the effect during the training trials. Instead, significantly
more incorrect selections were due to infants’ choice of the
novel distractor block (60%) over the familiar block, p <
.05. This suggests that the younger infants’ failure may have
been due to a preference for exploring the novel block.
Results indicate that by 21-24 months of age, infants are
able to infer a relational causal principle from a few pieces
of evidence, and use this inference to bring about a novel
causal outcome. However, these data do not rule out some
alternative interpretations: Infants may have succeeded on
this task by “matching” the experimenter’s selection or
because they preferred to create pairs on the toy, regardless
of training. Experiment 2 was designed to address these
alternatives.

Experiment 2
The procedure for Experiment 2 was identical to
Experiment 1, except that infants did not observe the
training trials. Infants were therefore given no evidence for
the relational property. Instead, after being introduced to
the toy, infants were immediately presented with a test trial.
If infants were simply matching the experimenter or had a
preexisting preference for pairs of blocks, then performance
should not differ significantly from the infants in
Experiment 1.
However, if these alternatives are
insufficient to explain the infants’ success, then infants
should perform at chance.

Method
Participants Twenty-two 21-24-month-olds participated (M
= 22.8 months; SD = 1.3 months; range = 21.5-24.8
months; 10 girls). Two additional children were tested but

1566

excluded for failing to respond. Recruitment procedures
and demographics were identical to Experiment 1.
Materials & Procedures Materials and procedures were
identical to Experiment 1. However, infants did not observe
the training trials. Instead, after infants were introduced to
the toy, they were given a single test trial. Only one test
trial was administered, in order to avoid providing feedback.
Therefore, infants could receive 0 or 1 point. Interrater
reliability for Experiment 2 was 100%.

Results & Discussion
In the absense of evidence for the relational principle, only
36% (8 out of 22) of infants selected the paired block,
[binomial test, p = .72, ns], which was significantly different
from the infants of the same age on their first trial in
Experiment 1, p < .05 by Fischer’s exact test. These results
demonstrate that the findings from Experiment 1 could not
have been the result of imitation or a preexisting bias to
prefer pairs.

General Discussion
These findings suggest that the differences in relational
reasoning between humans and non-human primates may be
in place very early, and that human infants can succeed on
match-to-sample tasks in a causal context without explicit
linguistic cues or instruction. On the other hand, the failure
of younger infants may suggest that the ability to use
language may play a role. Alternatively, failure may be due
to other factors that make it difficult for younger infants to
display competence in manual tasks, such as a general
impulse to explore novel objects. Additional research is
needed to examine whether relational abilities are supported
by the development of linguistic capacities – and language
production in particular. To this end, we are currently
examining the relationship between infants’ performance on
the causal match-to-sample task and their general language
skills. In particular, we are examining infants’
comprehension and production of relational words (e.g.,
“more”).
The method outlined in this paper provides a novel and
powerful paradigm for assessing relational reasoning in a
causal context. Importantly, this method minimizes the need
for verbal guidance, and is thus suitable for very young
children. Earlier “blicket detector” studies using very
similar methods have confirmed that children’s inferences in
these tasks go beyond simple associative learning and have
the distinctive profile of causal inferences. For example,
children will use inferences about the causal relation of the
block and machine to design novel interventions – patterns
of action they have never actually observed – to construct
counterfactual inferences and to make explicit causal
judgments, including judgments about unobserved hidden
features of the objects (e.g. Gopnik & Sobel, 2000; Schulz,
Gopnik, & Glymour, 2007; Sobel, Yoachim, Gopnik,
Meltzoff, & Blumenthal, 2007).

However, due to the constraints of the particular causal
context (i.e., the need to provide evidence for the
conjunctive relation over the disjunctive relation, noisy
OR), we opted to present evidence one block at a time,
rather than in simultaneously presented pairs. In the earlier
primate studies, the canonical relational tasks presented the
pairs simultaneously, so that the animals had to choose
between pairs of AA and BB. This difference in procedure
may have led to the divergent results between infants and
primates.
We have recently completed an additional follow-up
experiment exploring this possibility (Walker & Gopnik,
under review). In this study, 18- to 30-month-old infants
(M = 25.7 months) were divided into one of two conditions:
same or different. In the same condition, infants were given
two pieces of evidence that pairs of “same” objects (AA’,
BB’, CC’) simultaneously placed on the toy produce the
effect. In order to provide evidence for a conjunctive causal
relationship, we also provide two pieces of evidence that
pairs of “different” objects (DE, FG, HI) fail to produce the
effect. In the different condition, infants were given the
same four pieces of evidence, with the causal pattern
reversed: “different” pairs (i.e., DE) produced the effect,
while “same” pairs (i.e., AA’) failed to do so. By combining
positive and negative evidence, we were able to use a
similar causal method to demonstrate that infants are able to
learn the relational properties “same” and “different.”
Results of this study provide strong evidence that 2-yearolds are able to quickly learn relational causal principles,
with 81% of children selecting the relational match in both
the same and different conditions.
Clearly, toddlers are able to rapidly learn abstract
relational causal principles from minimal evidence and use
them to guide their subsequent actions in the world. This
ability appears to be in place surprisingly early in human
development. It emerges only a few months after the first
evidence of the ability to learn about specific causal
properties from contingency. This may help explain how
children acquire the impressively general and abstract causal
knowledge evident in early “intutive theories” (Gopnik &
Wellman, 2012; Carey, 2010).

Acknowledgments
Research was funded by the James S. McDonnell
Foundation and the National Science Foundation (BCS1023875) to A. Gopnik. We thank the parents and children
who participated and the University of California, Berkeley
Early Childhood Centers, Lawrence Hall of Science, and
Habitot. We are grateful to Fei Xu and Tania Lombrozo for
their feedback. Finally, we thank Rosie Aboody, Anna
Akullien, Ela Banerjee, Sierra Eisen, and Brynna Ledford
for facilitating data collection.

References
Byrne, R.W. (1995). The thinking ape: Evolutionary
origins of intelligence. New York: Oxford University
Press.

1567

Carey, S. (2010). The origin of concepts. USA: Oxford
University Press
Christie, S. & Gentner, D. (2010). Where hypotheses come
from: Learning new relations by structural alignment.
Journal of Cognition & Development, 11, 356-373.
Dewar, K.M. & Xu, F. (2010). Induction, overhypothesis,
and the origin of abstract knowledge: Evidence from 9month-old infants. Psychological Science, 43, 1227-1238.
Ferry, S., Hespos, S., & Gentner, D. (2012). Prelinguistic
relational concepts: Investigating the origins of analogical
reasoning in infants. Poster presented at the 18th
Biennial International Conference on Infant Studies, in
Minneapolis, MN, June 7, 2012.
Gentner, D. (2010). Bootstrapping the mind: Analogical
processes and symbol systems. Cognitive Science, 34,
752-775.
Gentner, D., Anggoro, F.K., & Klibanoff, R.S. (2011).
Structure mapping and relational language support
children’s learning of relational categories.
Child
Development, 82, 1173-1188.
Gopnik, A. (2012). Scientific thinking in young children:
Theoretical advances, empirical research, and policy
implications. Science, 337, 1623-1627.
Gopnik, A. & Sobel, D. (2000). Detecting blickets: How
young children use information about novel causal powers
in categorization and induction, Child Development,
71(5): 1205-1222.
Gopnik, A. Wellman, H. (2012). Reconstructing
constructivism: Causal models, Bayesian learning
mechanisms, and the theory theory. Psychological
Bulletin, 138, 1085-1108.
Gweon, H. & Schulz, L. (2011). 16-month-olds rationally
infer causes of failed actions. Science, 332, 1524.
Heyes, C. & Frith, U. (Eds.) (2012). New thinking: The
evolution of human cognition (Theme Issue).
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, B, 367.
Kemp, C., Perfors, A., & Tenenbaum, J.B. (2007). Learning
overhypotheses with hierarchical Bayesian models.
Developmental Science, 10, 307-321.
Kushnir, T., Xu, F., & Wellman, H.M. (2010). Young
children use statistical sampling to infer the preferences
of other people. Psychological Science, 21, 1134-1140.
Lany, J.A. & Gómez, R.L. (2008). Twelve-month-olds
benefit from prior experience in statistical learning.
Psychological Science, 19, 1247-1252.

Meltzoff, A., Waismeyer, A., & Gopnik, A. (2012).
Learning about causes from people: Observational causal
learning in 24-month-olds infants. Developmental
Psychology, Online First Publication.
Penn, D.C., Holyoak, K.J., & Povinelli, D.J. (2008).
Darwin’s mistake: Explaining the discontinuity between
human and nonhuman minds. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 31, 109-178
Premack, D. (1983). The codes of man and beasts.
Behavioral & Brain Sciences, 6, 125-167.
Premack, D. (1988). Minds without language. In L.
Weiskrantz, (Ed.), Thought without language (pp. 46-65).
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Premack, D. & Premack, A.J. (1983). The mind of an ape.
New York: W.W. Norton.
Premack, D. & Premack, A.J.
(2002).
Original
intelligence: Unlocking the mystery of who we are. New
York: McGraw-Hill.
Saffran, J.R., Newport, E.L., & Aslin, R.N. (1996).
Statistical learning by 8-month-old infants. Science, 274,
1926-1928.
Schultz, L. Gopnik, A., & Glymour, C. (2007). Preschool
children learn about causal structure from conditional
interventions. Dev Sci. 10(3): 322-332.
Sobel, D. & Kirkham, N.Z. (2006). Blickets and babies:
The development of causal reasoning in toddlers and
infants. Developmenal Psychology, 42, 1103-1115.
Sobel, D.M. Yoachim, C.M. Gopnik, A. Meltzoff, A.N. &
Blumenthal, E.J. (2007).
The blicket within:
Preschoolers’ inferences about insides and causes. J. of
Cog Dev, 8(2): 159-182.
Taylor, H.N., Miller, R., & Grey, R.D. (2012). New
Caledonian crows reason about hidden causal agents.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Science. Online
Sept. 17, 2012.
Tomasello, M. & Call, J. (1997). Primate cognition. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Tyrrell, D.J., Stauffer, L.B., & Snowman, L.G (1991).
Perception of abstract identity/difference relationships by
infants. Infant Behavior & Development, 14, 125-129.
Walker, C.M. & Gopnik, A. (under review). Infants infer
higher-order relational principles in causal learning.

1568

