UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Computational Model of Two Cognitive Transitions Underlying Cultural Evolution

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0007h14p

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Gabora, Liane
Chia, Wei Wen
Firouzi, Hadi

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Computational Model of Two Cognitive Transitions Underlying Cultural
Evolution
Liane Gabora (liane.gabora@ubc.ca)
University of British Columbia
Department of Psychology, Okanagan campus, Arts Building, 3333 University Way
Kelowna BC, V1V 1V7, CANADA

Wei Wen Chia (cww9989@gmail.com) and Hadi Firouzi (hadi.firouzi@ubc.ca)
University of British Columbia
Department of Engineering, 5000-2332 Main Mall
Vancouver BC,V6T 1Z4, CANADA
Abstract

generated artworks that humans preferred over those generated without CF (DiPaola & Gabora, 2009). However, the
portrait painting program did not allow investigation of the
effect of CF on the evolution of ideas through cultural interaction. The goal of the work presented here was to understand
the relationship between chaining and CF. Specifically, we investigate the feasibility of the hypothesis that RR is broadly
useful for improving cultural outputs, while CF is specifically
useful for overcoming a new or sudden challenge.

We tested the computational feasibility of the proposal that
open-ended cultural evolution was made possible by two cognitive transitions: (1) onset of the capacity to chain thoughts together, followed by (2) onset of contextual focus (CF): the capacity to shift between a divergent mode of thought conducive
to ‘breaking out of a rut’ and a convergent mode of thought
conducive to minor modifications. These transitions were simulated in EVOC, an agent-based model of cultural evolution, in
which the fitness of agents’ actions increases as agents invent
ideas for new actions, and imitate the fittest of their neighbors’
actions. Both mean fitness and diversity of actions across the
society increased with chaining, and even more so with CF, as
hypothesized. CF was only effective when the fitness function
changed, which supports its hypothesized role in generating
and refining ideas.

Early Signs of Human Creativity

Keywords: Agent-based model, CF, convergent though, creativity, cultural evolution, divergent thought, dual process, recursive retrieval, stream of thought.

Introduction
Humans are unique with respect to the ability to generate
accumulative, adaptive cultural evolution, a phenomenon referred to as the ratchet effect (Tomasello, Kruger, & Ratner,
1993). Gaining insight into the origins of the capacity for
complex culture is difficult, since all that is left of our prehistoric ancestors are bones and artifacts such as stone tools that
resist the passage of time. Although methods for analyzing
these remains are becoming increasingly sophisticated, they
cannot always distinguish amongst competing theories. Thus,
formal models provide valuable reconstructive tools for testing the feasibility of theories concerning the origins of the
cognitive mechanisms that have transformed our planet.
Several cognitive mechanisms have been implicated in
the ability to evolve culture. One is the capacity to chain
thoughts together to generate a sequence of actions or stream
of thought (Donald, 1991). Another is contextual focus (hereafter referred to as CF): the capacity to shift between analytic
and associative modes of thought (Gabora, 2003). Mathematical models of both have been developed (Gabora & Aerts,
2009; Gabora & Kitto, 2012; Veloz et al., 2011). Incorporating chaining into a computational model of cultural evolution increased the fitness and diversity of cultural outputs, as
well as the effectiveness of learning (Gabora & Saberi, 2011).
Incorporating CF into a portrait painting computer program

The minds of our earliest ancestors, Homo habilis, are referred to as episodic because there is no evidence that their
experience deviated from the present moment of concrete
sensory perceptions (Donald, 1991). They encoded perceptions of events in memory, but had little voluntary access to
them without cues. They were therefore unable to voluntarily
shape, modify, or practice skills and actions, and could not
invent or refine complex actions, gestures, or vocalizations.
Homo habilis was eventually replaced by Homo erectus,
which lived between approximately 1.8 and 0.3 million years
ago. This period is considered the beginning of human cultural evolution. Homo erectus exhibited signs of enhanced
intelligence, creativity, and adaptability. They made sophisticated task-specific stone hand axes, had complex stable seasonal home bases, and there is evidence of long-distance
hunting strategies involving large game, and migration out
of Africa (Leakey 1984). It is widely believed that these
early signs of creative culture reflect an underlying transition in cognitive or social abilities. The cranial capacity of
the Homo erectus brain was approximately 1,000 cc, which
is about 25% larger than that of Homo habilis, and at least
twice as large as that of living great apes, and 75% that of
modern humans (Aiello, 1996 ).
Some have suggested that these abilities are due to the onset of a theory of mind (Mithen, 1998) or the capacity to imitate (Dugatkin, 2001). However, there is evidence that nonhuman primates also possess theory of mind (Heyes, 1998)
and the capacity to imitate (Dugatkin, 2001), yet their cultural complexity do not compare with humans’. Evolutionary
psychologists have suggested that our unique abilities were
due to the onset of massive modularity (Barkow, Cosmides,

2344

& Tooby, 1992). However, although the mind exhibits an intermediate degree of functional and anatomical modularity,
neuroscience has not revealed vast numbers of hardwired, encapsulated, task-specific modules; indeed, the brain is more
subject to environmental influence than was previously believed (Buller, 2005; Byrne, 2000; Wexler, 2006).
Donald (1991) proposed that with the enlarged cranial capacity of Homo erectus, the human mind underwent a transition characterized by a shift from an episodic to a mimetic
mode of cognitive functioning, made possible by onset of
the capacity to voluntarily retrieve memories independent of
environmental cues and chain them into sequences. Donald
refers to the cognitive architecture underlying this capacity as
a self-triggered recall and rehearsal loop. It enabled information to be processed recursively, and from different perspectives. Voluntary access to memories made it possible to
act out1 events that occurred in the past or that might occur in
the future. Thus not only could the mimetic mind temporarily
escape the here and now, but by miming or gesture it could
communicate similar escapes to other minds. The capacity to
mime thus brought forth what is referred to as a mimetic form
of cognition, and allowed for the onset of culture. The selftriggered recall and rehearsal loop also enabled our ancestors
to engage in a stream of thought, in which one thought or idea
evokes another, and so forth recursively. In this way, attention
can be directed away from the external world toward one’s
internal model of it. Finally, self-triggered recall allowed for
voluntary rehearsal and refinement of actions, enabling systematic evaluation and improvement of skills and motor acts.

An Explosion of Creative Cultural Change
The European archaeological record indicates that an unparalleled cultural transition occurred between 60,000 and
30,000 years ago, at the onset of the Upper Paleolithic. Considering it ”evidence of the modern human mind at work,”
Leakey (1984:93-94) describes this period as ”unlike previous eras, when stasis dominated, ... [with] change being
measured in millennia rather than hundreds of millennia.”
Similarly, Mithen (1998) refers to the Upper Paleaolithic as
the ‘big bang’ of human culture, exhibiting more innovation
than in the previous six million years of human evolution. It
marks the beginnings of traits considered diagnostic of behavioral modernity, including a more organized, strategic,
season-specific style of hunting involving specific animals at
specific sites, elaborate burial sites indicative of ritual and religion, evidence of dance, magic, and totemism, colonization
of Australia, and replacement of Levallois tool technology by
blade cores in the Near East. In Europe, complex hearths and
many forms of art appeared, including cave paintings of animals, decorated tools and pottery, bone and antler tools with
engraved designs, ivory statues of animals and sea shells, and
personal decoration such as beads, pendants, and perforated
animal teeth, many of which may have indicated social status.
1 The term mimetic is derived from “mime,” which means “to act
out.”

Whether this period was a genuine revolution culminating in behavioral modernity is hotly debated because claims
to this effect are based on the European Palaeolithic record,
and largely exclude the African record (McBrearty & Brooks,
2000). However the dominant view is that modern behavior
appeared in Africa between 40,000 and 50,000 years ago, and
spread, resulting in displacement of the Neanderthals in Europe (Klein, 1999). From this point on there was only one
hominid species: modern Homo sapien, and despite a lack
of overall increase in cranial capacity, their prefrontal cortex,
and more particularly the orbitofrontal region, increased significantly in size (Dunbar, 1993). in what was most likely a
time of major neural reorganization (Klein, 1999). Given that
the Middle/Upper Palaeolithic was a period of unprecedented
creativity, what kind of cognitive processes were involved?
It is widely believed that a divergent or associative mode
of thought predominates during idea generation, while a convergent or analytic mode predominates during the refinement, implementation, and testing of an idea (Finke, Ward,
& Smith, 1992). It has been proposed that the Paleolithic
transition reflects fine-tuning of the biochemical mechanisms
underlying the capacity to subconsciously shift between these
modes, depending on the situation, by varying the specificity
of the activated cognitive receptive field (Gabora, 2003; Gabora Kaufman, 2010). This is referred to as contextual focus2 (CF) because it requires the ability to focus or defocus
attention in response to the context or situation one is in. Defocused attention, by diffusely activating a broad region of
memory, is conducive to divergent thought; it enables obscure
(but potentially relevant) aspects of the situation to come into
play. Focused attention is conducive to convergent thought;
memory activation is constrained enough to hone in and perform logical mental operations on the most clearly relevant
aspects.

The Computational Model
We reviewed the evidence for two hypotheses: (1) the earliest signs of culture were due to the onset of the capacity to
chain representations together, and (2) the cultural explosion
of the Middle-Upper Paleolithic was due to the onset of CF.
We investigated these hypotheses using an agent-based model
of cultural evolution referred to as “EVOlution of Culture”,
abbreviated EVOC. EVOC uses neural network based agents
that (1) invent new ideas, (2) imitate actions implemented by
neighbors, (3) evaluate ideas, and (4) implement successful
ideas as actions. EVOC is an elaboration of Meme and Variations, or MAV (Gabora, 1995), the earliest computer program
to our knowledge to model not just cultural transmission but
cumulative, adaptive, cultural evolution.3 It was inspired by
the genetic algorithm, a search technique that finds solutions
2 In neural net terms, CF amounts to the capacity to spontaneously and subconsciously vary the shape of the activation function, flat for divergent thought and spiky for analytical
3 The approach can thus be contrasted with computer models of
how individual learning affects biological evolution (e.g., Higgs,
2000; Hinton & Nowlan, 1987; Hutchins & Hazelhurst, 1991).

2345

Table 1: Definition table.

to complex problems by generating a ‘population’ of candidate solutions through processes akin to mutation, selecting
the best, and repeating until a satisfactory solution is found
(Holland, 1975). The goal behind MAV, and also behind
EVOC, was to distil the underlying logic of not biological
evolution but cultural evolution. Agents do not evolve in a biological sense–they neither die nor have offspring–but do in a
cultural sense, by adaptively modifying each others’ ideas for
actions. We summarize the architecture of EVOC in sufficient
detail to explain our results; for details we refer the reader to
previous publications (e.g., Gabora, 1995; Gabora & Saberi,
2011; Leijnen & Gabora, 2009).

Term
Body
Part

Definition
Component of agent
other than neural network.
Set of six components
that indicates position of
6 body parts. Each can be
in a neutral (0), up (1), or
down (-1) position.

Subaction

Action

Agents
Agents consist of (1) a neural network, which encodes ideas
for actions and detects trends in what constitutes a fit action,
(2) a ‘perceptual system’, which carries out the evaluation
and imitation of neighbours’ actions, and (3) a body, consisting of six body parts which implement actions. The neural
network is composed of six input nodes and six corresponding output nodes that represent concepts of body parts (LEFT
ARM, RIGHT ARM, LEFT LEG, RIGHT LEG, HEAD, and
HIPS), as well as hidden nodes that represent more abstract
concepts (LEFT, RIGHT, ARM, LEG, SYMMETRY, OPPOSITE, and MOVEMENT). Input nodes and output nodes are
connected to hidden nodes of which they are instances (e.g.,
LEFT ARM is connected to LEFT.) Activation of any input
node activates the MOVEMENT node. Same-direction activation of symmetrical input nodes (e.g., upward motion–of
both arms) activates the SYMMETRY node.

Invention
An idea for a new action is a pattern consisting of six elements
that dictate the placement of the six body parts. Agents generate new actions by modifying their initial action or an action
that has been invented previously or acquired through imitation. During invention, the pattern of activation on the output
nodes is fed back to the input nodes, and invention is biased
according to the activations of the SYMMETRY and MOVEMENT hidden nodes. (Were this not the case there would
be no benefit to using a neural network.) To invent a new
idea, for each node of the idea currently represented on the
input layer of the neural network, the agent makes a probabilistic decision as to whether the position of that body part
will change, and if it does, the direction of change is stochastically biased according to the learning rate. If the new idea
has a higher fitness than the currently implemented idea, the
agent learns and implements the action specified by that idea.

Imitation
The process of finding a neighbour to imitate works through
a form of lazy (non-greedy) search. The imitating agent randomly scans its neighbours, and adopts the first action that is
fitter than the action it is currently implementing. If it does
not find a neighbour that is executing a fitter action than its
own current action, it continues to execute the current action.

Template

One or more sequential
sub-actions.
Abstract or prototypical
format for a sub-action.
Position of a body part
can be unspecified (*).

Example
Left Arm (LA)

HD:0,
LA:1,
RA:-1,
LL:1,
RL:0,
HP:-1;
This sub-action
is abbreviated
01-110-1
01001-1, -10-1111
HD:0,
LA:*,
RA:1,
LL:*,
RL:1, HP:-1

Table 2: Partial set of the templates used in the first fitness
function. (The rest are omitted due to lack of space.)
T 1 = {0, ∗, ∗, ∗, ∗, ∗}
T 2 = {∗, 0, ∗, ∗, ∗, ∗}
T 3 = {∗, ∗, 0, ∗, ∗, ∗}

T 24 = {1, ∗, ∗, 1, 1, ∗}
T 25 = {1, ∗, 1, ∗, 1, ∗}
T 26 = {1, ∗, 1, 1, ∗, ∗}

Evaluation: The Fitness Function
Fitness was evaluated using an adaptation of the Royal Roads
fitness function (Forrest & Mitchell, 1993). Midway through
a run the fitness function was changed to test the effectiveness
of chaining and CF for adapting to a sudden change in the task
constraints or the environment. Definitions of terms used to
accomplish this are provided in Table One.
The first fitness function is determined by 45 templates, six
of which are shown in Table Two. The second (not shown) is
constructed analogously, with different sub-actions. The templates can be thought of as defining the cultural significance
of types of sub-actions (such as dance steps). Each template
T i consists of six components, one for each body part (i.e.,
T i = t ij ; j = 1..6). Each body part can be in a neutral position
(0) , up (1), down (-1), or an unspecified position (*). For
example, in template T i = ∗, 1, −1, ∗, ∗, 0, the left arm is up
(LA:1), the right arm is down (RA:-1), the hips are in the neutral position (HP:0), and the positions of other body parts is
unspecified (HD:*, LL:*, and RL:*). The templates provide
constraints, as well as flexibility with respect to what constitutes a fit action. For example, in an optimally fit action, the
head must be in the neutral position (in T 1 the first component
is 0) but the positions of other body parts can vary). The optimal sub-actions are {0, 1, −1, 1, −1, 1}, {0, 1, −1, 1, −1, −1},
{0, −1, 1, −1, 1, 1}, and {0, −1, 1, −1, 1, −1}.
Assume that D is a sub-action (i.e., D = d j ; j = 1..6) and T i
is the ith template (i.e., T i = t ij ; j = 1..6). Thus, d j represents
the position of the jth body part and the value of d j can be
either 0 (neutral), 1 (up), or -1 (down). Likewise, the value of

2346

t ij can be 0, 1, -1, or * (unspecified). Accordingly, the fitness
of sub-action D is obtained as per Eq. 1.

Method
Modeling Chaining

19

F(D) = ∑ Φ(T i , D) × Ω(T i )

(1)

i=1

As shown in Eq. 1, fitness is a function of template weight
(Φ(T i , D)) and template order (Ω(T i )).
Template Weight Φ(T i , D) is a function that determines
the weight of sub-action D by comparing it with template T i .
This weight is set to one if each component of the sub-action
(i.e., d j ; j = 1..6) either matches the corresponding component of the template (i.e., t ij ; j = 1..6) or if the corresponding
components of the template is unspecified (i.e., t ij = ∗):
Φ(T i , D) =



1
0

if

∀t ij

∈ Ti

: t ij

= d j or ∗
otherwise

(2)

Template Order Ω(T i ) computes the order of the template
T i by counting the number of components that have a specified value (i.e., t ij 6= ∗).

The chaining algorithm is illustrated schematically in Figure
1b. Chaining gives agents the opportunity to execute multistep actions. The agent can keep adding a new sub-action
to its current action so long as the most recently-added subaction is both novel and successful. A sub-action D is considered novel if at least one of its components is different from
that of the previous sub-action. It is considered successful if
there exists a template T i such that Φ(T i , D) is one.

success f ul(D) =

true i f ∃ T i : Φ(T i , D) = 1
f alse
otherwise

(4)

The fitness of an action consisting of more than one subaction is obtained by adding the number of sub-actions to the
fitness of the last sub-action in the sequence. For example, if
the last sub-action of an action is D = [0, 1, −1, 1, −1, 1] and
the number of sub-actions is seven, the fitness of the action is
F(D) + 7 = 14 + 7 = 21. Thus where c is ‘with chaining’, w
is ‘without chaining’, n is the number of chained sub-actions,
the fitness of a chained action, Fc , is calculated as follows:

6

Ω(T i ) =

∑i

t ij

(3)

j=1,t j 6=∗

The fitness functions are difficult to solve because they are
rugged; is to have multiple milestones, or fitness peaks, that
agents must achieve before reaching the plateau. For example, consider the fitness function given in Table 2. The action 0,0,0,0,0,0 has a fitness of 6. An agent may move on
from this action to find an actions that fits the third order
templates with a fitness of 31, e.g., F(D) : {1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 0} =
3 + 3 + 3 + 3 + 3 + 3 + 3 + 3 + 3 + 3 + 1 = 31.

Learning
Invention makes use of the ability to learn, and respond adaptively to trends. Knowledge acquired through the evaluation
of actions is translated into educated guesses about how to
invent fit actions. For example, an agent may learn that symmetrical movement tends to be either beneficial or detrimental, and bias the generation of new actions accordingly.

A Typical Run
Fitness and diversity of actions are initially low because all
agents are initially immobile, implementing the same action,
with all body parts in the neutral position. Soon some agent
invents an action that has a higher fitness than immobility,
and this action gets imitated, so fitness increases. Fitness increases further as other ideas get invented, assessed, implemented as actions, and spread through imitation. The diversity of actions increases due to the proliferation of new ideas,
and then decreases as agents hone in on the fittest actions.
Thus, over successive rounds of invention and imitation, the
agents’ actions improve. EVOC thereby models how “descent with modification” occurs in a purely cultural context.

Fc = Fw + n

(5)

An agent can execute an arbitrarily long action so long as
it continues to invent successful new sub-actions. In general,
the more sub-actions the fitter the action. This is admittedly a
simple algorithm of simulating the capacity for chaining, but
we were not interested in the impact of this action per se. The
goal here was simply to test hypotheses about how chaining
at the individual level affects dynamics at the societal level,
by providing agents with a means of implementing multistep
actions such that the optimal way of going about one step
depends on how one went about the previous step.

Modeling Contextual Focus
The CF algorithm is illustrated schematically in Figure 1c. In
the convergent mode, the current action is only slightly modified to create a new action. In the divergent mode, the current
action is substantial modified to create a new action. An agent
switches between these modes by modifying its rate of creative change (RCC). If the fitness of its current action is low
relative to previous actions, RCC increases, causing the agent
to shift to a more divergent processing mode conducive to
large leaps through the space of possibilities. If action fitness
is high relative to that of previous actions, RCC decreases,
and the agent shifts to a more convergent mode conducive to
minor adjustments. With CF turned off, RCC stays constant
throughout the run at 1/6 (i.e., a new action involves change
to one of the six body parts). The equation to modify RCC is
shown in Eq. 6 where a is a negative value. Since at the start
of a run previous fitness is undefined, RCC in this case is a
function of the current fitness as per Eq. 7, where 0 < b < 1.
∆RCC = a(Fnew − Fold )

2347

(6)

Figure 2: Mean fitness of cultural outputs across the society
with both chaining and CF (red line), chaining only (dashed
blue line), and neither chaining nor CF (dotted green line).

Figure 1: Schematic illustration of (a) neither chaining nor
CF, (b) chaining only, and (c) both. Chaining operates within
a generation whereas CF operates between generations.
RCCinitial = bFcurrent

Figure 3: Diversity of cultural outputs across the society
with both chaining and CF (red line), chaining only (dashed
blue line), and neither chaining nor CF (dotted green line).

(7)

In the results shown here a and b were initialized to -0.005
and 0.8 respectively.

Results
The results of introducing chaining and CF on the mean fitness and diversity (total number of different actions) of actions across all agents in the society are shown in Figures
2 and 3 respectively. All graphs show means of 500 runs.
Chaining and CF both significantly increased mean fitness of
actions. Without chaining, mean fitness quickly reached a
plateau; with chaining it could increase indefinitely. While
chaining increased mean fitness throughout the run, CF only
increased mean fitness following initial exposure to a new fitness function, i.e., at the beginning of the run, and when the
second fitness function was introduced at iteration 50.
Chaining also significantly increased the diversity of actions. Although inspection reveals that there is always convergence on optimal actions, without chained actions, this set
is a static (thus mean fitness plateaus) whereas with chained
actions the set of optimal actions changes, as increasingly fit
actions continue to be found. When agents were first exposed
to a fitness function, CF increased both the rate at which new
possibilities were generated, and the rate of convergence on
the fittest of these, although this effect is more pronounced
for the first fitness function than the second. As with fitness,
CF exerted no noticeable effect on diversity once the agents
had fit actions.

Discussion
This paper provides valuable insights into the mechanisms
underlying the uniquely human capacity for collectively generated, open-ended, adaptive cultural evolution. Our results
suggest that once humans became able to sequence thoughts
together to generate increasingly complex and refined cultural outputs, they would have found themselves at a significant adaptive advantage. Similarly, our results suggest that
once humans became able to employ an exploratory, divergent processing mode when stuck, followed by a shift to a
more constrained convergent processing mode to fine-tune
their cultural outputs, they would have been capable of generating significantly more valuable cultural outputs. We suggest that a mechanism akin to CF is what makes possible the
cumulative creativity exhibited by successful computational
models of language evolution (e.g., Kirby, 2001). A potential downfall of processing in a divergent mode is that since
effort is devoted to the re-processing of previously learned
material, less effort may be devoted to being on the lookout
for danger and simply carrying out practical tasks. Since divergent thought carries a high cognitive load, it would not
have been useful to think divergently until there was a means
to shift back to a convergent mode. Although these results
do not prove that onset of the capacity to chain thoughts together into sequences, and to shift between divergent modes
of thought through CF, are responsible for our cultural complexity, it shows that they provide a computationally feasible

2348

explanation. We know of no other cognitive mechanisms implicated in the evolution of complex culture for which openended, adaptive cultural change has been demonstrated.
Both chaining and CF were implemented in a simple manner. Future investigations will focus on developing more realistic implementations of chaining and CF. Chaining will use
associative recall to reconsider an item from multiple potentially relevant ‘perspectives’, and the divergent mode of CF
will use a sophisticated mathematical model of concepts to
facilitate the generation of new concept combinations.

Acknowledgments
This project was conducted at the Media and Graphics Interdisciplinary Centre (MAGIC), UBC. It was supported by
the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of
Canada, and Fund for Scientific Research, Flanders, Belgium.

References
Aiello, L. C. (1996). Hominine pre-adaptations for language
and cognition. In P. Mellars & K. Gibson (Eds.), Modeling
the early human mind, Cambridge, UK: McDonald Institute Monographs, 89-99.
Barkow, J. H., Cosmides, L., & Tooby, J., Eds. (1992). The
adapted mind New York: Oxford University Press.
Buller, D. J. (2005). Adapting minds. MIT Press.
Byrne, R., & Russon, A. (1998). Learning by imitation: A
hierarchical approach. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 2,
667-721.
Cavalli-Sforza, L. L., & Feldman, M. W. (1981). Cultural transmission and evolution: A quantitative approach.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
DiPaola, S. & Gabora, L. (2009). Incorporating characteristics of human creativity into an evolutionary art algorithm.
Genetic Programming and Evolvable Machines, 10, 97110.
Donald, M. (1991). Origins of the modern mind: Three
stages in the evolution of culture and cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Dugatkin, L. (2001). Imitation factor: Imitation in animals
and the origin of human culture. New York: Free Press.
Dunbar, R. (1993). Coevolution of neocortical size, group
size, and language in humans. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 16, 681-735.
Finke, R. A., Ward, T. B., & Smith, S. M. (1992). Creative
cognition: Theory, research, and applications. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Forrest, S. & Mitchell, M. (1993). Relative building block
fitness and the building block hypothesis. In (L. Whitley,
Ed.) Foundations of genetic algorithms. San Mateo: Morgan Kaufman.
Gabora, L. (1995). Meme and Variations: A computer
model of cultural evolution. In L. Nadel & D. Stein (Eds.)
1993 Lectures in Complex Systems. Boston: AddisonWesley.

2349

Gabora, L. (2003). Contextual focus: A cognitive explanation for the cultural transition of the Middle/Upper Paleolithic. Proceedings Annual Conference Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 432–437), Boston: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Gabora, L. & Aerts, D. (2009). A mathematical model of the
emergence of an integrated worldview. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 53, 434–451.
Gabora, L., & Kaufman, S. (2010). Evolutionary perspectives on creativity. In (J. Kaufman & R. Sternberg, Eds.)
The Cambridge handbook of creativity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gabora, L., & Kitto, K. (2012). Concept combination and
the origins of complex cognition. In (L. Swan, Ed.) Origins of mind. Berlin: Springer.
Gabora, L. & Saberi, M. (2011). How did human creativity
arise? An agent-based model of the origin of cumulative
open-ended cultural evolution. Proceedings Conference on
Cognition & Creativity (pp. 299-306). New York: ACM.
Higgs, P. (2000). The mimetic transition: a simulation study
of the evolution of learning by imitation. Proceedings:
Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 267, 1355-1361.
Heyes, C. M. (1998). Theory of mind in nonhuman primates. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 211, 104-134.
Hinton, G. E. & Nowlan, S. J. (1987). How learning can
guide evolution. Complex Systems, 1, 495-502.
Holland, J. K. (1975). Adaptation in natural and artificial
systems. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.
Hutchins, E. & Hazelhurst, B. (1991). Learning in the cultural process. In Langton, C., Farmer, D., & Rasmussen, S.
(Eds.) Artificial Life II. Redwood City: Addison-Wesley.
Kirby, S. (2001). Spontaneous evolution of linguistic structure: An iterated learning model of the emergence of regularity and irregularity. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary
Computation, 5(2), 102-110.
Klein, R. (1999). The human career: Human biological and
cultural origins. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Leijnen, S., & Gabora, L. (2009). How creative should creators be to optimize the evolution of ideas? A computational model. Electronic Proceedings in Theoretical Computer Science, 9, 108-119.
Leakey, R. (1984). The origins of humankind. New York:
Science Masters Basic Books.
McBrearty, S., & Brooks, A. S. (2000). The revolution that
wasnt: A new interpretation of the origin of modern human
behavior. Journal of Human Evolution, 39, 453-563.
Mithen, S. (1998). Creativity in human evolution and prehistory. London, UK: Routledge.
Tomasello, M., Kruger, A., & Ratner, H. (1993). Cultural
learning. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 16, 495-552.
Veloz, T., Gabora, L., Eyjolfson, M. & Aerts, D. (2011).
A model of the shifting relationship between concepts and
contexts in different modes of thought. Proc 5th Intnl Symposium on Quantum Interaction. Heidelberg: Springer.
Wexler, B. (2006). Brain and culture: Neurobiology, ideology and social change. New York: Bradford Books.

