UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A PDP Model for Capturing N400 Effects in Early L2 Learners during Bilingual Word Reading
Tasks

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/64c1547n

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Sadeghi, Sepideh
Pu, He
Scheitz, Matthias
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A PDP Model for Capturing N400 Effects in Early L2 Learners during Bilingual
Word Reading Tasks
Sepideh Sadeghi (sepideh.sadeghi @tufts.edu), Matthias Scheutz (matthias.scheutz @tufts.edu)
Department of Computer Science, Tufts University Medford, MA 02155 USA

He Pu (he.pu@tufts.edu), Phillip J. Holcomb (pholcomb@tufts.edu), Katherine J. Midgley
(kj.midgley@tufts.edu)
Department of Psychology, Tufts University
Medford, MA 02155 USA
Abstract

Background	  

Parallel Distributed Processing (PDP) models have been
widely used for modeling cognitive tasks where accuracy or
reaction time were the dependent performance measures.
However, only few PDP models have attempted to model
more brain-related data like event related potentials (ERPs).
In this paper, we take a step towards using ERP data for
model fitting by proposing a PDP model, which can
successfully replicate various known ERP effects.
Specifically, we introduce a PDP-equivalent of the N400 ERP
measure and apply it to a simple PDP model of early bilingual
word acquisition as bilingual word acquisition tasks provide
several well-established N400 effects that can be used for
model validation. We then analyze the dynamics of the
network to show why and how the network can capture each
of the targeted N400 effects. Furthermore, we qualitatively
compare model-generated and empirical N400 peak values for
L2 words.
Keywords: PDP, bilingualism, L2 word acquisition, event
related potential (ERP), N400

Introduction
In a recent paper, Laszlo & Plaut (2012) proposed a way to
capture N400 ERP word reading data in a parallel
distributed processing (PDP) connectionist network whose
architecture was based on two neurally plausible
characteristics: neurons can either be excitatory or
inhibitory, but not both, and inhibitory connections can only
occur within layers, but not between (as the range of
inhibitory connections in the brain is shorter than that of
excitatory connections). Given these two constraints, the
model generated cycle-based time-course data that reflected
the temporal evolution of the N400 response, replicating the
“orthographic neighborhood size” effect that words with
larger orthographic neighborhood size elicit larger N400s
compared to words with smaller neighborhood size.
However, it is currently unclear whether this model would
also capture various other known N400 word effects such as
those obtained in the context of bilingual word processing.
In this paper, we propose a PDP architecture for a PDP
model of bilingual word processing, which can successfully
capture several known N400 effects in early bilingual word
processing, including the “orthographic neighborhood size”
effect in addition to other known effects such as the
“pseudoword effect”.

Two important aspects of any bilingual processing model
are the representations of lexical items in the first (L1) and
second (L2) language and their requisite connections to
concepts. Research on word processing during the early
stages of L2 acquisition has revealed important constraints
about storage and processing of conceptual and lexical
information in the bilingual brain. Studies using speeded
translation tasks, for example, show L2 learners are faster to
translate from L2 to L1 (e.g., translating tenedor to fork in
native English learners of Spanish) than from L1 to L2
(translating fork to tenedor) (e.g., Kroll &Stewart, 1994).
These behavioral results indicate that adult bilinguals appear
to associate new L2 words with their L1 translation
equivalents in order to facilitate semantic access to these
new words.
This bootstrapping of L2 into the already established L1
language system involves an asymmetrical representation of
the two languages, accounted for in Kroll & Stewart's
Revised Hierarchical Model (RHM) (depicted in Figure 1).

3337

Figure 1: The RHM (Kroll & Stewart, 1994). Solid lines
indicate strong connections and dashed lines indicate weak
connections.

The RHM assumes a separate lexicon for L1 and L2 with
orthographic and phonological representations, each of
which is connected to a single amodal conceptual store. In
early second language learners, the L1 lexicon is assumed to
be much larger than the L2 lexicon and evidence from
picture naming tasks in bilinguals suggests that the strength
of the links between the two lexicons and the conceptual
store are also asymmetrical, with L1 having stronger
connections to semantics than does L2 (e.g., Kroll & Peck,
1998). Both the lexical level asymmetry and the concept-tolexicon asymmetry between L1 and L2 are modeled in the
RHM by disproportionately weighted links (see Figure 1).
Adhering to the behavioral data, the link from the L2
lexicon to the L1 lexicon is much stronger than the link
from L1 to L2, just as the link between the L1 lexicon and
conceptual store is much stronger than the link between the
L2 lexicon and the conceptual store.
However, behavioral data is often insufficient for
distinguishing between different processing mechanisms.
Hence, electrophysiological measures such as event-related
potentials (ERPs) with their fine-grained temporal
resolution can uncover particular neural activity elicited
during language tasks that might only be associated with a
particular class of model architectures. In particular, the
N400, which is a negative-going centroparietally distributed
ERP component peaking around 400ms after stimulus onset,
has been shown to index lexico-semantic integration during
word processing. Hence, it provides a robust measure of
changes in processing activity in the brain as language
learning takes place and can thus be used to flesh out
conceptual proposals like the RHM in computational
architectures such as the PDP connectionist models. We
will, in particular, focus on four aspects of monolingual and
bilingual word processing for which N400 effects have been
reported in the literature: (A1) L1/L2 words versus L1/L2
pseudowords (i.e., pronounceable L1/L2 non-words that
adhere to the orthographic rules of L1/L2); (A2) L1/L2
word repetition effects; (A3) variations in L1/L2 word
neighborhood size; and (A4) L1 vs. early L2 word
processing differences.
Regarding (A1), it is well-known that L1 pseudowords
elicit larger N400s than L1 words (e.g., Holcomb & Neville,
1990). Moreover, L2 learners showed larger N400s to L2
pseudowords than to L2 words after only 14 hours of
classroom learning, mimicking L1 pseudoword effects (e.g.,
McLaughlin et al., 2004; however, note that McLaughlin
and colleagues did not find any behavioral evidence of L2
words and pseudoword discrimination, thus supporting the
use of ERPs over behavioral measures for adjudicating
model architectures).
Regarding (A2), repeated words reliably elicit smaller
N400 amplitudes than their first presentation (e.g., Rugg,
1985). This attenuation of the N400 reflects the increased
ease of lexico-semantic integration upon the second and
subsequent presentations of a word (possibly due to residual
activation of the lexical item and/or facilitatory feedback
from the activated concept).

Regarding (A3), words with large numbers of
orthographic neighbors (e.g., words that differ from the
target by only one letter) elicit larger N400s than words with
smaller neighborhood size (e.g., Holcomb et al., 2002).
Notably, the effect occurs within as well as across
languages, i.e., L1 influencing L2 and vice versa (Midgley
et al., 2008).
And finally (A4), N400s can be used as a measure of how
closely L2 processing matches that of L1 processing. For
example, Midgley and colleagues found that both EnglishFrench and French-English bilinguals who had intermediate
L2 experience displayed smaller N400s to L2 words than to
L1 words (2009). Balanced bilinguals did not show any
N400 differences between L1 and L2 word processing. This
result might be in part explained by (A3). Given that the L1
lexicon contains more word forms than the L2 lexicon, L1
words generally have larger neighborhood sizes than L2
words. The larger neighborhood sizes of L1 items in
comparison to L2 items may contribute to larger N400
amplitudes for L1 words over L2 words.

Model Description
We start with four hypotheses, (H1) through (H4), about the
possible principles responsible for each corresponding N400
effect (i.e., (A1), (A2), (A3), and (A4)) in the context of a
RHM-like PDP architecture and then add connections
within and between layers of the network based on the
hypothesized mechanisms.
Hypotheses:
(H1) Pseudowords have no word-level representations and
thus no connections to concept nodes or nodes within the
lexical layer.
(H2) Concept nodes keep a residual activation between
repeated word presentations and can thus be activated faster
in subsequent presentations of the same word compared to
the first presentation.
(H3) Lexical inputs with more orthographic neighbors
should activate more concepts early on. This should lead to
increased competition among concepts and thus to reduced
overall activations later on, which can be facilitated via
inhibitory connections in the concept layer.
(H4) After some training (when fairly strong, direct L2
lexical-to-concept connections are in place), L2 words
should elicit a larger initial target concept activation than L1
words. This can be accomplished via L2-to-L1 word
connections that are stronger than those from L1-to-L2
words.
Based on the RHM framework, we developed a PDP
model with bidirectional excitatory lexical-to-concept
connections, top-down inhibitory concept-to-lexical
connections and inhibitory concept-to-concept connections
(see Figure 2). As in the (Laszlo & Plaut, 2012) model, we

3338

use IAC units (with standard parameter values for min=-.2,
max=1, and rest=-.1 activation levels as well as decay
rate=.1). For simplicity, we limit input words to 5 letters,
thus requiring 5 clusters of 26 input letters per word (for the
English alphabet). All letters in each cluster i have
excitatory connections to words that contain them in the i-th
slot and inhibitory connections to all words with a different
letter in the i-th position.

corresponding to a given target lexical item will only
activate the orthographic neighbors and not the other words
that differ from the target word in more than one letter. In
order to do so, we made the strength of inhibitory and
excitatory letter-to-word connections the same, so that if a
word is different from the target word in more than one
letter (for four-letter words), it receives zero or less than
zero netinput from the letter nodes. In addition, none of the
five-letter/three-letter words were similar to a four-letter
word in 3 or more slots.

Definition of PDP N400 Measure
Based on the semantic interpretation of the N400 signal
(Laszlo & Fedemeier, 2011), we define the networkequivalent of the N400 as the magnitude of overall
activation change (differential) in positively activated
(potential) concept nodes (potential). Specifically, we
calculate the sum of all positive concept activations at each
cycle and compute the change between two consecutive
cycles as the N400 (the discrete equivalent to the derivative
of the potential given by the summed concept node
activations).

Experimental Bilingual ERP Data
Figure 2: Model architecture. The thickness of links
indicates the strength of connections.
L1 versus L2. To account for larger L1 vs. L2 word
neighborhoods, we include more L1 words with a larger
neighborhood size in the model compared to L2 words.
Pseudowords versus words. Pseudowords have no
representation at the lexical or semantic layer.
Repetition. We model repetition effects by performing the
following sequence r times: input word i is presented for n
cycles (where n should be large enough to allow the N400
signal, to be defined below, to reach its peak). Then the
input is removed and the network is updated for d cycles to
let all node activations decay, after which point the whole
process is repeated, but without resetting any activation
values. We thus have three critical modeling parameters that
need to be set appropriately: r, n, and d.
Filtering word length artifacts. Assuming that each
constituent letter contributes equally to a word's activation
level, all connection weights from each letter in a word have
the same strength. However, because words have different
lengths, the overall incoming activation would be different
if we were to use the same connection weights for all letterto-word connections as longer words would get a higher
activation than shorter words, everything else being equal.
To avoid this effect, we scale the letter-to- word connection
weight c by the length |W| of the word W: wL, W = c/|W|.
We also needed to make sure that the input letters

We collected ERP measures from 14 native English
speakers who were enrolled in a first semester “Introductory
Spanish” class at Tufts University (9 females, mean age
18.4). Participants viewed Spanish words (e.g., HOLA,
GATO) and Spanish pseudowords (e.g., SERO, AGOL) one
at a time as part of a lexical decision task. The Spanish
words were a set of non-cognates taken from the textbook
used in class. Factors of length, English bi-gram frequency,
and English neighborhood size were balanced between the
words and pseudowords used in the study. Averaged ERPs
were computed for all word and pseudoword stimuli for
each participant at 29 scalp sites. Single item ERPs were
formed by averaging to time-locked stimuli across
participants. The mean amplitude averaged across a subset
of centroparietal electrodes (including: Cz, Pz, C3, CP5,
CP1, P3, C4, CP6, CP2, P4) between 300-500 ms was used
to quantify the N400 effect. The mean amplitude between
300-500 ms was used to quantify the N400 effect.
Additionally, N400 measures for single items were
calculated using the mean amplitude between item-specific
temporal windows, ranging from 250ms to 500ms.

Modeling Results
We selected a subset of 14 four-letter L2 words from all L2
words used in the ERP experiment and included all their L1
translations as well as their L1 neighbors to be able to
account for the cross-language orthographic neighborhood
size effects. Since some of the L1 words were 5 letters in
length, we included 5 clusters of letters in the model.

3339

gradually increase and the activations of its orthographic
neighbors to decrease.
Discharge. The overall semantic activation decreases as a
result of inhibition exerted by significantly activated
concept nodes.
Stabilization. Eventually, the overall activation levels of
the network stabilize.
We searched for values for the various connections that
would allow the model to capture the N400 effects: conceptto-L1=(.6,-2),
concept-to-L2=(.8,-.2),
concept-toconcept=(0,-.6), L1-to-concept=1, L2-to-concept=.8, L1-toL2=.1, L2-to-L1=1, letter-to-(3letterWord)=(.8,-.8), letterto-(4letterWord)=(.6,-.6), letter-to-(5letterWord)=(.48,-.48)
(the first element of each tuple is the excitatory weight value
between related items, and the second element is the
inhibitory weight value between the unrelated items).
For all simulations, we took the maximum peak value as
the measure for comparing N400 signals to the empirical
data. Furthermore, since several factors can influence the
N400 value, we investigated only one factor at a time while
keeping the others fixed.

Figure 3: Sum of semantic activation (top row) and the
N400 amplitude (bottom row), over 75 update cycles in
response to three words: “son” (L1 word in black), “azul”
(L2 word in blue), and “sero” (L2 pseudoword in red).
Figure 3 shows the shape of the N400 signal generated by
the model along with the time-course of the summed
concept nodes’ activations during the whole word exposure.
Note that the change in total concept activation is
proportional to the maximum value of the N400 generated.
The right column in Figure 3 reveals three distinct phases
in the dynamic of the overall semantic activation in our
network: (a) charge (positive overall change), (b) discharge
(negative overall change), and (c) stabilization.
Furthermore, since inhibitory connections only originate
from concept nodes, any significant flow of inhibition can
only come after an initial flow of activation, i.e., until
concept nodes have reached sufficiently strong activations.
Charge. The activation of the target concept and concepts
associated with orthographic neighbors or its associated
word-level node initially start to increase, followed by the
feedback from excitatory and inhibitory connections to
word-level nodes causing the activation of the target word to

Figure 4: N400 data for repetitions of “son” using first:
r=3, n=30, d=30, second: r=1, n=30, d=70, and then n=30
(see text for details).
Figure 4 shows that the model replicates the repetition
effect (A2), i.e., maximum N400 values (peaks) after the
first exposure are all smaller than the first peak.
Figure 5 shows that the model is able to replicate the
neighborhood size effect regardless of lexical type: L1, L2,
and pseudowords.
Figure 6 shows the replication of (A4) – in all cases – and
the replication of (A1) – in all cases except for (a) and (b).
Furthermore, Figure 4 suggests that the replication of (A1)
and (A4) is dependent on neighborhood size: as the
neighborhood size increases, the network replicates (A1)
more strongly, while showing weaker replication of (A4).
The network best replicates (A4) for L2 words of nSize=0.

3340

Figure 6: Mean N400 signals for words sharing the same
neighborhood size (nSize): a) nSize=0, b) nSize=1, c)
nSize=2, d) nSize=3, e) nSize=5, f) nSize=6, in three
categories: L1 words in black, L2 words in blue, and L2
pseudowords in red. Note that there was no L2 word of
nSize=1 , no pseudoword of nSize=2, and no L1 word of
nSize=3.

Figure 5: Neighborhood size effects within three
categories: in order L1, L2, Pseudowords, shown by mean
N400s of words with n orthographic neighbors: 0=black,
1=blue, 2=green, 3=cyan, 4=red,
5=yellow, 6=magenta, & 10=black stars.

3341

Note that the correlation value (corr=.2135) between the
maximum N400 values (for L2 words) generated by the
model and those collected in the experiments shows that the
model does not yet quantitatively fit the empirically
obtained ERP values, despite qualitatively replicating ERP
effects.

Discussion
The model succeeded in capturing qualitatively all four ERP
effects. Furthermore, the results confirm that the (A1) and
(A4) effects are dependent on neighborhood size as
suggested in (Midgley et al, 2008 and Holcomb & Neville,
1990).
However, the model allows for a different
explanation from that of Midgley et al. who hypothesized
that the overall lower N400 for L2 words compared to L1
words might be caused by the smaller neighborhood size of
L2 words compared to L1 words, everything else being
equal. Specifically, the model shows that this difference can
also be obtained with identical neighborhood sizes based on
the generally higher initial activation induced at the target
concept in response to an L2 input word (compared to that
of an L1 input word). This higher initial activation tends to
suppress the other concept nodes, thus leading to an overall
lower ERP and thus lower N400. Hence, it is likely that
both neighborhood size and difference of initial target
concept activation via L1 or L2 words contribute to the
smaller N400 for L2 words (compared to L1 words).
Note that all simulation results where obtained by
considering N400 peak values only, but other measures are
certainly possible (e.g., the integral of the N400 signal over
the 300-500msec time frame or the average value over the
same period). This is left for future work.

Conclusion
We have developed a PDP model based on Kroll &
Stewart’s Revised Hierarchical Model (RHM) of bilingual
word processing and tested it against well-established N400
effects. The model succeeded in qualitatively replicating
language, neighborhood size, pseudoword, and repetition
effects. However, the model did not quite replicate the N400
results from our empirical experiments, as shown by a fairly
low correlation between the ERPs of the model and
empirical data. Future work will focus on exploring the
model's parameter space to determine if better model fits are
possible with the given model architecture. In addition, we
will investigate simpler model architectures and the extent
to which they may succeed in replicating some of the N400
effects. We will also investigate alternative definitions of
N400 (e.g., including the lexical level activations) as well as
exploring the use of average N400 amplitudes rather than
peak values.

neighborhood size on printed word perception. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 14, 938-950.
Holcomb, P. J & Neville, H. J. (1990). Auditory and visual
semantic priming in lexical decision: A comparison using
event-related brain potentials. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 5, 281-312.
Kroll, J. F., & Stewart, E. (1994). Category interferences in
translation and picture naming: Evidence for asymmetric
connection between bilingual memory representation.
Journal of Memory and Language, 33, 149-174.
Kroll, J. F., & Peck, A. (1998). Competing activation across
a bilingual’s two languages: Evidence from picture
naming. Proceedings of the 43rd Annual Meeting of the
International Linguistic Association. New York
University, NY.
Laszlo, S., & Plaut, D.C. (2011). Simulating event-related
potential reading data in a neurally plausible parallel
distributed processing model. Proceedings of the 33rd
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Laszlo, S., & Plaut, D.C. (2012). A neurally plausible
parallel distributed processing model of event-related
potential reading data. Brain and Language, 120, 271281.
Laszlo, S., & Federmeier, K.D (2011). The N400 as a
snapshot of interactive processing: evidence from
regression analyses of orthographic neighbor and lexical
associate effects. Psychophysiology, 48, 176-186.
McLaughlin, J., Osterhout, L., & Kim, A. (2004). Neural
correlates of second-language word learning: Minimal
instruction produces rapid change. Nature Neuroscience,
7, 703–704.
Midgley, K.J., Holcomb P.J., van Heuven, W. J. B., &
Grainger, J. (2008). An Electrophysiological investigation
of cross-language effects of orthographic neighborhood.
Brain Research, 1246, 123-135.
Midgley, K. J., Holcomb, P. J., & Grainger, J. (2009).
Language effects in second language learners and
proficient bilinguals investigated with event-related
potentials. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 22, 281-300.
Rugg, M.D. (1985). The effects of semantic priming and
word
repetition
on
event-related
potentials.
Psychophysiology, 22, 642–647.
Rugg, M.D. (1990). Event-related brain potentials dissociate
repetition effects on high- and low-frequency words.
Memory & Cognition, 18, 367-379.

References
Holcomb, P. J., Grainger, J., O'Rourke, T. (2002). An
electrophysiological study of the effects of orthographic

3342

