UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Question of Timing: The Impact of Label Synchrony on Infants' Categorisation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2xt7h704

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Althaus, Nadja
Plunkett, Kim

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Question of Timing:
The Impact of Label Synchrony
on Infants’ Categorisation
Nadja Althaus (nadja.althaus@psy.ox.ac.uk)
Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford
South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3UD, United Kingdom

Kim Plunkett (kim.plunkett@psy.ox.ac.uk)
Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford
South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3UD, United Kingdom
Abstract
Recent research into the impact of labelling on infants’ visual category formation has led to controversial results, with
some findings indicating a beneficial role and others pointing to interference effects in the presence of labels. Here we
present an eye tracking study with 12-month-olds investigating the impact of the label’s timing on categorisation. We find
that synchronous presentation of words and objects leads to
a decreased novelty preference, creating the impression of a
dramatic detrimental impact on learning. Asynchronous presentation of the word one second after the image onset does
not appear to interfere with processing. Detailed analyses of
infants’ gaze patterns with respect to object parts reveal that
even synchronous labels do not hinder learning but slow down
infants’ shift from familiarity to novelty preference. Besides
offering detailed insight into the effects of labelling on infants’
attention our findings offer the potential to reconcile previous
contradictory results.
Keywords: Categorisation; cognitive development; language
development; eye tracking; attention.

Introduction
The idea of linguistic influences on cognitive processes has
been a heavily debated subject over the past century, with
very extreme positions like Whorfian determinism (Whorf,
1956) gradually being replaced by less radical points of view
(e.g. Boroditsky, 2001). From a developmental perspective, the question is fundamental: do infants use language,
and words in particular, as cues to learn about the complex
structure of the world? The almost universal presence of labels in an infant’s environment, both in speech directed at the
infant and in conversation between adults overheard by the
infant, makes the hypothesis that labels may serve as meaningful cues very compelling. Shared labels indicate, after all,
that dissimilar looking things may share attributes or function (e.g., a bonnet and a boater may both simply be called a
“hat”). However, labels are not always readily identified by
infants in their first year of life: language development is a
gradual process involving learning about relevant dimensions
in rhythm, prosody and phonetics before individual words are
segmented from the speech stream and mapped onto referents (Tincoff & Jusczyk, 1999; Bortfeld, Morgan, Golinkoff,
& Rathbun, 2005; Bergelson & Swingley, 2012). In spite of
this, several studies in the past 20 years have found facilitative
effects of labelling on categorisation in pre-linguistic infants
between six and twelve months (e.g., Waxman & Markow,

1995; Balaban & Waxman, 1997; Waxman & Braun, 2005;
Fulkerson & Waxman, 2007), and more recently even in infants as young as three months (Ferry, Hespos, & Waxman,
2010). This work suggests that even infants who are just
at the beginning of language development can make use of
labels when learning about objects and similarities between
them. In fact, Plunkett, Hu, and Cohen (2008) and Althaus
and Westermann (in prep.) have demonstrated that labels can
serve to guide the formation of category boundaries when the
structure of visual space is ambiguous, i.e. labels can cause
infants to merge or split visual clusters depending on whether
the visual exemplars are encountered with identical or differing labels. However, contradicting results which report “auditory overshadowing” effects in the presence of labels (as well
as other auditory stimuli) have also been reported (Robinson
& Sloutsky, 2007), calling into question whether labelling has
uniformly beneficial effects. It is as of yet unclear under what
circumstances labels can facilitate learning, and what factors
may contribute to labels attenuating learning.
From an information-processing point of view, labels provide additional information that may help learning – e.g., by
increasing perceived similarity between objects that share labels (Sloutsky, Lo, & Fisher, 2001), or by highlighting commonalities (Waxman & Markow, 1995). However, processing
this additional signal comes at a cost: attention and processing resources have to be allocated to two modalities rather
than one – a feat which may be particularly problematic for
young infants. This factor in particular makes it seem likely
that the exact circumstances of how labels are encountered
will play a role in whether they are going to interfere with, or
aid, processing.
Here we explore the hypothesis that whether or not labels
and objects can both be processed depends on the timing of
the label: if both are presented in exact synchrony, i.e. image
and label occur simultaneously, this may impose high cognitive load, and processing in one or both modalities may be
attenuated. By contrast, if there is a delay between visual
onset and auditory onset, this may allow infants to process
both stimuli equally well – simply because some visual object recognition processes will already have been completed
by the time the label occurs (Quinn, Westerlund, & Nelson, 2006; Grossmann, Gliga, Johnson, & Mareschal, 2009).

1726

Whereas synchronous label onsets have been used in experimental scenarios (e.g., Robinson & Sloutsky, 2007), delayed
labelling scenarios appear to be much more likely to occur in
a young child’s experience (for example, a caregiver asking
“Do you like the ball?” when the child is already attending
to the toy). Even though some researchers have claimed that
synchrony is beneficial for word-object association (Gogate,
Bahrick, & Watson, 2003), and cross-modal synchrony has
been demonstrated to facilitate discrimination of amodal signals such as tempo or rhythm (Bahrick & Lickliter, 2000), it
is likely that synchronous picture-word pairings are unusual
and surprising to infants at one year of age. These infants,
after all, are at a stage in development where they may have
learned some things about words (e.g., they often occur together with their referents, but not generally in synchrony like
“causal” sounds, such as a hammer hitting a wall), but are far
from being experts at processing speech sounds as phonetic
units and mapping them to words.
In order to examine the impact of audiovisual synchrony
on the interaction of labelling and categorisation, we familiarised three groups of 12-month-olds with a novel category
either in silence (Silent condition), with labels presented one
second after the picture onset (Asynchronous Label condition), or with labels and pictures occurring simultaneously
(Synchronous Label condition). In order to gain further insight into how infants process objects, the target category was
constructed such that each exemplar consisted of two spatially separate object parts (a shell and a leaf, see Figure 1
for example objects). The shells were highly variable across
exemplars, whereas the leaves were quite similar. This allowed us to track infants’ encoding of features with different
similarity structure. On test, infants were presented with an
out-of-category item, as well as an object consistent with the
familiarised category. In familiarisation/novelty preference
paradigms, novelty preference for the out-of-category object
has been established as an indicator of category formation.
However, the two out-of-category items occurring in the first
two test trials were constructed by replacing just one of the
two parts (shell or leaf) with an item that differed from the
familiarisation exemplars. We were therefore able to track on
a very fine-grained, almost featural, level whether infants responded to novelty. Our hypothesis was that if infants were
able to learn the category in silence, but labels (asynchronous
or synchronous) interfered with learning, then infants should
not exhibit novelty preference in the relevant conditions. A
difference between Asynchronous and Synchronous conditions with regard to novelty preference would further indicate
that the timing of the label plays an important role in infants’
ability to process and integrate both stimuli.

Methods
Participants
A total of 87 infants participated in this study (mean age: 372
days, 43 girls). Eight additional infants were not included in
the analysis due to failure to reach the looking time criterion.

Infants were recruited shortly after birth at the local maternity ward and English was the main language spoken in their
home.

Stimuli
A novel category was constructed by assembling 11 “objects”
from images of a shell, a leaf and a pipe-cleaner in the Gnu
Image Manipulation Program (see Figure 1 for example stimuli). Across the different objects, the leaves were very similar, the shells highly variable, and the invariable pipe cleaner
served as a connecting limb between these two parts. In addition, three “out-of-category” objects were constructed (see
Figure 2): Test object 1 contained a shell consistent with
the category, but an inconsistent type of leaf (“novel leaf”),
Test object 2 contained a leaf consistent with the category but
an inconsistent shell (“novel shell”), and Test object 3 contained a sea urchin and a starfish instead of shell and leaf.
All images were depicted against a medium grey background.
Objects subtended approximately 14 x 10◦ visual angle. On
test displays, there was a gap of approximately 5◦ visual angle between out-of-category and within-category objects. A
recording of the novel label “timbo”, pronounced by a female
British-English speaker in an infant-directed voice, served as
the auditory stimulus in the Asynchronous and Synchronous
Label conditions.

Figure 1: Example familiarisation stimuli.

Figure 2: Test objects 1, 2 and 3.

Procedure
After a short warm-up phase during which written consent
was obtained from the caregiver, infants were seated on the
caregiver’s lap at 75 cm distance from the eye tracker. A ninepoint calibration sequence was performed up to three times or
until all points had been calibrated successfully.
Infants were presented with eight familiarisation images
in pseudo-randomised order which were on the screen for
6000 ms each. Four of the familiarisation images appeared
on the left half of the screen, and four on the right, in no

1727

predictable order. Every image was preceded by an attention getter, a small animation at the centre of the screen (with
a medium grey background) accompanied by an attractive
chiming sound. Animation and sound lasted about 1.5 seconds, with the next trial beginning 2 seconds after the onset
of the attention getter. In the Asynchronous Label condition,
the sound file containing the label “timbo” was played 1000
ms after the picture onset. In the Synchronous Label condition, the label started at picture onset. Familiarisation was
followed by three test trials, lasting 10 000 ms each. On the
test trials, the three test objects described above were paired
with one of the three remaining objects from the familiar category. Test trials in all conditions were silent. Infants’ looking
was recorded using a Tobii eye tracker sampling at 120 Hz
throughout the familiarisation and test phase.

but not in either of the Label conditions (Asynchronous
Label: t(28)=.46, p>.64; Synchronous Label: t(28)=1.246,
p>.22). This is consistent with previous research showing
that auditory input causes infants to maintain their looking
(e.g. Baldwin & Markman, 1989; Robinson & Sloutsky,
2007; Plunkett et al., 2008).
Part-based looking during familiarisation In order to investigate whether synchronous or asynchronous labels affected infants’ processing of individual parts during familiarisation, we calculated a mean looking proportion for the
“leaf” part by dividing the amount of looking at the leaves
accumulated during familiarisation by the total looking time
accumulated during familiarisation. These data were subjected to a one-way ANOVA with factor Condition, which revealed no significant effect (F(2,84)=1.226, p=.299). Across
all three conditions, infants spent less time looking at the
leaves than at the shells, indicating that they were sensitive
to the greater variability of the shells (Proportion of looking at leaf, collapsed across conditions: M=.33, SE=.01;
t(86)=13.1, p<.001).

Results
We first focus on global measures of looking during familiarisation and test (i.e. with respect to whole objects), and
then turn to a more detailed analysis of looking directed at
individual object parts. In order to analyse gaze patterns with
regard to object parts, areas-of-interest (AOIs) were defined
to contain the area covered by the images of shell and leaf,
respectively, plus a 30-pixel margin around the image outline (corresponding roughly to the eye tracker’s 0.5 degree
visual angle accuracy). Recorded gaze data were analysed
using custom Matlab code.

Novelty Preference Score

Silent
Async. Label
Sync. Label

3400

LOOKING TIME (ms)

.7

3200
3000

*

2800
2600

Block 1

(n.s.)

.55
.5
.45

0

Block 2

***

.6

.4

2400
2200

*
.65

.61
Silent

.61
Async. Label

Condition

.54
Sync. Label

Figure 3: Looking time during familiarisation.
Looking time during familiarisation Looking time for
each familiarisation trial was calculated as the sum of
fixation time falling on the leaf and shell AOIs. Average
looking times for Blocks 1 (Trials 1-4) and 2 (Trials 5-8) are
shown in Figure 3. A mixed ANOVA with within-subjects
factor Block (Block 1, Block 2) and between-subjects
factor Condition (Silent, Asynchronous Label, Synchronous
Label) revealed a near-significant main effect of Block
(F(1,84)=3.639, p=.06). Neither the Block x Condition
interaction (F(2,84)=2.231, p=.114) nor the main effect of
condition were significant (F(2,84)=1.76, p=.178). Planned
comparisons (paired t-tests) showed that infants’ looking
decreased in the Silent condition (t(28)=2.864, p=.008),

Figure 4: Novelty preference scores in Test 1.
Preferential looking at test (object-based preferences)
Object-based novelty preference scores were obtained for all
test trials by dividing the amount of looking at the out-ofcategory object by the total looking time accumulated for the
trial (within-category and out-of-category object).
Separate one-way ANOVAs on novelty preference scores
with factor Condition were conducted for all three test types,
which did not reveal any significant differences between conditions (all Fs<1.4, ps>.2). However, planned comparisons
were conducted to test each group’s performance against the
chance level of 0.5 . If infants failed to form a category and

1728

Table 1: Novelty preference scores for test trials 2 and 3 in all
conditions. * indicates significance at the .05-level, ** indicates significance at the .005 level, *** indicates significance
at the .0005 level.

Async. Label

Test 3
M(SE)
.66 (.05)**
.65 (.04)**
.68 (.04)***

Sync. Label

(a)

did not discriminate between the two objects, we would expect them to spend 50% of their looking directed at each object. By contrast, if they successfully formed a category we
would expect them to reliably prefer the out-of-category object.
The results for Test 1 are illustrated in Figure 4. Here, the
out-of-category object contained a novel, inconsistent type
of leaf and consistent shell. Infants in the Silent and Asynchronous Label conditions exhibited significant preference
for the out-of-category object (Silent: t(28)=2.679, p=.01;
Asynchronous Label: t(28)=4.04, p <.001). Infants in the
Synchronous Label condition, by contrast, failed to prefer the
out-of-category object systematically (t(28)=1.067, p=.29).
Results for Test 2, where the out-of-category object contained
a novel shell, and Test 3, where the out-of-category object
contained two entirely novel parts, are provided in Table 1.
In both Test 2 and 3, all infants exhibited systematic novelty
preference, even those familiarised with synchronous labels.
In order to further understand the pattern of results in Test
trial 1, we obtained the number of infants in each condition
who spent more than 50% of looking time on the novel object.
This confirmed that infants in the Silent and Asynchronous
Label condition were mostly successful at learning the category (Silent: N=20, p=.06, two-tailed binomial test; Asynchronous label: N=22, p <.01), whereas the number of successful infants was at chance level in the Synchronous Label
condition (N=16, p >.7).
Infants’ failure to recognise the out-of-category stimulus
on Test 1 as novel in the Synchronous condition suggests a
detrimental impact of the synchronous label on learning: it
seems as though infants in this condition have not encoded
the category equally well as infants in the other conditions.
While this is in line with the hypothesis that synchronous
labels impose greater processing load and therefore visual
stimuli may be processed in less detail, it is possible to
achieve a more fine-grained insight into infants performance
at test. The out-of-category stimulus in Test 1 was designed
to be novel owing to the presence of a different type of leaf –
its shell part, by comparison, is relatively consistent with the
familiarisation category. Examining infants’ looking patterns
with regard to the two object parts and corresponding parts
in the within-category object should therefore provide more
information as to how infants process the object.

example test display

0.6

Looking Proportion

Test 2
M(SE)
.63 (.05)*
.64 (.04)**
.65 (.04)**

0.5

*

*

*

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

OOCO: leaf (novel)

WCO: leaf (consistent)

Part
(b)

0.6
0.5

Looking Proportion

Condition
Silent
Async.
Sync.

Silent

0.4

(*)

0.3
0.2
0.1
0

OOCO: shell (consistent) WCO: shell (consistent)

Part

Figure 5: Looking proportions for individual object parts during Test 1: (a) Leaves belonging to out-of-category object
(OOCO), here the “novel” part, and within-category object
(WCO); (b) Shells belonging to OOCO and WCO. The inset
shows an example test display with both objects. * indicates
a statistically significant difference, (*) indicates a trend.
Part-based looking at test Figure 5 (a) shows looking
proportions directed at the leaves belonging to the two ob-

1729

jects in Test 1, i.e. out-of-category leaf and within-category
leaf, for every condition. All infants in fact had a clear
preference for the novel leaf in comparison to the familiar
leaf, even those in the Synchronous Label condition (paired
t-test: t(28)=5.157, p <.001, two-tailed). In contrast to what
the standard analysis of global looking indicates, infants in
the Synchronous Label condition as a group did not fail to
encode the distributional properties of the “leaf”, as they
did not fail to perceive the novel leaf as unfamiliar. In fact,
the only difference between the looking patterns across
conditions is a trend for the “familiar shell” to be looked at
more in comparison to the “novel shell” (illustrated in Figure
5 (b) ) in the Synchronous condition (t(28)=1.76, p=.09,
paired t-test, 2-tailed) – which does not exist in the other
conditions.

Discussion
We familiarised infants with a novel object category, either in
silence (Silent condition) or with novel labels. Labels were
either presented one second after image onset (Asynchronous
Label condition) or simultaneously with image onset (Synchronous Label condition). Global preferential looking results on three subsequent test trials indicated that infants in
the Silent and Asynchronous Label conditions were highly
successful at learning the target category, exhibiting novelty
preference on all test trials. Infants in the Synchronous Label condition, however, did not exhibit novelty preference
until the second test trial, pointing to a disruptive role of synchronous labels. Detailed looking patterns indicated, however, that infants in the Synchronous Label condition still preferred the novel leaf within the out-of-category object over
the familiar leaf in the consistent test object.
While our present analysis of part-based looking during
familiarisation did not reveal an effect of labeling, future
analyses will focus on more fine-grained measures of looking
(such as the time course of processing within a trial) in order
to establish a link between individual infants’ gaze patterns
during familiarisation and their performance on test.
Preferential looking on the test trials shows that both infants in the Silent and the Asynchronous Label condition
learned the category and showed novelty preference on Test 1
and 2, where either the highly variable or the less variable object parts were replaced. This indicates that they successfully
encoded the feature distribution of both parts. By contrast,
infants in the Synchronous condition did not exhibit novelty
preference until Test Trial 2. Using the established measure
of object-based novelty preference as a marker of successful
category formation this appears to indicate that learning was
attenuated in comparison to silence by the presence of the label at the start of the trial. However, analysing infants’ looking patterns at the level of individual object parts revealed that
infants in the Synchronous condition did appear to be sensitive to the replacement of the leaf part, even though they spent
more time inspecting the within-category object compared to

the other groups. In addition, on the subsequent test trial, in
which the highly variable shell part was replaced by a novel
type of shell, even infants in the Synchronous Label condition
exhibited significant preference for the novel object. Taken
together these data imply that rather than signifying a failure
to learn, the looking patterns reflect a delay in the progression to novelty preference, or a lingering familiarity preference (Hunter & Ames, 1988). This finding is consistent with
the hypothesis that synchronous labelling increases cognitive
load, but it is inconsistent with the hypothesis that visual processing as such is compromised as a result. Infants hearing
synchronous labels during familiarisation have learned about
the category in question – but they have a tendency to prefer
looking at familiar elements.
This finding has implications for the interpretation of studies investigating the impact of labelling on categorisation.
First of all, a decrease in novelty preference scores at the
object level does not necessarily imply a decrease in visual
learning, but can potentially be explained by changes in the
speed in which the shift from familiarity to novelty preference
is obtained. Null preferences therefore have to be interpreted
with caution, specifically when comparing conditions that inherently differ in terms of cognitive load, such as a silent condition vs. one that includes auditory stimuli.
Secondly, this result highlights the role of timing in infants’
early learning: even if it is not the categorisation success per
se that has been compromised due to the synchrony of the
label, a lingering familiarity preference still indicates greater
difficulty processing the stimuli. This could potentially play a
role in reconciling previous contradictory findings regarding
the impact of labelling on categorisation. Most studies cited
above (e.g. Fulkerson & Waxman, 2007; Ferry et al., 2010;
Plunkett et al., 2008; Althaus & Westermann, in prep.) used a
delayed label onset similar to our Asynchronous label condition, but Robinson and Sloutsky (2007), who found auditory
overshadowing in the presence of labels, presented labels at
picture onset. Further research will be necessary in order to
determine whether the timing of the label can indeed explain
the discrepancies between the findings.
Finally, the fact that infants can deal with asynchronous labels and may even benefit from them, whereas synchronous
presentation seems to cause problems with cognitive load, is
an important cue to how words and images are processed.
Clearly stimuli are processed on-line, rather than stored in
short term memory and processed separately and independently of their presentation time. While, in the context of
cross-modal processing, synchrony is often claimed to be
beneficial at least for young infants (Gogate et al., 2003), the
increased load due to synchronous presentation here appears
to slow down learning. The actual processing load of any coupling of visual and auditory stimuli is also dependent on the
visual and auditory complexity or novelty. However, the fact
remains that the likelihood of a label in real life occurring at
the same time as an object comes into view is rather small. In
terms of learning, this may be an ecological advantage rather

1730

than a shortcoming. Perhaps having the opportunity to process visual and auditory information sequentially allows the
learning of more complex visual structures. Specifically, the
grouping of similar (but not identical) items into categories,
for which more abstract visual processing may be needed than
just for recognition of individual objects, could be facilitated
in this way. Further research is needed in order to shed light
on the relationship between exact time course of word-object
integration and the ecological circumstances the auditory and
visual signals occur in.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by Wellcome Grant
084386/Z/07/Z to Kim Plunkett and the Winkler Career
Development Fellowship at St Hugh’s College, University of
Oxford, to Nadja Althaus. We wish to thank all parents and
infants who participated in this study.

References
Althaus, N., & Westermann, G. (in prep.). Labels can cause
infants to split a visual category. (In preparation)
Bahrick, L., & Lickliter, R. (2000). Intersensory redundancy
guides attentional selectivity and perceptual learning in infancy. Developmental psychology, 36(2), 190.
Balaban, M., & Waxman, S. (1997). Do words facilitate
object categorization in 9-month-old infants? Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 64, 3–26.
Baldwin, D., & Markman, E. (1989). Establishing wordobject relations: A first step. Child, 60, 381-398.
Bergelson, E., & Swingley, D. (2012). At 6–9 months, human
infants know the meanings of many common nouns. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 109, 3253–
3258.
Boroditsky, L. (2001). Does language shape thought?: Mandarin and english speakers’ conceptions of time. Cognitive
Psychology, 43, 1-22.
Bortfeld, H., Morgan, J., Golinkoff, R., & Rathbun, K.
(2005). Mommy and me familiar names help launch babies into speech-stream segmentation. Psychological Science, 16(4), 298–304.
Ferry, A., Hespos, S., & Waxman, S. (2010). Categorization
in 3- and 4-month-old infants: An advantage of words over
tones. Child Development, 81, 472–479.
Fulkerson, A., & Waxman, S. (2007). Words (but not tones)
facilitate object categorization: Evidence from 6-and 12month-olds. Cognition, 105, 218–228.
Gogate, L., Bahrick, L., & Watson, J. (2003). A study of
multimodal motherese: The role of temporal synchrony
between verbal labels and gestures. Child development,
71(4), 878–894.
Grossmann, T., Gliga, T., Johnson, M., & Mareschal, D.
(2009). The neural basis of perceptual category learning
in human infants. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 21,
2276-2286.
Hunter, M., & Ames, E. (1988). A multifactor model of

infant preferences for novel and familiar stimuli. Advances
in Infancy Research, 5, 69-95.
Plunkett, K., Hu, J., & Cohen, L. (2008). Labels can override perceptual categories in early infancy. Cognition, 106,
665–681.
Quinn, P. C., Westerlund, A., & Nelson, C. (2006). Neural
markers of categorization in 6-month-old infants. Psychological Science, 17, 59-66.
Robinson, C., & Sloutsky, V. (2007). Linguistic labels and
categorization in infancy: do labels facilitate or hinder? Infancy, 11, 233–253.
Sloutsky, V., Lo, Y., & Fisher, A. (2001). How much does
a shared name make things similar? linguistic labels, similarity, and the development of inductive inference. Child
Development, 72, 1695–1709.
Tincoff, R., & Jusczyk, P. (1999). Some beginnings of word
comprehension in 6-month-olds. Psychological Science,
10, 172–175.
Waxman, S., & Braun, I. (2005). Consistent (but not variable) names as invitations to form object categories: new
evidence from 12-month-old infants. Cognition, 95, 59–
68.
Waxman, S., & Markow, D. (1995). Words as invitations
to form categories: Evidence from 12-to 13-month-old infants. Cognitive Psychology, 29, 257–302.
Whorf, B. (1956). In J. B. Carroll (Ed.). Language, thought
and reality: Selected writings of Benjamin Lee Whorf ,
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

1731

