UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A ?ritical View on Conceptual Blending Theory

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/95p302sj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Author
Glebkin, Vladimir

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Сritical View on Conceptual Blending Theory
V.V. Glebkin (gleb1514@gmail.com)
Gymnasium 1514, 12 Krupskoi Street
Moscow, 119311 Russia
Abstract
This study addresses conceptual blending theory, originated
by J. Fauconnier and M. Turner. The author raises some criticism of the theory’s underpinnings and methodology. Particularly, he points at the lack of cultural-historical analysis and
the neglect of experimental data as the shortcomings of the
theory as stated. It is shown in the paper that the view on
blending as an important tool to adapt knowledge to the experience of average people is more correct than its interpretation as a basic instrument for the creation of new knowledge.
Keywords: conceptual blending; criticism; cultural-historical
approach; popularization.

Introduction
Conceptual blending (or conceptual integration) theory
is, without a doubt, one of the central conceptual pillars of
modern cognitive linguistics, and it has considerable influence on cognitive science in general. According to the authors, J. Fauconnier and M. Turner, conceptual blending is
“a great mental capacity that, in its most advanced “doublescope” form, gave our ancestors superiority and, for better
and for worse, made us what we are today. We investigate
the principles of conceptual blending, its fascinating dynamics, and its crucial role in how we think and live” (Fauconnier, Turner 2002, V; for an extended commentary see:
ibid., 389-396). In other words, conceptual blending here is
claimed to be the key to the mystery of human evolution and
cognition.
At first sight, such a groundbreaking point would be
expected to lead to an intensive debate and to meet strong
criticism from the less radical researchers. However, in fact,
there are no heated debate around conceptual blending theory. We can find a number of papers raising some objections (Gibbs 2000; Harder 2003; Brandt 2005; Oakley,
Hougaard 2008, 12; Ferguson, Sanford 2008, 610), but a
comprehensive analysis of the theory’s underpinnings,
methodology, and heuristic potential is a matter of the future. This paper can be considered as a step in that direction.

Fauconnier, Turner 1996; Fauconnier, Turner 1998;
Fauconnier, Turner 2000; Sweetzer 2000; Fauconnier,
Turner 2002; Fauconnier, Turner 2008; Fauconnier
2009 should be mentioned as the salient milestones in
the theory’s development.
The gist of the theory can be formulated as follows:
а) the unique feature of human beings is the capacity to
create new meanings from existing ones; b) the main way
to implement this capacity is to perform double-scope
blending, that is, to build an integrated mental space on
the base of a number of input spaces.
A star example illustrating that point is the Buddhist
Monk riddle: “A Buddhist monk begins at dawn one day
walking up a mountain, reaches the top at sunset, meditates at the top overnight until, at dawn, he begins to walk
back to the foot of the mountain, which he reaches at sunset. Make no assumptions about his starting or stopping or
about his pace during the trips. Riddle: is there a place on
the path that the monk occupies at the same hour of the
day on the two separate journeys?” (Fauconnier, Turner
2002, 39).
This riddle has an elegant solution if we imagine the
monk strolling up and down on the same day, in other
words, combine both walks. In such a blended space the
monk is to meet himself and that place is the positive answer to the riddle question. The authors illustrate the solution with the following schema:

Theoretical underpinnings and structure of
conceptual blending theory
Although this may be familiar information to some of
readers, I will start with a coarse-grained description of the
Fauconnier and Turner’s attitudes. It allows more relevant
understanding of my criticism in the second part of the
paper. To be sure, some aspects of conceptual blending
theory were touched earlier, but its first systematic description holds, presumably, in Fauconnier, Turner 1994.

Fig. 1. The basic schema of the Buddhist Monk
riddle (Fauconnier, Turner 2002, 45)
We can see here the two input spaces (the day of
climbing on and that of climbing down), blended space
and generic space, containing “what the inputs have in

2404

common: a moving individual and his position, a path linking foot and summit of the mountain, a day of travel, and
motion in an unspecified direction” (ibid., 41)).
Another striking example is “The Debate with Kant”1.
Authors suggest to imagine a contemporary philosopher
discussing the issue whether reason is innate capacity when
leading a seminar. During that dispute he appeals to Kant as
his opponent, namely, states his point, then poses hypothetical objections retrieved from Kant’s treatises, then again
come up with his own counterarguments, etc. For the audience it looks as face-to-face debate of two modern scholars.
For the authors we have here the two input spaces connected
with modern philosopher making claims in English and with
Kant thinking and writing German. In the blend we find
two philosophers speaking English to discuss ultimate philosophical problems. Thus, the blended space emergent
structure in some aspects differs from that of input spaces
radically reflecting the novel mental (but not ontological)
reality.
The next example is so called Regatta. The backstory
for it holds such facts: “The clipper ship Northern Light
sailed in 1853 from San Francisco to Boston in 76 days, 8
hours. That time was still the fastest on record in 1993,
when a mod-catamaran, Great American II, set out on the
same course” (ibid., 63). According to authors, “a few days
before the catamaran reached Boston, observers were able to
say: At this point, G r e a t A m e r i c a n I I is 4.5 days
ahead of N o r t h e r n L i g h t ” (ibid.). This sentence constructs blended space in close similarity with the Buddhist
Monk riddle; like two monk trips above, two 140-yeardistanced voyages are combined into a novel event, in this
case, into the boat race. Such time scale compression paves
the way for a pictorial perception of two voyages just as
“The Debate with Kant” blend provides the audience’s emotional engagement in the process of philosophical reasoning.
How wide the field covered by conceptual blending
theory is, can be illustrated with two examples below. The
first one is complex numbers, the second one is the computer desktop. As is well-known, complex numbers,
expressed in the form a+bі, can be viewed as points or
position vectors in a two-dimensional coordinate system
called the complex plane where the real part of a number is
represented with the horizontal projection, and the
imaginary part with the vertical one. The authors suppose
this representation to be the blend, where the first input
space holds points in oriented plane with its vector
transformations, whereas the second one contains real
numbers with operations of addition and multiplication. The
generic space in this case holds commutative ring operations
on pairs of elements. In that perspective the blended space
have a number of new features with regard to input ones
(unlike real numbers there is not an order relation between
two complex ones; unlike points and vectors complex numbers can be multiplied and divided by each other). So, for
1

All the examples discussed can be found in Fauconnier,
Turner 1998 as well as in Fauconnier, Turner 2002.

authors, conceptual blending is an important tool used to
create the new knowledge in mathematics (see also Alexander 2011).
A computer desktop, for authors, is the blend of our
day-to-day experience space (where we open folders to
place or extract documents, throw old folders into a trash
can, etc.) and space of formal operations performed in a
computer (an abstract language of computer commands
which correspond to virtual motions in the blend). In this
case, again, the structure of the blend has obvious novelty
as compared with input spaces.
Conceptual blending, the authors state, is an important tool to create novel grammatical and lexical constructions in language. Thus, the construction Noun-Phrase
Verb Noun-Phrase Prepositional-Phrase, found in a great
number of languages to express caused motion, is a conceptual blend of two different actions (e.g., Jack threw the
ball into the basket includes three steps: Jack acts on the
ball; the ball moves; the ball is in the basket. The blend
combines the beginning and the end of the action, omitting the middle part). In some languages, like English, it
can be extend to some other classes of action, e.g., Anna
sneezed the napkin off the table or The commander let the
tank into the compound, etc. (Fauconnier, Turner 1996;
cf. Mandelblit 2000).
Such figures of speech as metaphor and metonymy
are also blends, according to the authors. They describe
highly conventional source-target metaphors as singlescope networks, where the integrated space frame is supplied by only one input space; e.g., Murdoch knocked
Iacossa out for companies Murdoch and Iacossa. The
integrated space here is a blend of a boxing match and
business competition, but the blend topology has no in
common with business, it is completely defined by the
boxing space frame (Fauconnier, Turner 2002, 126-129).
Meanwhile, only a narrow class of metaphors can be
represented by single-scope networks. For instance, this
representation is impossible for the expression digging
one’s own grave (e.g., They dug their own financial
grave). In this case the blend inherits the structure from
“digging the grave” and “unwitting failure” inputs. However, in the blend the input frames are not simply juxtaposed; the emergent structure is radically different from
both of them in some aspects. Thus, in “digging the
grave” space people dig the grave not for themselves, but
for other people, who have already died. Furthermore, this
action here is not a big blunder as opposed to the blend
frame. In a similar vein, unwittingly failed (particularly,
in the financial sphere) person is unlikely to operate with
a real spade as his counterpart in the blend.
This type of integration frame entitled double-scope
network characterizes, as mentioned, the unique human
capacity distinguished human beings from other species.
They date the emergence of this capacity to the epoch
about 50,000 years ago and draw the birth of religion, art
and language as a conclusion (ibid., 180-187). The gist of
their argumentation can be formulated in the form of the
following syllogism: a) the general process to provide the

2405

human culture development is the emergence of novel conceptual structures on the base of existing ones; b) in doublescope networks the emergent blend structure has a novel
quality with regard to the input spaces; hence, c) doublescope conceptual integration can provide the development
of a wide range of cultural forms created by humans.
It is noteworthy that Fauconnier and Turner don’t analyze concrete data to argue for this point, and their approach
looks a bit like an “ivory tower” theory. At the same time
such analysis can be found in the papers of other researchers
working within Fauconnier and Turner's paradigm, particularly, in Sweetser 2000. In her work the author describes a
hypothetical buffalo hunting ritual where primitive hunters
perform a ritual dance in order to provide success in a real
hunt in the future. In accord with Sweetser’s views, such a
ritual is a blend “between (Input 1) the ritual setting and
participants and (Input 2) a hunting scene and its participants” (ibid., 319). The blended space holds the new elements which have no counterpart in the input spaces; a buffalo rock painting is transformed here into a real buffalo
which is struck in the ritual dance, etc.
A researcher working with blending as a real cognitive
process encounters the two general questions: which phases
does this process have in on-line regime and what are the
criteria to select the elements in the input spaces for the projection into the blend. Fauconnier and Turner try to tackle
these issues, although it is hard to say if they are clear about
that.
According to authors, “there are three operations involved in constructing the blend: composition, completion,
and elaboration” (Fauconnier, Turner 1998, 144). The first
stage is characterized by composing the blend from the elements of input spaces; then, the blend is completed with a
great range of background conceptual structure; and on the
last stage it is developed “through imaginative mental simulation according to principles and logic in the blend” (ibid.).
The model described, however, did not rest on any experimental data and it is a problem to check whether it holds
water.
With regard to the second issue the authors speak about
constitutive and governing principles of conceptual integration. The first ones are connected with the general laws of
logic and the rules of language, the second ones are more
flexible and not so strictly defined. The authors mark out the
overarching goal driving all of the governing principles:
Achieve Human Scale, and several subgoals, namely, Compress what is diffuse; Obtain global insight; Strengthen vital
relations; Come up with a story; Go from Many to One.
Alongside with that, they suggest a number of more concrete principles, such as, Topology Principle (“Other things
being equal, set up the blend and the inputs so that useful
topology in the inputs and their outer-space relations is reflected by inner-space relations in the blend” (Fauconnier,
Turner 2002, 327)) or Integration Principle (“Achieve an
integrated blend” (ibid., 328)), etc. Again, the algorithm of
applying these principles to particular cases is not transparent; e.g., it is not clear how to find out if topology is useful
or not.

Given the overview of conceptual blending theory as
completed here, let us move on to the next step.

Some objections against conceptual
blending theory
There are three aspects of conceptual blending theory
as stated to be cast in doubt.
A) Contrary to Fauconnier and Turner’s interpretation, almost all examples they suggest are connected with
the form the conceptual operations are presented in, but
not with their essence (the only exception is, perhaps, the
quite specific Buddist Monk riddle). The main task of the
blend in the examples given is to represent conceptual
structure in a convenient, compact, familiar for an average
person form; in other words, to provide its popular presentation2. The direct link between the popularization and
conceptual blending is clear in the popular science literature, where extremely abstract ideas are represented in the
form of visible images to be processed by the less educated audience. The S. Hawking’s analogy between balloon in which cover tension holds air pressure within it
and star where the gravitational interaction between atoms
are balanced by the star gas pressure is a classic blend
from conceptual blending theory perspective (the input
space-1: a balloon, located near the earth’s surface; a rubber cover; gas within the balloon; the input space-2: a
star; helium and hydrogen atoms within the star; the
blend: the star is a balloon with heated air inside, situated
among other stars).
Another striking example of such “popular science
blend” was suggested by A. Einstein to explain the space
curvature in the general theory of relativity. It is the analogy between hypothetical “flat beings” existing in two
dimensions and humans living in the three-dimensional
space. The “flat beings” are able to perceive the line curvature, but not the space one; the humans can comprehend
the curvature of the plane, but the curvature of the space
is beyond their comprehension. The blend here holds human beings living inside the plane.
Let us now look from this perspective at Fauconnier
and Turner’s examples described above. Given “The Debate with Kant” story, the emergence of the blend has no
impact on the essence of the problem discussed (in this
case, as mentioned, the question whether reason is innate
capacity). Such a debate could be held with another philosopher who shared Kant’s ideas or, say, in inner dialog
of the philosopher with himself. The format described by
the authors gives the opportunity to adopt the disputed
issue to the audience; it is a “pedagogical trick” transforming an abstract philosophical matter into a kind of
2

This point can be illustrated with a presentation at a conference. The quality of presentation is not directly connected with the quality of the idea. From time to time we
encounter an attractive presentation representing a dull or
controversial theory and vice versa.

2406

performance, in other words, coming up with a story.
The “Regatta” example has the same structure. The
blend gives here a visible and attractive picture of the
events, while touching no ground or even distorting their
ground (thus, it is not clear, if the context of the regatta described is relevant to the clipper Northern Light, which goal
it pursued during the voyage from San Francisco to Boston,
etc.).
The computer desktop example is consistent with the
ones examined above. The emergence of the blend helps an
average user to work with a computer because it transforms
an abstract machine language into the set of objects from his
day-to-day experience. Here again we deal with the adaptation of the conceptual structure to the cognitive horizon of
the lay observer.
The “complex numbers” case, which is, perhaps, the
strongest argument for blending as creation of novel conceptual knowledge, rests on misunderstanding. Complex
numbers, as mentioned, are an ordered pair of real numbers
which can be represented as a point in oriented plane. However, real numbers can also be represented as a point in oriented line or as a vector which reference point coincides
with the origin of coordinates. We can only wonder why the
authors address such representation for complex numbers
and don’t apply it to real ones. A geometric representation
of complex numbers is in demand much less than an algebraic or a trigonometric one. The gist of complex numbers
has no connection with properties of points in oriented plane
or plane vectors. The gist of complex numbers as expansion
of real numbers is determined by introducing “imaginary
unit” i (i= -1) and by a lot of interesting properties connected with that. The analogy with points in plane provides
visual image for complex numbers; hence, this case is situated in line with the ones examined above.
The construction Noun-Phrase Verb Noun-Phrase
Prepositional-Phrase works, by and large, in the similar
direction. Omitting middle links and pointing out only the
beginning and the end of the process offer a more visible
and dynamic process description which facilitates its perception.
To sum up my contention here, I would like to get to
the general point: blending can not provide the emergence
of new conceptual knowledge; its function is to adapt existing knowledge to the needs of average people. To consider
blending as great mental capacity, which brought about the
emergence of various forms of culture, means to put shoes
on the wrong foot.
B) The lack of cultural-historical analysis is the next
defect of the Fauconnier and Turner’s approach. In order to
illustrate that let us return to the metaphor digging one’s
own grave. This expression is likely to appear in different
languages in the first decades of the 20th century. According
to The Oxford English Dictionary, its earliest example dates
back to 1934. Similarly, in Russian language it arises as
metaphor in the 1920th alongside with its emergence in direct meaning (e.g., Chasto jertvy prinujdalis' ryt' sebe sami
mogilu (Often victims were forced to dig their own grave,

1924)). If it is so, we can suppose that the metaphor digging one’s own grave came into being as the comprehension of the new social experience of the first quarter of the
20th century, reflected by literature and language. The
picture of people digging their own graves at gun point
turned out so vivid and emotionally affecting that it entailed its expansion in other regions. Given this assumption is correct the metaphor structure proves to radically
differ from the authors’ description. To be sure, we can
find here double-scope blending (a man digging his own
grave at gun point performs this action by necessity,
whereas a man plunging into financial adventure operates
by choice; so, it is not fairly correct to speak about direct
mapping of the “digging” input space onto the blend), but
the other thing is important. Importantly, this or that construction emerges in the here and now, but not in the transcendental reality; in that, its emergence is brought about
by socio-cultural shifts, but not by abstract schemas like
one suggested by Fauconnier and Turner.
E. Sweetser’s interpretation of the buffalo hunting
ritual is, perhaps, even a more representative example of
distortions influenced by eliminating socio-cultural aspect
from the analysis. In order to argue that we need to address the school of cultural-historical psychology and,
particularly, the concept complex thinking originated by
L. Vygotsky (Vygotsky 1986). The Russian psychologist
defined complex as a structure where the bonds between
its components are contextual and flexible rather than
abstract and fixed. He illustrated his approach with the
striking Darwin’s example: «A child’s use of ‘quah’ to
designate first a duck swimming on the pond, then any
liquid, including the milk in his bottle; when he happens
to see a coin with an eagle on it, the coin is also called a
‘quah’, and then any round, coinlike object. This is typical
of a chain complex3—each new object included has some
attribute in common with another element, but the attributes undergo endless changes» (ibid., 127). When thinking in complexes a child keeps in mind the same objects
as an adult (which provides the right communication between them), but his way of operating these objects, and
his mental schemas are radically different.
Given this concept as the ground, Vygotsky, among
other things, explained the French cultural anthropologist
L. Lévy-Bruhl’s account of Bororo (the tribe of Northern
Brazil) views which sounded counter to Aristotelian logic
(Lévy-Bruhl 1978, Lévy-Bruhl 1979). For instance, the
Bororo (the tribe in Northern Brazil) boasted that they
were red araras (parakeets), which did not merely signify
that they would become araras after their death, or that
araras metamorphosed the Bororo, but they claimed that
they were araras at the current time, which was their actual identity. Levi-Bruhl defined this operation as the law
of participation and such way of reasoning as pre-logical
thinking.

3

2407

A chain complex is one of the ways of complex thinking.

For Vygotsky, the Bororo and araras make up a single
complex; they are not two discrete entity. A great number of
such complexes can be found in primitive and ancient cultures. For instance, magical operations with the name of the
enemy were used to damage him, and because of that people
endeavored to keep their true name in secret.
The buffalo hunting ritual is the part of the phenomenon described above. A buffalo rock painting and a genuine
buffalo are not the two separate objects; they are the elements of the same object, namely, a complex with the topology, rather unusual for the modern people. If it does, to
find the blend in this ritual is an obvious mistake.
Reasons of this kind cover a lot of other expressions
examined by Fauconnier and Turner (particularly, their
analysis of the Grim Reaper metaphor). The lack of the cultural-historical component in the analysis leads (at least, in
some cases) to failure to reveal the true causes of blend
emergence and evolution and to account for the real conceptual structure of the phenomena investigated.
C) It is also to the point to address here a set of experimental researches providing us with some data to estimate the correctness of conceptual blending theory from the
psycholinguistic perspective. We will focus on the investigation of counterfactual conditionals as a significant example of such researches (de Vega et al. 2007; de Vega 2008;
Ferguson, Sanford 2008; de Vega, Uritta 2011). Fauconnier
and Turner take great pains to examine counterfactuals.
Such counterfactuals as If Clinton were the T i t a n i c , the
iceberg would sink alongside with the Buddhist Monk riddle
or “The Debate with Kant” story would be considered as
arch examples of conceptual blending. This sentence, for the
authors, is the double-scope blend of Titanic and President
Clinton mental spaces; in the blend Clinton collides with the
iceberg and the iceberg is sinking. In this case blend is figured out as the novel mental space with the unique topology.
A part of experimental data in this field is completely
consistent with the interpretation given. Thus, when participants read short stories like Marta switched on the radio
and heard the winning lottery numbers. Since she won the
lottery prize, the first thing she did was to buy a new Mercedes car and Marta switched on the radio and heard the
winning lottery numbers. If she had won the lottery prize,
the first thing she would have done was to buy a new Mercedes car and after reading were asked to verify a test probe
belonged to the beginning of the story (“heard”), they verified it faster in the counterfactual than in the factual stories,
which means, according to the authors, that in counterfactual story the situation model is not updated and the attention of the readers focuses on the initial information. This
observation, in turn, argues for the view on counterfactual
mental spaces as endowed with special qualities in comparison with factual ones (de Vega et al. 2007; de Vega 2008,
296-297).
The fact that correct comprehension of counterfactuals
requires knowledge about both real and counterfactual
worlds is also in line with the conjectures of conceptual
blending theory (de Vega 2008, 298-299; Ferguson, Sanford
2008, 610; de Vega, Uritta 2011, 962-963).

However, the more precise analysis gives the strong
evidence that Fauconnier and Turner’s attitudes are too
speculative to account for a real time cognitive process.
The key question in this context is whether mental spaces
are exclusively mental structures, which have no connection with human perception, or they are based on human
sensorimotor experience. Although de jure the authors of
conceptual blending theory stress the second opportunity,
de facto they work with the first one.
In the meantime, the data of the experiments testifies
the sensorimotor anchoring of meaning for counterfactual
expressions, at least, for special groups of words. Thus,
the results of de Vega, Uritta 2011 show that in the process of blend construction counterfactuals apply to the sensorimotor anchors similar to their factual counterparts.
Similar point is formulated in Ferguson, Sanford 2008.
The authors claim that the processing of a true utterance
in the factual context and of a false utterance in the counterfactual one face similar obstacles at the first stage, and
the principles of counterfactual space topology are comprehended by the reader only at the second stage of this
process.
In other words, the schema of three phases in blend
construction (composition, completion, and elaboration)
doesn’t work, at least, in two aspects. Firstly, the background conceptual structure doesn’t complement the
blend on the second step; it is kept in mind from the very
beginning. Secondly, even after the blend constructed, its
elements are perceived at the first phase as objects in the
real space with all spectrum of sensorimotor reactions,
and only afterwards they are replaced in the counterfactual space.

Conclusion
I would like to sum up by saying that conceptual
blending theory contains a lot of fascinating observations
and provocative ideas extending the horizon of our
knowledge. At the same time the authors seem to be
prone to unreasonable generalizations, and they are not
fairly correct in revealing the cognitive meaning of the
operation they discovered. The view on blending as an
important tool to adapt knowledge to the experience of
average people seems to fit the gist of this procedure better than the intention to look at blending as a basic instrument for the creation of new knowledge.
The second weak point of conceptual blending theory is the lack of cultural-historical analysis as well as the
absence of experimental data justifying it. It may therefore be interesting in this context to address the demarcation between formal as-if theories and heuristic theories,
fitting the process in on-line regime (Gigerenzer, Todd
1999; Hertwig, Hoffrage 2012). Fauconnier and Turner
present their theory as heuristic, but, to considerable extent, it looks like as-if theory. The elimination of this contradiction could provide a new impulse for the theory development and strengthen its heuristic potential.

2408

References
Alexander, J. (2011). Blending in mathematics. Semiotica,
187, 1-48.
Brandt, P.A. (2005). Mental spaces and cognitive semantics:
A critical comment. Journal of Pragmatics. 37, 1578–1594.
de Vega, M. (2008). Levels of embodied meaning: From
pointing to counterfactuals. In de Vega M., Glenberg A.,
Graesser A. (eds.). Symbols and embodiment: debates on
meaning and cognition. Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press, 285-308.
de Vega, M., Uritta M. & Riffio B. (2007). Canceling updating in the comprehension of counterfactuals embedded in
narratives. Memory and Cognition, 35, 1410-1421.
de Vega M. & Uritta M. (2011). Counterfactual sentences
activate embodied meaning: An action–sentence compatibility effect study. Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 23, 8,
962-973.
Fauconnier, G. (2009). Generalized integration networks. In
Evans, V., Pourcel S. (eds). New Directions in Cognitive
Linguistics. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 147-160.
Fauconnier, G. & Turner, M. (1994). Conceptual Projection
and Middle Spaces. San Diego: University of California,
Department of Cognitive Science Technical Report 9401
(http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=129086
2).
Fauconnier, G. & Turner, M. (1996). Blending as a Central
Process of Grammar. In Goldberg A. (ed.). Conceptual
Structure, Discourse, and Language. Stanford: CSLI Publications, 113-129.
Fauconnier, G. & Turner, M. (1998). Conceptual integration
networks. Cognitive science. 22, 2, 133-187.
Fauconnier, G. & Turner, M. (2000). Compression and
global insight. Cognitive linguistics. 11, 3/4, 283-304.
Fauconnier, G. & Turner, M. (2002). The Way We Think.
Conceptual Blending and the Mind's Hidden Complexities.
N. Y.: Basic Books.
Fauconnier, G. & Turner, M. (2008). The Origin of Language as a Product of the Evolution of Modern Cognition.
In Laks B. (ed.). Origin and evolution of languages: approaches, models, paradigms. L.: Equinox, 133-156.
Ferguson, H. & Sanford A. (2008). Anomalies in real and
counterfactual worlds: An eye-movement investigation.
Journal of Memory and Language. 58, 609-626.
Gibbs, R. W., Jr. (2000). Making good psychology out of
blending theory. Cognitive linguistics. 11, 3/4, 347-358.
Gigerenzer, G. & Todd, P. (1999). Fast and Frugal Heuristics: The Adaptive Toolbox. In Gigerenzer G., Todd P.
(eds.). Simple heuristics that make us smart. New York:
Oxford University Press, 3-36.
Harder, P. (2003). Mental spaces: exactly when do we need
them? Cognitive Linguistics. 14, 1, 91–96.
Hertwig, R. & Hoffrage, U. (2012). Simple Heuristics: the
Foundations of Adaptive Social Behavior. In Hertwig R.,
Hoffrage U.(eds.). Social rationality: simple heuristics in a
social context. New York: Oxford University Press, 3-38.

Lévy-Bruhl, L. (1978). Primitive mentality. New York:
AMS Press.
Lévy-Bruhl, L. (1979). How natives think. New York:
Arno Press.
Mandelblit, N. (2000). The grammatical marking of conceptual integration: From syntax to morphology. Cognitive linguistics. 11, 3/4, 197-251.
Oakley, T. & Hougaard, A. (2008). Mental spaces and
discourse analysis. In Oakley T., Hougaard A. (eds.).
Mental spaces in discourse and interaction. Amsterdam;
Philadelphia: J. Benjamins Publishing, 1-26.
Sweetser, E. (2000). Blended spaces and performativity.
Cognitive linguistics. 11, 3-4, 305-333.
Vygotsky, L. (1986). Thought and language. Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press.

2409

