UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A two process account of the memory improvement due to choosing

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8gn576sm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Author
Driver, Charles

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Two Process Account of the Memory Improvement Due to Choosing
Charles Driver (charles.driver@uqconnect.edu.au)
Department of Psychology, University of Queensland, Queensland, Australia, 4072

Abstract
Previous accounts of the mechanism which generates
improvement in memory when people freely choose items,
compared to other methods of item assignment, conflict and
lack integration. I examine facial recognition performance of
40 participants asked to choose either the most or least
attractive face from a series of pairs, and find that recognition
of chosen faces is greater than recognition of unchosen, while
no effect is found for the valence of faces. Considering these
results in tandem with prior results and theories, I argue that a
two process account of memory improvements due to choice
is necessary, with one deliberative process occurring across
all options available to choose from, and the other selective
process focused on the actual chosen item. I detail the
delineation of these processes, and describe and test the
current best accounts of each — the multiple-cue hypothesis,
and the self-reference effect for memory.

one possible mechanism, and conflict with each other.
Early work in the field noted improvements in associative
learning performance when participants chose their own
learning materials (Perlmuter, Monty, & Kimble, 1971). It
was argued that increased motivation arising from having
freely chosen either the stimulus or response increased
performance. Later work by Takahashi (1991) examined
recall and recognition performance for freely-chosen versus
experimenter-assigned options, and found an improvement
in memory for freely-chosen items that they termed the selfchoice effect.
Takahashi posed a meta-memory
interpretation for this effect, suggesting that while choice
enhances memory, it does so because participants can select
more easily remembered options, and not because freely
choosing items increases motivation.

Keywords:
Self; incidental memory; choice; self-choice
effect; multiple cuing; learning and memory;

The multiple-cue hypothesis

Introduction
Why did you choose that brand at the supermarket, or that
politician to vote for? Choices are everywhere, with
ramifications from insignificant to major. A form of
decision-making, choice more specifically involves a
selection from a set of options. Substantial research has
addressed the influence of various factors influencing our
choices, but comparatively little has examined the direct
cognitive impact of actually making a choice. One
important cognitive impact is our memory of the choice,
both because simply remembering them can be crucial, but
also because the memory of previously choosing something
has been shown to positively influence us in regards to that
choice in future — even when that memory is incorrect.
This positive influence occurs during both recall and
encoding (Benney & Henkel, 2006),via an influence on
preferences (Bernstein & Loftus, 2009), further decisions
(Chen & Zhang, 2003), as well as the attributes we associate
with items (Benney & Henkel, 2006; Henkel & Mather,
2007). A better understanding of the way choices are
remembered may thus help us to mitigate some of these
arbitrary biases, improve our decision making in general,
and inform our broader understanding of both memory and
choice.

Memory improvements due to choice
Freely choosing items has long been recognized to
facilitate memory compared to other methods of item
assignment (e.g. random assignment), but current accounts
of the mechanisms driving this improvement focus on only

Watanabe (2001) critiqued both Takahashi and
Perlmuter’s explanations (though further endorsed the selfchoice effect) by demonstrating that the effect was
maintained in a constrained choice condition. Watanabe
asked participants a series of questions, and provided a
number of answers to select from for each, although only
one was correct. Participants had to process the various
options and make a selection — just as with free choices —
but only one of the options answered the question
appropriately.
Because the self-choice effect was
maintained when participants went through the process of
choosing, yet could not simply choose their favored or more
easily remembered options, Watanabe rejected both
motivational and meta-memory explanations.
Instead,
Watanabe proposed a parallel between the self-choice effect,
and the generation effect. When participants generate
responses to a question, they are generally remembered
better than when they are assigned responses (Slamecka &
Graf, 1978). This generation effect also accords with Craik
and Lockhart’s (1972) levels-of-processing framework,
which suggests that the more substantively we think about
an item, the better we remember it. The premise for the
generation effect is that responding to a question typically
involves generating multiple candidate responses,
comparing and deliberating between them, then selecting
the best response.
Watanabe suggests that in order to
compare responses, positive and negative attributes of each
must be generated. They then argue that while choosing
between presented options does not involve the generation
of candidate responses themselves, it does involve the
generation of attributes for each candidate, and then a

2219

comparison between these generated attributes. They call
this the multiple-cue hypothesis, and suggest it is
responsible for the improved memory in both generation
and self-choice effects; the item attributes that are generated
in both cases provide additional cues to facilitate memory of
the item. The generative process encourages the encoding
of item-specific information (i.e. detailed information about
the item), while the comparative process encodes relational
information (i.e. how the item connects to other items and
concepts in memory).

The Self-reference effect
An entirely separate stream of research into choice
suggests that rather than improvements in memory being
driven by the generative and comparative processes of
deliberation, they instead arise because the feeling of freely
choosing something causes us to associate it with our selves
(Cloutier & Macrae, 2008). This is suggested as arising
because self-reference is encouraged by the sense of
personal responsibility in selection. The self-reference
effect for memory was proposed by Rogers, Kuiper and
Kirker (1977) after many observations that we remember
items such as traits, nouns, prose, mental imagery, etc.
better when we consider how the items relate to ourselves
than to others. Symons and Johnson conducted an extensive
meta-analysis of theories and findings for the self-reference
effect (1997), and suggest that items encoded in relation to
our self construct benefit from the highly developed
memory structure (i.e., well organised, richly detailed and
massively connected), already in place regarding our self.
This self-referential encoding facilitates recognition and
recall, as more connections exist to other memory traces.
As with the self-choice effect, Symons and Johnson argue
that self-reference encourages both item-specific and
relational information encoding (i.e., increases encoding of
both detail regarding the specific item, and associated
connections with other memory traces). Additionally,
Symons and Johnson suggest that we use our self-concept as
a default source of retrieval cues. This default means that in
the absence of other sources of cues, we look to memory
traces associated with our self. As such, self-referentially
encoded items are also likely to be recalled with reference
to the self. Such compatibility of encoding and retrieval
conditions — transfer-appropriate-processing (Morris,
Bransford, & Franks, 1977) — leads to improved memory
for the items (Wells, Hoffman, & Enzle, 1984).
When Cloutier and Macrae (2008) extended self-reference
to the domain of choices, they examined whether selfreference could improve memory when participants were
not explicitly directed to think in terms of the self. They
theorized that when someone feels personally responsible
for the assignment of an item to their self (i.e. free choice),
greater self-reference should be elicited, improving memory
for the item. While this is similar to work on the self-choice
effect, this study allows a critical delineation between the

act of selecting an item and the process of deliberating
between items, by removing the latter. Cloutier and Macrae
paired 44 participants, and had each member of the pair take
turns to pass slips of paper to the experimenter from either a
central bowl (free choice condition), or a participantspecific bowl (assigned condition). The experimenter then
read out loud a number printed on the slip, and indicated a
positive trait that corresponded to that number from a
hidden list — removing any possible influence of
deliberation between choices on memory. Even though a
choice from the central bowl resulted in just as random and
arbitrary a selection as an initial assignment of items to
individual bowls, recall and recognition performance of the
traits that participants chose themselves via the central bowl
was significantly better than both traits chosen by the other
participant, and traits when participants chose from the selfspecific bowl. While the explanation that this memory
improvement occurs due to increased self-reference needs
further examination and testing, this work does show that
the mere act of selecting an item can enhance memory for it,
so long as a sense of choosing is maintained — even in
situations where the choice is arbitrary and no processing of
the options is involved.

Two mechanisms for memory improvement?
The multiple-cue hypothesis and self-reference accounts
pose very different mechanisms for memory improvements
due to choosing. Watanabe’s (2001) examination of the
self-choice effect and multiple-cue hypothesis suggested
that deliberation between options drives memory
improvements when choosing items, but Cloutier and
Macrae’s (2008) work on choice and self-reference
demonstrated that the sense of freely choosing an item,
devoid of deliberation, is sufficient to elicit better memory
for it. This latter sense alone could be sufficient to account
for the full extent of memory improvement due to choosing,
with no need for the multiple-cue hypothesis. However, the
effect that the sense of freely choosing has on memory for
unchosen items is unknown, whereas Watanabe showed that
memory improvements also occurred for deliberated and
compared, but unchosen, items. For the sense of freely
choosing to sufficiently account for all memory
improvements due to choice, it must endow unchosen items
with comparable memory improvements to chosen items.
That is, chosen and unchosen options that have been
deliberated between should exhibit comparable memory
performance. This requires a direct comparison between
unchosen and chosen item memory performance, which
prior works have not pursued (Watanabe compared both to
different assignment methods). So, while prior works posit
different, but singular, processes for the memory
improvement due to choice, a direct comparison between
unchosen and chosen can show whether one is sufficient, or
that multiple processes are necessary.

2220

Is self-reference relevant?
Beyond the question of one or two (or more) processes, is
the question of why the sense of freely choosing an item is
important for memory — how does it cause the
improvement. Cloutier and Macrae (2008) argued that it is
the self-referentiality caused by the sense of choosing which
drives memory improvements.
However, because
participants in their studies only chose their own items, and
were not asked to choose items from the central bowl for the
other participant, it is unclear whether it is the sense of
choosing an item to suit oneself, or the mere sense of
choosing at all that is driving the effect. Were the latter
found to be the case, self-reference would either need to be
construed very differently in regards to choice, or a new
explanation developed. Cloutier and Macrae acknowledge a
further limitation, in that they only provided positive traits
in each condition — would the act of selection have
improved memory for neutral or negative traits in the same
manner as for positive? Items which were deemed less
favorable, less in line with personal preferences and desires,
should elicit fewer connections in memory with the self.
Although far from a complete test of the theory, examining
this can enlighten us as to whether the theoretical
background of self-reference is a strong basis for this
observed effect of freely choosing on memory.

attractive. The faces will then be presented one at a time,
interspersed with unfamiliar faces, and recognition for the
faces will be assessed.

Method
Participants
Forty undergraduate psychology students (Six male) of
mean age 19.57 years (SD = 2.64) participated in this study
for course credit.

Materials
Participants completed a computer-based choice and
subsequent memory task. Colour images of female faces
were used for the choices offered to participants, the same
as in Tangen, Murphy and Thompson (2011). Originally
from a Slovakian database of 200 faces (SmartNet IBC,
n.d.), the faces were eye-aligned using PsychoMorph
(Tiddeman, Burt, & Perrett, 2001), and clearly identifying
extraneous features such as piercings were digitally
removed as necessary. An example face pairing is shown in
Figure 1.

Outline of the experiment
To determine whether freely choosing between a pair of
options causes differences in memory of unchosen and
chosen items, and thus whether one or two processes are
necessary to account for memory improvements due to
choice, I will examine whether our memory for chosen
items is better than our memory for unchosen. Support for
this would demonstrate that the sense of freely choosing is
insufficient on its own to account for memory
improvements due to choosing. Such a finding would then
lend support to a two process account, whereby
improvement across both chosen and unchosen items arises
due to deliberation between the items, while further
improvement in memory for only the chosen item arises due
to the sense of having personally selected it.
Further to determing whether a one or two process
account is necessary, I will also examine the mechanism of
the memory improvements due to the sense of freely
choosing. I examine this aspect because while I do not
debate the existence of the effect, it is very unclear that selfreference is the mechanism. To assess this I will ask
whether when we choose options we favor, we will exhibit
more improvement in memory than when we choose
unfavorable options. Such a finding would lend support to
the notion that self-reference is behind the memory
improvement associated with the sense of freely choosing.
To examine these questions I will present participants a
series of choices between two facial images. Half will be
asked to choose the most attractive face, and half the least

Figure 1: Example of facial image pairings

Procedure
Participants were initially told they would be completing
a task in which they had to select faces based on
attractiveness, followed by a range of cognitive testing.
They were given basic demographic questions followed by a
series of 18 choices. Each choice was between a pair of
female face images as shown above in Figure 1. The order
of pair presentation was randomized for each participant.
Half of the participants were asked to “please choose the
face you find most attractive”, while the other half were
asked to choose least attractive. Participants then performed
a word unscrambling distracter task for two minutes, after
which a surprise memory test commenced. During the
memory task, the 18 chosen faces, 18 unchosen faces, as
well as 36 new faces, were presented serially in randomized
order. Participants were told that they would be presented
both old and new faces, but were not informed of the
proportion, or of how long the test would last.

2221

General Discussion

Design
A 2 (choice type: most attractive, least attractive) × 2
(memory stimulus: chosen, unchosen) mixed factorial
design was used, where choice type was randomly assigned
and varied between-participants. Memory stimulus varied
within-participants in a randomized order. Recognition was
gauged by asking participants “Did you see this face in the
earlier sequence of pairs”, with a forced-choice response of
yes or no. The percentage of recognition responses to each
type of memory stimulus was calculated for each
participant.

Results
Initial examination of the data in Table 1 suggests that
chosen faces are recognized more often than unchosen,
while both are recognized more often than new faces.
Participants appear to be more accurate in their recognition
judgment when presented with a new face than either a
chosen or unchosen, in that they make the correct judgment
84% of the time. However this simply suggests that people
are more likely to not recognize a previously seen face than
they are to mistakenly recognize a new face.
Table 1: Recognition rates based on choice type.

Memory
stimuli
Chosen face
Unchosen face
New face

Choose most
attractive (n=20)
M
SD
.71
.14
.62
.15
.16
.8

Choose least
attractive (n=20)
M
SD
.71
.12
.65
.14
.16
.9

Recognition rates were assessed with a mixed betweenwithin subjects 2 × 2 (choice type [most, least] × memory
stimulus [chosen, unchosen]) analysis of variance. There
was no main effect of choice type on recognition, F(1, 38) =
0.12, p = .731. This lack of main effect of choice type
indicates that the type of choice participants were asked to
make – choosing either the most or least attractive – did not
influence overall recognition rates. There was a significant
main effect of stimulus type, F(1, 38) = 12.48, p = .001.
This main effect of stimuli type indicates that previously
chosen faces were recognized significantly more often than
faces that were shown and participants deliberated over, but
left unchosen. No significant interaction between choice
type and memory stimuli was observed, F(1, 38) = 0.47, p =
.490. This absence of interaction indicates that the observed
effect of memory stimuli on recognition was not influenced
by choice type; the improvement in recognition for chosen
compared to unchosen faces was the same whether people
were asked to choose the most, or the least, attractive face.

When asked to choose between pairs of faces, participants
later recognized faces they had chosen more frequently than
the faces they did not choose — deliberating between two
items and then selecting one led to improved memory for
the chosen item compared to the unchosen. This lends
support to my proposal that two processes are necessary to
account for memory improvements due to choosing.
Previous accounts of this memory improvement include the
multiple-cue hypothesis (Watanabe, 2001) and the selfreference effect (Cloutier & Macrae, 2008). My results
show that neither explanation alone is sufficient to account
for the range of results seen across research in the area, but
that in combination they may provide an effective account.
The multiple-cue hypothesis (Watanabe, 2001) suggests
that deliberating between items generates additional
attributes (which can function as cues) associated with each
item, thereby improving recognition and recall of the items.
This was based on observations that any items that were part
of a selection process (both chosen and unchosen) were
better remembered than items that were merely assigned to
participants. However, Cloutier and Macrae (2008) showed
that even in the absence of deliberation between items, a
sense of involvement in the selection process is sufficient to
improve memory for items. This sense of involvement
could thus have potentially accounted for the full extent of
memory gains that people exhibit when choosing between
items. However, because personal involvement in the
decision is comparable for both chosen and unchosen items,
and my results show that participants’ recognition of chosen
items is greater than unchosen, the sense of involvement is
insufficient to explain Watanabe’s earlier findings of
improved memory for unchosen items compared to items
assigned by an experimenter. As such, it appears that at
least two processes are necessary to account for memory
improvements due to choosing.
Some portion of
improvement likely occurs as a function of the process of
deliberating between options, which improves memory for
all items involved in the decision process, while another
process related to the act of selecting one option improves
memory primarily (or only) for the selected option.

Multiple-cues and the deliberative process
Although insufficient to explain the entirety of
improvements in memory due to choosing, the multiple-cue
hypothesis (Watanabe, 2001) is presently the best
explanation for the memory improvement arising from the
process of deliberating between items, and is thus
responsible for improvements observed for unchosen items
involved in a deliberative process compared to unchosen
items not involved in a deliberative process. Further
understanding of the influence of this deliberative process
on memory could be gained by varying the number of
options selected between while constraining the time
available to choose. I expect that the inclusion of additional

2222

options would reduce the influence of deliberation, while
maintaining a similar effect of selection. That is, if
choosing between five options instead of two, differences in
memory between chosen and unchosen options should be
greater, because any quickly rejected options will benefit
less from deliberative processes, while chosen options
should still benefit similarly from the sense of freely
choosing. Note though that it was important in this work to
limit the options in choices to two, to avoid confounding an
effect of choosing with an effect of rejecting early. This is
because if three options are presented, one could be rejected
as inappropriate early in the choice process, leading to
reduced memory for it, unrelated to the actual act of
selection. If this effect were apparent, it would mean that
any examination of differences between unchosen and
chosen when more than two options are presented is likely
to be confounded by attentional differences due to early
rejecting. However, now having confirmed the influence of
both deliberative and selective processes on memory,
choices with more than two options may be able to both
further test the two mechanisms, and highlight the relative
effects of each.

While this result raises questions as to the applicability of
self-reference as an explanation for memory improvements
due to choice, further research is needed to assess whether
this null result is: an artifact of the type of stimuli used; an
indication that an items’ self-referentiality does not vary
based on the strength of accord with personal preferences;
or an indication that the observed memory improvement due
to the sense of personally choosing is not due to selfreference. These multiple possibilities highlight what I
think is a weakness in the application of self-reference based
theories — unless directly and overtly introduced, greater
self-reference must be assumed in order for self-reference to
function as an explanatory mechanism for observed
improvements in memory. An alternative approach to this
question would be to repeat my experiment, but ask some
participants to make choices based on their own preferences,
and others to make choices for a friend. This would more
closely match the typical approach to eliciting selfreference, such that choosing for a friend should result in
less self-reference. Should such an experiment also yield a
null result, the predictive usefulness of self-reference as an
explanation for the observed effect would seem very
questionable.

Self-reference and the act of selection
Memory improvements due merely to the act of selection
(as distinct from the deliberation between items) have only
recently been noted, with the frequently observed but
somewhat narrowly specified self-reference effect (Rogers
et al., 1977) posed by Cloutier and Macrae (2008) as the
only explanation so far.
Typically regarded as the
phenomenon whereby participants remember items assessed
in terms of their relation to their self better than items
assessed in relation to others (Symons & Johnson, 1997), it
is generally elicited by explicitly asking participants to think
of an item in relation to their self or another. When
stepping outside this paradigm, it is difficult to determine a
priori the types of items or actions likely to elicit selfreferential processing. Nevertheless, Cloutier and Macrae
posed self-referential processing as responsible for
participants improved memories of items they felt they
chose themselves, compared to memories of items they felt
others had chosen. In their case however, rather than
varying whether the item was assessed in relation to the self
or other, they varied the sense of who was responsible for
selecting the item.
To test support for Cloutier and Macrae’s proposed selfreference explanation, half of my participants were asked to
choose items they found most attractive, while half chose
items they found least attractive. Items which more closely
represent a participants preferences and desires were
expected to be more likely to induce associations with their
self (Cloutier & Macrae, 2008), however, no difference in
recognition performance between more and less attractive
faces was found, and participants performed no differently
when choosing either the most or least attractive faces.

Delineating between the two processes
I have demonstrated that memory improvements due to
choosing are likely best described by two distinct processes,
as opposed to the singular process accounts described in the
literature until now, which I have shown to be inadequate.
These two processes are delineated as the initial deliberation
between multiple options, or latter act of selecting one
specific option. The best accounts of the individual
processes at present are the multiple-cue hypothesis
(Watanabe, 2001) as driving that portion of improvements
due to deliberation, and a self-reference effect (Cloutier &
Macrae, 2008) further improving memory only for those
items which are felt to be personally selected. The multiplecue hypothesis was developed in response to a series of
works in the area of memory for choices, and allows for
relatively clear predictions and testing. Results here neither
confirm nor disconfirm the theory, but the further testing I
propose involving more choice candidates will go some way
towards this. While my results clearly show an effect
related only to selection, there are weaknesses with selfreference as an explanation for this effect. My results failed
to demonstrate one possible prediction of self-reference, that
the valence of items should influence the level of selfreference — yet the weaknesses of self-reference (in current
guise) as a theory for memory of choices is seen in that
alternative explanations can be given for my observed
results which maintain a causal role for self-reference. One
such explanation could be that self-reference occurs
whenever we judge an item for ourselves, and we do not in
fact more closely associate positive items and features with
ourselves. My proposal of adhering more closely to the

2223

original self-reference paradigm will be one informative
step for this issue.
While I have proposed a number of specific extensions to
this line of research, I also suggest that a critical feature of
my work — the direct comparison between chosen and
unchosen options — is crucial to further investigations
related to choice. This distinction allows a clear delineation
of the process of deliberating between items, from the act of
selecting a single item. That is, the process of deliberating
involves cognitive processes that occur across all options,
selecting one option rather than another results in
differential cognitive effects — direct comparisons between
chosen and unchosen options allow these to be examined.

Towards a reduction of biases
A final, more general direction this research could
fruitfully be extended, is the influence of memories for
choosing, and not choosing, on preferences and future
decisions. How do the arbitrary biases in memory (Benney
& Henkel, 2006; Henkel & Mather, 2007; Mather, Shafir, &
Johnson, 2000), and resulting preferences (Bernstein &
Loftus, 2009), that choosing causes vary under different
conditions of choice? Could we enhance or minimize this
post-choice polarization between options? My results
suggest this may be possible: while the choice posed to
participants (which face they found more, or less, attractive)
varied, the information gained did not — regardless of
choice type, we come to know both the face they found
most attractive, and the face they found least attractive.
Therefore varying the direction of the original choice,
manipulating how well the different options and the
decision are remembered, may be a very simple way to alter
the extent of bias people show towards items after making a
choice between them. The earlier suggestion of testing with
more than two options could also be explored here. If the
multiple-cue hypothesis is adequate, more choices may
further reduce our memories for unchosen items, and in turn
reduce any biases towards the unchosen options which arise
from a memory of not choosing them.

Acknowledgements
I thank Jason Tangen for his support across all aspects of
the project, and Mike Humphreys and Giulia Paparo for
their comments on various portions. The School of
Psychology at University of Queensland provided the
participant pool.

References
Benney, K. S., & Henkel, L. A. (2006). The role of free
choice in memory for past decisions. Memory, 14(8),
1001-1011.
Bernstein, D. M., & Loftus, E. F. (2009). The consequences
of false memories for food preferences and choices.
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 4(2), 135-139.

Chen, C. Y., & Zhang, S. (2003). A dynamic choice
process: How choices generate biased memory that
influences future choices. In P. A. Keller & D. W. Rook
(Eds.), Advances in consumer research (Vol. 30)
Cloutier, J., & Macrae, C. N. (2008). The feeling of
choosing: Self-involvement and the cognitive status of
things past. Consciousness and Cognition, 17(1), 125-135.
Craik, F. I. M., & Lockhart, R. S. (1972). Levels of
processing: A framework for memory research1. Journal
of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 11(6), 671-684.
Henkel, L. A., & Mather, M. (2007). Memory attributions
for choices: How beliefs shape our memories. Journal of
Memory and Language, 57(2), 163-176.
Mather, M., Shafir, E., & Johnson, M. K. (2000).
Misremembrance of options past: Source monitoring and
choice. Psychological Science, 11(2), 132-138.
Morris, C. D., Bransford, J. D., & Franks, J. J. (1977).
Levels of processing versus transfer appropriate
processing. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 16(5), 519-533.
Perlmuter, L., Monty, R. A., & Kimble, G. A. (1971). Effect
of choice on paired-associate learning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 91(1), 47.
Rogers, T. B., Kuiper, N. A., & Kirker, W. S. (1977). Selfreference and the encoding of personal information.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 35(9), 677688.
Slamecka, N. J., & Graf, P. (1978). The generation effect:
Delineation of a phenomenon. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Learning and Memory, 4(6), 592.
Symons, C. S., & Johnson, B. T. (1997). The self-reference
effect in memory: A meta-analysis. Psychol Bull, 121(3),
371-394.
Takahashi, M. (1991). The role of choice in memory as a
function of age: Support for a metamemory interpretation
of the self-choice effect. Psychologia: An International
Journal of Psychology in the Orient.
Tangen, J. M., Murphy, S. C., & Thompson, M. B. (2011).
Flashed face distortion effect: Grotesque faces from
relative spaces. Perception, 40(5), 628-630.
Tiddeman, B., Burt, M., & Perrett, D. (2001). Prototyping
and transforming facial textures for perception research.
Computer Graphics and Applications, IEEE, 21(5), 42-50.
Watanabe, T. (2001). Effects of constrained choice on
memory: The extension of the multiple-cue hypothesis to
the self-choice effect. Japanese Psychological Research,
43(2), 98-103.
Wells, G. L., Hoffman, C., & Enzle, M. E. (1984). Selfversus other-referent processing at encoding and retrieval.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 10(4), 574584.

2224

