UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Adaptive Foraging: Effects of Resource Conditions on Search Paths in a Web-Based Foraging
Game

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7vh330tw

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Kerster, Bryan
Kello, Christopher
Rhodes, Theo
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Adaptive Foraging: Effects of Resource Conditions on Search Paths
in a Web-Based Foraging Game
Bryan Elvis Kerster (bkerster@ucmerced.edu)
Christopher T. Kello (ckello@ucmerced.edu)
Cognitive and Information Science, 5200 N. Lake Road
Merced, CA 95343 USA
Theo Rhodes (theorhodes@gmail.edu)
Cognitive Science and Psychology, 7060 Route 104
Oswego, NY 13126 USA
Ralph Jerry Bien-Aime (rbien-aime@ucmerced.edu)
Cognitive and Information Science, 5200 N. Lake Road
Merced, CA 95343 USA
Abstract
Foraging is a search process common to mobile organisms,
and foraging paths commonly exhibit statistical patterns akin
to Lévy walks. There may be common factors and benefits
underlying these patterns, but investigations are hindered by
difficulty in assessing and manipulating search environments
and task conditions. In the present study, a simple foraging
game was developed to isolate and manipulate two factors
hypothesized to make Lévy walks adaptive search
strategies—sparsity, and spatial clustering of targets in the
search environment. Players navigated a fuel-limited ship
over a 2D grid to find as many targets as possible, rendered as
asteroids in outer space. Over 1800 participants were
recruited to play using Amazon’s Mechanical Turk, in order
to widely sample the parameter space defined by degrees of
target sparsity and clustering. Observed search paths
resembled Lévy walks with memory, and those of high
performers were found to vary adaptively with clustering, but
not sparsity. Results indicate that Lévy-like walks can
emerge from search strategies and algorithms adapted to
environments with clustered resources.
Keywords: Foraging; Lévy walks; crowdsourcing; adaptive
search.

Introduction
Perhaps the most ancient kind of search function in
biological organisms, in terms of evolutionary history, is
foraging—moving about one’s environment in search of
resources like food, locales like shelter, or other organisms
like mates. Studies of animal foraging have found that
foraging paths tend to resemble Lévy walks (Viswanathan et
al., 1996). Paths are clustered such that most path segments
are relatively short, but they are interspersed with longer
segments, occasionally much longer. Paths resemble Lévy
walks in that distributions of path lengths follow an inverse
power law, P(l) ~ 1/lα, where α ~ 2. Lévy-like paths are
observed for foragers from bacteria (Berg, 1993) to humans
(Rhee, Shin, Hong, Lee, & Kim, 2011).
Lévy foraging paths can be modeled simply as random
walks with path lengths sampled from a power law,
although path directions may be correlated over time
(Viswanathan et al., 2001), and mechanisms of navigation

are left unspecified. Despite their simplicity, Lévy walks
have proven influential because they suggest that search
benefits are conferred by power law path lengths, at least
under certain foraging conditions (Viswanathan &
Buldyrev, 1999). In particular, when α ~ 2 and targets are
sparsely and randomly distributed, Lévy walks maximize
the rate of finding targets compared with Gaussiandistributed random walks.
The potential benefits of Lévy walks recently have led
cognitive scientists to investigate whether they occur in
perceptual, memory, and decision-making search tasks. First
were Rhodes and Turvey (2007), who investigated Lévy
walks in a classic category recall paradigm (Bousfield &
Sedgewick, 1944). Participants recalled as many animals as
they could from long-term memory, for twenty minutes.
Inter-response intervals were used as indirect measures of
memory “path lengths”, and they were found to be best fit
by inverse power law functions with exponents near two.
Then, Rhodes, Kello, and Kerster (2011) found that saccade
lengths in visual foraging tasks also followed a heavy-tailed
distribution resembling efficient Lévy walks, although the
lognormal function provided the best fit to data. A
lognormal can be viewed as a constrained power law
(Stephen & Mirman, 2010), which should be expected when
search is constrained to a relatively small space (a computer
monitor). Most recently, Radicchi and Baronchelli (2012)
found search intervals to be Lévy-like when buyers searched
the bid space in online auctions, and observed exponents
were shown to maximize economic gains.
These and other similar studies raise the question of what
mechanisms and factors give rise to Lévy-like search paths
across so many different species and foraging conditions.
Theoretical analyses suggest that sparsity of targets is a
factor, but it is prohibitively difficult to test this hypothesis
in natural foraging conditions, including visual and memory
foraging of natural scenes and categories. Also, most
theoretical analyses have assumed randomly distributed
targets (Viswanathan & Buldyrev, 1999), but food and other
resources may instead tend to be clustered in nature, as is
the case with plankton distributions, for instance (Mackas &
Boyd, 1979). In terms of mechanism, Lévy-like foraging

2680

may be intrinsic to both biological and cognitive search
functions, in which case Lévy walks would occur regardless
of search conditions. Alternatively, Lévy walks may emerge
as a result of interactions between search processes and their
environments. These interactions may unfold over the
course of minutes and even faster timescales.
In the present experiment, we examined the roles of
sparsity and clustering in a web-based video game designed
to mimic canonical foraging. We used a video game because
it allowed us to know and manipulate search conditions. We
made the game web-based to collect data from large
numbers of participants on Amazon’s Mechanical Turk.
Recent studies show that Turk yields data comparable to
university participant pools (Germine et al., 2012; Snow,
O’Connor, Jurafsky, & Ng, 2008), and we confirmed this in
a pilot study run through the UC Merced participant pool
(not reported). Turk allowed us to robustly sample the
parameter space created by factorial manipulation of
sparsity and clustering. Turk also allowed us to collect
enough data to compare players who find greater versus
fewer numbers of targets, i.e. high versus low performers.
Comparisons of high versus low scorers are critical
because they test whether adaptive search is associated with
closer-to-optimal (i.e. higher scoring) performance. That is,
do high performers adapt their search strategies, as
measured by path length distributions, to changes in sparsity
and clustering? Do high scoring foraging paths more closely
resemble Lévy flights with the theoretically optimal
exponent of two? Addressing these questions will provide
evidence on 1) whether Lévy-like foraging paths can
emerge from searcher-environment interactions on
timescales no longer than minutes, and 2) whether adapting
paths to sparsity or clustering is associated with better
performance.

and fuel usage (shown by a fuel bar) was a linear function of
distance traveled, plus a small constant for each zoom
in/out. The amount of fuel provided was determined based
on pilot work to allow for about 5 minutes per play, and to
enable players to find some but not all asteroids. Each
successful harvest was indicated by sight and sound, and
asteroids could only be harvested once (the un/harvested
status of asteroids was not displayed). Each harvest added
one point to the score (no fuel was added), and play
continued until all fuel was expended.

Methods
The foraging game was framed as a task of exploring
outer space to find resources on asteroids (see Figure 1, and
http://cogmech.ucmerced.edu/downloads.html to play).
Participants used a mouse (or functionally equivalent
device) to move a spaceship over a 1280x1024 grid of
space. Movement was controlled at two scales, zoomed in
and zoomed out. When zoomed out, the entire space was
visible at once, and participants clicked on a location to
“fly” the ship to that spot (shown by animation).
Participants pressed the space bar to zoom in 15X at a given
location, at which point they again could navigate the ship
via point-and-click. Hubble images were used as
background to help engage players by giving the sense of
outer space, and to provide environmental cues that are, in
general, ubiquitous to natural search conditions. These cues
may encourage use of memory in navigation (e.g. Vinson,
1999), which shall be discussed later.
Asteroids were visible only when zoomed in, and
resources were harvested by moving to them such that
collision occurred between the asteroid and ship graphics. A
set amount of fuel was provided for each play of the game,

Figure 1: Example game space shown zoomed out (above),
along with the corresponding zoomed in view (below).
Current score is shown in upper left corner, and fuel bar
with remaining fuel in red is shown in upper right corner.
The game was designed to mimic foraging as exemplified
by aquatic birds hunting for fish, or the eyes scanning a
scene to gather visual information. Relatively short
movements are made during resource acquisition (while in
the water and close to the surface, or during fixations),
interspersed with longer-scale movements when no
resources are acquired (while flying high above the water,
or during saccades when visual information uptake is
attenuated; Ross, Morrone, Goldberg, & Burr, 2001).
Foraging costs in natural searches (e.g. risk and energy
expenditure) were lumped into the fuel cost of travel,
although time costs were also a factor, given the natural
tendency
to
minimize
time
spent
foraging.
The game was coded in Flash so it could be distributed via
the web, with game data collected on a local server. We

2681

used Amazon’s Mechanical Turk to find people willing to
play the game twice (plus a 1 minute practice session to
learn) for 75 cents in compensation. Pilot work indicated
that the availability and quality of Turk workers fell off
precipitously for tasks lasting more than 10-15 minutes. A
step-by-step demo, along with instructions in English, was
presented at the beginning of play, and each play was set to
last about 5 minutes (assuming no breaks). Two plays were
required for each paid work session.

example asteroid distribution for the condition the
participant was in, to help them formulate an informed
foraging strategy. Players were also encouraged to achieve
the best score possible by maintaining a high score board,
and allowing high scorers to enter their initials for display to
other players.
function distributeResources(rectangle, prob_split)
{
// stop when no stars or no space left
if (rectangle.stars_remaining < 1) return
else if (rectangle.size < 1 pixel) {
place remaining stars at pixel
return
}
else if (rectangle.stars_remaining == 1) {
place star randomly in rectangle
return
}
// split rect in half, alternate between vert and horiz
(rectangle1,rectangle2) = splitRectangle(rectangle,alternate)
// randomize bias for placing stars in each half
if (random_prob() < 0.5) prob_split = 1 – prob_split
for each star {
if (random_prob() < prob_split) place star in rectangle1
else place star in rectangle2
}
distributeResources(rectangle1, prob_split)
distributeResources(rectangle2, prob_split)
}

Figure 3: Pseudocode for asteroid distribution algorithm.
Note that a smaller parameter leads to increased clustering.

Results
Figure 2: Example of 150 asteroids clustered at 0.05, 0.15,
0.25, and 0.5, left to right, top to bottom.
The number of asteroids per play was set at four different
levels: 25, 50, 100, and 150. Pilot work indicated that 25
asteroids meant that players occasionally found only a few
of them (or even none), and 150 meant that players found
asteroids nearly every time the zoomed in. Clustering of
asteroids was manipulated at four different levels of a
probabilistic parameter: 0.05, 0.15, 0.25, and 0.5. This
parameter controlled the probability of dividing asteroids
evenly (0.5) or entirely to one side (0.0) in an algorithm that
divided a given set of asteroids recursively into alternating
horizontal and vertical splits of a given 2D space. Asteroids
were placed when only one remained in a given recursively
split section of the space (placed at random in the section),
and/or when the space could be split no further (see Figure 2
for example asteroid distributions, and Figure 3 for
pseudocode). This algorithm created clusters whose sizes
followed a nested scaling relation to varying degrees,
consistent with findings of scaling law clustering of natural
resources (Humphries et al., 2010; Mackas & Boyd, 1979).
The algorithm also created asteroid distributions that were
independent of Hubble image backgrounds, and participants
were informed of this independence during the demo/
instruction period.
The full 4x4 factorial of sparsity and clustering levels was
tested. Each participant played twice in only one of the 16
possible conditions, chosen at random at the start of each
Turk session. The demo and instructions included an

A total of 1,825 game sessions were administered on
Turk. Participants who did not produce more than 80 zoomin actions per play were excluded from analysis (603
participants). Pilot work indicated that participants who
simply expended fuel to complete the task, rather than
endeavored to find asteroids, were revealed by low numbers
of zoom-in actions. Of the remaining 1,222 participants, 393
played in two or more Turk sessions. Analyses with and
without these repeats indicated no qualitative change in
results, so both were included in the reported results.
Analyses combine zoomed in and zoomed out path lengths.
Visual inspection of zoomed out flight paths revealed
directional movements that ranged in their temporal
correlations, which express a very simple memory (i.e.
effect of history) in search paths. Two example paths at the
two ends of this range are shown in Figure 4. Paths that
consisted of highly regular directional movements were seen
as “sweep” strategies designed to systematically cover the
space in left-right, top-down, spiral, and other search
patterns. Other paths consisted of apparently haphazard
directional movements, akin to random walks. In the middle
were mixtures of the two, plus directional movements that
followed irregular contours of Hubble images (despite
instructions that distributions were independent of images).
To minimize effects of practice and learning, only the
second of two plays per Turk session was analyzed.
Performance was measured as the proportion of available
targets found, and plays were divided into three categories
of performance, for each of the 16 game conditions: Top 20,
middle 20, and bottom 20 scores. More than 60 Turk

2682

sessions were randomly assigned to each game condition, so
any additional plays were excluded from reported analyses.
The constant of 20 plays per cell simplified statistical
analyses, and excluding intermediate performances helped
to further distinguish our three categories.

performers. These results show that foragers adapted to
clustering but not sparsity, and low performers appeared to
adapt counterproductive strategies in terms of score. Thus
we have initial evidence that high performers took
advantage of the spatial correlations in clustering,
suggesting that foraging paths adapted based on interactions
between search processes and game conditions.
1

Score

0.9

1
Top 20 Scores
Middle 20 Scores
Bottom 20 Scores

0.8

0.8

0.7

0.7

0.6

0.6

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1

0.1

0
.05

.15
.25
Resource Clustering

.50

Top 20 Scores
Middle 20 Scores
Bottom 20 Scores

0.9

0
25

50

100
Resource Quantity

150

Figure 5: Proportional score as a function of sparsity,
clustering, and performance category.
However, one might argue for an alternate interpretation
of the data. It may be that each forager chooses a strategy a
priori without regard to conditions, and effects of clustering
merely show that strategies matter more for greater
clustering. We tested this possibility by examining the
change in score from first to second play. We found that
score increased over time for high performers (+19%), but
decreased for low performers (-14%), t(638) = 17.7, p < .01.
This difference suggests that strategies changed over the
course of play, for better or worse, indicating that strategies
were indicative of interactions between search processes and
game conditions.

Figure 4: Two example flight paths of more versus less
directionally correlated movements (top versus bottom).
Red and green lines indicate zoomed out and zoomed in
movements, respectively. Blue dots indicate clicked
locations, and yellow dots indicate points of harvest.
White boxes indicate areas of zoom in.
All results are graphed and analyzed as a function of
sparsity, clustering, and performance category. A three-way
analysis of variance was conducted for each dependent
measure, but we report only main effects and two-way
interactions relevant to our research questions and
hypotheses. First, we examined score as function of
sparsity, clustering, and performance levels (Figure 5). The
main effect of performance category is itself based on score,
and is so large throughout our analyses that reporting its
reliability was unnecessary.
As for the other two main effects, sparsity was not
reliable, F(3,18) = 2.1, p > 0.1, but clustering was, F(3,18) =
38.42, p < .05. The interaction of performance level with
sparsity was also not reliable, F(6,18) = 0.84, p > 0.5, but it
did interact with clustering, F(6,18) = 55.41, p < .05. Visual
inspection shows that scores improved with clustering for
high performers, but the opposite effect occurred for low

Path Length

g

g

340

340

320

320

300

300

280

280

260

Top 20 Scores
Middle 20 Scores
Bottom 20 Scores

240

240
220

200

200

180

180

160
.05

.15
.25
Resource Clustering

.50

160
25

g

Top 20 Scores
Middle 20 Scores
Bottom 20 Scores

260

220

g

50

100
Resource Quantity

150

Figure 6: Path Length as a function of sparsity, clustering,
and performance category.
Next we examine mean path length, shown in Figure 6.
High performers had shorter path lengths overall, reflecting
the fact that shorter path lengths allowed for greater
coverage of the space by reducing zoom costs. This main

2683

participants, including those whose data were better fit by
normal or exponential distributions.
The overall pattern of results was similar to those reported
earlier. There was no main effect of sparsity, F(3,18) = 1.17,
p > .35, but clustering was again reliable, F(3,18) = 10.52, p
< .05. Visual inspection reveals the possibility of an effect
in the high/mid performers which was supported by a
reliable interaction of performance category with clustering,
F(6,18) = 12.29, p < .05. Once again, there was no reliable
interaction with sparsity, F(6,18) = 1.77, p > .15. Visual
inspection shows that the tails of path length distributions
were heavier overall for low performers, but they became
heavier with greater clustering only for high performers.
To gauge whether distributions were becoming more
similar to the theoretical power law exponent of two, we fit
regression lines (see Figure 7) to the right half of
distributions in logarithmic coordinates, and results are
shown in Figure 9. None of the main effects (excluding
performance category) or interactions were reliable, but
slopes were generally in the neighborhood of the theoretical
optimum of -2 (negative of the optimal exponent).
Moreover, slopes for high performers were closest in their
approach towards -2 with greater clustering.
1.05

1.05

1

0.95

Sigma

effect would be expected to diminish, and possibly even
reverse, if fuel costs were greater per zoom.
There were no main effects of sparsity on mean path
length, F(3,18) = 2.19, p > .1, or clustering, F(3,18) = 1.7, p
> .2. Once again, the interaction of performance category
with sparsity was not reliable, F(6,18) = 1.66, p > .15, but it
was with clustering, F(6,18) = 4.61, p > .05. Visual
inspection shows that path lengths for high performers
increased with clustering, whereas they decreased for low
performers. The increase for high performers presumably
reflects the increased need for larger jumps as clusters
became sparser. Again, low performers appeared to adjust
strategies as well, but in counterproductive ways.
Next we examine whether foraging paths resembled Lévy
walks, in the sense that path length distributions were power
law distributed with estimated exponents near two. We used
multi-model inference (Symonds & Moussalli, 2010) to test
which of four different functions provided the best fit to the
distribution of path lengths for each participant (mean of
217 path segments per participant): Normal, exponential,
lognormal, and Pareto. Only the latter two are heavy-tailed
and Lévy-like, and the method uses Akaike’s information
criterion (AIC) to find the function with the shortest
information-theoretic distance to the data.
The lognormal function provided the best fit for 68% of
the participants, with the remaining trials roughly evenly
split between normal and exponential fits (Pareto never
provided the best fit). As mentioned earlier, the lognormal is
akin to a constrained power law, and the foraging game
constrained movements in terms of a limited amount of
space. An example distribution from one participant is
plotted in Figure 7 in logarithmic coordinates, which is
representative of the majority of participants. The
constrained, normal-like portion of the distribution is seen
as a slight hump on the left side, and the power law-like tail
is seen as a negatively sloped line on the right.

1
Top 20 Scores
Middle 20 Scores
Bottom 20 Scores

Top 20 Scores
Middle 20 Scores
Bottom 20 Scores

0.95

0.9
0.9

0.85

0.8

0.75
.05

0.85

.15
.25
Resource Clustering

.50

25

50

100
Resource Quantity

150

Figure 8: Lognormal σ as a function of sparsity, clustering,
and performance category.

Figure 7: An representative path length distribution for one
participant, plotted in logarithmic coordinates
We further examined the tails of path length distributions
in two ways. First, the fitted lognormal functions have μ and
σ parameters, where the latter roughly corresponds with the
heaviness of the tail. Heavier tails indicate more Lévy-like
distributions. Best-fitting σ’s are shown in Figure 8 for all

To summarize, search paths generally resembled efficient
Lévy walks as predicted, at least to some degree. The
majority of path length distributions were heavy-tailed, and
tails resembled truncated power laws with exponents near
two. Distributions most closely resembled Lévy walks for
high performers in the most clustered resource conditions.
Foraging paths were not like random walks, in that path
directions were never drawn purely at random. Instead, path
directions tended to be correlated over time. This tendency
can be quantified simply by computing the proportion of
times that next steps went in the same direction, within
some threshold. Angular changes were between 0 and 180
degrees (collapsing left versus right turns) and divided
evenly into 45 bins. The proportion of movements falling
into the smallest angular bin was 25%, about ten times
greater than chance. Thus foraging paths had memory in
that the direction of each step was sensitive to previous
steps.

2684

-1.7

-1.7

-1.8

-1.8

Slope

-1.9

Top 20 Scores
Middle 20 Scores
Bottom 20 Scores

-2

-2

-2.1

-2.1

-2.2

-2.2

.05

.15
.25
Resource Clustering

.50

Top 20 Scores
Middle 20 Scores
Bottom 20 Scores

-1.9

25

50

100
Resource Quantity

150

Figure 9: Regression slopes as a function of sparsity,
clustering, and performance category.

Discussion
In the present study, analyses of data from a web-based
foraging game showed that Lévy-like search paths emerge
from search processes that change depending on the
clustering of resources. This was true for both high and low
performers, although only high performers changed their
search processes adaptively. The lack of a sparsity effect
was conspicuous because prior theoretical analyses suggest
that the benefits of Lévy-like search paths are most
prevalent when items are rare to be found. However, prior
analyses focused on random Lévy walks, whereas observed
foraging paths clearly had memory. Memory sometimes
manifested as “sweep” searches, but more generally,
directions of next steps depended on previous steps.
Our results suggest that the prevalence of Lévy-like walks
in both animal and cognitive searches can be better modeled
by processes with memory that attend to target and task
conditions, as opposed to random walk processes. The
observed effects of clustering indicate that search processes
take advantage of spatial correlations in resource
distributions when they exist and are known or learned. A
simple approach to modeling an effect of spatial correlations
is for search processes to follow a gradient of resource
density. These and related modeling ideas (e.g. Ferreira,
Raposo, Viswanathan, & da Luz, 2012) are potentially
interesting topics for future research.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a grant from the National
Science Foundation, BCS 1031903 (PI Kello). The authors
thank members of the Cognitive and Information Sciences
graduate group for helpful comments and feedback.

References
Berg, H. C. (1993). Random walks in biology. Princeton
University Press.
Bousfield, W. A., & Sedgewick, C. H. W. (1944). An
analysis of sequences of restricted associative responses.
Journal of General Psychology.
Ferreira, A. S., Raposo, E. P., Viswanathan, G. M., & da
Luz, M. G. E. (2012). The influence of the environment

on Lévy random search efficiency: Fractality and memory
effects. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its
Applications, 391(11), 3234-3246.
Germine, L., Nakayama, K., Duchaine, B. C., Chabris, C.
F., Chatterjee, G., & Wilmer, J. B. (2012). Is the Web as
good as the lab? Comparable performance from Web and
lab in cognitive/perceptual experiments. Psychonomic
bulletin & review.
Humphries, N. E., Queiroz, N., Dyer, J. R. M., Pade, N. G.,
Musyl, M. K., Schaefer, K. M., … Sims, D. W. (2010).
Environmental context explains Lévy and Brownian
movement patterns of marine predators. Nature,
465(7301), 1066–9.
Mackas, D. L., & Boyd, C. M. (1979). Spectral analysis of
zooplankton spatial heterogeneity. Science, 204(4388),
62.
Radicchi, F., & Baronchelli, A. (2012). Evolution of optimal
Lévy-flight strategies in human mental searches. Physical
Review E, 85(6), 1–8.
Rhee, I., Shin, M., Hong, S., Lee, K., & Kim, S. (2011). On
the levy-walk nature of human mobility. /ACM
Transactions on, 19(3), 630–643.
Rhodes, T., & Turvey, M. (2007). Human memory retrieval
as Lévy foraging. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and
its Applications, 385(1), 255–260.
Ross, J., Morrone, M., Goldberg, M., & Burr, D. (2001).
Changes in visual perception at the time of saccades. Rev.
Neurosci, 24(2), 113–21.
Snow, R., O’Connor, B., Jurafsky, D., & Ng, A. (2008).
Cheap and fast---but is it good?: evaluating non-expert
annotations for natural language tasks. … Methods in
Natural Language …, (October), 254–263.
Stephen, D. G., & Mirman, D. (2010). Interactions dominate
the dynamics of visual cognition. Cognition, 115(1), 154–
165.
Symonds, M. R. E., & Moussalli, A. (2010). A brief guide
to model selection, multimodel inference and model
averaging in behavioural ecology using Akaike’s
information criterion. Behavioral Ecology and
Sociobiology, 65(1), 13–21.
Vinson, N. (1999). Design guidelines for landmarks to
support navigation in virtual environments. Proceedings
of the SIGCHI conference on Human ….
Viswanathan, G., Afanasyev, V., Buldyrev, S., Murphy, E.,
Prince, P., & Stanley, H. E. (1996). Lévy flight search
patterns of wandering albatrosses. Nature, 381(6581),
413–415.
Viswanathan, G., Afanasyev, V., Buldyrev, S. V., Havlin,
S., Luz, M. G. E. da, Raposo, E. P., & Stanley, H. E.
(2001). Lévy flights search patterns of biological
organisms. Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its
Applications, 295, 85–88.
Viswanathan, G., & Buldyrev, S. V. (1999). Optimizing the
success of random searches. Nature, 401(6756), 911.

2685

