UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Agency Intuitions in Physical Interactions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5rv3r240

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Mayrhofer, Ralf
Waldmann, Michael

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Agency Intuitions in Physical Interactions
Ralf Mayrhofer (rmayrho@uni-goettingen.de)
Michael R. Waldmann (michael.waldmann@bio.uni-goettingen.de)
Institute of Psychology, University of Göttingen,
Gosslerstraße 14, 37073 Göttingen, Germany

theories are capable of expressing abstract intuitions about
mechanisms without requiring elaborate knowledge.
Force dynamics has been initially been developed in linguistics in the context of verb semantics (see Riemer, 2010;
Talmy, 1988) but uses concepts that can be traced back to
Aristotle (see Gnassounou & Kistler, 2007). Aristotle explained efficient causation as a consequence of the interaction of two entities, an agent and a patient. An agent is,
according to Aristotle, a substance operating on another
substance, the patient, which is suffering the process of
change. The acting agent who affects the patient therefore
has the disposition, capacity or power to act; and the patient
has the disposition, capacity or power to undergo the agent’s
action.
In linguistic theories of verb semantics and argument
structure verbs place constraints on the possible participants
mentioned in the noun phrases. For example, in “Peter
pushes Mary”, “push” has two arguments, one describing an
agent (Peter), the other the patient (Mary). Typically, agents
are assigned the syntactic subject position. Other participant
roles (also called thematic or theta roles) have been postulated but there is no agreement in linguistics about the proper list (see Riemer, 2010, for an overview). Another important semantic theory for a theory of causation is Talmy’s
(1988) theory of force dynamics. He argues that intuitions
about the interaction of forces are an important component
of our general semantic intuitions.
Using a force dynamics framework, White (e.g., 2006,
2009) demonstrated the difference between intuitive causal
representations and physics by studying Michotte type
launching events. In Michotte’s (1963) famous demonstrations of phenomenal causality, subjects observed moving
objects. For example, in a launching scenario Object X, a
ball, moves towards Object Y, another ball, and touches it.
This stops Object X and sets Object Y into motion at the
same or a slightly lesser speed. Observers typically describe
this scenario as a case in which the movement of Object Y
is caused by Object X (i.e., launching). Although according
to Newtonian physics the force on body Y exerted by body
X is equal in magnitude but opposite in direction to that on
body X exerted by body Y, observers often see Object X as
the cause and Object Y as the effect (causal asymmetry).
Nobody would describe the scenario as a case of Object Y
stopping Object X, although this would be a legitimate description.
The impression of causal asymmetry is also reflected in
judgments of force. White (2009) presented participants
with different launching events, and asked them to provide
estimates of the relevant underlying forces. The results

Abstract
The question how agent and patient roles are assigned to causal
participants has largely been neglected in the psychological literature on force dynamics. Based on the linguistic theory of Dowty
(1991), we propose that agency is a prototype concept. We adapted
Dowty’s theory to account for scenarios showing physical interactions. In the standard Michotte launching scenario the ball entering
the scene is usually assigned the agent role, whereas the ball that is
being launched is viewed as the patient. We showed in two experiments that agency intuitions were moderated by manipulations of
the context prior to the launching event. Altering features such as
relative movement, sequence of visibility, and self-propelled motion tended to increase agency attributions to the patient relative to
the standard scenario. We suspect that shifts in figure-ground
perceptions, and intuitions about characteristics of interventions
may be the overarching reason for the efficacy of the tested criteria.
Keywords: force dynamics; causal reasoning; agency; Michotte task; physical causality

Introduction
Currently there is a debate between two competing frameworks modeling causal reasoning. One prominent class is
dependency theories, including covariation theories, counterfactual theories, and causal Bayes nets. The ontology
expressed by these theories contains causal variables that
either encode the presence or absence of events, facts, and
properties, or different values of continuous quantities.
These variables are interconnected by causal arrows that
represent hidden mechanisms, and whose strength can be
numerically expressed by causal strength parameters (see
Waldmann & Hagmayer, in press, for an overview).
A completely different view answers the question why an
observed lawfulness holds by focusing on the participants
involved in a causal relation, for example Ball A and Ball B
in Michotte’s task, or Aspirin and a person with headache in
a medical scenario. One variant of this view, dispositional
theories of causation, would say, for example, that the ingestion of Aspirin relieves headaches because Aspirin has
an intrinsic property, a disposition (or capacity or power), to
relieve headaches in suitable organisms (see, for example,
Gnassounou & Kistler, 2007; Mumford & Anjum, 2011).
In psychology force dynamics, an example of a dispositional account, has become increasingly popular in recent
years. Pinker (2007) has argued that force dynamics is a
major competitor of Bayes net theories because it allows us
to model intuitions about the generative processes underlying observed covariations. One attractive feature of dispositional theories and force dynamics in particular is that these

996

showed that in such events more force is attributed to Object
X than to Object Y, and that Object X is viewed as active
and exerting a force on Object Y, whereas the initially stationary Object Y is viewed as inactive, exerting resistance to
being moved. Thus, causal interactions are perceived as the
result of the opposition between forces of agents (e.g., Object X) and resistance of patients (e.g., Object Y).
A related theory that aims at elucidating our understanding of abstract causal concepts, such as “cause”, “prevent”,
and “enable”, is Wolff’s (2007) theory of force dynamics
(see also Wolff & Song, 2003; Wolff et al., 2010). As in the
theories of White (2009) and Talmy (1988), two entities are
distinguished, which Wolff calls affectors and patients (i.e.,
the entity acted upon by the affector)(Talmy labels them
antagonist and agonist). Force theory states that people
evaluate configurations of forces attached to affectors and
patients, which may vary in direction and degree, with respect to an endstate, that is, the possible result. Forces can
be physical, psychological (e.g., intentions) or social (e.g.,
peer pressure). Causal relations are analyzed in terms of
three components, (a) the tendency of a patient for an endstate, (b) the presence or absence of concordance between
affector and patient, and (c) the degree to which the endstate
is reached. For example, force theory would represent the
singular causal fact “Winds caused the boat to heel” in
terms of a patient (the boat) that had no tendency to heel
(Tendency = No), the affector (the wind) acted against the
patient (Concordance = No), and the result (heeling) occurred (Endstate approached = Yes).
Empirical support for the model was provided in a series
of experiments in which participants made judgments about
3-D animations of realistically rendered objects (e.g., moving boats on a lake) with trajectories that were wholly determined by the force vectors entered into a physics simulator (see also Beller et al., 2009; Wolff et al., 2010; for further developments).

signed the role of the agent. However, when both balls were
moving the assignment was less clear, and additional assumptions had to be made for agency assignments (see
White, 2012, for an extended variant of White’s, 2009,
theory to predict pushing vs. pulling intuitions in cases in
which both balls leave the scene attached to each other).
Another example of the ambiguity of agency assignments
comes from a recent study by Mayrhofer and Waldmann
(2013). In this study, the alien mind reader task was used
that had been introduced in the literature by Steyvers et al.
(2003; see also Mayrhofer, Hagmayer, & Waldmann, 2010,
for details). This scenario describes a set of aliens some of
which have the capacity of picking up the thoughts of each
other. In our studies the causal dependency relations were
kept constant. In general a causal transmission process was
described in which the thoughts of one alien (i.e., the cause)
were transmitted into the heads of three other aliens (i.e., the
effects). What we manipulated were subjects’ assumption
about the underlying dispositions responsible for the observed causal transmission. In one condition, the cause alien
was assigned the role of the agent. Here the instructions
stated that the cause alien has the capacity to send out his
thoughts, and plant them into the heads of the effect aliens.
In the contrasting condition, the effect aliens were described
as the agents, being capable of reading the thoughts of the
cause alien. We empirically ascertained that subjects shared
our intuitions about the different assignments of the agent
role. Interestingly, the results were clear-cut in the sender
but ambiguous in the reader scenario. In the sender condition it was clear that the cause alien was the agent. However, in the reader scenario the intuitions did not uniquely
attribute agency to the reader side, but equally divided agentive responsibility to the two sides, cause and effects. This
may be analogous to the intuition that, although radios play
an important part in picking up radio waves, the sending
station also plays an active role.
What these results show is that it cannot always be a priori determined how the agency role is assigned, and sometimes the complementary participants may be both viewed
as equally active. Hence our current goal is to empirically
investigate empirical indicators of agency.
We are not the only ones who noticed that occasionally it
is difficult to determine who should be assigned the agent
role. For example, in the sentence “John hits Mary” John is
clearly assigned the agent role. This example might suggest
that grammatical subjects encode agent roles. However, in
“John admires Mary”, both participants play an active role
so that a clear assignment is often impossible (similar with
other psychological verbs, such as “mind reading”)(see
Dowty, 1991). Other ambiguous verbs include “buying” and
“selling.” They both require two active participants, and it is
hard to uniquely assign the agent role.
Our experiments represent an initial attempt in a physical
domain (launching events) to study factors moderating
agency assignments. As a heuristic for criteria we will use
Dowty’s (1991) linguistic theory of the distinction between
(proto-)agents and (proto-)patients. According to Dowty,

The Empirical Basis of Agency Intuitions
In psychological research on force dynamics the main focus
has been on how causal intuitions can be predicted on the
basis of configurations of forces attached to agents and
patients. The assignment of the roles of agent and patient to
the causal participants has typically been treated as selfevident. In Wolff’s (2007) example “Winds caused the boat
to heel” there is no question that the winds should be assigned the agent role because obviously they play the role of
actively overcoming the passive tendency of the boat. However, one deficit of current psychological versions of this
theory is that no systematic set of empirical criteria has been
laid out that unambiguously motivates the assignments of
the agent and patient roles.
White’s (2006, 2009) theory represents progress in this
regard because he has pointed out one important criterion in
the Michotte tasks, movement. For example, in a typical
study White presented situations in which one ball stands
still, and the other moves toward this ball launching it to the
other side. In this scenario the moving ball is clearly as-

997

agency is a prototype concept that can be assigned on the
basis of a number of empirical criteria. None of these criteria is necessary (hence prototype) but the confidence of the
assignment should increase the more criteria are present. In
Dowty’s theory the agent features include (a) volitional
involvement in the event or state, (b) sentience (and/or perception), (c) causing an event or change of state in another
participant, (d) movement (relative to the position of the
other participant), (e) exists (independently of the event
named by the verb). The complementary patient features
include (a) undergoes change of state, (b) incremental
theme, (c) causally affected by another participant, (d) stationary relative to movement of another participant, (e) does
not exist (independently of the event named by the verb).
According to Dowty, when two participants are involved in
a scenario, the relative number of properties from these lists
decides about the assignment of roles. If there is an impasse,
multiple assignments are possible. Dowty’s criteria are
developed to capture semantic implications of verbs. In
scene perception other cues might additionally be used,
including covariation.
How can this theory be applied to launching events? Obviously some of the criteria (e.g., sentience) do not apply.
The remaining relevant criteria for agency include volitional
involvement, causation, and relative movement. We believe
that a unifying principle behind these three criteria is provided by the intervention concept popular in both the dependency account (Woodward, 2003) and force dynamic
theories (White, 2006). In fact, White (2006) believes that
force dynamic intuitions are grounded in sensomotoric experiences of actors sensing resistance from the objects they
are attempting to manipulate.
The prototypic agent is a human confronted with a stationary scenario that either is constant or changes in a predictable way (i.e., the ground)(relative movement). The
agent’s act, which is considered independent of the target
system, creates a change in a variable, which in turn affects
other variables (i.e., the figure)(volition; causation). Following developmental evidence (Muentener & Carey, 2010) we
believe that people also make agency attributions when
some of the features of the prototype are missing. For example, when no human agent is visible, the object behaving
like it was manipulated by a hidden agent plays the role of
the agent (e.g., one ball in the Michotte task). Apparently
uncaused covariation against an invariant background has
features of an intervention, which explains why the entity
involved in the covariation will play the role of the agent.
White’s (2007) finding that the moving participant is assigned the agent role is also captured because a typical explanation of an apparently unmotivated movement is that
there may be an invisible force causing it.
This theory, although derived from a force dynamic
framework, is reminiscent of theories proposed within the
dependency paradigm. The distinction between figure and
ground is analogous to Cheng and Novick’s (1991) criteria
of the distinction between causes and enabling conditions.
According to their theory, causal events that remain invari-

ant within a focal set are assigned the enabler role, whereas
the event covarying (i.e., changing) with the effect within
the focal set is the cause. This theory does not distinguish
between agents and patients, however. Another closely
related theory is the intervention account of causal Bayes
net theory (Woodward, 2003). According to this theory a
change of a variable by a free agent qualifies as an intervention. Thus, volitional involvement, movement, and causation are hallmarks of this concept. Note that this theory is
not restricted to human agents. Every change of a variable
that deterministically sets the variable and has characteristics of statistical independence with respect to the target
system can play the formal role of an intervention.
Although there are analogies between force dynamic and
dependency theories, there are also differences. The dependency theories mainly focus on covariation and event
causation, whereas other criteria we will study, including
relative or spontaneous movement, are neglected.
Our main empirical strategy will be to present scenarios
involving an event with two participants (e.g., two balls) but
manipulate across conditions properties of the participants
possibly relevant for the assignment of participant roles
(agent, patient). Our aim is to show that intuitions based on
the proto-agency theory predict whether a participant in a
fixed scenario is assigned the agent or patient role (or both).

Experiment 1
In our experiments we employed variants of the Michotte
task, which has been used as a classic demonstration for the
usefulness of force theories. White (2006, 2009) has extensively studied this task, and has found a causal asymmetry
effect: Agents are typically assigned greater force than patients. Another observation consistent with causal asymmetry is that the agent, for example a Ball X that is moving
toward a stationary Ball Y, is typically described as causing
the movement, but Ball Y is never described as stopping
Ball X. Our goal is to manipulate the Michotte task in a way
that either Ball X (the pushing ball) or Ball Y (the pushed
ball) are more or less viewed as agents. In line with the
proto-agency theory we predict that subjects differentiate
between a stationary scenario (the ground) and an event that
shares properties with hypothetical interventions. In Michotte’s task a stationary scenario either consists of a set of
balls at rest, or balls that are constantly moving in a predictable way. Given that no volitional agent (i.e., a human) is
visible, other properties of causal agency apply.
As baseline condition (Condition A), we used the standard Michotte launching setup that was also used by White
(2006, 2007, 2009): Ball Y is at rest in the middle of the
display, Ball X is constantly moving and rolls from the left
edge toward Ball Y. After contact, Ball Y moves and Ball X
is at rest. In this condition Ball X should clearly be seen as
the agent and Ball Y as the patient.
In three further conditions, we manipulated agency indicators for Ball Y while holding the properties of the physical interaction (i.e., the collision event) constant. Thus, in all
conditions Ball Y is at rest in the middle of the screen im-

998

mediately prior to the collision. When Ball X hits Ball Y,
then Ball X stops and Ball Y moves (with exactly the same
speed and direction as Ball X had prior to the collision)
towards and then beyond the edge of the screen.
What we manipulated were the conditions prior to the invariant launching event. In Conditions B and C, we manipulated relative movement. In both conditions Ball Y enters
the screen from the bottom, moves towards its position in
the middle of the screen, and stops there just before it is hit
by Ball X. Thus, we added movement as an agency indicator expecting an increase of agency intuitions regarding Ball
Y. We suspected that observing the movement of Ball X
toward the middle position might lead some subjects to infer
an intention to stop Ball X. Given that this possible intention is not successful (Ball Y will be launched by Ball X),
this may not fully overcome the assignment of agency for
Ball X, but a difference to the standard condition may be
expected.
Furthermore, we manipulated which of the balls was seen
first by restricting the section of the scene that is visible to
the subject. In Condition B, we hid the left hand side margin
of the scene; whereas in Condition C the lower margin was
hidden. Thus, in Condition B the movement of Ball Y was
seen first (i.e., Ball Y is the ground); in Condition C Ball X
was already seen moving when Ball Y enters the scene (i.e.,
Ball Y is the figure). Our goal motivating the sequence of
visibility was to test whether this subtle figure-ground manipulation affects agency attributions despite the fact that
the underlying physical events are identical across the two
conditions. We predicted that viewing Ball Y first as the
figure would increase agency attributions regarding this
ball.
In Condition D, Ball Y is at rest outside the trajectory of
Ball X in the lower part of the screen. Suddenly, Ball Y
starts to move so that it ends up in the same position as in
the other conditions. Here the constant movement of X
should be viewed as stationary (i.e., ground) with Ball Y
behaving like an animate volitional agent. It is well known
that spontaneous movement is seen as an indicator of animacy. In this condition the intuition that the self-propelled
movement of Ball Y is a result of volition should be strongest, which should lead to the strongest agency intuitions
within the set of conditions.
To sum up: From Condition A to Condition D we added
more and more agency indicators for Ball Y (relative
movement; relative visibility; volition). According to the
proto-agency theory, we expect an increasing willingness of
participants to judge Ball Y as the agent in the scenarios. Of
course, given that Ball Y is always eventually launched by
Ball X we did not expect a complete reversal of agency
assignments.

puter-based experiments in our computer lab. Participants
received either course credit, or were paid €8 per hour.
Material For each condition, we constructed a flash movie
of size 760 x 760 pixels that played for 3,000 milliseconds;
the first and last 400 milliseconds presented a black screen
resulting in an effective movie length of 2,200 milliseconds.
Ball X and Ball Y were 120 pixels in diameter; one colored
in red, the other in blue. In the standard condition (Condition A), Ball Y rests in the middle of the screen such that the
left most point of Y coincides with the center of the scene.
After 20 milliseconds Ball X enters the scene from the left
side on a horizontal trajectory with constant speed until it
reaches the center of the screen (and, therefore, Ball Y) after
1,100 milliseconds. Then Ball X stops moving, and at the
same time (no time lag) Ball Y starts moving with the same
speed as Ball X towards the right hand side of the screen.
Ball Y leaves the screen after 2,180 milliseconds. (Thus, the
movie is symmetric in time and space.)
Keeping the movement shown in Condition A constant,
we slightly altered the events prior to the launching event in
the other conditions. We only manipulated the 800 milliseconds prior to the collision after which the movement pattern
of the balls were identical across all conditions. In Conditions B and C, Ball Y entered the scene at the bottom after
20 milliseconds and moved vertically upwards until it
reached its final position after 800 milliseconds. In Condition B, we covered 240 pixels of the scene’s left hand side
with a white panel; in Condition C, 240 pixels of the bottom
were covered. Thus, in Condition B Ball X entered the scene after 700 milliseconds (whereas Ball Y was visibly moving the whole time); in Condition C Ball Y entered the scene after 840 milliseconds (whereas Ball X was visibly moving the whole time).
In Condition D, Ball Y was at rest in the lower half of the
display (200 pixels above the bottom) and started moving
upwards after 900 milliseconds (at the same speed Ball Y
moves in Conditions B and C), and stopped at its final position after 800 milliseconds (i.e., movement time of 300
milliseconds). This sudden, apparently self-propelled
movement was expected to suggest a volitional intervention
into the trajectory of Ball X.
For counterbalancing purposes we additionally generated
seven more movies per condition by rotating the scene by
90°, 180°, and 270°, respectively, and switching colors of
the balls yielding 4 x 2 = 8 movies per condition (i.e., in
sum 32 movies).
Procedure We presented each subject with all 32 movies in
random order. After seeing a movie (self-paced), we requested participants to select one of four sentences (presented in randomized order) as the best description of the scene:

Method

1.
2.
3.
4.

Participants 39 students (27 women; mean age 23.4 years)
from the University of Göttingen, Germany, participated in
this experiment as part of a series of various unrelated com-

999

The red ball launched the blue ball.
The blue ball stopped the red ball.
The blue ball launched the red ball.
The red ball stopped the blue ball.

Note that only two of the sentences actually described
what was seen in the movie. If a subject selected one of the
two nonsensical sentences we coded the answer as an error.
Design and Prediction We recoded subjects’ responses
according to the color coding as “X launched Y” vs. “Y
stopped X” (plus error), and aggregated the eight color/rotation versions to align with a consistent X/Y assignment. We expected an increasing selection rate for “Y
stopped X” and a decreasing selection rate for “X launched
Y”, respectively, from Condition A to Condition D. 1

Results and Discussion
Fig. 1 shows the average selection rates for the two relevant
scene descriptions across the four agency conditions. In line
with previous research, Condition A revealed a strong preference in selecting Ball X as the agent (94.9% vs. 3.9%). As
predicted, selecting Ball X decreased from Condition A to
Condition D, F3,114=24.0, p<.001, η2=.39. The preference for
seeing Ball Y as the agent increased analogously,
F3,114=22.9, p<.001, η2=.38. The average error rate was
2.6% and did not significantly differ across conditions,
F3,114<1.
Experiment 1 clearly demonstrates that agency intuitions
are grounded in empirical indicators of agency, and confirmed the proposed proto-agency theory. However, it could
be argued that the forced-choice format forced people to
choose one description even when their intuition was in line
with the symmetry assumptions of Newtonian mechanics.
This argument does not explain why on average the choices
did not even out, but we still wanted to replicate the results
of Experiment 1 using a more unrestricted response format.

Experiment 2
The goal of Experiment 2 was to replicate the findings of
Experiment 1 with an unrestricted response format that
allows subjects to express that they see both alternative
sentences as valid descriptions of the scene. To accomplish
this goal we presented subjects in Experiment 2 with rating
scales that allowed them to judge the appropriateness of the
scene descriptions independently.

Figure 1: Results of Experiment 1. Error bars indicate
standard error of the means.
scales ranging from 0 (“not appropriate at all”) to 10 (“highly appropriate”). Both sentences and rating scales were
presented on a single screen; the order of the sentences was
counterbalanced within subjects.
Design and Predictions We aggregated subject-wise across
color/rotation conditions, which yielded a 4 (agency condition) x 2 (Ball X vs. Ball Y) within-subjects design with
agency ratings as dependent measure. Since we expected
decreasing ratings for Ball X and increasing ratings for Ball
Y, we predicted an interaction between agency condition
and the rated ball (X vs. Y).

Results and Discussion
Fig. 2 shows the results for Experiment 2. As expected, the
ratings for Ball X were higher as for Ball Y in Condition A
with a decreasing trend for Ball X and an increasing trend
for Ball Y from Condition A to Condition D. This pattern
led to a significant interaction, F3,99=23.7, p<.001, η2=.42.
Across conditions, Ball X received higher agency ratings
than Ball Y, F1,33=34.3, p<.001, η2=.51, reflecting the fact

Method
Participants A new set of 34 students (23 women; mean
age 23.4 years) from the University of Göttingen, Germany,
participated in this experiment using the same design as in
Experiment 1.
Material and Procedure We used the same set of 32 movies and the same procedure as in Experiment 1. Instead of a
forced choice decision between scene descriptions, we presented subjects with the two sentences (adapted to the respective color version), and requested them to rate how well
the sentences describe the scene using two separate rating
1
Note that both measures are not independent of each other; selection and error rates add up to 1.

1000

Figure 2: Results of Experiment 2. Error bars indicate
standard error of the means.

that the salient end of the scene (Ball Y’s leaving) overall
dominates agency intuitions.
The results of Experiment 2 resemble the results of Experiment 1 closely. Although the difference between rating
Ball X as the agent vs. rating Ball Y as the agent is much
smaller in Condition A compared to Experiment 1, the overall pattern (decreasing ratings for Ball X and increasing
ratings for Ball Y from Condition A to Condition D) was
replicated, and showed that the findings were nor restricted
to specific response formats.

General Discussion
In contrast to dependency theories, force and dispositional
theories of causal reasoning incorporate the distinction between agents and patients in causal interactions. The principal focus of research motivated by dispositional accounts
was on how force configurations predict causal judgments,
whereas the assignment of the agent and patient roles has
largely been treated as self-evident. Various studies in both
linguistics and psychology have shown, however, that role
assignments are not always clear-cut. Occasionally it may
even be necessary to assign the agent role to multiple causal
participants.
Based on the linguistic theory of Dowty (1991), we proposed that agency is a prototype concept with multiple criteria, none of which necessary for the role assignment. We
adapted this theory to account for physical interactions (e.g.,
Michotte type launching events). In the standard Michotte
launching scenario the ball entering the scene (and launching the other ball) is typically assigned the agent role,
whereas the ball that is being launched is viewed as the
patient. We showed that agency intuitions are moderated by
manipulations of the context prior to the launching event.
Altering scene features, such as relative movement, sequence of visibility, and self-propelled motion tended to
increase agency attributions to the patient relative to the
standard scenario.
A unifying principle underlying these criteria may be that
they all tend to lift the patient into the foreground (i.e., into
the figure role), and appear to suggest some kind of volitional intervention. Intervention seems to be a central concept unifying dependency and force theories, although the
criteria for determining agency are different in these two
frameworks. We realize that our experiments just represent
a first step. Future studies will have to go beyond launching
scenarios to arrive at a more complete theory of
agent/patient assignments.

Acknowledgments
We wish to thank Sven Ritter for help in preparing the experiments. This research was supported by a research grant
of the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (WA 621/22-1)
that is part of the priority program “New frameworks of
rationality” (SPP 1516).

References
Beller, S., Bender, A., & Song, J. (2009). Weighing up
physical causes: Effects of culture, linguistic cues and
content. Journal of Cognition and Culture, 9, 347-365.
Cheng, P. W., & Novick, L. R. (1991). Causes versus enabling conditions. Cognition, 40, 83-120.
Dowty, D. (1991). Thematic proto roles and argument selection, Language, 67, 547-619.
Gnassounou, B. & Kistler, M.(2007). Introduction. In M.
Kistler & B. Gnassounou (Eds.)(2007). Dispositions and
causal powers. Aldershot: Ashgate.
Mayrhofer, R., Hagmayer, Y., & Waldmann, M. R. (2010).
Agents and causes: A Bayesian error attribution model of
causal reasoning. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Second
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
925-930).
Mayrhofer, R., & Waldmann, M. R. (2013). Agents and
causes: Dispositional intuitions as a guide to causal
structure. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Michotte, A. E. (1963). The perception of causality. New
York: Basic Books.
Muentener, P., & Carey, S. (2010). Infants’ causal representations of state change events. Cognitive Psychology, 61,
63-86.
Mumford, S., & Anjum, R. L. (2011). Getting causes from
powers. New York: Oxford University Press.
Pinker, S. (2007). The stuff of thought: Language as a window into human nature. New York: Viking.
Riemer, N. (2010). Introducing semantics. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Steyvers, M., Tenenbaum, J. B., Wagenmakers, E-J., &
Blum, B. (2003). Inferring causal networks from observations and interventions. Cognitive Science, 27, 453-489.
Talmy, L. (1988). Force dynamics in language and cognition. Cognitive Science, 12, 49-100.
Waldmann, M. R., & Hagmayer, Y. (in press). Causal reasoning. In D. Reisberg (Ed.), Oxford Handbook of Cognitive Psychology. New York: Oxford University Press.
White, P. A. (2006). The causal asymmetry. Psychological
Review, 113, 132-147.
White, P. A. (2009). Perception of forces exerted by objects
in collision events. Psychological Review, 116, 580-601.
White, P. A. (2012). Visual impressions of pushing and
pulling: The object perceived as causal is not always the
one that moves first. Perception, 41, 1193-1217.
Wolff, P. (2007). Representing causation. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 136, 82-111.
Wolff, P., & Song, G. (2003). Models of causation and the
semantics of causal verbs. Cognitive Psychology, 47, 276332.
Wolff, P., Barbey, A. K., & Hausknecht, M. (2010). For
want of a nail: How absences cause events. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 139, 191-221.
Woodward, J. (2003). Making things happen: A theory of
causal explanation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

1001

