UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
An evolutionary account of reactions to a wrong

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/72g667nr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Andrighetto, Giulia
Giardini, Francesca
Conte, Rosaria

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

An evolutionary account of reactions to a wrong
Giulia Andrighetto (giulia.andrighetto@istc.cnr.it)
Institute of Cognitive Science and Technology (ISTC-CNR), via San Martino della Battaglia 44, 00185, Rome, Italy
European University Institute (EUI), Fiesole, Italy

Francesca Giardini (francesca.giardini@istc.cnr.it)
Institute of Cognitive Science and Technology (ISTC-CNR), via San Martino della Battaglia 44, 00185, Rome, Italy

Rosaria Conte (rosaria.conte@istc.cnr.it)
Institute of Cognitive Science and Technology (ISTC-CNR), via San Martino della Battaglia 44, 00185, Rome, Italy

Abstract
In this work, we propose an evolutionary account of reactions to
a wrong as an integrated set. Unlike other theories, we are not
interested in revenge, punishment or sanction per se, but in their
co-existence. We posit that this variety of reactions is needed in
order to achieve different goals, but it also implies an increase in
cognitive costs that requires to be explained from an evolutionary
perspective. Moving from the identification of the psychological
traits that uniquely define each reaction, two concurrent
hypotheses are suggested and discussed: either the richness of
human social life requests a variety of reactions, or the benefits of
single reactions at the psychological level allowed these reactions
to be maintained in the social life.
Keywords: Evolution; punishment; revenge; sanction;
cognitive influencing; norms; enforcing institutions social
order.

Introduction
Human actions are potentially unbounded and much more
opportunities are available when other people are involved.
When talking about social actions we have to distinguish
between actions and reactions, i.e., actions triggered by
someone's else previous action. Reactions are a constitutive
part of living in societies, and the ability of displaying the
appropriate reaction in the right content is extremely
important for our “ultra-social” species (Richerson & Boyd
1998, 2005; Hill et al. 2009). The nature and the intensity of
reactions depend on both the actor and the triggering action,
and it requires the capacity to forecast further reactions and
to plan ahead, among other things. Humans are unique
under this respect, and everyone has experienced how many
reactions the same individual can display in response to the
same action, even in the same context. Animals can
modulate their reactions, in some cases they can also decide
their behaviour on a cost-benefit analysis, but others'
representations do not enter this picture (Clutton-Brock &
Parker 1995; Jensen et al. 2007). Humans react because of
what they believe and want, and because of what they want
others to believe and of how they want them to behave.
A particularly interesting class of social reactions is that
triggered in response to a wrong. Retaliation, revenge,

punishment and sanctions have been a matter of interest
since the rise of Western culture, as witnessed by the fact
that the need to understand and explain motives for reacting
to wrongs never ceased since pre-Homeric Greece to these
days (for an analysis of the differences among these
reactions see Giardini et al. 2010).
Philosophers, social scientists, political scientists,
psychologists, anthropologists have been striving to answer
the fundamental question: why do people react to a wrong?
In many circumstances reacting is more costly than
standing, it requires some kind of planning, and it also
implies the possibility of suffering a counter-reaction. Even
more striking, people react to wrongs suffered by strangers,
intervene in others' disputes, and sanction others when
failing to comply with norms that they are not supposed to
enforce. Although several scholars have been interested in
explaining the evolution of revenge, punishment and
sanction (Lorenz, 1966; Hamilton, 1970; Boyd &
Richerson, 1992; Clutton-Brock & Parker 1995; Gardner &
West, 2004; Jensen, 2010), these phenomena have been
usually considered in isolation and not as a rich and
complex repertoire. We propose that revenge, punishment
and sanction are different reactions that should not be
considered in isolation but as interdependent and
complementary. If we look at them as an intertwined set, we
need to explain the reason why they are different, but we
also need to understand why we still have more than one
reaction to an offense, and how the related extra cognitive
costs are compensated. Our goal is to explain the decision to
apply punishment in terms of the complementary decisions
to use neither revenge nor sanction, thus understanding the
motives behind each and every reaction.
We propose that this variety is necessary because, unlike
animals, humans' reactions do not only target the offender's
behavior, but also her mental states, as well as the victim's
mental states. Comparing different reactions, we highlight
an evolutionary trajectory that links revenge, punishment
and sanction by explaining costs and benefits of each
reaction. Having the opportunity to choose among several
responses means higher cognitive costs to select between
actions, and to choose the most appropriate one. Therefore,
a set of questions arises: Why do we have such a repertoire?
Can we identify evolved mechanisms that allowed us to

1756

distinguish among reactions and to selectively apply them
depending on the context?
Moving from the identification of the psychological traits
that uniquely define each reaction, we propose a complex
relationship between the richness of human social life,
which requests a variety of reactions (society  individual
motivations), and the benefits of single reactions at the
psychological level. These benefits favoured the
maintenance of reactions in the social life (individual
motivations  society).
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 1
outlines the evolutionary model, Section 2 defines the
different phenomena and Section 3 introduces the main
features of our taxonomy.

An evolutionary account of reactions
Revenge, punishment and sanction are superficially similar
but deeply different in terms of the evaluation of the wrong
suffered (or its interpretation), the intended goal, the
consequent cognitive influencing, the temporal dimension
and the kind of target. Humans are usually effective in
administering punishment, i.e., in selecting the best reaction,
taking into account the differences and selecting, through a
fast and efficient process, how to react according to the
external circumstances and their internal states.
The computational demands associated with the choice are
not negligible and the risks of a mismatch between the
perceived wrong and the reaction are high. We propose that
revenge, punishment and sanction require the evolution of
specialized mental mechanisms regulating the activation of
different responses to wrongs or rule violations. We suggest
that humans have mechanisms designed to produce revenge,
punishment and sanction that evolved because of their
effectiveness in solving recurrent social problems that
humans encountered during evolution (Petersen et al. 2012).
Given the richness of human bonds and social life, the need
for acquiring social bonds (Dunbar, 1996) and for
maintaining them, also remembering who is related to
whom, could have favoured the selection of different
reactions that have different consequences in terms of
relationships (McCullough, Kurzban, Tabak, 2012).
Moreover, psychological benefits of reactions may motivate
their maintenance at the individual level and thus foster their
selection at the social one. On the one hand, restoring the
status quo, achieving deterrence or promoting the norms are
goals that cannot be achieved through a single reaction, and
their related specific benefits at the psychological level may
have prompted the maintenance of multiple responses. On
the other hand, the costs of selecting among different
reactions are not negligible, also because having more
choices implies being more prone to errors, with negative
consequences arising at both the individual level and the
social level. In the latter case, this mismatch between the
reaction chosen and the wrong suffered can be extremely
dangerous, and it may challenge the social order. Avenging
a wrong when there is a social norm and the related
sanction, or punishing someone in a context in which

revenge was expected could result in a negative judgment
about the reacting agent. Failing in interpreting correctly the
situation and thus applying an inappropriate reaction may
lead individuals to consider the avenger/punisher/sanctioner
as socially inadequate and to avoid interactions with her. At
the group level, frequent failures in using the appropriate
reaction may undermine the cohesion of the group and make
it more vulnerable to turmoil and fights.
In evolutionary terms, the risk associated with the
application of the wrong kind of reaction were compensated
by the evolution of specific psychological mechanisms for
selecting among reactions.
Each and every reaction involves some unintended side
effects, which may prevent the agent from achieving her
goals and may also make the reaction inappropriate. In
revenge, making the other suffer and regaining one’s sense
of control, together with restoring the status quo, require the
agent to evaluate the wrong suffered and to estimate how
much sufferance to inflict on the offender. Since there is not
any objective criterion to estimate the sufferance
experienced, this evaluation can only be subjective, thus
exposing the avenger to the risks of damaging his reputation
because the reaction was disproportionate (too harsh or too
weak), or loosing social ties, or even triggering a feud with
escalation of violence. Feuds are especially costly at the
group level and they may even lead to the dissolution of the
group. The punisher aims at deterring the wrongdoer from
further hostility (by making it a costly option). There is not
a pre-established and socially shared set of rules that govern
how to punish. This lack of explicit and objective regulation
can have several negative consequences. If the punishment
inflicted is not appropriate in quantity or in kind, this can
result in perception of the punishment received as
unjustified, not legitimate and unfair. When punishment is
perceived inappropriate it may also become ineffective in
inducing deterrence, so the punisher is not able to achieve
her main goal. In addition, the punisher can acquire a bad
reputation for being too harsh, and she can see some social
ties severed because of his action with the consequent risk
of an escalation of violence, which has consequences for the
whole group.
The risks of administering an inappropriate sanction are
more limited and they are mainly related to the fact that the
normative message is not clearly understood by those who
receive the sanction. Therefore, when the normative
character of the situation is not recognized, the sanction is
ineffective, and the normative belief and the normative goal
will not be formed in the mind of those who receive the
sanction. An inappropriate sanction may also lead to
counter-reactions, either in the form of a further sanction or
as a retaliatory behavior.
In what follows we will detail our model of reactions,
specifying the cognitive underpinnings and the dimensions
of change characteristics of each and every phenomenon,
and then supporting our model with a discussion of the
relevant literature.

1757

Distinguishing among reactions
Although a number of accounts (for some representative
work see Bowles & Gintis 2004; Henrich & Boyd, 2001;
Henrich et al. 2006) have stressed the relevance of
punishment in human societies, they suffer the flaw of
considering punishment as a single behaviour. In our view,
punishing actually consists in a complex behavioral
repertoire in which it is useful to disentangle at least
revenge, punishment, and sanction. In Giardini,
Andrighetto, Conte (2010) it has been argued that this
variety of punishing strategies can be differentiated on the
basis of 1. their mental antecedents, 2. the way in which
they influence the future conduct of others, and 3. the
effects they aim to achieve. Having more than one available
strategy allows humans to tailor their reactions and to
achieve their goals more easily but, at the same time, this
implies higher cognitive and computational costs. In fact,
agents must be able to categorize actions in the correct way,
meaning that the context has to be interpreted adequately,
the most appropriate reaction has to be chosen on the basis
of the perceived wrong, of the situation, and of the offender
and other agents’ mental states. This calculation leads to a
significant increase in the computational costs, which
should be compensated, by some sort of benefits. Revenge,
punishment and sanction result from psychological
adaptations that allowed to solve recurrent conflicts that
humans encountered during their evolutionary history, but
we still do not know why we have more than one
mechanism.
If animal societies are able to cope with aggressions by
using just one form of reaction (Clutton-Brock & Parker,
1995), usually termed “punishment”, why do we need a
collection of counter-reactions? What are the fitness benefits
coming from revenge, punishment and sanction?
In our theoretical analysis of reactions to a wrong, we
start by providing a preliminary list of the core elements that
determine the kind of response that an individual will
choose in response to an aggression (see Table 1):
• The wrong suffered, i.e., the cause of the response.
The evaluation of the offense depends both on the
intentions the aggressor (the offense was
intentional vs the offense was not intentional), and
on the nature and value of the goal(s) frustrated by
the aggressor.
• The goal of the reaction. When deciding how to
react to an aggression, individuals consider the
goal(s) they want to achieve and then select the
appropriate reaction.
• The kind of influencing the agent reacting wants to
apply to achieve her goal(s). Our theory is based on
the idea that different reactions are aimed to
produce different changes in the mind-set of the
victim. For example, the avenger is aimed at acting
at the epistemic level, by changing the target’s and
audience’s beliefs about herself. The punisher aims
to act both at the epistemic and motivational levels,
by generating in the victim’s mind the goal –

•

usually under threat of punishment– of abstaining
from doing the action that has triggered
punishment again. Finally, the sanctioner wants to
endow the offender with new normative knowledge
and to generate in her mind the goal to comply
with the norm in the future.
The focus of the reaction refers to the agent herself
(as it is in revenge), another agent (as it is in
punishment), or a norm (as it is in sanction).

It is worth noticing that we do not consider reactions as
clear-cut phenomena, but they are overlapping in several
respects. In Table 1, we summarize the main features of
each reaction, in an attempt to identify the key elements of
each phenomenon.
Table 1: Dimensions of change
Wrong
suffered

Goal

Cognitive
influencing
Temporal
dimension
Focus

Revenge
Intentional
aggression;
Frustration of
a personal
goal of the
agent;
Sufferance
experienced
Making the
aggressor
suffer;
Status
quo
restoration
Beliefs

Punishment
Intentional
aggression;
Frustration of
a personal or
social goal of
the agent.

Sanction
Norm
violation

Deterrence

Norm
recognition;
Norm
compliance

Beliefs
Goals

Backwardlooking
Self

Forwardlooking
Other

Normative
Beliefs
Normative
Goals
Forwardlooking
Norm

Figure 1 depicts the mental path that triggers to choose a
specific reaction. In the following section, a cognitive
anatomy of revenge, punishment and sanction will be
provided. In section 3, an analysis of the intended and
unintended effects of the three reactions is presented. The
latter analysis will allow us to sketch an evolutionary
explanation of why we have more than one reaction to an
offense, and how the cognitive extra-costs resulting from
this variety of reactions are compensated.

1758

Figure1: The cognitive path of reactions to a wrong
A further consideration involves the role of emotions. The
specific role that anger, but also social emotions, such as
moral outrage, pride, shame, guilt, indignation, contempt,
disgust, resentment, etc., (e.g. Fessler & Haley 2003; Frank
1988) play in triggering the reactions under study deserves
an attentive theoretical and experimental analysis. Although
crucial, this analysis is beyond the scope of the present
paper and will be developed in future work.

Taxonomy of reactions to a wrong: Revenge,
Punishment and Sanction
Revenge
Revenge, according to the Merriam-Webster dictionary, is
“punishment inflicted in retaliation for an injury or offence”.
In Elster’s terms (1990) it is “the attempt at some cost or
risk to oneself, to impose suffering upon those who made
one suffer, because they have made one suffer” (p. 862).
Broadly speaking, the term ’revenge’ refers to two diverse
but connected phenomena.
In the first of these phenomena, revenge is a social ritual
that requires and prescribes specific behaviours to group
members to repair an offence. Ethnographic studies
highlighted the transition from tribal to modern societies, in
which retributive concepts of law and the creation of
institutions replaced vengeance and avoided blood feuds
(Boehm 1986). Posner (1980) suggests that revenge and
retribution may be partially determined by historical and
economic circumstances, such the private enforcement of
law and high probabilities of detecting and punishing
offences. When these conditions are met, a pure vengeance
system may appear, although it is unlikely to be optimal.
These systems are not completely extinguished, as the
culture of honour in the southern United States (Nisbett
1993; Nisbett and Cohen 1996) and the Kanun in Albania
demonstrate. The Kanun, a customary set of laws used
mostly in northern Albania and Kosovo, disciplined
people’s reactions to murder (blood revenge or gjakmarrje)
and other offences (hakmarrje), according to the roles and
degree of kinship of all the people involved. Shirking
revenge or taking it without respecting what is stated in the
Kanun leads to the same result: honour cannot be restored
and the whole family or clan is to blame. Apparently, the
Kanun has not disappeared completely, and in some areas it
is still observed, showing how an institution that is
preserved in the mind can out-compete another centrally
enforced institution, because the latter one is not recognized
as such.

The other way of looking at revenge is to consider it as an
individual behaviour, which is present both in human
societies (Zaibert 2006), and non-human primate groups
(Jensen, Call and Tomasello 2007). Turning our attention to
individual factors it becomes possible to provide a cognitive
anatomy of this reaction. The avenger wants to repay the
damage she suffered with an equal or greater offence, no
matter how risky or dangerous this retaliation is. In a sense,
we can say that the avenger is a backward-looker who
revolves around the past and acts in the present to rebalance
what happened, with no concern for the future. Unlike other
authors (McCullough, Kurzban, Tabak, 2012), we do not
see vengeance as a means to affect the likelihood that the
wrongdoer will repeat the aggression in the future, inducing
her to cooperate next time or deterring her from further
aggressions. Long term, strategic planning does not seem to
characterize the avenger’s mind, although unintended
deterrence effects can be obtained.
Revenge is motivated not only by the desire to make the
target suffer, but also by the goal to change the target’s and
audience’s beliefs about the avenger, in order to restore the
image that has been damaged by the aggression suffered. In
this case cognitive influence is aimed at changing the beliefs
of the wrongdoer and of the audience: the avenger aims to
repay the damage she suffered with an equal or greater
offence in order to change the target’s and audience’s
beliefs about himself. Revenge is a way to regain one’s
position after an offence and this applies also to the
symbolic dimension: the avenger wants to restore her image,
damaged by the aggression suffered. Revenge is aimed to
modify what the others believe about the avenger, her role
and status. Presumably, the greater the offence, the more
efficacious the image restoration and the effort to restore the
status-quo.

Punishment
Enforcing institutions have evolved with society: starting
out as simple systems of revenge and retribution imposed by
the individual, family, or tribe, in modern societies they
grew as institutions characterized by a higher concern for
deterrence and rehabilitation. Institutions controlling
modern societies moved from systems based on revenge to
ones based on punishment. In primitive society enforcement
was left to the individuals wronged, or their families, and
was vindictive or retributive (Boehm 1986): in quantity and
quality it would bear no special relation to the character or
gravity of the offence. Gradually it arose the idea of
proportionate punishment, of which the characteristic type is
the lex talionis of early Roman law or in the Old Testament
and Koran. Like revenge, also punishment refers to two
distinct class of phenomena: punishment is both a social
institution and an individual behavior.
As an institution, punishment serves to dissuade people
from engaging in activities deemed wrong by law and by the
society itself, thus reducing the frequency and likelihood of
future offences. Deterrence theory suggests that punishment
works by modifying the relative costs and benefits of

1759

situation, so that wrongdoing becomes a less attractive
option (Bentham 1962; Becker 1968). Punishment possibly
has the effect of preventing blood feuds and giving more
stability to the social order.
As an individual behaviour, punishment is a reaction
intentionally aimed to minimize the chance that the
aggressor will repeat the act again (Giardini, Andrighetto
and Conte 2010). Unlike revenge, punishment is not
inflicted in retribution for an offence or transgression. The
punisher is driven by forward-looking considerations, and
deterrence is intentionally pursued.
This enforcing mechanism, controlling modern societies, is
not at all easy to distinguish from revenge (Zaibert 2006), at
least from a mere behavioural point of view. Cognitive
modelling allows us to disentangle them on the basis of their
mental antecedents and the way in which they influence the
future conduct of others. The punisher and the avenger are
aimed at influencing and modifying the target and the
audience’s minds in different ways: unlike the avenger, the
punisher has the explicit goal to deter the wrongdoer from
repeating the aggression in the future. To achieve this goal,
the punisher should act in such a way that the offender, and
possibly the audience, generates in her mind the goal –
usually under threat of punishment (i.e., by generating the
belief in the victim’s mind that future aggressions will be
punished)– of abstaining from doing the action that has
triggered punishment again.

Sanction
Social order can be explained as the mere result of the
deterrence effect of punishment. However what makes
human cooperation so spectacular with respect to all other
species is the presence of social norms, efficiently
orchestrating social life. When punishing institutions are
able to work in tandem with social norms, they are much
more viable and effective in achieving and maintaining
compliance and are more robust across time (Andrighetto
and Villatoro, 2011; Villatoro et al. 2011).
By analyzing a large number of spontaneously emerged
institutions in different countries, the political scientist
Elinor Ostrom has identified a set of characteristics that
make them successful in promoting social order. She
suggests that the most effective institutions are those that
facilitate norms’ elicitation, their spreading, and compliance
(Ostrom 2005; see also Casari 2007). Punishment, when
properly designed, should tell people which behaviours are
acceptable, i.e., the (social) norms regulating society, and
which actions will cause punishment.
We refer to punishing institutions enforcing social order
through mechanisms intentionally aimed to focus people’s
attention on social norms and to condemn their violation as
sanction institutions. We consider sanction institutions as
the last step of the institutional evolutionary process.
As in previous work (Giardini et al. 2010; Andrighetto and
Villatoro, 2011; Villatoro et al. 2011), we use sanction to
indicate the enforcing individual behaviour that, in addition
to imposing a cost for the wrongdoing, as punishment does,

is also intentionally aimed at signalling norms to the
offender (and possibly to the audience) so that she will
comply with them in the future.
The type of cognitive influencing sanction exerts on the
offender is more complex than those in revenge and
punishment. In order to deter future norms’ violations, the
sanctioner endows the offender with (new) normative
knowledge. The sanctioner uses scolding to reign in
wrongdoers, expresses indignation or blame, or simply
mentions that the targeted behaviour violated a norm.
Through these actions, the sanctioner aims to focus people’s
attention on different normative aspects, such as: (a) the
existence and violation of a norm; (b) the causal link
between violation and sanction: "you are being sanctioned
because you violated that norm" (c) the probability that
violations will be sanctioned; (d) the fact that the sanctioner
is acting as a norm defender. As recent psychological and
economic experimental evidence shows (Cialdini et al.
1990; Bicchieri 2006; Galbiati and Vertova 2008; Houser
and Xiao 2010), the norm focusing effect of sanction plays
an important role in eliciting norm compliance. Thus,
despite punishment, we suggest that sanction has the further
effect, possibly aimed at by the sanctioner, to encourage the
target to ground future decisions on internal evaluative
criteria, established by the norm. By facilitating the
spreading, recognition and internalization of norms,
sanction possibly has the effect of promoting social order in
a more stable and less costly way with respect to
punishment.

Concluding Remarks
In this work, we proposed an evolutionary account of
reactions to a wrong as an integrated set. Unlike other
theories, we are not interested in revenge, punishment or
sanction per se, but in their co-existence. We posited that
this variety of reactions is needed in order to achieve
different goals, but they also imply an increase in
complexity, due to the costs associated with the
interpretation of the situation and the selection among
reactions. We proposed that the transition from one to the
other has been allowed by specific cognitive patterns, and
suggesting that these mental mechanisms selected among
given social structures, at the same time reinforcing and
being reinforced by them.
Modifying others' actions require a set of cognitive skills
that allow to represent others' mental states, considering the
way in which these are harbored in one's mind, giving rise
to social beliefs, namely beliefs about others' mental states
(e.g. beliefs, intentions, desires, emotions). In addition, this
requires also cognitive influencing, as the willingness to
modify others' goals. Having a set of available reactions
means that individuals should also be endowed with
cognitive mechanisms to recognize which reaction is more
appropriate in a given situation.
This theoretical analysis will be

1760

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Institute of Cognitive
Science and Technologies, CNR; the European University
Institute; the Complexity-Net Project SEMIRA; the ERC
project “Willing to Pay”; the European Project GLODERS.

References
Andrighetto, G., & Villatoro, D. (2011). Beyond the carrot
and stick approach to enforcement: An agent-based model.
In European Perspectives on Cognitive Science, edited by
B. Kokinov, A. Karmiloff Smith, N.J. Nersessian. Sofia:
New Bulgarian University Press.
Bentham, J. (1962). Principles of penal law. In J. Bowring
(Ed.). The Works of Jeremy Bentham. (pp. 365-580) New
York: Russell and Russell.
Becker, G. S. (1968). Crime and Punishment: An Economic
Approach. Journal of Political Economy 76: 169-217.
Bicchieri, C. (2006). The Grammar of Society: the Nature
and Dynamics of Social Norms. Cambridge (MA):
Cambridge University Press.
Boehm, C. (1986). Blood Revenge: The Enactment and
Management of Conflict in Montenegro and Other Tribal
Societies. Philadelphia (PA): University of Pennsylvania
Press.
Bowles, S., & Gintis, H. (2004). The evolution of strong
reciprocity: Cooperation in heterogeneous populations.
Theoretical Population Biology, 61: 17–28.
Boyd, R. & Richerson, P. J. (1992). Punishment allows the
evolution of cooperation (or anything else) in sizable
groups. Ethol. Sociobiol. 13: 171 – 195.
Casari, M. (2007). Emergence of endogenous legal
institutions: Property rights and community governance in
the Italian Alps. The Journal of Economic History
67(1):191-226.
Cialdini, R. B., Reno, R.R. & Kallgren, C.A. (1990). A
focus theory of normative conduct: Recycling the concept of
norms to reduce littering in public places. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 58: 1015-1026.
Clutton-Brock, T. H., & Parker, G.A. (1995). Punishment in
animal societies. Nature 373: 209-216.
Elster, J. (1990). Norms of revenge. Ethics 100(4): 862–
885.
Fessler, D. M. T. & Haley, K. J. (2003). The strategy of
affect: emotions in human cooperation. In P. Hammerstein
(Ed.). Genetic and cultural evolution of cooperation (pp. 7 –
36). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Frank, R. H. (1988). Passions within reason: the strategic
role of the emotions. New York, NY: Norton.
Galbiati, R., & Vertova, P. (2008). Obligations and
Cooperative Behaviour in Public Good Games. Games and
Economic Behavior 64(1): 146-170.
Gardner, A. & West, S. A. (2004) Cooperation and
punishment, especially in humans. Am. Nat. 164: 753 – 764.
Giardini, F., Andrighetto, G., Conte, R. (2010). A
cognitive model of punishment. Proceedings of the 32nd
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
1282-1288). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.

Gjeov, S. (1989). Kanuni i leke dukagjinit. Albanian text
collected and arranged by Shtjefn Gjeov. New York:
Gjonlekaj Publishing Company.
Hamilton, W. D. (1970). Selfish and spiteful behaviour in
an evolutionary model. Nature, 228: 1218–1220
Henrich, J., & Boyd, R. (2001). Why people punish
defectors. weak conformist transmission can stabilize costly
enforcement of norms in cooperative dilemmas. Journal of
Theoretical Biology, 208: 79–89.
Henrich, J., McElreath, R., Barr, A., Ensminger, J., Barrett, C., Bolyanatz, A., et al. (2006). Costly punishment
across human societies. Science, 312(5781), 1767-1770.
Hill, K., Barton, M. & Hurtado, A. M. (2009). The
emergence of human uniqueness: characters underlying
behavioral modernity.
Evolutionary
Anthropology,
18, 187 – 200
Houser, D., & Xiao, E. (2010). Understanding context
effects. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization
73(1): 58-61.
Lorenz, K. (1966). On aggression. London, UK:
Methuen.
Janssen, M. & Bushman, C. (2008). Evolution of
cooperation and altruistic punishment when retaliation is
possible. J. Theor. Biol., 254,
541 – 545.
Jensen, K. (2010). Punishment and spite, the dark side of
cooperation. Philosophical transactions of the Royal Society
of London. Series B, Biological sciences, 365, 2635–2650.
Jensen, K., Call, J., & Tomasello, M. (2007).
Chimpanzees are vengeful but not spiteful. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 104: 13046–13050.
McCullough, M.E., Kurzban, R., Tabak, B.A. (2012). A
cognitive system for revenge and forgiveness. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 1-58
Nisbett, R.E. (1993). Violence and U. S. regional culture.
American Psychologist 48: 441- 449.
Nisbett, R. E., & Cohen, D. (1996). Culture of honor.
Boulder (CO): Westview Press.
Ostrom, E. (2005). Understanding Institutional Diversity.
Princeton (NJ): Princeton University Press.
Petersen, M. B., Sell, A., Tooby, J. & Cosmides, L.
(2012) To punish or repair? Evolutionary psychology and
lay intuitions about modern criminal justice. Evolution and
Human Behavior. Advance online publication.
Posner, Richard. 1980. “Retribution and related concepts
of punishment.” Journal of Legal Studies 9: 71–92.
Richerson, P. J., & Boyd, R. (1998). The evolution of
human ultra-sociality. In I. Eibl-Eibisfeldt & F.Salter (Eds.).
Ideology, warfare, and indoctrinability; evolutionary
perspectives (pp. 71 – 95). London,UK: Berghahn Books.
Villatoro, D., Andrighetto, G., Conte, R., & Sabater-Mir,
J. (2011). Dynamic Sanctioning for Robust and CostEfficient Norm Compliance. Proceedings of the TwentySecond International Joint Conference on Artificial
Intelligence (IJCAI 2011)
Zaibert, L. (2006). Punishment and Revenge. Law and
Philosophy 25: 81-118.

1761

