UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
An Information-Theoretic Account of Musical Expectation and Memory

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/46x943kr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Agres, Kat
Abdallah, Samer
Pearce, Marcus

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

An Information-Theoretic Account of Musical Expectation and Memory
Kat Agres (kathleen.agres@eecs.qmul.ac.uk)
Centre for Digital Music and Cognitive Science Research Group
School of Electronic Engineering & Computer Science
Queen Mary, University of London
London E1 4NS, United Kingdom

Samer Abdallah (samer.abdallah@eecs.qmul.ac.uk)
Centre for Digital Music
School of Electronic Engineering & Computer Science
Queen Mary, University of London
London E1 4NS, United Kingdom

Marcus Pearce (marcus.pearce@eecs.qmul.ac.uk)
Cognitive Science Research Group, Centre for Digital Music and Centre for Research in Psychology
School of Electronic Engineering & Computer Science
Queen Mary, University of London
London E1 4NS, United Kingdom

This paper examines the process of learning novel music
over time, with a focus on mental anticipatory processing
and musical structure. By using carefully constructed tone
sequences, we are able to test how the statistical structure of
music, as measured using information theory, affects the
expectedness of tones, as well as memory for specific
exemplars, over a period of increasing exposure.

Abstract
When listening to music, we form implicit expectations about
the forthcoming temporal sequence. Listeners acquire
knowledge of music through processes such as statistical
learning, but how do different types of statistical information
affect listeners’ learning and memory? To investigate this, we
conducted a behavioral study in which participants repeatedly
heard tone sequences varying within a range of informationtheoretic measures. Expectedness ratings of tones were
collected during three listening sessions, and a recognition
memory test was given after each session. This enabled us to
examine how statistical information affects expectation and
memory for tone sequences over a period of increasing
exposure. We found significant correlations between
listeners’ expectedness ratings and measures of information
theory (IT), and although listeners demonstrated poor overall
memory performance, the IT properties significantly impacted
on musical memory. Generally, simple sequences yielded
increasingly better memory performance. High-information
sequences, for which making accurate predictions is difficult,
resulted in consistently poor recognition memory.
Keywords:
Music
cognition;
information
computational approach; predictive models.

Information Theory and Music
Information theory has contributed to fields as diverse as
engineering and linguistics by describing and quantifying
the information contained in a signal. This is especially
useful for clarifying how the brain processes temporal
signals; and indeed, information-theoretic measures such as
entropy, a measure of uncertainty, have successfully
described and predicted how the human brain anticipates
forthcoming sensory input, such as music and language
(e.g., Manning & Schutze, 1999; Abdallah & Plumbley,
2009). Within the domain of music, there has been a longstanding interest in anticipation and prediction, and
statistical and probabilistic approaches to learning have been
influential for decades (consider Krumhansl & Kessler,
1982; and Saffran, Johnson, Aslin, & Newport, 1999).
Computational models such as IDyOM (Pearce, 2005)
derive information-theoretic properties of music that
accurately reflect and predict listeners’ expectations during
music listening (Pearce & Wiggins, 2006; Pearce et al.,
2010).
While statistical and computational approaches have
modeled human performance on a variety of music
perception tasks, these approaches have not yet been
extended to modeling the learning trajectory of listeners: we
do not yet know how information-theoretic measures
capture musical learning over increasing exposure to
musical exemplars, and how much exposure is necessary to

theory;

Introduction
Music is a fruitful domain for exploring the mechanisms
responsible for learning structured temporal sequences, a
type of learning that subserves a wide range of human
behaviors. Research by Krumhansl (1990), Pearce &
Wiggins (2006), Huron (2006), and others shows that
listeners implicitly acquire knowledge about the statistical
structure of music. But is this implicit learning influenced
by the information contained in the musical signal and, if so,
how? Using computational methods, the pitch structure of
music can be manipulated systematically to help reveal the
ways in which various information-theoretic properties of
melody interact and influence human learning and memory.

127

learn the statistical regularities of novel music. The
following research addresses these questions.

ability to predict the current observation depends on having
observed the preceding observations, and is a difference of
log probabilities: log p(xt|xt-1, Өt) - log p(xt|Өt), where the
latter term is derived from the stationary distribution of the
transition matrix. Predictive Information is quantified as the
distance between two probability distributions over the next
symbol xt+1, representing the observer's probabilistic beliefs
about xt+1 before and after the observation of xt. The average
of each of these three measures was computed for every
tone sequence in the present study, henceforth referred to as
sequence statistics.
To investigate the processes underlying musical learning,
listeners were exposed to tone sequences and tested on
recognition memory over several listening sessions. In each
listening session, participants heard tone sequences and
rated the expectedness of a tone (termed the “probe tone”)
within each sequence. Probe tones varied in terms of
information content (representing unexpectedness) across
sequences. A recognition memory test followed each
listening session. This format enabled us to compute
information-theoretic measures for every tone sequence, and
compare the effect of these measures on probe tone ratings.
We also examined how IT measures impacted on
recognition performance in the test sessions. We
hypothesized that sequences featuring generally highentropy would be difficult to remember, and probe tones
would be rated with lower expectedness. Because each tone
sequence was presented in every listening session, we also
aimed to clarify the learning trajectory for the different
classes of tone sequence; that is, how music represented in
short-term memory gradually becomes more richly encoded
in long-term memory, and how musical information and
complexity, as measured using IT, influence this process
over time.

Behavioral Experiment
In the present study, computational techniques were used
to create a set of tone sequences varying systematically
across several information-theoretic measures. Varying the
sequences’ statistical structure allows us to assess which
factors have the greatest impact on listeners’ musical
expectations and memory for tone. We focused on testing
the relative influence of three information-theoretic factors
based on the information theoretic concepts of entropy rate,
multi-information rate (a kind of redundancy), and
predictive information rate (see Abdallah & Plumbley,
2009). These measures are defined for a random process
with a known probability distribution, and hence thought of
as 'objective'. However, listeners cannot know these
probability distributions; they can only estimate them from
observations, and so we defined variants of each measure
appropriate for an observer processing events sequentially
as they happen, updating its estimated probability model as
it goes along: they are dynamic information measures based
on an adaptive probabilistic model. Since they depend only
on the actual observed sequences (rather than a theoretical
statistical ensemble) and any prior expectations built into
the listener model (which we may think of as summarizing
the listener's previous musical experience), we can usefully
think of these as 'subjective' information measures.
In our experiments, the listener model was an adaptive
first-order Markov chain, as described by Abdallah and
Plumbley (2009), which assumes that notes are sampled
from a Markov chain with an unknown transition matrix,
and tries to estimate the transition matrix from the
observations. The model is supplied with an initial
expectation (a Bayesian prior) that the transition matrix is
similar to a first-order transition matrix derived from a large
corpus of Western tonal music in a major key.
The three information measures examined in this paper
are Information Content (IC), Coding Gain, and Predictive
Information. IC is a measure of the subjective
unexpectedness of an observation. Coding Gain measures
how much temporal structure or pattern there is in the
sequence. And Predictive Information quantifies how much
the current observation improves the listener's predictions
about future observations (assuming knowledge of the
previous observations). High predictive information is also
associated with temporal structure or pattern, but of the sort
that has more variation, requiring the observer to continually
pay attention in order to follow the pattern.
These three measures are defined in the Markov model as
follows: at any integer time t, let xt be the note occurring at
that time, and Өt be the estimated transition matrix using
information available before t. Then, the IC at time t is the
negative log probability of xt given the context and the
estimated model: -log p(xt|xt-1, Өt), where the relevant
transition probability is extracted from the matrix Өt.
Coding Gain at time t quantifies how much the model's

Method
Participants
Twenty-three students (12 female and 11 male; mean age
= 21.0 yrs) at Cornell University participated in this study
for extra credit in a psychology course. The participants had
an average of 1.61 years (SD = 1.88 yrs) playing music in
the previous five years, and an average of 5.82 years (SD =
4.54 yrs) of lifetime experience playing an instrument.

Materials and Procedure
After receiving written and verbal instructions, participants
listened to tone sequences in three sessions, each lasting
approximately 15 minutes and followed by a brief test
session. In the listening sessions, participants heard each of
the 24 tone sequences (presented in a different order in each
session) and were asked to rate the expectedness of a
particular tone (the probe tone) within each sequence. This
tone was identified visually on the computer screen via a
clock counting down on the subsequent tones of the
sequence. When the clock returned to midnight, participants
rated the expectedness of the concurrently sounding tone on

128

a scale from 1 to 5, where ‘1’ represented highly unexpected
and ‘5’ represented highly expected.
Each listening session was followed by a test session.
Sixteen test stimuli were presented in each of the three test
sessions, where 8 sequences were Old (had been presented
previously) and 8 were New. After each test sequence,
participants responded “Yes” or “No” to whether they had
heard the sequence before. Upon responding, the listener
made a confidence rating on a scale from 1 to 5 where ‘1’
represented not confident and ‘5’ represented very
confident.
The 24 sequences of the listening sessions each comprised
24 isochronous tones, played in a piano timbre. Each tone
was 500 ms in duration, yielding sequences that were 12seconds-long each. The sequences were generated with an
alphabet of 7 pitches (representing one octave of the
diatonic scale). A first-order Markov transition matrix was
derived (Pearce, 2005) from the scale degrees of Canadian
folk songs/ballads, Chorale melodies, and German folk
songs in a major key (the same corpus described in Table 2
of Pearce and Wiggins, 2006). To construct the tone
sequences, many transition matrices were generated
randomly using a process biased towards the tonal transition
matrix. From each matrix, one sequence of 24 notes was
sampled. A subset of these was then selected manually to
ensure a good spread in the 3-dimensional subjective
information space formed by the information theoretic
measures described above.
A distinct 500 ms white noise clip was played after every
tone sequence in the listening and test sessions as a
perceptual “reset” to ensure that expectedness ratings and
memory judgments were based only on the current trial. The
study was administered on a MacBook Pro laptop, and
stimuli were presented and responses collected using
Psychophysics Toolbox (Version 3) within the
programming
environment
of
MATLAB
2010a
(MathWorks, Inc). Participants listened to stimuli over
headphones set to a comfortable listening volume.

Sequence Coding Gain and Average Expectedness Ratings,
also significant in this analysis, R2 = .37, F = 41.54, p < .01.

Results and Discussion
Whole-Sequence IT measures and Expectedness
During Listening Sessions

Figure 1: The main effects of Sequence IC, Sequence
Predictive Information,
and Sequence Coding Gain (in
nats, where 1 nat = 1.44 bits) on average expectedness
ratings during the listening sessions.

To examine how the information-theoretic properties of
each sequence influenced the expectedness of probe tones,
correlations were analyzed between the IT factors and
Average Expectedness Ratings. In terms of whole-sequence
statistics, both Sequence IC and Sequence Predictive
Information were significant predictors of Average
Expectedness Ratings. As shown in the top graph of Figure
1, Sequence IC was correlated with Average Expectedness
Ratings such that more predictable sequences (lower
Sequence IC values) yielded higher expectedness ratings of
probe tones, R2 = .29, F = 28.87, p < .01. The second graph
of Figure 1 displays the correlation between Sequence
Predictive Information and Average Expectedness Ratings,
R2 = .34, F = 36.23, p < .01. The third graph shows

Sequences with high average IC values contain
unexpectedness; the tones comprising these sequences have
high average Information Content. Therefore, it is logical
that sequences containing many unexpected, unpredictable
tones would yield lower expectedness ratings as shown
below.
Regarding the effects of Sequence Predictive Information,
information is inextricably associated with unexpectedness:
an event cannot be informative if the observer knew it was
going to happen, because it will not change the observer's
beliefs about the future. (Mathematically, Predictive

129

Information is upper-bounded by the Information Content.)
Hence, sequences with higher average Predictive
Information will necessarily have moderately high average
information content and thus we would expect the probe
tones to see relatively lower expectedness ratings.
Coding Gain is a measure of how much information was
gained about the current observation from the preceding
context. Therefore, the greater the average Coding Gain of
the sequence, the greater the predictability of the sequence
and so we would predict higher expectedness ratings in such
cases.

receive reliably higher expectedness ratings than high-IC
probe tones over the course of listening.

Recognition Memory in Test Sessions
Data from the test sessions are reported in Table 1 as
Proportion Correct Response. Chance performance is 0.5,
and the similarity of performance for Old and New items
indicates little bias towards either response.
Table 1: Recognition memory test performance (proportion
correct) for Old and New sequences across listening
sessions.

Expectedness and Probe Tone IC To examine which
factors in the listening sessions had the greatest impact on
expectation, a multiple regression analysis was performed
with Probe Tone IC, Sequence IC, Sequence Coding Gain,
Sequence Predictive Information, and Listening Session as
independent measures, and Expectedness Ratings as the
dependent measure (note that all expectedness ratings were
used, not the average rating for each stimulus). Listeners
were included as a random effect in the analysis. There was
a significant main effect of Probe Tone IC, F = 181.74, p <
.001, with high-IC tones rated as less expected. As for the
whole-sequence IT measures, there were also main effects
of Sequence IC, F = 3.92, p < .05, and Sequence Predictive
Information, F = 9.67, p < .01. In addition to these main
effects, there were also significant interactions between
Probe Tone IC and all three of the IT measures of sequences
statistics: Sequence IC X Probe Tone IC, F = 22.34, p <
.001, and Sequence Coding Gain X Probe Tone IC, F =
35.72, p < .001, and Sequence Predictive Information X
Probe Tone IC, F = 91.65, p < .001. Listening Session did
not contribute significantly to the results indicating that
pitch expectation remained constant overall during the
study.

Listening
Session
Session 1
Session 2
Session 3

Old/
Correct
(Hits)
0.67
0.63
0.70

Old/
Incorrect
(Misses)
0.33
0.37
0.30

New/Correct
(Correct
Rejections)
0.64
0.65
0.65

New/Incorrect
(False Alarms)
0.36
0.35
0.35

Despite little evidence for an increase in overall memory
performance over the course of the experiment, we
investigated whether certain types of statistical information
were being learned, and examine whether performance
differed depending on the properties of the individual
sequences. Therefore, to examine the effects of the IT
measures on recognition scores across listening sessions, a
logistic regression was performed with Sequence IC,
Sequence Coding Gain, Sequence Predictive information,
Familiarity (Old or New stimulus), and Listening Session as
factors, and Correct Response as the binary dependent
variable.
All three whole-sequence statistics showed significant
main effects: Sequence IC, χ² = 16.21, p < .01; Sequence
Predictive Information, χ² = 12.09, p < .01; and Sequence
Coding Gain, χ² = 4.27, p < .05. Listening Session interacted
with each of the whole-sequence IT measures: Sequence IC
X Listening Session, χ² = 6.14, p < .05, Sequence Predictive
Information X Listening Session, χ² = 7.98, p <.05, and
Sequence Coding Gain X Listening Session, χ² = 6.53, p <
.05, were all significant interactions.
The only significant interaction including Familiarity was
with Sequence Predictive Information, χ² = 12.15, p < .01.
As shown in the top plot of Figure 3 below, New sequences
that are high in Predictive Information yield more correct
responses than those with low Predictive Information.
Conversely, Old sequences show the opposite trend, with
worse recognition memory performance on high Predictive
Information sequences. Note that Proportion Correct
Response is used in Figure 3 rather than the categorical
variable Correct Response for clarity of illustration.

Figure 2: Probe Tone IC as a predictor of average
expectedness ratings of probe tones.
Probe Tone IC had the largest effect in the listening
sessions, with a significant linear relationship with
Expectedness Ratings, R2 = .69, F = 154.20, p < .01. In
Figure 2, the average expectedness rating for each melody is
shown to display more clearly the main effect on a
continuous rather than discrete scale. Low IC tones do

130

New/Unfamiliar Sequences

Conclusion
The analyses above highlight the significant roles that
measures of entropy and predictability have on musical
learning and memory. The three information-theoretic
measures examined here, Sequence IC, Sequence Predictive
Information, and Sequence Coding Gain, all impacted on
learning over time (as evinced by their significant
interactions with Listening Session). In the first memory
test, Sequence IC had little effect on the correctness of
participants’ responses. In the subsequent listening sessions,
a trend was displayed between increasing Sequence IC and
number of incorrect responses (p < .01). Similarly,
Sequence Coding Gain did not have a significant effect on
response in the first listening session, but was positively
correlated (p < .01) with correct response in the second and
third listening sessions. Sequences with high average
Coding Gain were more likely to yield correct responses in
the memory tests. In addition, Sequence Predictive
Information did not impact on memory performance
initially, but by the third listening session, this measure was
negatively correlated with Correct Response such that
greater Predictive Information led to fewer correct responses
(p < .05). Again, Predictive Information is upper-bounded
by Information Content (unexpectedness); therefore, high
Predictive Information sequences sound relatively
unpredictable. To summarize, these results suggest that the
global statistical properties of the tone sequences had little
bearing on recognition memory judgments initially, but over
repeated listenings, sequences higher in information and
entropy (those that sounded less predictable) produced both
lower expectedness ratings and poorer recognition memory.
As displayed by the interaction between Familiarity and
Sequence Predictive Information, New sequences that are
high in Predictive Information tend to yield more correct
responses (Correct Rejections) compared with Old
sequences that are high in Predictive Information, which
yield fewer correct responses (Misses). We suggest that
sequences with high Predictive information are surprising
but also distinctive, making them easier to correctly reject
on New trials but harder to remember on Old trials.
Listeners display poor recognition memory performance for
individual sequences, and appear to respond based on the
statistical properties of the sequence. Follow-up studies
need to be conducted to explore these complex information
dynamics, but it is clear that the information-theoretic
measures investigated in this study interact dynamically
with both expectedness and learning over a period of
increasing exposure to novel tone sequences.

Old/Familiar Sequences

Figure 3: The differential effect of Sequence Predictive
Information on Proportion Correct Response during
recognition memory tests for New and Old sequences.
Confidence Ratings Confidence ratings of recognition
memory judgments were collected after every test sequence;
responses were made on a 1-5 scale where on a where ‘1’
represented not confident and ‘5’ represented very confident.
A logistic regression was performed with the same factors
as those used above: Sequence IC, Sequence Coding Gain,
Sequence Predictive Information, Familiarity (Old or New
stimulus), and Listening Session. This analysis yielded
significant effects of Sequence IC, χ² = 16.44, p < .01, and
Sequence Coding Gain, χ² = 15.33, p < .01, and interactions
of these two factors with Listening Session: Sequence IC X
Listening Session, χ² = 21.94, p < .01, and Sequence Coding
Gain X Listening Session, χ² = 23.10, p < .01.
As expected, listeners made more confident memory
judgments when sequences had lower IC and higher Coding
Gain. For Sequence IC, there was a decrease in confidence
(fewer 4 and 5 responses) over the course of the experiment,
which was especially noticeable for low-IC sequences
(because high-IC sequences rarely received 5 responses
throughout the study). Similarly, there was also a decrease
in highly confident ratings (4 and 5 responses) for Sequence
Coding Gain over the course of the experiment, which was
more apparent in the high-Coding Gain sequences (lowCoding Gain sequences elicited few 5 responses).

General Discussion
Information-theoretic approaches have elucidated various
aspects of music perception, such as melodic expectation
(e.g., Pearce et al., 2010). In the IT study described above,
three subjective information-theoretic factors, Sequence IC,
Sequence Predictive Information, and Sequence Coding
Gain, all significantly influenced expectedness ratings of
probe tones during the listening sessions. This reveals that

131

the perceived expectedness of events is influenced not only
by properties of the event itself, but also by properties of the
sequence within which it is embedded. These factors also
impacted on nuanced memory performance during the
recognition tests. It was also interesting to discover a
significant interaction between Familiarity and Sequence
Predictive Information for memory performance. The
increasing effect of IT measures on recognition accuracy
may result from listeners gradually learning the underlying
Markov model: Upon gleaning the basic information
structure of the melodies, Predictive Information has a
greater effect on recognition memory. Additionally,
sequences that have high average IC can also vary in
Predictive Information; that is, tones may be perceived as
unexpected, but they can be surprising in either a way that
increases listeners’ predictions of forthcoming tones, or in a
way that is surprising but does not increase predictive
accuracy. The significant interaction between Familiarity
and Sequence Predictive Information, but not Familiarity
and Sequence IC, demonstrates that it is not simply the
high-information content of sequences, but rather the
Predictive Information of these sequences that listeners can
successfully use when making memory judgments.
Generally, sequences that were more difficult to predict
(higher IC/Predictive Information) gave rise to worse
memory performance. There was also an increasing impact
of these factors on memory as exposure increased. The
effect of Sequence IC became more pronounced as listeners
repeatedly heard melodies (e.g., sequences with low average
IC were more likely to be remembered by the third listening
session). To our knowledge, this research is the first
investigation of the time course of music learning using an
information-theoretic approach.
Although listeners struggled with the difficulty of the
recognition memory task, they responded differentially
based on the statistical properties of the sequences. Listeners
may be more adept at learning the statistical rules
underlying musical sequences than the specific exemplars
themselves, especially with non-stylistic music such as the
sequences used in this study (see Saffran et al., 1999; Loui,
Wessel, & Kam, 2010; Halpern & Bartlett, 2010). Listeners
are capable of learning a vast number of songs and themes,
therefore more ecological stimuli may lead to better learning
and memory performance. Language research (a domain in
which listeners have been shown to be proficient in
statistical learning of phonological sequences) has
historically revealed that people tend to remember the
semantics of what is said, not a verbatim account (e.g.,
Bartlett, 1932). Therefore, it may prove more insightful to
test listeners’ learning of semantics (musical structure and
underlying statistics) across exemplars rather than the
individual exemplars themselves.
We see from this IT study that learning individual
sequences is possible, but challenging. Because we see
effects of the IT properties of the stimuli but no significant
effect of Listening Session, it is likely that participants were

learning the rules describing the underlying transition
matrices rather than the particular exemplars themselves.
Because it is impossible to perform an exhaustive
behavioral investigation into which exemplars and rules
listeners learn, future work will develop computer models to
simulate and predict the process of musical learning.
Computational models can offer insight into this process by
analyzing information-theoretic measures to predict human
listeners’ performance. Future work will also test memory
differences between ecological melodies and experimentally
controlled tone sequences with an expectation that stylistic,
ecological exemplars will aid memory performance.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by EPSRC via grant number
EP/D038855/1: Neural and Information Dynamics in the
Processing of Musical Structure.

References
Abdallah, S. & Plumbley, M. (2009). Information dynamics:
patterns of expectation and surprise in the perception of
music. Connection Science, 21, 89-117.
Bartlett, F. (1932). Remembering: A study in experimental
and social psychology. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Halpern, A. & J. Bartlett (2010). Memory for melodies. In
M.R. Jones, A. Popper, & R. Fay (Eds.), Music
Perception. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Huron, D. (2006). Sweet anticipation: Music and the
psychology of expectation. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Krumhansl, C. (1990). Cognitive foundations of musical
pitch. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Krumhansl, C. & Kessler, E. (1982). Tracing the dynamic
changes in perceived tonal organization in a spatial
representation of musical keys. Psychological Review, 89,
334-368.
Loui, P., Wessel, D.L., & Kam, C. (2010). Humans rapidly
learn grammatical structure in a new musical scale. Music
Perception, 27, 377–388.
Manning, C. & Schutze, H. (1999). Foundations of
statistical natural language processing. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Pearce, M. T. (2005). The construction and evaluation of
statistical models of melodic structure in music
perception and composition. Doctoral Dissertation,
Department of Computing, City University, London, UK.
Pearce, M. & Wiggins, G. (2006). Expectation in melody:
The influence of context and learning. Music Perception,
23, 377–405.
Pearce, M. T., Ruiz, M. H., Kapasi, S., Wiggins, G. A., &
Bhattacharya, J. (2010). Unsupervised statistical learning
underpins computational, behavioural and neural
manifestations of musical expectation. NeuroImage, 50,
302-313.
Saffran, J.R., Johnson, E.K., Aslin, R.N., & Newport, E.L.
(1999). Statistical learning of tone sequences by human
infants and adults. Cognition, 70, 27–52.

132

