UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Anxiety Can Influence Analogy-Making Both Positively and Negatively Depending on the
Complexity of the Mapping Task

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/57f725jr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Hristova, Penka
Petkova, Yoana
Kokinov, Boicho

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Anxiety Can Influence Analogy-Making Both Positively and Negatively
Depending on the Complexity of the Mapping Task
Penka Hristova (phristova@cogs.nbu.bg)
Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology, New Bulgarian University, 21 Montevideo Street
Sofia 1618, Bulgaria

Yoana Petkova (yoana.l.petkova@gmail.com)
Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology, New Bulgarian University, 21 Montevideo Street
Sofia 1618, Bulgaria

Boicho Kokinov (bkokinov@nbu.bg)
Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology, New Bulgarian University, 21 Montevideo Street
Sofia 1618, Bulgaria

or an extremely similar object present in the second picture)
and another at the level of relational similarity (i.e., a
superficially distinct object that plays an analogous role in
the second picture). Less relational responses (Exp1) and
less accuracy of identifying the relational match (Exp2)
were found for participants from the high state-anxiety
group. The decline in relational reasoning was explained by
the Processing Efficiency Theory of Eysenck and Calvo
(1992). According to that theory and its successor – the
Attentional Control Theory (Eysenck, Deraksan, Santos &
Calvo, 2007), attention of highly anxious individuals is
distracted by the anxiety related thoughts. Thus, instead of
focusing on the main task, anxious individuals ruminate
about the threatening situation, the stimuli or the potential
failure. Hence, as Holyoak (2012) has pointed out, anxiety
seems to place individuals in a dual task situation that
definitely reduces the available working memory resources
and in turn, changes analogical mapping from relational
(based on common relations) to superficial mode (based on
common features). Besides, it was argued that both the
capability to integrate multiple relations and to inhibit
distracting information during analogy-making depend
crucially on the available resources (Cho, Holyoak, &
Cannon, 2007; Krawczyk, Morrison, Viskontas, Holyoak,
Chow, Mendez, Miller, & Knowlton, 2008; Sweis, Bharani,
& Morrison, 2012; Viskontas, Morrison, Holyoak, Hummel,
& Knowlton, 2004). To sum up, it seems reasonable to
consider that state anxiety reduces the capability of an
individual to integrate the relevant relations and to inhibit
the irrelevant ones, which are directly connected to
analogical mapping.
However, analogy-making involves not only choosing
among various potential relational matches, but is a much
more complicated process that integrates perception and
encoding of the existing relations in the environment
(among the many possible relations some are relevant for
the analogy, others are not), building hypotheses about
possible pairs of corresponding relations, and choosing
among these hypotheses which are forming the most
consistent mapping.

Abstract
In attempt to resolve the controversial issue of the influence
of the anxiety state on analogy-making this paper presents a
replication of the original Tohill and Holyoak study extending
it with a new factor – the complexity of the mapping. It turns
out that the anxiety influence interacts with the complexity of
the mapping task. This has certain implications for the models
of analogy and for the further study of the role anxiety plays
in analogy-making.
Keywords: analogy; emotion, state anxiety, complexity.

How Anxiety Changes Analogical Mapping
The chronologically first studies that focus on analogies
under anxiety, suggest that analogical performance drops
significantly when the state anxiety is heightened. Leon and
Revelle (1985) manipulated anxiety via time pressure. They
found that people are more accurate under low timepressure, but unfortunately, as Tohill and Holyoak (2000)
have argued, these results could also be interpreted as a
speed/accuracy trade-off. The negative correlation between
anxiety and accuracy reported for the low time-pressure
group is also inconclusive with respect to the possible
causal link between anxiety and analogies.
Tohill and Holyoak (2000), however, also found decline
in identification of the relational mappings under an induced
state anxiety in a well-controlled study (Exp2). Prior to the
analogy-making session, they manipulated the state anxiety
via a serial subtraction task with negative feedback. The
procedure turned out to differentiate successfully the anxiety
of the two groups, measured with the State-Trait Anxiety
Inventory (STAI) (Spielberger, Gorsuch, & Lushene, 1970).
Analogy performance was measured by a cross-mapping
visual task. Participants saw two pictures on the screen for
15 seconds, then one object in the first picture was pointed
at and they were instructed to indicate either which object
from the second picture “goes with” the pointed one (Exp1),
or to indicate the object from the second picture that
“relationally matches” the pointed one (Exp2). The task is
difficult because the target object has always two plausible
matches – one at the level of object similarity (i.e., the same

627

Anxiety could have an influence on all these processes,
including the perception of relations. However, it was
shown that threatening stimuli prompt participants to search
faster for both threatening and non-threatening stimuli
(Becker, 2009). Likewise, Phelps, Ling, and Carrasco
(2006) reported that contrast sensitivity increases after a
presentation of a fearful face. In addition, Pacheco-Unguetti,
Acosta, Callejas, and Lupianez (2010) reported
neuroimaging data suggesting that state and trait anxiety
modulate differentially the work of the three attentional
networks presumed by Posner and Petersen (1990) and
Posner, Rueda, and Kanske (2007). State anxiety was
associated with overfunctioning of the alerting and the
orienting attentional networks, while trait anxiety with
insufficiency of the executive control network. In other
words, state anxiety reinforces bottom-up processing (i.e.,
perception and selection of relevant information), and traitanxiety hampers the top-down control (i.e., voluntary action
control and conflict resolution). That is why Hristova and
Kokinov (2011) studied the influence of anxiety on the
perception of relations. They reported that people in
heightened state anxiety are superior in encoding of
relations between superficially dissimilar geometric figures:
they were both faster and significantly more accurate than
participants in the control group in recognizing identical
relations between two sets of figures. Therefore, it was
argued that the superior encoding of relations under
heightened state anxiety may improve, instead of impeding
analogical mapping. Indeed, some research supports this
hypothesis.
Richert, Whitehouse, and Stewart (2005) showed that
religious rituals, performed in high anxiety states, lead to a
higher percentage of generated reflections (including ones,
based on analogies) and that percentage increased
significantly over a one-month time period. They argued
that rarely performed religious rituals, accompanied by high
physiological arousal become the focus of conscious
rumination and in that way advantage the drawing of more
and deeper analogies between the current anxious situation
and the individual personal memory. This leads to a better
memory for a given ritual and binds the religious ideas to
personal experience. The reported results, however, were
inconclusive, since arousal was manipulated through the
ritual itself (high arousal and low arousal rituals) and
analogies were only part of the interpretations that were
measured.
Later, Feldman, Hristova, and Kokinov (2010)
demonstrated that participants in high state anxiety were
more prone to relational matches between superficially
dissimilar stimuli instead of superficial matches between
structurally dissimilar stimuli in a match-to-sample task.
Participants were shown a sample set that consists of three
geometric figures and were asked to indicate which of the
two target sets of figures is more similar to the sample one.
High state anxiety participants were significantly more
likely to indicate the relational target instead of the
superficially similar one, for a comparable amount of time

(i.e. the difference between RTs in the anxiety and the
control group was insignificant). Thus, surprisingly, it was
demonstrated that induced state anxiety can support
analogies in a situation quite similar to the one used in the
first experiment of Tohill and Holyoak (2000). Both
experiments require a choice between superficially similar
and relationally similar options. The authors (Feldman et al.,
2010) discussed the controversy between the data and
suggested that it can be potentially explained by the
difference in the experimental procedures that possibly
eliminated the benefits of the superior encoding (if any) for
the anxiety group in the Tohill and Holyoak’s case: maybe
the 15 sec stimulus presentation used in the Tohill and
Holyoak’s study (Tohill & Holyoak, 2000), but not in
theirs1, had restricted the effect of the superior encoding of
relations that was discussed above.
Alternatively, however, as Feldman et al. (2010)
discussed, the same empirical inconsistency may be due to
the difference in either the intensity of the induced state
anxiety or the difficulty of the analogical tasks used in either
or both studies. That particular explanation corresponds to
the well-known Yerkes–Dodson Law (Yerkes & Dodson,
1908) that postulates a nonlinear inverted U-shaped
relationship between stimulus strength and the rapidity of
habit formation for tasks varying in discrimination
difficulties. Taking into account the fact that later, it was
largely assumed that the same U-shaped relationship is also
valid when describing the relation between (emotional)
arousal and performance (Broadhurst, 1957), and that
arousal is largely recognized as the physiological
component of any emotional state, including anxiety, it is
reasonable to assume that the studies of Tohill and Holyoak
(2000) and Feldman et al. (2010) could have been run with
anxiety states that differ in intensity. Unfortunately, the two
studies differ in both the procedure used for anxiety
induction2 and the manipulation-check instrument3, so it
was not possible to reject that explanation at that point.
Moreover, those studies used different stimuli 4 and tasks5.
Hence, if one of the tasks was more difficult than the other,
1

Participants in the study of Feldman et al. (2010) were
prompted to give an answer immediately after the presentation of
the stimulus.
2
Tohill and Holyoak (2000) used a serial subtraction task, while
Feldman et al. (2010) – a “public speech” procedure.
3
STAI for Tohill and Holyoak (2000) and a self-assesment 5point scale for the Feldman et al. (2010).
4
The Feldman et al. (2010) study used geometric figures and the
relations between them, while the Tohil and Holyoak (2000) study,
used much more complex everyday situations, depicted in two
pictures, which usually involved more than 3 actors and a number
of diverse relations between them.
5
Match-to-sample task (Feldman et al. (2010)) - one sample and
two distinct targets (one superficially similar and one relationally
similar) vs. a cross-mapping task, where participants should choose
which option in the bottom picture “goes with” the object, pointed
from the experimenter. Both the target object and the options were
embedded in complex relational structures. The number of options
varied between 3 and 6 alternatives for answer, etc.

628

the respective optimal levels of arousal will also differ,
since the more difficult the task is, the lower the respective
level of optimal arousal is.
Thus the goal of the present study is to replicate
Experiment 2 of Tohill and Holyoak (2000), while explicitly
varying the complexity of the task. And we expect
interaction between the anxiety state (low and high anxiety)
and the complexity of the analogy task. The complexity here
is operationalized by the number of potential hypotheses
that could participate in the competition for the best match.
This is manipulated in the task by the number of alternatives
offered among which the answer is to be chosen.

quite different from their originals, but they consist of the
same relations and preserve the cross-mapping structure of
their originals. We add 5 new picture-pairs that also have a
cross-mapping structure. So, overall we used 14 black and
white picture-pairs in our study. For all of them, the key
object in the top picture (i.e. the circled one) corresponds to
two objects in the bottom picture in the same picture-pair: in
picture-pair 1 in Figure 1 the fisherman in the picture
corresponds to both the fisherman and the seagull in the
bottom picture. The former correspondence is based on
shared physical characteristics and that is why, it can be
considered as a result from an attribute mapping, while the
latter is based on shared relations (i.e. they both catch the
fish) and hence it can be considered to be based on a
relational mapping. Similarly, the circled girl in the top
picture of pair 2 (Figure 1), maps both the girl and the
teddy-bear in the bottom picture. The former mapping is an
attribution one (i.e. the two girls possess similar physical
characteristics), the latter is an relational one (i.e. they both
receive an injection).

Experiment: Many vs. Small Number of
Alternatives
This experiment varies within-subject the number of the
suggested alternatives for the answer. This seems an easiest
way to manipulate the complexity of the task without
changing the stimuli themselves: choosing between two
alternatives is easier than choosing between four.

Method
Design
We used a 2x2 mixed factorial design with two levels of
state anxiety (anxiety and control) and two options for
complexity of the task (choosing between 2 answers vs.
choosing between 4 answers). The level of state anxiety was
varied between-subject by serial subtraction task, described
thoroughly in the procedure section below. The complexity
of the task was operationalized as the number of possible
alternatives for the answer and it was varied within-subject.
Half of the trials for each participant required a choice of
answer between 2 alternatives, the other half between 4
alternatives. The dependent variables of this study were the
accuracy, defined as correct identification of the relational
match, and the response time.
Between-subject counterbalancing: Stimuli were betweensubject counterbalanced with the number of alternatives (i.e.
2 or 4 alternatives for answer). In addition, the letters of the
available alternatives for answer (i.e. A, B, C or D) were
also balanced across stimuli and participants.

Figure 1: Examples of picture-pairs that contain crossmapping. Picture-pair1 is a redrawing of one of the original
drawings used in the Tohill and Holyoak study (2000).
Picture-pair2 is an example of one of the new stimuli with
cross-mapping created purposely for the current study.
Picture-pair3 is the training picture-pair, used to explain the
meaning of relational correspondence.
Procedure
Participants were tested individually in a soundproof
cubicle. They were randomly assigned to the control or
anxiety condition. All of them were informed that they
would take part in a study on representation of numbers and
they might be asked either to count backward or forward
from a given number. They were told that the specific
direction for each of them will be chosen randomly.
However, since the counting procedure should be
accomplished twice they were notified that we would asked
them to take part in two short unrelated investigations inbetween: the first one, connected to relational reasoning and
the second one, connected to an on-going standardization of
a questionnaire for a Bulgarian population.
Participants in the anxiety condition were asked to count
aloud backward beginning at 1000, 970 or 950 in increment
of 13. The starting point for each participant was randomly

Stimuli
The stimuli were 14 analogical picture-pairs with crossmapping (i.e., they allow both an attribute mapping of a key
object and a relational one). Nine of those pairs were
redrawn from the original stimuli used in the study of Tohill
and Holyoak (2000)6. Taken as a whole, the pictures look
6

Seven of them were devised by Markman and Gentner (1993)
for a study of structural alignment; two were created later and used
in the experiments on how anxiety influences analogical mapping
by Tohill and Holyoak (2000). Both research groups kindly
provided their stimuli for our study. All original stimuli were
drawn again, carefully preserving the key relations between the
objects.

629

they didn’t know what kind of differences were expected
between conditions.

assigned. Two experimenters took part in the experiment:
one of them corrected the mistakes, while the other one –
measured the time and urged participants to count faster and
faster, since the predetermined time of 45 seconds was
about to expire. When the counting task was finished, one of
the experimenters left the cubicle. Participants in the control
condition were asked to count forward aloud beginning at 1
for 45 sec. They were instructed to count at a pace that
relaxes them.
Both groups started the analogy-making task immediately
after the counting. The procedure for stimuli presentation
and the instruction given to the participants were analogous
to those used by Tohill and Holyoak in Experiment 2 of
their study (2000). Participants were told that they would be
shoun picture-pairs one by one on the screen. Some of the
objects in the top picture would be numbered and some of
the objects in the bottom picture would be lettered. The two
pictures will stay on the screen for 15 seconds before one of
the numbered objects in the top picture will be circled in
red. Their task is to indicate by pressing the respective
button on the BBOX, which of the lettered objects from the
bottom picture corresponds to the circled one from the top
picture. They were trained to focus on the relations between
objects with the robot example used by Tohill and Holyoak
(2000) (Figure 1). Frist, the participants were asked to think
and say, whether robot “A”, “B” or “C” from the bottom
picture is related analogously to the robot 1 from the top
picture. Independent of the answer all participants received
the same explanation: “Robot “1” corresponds to robot “A”
because they took part in similar relations, i.e. they both are
using weapons”.
Then participants were instructed that some trials would
require a choice between two alternatives, others between
four alternatives. Finally, they were asked to indicate their
answer as accurately and as fast as possible. If participants
confirmed that they have understood the task and they have
no questions concerning the experiment they move on to the
target trails.
After the analogy-making task the participants filled out
the Bulgarian adapted version of Spielberger’s STAI
(Щетински, Паспаланов, 1989). Then they count again
forward or backward, depending on the condition and were
not urged so frantically this time to count faster. In fact, the
last counting was exclusively made to restore participant’s
mood after anxiety manipulation. Anxious participants were
told that they have counted backward exceptionally well
during their second turn. In addition, although we did not
revealed the real hypothesis of the experiment, we told them
that the counting task sometimes leads people to feel a little
bit disturbed or tense, so if they feel in that way it may well
be because of the task.
The whole experiment lasts between 15 and 20 minutes.
The timing of events during the whole experiment is
presented in Figure 3.
The experiment was double-blind: the experimenters
knew that they should induce anxiety via the serial
subtraction task and that we are looking for some
differences in performance due to that anxiety. However

Figure 3: Stimulus displays and the timing of events.
Participants
90 (44 female and 46 male) volunteers took part in this
experiment. All of them were students at New Bulgarian
University from different university specialties. The mean
age was 23.5 years ranging from 19 to 39 years. The
control group consisted of 44 participants, the anxious
group – of 46. The groups were balanced on gender.

Results and Discussion
The anxiety manipulation was successful; the mean state
anxiety scores of STAI significantly differed between
groups: the mean state anxiety for the anxious group was
40.59 (SD=10.701) and for the control group was 36.05
(SD=9.977). That difference in state anxiety turned to be
significant tested with ANOVA: F (1, 89) = 4.327, p=0.040.
The mean trait anxiety scores, however, did not differed
significantly between groups: F (1, 89) = 0.293, p=0.590
(means of 41.57 (SD=10.100) for the control condition and
of 42.70 (SD=9.661) for the anxious condition). Hence, any
difference between the groups should be due to that change
in state anxiety, instead of some individual differences in
trait anxiety. The difference in the state anxiety scores,
however, is only 4.54, while the same difference in the
Tohill and Holyoak Experiment 2 was 9.27. Therefore, any
direct comparisons between the two experiments seem not
well-grounded.
The mean percentage of relational responses for all
conditions is presented in Table 1.
A Repeated Measures ANOVA with one within-subject
variable (complexity of the task: task with 2 options and
task with 4 options) and one between-subject variable (the
level of state anxiety: anxiety and control) was carried out
on the accuracy data. The main effect of state anxiety on
accuracy was not significant (F (1, 88) = 0.001, p=0.970, ηp
=0.000) but the main effect of complexity on accuracy was
significant (F (1, 88) = 8.996, p=0.004, ηp =0.093) such that

2

2

7

State anxiety in the control condition of our experiment is 2.65
higher than in the Tohill and Holyoak’s study, and 2.01 lower in
the anxiety condition.

630

accuracy was higher when two alternatives were considered
(86%), compared to four (78%).

would hamper analogical mapping even more than in the
control condition. That seems not to be the case in our data:
participants in the anxiety condition do not differ in terms of
accuracy when searching for a relational match among 2 or
4 alternatives.
However, the fact that state anxiety fosters encoding of
objects as well as relations (Hristova & Kokinov, 2011) may
suggest a plausible explanation of the obtained results.
When the relational match is chosen between 2 and 4
alternatives, it is not only that the mapping becomes harder
with the number of the available alternatives, the number of
required relations that should be considered also increases.
Hence, the state anxiety group would have an appreciable
encoding superiority over the control group in the case of
four alternatives: they will encode the necessary relations
faster and may use the time for resolving the harder
mapping. In other words, the superior encoding of the
anxiety group may compensate for the difficulties in the
subsequent mapping, associated with the more complex
task. Of course, it is possible, actually quite probable, that
the improvement of relational encoding and the suggested
impoverished inhibition due to the state anxiety, depend on
the level of anxiety. On one hand that may explain the
inconsistency between the reported results and Tohill and
Holyoak’s data (2000, Experiment 2): the difference
between the anxiety levels in the control and anxiety groups
in their experiment was almost twice the difference in the
current study. That might indicate quite different outcomes
with regard to the Yerkes–Dodson Law (1908).
The experiment described here, however, points to an
interesting interplay between the subprocesses of analogy
making under anxiety.

Table 1: Mean percentage of relational mapping per
condition.
Condition

%relational mappings

Control_2 alternatives
Control_4 alternatives
Anxiety_2 alternatives
Anxiety_4 alternatives

89%
75%
83%
81%

There was a significant interaction between complexity
and anxiety, F (1, 88) = 5.724, p=0.019, ηp =0.019. The
impact of complexity on accuracy was only significant for
the control condition (Figure 4).
Interestingly, the 2x2 Repeated Measures ANOVA on
response time revealed a main effect of complexity (F
(1,88)=6.606, p=0.012, ηp =0.070: response times were less
for 2 alternatives than for 4 alternatives condition, means of
4255.093msec and 4692.856msec, respectively) but not of
anxiety (F (1,88) = 0.027, p=0.871, ηp =0.000). Besides, the
interaction between complexity and anxiety was not
significant: F (1,88)=0.274, p=0.602, ηp =0.003. Thus, the
accuracy data are not explainable in terms of performance
time, they are rather due to real differences in processing.
2

2

2

2

Conclusion
The data from this experiment suggest that anxiety
influences differentially the encoding of relations and the
inhibition of alternative hypotheses, which are crucial for
the final analogical mapping. Complexity does change
relational mapping under low but not under high state
anxiety.
In a recent paper Vendetti, Knowlton, and Holyoak
(2012) varied the semantic distance between analogical
domains and showed that anxiety does not decrease the
number of correct relational responses, but increases the
number of false alarms in verbal A:B::C:D analogies. This
was interpreted as switching to a non-analogy strategy
which looks for the superficial overlap of the domains,
rather than their structure. That explanation, however, does
not seem applicable to our data, since the superficial overlap
between the two structures represented in the two pictures of
each stimulus pair are identical, but differ only in the
number of relations that should be considered in the case of
2 and 4 alternatives.
Finally, the current conflict between the data in the field
can be explained both via differences in the complexity of
the tasks and in the obtained level of state anxiety, which in
turn highlights the importance of experiments that

Figure 4: Mean number of relational mappings per
condition.
To sum up, the obtained difference in accuracy but not in
response time data only for the control group speaks in
favor of processing that compensate the complexity of the
task in high state anxiety. An increase in the number of
alternatives slows the answers down significantly for both
the control and anxiety groups. The accuracy, however,
differs. If 4 alternatives require a higher level of inhibition
to come up with a relational mapping as the results in the
control condition seem to suggest, then the logical result
would be that anxiety would diminish the accuracy for more
complex tasks. Moreover, as Holyoak (2012) has pointed
out, if anxiety reduces the available cognitive resources,
crucial for the inhibition of irrelevant information, then it

631

manipulate anxiety on at least three levels (in order to
capture a particular nonlinear relationship between anxiety
and performance on analogy tasks), while controlling for the
complexity of the given task.

Leon, M., & Revelle, W. (1985). Effects of anxiety on
analogical reasoning: A test of three theoretical models.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 49(5),
1302-1315.
Markman, A. B., & Gentner, D. (1993). Splitting the
differences: A structural alignment view of similarity.
Journal of Memory and Language, 32, 517-535.
Pacheco-Unguetti, A., Acosta, A., Callejas, A., & Lupianez,
J. (2010). Attention and anxiety: Different attentional
functioning under state and trait anxiety. Psychological
Science, 21(2): 298-304.
Phelps, E.A., Ling, S., & Carrasco, M. (2006). Emotion
facilitates perception and potentates the perceptual
benefits of attention. Psychological Science, 17, 292–299.
Posner, M.I., & Petersen, S.E. (1990). The attention system
of the human brain. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 13,
25–42.
Posner, M.I., Rueda, M.R., & Kanske, P. (2007). Probing
the mechanisms of attention. In J.T. Cacioppo, J.G.
Tassinary, & G.G. Berntson (Eds.), Handbook of
psychophysiology. Cambridge, England: Cambridge
University Press.
Richert, R., Whitehouse, H., & Stewart, E. (2005). Memory
and analogical thinking in high arousal rituals. In: H.
Whitehouse & R.H. McCauley (Eds.), Mind and religion:
psychological and cognitive foundations of religiosity.
Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira Press.
Spielberger, C.D., Gorsuch, R.L., & Lushene, R. (1970).
STAI manual for the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory. Palo
Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.
Sweis, B.M., Bharani, K.L. & Morrison, R.G. (2012). The
time course of inhibition in analogical reasoning: An
event-related potential approach. In N. Miyake, D.
Peebles, & R. P. Cooper (Eds.), Proceedings of the 34th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society, 1030-1035.
Tohill, J., & Holyoak, K. (2000). The impact of anxiety on
analogical reasoning, Thinking & Reasoning, 6:1, 27 – 40.
Vendetti, M., Knowlton, B., & Holyoak, K. (2012). The
impact of semantic distance and induced stress on
analogical reasoning: A neurocomputational account.
Cognitive, Affective & Behavioral Neuroscience, 12, 804812.
Viskontas, I. V., Morrison, R. G., Holyoak, K. J., Hummel.
J. E., & Knowlton, B. J. (2004). Relational integration,
inhibition, and analogical reasoning in older adults.
Psychology and Aging, 19(4), 581-591.
Yerkes, R. M., & Dodson, J. D. (1908) The relation of
strength of stimulus to rapidity of habit-formation.
Journal of Comparative Neurology and Psychology, 18,
459-482.
Щетински, Д., Паспаланов, И. (1989). Методическо
пособие за работа с българската форма на
въпросника за оценка на тревожността на
Ч.Спилбъргър. БАН – Институт по психология.
(Bulgarian standardized version of Spielberger’s STAI).

Acknowledgments
We express our gratitude to Art Markman and Keith
Holyoak, who gave us the opportunity to work with the
original stimuli used in the studies, respectively of
Markman and Gentner (1993) and Tohill and Holyoak
(2000). We also thank the artist Kristian Sarbinov who
redrew all the pictures and drew the new ones under our
guidance. This study, would be impossible without the work
of our experimenters Dilyana Nikolova and Pavlina
Petrakieva, who did their best to apply the anxiety induction
procedure without knowing its purport.
Finally, we would like to thank the anonymous reviewers
for their helpful comments and suggestions.
This work has been supported by the European Office for
Aerospace Research and Development under grant FA865510-1-3061.

References
Becker, M. (2009). Panic Search: Fear produces efficient
visual search for nonthreatening objects. Psychological
Science, 20(4), 435-437.
Broadhurst, P.L. (1957). Emotionality and the Yerkes–
Dodson law. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 54,
345–352.
Cho, S., Holyoak, K. J., & Cannon, T. D. (2007).
Analogical reasoning in working memory: Resources
shared among relational integration, interference
resolution, and maintenance. Memory and Cognition,
35(6), 1445-1455.
Eysenck, M., & Calvo M. (1992). Anxiety and performance:
The processing efficiency theory. Cognition and Emotion,
6, 409-434.
Eysenck, M. W., Deraksan, N., Santos, R., & Calvo, M. G.
(2007). Anxiety and cognitive performance: Attentional
control theory. Emotion, 7, 336-353.
Feldman, V., Hristova, P., & Kokinov, B. (2010). How does
anxiety influence analogical mapping? Proceedings of the
32nd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Holyoak, K. J. (2012). Analogy and relational reasoning. In
K. J. Holyoak & R. G. Morrison (Eds.), The Oxford
handbook of thinking and reasoning. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Hristova, P., & Kokinov, B. (2011). Anxiety fosters
relational encoding. In: B. Kokinov, A. Karmiloff-Smith,
& N. Nersessian (Eds.), European Perspectives on
Cognitive Science. Sofia: NBU Press.
Krawczyk, D. C., Morrison, R. G., Viskontas, I., Holyoak,
J., Chow, T. W., Mendez, M. F., Miller, B. L., &
Knowlton, B. J. (2008). Distraction during relational
reasoning: The role of prefrontal cortex in interference
control. Neuropsychologia, 46, 2020-2032.

632

