UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Application of the Category Adjustment Model in Temporal, Spatial, and Abstract Magnitude
at the Billions Scale

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9165449w

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Resnick, Ilyse
Shipley, Thomas F.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Application of the Category Adjustment Model in Temporal, Spatial, and Abstract
Magnitude at the Billions Scale
Ilyse Resnick (ilyse.resnick@temple.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1701 N. 13th Street
Philadelphia, PA 19122 USA

Thomas F. Shipley (tshipley@temple.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1701 N. 13th Street
Philadelphia, PA 19122 USA

Abstract
The current study examines the generalization of the Category
Adjustment Model (CAM) across scales along two
dimensions: time and distance. Participants were presented
with geologic time and astronomical distance information
either conventionally or using the hierarchical alignment
model. Participants provided with hierarchically structured
magnitude information for time and distances were more
accurate on similar estimations at large scales than
participants given the same content in a conventional manner.
Patterns in event and distance estimation, along with overall
group differences, are consistent with the CAM; suggesting
people use hierarchically organized categorical information
when estimating across scales and dimensions, and providing
salient category boundary information improves estimation.
Findings suggest a common representation of scale
information for temporal, spatial, and abstract (numeric)
magnitudes. Patterns of abstract magnitude estimations are
consistent with segmented linear models of scale
representation. Implications of the CAM in scale
representation and the hierarchical alignment model in
education are discussed.
Keywords: Category Adjustment
Alignment; Scale Representation

Model;

Hierarchical

Introduction
The Category Adjustment Model (CAM) is an adaptive
Bayesian account for the pattern of systematic biases
observed in recall of metric quantities due to category
membership (Huttenlocher, Hedges, & Prohaska, 1988;
Huttenlocher, Hedges, Vevea, 2000). The CAM posits 1D,
2D, and 3D magnitudes are stored in a hierarchical
combination of metric and categorical information. In the
absence of lower-level information (e.g., precise metric
information), people use higher-level categories to aide in
estimation. Variation in estimation, therefore, occurs due to
imprecision of category boundaries. Recall is biased
towards the ‘prototype’ of the respective category. For
example, when recalling the position of an object in a
circular display, participants naturally divide the circle into
mental quadrants and the recalled location is biased towards
the center (or prototype) of the relevant quadrant
(Huttenlocher, Hedges, & Duncan, 1991).
The CAM predicts recall patterns on a range of
dimensions (e.g., fatness of fish, grayness of squares, and
lengths of lines (Huttenlocher, et al., 2000), events

(Huttenlocher, et al., 1988), and even social dimensions
such as perception of facial expressions (Roberson,
Damjanovic, & Pilling, 2007) and judgments of gender and
ethnicity (Huart, Corneille, & Becquart, 2005)). However,
there is limited research examining the CAM’s predictive
capability for a given dimension (such as temporal and
spatial scales) across different scales (such as from human
scales through to scales outside of human perception).
Science education research has identified conceptual
categories for spatial and temporal scales outside of human
perception (e.g., Trend, 2001; Tretter, Jones, Andre,
Negishi, & Minogue, 2006), suggesting people may
conceptualize magnitude information at relatively small and
large temporal and spatial scales using a combination of
metric and categorical information. Resnick, et al. (2012)
experimentally assessed the role of categories in estimations
of large temporal magnitudes. Participants who were
provided with salient hierarchically organized event
boundaries fostered a linear representation of events on the
Geologic Time Scale compared to those who received the
same information about the events without the salient
hierarchical structure. Aligned with the CAM, this finding
suggests the use of hierarchically organized category
boundaries in the representation of events at larger temporal
scales.
The current study aims to add to this relatively sparse
literature by examining the generalization of the CAM
across scales and dimensions. Two main objectives are to
replicate research on memory for large temporal magnitudes
(geologic time), and extend research to another dimension:
space. Astronomical distance (a spatial magnitude at a large
scale) was chosen for two reasons. There is already
extensive research on CAM and spatial distance;
demonstrating spatial distances at familiar scales are stored
in a combination of metric and categorical information (e.g.,
Huttenlocher, et al., 1991; Huttenlocher, et al., 2000).
Additionally, while the precise nature of the relationship is
unclear, there is a systematic relationship between time and
distance (e.g., Clark, 1973; Gentner, 2001), suggesting that
time and distance at human scales are represented and
estimated in the same way. Thus, if temporal and spatial
dimensions across familiar and relatively larger scales are
represented in a similar way, an analogous pattern of
memory performance would be expected.

3275

Relevant to the current study, the CAM makes two
predictions. First, estimations of temporal and spatial
magnitude should be biased towards the prototype of each
event or object’s category. There is evidence that suggests
people with a moderate amount of knowledge regarding
geologic time (e.g., in-service science teachers), divide the
Geologic Time Scale (4.6 billion years) into three
categories: ‘extremely ancient’, ‘less ancient’, and
‘geologically recent’ (Trend, 2001). It is beyond the scope
of this paper to identify and characterize the types of
categories used by novices to represent large temporal and
spatial magnitudes. Rather, the current study will assess if
providing salient internal structure of magnitude relations,
through the use of the hierarchical alignment activity
(Resnick, et al., 2012), improves estimation of large
temporal and spatial magnitudes. In this way, the current
study examines a second prediction of the CAM: people
with salient internal structure of magnitude relations within
hierarchically organized category boundaries should have
more linear representations of magnitude compared to those
who do not.
The current study also examines patterns of abstract
(numeric) magnitude estimation (i.e., not content-specific)
at the same scale as geologic time and astronomical
distance. One common property of time and distance is they
are both one-dimensional vectors (e.g., Clark, 1973;
Gentner, 2001), as is abstract magnitude. Similar patterns in
overestimation of small magnitudes and underestimation of
large magnitudes are found with estimations of geologic
events (Libarkin, Kurdziel, & Anderson, 2007),
astronomical distance (Miller & Brewer, 2010), and abstract
magnitude (Siegler & Opfer, 2003). Studies of abstract
magnitude suggest this pattern of errors may be due to
compressive effects of unfamiliar magnitudes on a mental
number line (see Barth & Paladino, 2011 and Opfer, Siegler
& Young, 2011 for discussion of competing models).
Consistent with the scale of geologic time and astronomical
distances, the current study will examine abstract magnitude
at two scales: million and billion. Number word frequency
studies suggest that there may be differences in the
representation of the million and billion scales, because the
frequency of occurrence influences the structure of
representation and the number ‘million’ appears more
frequently than ‘billion’ (e.g., Dehaene & Mehler, 1992).
Thus, sampling from across the million and billion scales
may reveal potential representational differences between
the two scales.
While research has not explicitly examined the CAM in
abstract (numeric) magnitude representation, there are a
number of studies that look at the role of the subjective
categorization of numbers in estimation (e.g., Laski &
Siegler, 2007; Mix, Huttenlocher, & Levine, 2002; Siegler
& Robinson, 1982). Findings suggest that individual
numbers can serve both as their own distinct category (a
specific quantity of something) as well as part of a set of
numbers (e.g., ‘small’ versus ‘big’ numbers) (Mix, et al.,
2002). Further, children who spread numbers evenly across

group dimensions were more accurate on an abstract
magnitude task than those who grouped more numbers into
one ‘big’ category (Siegler & Robinson, 1982). The current
study will examine if the presentation of salient category
boundaries in specific dimensions transfers to abstract
magnitude representation. Because participants will be
working with magnitudes with temporal and spatial content,
transfer to abstract magnitude should occur. If the CAM
accounts for abstract magnitude at large scales, similar
patterns of estimation are expected for geologic time,
astronomical distance, and abstract magnitude.

Methods
Participants
Forty participants were recruited from an undergraduate
psychology experiment pool (20 in the hierarchical
(experimental) group and 20 in the conventional (control)
group). The demographics of the participants were
consistent with a large urban American university.
Hierarchical Design In the hierarchical alignment
condition, participants completed the same hierarchical
alignment activity developed by Resnick and colleagues
(2012), which is based on the progressive alignment model
(Kotovsky and Gentner, 1996; Thompson & Opfer, 2010).
Participants made ten separate time lines, aligning time to a
horizontal one meter space. They began with a familiar
personal time scale, working through different historic and
geologic time lines, up to the full Geologic Time Scale. For
each time line, participants were given a partially completed
time line, and were required to label the time line’s length
(in years) and locate where all previous time lines would
begin on the current time line (see Figure 1).
Hierarchical organization highlights how each temporal
scale is related to the other scales. Practice mapping
magnitude relations across scales provides internal structure
of magnitude relations within each scale. Thus, the
hierarchical organization helps to populate each scale with
additional categorical boundary information.
The current study developed a new analog version of the
temporal hierarchical alignment activity for spatial distances
(see Table 1 and Figure 1). For the hierarchical alignment of
spatial distances, participants align ten increasingly larger
scales of distance to a one meter space, beginning with a
familiar distance. The hierarchical alignment condition takes
approximately 45 minutes to complete.
Conventional Design The study sought to contrast the
intervention with a realistic training program similar to one
that might be used to instruct students in a classroom on
these scales. Common pedagogical approaches to teaching
geologic time (Libarkin, et al., 2007) and astronomical
distances (Miller & Brewer, 2010) are to create spatial
analogies, such as placing events or objects in the correct
sequence. Participants completed ten separate puzzles,
placing the events/objects into the correct sequence. The

3276

puzzles were made up of pieces of paper, half containing
magnitude information and half with the respective category
information. Participants were required to match the
magnitude information with the corresponding category
information for each scale, and place the scales in the
correct sequence. The first puzzle represented the first
temporal/spatial scale (see Table 1), with each puzzle
representing an increased amount of magnitude. The tenth
and final puzzle represented all of geologic time/distance to
Makemake. The conventional condition took approximately
45 minutes to complete.
The conventional and hierarchical conditions were
aligned on the following properties: number of scales,
number of times participant identifies each scale (i.e., the
first scale is identified ten times; the last scale is identified
once), progressive increase of magnitude, information
provided about each event/object, and total length of time
on task. Thus, the only difference between conditions was
the hierarchical alignment of scale information.
One potential difference between the temporal and spatial
information was identified. Participants are likely to be
familiar with thinking about temporal scales extending back
hundreds of years ago; learning about recent human history
is common. However, participants may not have the same
level of familiarity with conceptualizing the vertical nature
of the spatial scales. Because it is likely people have more
experience traveling parallel to Earth’s surface, or
‘horizontally’, as opposed to traveling vertically away from
Earth’s surface, we used this horizontal experience as an
initial introduction of the vertical scale. As a way to
familiarize participants with the vertical scale, a horizontal
map was presented for each of the first three scales in both
the hierarchical and conventional conditions. The maps
showed an eleven, fifty-two, and four-hundred mile radius
extending out from the university where the study took
place. To engage the participants in grounding this scale to
their personal experience, participants were asked if they
had been anywhere on that radius or if they were familiar
with the area. Because participants likely do not have
experience thinking about larger temporal scales, no map
was provided for the remainder of the spatial scales.
Table 1. List of Temporal and Spatial Scales, including
category names and magnitude information

Figure 1. Example of a temporal and spatial number line at
the thousands scale in the hierarchical condition. Note: the
three previous temporal and spatial number lines are located
relative to the current scale.
Procedure In a two-hour session, participants were
presented with information about time and distance, with
both presented as either hierarchically or conventionally
(~90 minutes). Participants across conditions then
completed the same assessment measures (~30 minutes).
Measures A series of line estimation tasks were developed
to assess participants’ representations of geologic time,
astronomical distances, and abstract (numeric) magnitude.
Line estimation tasks are commonly used to assess mental
scaling of abstract magnitude (e.g., Ebersbach, et al., 2008;
Siegler & Booth, 2004).
To measure representation of events on the Geologic
Time Scale, an item from the Geoscience Concept Inventory
(GCI), a reliable and valid instrument measuring a range of
geoscience knowledge (Libarkin, et al., 2005), was adapted
as a number line task. The GCI item presents participants
with five time lines, with the following four geologic events
placed in different locations: life appears, dinosaurs appear,
dinosaurs disappear, and humans appear. Participants are
required to choose the correct linear representation, with the
other four time lines representing common misconceptions.
In order to capture more variance in participants’
representations, the GCI item was adapted so that
participants were given a blank time line (anchored by
‘present day’ and ‘Earth forms’), and asked to locate the
same four events as used in the GCI item.
To measure representation of objects on an astronomical
scale, an item was developed as an analog to the geologic
event time line described above. Here, participants were
presented with a blank number line (anchored by ‘Earth’s
surface’ and ‘Makemake’), and asked to locate four objects
on the same scale as on the event time line: Pluto, Mars,
Mercury, and Cruithne.
To measure representation of abstract (numeric)
magnitude (not content specific) a series of line estimation

3277

tasks were given. Participants were given a sentence stating
when/where an event/object was, and then asked to locate
that magnitude on the number line (e.g., “Venus is 26
million miles away from Earth. Please draw on the line
provided where Venus is located.”). These items were
framed in terms of objects and events to match the form of
the other experimental measures. These estimations are
considered estimations of abstract magnitude because the
participants are explicitly given a magnitude to place on the
number line; no recall is required. The questions provide the
numerical values and ask for an estimation of the
appropriate location on a spatial scale. To assess
representations of the millions and billions scale,
participants were asked to estimate two ‘events’ and two
‘objects’ on a 4.6 billion scale, and two ‘events’ and two
‘objects’ on a 542 million scale.

compared with estimations on the billions scale (μ error =
26mm) (t(39)=3.45, p<.001).

Results

Figure 2. Average error (mm) for hierarchical and
conventional conditions on the event and object line
estimation tasks. For the event/object line estimation tasks,
1st = Life/Pluto, 2nd = Dinosaurs appear/Mars, 3rd =
Dinosaurs disappear/Mercury, and 4th = Humans
appear/Cruithne, respectively.

120
Hierarchical
- Event task

Error (mm)

100
80

Conventional
- Event task

60

Hierarchical
- Object task

40
20

Conventional
- Object task

0
1st

Participants in the hierarchical condition were more accurate
overall on the event time line estimation task (t(38)=2.67,
p=.01) and the object distance task (t(38)=3.02, p=.01)
compared with participants from the conventional condition.
On both tasks, this effect is driven primarily by the
estimation of the 2nd and 3rd events/objects. Participants
across conditions performed similarly when placing the 1 st
(life appears/Pluto) and 4th (humans appear/Cruithne)
events/objects on the number line (p>.05). However,
participants in the hierarchical condition were significantly
more accurate when placing the 2nd (dinosaurs appear)
(t(38)=2.79, p=.01) and 3rd (dinosaurs disappear)
(t(38)=2.53, p=.02) events on the time line, and the 2nd
(Mars) (t(38)=3.38, p<.01) and 3rd (Mercury) (t(38)=2.79,
p=.01) objects on the number line compared to the
conventional condition (see Figure 2).
Performance across groups on the object distance
estimation task was significantly more accurate than on the
event time line estimation task (t(39)=2.85, p=.01).
The eight abstract (numeric) magnitude line estimation
tasks were highly correlated (rs > .529, p<.01) and had
strong internal consistency (Cronbach’s alpha=.94). There
was no difference in performance when estimating abstract
magnitude when estimations were temporally framed
compared with spatially framed (p>.05). Given the high
correlations, strong internal consistency, and no
performance differences between items that were temporally
and spatially framed; a single abstract magnitude scale was
created. Participants from the hierarchical condition were
significantly more accurate on the abstract magnitude scale
(μ error = 11.50mm) than the conventional condition (μ
error = 30.14mm) (t(25.38)=2.58, p=.02). That the
participants from the hierarchical condition are more
accurate on the abstract magnitude scale than participants
from the conventional condition is consistent for estimations
on both the million and billion scales. Across conditions,
participants were significantly more accurate when making
estimations on the millions scale (μ error = 14.73mm)

2nd

3rd

4th

Discussion
The current study successfully replicated the Resnick, et al.
(2012) findings; participants provided with hierarchically
structured event information were more accurate on event
time line estimations than participants given the same
content in a conventional manner. Here we found a similar
result for astronomical distances and abstract (numeric)
magnitude. These findings are aligned with the CAM,
suggesting people use hierarchically organized categorical
information when making estimations across scales and
across dimensions; and that providing people with more
salient category boundary information improves estimation.
In both the event time line and object distance tasks,
participants across conditions were relatively accurate in
identifying the location of the 1st (Life appears/Pluto) and 4th
(Humans appear/Cruithne) events/objects (respectively).
This may be because the 1st and 4th events/objects are
anchored by the relatively close flanks of the number line
itself (‘top’ and ‘bottom’), whereas the 2nd (Dinosaurs
appear/Mars) and 3rd (Dinosaurs disappear/Mercury)
events/objects (respectively) may not be naturally perceived
in these same salient categories; they are located
‘somewhere in between’. Consistent with this interpretation,
participants from the conventional condition demonstrate
more bias in estimation towards the center of the number
line than the participants from the hierarchical condition (as
seen in the overestimation of the 2nd and 3rd events/objects).
This finding is aligned with the three-category
representation of geologic time advocated by Trend (2001),
as well as predictions of biases towards the middle of these
categories by the CAM. However, more research is needed
to further identify and characterize categories used in the
representation of geologic time and astronomical distances.

3278

Participants across conditions were significantly more
accurate on the object distance task (μ error = 33.76mm)
than the event time line task (μ error = 45.45mm)
(t(39)=2.85, p=.01). Participants across conditions also were
more accurate on the abstract (numeric) magnitude task (μ
error = 22.7) compared to the event time line task
(t(39)=5.55, p<.001) and the object distance task
(t(39)=2.96, p=.01). One explanation for this pattern of
differences in performance is that temporal, spatial, and
abstract magnitudes are represented differently (see Agrillo,
Ranpura, & Butterworth, 2010 and Walsh, 2003 for a
discussion on a general magnitude system). Alternatively, it
may be the case that temporal, spatial, and abstract
magnitudes are all represented in a similar way, but
preexisting knowledge (and misconceptions) bias the
subjective categories people use to make estimations. For
example, consistent with participants being better at the
object distance task compared to the event time line task,
that geologic time is often neglected in the classroom
(Dodick, 2007; Trend, 2001) and learning about the solar
system is commonplace, it seems likely participants did
have more knowledge of the solar system than geologic
time. Related, the first three base analogies (tens, hundreds,
thousands) may be differentially familiar to participants for
temporal and spatial magnitudes. While temporal and spatial
scales of magnitude were aligned, participants may be more
familiar with traveling tens, hundred, and even thousands of
miles; whereas participants could have only personally
experienced years at the tens scale (no participants were
over one hundred years old). Alternatively, mapping the
vertical distances onto a horizontal map, and not having an
analogous temporal activity, may have contributed to the
observed domain differences. Future research should
examine unfamiliar scales, both in content and magnitude.
One may use an unfamiliar solar system, which would have
a different time-course and different celestial objects.
Findings from the abstract magnitude task are consistent
with the segmented number line model of scale
representation (Ebersbach, et al., 2008; Landy, Silbert, &
Goldin, 2012). The segmented linear model posits separate
linear functions for familiar versus unfamiliar magnitudes
when estimated magnitude is plotted against actual
magnitude. Ebersbach and colleagues (2008) found young
children had a fairly accurate linear slope for smaller,
familiar numbers, and a separate shallower linear slope for
larger, unfamiliar numbers. While there were not enough
estimations in the current study to carefully characterize the
slope function, participants across conditions had a more
accurate linear slope for estimations made on the million
scale, and, while still linear, were significantly less accurate
on estimation on the billion scale (overestimation). More
research is needed examining estimations at large scales for
detailed modeling of these slope functions.
That the hierarchical condition transferred to estimations
about abstract magnitudes, suggests that people use
categorical information when making these types of
estimations. While there are some studies that look at the

subjective categorization of numbers (Laski & Siegler,
2007; Mix, Huttenlocher, & Levine, 2002; Siegler &
Robinson, 1982), there has not been previous work mapping
the CAM onto number line estimations and scale
representation. While more direct and explicit research is
needed, we speculate that the CAM could serve as a
unifying model for currently competing theories (e.g.,
logarithmic-to-linear, power function with anchor points,
segmented linear). Category boundaries may serve as
distinct anchor points, with adults possessing more precise
categories (at the individual numbers level) compared with
children. Whereas young children may have many numbers
in one “big” or “unfamiliar” category, adults may possess
counting strategies for numbers within “unfamiliar” scales.
Thus, the CAM offers an account for the overestimation of
unfamiliar magnitudes that maintain linearity within the
scale. More extensive research is needed to identify types of
categories used in scale representation to see if a CAM can
predict the changing pattern of bias in number line
estimations that occurs with development.
An implication of the current findings is the hierarchical
alignment model is an effective way to teach about scales
outside of human perception. Understanding scale
information is important, as fundamental concepts in many
disciplines require understanding of scales outside of
human experience. “Size and scale” have been identified by
the new National Research Council Framework for K-12
Science Education (2011) and the Benchmarks for Science
Literacy (AAAS, 1993) as a fundamental and unifying
theme of science education. Having a linear representation
of scale is predictive of performance on a range of
standardized tests in mathematics (Siegler & Booth, 2004).
Unfortunately, understanding large scales is difficult (e.g.,
Libarkin, et al., 2005; Tretter, et al., 2006). Undergraduate
students, even those in science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics majors, have difficulty mastering concepts
of size and scale (Drane et al., 2008). While people are
fairly accurate on identifying correct sequences, they fail to
understand the magnitude between the events (Tretter, et
al., 2006) and objects (Jones, et al., 2008). By providing a
salient internal structure of magnitude boundaries, the
hierarchical alignment activity may be an effective
classroom tool to help foster a linear representation of
scales like geologic time and astronomical distance.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded in part from National Science
Foundation Grant SBE-0541957 and National Science
Foundation Grant SBE-1041707 that both support the
Spatial Intelligence and Learning Center (SILC).

References
Agrillo, C., Ranpura, A., and Butterworth, B. (2010). Time
and numerosity estimation are independent: behavioural
evidence for two different systems using a conflict
paradigm. Cognitive Neuroscience, 1

3279

American Association for the Advancement of Science
(AAAS). (1993). Benchmarks for science literacy.
NewYork: Oxford University Press.
Barth, H. C., & Paladino, A. M. (2011). The development of
numerical estimation: evidence against a representational
shift. Developmental Science, 14.
Clark, H.H. (1973). Space, time, semantics, and the child. In
T.E. Moore (Ed.), Cognitive development and the
acquisition of language. New York: Academic Press.
Dehaene, S. & Mehler, J. (1992). Cross-linguistic
regularities in the frequency of number words. Cognition:
International Journal of Cognitive Science, 43(1)
Dodick, J. (2007). Understanding evolutionary change
within the framework of geological time. McGill Journal
of Education, 42(2).
Drane, D., Swarat, S., Hersam, M., Light, G., & Mason, T.
(2008). An evaluation of the efficacy and transferability
of a nanoscience module. Journal of Nano Education.
Ebersbach, M., Luwel, K., Frick, A., Onghena, P., &
Verschaffel, L. (2008). The relationship between the
shape of the mental number line and familiarity with
numbers in 5- to 9-year-old children: Evidence for a
segmented linear model. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 99.
Huart, J., Corneille, O., & Becquart, E. (2005). Face-based
categorization,
context-based
categorization,
and
distortions in the recollections of gender ambiguous faces.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 41.
Huttenlocher, J., Hedges, L. V., & Duncan, S. (1991).
Categories and particulars: Prototype effects in estimating
spatial location. Psychological Review, 98.
Huttenlocher, J., Hedges, L. V., & Prohaska, V. (1988).
Hierarchical organization in ordered domains: Estimating
the dates of events. Psychological Review, 95.
Huttenlocher, J., Hedges, L. V., & Vevea, J. L. (2000). Why
do categories affect stimulus judgment? Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 129.
Gentner, D. (2001). Spatial metaphors in temporal
reasoning. In M. Gattis (Ed.), Spatial schemas and
abstract thought. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Jones, M. G., Tretter, T., Taylor, A., & Oppewal, T. (2008).
Experienced and novice teachers’ concepts of spatial
scale. International Journal of Science Education, 30(3).
Kotovsky, L., & Gentner, D. (1996). Comparison and
categorization in the development of relational similarity.
Child Development, 67.
Landy, D., Silbert, N., Goldin, A. (2012). Getting off at the
end of the line: the estimation of large numbers. 2012
Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society
Conference Proceedings.
Laski, E. V., & Siegler, R. S. (2007). Is 27 a big number?
Correlational and causal connections among numerical
categorization, number line estimation, and numerical
magnitude comparison. Child Development, 76.
Libarkin, J.C., Anderson, S.W., Dahl, J., Beilfuss, M., &
Boone, W. (2005). Qualitative Analysis of College

Students’ Ideas about the Earth: Interviews and OpenEnded Questionnaires. J. of Geoscience Edu., 53(1).
Libarkin, J.C., Kurdziel, J.P. & Anderson, S.W. (2007).
College student conceptions of geological time and the
disconnect between ordering and scale. Journal of
Geoscience Education, 55: 413-422.
Miller & Brewer. (2010). Misconceptions of Astronomical
Distances. International Journal of Science Education,
32(12).
Mix, K. S., Huttenlocher, J., & Levine, S. C. (2002).
Quantitative development in infancy and early childhood.
New York: Oxford Press.
National Research Council. (2011). A Framework for K-12
Science Education. Committee on a Conceptual
Framework for New K-12 Science Education Standards.
Board on Science Education, DBASSE. Washington,DC:
The National Academies Press.
Opfer, J. E., Siegler, R. S., & Young, C. J. (2011). The
powers of noise-fitting: Reply to Barth and Paladino.
Developmental Science, 14.
Resnick, I., Shipley, T., Newcombe, N., Massey, C., Wills,
T. (2012). Examining the Representation and
Understanding of Large Magnitudes Using the
Hierarchical Alignment model of Analogical Reasoning,
2012 Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society
Conference Proceedings.
Roberson, D., Damjanovic, L. & Pilling, M. (2007).
Categorical Perception of Facial Expressions: Evidence
for a 'Category Adjustment' model. Memory & Cognition,
35
Siegler, R. S., & Booth, J. L. (2004). Development of
numerical estimation in young children. Child
Development, 75.
Siegler, R. S., & Opfer, J. E. (2003). The development of
numerical
estimation:
Evidence
for
multiple
representations of numerical quantity. Psychological
Science, 14.
Siegler, R. S., & Robinson, M. (1982). The development of
numerical understandings. In H. W. Reese & L. P. Lipsitt
(Eds.), Advances in child development and behavior: Vol.
16. New York: Academic Press.
Thompson, C., & Opfer, J. (2010). How 15 hundred is like
15 cherries: Effect of progressive alignment on
representational changes in numerical cognition. Child
Development, 81(6)
Trend, R.D. 2001, Deep Time Framework: a preliminary
study of UK primary teachers' conceptions of geological
time and perceptions of geoscience. Journal of Research
in Science Teaching, 38(2)
Tretter, T. R., Jones, M. G., Andre, T., Negishi, A., &
Minogue, J. (2006). Conceptual boundaries and distances:
Students’ and experts’ concepts of the scale of scientific
phenomena. Journal of Research in Science Teaching,
43(3).
Walsh, V. (2003). A theory of magnitude: common cortical
metrics of time, space and quantity. TRENDS in Cognitive
Sciences, 7(11)

3280

