UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Auditory Overshadowing in Preschoolers: A Preference for the Input, the System, or Both?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6t26h46m

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
O'Leary, Allison
Sloutsky, Vladimir

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Auditory Overshadowing in Preschoolers:
A Preference for the Input, the System, or Both?
Allison O’Leary (oleary.83@osu.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1835 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Vladimir M. Sloutsky (sloutsky.1@osu.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1835 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Abstract
Auditory overshadowing occurs when the presence of an
auditory stimulus interferes with visual processing. The
current study tested whether this occurs due to a privileged
attentional status of auditory input or due to the dynamic
characteristics of auditory input. To address these questions,
preschoolers completed one of four discrimination tasks. In
the sound, motion, and item baseline conditions, children
discriminated these single information types by judging
whether paired stimuli were the same or different. In the
combined condition, children discriminated changing sounds,
motions, or items in the face of competing input in the other
two dimensions. Although children’s discrimination of all
information types attenuated in the combined condition
relative to baseline, motion and item discrimination
attenuated more than auditory discrimination. This provides
evidence that early in development auditory information
receives privileged processing in the face of competing input.
Keywords: Attention; Cross-modal processing; Cognitive
development; Preschoolers

Introduction
To successfully navigate and form an understanding of our
environment, we must develop the ability to efficiently
integrate information from multiple sensory modalities.
There is evidence that some multisensory integration occurs
even in neonates, as demonstrated by the structural
convergence of input from different sensory modalities
(Stein & Meredith, 1993). However, it is clear that the
ability to integrate multimodal information is not fully
mature at birth and, in fact, exhibits a protracted
developmental trajectory. For example, in contrast to
normally functioning adults, infants and young children
exhibit a phenomenon known as auditory overshadowing
(Robinson & Sloutsky, 2004b). This occurs when the
presence of an auditory stimulus interferes with one’s
processing of a visual stimulus. That is, infants and young
children more easily discriminate visual stimuli when
presented in isolation than when paired with labels or
sounds. In some cases, children completely fail to
discriminate changes in a visual stimulus when presented
simultaneously with a sound (Napolitano & Sloutsky,
2004). Importantly, although visual discrimination is
impaired in the presence of auditory information, auditory
discrimination does not suffer in the presence of visual

information (Sloutsky & Napolitano, 2003; Robinson &
Sloutsky, 2010b).
The importance of audio-visual integration is especially
apparent for processes like word learning, where individuals
must map verbal labels to objects in visual space. If visual
processing is inhibited when an auditory stimulus is present,
auditory overshadowing could be a major contributor to the
difficulty children face mapping words to objects. Indeed,
10-month-olds encoded only auditory information when
presented with visual information and a verbally presented
label. However, 16-month-olds demonstrated able
processing of both the visual information and the label (as
indicated by looking time preferences; Robinson &
Sloutsky, 2004a).
Although the ability to process auditory and visual
information progresses through infanthood, even preschoolaged children show difficulties discriminating static visual
stimuli in the presence of sounds and labels. Napolitano and
Sloutsky (2004) demonstrated that 4-year-olds were
susceptible to auditory overshadowing when asked to
discriminate changes in the visual and auditory aspects of a
target stimulus. Specifically, this effect was most profound
when the visual and auditory stimuli were unfamiliar.
Further, the authors demonstrated that this overshadowing
was resistant to explicit instruction, in that it still occurred
when children were asked to attend exclusively to visual
information.
More recent research has aimed to detail the conditions in
which auditory overshadowing occurs and to elucidate the
basic cognitive mechanisms underlying these effects. Input
from the visual and auditory modalities seem to “compete”
for processing resources early in development, whereas
adults are able to process multimodal information
(Robinson & Sloutsky, 2004a). Robinson and Sloutsky
(2007a) also argued that overshadowing may occur during
initial processing/encoding as well as during response
selection. In addition, unfamiliar auditory stimuli slow
visual processing, whereas familiar auditory stimuli do not
(Robinson & Sloutsky, 2007b). Despite our understanding
of the subtleties of the effect, major questions remain
regarding the privileged status of auditory input and a
number of hypotheses explaining auditory overshadowing
effects have been proposed.

1091

One possibility is that auditory and visual information are
processed serially, and that auditory stimuli are processed
more thoroughly because they are faster to engage attention.
Visual processing may be inhibited until attention is
disengaged (Robinson & Sloutsky, 2010a). However, there
are at least two possible explanations as to why auditory
input would more easily engage attention. First, adults
process auditory information more quickly than visual
information, which may reflect privileged processing of
auditory input per se (Green & von Gierke, 1984). Because
the auditory system begins maturing before the visual
system, it is possible the auditory system processes
information more efficiently even during childhood.
Alternatively, it is possible that the nature of the input plays
a role. For example, auditory stimuli are typically dynamic
(i.e., exhibit change over time) and have more abrupt onset
than visual stimuli. Perhaps it is this dynamicity that quickly
engages attention.
However, previous research could not distinguish
between these possibilities because all previous studies of
auditory overshadowing have utilized static visual stimuli.
The current study aimed to test these explanations by
increasing the dynamicity of visual stimuli. This was done
by adding motion to the visual stimulus, which is a powerful
bottom-up attentional cue (Egeth & Yantis, 1997). If the
dynamic nature of auditory input is responsible for auditory
overshadowing, one would expect the increased dynamicity
of the visual stimulus to attenuate auditory overshadowing,
resulting in more thorough visual processing. In this
situation, visual information may even overshadow auditory
information. On the other hand, if the auditory system itself
is privileged, one would not expect such attenuation, even if
the visual cue is dynamic. Distinguishing between these
possibilities would result in better understanding of the
mechanisms underlying auditory overshadowing.
In previous studies where young children were presented
with auditory and visual information, visual discrimination
attenuated significantly whereas auditory discrimination
showed no significant attenuation. The current study aimed
to investigate the effect when presented stimuli had an
auditory, visual, and motion component. In this “combined”
condition, target and test stimuli included all of these
components. Children were instructed to say “same” if the
target and test stimuli were the same in all 3 aspects.
Children were instructed to say “different,” however, if the
sound component changed, the motion component changed,
or the item appearance component changed. To determine
the extent of overshadowing, we assessed children’s
discrimination of changes in the sound, image, or motion of
these more complex stimuli relative to their ability to
discriminate these types of information when presented in
isolation (i.e., sound, motion, and item discrimination
baselines). If auditory overshadowing stems from the
dynamic nature of sound, then the dynamic motion cue
should attenuate auditory processing.

Method
Participants
Eighty-two four-year-olds (41 girls and 41 boys, M = 4.48
years, SD = .28 years) participated in this experiment.
Children completed one of four conditions: sound baseline
(N = 20), motion baseline (N = 20), item baseline (N = 20),
or a combined (sound-motion-item) condition (N = 22).
Children were recruited through local daycares and
preschools located in Columbus, Ohio. The majority of
participants were Caucasian.

Stimuli
In the combined condition, children saw two moving “toys”
which were each paired with a sound, and were asked to
discriminate changes in the sound, motion, or appearance of
these toys. Each stimulus in this condition consisted of a
sound, motion, and an object, referred to as “item”. There
were 8 sound, 8 motion, and 8 item appearance possibilities.
All of these were intended to be novel to children, as
overshadowing effects are sensitive to stimulus familiarity
(Robinson & Sloutsky, 2010b). For example, auditory
stimuli consisted of dynamic sounds like camera clicks and
notes from an organ. Each auditory stimulus was 1500ms in
duration. The 8 items all consisted of a central ‘X’ on which
four colored shapes were placed. Each of these items was
animated in 8 different motion patterns (e.g., 360° rotation,
looming) to produce 512 total sound-motion-item
combinations. Each stimulus presentation proceeded in the
following way: children viewed the static image in silence
for 500ms, after which the motion and sound began
simultaneously, lasting for the remaining 1500ms of
stimulus presentation.
Each of the baseline conditions aimed to assess children’s
discrimination when a single type of information is
presented. In the sound baseline, children were asked to
discriminate 2 of the 8 sounds used in the combined
condition. In this baseline, the only visual stimulus was a
small fixation cross presented in the center of the screen. In
the motion baseline, children were asked to discriminate 2
of the 8 motion types. Here, the same item was used
throughout the task, and these visual stimuli were presented
in silence. In the item baseline, children discriminated 2 of
the 8 items, presented statically and in silence.

Procedure
In all conditions, children observed pairs of stimuli
presented sequentially and were asked to indicate whether
the two stimuli were the same or different. Because of their
novelty, the experimenter described the stimuli as “toys
from outer space.” Children were told they would see two of
these toys and that their job was to tell the experimenter
whether the two toys were different in any way (i.e., if they
noticed a difference in the item, motion, or sound). During
each trial, children were first presented with a fixation cross
in the center of the screen. Once the child fixated on this

1092

Figure 2. Target and test stimuli used in the combined
condition.

Figure 1. Target and test stimuli used in the sound, motion,
and item baseline conditions. The top images depict
example target stimuli. Bottom images depict potential test
stimuli for that target.

cross, the experimenter pressed the spacebar to present the
target stimulus. The child then saw another fixation cross.
Upon the child’s fixation, the experimenter pressed the
spacebar to present the test stimulus. Each target and test
stimulus was 4000ms in duration. Following test stimulus
presentation, the child was asked to indicate verbally
whether the two toys they just observed were the same or
different. Half of the trials were “same” trials, in that the
target stimulus was identical to the test stimulus. The
remaining half of trials were “different” trials, such that
theitem, motion, or sound presented at test differed from
that in the target. Each child completed 4 blocks which each
consisted of 12 trials. Children saw a 12-second cartoon
between blocks.
In the combined condition, each target trial consisted of a
moving toy paired with a sound. Each sound, motion, and
item was selected randomly. During the “same” test trials,
children were presented with a stimulus identical to the
target stimulus. In one third of the “different” trials, only the
sound changed at test, and the item and motion remained the
same. In one third of these trials, only the motion of the item
changed, and the item itself as well as the sound remained
the same. In the remaining third of these “different” trials,
the item changed, but the motion and sound remained the
same. Of interest was whether children showed differential
ability to discriminate these 3 types of information when
presented simultaneously, relative to when presented in
isolation (i.e., performance in the respective baselines).
The baseline conditions assessed children’s ability to
discriminate sound, motion, and item information
individually. In the sound baseline, target trials consisted of
an auditory stimulus (selected randomly from the 8
possibilities) presented with only a fixation cross in the
center of the screen. During “same” trials, children heard the
same sound. During “different” trials, children heard a
different sound. The same structure applied to the motion
and item baselines.

1093

Results
To ensure that children understood and were engaged with
the tasks, only those children whose overall performance
was above chance (50% accuracy) were included in
subsequent analyses. This eliminated 2 children in the sound
baseline condition, 2 children in the motion baseline
condition, and 2 children in the item baseline condition.

Baseline conditions
To evaluate the meaning of differential performance
(discriminating sound, motion, and item) in the combined
condition, it was necessary to first establish children’s
ability to discriminate each type of information presented
independently. Children demonstrated high performance
across the sound (M = .91, SD = .08), motion (M = .87, SD
= .10), and item (M = .92, SD = .07) baselines. A one-way
ANOVA indicated no significant differences between
children’s performance in these three conditions, F(2, 51) =
2.03, p = .142.
A one-way ANOVA comparing children’s reaction times
to “different” trials in the 3 conditions (including only
correct responses) revealed a main effect of information
type, F(2, 51) = 8.77, p < .005. Post hoc multiple
comparisons using Fisher’s LSD revealed that individuals in
the item baseline condition (M = 1486.81, SD = 1066.36)
discriminated more quickly than those in the motion (M =
2409.69, SD = 817.29) and sound (M = 2653.24, SD =
724.60) baselines. Average RTs in the motion and sound
baselines did not differ significantly from one another.
These results suggest that item discrimination was
somewhat easier than discrimination of sounds or patterns
of motion.

As indexed by these difference scores, children’s
performance in the combined condition attenuated
significantly across all the information types (i.e., all
difference scores differed from zero): sound, t(21) = -3.83, p
< .005; motion, t(21) = -6.03, p < .001; and item, t(21) = 8.29, p < .001.
A one-way ANOVA comparing children’s difference
scores revealed a main effect of condition, F(2, 63) = 7.472,
p < .005. Post-hoc multiple comparisons using Fisher’s LSD
revealed children’s performance in the combined condition
attenuated less in the auditory condition (M = -.20, SD =
.25) than in the item condition (M = -.53, SD = .30) as well
as the motion condition (M = -.39, SD = .30). Difference
scores in the item and motion conditions did not differ from
one another. Children’s reaction times differed amongst the
baseline and combined conditions only when it came to
discriminating item information, t(38) = -2.53, p < .05.

Figure 3. Proportion of accuracy to “different” trials for
sound, motion, and item information by condition.

Combined condition
In the combined condition, children indeed showed
differential accuracy discriminating sound, motion, and item
changes, F(2, 63) = 7.11, p < .005. Post-hoc multiple
comparisons indicated children were significantly more
accurate when discriminating sounds (M = .70, SD = .25)
than both motions (M = .48, SD = .30), and items (M = .39,
SD = .30). Children’s discrimination of motions and items
did not differ significantly. Further, children’s reaction
times did not differ significantly when discriminating the
different information types, F(2, 63) = 1.45, p = .242.

Comparing baseline and combined conditions
Because the assessment of overshadowing requires the
comparison of performance on the between-subjects
baseline conditions and the within-subjects combined
condition, we calculated difference scores to describe each
individual’s attenuated performance in the combined
condition relative to baseline. For example, we subtracted
the mean accuracy of all individuals in the sound baseline
from each individual’s average accuracy to “different
sound” trials in the combined condition.

Figure 4. Average reaction time to discriminate “different”
trials for sound, motion, and item information by condition.
Baseline reaction times include only correct responses.
In sum, children’s discrimination of sound, motion, and
item information attenuated when presented simultaneously
rather than in isolation. Sound discrimination attenuated the
least, followed by motion discrimination, and then item
discrimination, which attenuated most.
These results
indicate that auditory information was more likely to
overshadow visual motion than the other way around.

1094

These findings, in turn, suggest that processing of auditory
information may indeed be privileged compared to visual
information, even if visual information is dynamic in nature.

General Discussion
The current experiment compared children’s ability to
discriminate motion, sound, and item appearance
information when presented simultaneously versus in
isolation. When combined, children’s discrimination of all 3
information types attenuated relative to baseline
performance. This indicates that all 3 types of information
were somewhat susceptible to interference from one another.
It is well established that when auditory and static visual
stimuli are presented simultaneously, processing of the
visual stimulus suffers whereas auditory processing remains
intact. Thus, the additional motion information in the
current study contributes to the overshadowing of auditory
processing. This provides support to the idea that the
dynamicity of visual and auditory input plays a role in the
allocation of attention to these two modalities.
Although children in the baseline conditions exhibited
high accuracy across the board, the levels of attenuation in
the combined condition differed significantly across
information types. The most attenuation occurred for item
discrimination, followed by motion discrimination, and the
least attenuation to sound discrimination. The fact that
auditory discrimination was overshadowed least suggests
that the auditory system may have privileged status early in
development.
Interestingly, children’s reaction times in the item
discrimination baseline were significantly faster than in the
other baseline conditions. Note that accuracy in this
condition was high and equivalent to the other conditions.
Therefore, it is unlikely that differential attenuation
occurred due to differences in baseline discrimination. If
this had been the case, one would have expected the least
overshadowing for item discrimination.
Overall, the current study demonstrates that there may be
multiple influences at play in the manifestation of auditory
overshadowing of visual information. Pulls on attention
appear to be sensitive to increased stimulus dynamicity. In
addition, auditory information receives privileged
processing even in the face of competing dynamic visual
input. In terms of the directionality of overshadowing
effects, however, the current study is limited in its potential
conclusions. Children were exposed to one information type
in the baseline conditions and all three information types in
the combined condition. It is impossible to speculate the
direction of overshadowing effects without comparing the
extent of children’s overshadowing in the combined
condition to conditions involving only two types of
information. For example, this would allow us to compare
overshadowing when sound, motion, and visual information
are combined to the traditional overshadowing effect
involving only auditory and static visual stimuli. Without
this manipulation (which is currently in progress), we are
unable to identify whether the additional motion

information contributes to the attenuation of item
discrimination.
Further research will also need to elucidate whether
increasing the dynamicity of visual input could benefit
young children’s word learning. Previous work indicates
that, in some cases, novel sounds like the ones used in the
current experiment overshadow visual input, whereas
familiar sounds and words do not. Perhaps the use of more
familiar auditory stimuli would result in less overshadowing
overall. If this were the case, this increased attention to
visual and motion information would provide more optimal
conditions for learning object-word mappings. Future work
could also investigate whether these mappings occur more
easily when visual stimuli are presented dynamically.
In addition, it will be interesting to investigate the
developmental trajectory of auditory overshadowing in the
context of dynamic visual input. Perhaps there are times
throughout development in which motion facilitates visual
processing, and times when it hinders or distracts. Further, a
developmental investigation can help us identify related
processes that could help explain the typically observed
reduction in overshadowing with age. For example, perhaps
increases in working memory capacity are associated with
the developing ability to bind auditory and visual
information (Allen, Hitch, & Baddeley, 2009). This research
could illuminate ways of presenting particular stimuli to
encourage processing between different modalities. Once
we understand the developmental process contributing to
audio-visual association, we can apply those principles to
identify optimal learning conditions in order to teach
children more efficiently.

Conclusions
In sum, the current research points to several important
findings. When auditory stimuli were presented with
dynamic visual stimuli, children’s processing of auditory
information attenuated. This finding is the first evidence
that visual information may interfere with auditory
processing early in development. Although auditory
discrimination attenuated, it attenuated less than the
discrimination of motion patterns or item appearances. The
combination of these findings indicates that auditory
overshadowing may have multiple underlying causes.
Children’s attention to dynamicity in the visual modality
seemed to pull attention ordinarily devoted to auditory
processing. However, the auditory information was still
processed better than motion or item appearance
information in the face of this competing input. Thus,
auditory overshadowing seems to be a function of privileged
processing of auditory information.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by a National Science
Foundation (NSF) grant (BCS-0720135) to Vladimir
Sloutsky. We thank the children, parents, and preschools
that participated in this research.

1095

References
Allen, R. J., Hitch, G. J., & Baddeley, A. D. (2009). Crossmodal binding and working memory. Visual
Cognition, 17(1-2), 83-102.
Egeth, H. E., & Yantis, S. (1997). Visual attention: Control,
representation, and time course. Annual review of
psychology, 48(1), 269-297.
Green, D. M., & Von Gierke, S. M. (1984). Visual and
auditory choice reaction times. Acta psychologica, 55(3),
231-247.
Napolitano, A. C., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2004). Is a picture
worth a thousand words? The flexible nature of modality
dominance in young children. Child Development,
75, 1850-1870.
Robinson, C. W., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2004a). Auditory
dominance and its change in the course of
development. Child Development, 75, 1387-1401.
Robinson, C, W., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2004b). The effect of
stimulus familiarity on modality dominance. In K.
Forbus, D. Gentner, & T. Regier (Eds.), Proceedings of
the XXVI Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society, 1167-1172 Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Robinson, C. W., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2007a). Auditory
dominance: Overshadowing or response competition? In
D. McNamara & G. Trafton (Eds.), Proceedings of the
XXIX Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 605-610) Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Robinson, C. W., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2007b). Visual
processing speed: Effects of auditory input on visual
processing. Developmental Science, 10, 734-740.
Robinson, C. W., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2010a). Development
of cross-modal processing. Wiley Interdisciplinary
Reviews: Cognitive Science, 1135-141.
Robinson, C. W., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2010b). Effects of
multimodal presentation and stimulus familiarity on
auditory and visual processing. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 107, 351-358.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Napolitano, A. (2003). Is a picture worth
a thousand words? Preference for auditory modality in
young children. Child Development, 74, 822-833.
Stein, B. E., & Meredith, M. A. (1993). The merging of the
senses. The MIT Press.

1096

