UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Autism, optimism and positive events: Evidence against a general optimistic bias

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/76c4g9gp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Harris, Adam
Shah, Punit
Catmur, Caroline
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Autism, optimism and positive events: Evidence against a general optimistic bias
Adam J. L. Harris (adam.harris@ucl.ac.uk)
Department of Cognitive, Perceptual & Brain Sciences, University College London, Gower Street, London, UK

Punit Shah (ps00113@surrey.ac.uk) and Caroline Catmur (c.catmur@surrey.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Surrey, Guildford, UK

Geoffrey Bird1 (geoff.bird@kcl.ac.uk) and Ulrike Hahn (u.hahn@bbk.ac.uk)
Department of Psychological Sciences, Birkbeck College, University of London, Malet Street, London, UK

healthy human thought (e.g., Sharot, 2012; Taylor &
Brown, 1988), ‘unrealistic optimism’ may instead be a
statistical artifact resulting from a flawed methodology.

Abstract
The conclusion that people are optimistic concerning personal
risk does not have a sound evidential basis. Following Harris
and Hahn’s (2011) critique of unrealistic optimism research,
we consider the evidence from a recent series of high profile
neuroscience papers. We demonstrate that the methods used
are fundamentally flawed. A simulation and an empirical
comparison of autism spectrum condition participants with
typical adults confirm that we have learnt nothing about
optimism from these studies.

Identifying Optimism: A New Development
Unrealistic optimism is widely regarded as a central
cognitive bias, yet the fact that almost all past research is
based on the comparison method means that there is very
little empirical evidence for its existence. The frailties
associated with the comparison method have, however, only
recently been identified, and common belief amongst both
researchers and the general public is that risk estimates are
characterised by an optimism bias (e.g., Sharot, 2012).
With this position as their starting point, Sharot and
colleagues (Sharot, Guitart-Masip et al., 2012; Sharot,
Kanai, et al., 2012; Sharot, Korn, & Dolan, 2011) have
begun an investigation into the neural underpinnings of the
phenomenon. Sharot et al. (2011) claimed that people
maintain an optimistic view of the future through selectively
incorporating new desirable information into their beliefs
more than new undesirable information. If this result is
robust, it seems to shift the body of evidence back in favor
of an optimistic bias in human likelihood judgments.

Keywords: Optimism; human rationality; belief updating;
statistical artifact

Introduction
It is a long-established ‘fact’ that human judgment is
biased when estimating personal risk. It has been argued
that people underestimate their risk of encountering
negative events (compared to their estimate of the average
person’s risk), and overestimate their chances of
encountering positive events (e.g., Weinstein, 1980). This
pattern of optimistic self-estimates has been termed
‘unrealistic optimism’.
The majority of evidence for unrealistic optimism
originated from research employing what we will term the
‘comparison method’. Participants are asked to directly
(Weinstein, 1980) or indirectly (e.g., van der Velde, van der
Pligt, & Hooykas, 1994; for a review, see Helweg-Larsen &
Shepperd, 2001) compare their chance of experiencing a
negative life event with that of the average individual. It is
argued that the existence of unrealistic optimism is
supported by a pattern of results where the mean of
participants’ estimates of self-risk is significantly lower than
the mean of their estimates of the average person’s risk.
However, a recent analysis of studies using the comparison
method casts doubt over the existence of unrealistic
optimism. Harris and Hahn (2011) showed that perfectly
rational (non-biased) agents generated personal risk
estimates that would be classified as unrealistically
optimistic on the comparison method for purely statistical
reasons. Unfortunately, the comparison method has been
used in the vast majority of unrealistic optimism studies to
date, meaning that rather than being a characteristic of
1

The Update Method We shall refer to the method
introduced in Sharot et al. (2011; see also, Sharot, GuitartMasip, et al., 2012; Sharot, Kanai, et al., 2012) as the update
method (Figure 1). Participants estimate their chance of
experiencing each of a series of negative events. They are
subsequently given the probabilities with which these
negative events are experienced by the average individual
(base rates). Subsequently, participants re-estimate their
chances of experiencing the same negative life events. The
critical variable is the degree to which participants update
their personal risk estimates in light of the given
information about the average person’s risk. Updates are
compared across two types of trial: trials where the base rate
of the negative event was lower than the participant’s initial
estimate (‘desirable information’), and trials where it was
higher (‘undesirable information’). Participants are found to
update their estimates more in response to desirable

Geoffrey Bird is now at Institute of Psychiatry, King’s College London.

555

information, thus enabling the preservation
unrealistically optimistic view of the future.

of

an

(1) P(h | e) 

P ( h) P (e | h)
P(h) P(e | h)  P(h) P(e | h)

Bayes’ Theorem prescribes the probability, P(h|e), of
experiencing an event h (e.g., HD) in light of evidence e (no
family history of HD). The best estimate of experiencing
that event is a function of the base rate of the event, P(h),
and the diagnosticity of the evidence - the likelihood ratio of
true positives, P(e|h), relative to false positives, P(e|¬h). In
Tim’s case, P(e|h) reflects how likely an HD patient is to
have no family history of HD, whereas P(e|¬h) reflects the
probability of no family history of HD in those who do not
contract HD. From a longitudinal study (Hawe, Talmud,
Miller, & Humphries, 2003), we can calculate P(e|h) = .52
and P(e|¬h) = .66. Tim’s estimate of P(h) is 20% and
therefore his best estimate of his chance of contracting HD
is:

Figure 1: The update method.

Overview
The present paper proceeds in two stages. In the first stage,
we present a formal critique of the update method. We
subsequently demonstrate (Study 1) that, as a result of the
identified flaws, the update method gives rise to a seemingly
optimistic pattern of belief updating in a population of
rational Bayesian agents. Finally, in anticipation of a
counter-argument that the demonstration of neural
moderators of the effect (e.g., Sharot, Kanai, et al., 2012)
provides further evidence for its existence, we present
results from a study comparing autism spectrum condition
(ASC) participants with typical adult (TA) controls. With a
suitable addition to the update method, we demonstrate that
we can infer nothing about the neural correlates of optimism
from the results currently present in the literature.

(2)

.2  .52
 16%
.2  .52  .8  .66

The base rate of HD is actually 33% for 55 year-old males
(Bleumink et al., 2004). If Tim receives this information, he
should recalculate his personal risk once more, using Bayes’
Theorem, replacing his previous base rate estimate (20%)
with 33%, which will result in an increased ‘best estimate’:
(3)

.33  .52
 28%
.33  .52  .67  .66

Given the two basic components to normative probability
judgments – base rates and evidence – there are thus two
ways to receive undesirable (desirable) new information:
One can receive new, diagnostic information which suggests
that one is more (less) at risk, or one may discover that the
base rate is higher (lower) than previously thought.
In Equation 2, Tim knows the accurate base rate,
calculates his personal risk rationally, and yet his personal
risk is different from the base rate. In contrast to the central
assumption of the update method, individuals should not
necessarily change their estimate of personal risk simply
because it lies above or below the base rate. Researchers can
only prescribe what effect the new base rate information
should have on a participant’s risk estimate if they know the
participant’s previous estimate of the base rate. Without this
knowledge, it is impossible to classify a particular trial as
‘desirable’ or ‘undesirable’ and therefore to say in which
direction (and how much) the participant’s estimate should
change. Study 1 highlights the flaws in the update method
by simulating optimistic data from non-biased agents!

What’s Wrong With the Update Method?
There are two distinct ways in which we might receive new
information relevant to our individual risk. We may receive
new information about the base rate, or we may receive
diagnostic information that pertains to us personally (e.g.,
genetic vulnerability). Both types of information are
relevant, both can be desirable or undesirable, and both
should be combined via Bayes’ Theorem to provide our best
estimate of risk (e.g., Kahneman & Tversky, 1973), as is
illustrated in the following example.
Normative Risk Updating 55-year-old Tim estimates that
the average 55-year-old’s risk of contracting heart disease
(HD) (the base rate) is 20%. In the absence of any other
information, Tim’s best estimate of his own likelihood of
contracting HD is 20%.
If Tim possesses any diagnostic information that
differentiates his risk from the average person’s, he should
normatively combine the base rate with this diagnostic
information. For example, if he does not have a family
history of HD, his risk is lower than the average person’s.
Bayes’ Theorem prescribes how this information should be
combined (e.g., Kahneman & Tversky, 1973):

Study 1: A Simulation
Take a hypothetical sample of 100 Bayesian agents, 25 of
whom assume base rates of .1, .2, .3, and .4 respectively
(mean = .25) for Disease X, which has a true base rate of
.25. Before the study, these agents receive evidence

556

reflecting their vulnerability to Disease X with the following
characteristics: P(e|h) = .5; P(¬e|¬h) = .9.
P(h)P(e|h) + P(¬h)P(e|¬h) defines the proportion who
received evidence suggesting increased risk, here: .25 × .5 +
.75 × .1 = .2. Thus 20% of agents have evidence suggesting
they will get the disease (‘positive evidence’) and 80% have
evidence suggesting they will not (‘negative evidence’). At
each base rate, 5 agents will receive positive evidence, and
20 will receive negative evidence.
In the study (Table 1), agents calculate their initial risk
estimates normatively via Bayes’ Theorem, using their
subjective base rates; their second estimate recalculates
Bayes’ Theorem using the experimenter-provided true base
rate (see Equations 2 and 3).
Agents whose subjective base rate estimates were below
the true base rate (.25) truly receive undesirable
information: Disease X is more prevalent than they thought.
Agents whose subjective base rate estimates were above the
true base rate truly receive desirable information: Disease X
is less prevalent than they thought. However, the update
method classifies information as ‘desirable’ or ‘undesirable’
based on the relationship between initial estimate and true
base rate, thus misclassifying 30% of the sample (grey
columns).
The final experimental ‘result’ is obtained by averaging
across those agents receiving ‘desirable’ and ‘undesirable’
information (as defined by the experimenter). As each
positive evidence group represents 5 agents, and each
negative group 20 agents, the resulting absolute means are:
Desirable Group = 0.04; Undesirable Group = 0.03. Thus,
these rational agents show ‘greater updating’ in response to
‘desirable’ than ‘undesirable’ information and would be
labelled optimistic – though rational by definition – simply
due to incorrect classification. Although this is a somewhat
small effect, it becomes much more pronounced when base
rate estimates are regressive toward the midpoint of the
scale, as is typical of people’s probability estimates in many

contexts (see e.g., Harris & Hahn, 2011; Moore & Small,
2008, and references therein). If the true base rate were .21,
i.e., below the agents’ mean estimate, then the seeming
difference in updating rises to 8% (‘desirable’ = .084;
‘undesirable’ = .004) – easily able to account for extant
experimental data. Figure 2 demonstrates that this pattern of
results is not dependent on the precise parameters used in
this illustrative example. The preponderance of positive
differences in updating (where people update more in
response to desirable than undesirable information) is clear
from both Figure 2a (where mean estimates of the
underlying base rate are correct) and Figure 2b (where base
rate estimates are regressive, & consequently represents
more realistic simulations).

Implications of the Update Method’s Flaws
The key implication of the simulation results presented
above is that a difference in participants’ amount of
updating in response to ‘desirable’ and ‘undesirable’
information, as defined in Sharot et al. (2011; see also,
Sharot, Guitart-Masip et al., 2012; Sharot, Kanai et al.,
2012), cannot be taken as evidence of optimism. As with the
statistical confounds in the comparison method, however,
there is a simple test that disassociates the predictions of an
optimism account from a statistical artifact account: the
inclusion of positive events (Harris & Hahn, 2011). Our
simulation result is blind to the valence of the events being
judged. Consequently, for positive events the statistical
account again predicts that updating will be greater in
response to information that the base rate is lower than you
originally believed your own risk to be. For positive events,
which we want to experience, these would be classified as
‘undesirable’ trials, and hence this pattern of results would
suggest pessimism. Thus, updating is undoubtedly
optimistic (despite the flaws in the method) if participants
update more in response to desirable than undesirable
information for both negative and positive events.

Table 1: Artifactual Unrealistic Optimism in Study 1
Those with positive evidence
Subjective base rate
Initial Estimate
True Base Rate
Experimenter-defined Desirabilitya
a

True Desirability
Correctly Classified?
Final Estimate
Amount of update (IE - FE)
a

Those with negative evidence

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

(n=5)
0.357
0.25

(n=5)
0.556
0.25

(n=5)
0.682
0.25

(n=5)
0.769
0.25

(n=20)
0.058
0.25

(n=20)
0.122
0.25

(n=20)
0.192
0.25

(n=20)
0.270
0.25

Des

Des

Des

Des

Undes

Undes

Undes

Des

Undes
NO
0.625

Undes
NO
0.625

Des
YES
0.625

Des
YES
0.625

Undes
YES
0.156

Undes
YES
0.156

Des
NO
0.156

Des
YES
0.156

-0.268

-0.069

0.057

0.144

-0.098

-0.034

0.036

0.114

Des = Desirable information; Undes = Undesirable information

557

Furthermore, Figure 2 demonstrates how a non-selective
change to a probabilistically relevant quantity (e.g.,
changing the perceived diagnosticity of individuals’
evidence; or altering the regressiveness of their initial base
rate estimates) that affects all agents equally, can lead to a
seemingly selective effect: a sharp increase in the difference
between updating for ‘desirable’ vs. ‘undesirable’
information. Thus, the selective effects of L-DOPA (Sharot,
Guitart-Masip et al., 2012) and transcranial magnetic
stimulation (TMS) (Sharot, Kanai, et al., 2012) on belief
updating might be entirely unrelated to optimism, and
simply reflect (for example) better learning (i.e., less
conservative updating - formally equivalent to an increase in
the diagnosticity of information) following receipt of LDOPA.

Study 2: An Experiment
The results reported above led us to run an experiment in
which we followed Sharot et al.’s (e.g., 2011) method, but
crucially included a selection of positive events in addition
to the negative events. We were further interested in a
comparison of ASC participants, with typical adult (TA)
controls. Sharot et al. (2011) reported that optimistic
updating was largely mediated by the medial prefrontal
cortex. Given that ASC is associated with hypoactivity in
this region across a range of tasks (Gilbert et al., 2008), and
ASC participants have been suggested to be less susceptible
to emotional biases in decision making (de Martino et al.,
2008), one might predict these individuals to show less of
an optimistic bias, similar to the attenuation of the effect in
participants who have received TMS to the left inferior
frontal gyrus (Sharot, Kanai, et al., 2012). Should this effect
be observed, we are crucially interested in the results from
the positive events in this study. If TAs do show a seeming
pessimism bias (as predicted by the statistical account), will
the individuals with ASC show more of a ‘pessimism bias’
(as they appear to be less optimistic than TAs with negative
events), or will this effect also be attenuated – suggesting
that ASC has not had a selective effect on ‘optimism’?

a)

Method
Participants 20 male participants with a mean age of 34
years participated in return for £10. The 10 ASC
participants all received diagnoses from an independent
clinician. Of the 10, using the Autism Diagnostic
Observation Schedule (Lord et al., 2000), 5 met the criteria
for autism, and 5 for autistic spectrum disorders. The ASC
and NT participants were matched for IQ (Weschler, 2011)
and age, ts < 1.

b)

Design The experiment was a 2x2x2 (group x event type
[positive/negative] x information desirability) design, with
event type and information desirability manipulated withinparticipants. In a departure from Sharot et al.’s (e.g., 2011)
method, the base rates presented to participants were
derived from participants’ initial estimates of their own risk
(IE1), rather than being externally sourced. This enabled the
experimental manipulation of information desirability, as
well as controlling for the potential differential accuracy of
base rate information pertaining to negative events (for
which there is plenty of information) versus positive events
(for which there is a scarcity of information). Base rates
were computed according to the following formula: A
random percentage between 17% and 40% (uniform
distribution) of IE was either added to, or subtracted from,
the IE, according to trial type, and rounded to the nearest
integer. Thus, for example, on positive desirable trials a
random percentage of the IE was added to the IE resulting in
a derived probability indicating that the positive event was
more likely to occur than had previously been estimated,
and on negative desirable trials a random percentage of the
IE was subtracted from the IE, indicating that the negative
event was less likely than had been estimated. All

Figure 2: Seemingly ‘optimistic’ updating. Positive values
in the z-axes demonstrate ‘optimistic’ updating for Bayesian
agents receiving evidence with the properties shown in the
x-axes, P(e|h), and y-axes, P(¬e|¬h). Panel a), agents
estimate the base rate as either: .1, .2, .3, .4, and the true
base rate = .25 (as in Table 1). Panel b), true base rate = .21.
The mass of data points in both plots spuriously suggests
optimistic updating.

558

probabilities were capped between 3% and 80% as
participants were informed that this was the range of
possible probabilities (see also, e.g., Sharot et al., 2011).
Stimuli and Procedure Eighty short descriptions of life
events, many of which had previously been used in the
study of unrealistic optimism (e.g., Sharot et al., 2011;
Weinstein, 1980), were presented in a random order. Half of
the events were positive and half negative. Very rare or very
common events were avoided and all known probabilities
lay between 10% and 70% (M = 32.6, SD = 18.8; Office for
National Statistics and PubMed). The procedure followed
that of Sharot et al. (2011) (see Figure 1), with one addition.
Following their IE, participants were asked to estimate the
chance of the event occurring to the average person2.
Following the main task, participants’ memory for the base
rates presented to them was tested, and they provided four
salience ratings for each event3. Finally, a funneled debrief
procedure (Bargh & Chartrand, 2000) showed that no
participants suspected that the derived base rates were
inaccurate.

Figure 3: Mean updates in Study 2. Error bars are +/- 1 SE.
4.83, p < .041. None of the effects observed in the TAs were
observed in the autistic participants (ps > .17). The
significant 3-way interaction demonstrated that updating in
the ASC group was different from in the TA group, but
there was no evidence that they were either more or less
optimistic.

Scoring For each event the amount of update was calculated
first by computing the absolute difference between the
updated estimate in the second session and the IE, and
second, coding the difference as positive when the update
was in the direction of the base rate and negative when the
update was away from the base rate. Mean updates for each
participant in each condition were then calculated after
removal of outliers (± 3 × the interquartile range) and trials
for which a derived probability could not be applied (e.g.,
when a participant’s IE was already at the lowest extreme of
the probability range, but the trial-type required that a lower
base rate be supplied).

Discussion
Sharot, Kanai et al. (2012) administered TMS to the left IFG
in one group of their participants. Participants subsequently
completed an update task comprised entirely of negative
events. Participants who had received TMS to the left IFG
were shown to exhibit less of an asymmetry in updating to
desirable versus undesirable information, and it was
therefore concluded that the left IFG is involved in the
suppression of updating beliefs about vulnerability in
response to undesirable information. Study 2 can be seen as
analogous to this study, with the presence or absence of
ASC the quasi-experimental variable in place of the location
of TMS. Study 2 included positive events in addition to
negative events. For positive events, TAs did not show an
optimistic bias in belief updating, but rather a seeming
pessimistic bias. This resulted in a 2x2 interaction, such that
TAs updated more in response to desirable information for
negative events, but more in response to undesirable
information for positive events. It was this interaction,
rather than a specific optimism bias that was attenuated in
the ASC participants. One can only speculate whether the
same effect would occur with TMS of the left IFG.

Results
TA Controls For negative events, we replicated the central
result from Sharot et al. (2011). Participants updated more
in response to desirable information than to undesirable
information, t (9) = 5.02, p = .001 (see Figure 3). This result
demonstrates that the minor changes to the update method’s
procedure were not consequential for the general paradigm.
For positive events, however, the reverse pattern was
observed, with greater updating in response to undesirable
information than desirable information, t (9) = 4.71, p =
.001. Across both event types, a significant event type x
desirability interaction was observed, F (1, 9) = 35.45, p <
.001, with no main effect of event type or, crucially,
information desirability (Fs < 1).
TA Controls and ASC Participants Figure 3 shows that
ASC participants showed significantly less asymmetry in
their information updating than did TAs, with a significant
group x event type x desirability interaction, F(1, 18) =

Summary
Optimism is currently a research area of much interest.
Studying optimism with real-world events is complicated by
our inability to know the objective probability of an event in
a given individual’s future (see also, Weinstein & Klein,
1996). The very prevalent comparative method has been
shown to be insufficient (Harris & Hahn, 2011), and here

2

This enables a more appropriate normative analysis of the data
(see Shah et al., 2013), which we do not elaborate on here.
3
Controlling for these factors did not change the results.

559

we have demonstrated that a recent (‘update’) method also
fails as a test of human rationality, through ‘demonstrating’
that rational agents are irrational (Study 1)! Despite this
weakness, the addition of positive events can determine
whether there is evidence for an optimistic bias. With this
addition, no evidence is found (Study 2). The inclusion of
ASC participants in Study 2 also demonstrated the
difficulties inherent in making conclusions about the effects
of individual differences or experimental manipulations on
optimistic belief updating, without the inclusion of both
positive and negative events.
Our resulting conclusion, that there is no evidence for a
general optimistic bias in human likelihood judgments,
might seem surprising in the light of historical common
belief. It is, however, consonant with recent results where
participants overestimate the likelihood of negative events
relative to neutral events in the laboratory (e.g., Bilgin,
2012; Harris, Corner, & Hahn, 2009; Risen & Gilovich,
2007; Vosgerau, 2010). On the basis of the extant evidence,
we cannot conclude that an optimistic view of the future
characterises healthy human thought (Taylor & Brown,
1988).

Helweg-Larsen, M., & Shepperd, J. A. (2001). Do
moderators of the optimistic bias affect personal or target
risk estimates? A review of the literature. Personality and
Social Psychology Review, 5, 74-95.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1973). On the psychology of
prediction. Psychological Review, 80, 237-251.
Lord, C., Risi, S., Lambrecht, L., Cook, E. H., Jr.,
Leventhal, B. L., DiLavore, P. C., et al. (2000). The
autism diagnostic observation schedule-generic: A
standard measure of social and communication deficits
associated with the spectrum of autism. Journal of Autism
and Developmental Disorders, 30, 205-223.
Moore, D. A., & Small, D. A. (2008). When it is rational for
the majority to believe that they are better than average.
In J. I. Krueger (Ed.), Rationality and Social
Responsibility. Essays in Honor of Robyn Mason Dawes.
New York: Psychology Press.
Risen, J. L., & Gilovich, T. (2007). Another look at why
people are reluctant to exchange lottery tickets. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 93, 12-22.
Shah, P., Harris, A. J. L., Hahn, U., Catmur, C., & Bird, G.
(2013). A pessimistic view of optimistic belief updating.
Manuscript submitted for publication.
Sharot, T. (2012). The Optimism Bias: Why we’re wired to
look on the bright side. London: Constable & Robinson.
Sharot, T., Guitart-Masip, M., Korn, C. W., Chowdhury, R.,
& Dolan, R. J. (2012). How dopamine enhances an
optimism bias in humans. Current Biology, 22, 14771481.
Sharot, T., Kanai, R., Marston, D., Korn, C. W., Rees, G., &
Dolan, R. J. (2012). Selectively altering belief formation
in the human brain. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America, 109, 1705817062.
Sharot, T., Korn, C. W., & Dolan, R. J. (2011). How
unrealistic optimism is maintained in the face of reality.
Nature Neuroscience, 14, 1475-1479.
Taylor, S. E., & Brown, J. D. (1988). Illusion and wellbeing: A social psychological perspective on mental
health. Psychological Bulletin, 103, 193-210.
Van der Velde, F. W., van der Pligt, J., & Hooykas, C.
(1994). Perceiving AIDS-related risk: Accuracy as a
function of differences in actual risk. Health Psychology,
13, 25-33.
Vosgerau, J. (2010). How prevalent is wishful thinking?
Misattribution of arousal causes optimism and pessimism
in subjective probabilities. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 139, 32-48.
Weinstein, N. D. (1980). Unrealistic optimism about future
life events. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
39, 806-820.
Weinstein, N. D., & Klein, W. M. (1996) Unrealistic
optimism: Present and future. Journal of Social and
Clinical Psychology, 15, 1-8.
Weschler, D. (2011). Weschler Abbreviated Scale of
Intelligence (2nd Edition). San Antonio, TX: Pearson.

References
Bargh, J.A., & Chartrand, T.L. (2000). The mind in the
middle: A practical guide to priming and automaticity
research. In H.T. Reis & C.M. Judd (Eds.), Handbook of
research methods in social and personality psychology.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press
Bilgin, B. (2012). Losses loom more likely than gains:
Propensity to imagine losses increases their subjective
probability. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 118, 203-215.
Bleumink, G. S., Knetsch, A. M., Sturkenboom, M. C. J.
M., Straus, S. M. J. M., Hofman, A., et al. (2004).
Quantifying the heart failure epidemic: Prevalence,
incidence rate, lifetime risk and prognosis of heart failure.
European Heart Journal, 25, 1614-1619.
De Martino, B., Harrison, N., Knafo, S., Bird, G., and
Dolan, R. (2008). Explaining enhanced logical
consistency during decision making in autism. Journal of
Neuroscience, 28, 10746-10750.
Gilbert, S.J., Bird, G., Brindley, R., Frith, C.D., and
Burgess, P.W. (2008). Atypical recruitment of medial
prefrontal cortex in autism spectrum disorders: An fMRI
study of two executive function tasks. Neuropsychologia,
46, 2281-2291.
Harris, A. J. L., Corner, A., & Hahn, U. (2009). Estimating
the probability of negative events. Cognition, 110, 51-64.
Harris, A. J. L., & Hahn, U. (2011). Unrealistic optimism
about future life events: A cautionary note. Psychological
Review, 118, 135-154.
Hawe, E., Talmud, P. J., Miller, G. J., & Humphries, S. E.
(2003). Family history is a coronary heart disease risk
factor in the second Northwick Park heart study. Annals
of Human Genetics, 67, 97-106.

560

