UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Automatic and Strategic Search During Analogical Retrieval

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2p55g63k

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Trench, Maximo
Olgun, Valeria
Margni, Adrian
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Automatic and Strategic Search During Analogical Retrieval
Máximo Trench (MAXTRENCH@Gmail.Com)
Universidad Nacional del Comahue & Universidad Abierta Interamericana
Quintral 1250, Bariloche, Rio Negro, Argentina

Valeria Olguín (VALITAO@Yahoo.Es)
Department of Psychology, Universidad Nacional del Comahue
Irigoyen 2000, Cipolletti, Río Negro, Argentina

Adrián Margni (ADRIANMARGNI@Gmail.Com)
Department of Psychology, Universidad Nacional del Comahue
Irigoyen 2000, Cipolletti, Río Negro, Argentina

Ricardo A. Minervino (MINERVINOR@Jetband.Com.Ar)
Department of Psychology, Universidad Nacional del Comahue
Irigoyen 2000, Cipolletti, Río Negro, Argentina
Abstract
The present study investigates two key aspects of analogical
retrieval: (1) whether other activities different from problem
solving automatically elicit a search for analogical sources, and
(2) whether strategic search can overcome the superficial bias
observed in classical experiments. In Experiment 1, participants
had to generate persuasive arguments for a target situation
under three experimental conditions: without indication to use
analogies, with instruction to use analogies, and with
indication to search for sources within four predefined domains:
health, human relations, housekeeping, and breeding of animals
and plants. Responses from the first condition showed that
argumentation rarely triggers spontaneous analogical retrievals,
a result that is at odds with most studies on problem solving.
Results from the remaining conditions demonstrated that the
superficial bias can be strategically reversed when participants
are suggested to focus on specific domains. Experiment 2
replicated this last result with the simple instruction to search
within domains different from that of the target (i.e., without
being provided with a list of specific domains). The theoretical
and educational implications of these findings are discussed.
Keywords: Analogy, retrieval, similarity, transfer.

Introduction
Analogical reasoning consists in acknowledging that the
objects of two situations are organized by an identical
system of relations (Gentner, 1983). Across activities as
diverse as problem solving, instruction or argumentation,
finding the right analogical correspondences allows
transferring knowledge from a known situation (the base
analog: BA) to novel situation (the target analog: TA) in
order to improve the representation of the latter. A traditional
taxonomy distinguishes between intradomain analogies (i.e.,
when BA and TA pertain to the same thematic domain) and
interdomain analogies (i.e., when BA and TA belong to
thematically separate domains). In intradomain analogies, the
compared analogs maintain superficial similarity, as corresponding objects and relations tend to be semantically similar.

A number of empirical studies have demonstrated that
people can easily understand analogies even in the absence
of superficial similarity (e.g., Gentner, Rattermann, & Forbus,
1993, see Holyoak, Novick & Melz, 1994, for a review). In
contrast with the relative easiness of finding the right
mapping between a BA and a TA that are simultaneously
active in working memory (WM), the process of retrieving
interdomain BAs from Long Term Memory (LTM) turns
out to be rather taxing. As in most studies in the memory
literature, the standard paradigm for investigating the
conditions that foster analogical retrieval comprises two
different phases. During the learning phase, participants
receive the BAs embedded in tasks aimed at enforcing a
proper encoding of the BAs in LTM. During the retrieval
phase, sometimes temporally and/or contextually separated
from the first, participants receive the TAs embedded in
target tasks for which retrieving the BAs becomes crucial,
and experimenters assess whether the processing of the TA
triggers the retrieval of the critical BA. Studies using this
paradigm showed that intradomain BAs are retrieved
between two and four times more frequently than
interdomain BAs (Holyoak & Koh, 1987; Keane, 1987).
These findings led researchers to conclude that superficial
similarity represents a crucial precondition for analogical
retrieval. On the other hand, computational modelers of
analogical retrieval agree that the computational cost
implicated in carrying out a structural mapping between a
TA and every potential BA in LTM would be
psychologically implausible (Forbus, Gentner & Law, 1994;
Thagard, Holyoak, Nelson & Gochfeld, 1990).
Under these considerations, proponents of the structure
mapping theory (Gentner, 1983) developed MAC/FAC
(Forbus, Gentner & Law, 1994), an algorithm designed to
mimic human patterns of analogical retrieval through psychologically realistic computations. MAC/FAC, for Many Are
Called, Few Are Chosen, divides retrieval into two phases:
MAC, a fast superficial filter, and FAC, a structural matcher.

1480

The MAC phase begins by generating content vectors for
the TA and every representation in LTM, with each content
vector being generated by assigning a position in an ordered
series to all concepts in LTM, and counting how many times
each concept appears in each BA. Upon taking the vector
products between the content vector of the TA and the
vector of all situations in LTM, the MAC stage submits the
winning BAs (most of them superficially similar to the TA)
to the FAC stage. For each BA, FAC starts by creating all
possible local mappings between elements of the same
formal type, with the added restriction that mapped relations
must have identical meaning. The program then incrementally
coalesces local matches into global mappings that satisfy the
constraints of parallel connectivity (if two predicates are
mapped, their arguments must also be mapped) and one-toone mapping (elements in one analog must map to only one
element in the other analog). Finally, FAC scores the quality
of global mappings as a function of their size, their depth,
and the semantic similarity of their corresponding objects.
This last criterion amplifies MACs' bias towards BAs
bearing superficial similarity with the TA.
LISA (Learning and Inference with Schemas and
Analogies; Hummel & Holyoak, 1997) is the latest matcher
developed by proponents of the multiconstraint theory of
analogy (Holyoak & Thagard, 1989, 1995). Its architecture
aims at encompassing retrieval, mapping, inference and
schema abstraction by a unified set of core processes that
are more neurally plausible than in earlier attempts (e.g.
ARCS; Thagard, Holyoak, Nelson & Gochfeld, 1990).
LISA’s architecture is a system for representing dynamic
role-filler bindings in WM and encoding them in LTM for
later retrieval. When a proposition unit (P) like John loves
Mary gets activated, it propagates top-down activation to
subproposition units (SPs) that represent bindings between
each of the case roles of the proposition and its
corresponding filler. During the lapse while each SP unit
remains active, it transfers top-down activation to two
independent structure units representing a case role and its
filler (e.g., John and lover) which fire in synchrony with
each other and out of synchrony with the units of the
complementary SP (i.e. Mary and beloved). Case roles and
their fillers—which represent the lower level in the
structural hierarchy—in turn activate a collection of
semantic units representing their meaning. Therefore, when
a proposition such as John loves Mary is selected, the
semantic primitives of lover (e.g., emotion1, positive1, and
strong1) fire in synchrony with the semantic primitives of
John (e.g., human, male and adult), while units representing
the beloved role (e.g., emotion2, positive2 and strong2) fire
in synchrony with units representing Mary (e.g., human,
female and adult). When the semantic primitives of a given
role-filler binding in the TA fire in WM, predicate, object
and SP units from one or various BAs compete in responding
to this array as a function of the extent to which their
semantic units overlap. As in MAC/FAC, LISA's reliance on
semantic similarities between BAs and TAs leads to a
majority of superficial remindings.

In contrast with the emphasis placed in justifying the
appropriateness of the representational and computational
assumptions incorporated in each of the above models (e.g
MAC/FAC uses serial operations on symbolic representations
while LISA uses connectionist computation on distributed
representations), the proponents of these models are
ambiguous as to whether the models account for spontaneous
remindings, voluntary remindings, or both. Given the
importance of this distinction within current memory
research (see Mace, 2010, for a review), the first objective
of the present study is thus to investigate to what extent the
search for BAs in LTM is automatically triggered by the
processing of the TAs. A second objective of the present
study concerns whether voluntary retrieval of BAs is
invariably biased towards superficial matches, as in current
implementations of the above models, or if search for BAs
can be strategically circumscribed to areas of knowledge
different from that of the target—a central preoccupation of
psychologists and educators (see, e.g., Loewenstein, 2010).
Before presenting our study, the available evidence bearing
on these two questions is briefly reviewed.

Automatic vs. Voluntary Search for Base Analogs
It is a common experience to be spontaneously reminded of
analogous cases while carrying out thoughtful activities like
science teaching, explanation, and persuasive argumentation.
However, a sensible question to be asked concerns to what
extent being engaged in the above activities automatically
initiates a search for BAs in LTM. Even though no single
study has yet manipulated whether or not participants are
explicitly invited to "think of analogous problems", acrossstudies comparisons within the problem-solving literature
suggest that participants' attempts to find a solution
automatically elicit a search for BAs. For instance, using
roughly comparable stimuli, Keane (1987) and Holyoak and
Koh (1987) assessed the retrieval of a BA during a
temporally and contextually separated problem solving
activity. Even though the former study (but not the latter)
explicitly asked participants to look for analogous problems
prior to attempting a solution, both obtained comparable
rates of retrieval, which suggests that the mere disposition to
find solutions suffices to trigger a search for BAs. Other
studies of spontaneous analogical retrieval during problem
solving (e.g., Chen, Mo & Honomichl, 2004) point in the
same direction. With these antecedents in mind, the specific
question that concerns us here is whether other thoughtful
activities such as those listed above also trigger a search for
analogous cases in a reliable manner.
A likely candidate task for automatic analogical retrieval
is persuasive argumentation. A series of naturalistic studies
(e.g., Blanchette & Dunbar, 2000; Trench, Oberholzer &
Minervino, 2009; Trench, Olguín & Minervino, 2011) have
shown that when being asked to generate analogies to
convince somebody of performing an action, people easily
retrieve BAs from their autobiographical memory. As in
these studies, the procedure followed by one of the groups of
the first experiment reported in the present study consisted

1481

in presenting participants with a target situation admitting
two alternative lines of action, and asking them to provide
as many analogies as they could in favor of one of such
actions. In order to shed light on whether the activity of
finding persuasive arguments automatically triggers a search
for relevant BAs, we had another group receive the same
TA and the same instructions to argue in favor of the
intended action, but without any hint to base their arguments
on analogous situations.

Voluntary Analogical Search: Fixed or Strategic?
As stated above, a wealth of laboratory studies demonstrate
that search for BAs yields mostly superficial matches to the
TA. Even though most retrieval algorithms were specially
engineered to mimic such pattern of results, some of them
left open the question of whether such superficial bias could
be "tuned" by the analogizer, be it by means of adjusting the
weight given to object attributes by the structural
component of the system (FAC), or by having the whole
retrieval algorithm run on a subset of MLP selected via
other general mechanisms of memory such as spreading
activation or indexing (Gentner & Forbus, 1991, p. 4).
Consistent with this last possibility, Ripoll (1998)
postulated the psychological reality of a synthetic level of
representation that specifies the thematic domain to which a
given problem/story belongs, and demonstrated how these
"domain tags" operate during the time-course of analogical
retrieval. The procedure consisted in coupling superficially
similar and superficially dissimilar target problems with a
heading intended to activate a domain tag (e.g., "a learning
problem"), which could match (or not match, depending on
the condition) the domain tag of the base problem. Using
concurrent measures of retrieval, Ripoll (1998) found that
the presence of shared surface features facilitated retrieval,
but only when the domain tags of the problems matched.
In the first experiment of the present study, the second and
third groups received a TA and an instruction to search for
potential analogous situations that could be used to convince
the main character of the TA to pursue a given action.
However, while participants of the second group were not
given any indication to focus search in any particular
direction, participants of the third group were provided with
domain tags representing domains thematically distant from
the TA, and were asked to search for potential situations
within such domains. The comparison between the types of
analogies provided by these two groups seeks to extend
Ripoll's (1998) findings in two ways. On the one hand, they
test the psychological reality of domain tags outside the realm
of analogical problem-solving. Most importantly, though,
they explore whether these tags can be strategically exploited
by the analogizer during voluntary analogical reminding.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants and Design One hundred and twenty undergraduate students at Universidad Nacional del Comahue

volunteered to participate in the experiment (Mean age =
21.49, SD = 3.42). An even number of participants was
randomly assigned to the argumentation condition (GAR),
the analogical argumentation condition (GAN), and the
analogical argumentation with predefined domains condition
(GAN+D). The variables indication to use analogies (two
levels: with and without explicit indication to use analogies)
and provision of search domains (two levels: with and
without indication to search within particular domains)
received between subjects manipulation. The dependent
variables were the number and type (intra/interdomain) of
the proposed BAs.
Materials and Procedure Before advancing to the target
task, participants of all groups received an instructional
material on argumentation. The material handed to the GAR
covered general features of arguments, but did not describe
specific types of arguments (e.g., analogies). The material
handed to the GAN and the GAN+D described the use of
analogies in persuasion, illustrating with two examples the
distinctions between intra and inter-domain analogies, as
well as between analogies based on situations retrieved from
memory and analogies based on invented situations. Once
the 10 min allotted to reading the instructional material had
elapsed, participants of all groups were given TA describing
the situation of a family that was accumulating an important
debt in the balance of their credit card. All groups had to
generate as many arguments as they could to persuade them
to cut expenses immediately in order to cancel the debt, on
the grounds that otherwise it would grow so big that future
cuts would need to be even more dramatic. Whereas
instructions given to the GAR did not mention the
convenience of including analogies to prior cases among the
persuasive arguments, participants of the GAN and GAN+D
were asked to base their arguments on analogies to known
situations. The difference between GAN and GAN+D was that
while participants of GAN received no instructions
concerning the domains of the BAs, participants of the
GAN+D were asked to sequentially focus their search within
four domains different from economy: health, human
relations, housekeeping, and breeding of animals and plants.
In order to prevent participants of the GAN+D and GAN+D
from reporting BAs not originated in retrieval processes
they were encouraged to base their analogies on past
episodes which had happened to them or to others, or that
were learned from verifiable sources such as newspapers,
books, movies, etc. Participants of GAR and GAN were given
20 min to complete the argumentation task. In the case of
GAN+D, participants were allotted 5 min for each of the
suggested domains. Once this time had elapsed, participants
of all groups were allotted 5 more minutes to report all other
arguments (or analogies, depending on the group) that had
come to mind during the previous phase but were not
reported for whatever reasons. This question was intended
to neutralize an eventual conscious editing of retrieved BAs,
(cf. Trench, Olguín & Minervino, 2011), like when a BA is
rejected for not being persuasive, or for not pertaining to the
specific domain that was requested (e.g., in GAN+D).

1482

Data analysis Two judges received instruction on the
concept of analogy, as well as on the general distinction
between intra and interdomain analogies. For the particular
TA at stake, they were instructed to regard as "analogical
responses" all proposals including the following elements:
(1) a problem of increasing magnitude, (2) a delay in the
attempts to solve it, and (3) a consequent increase in the cost
of solving it. Regarding the intra/interdomain distinction,
judges were instructed to score as intradomain all situations
where the problem of increasing magnitude was economic
(e.g., a public debt) and to score as interdomain all instances
in which the problem of increasing magnitude was not of
economic nature (e.g., an illness or addiction). Given that
we sought to detect all the BAs that were retrieved from
LTM in response to the target task, judges were handed all
responses produced by the participants, regardless of whether
they were reported during the argumentation phase, or
during later requirement to list all other situations that had
come to mind during the first task, but were not included
among the final proposals. Judges agreed in 82% of the
cases regarding the analogical status of proposals, and in
94% of the cases regarding their intra/interdomain nature.
Cases of disagreement were resolved by open discussion.

the TA, and 38% of retrieved TAs were semantically
dissimilar from the TA, a result that reproduces the pattern
typically obtained in the literature. In contrast with this
standard pattern of retrievals, judges' analyses of analogies
generated by the GAN+D showed that whereas 35% of the
retrieved BAs came from the same domain of the TA, 65%
of the retrieved BAs were interdomain, a result that goes
against the superficial bias typically obtained in the
literature on analogical retrieval. A comparison between the
GAN and the GAN+D in terms of their relative proportions of
superficially similar vs. superficially dissimilar retrievals thus
demonstrates that the participants can strategically favor the
retrieval of one or the other type of BAs, Z = -2.54, p < .05.
1.4	  
1.2	  
1	  

Intradomain
retrievals

0.8	  
0.6	  

Interdomain
retrievals

0.4	  
0.2	  
0	  

Gar

Results and Discussion

Gan

Gan+D

Figure 1. Mean number or retrievals, Experiment 1

Across conditions, participants proposed a mean of 2.10
responses (SD = .94), out of which 44% were rendered
"analogical" by the judges. Further comparisons and
statistical analyses were restricted to analogical proposals.
Our first empirical question concerned whether the task of
generating persuasive arguments would reliably elicit a
search for BAs in LTM, as observed within the literature on
analogical problem solving. Taking together intra and
interdomain proposals, participants of GAR retrieved a total of
7 BAs in response to the TA (M = .18, SD = .45). This level
of analogical retrieval is markedly lower than that of GAN
(M = .73, SD = .60), where participants were explicitly asked
to base their arguments on analogies to known situations,
t(72.14)= 4.658, p < .01. Given the performance exhibited
by the GAN, the disappointing number of BAs retrieved by
participants of GAR cannot be attributed to a lack of BAs
available in LTM for retrieval. Rather, it indicates that that
the pragmatic of generating persuasive arguments for a realworld target situation does not reliably elicit a spontaneous
search for relevant analogs in LTM. A likely explanation for
the difference between our results and those obtained with
problem solving tasks might lie in the fact that the types of
problems typically used (e.g. the tumor problem) do not
admit direct methods of solution (e.g., means-ends analysis).
Perhaps with other types of problems, the spontaneous use
of analogies would be less frequent, as it happened in the
present study.
Our second empirical question dealt with whether the
search mechanisms underlying voluntary analogical retrieval
are invariably set to favor superficially similar BAs. Judges'
analysis of analogical proposals reported by the GAN showed
that 62% of the retrieved BAs were semantically similar to

An intriguing question raised by the possibility of shifting
search away from the target domain concerns whether the
increased number of distant matches comes at the expense
of missing a number of intradomain BAs that would be
retrieved under a non strategically-oriented search, as a
"shift of focus" metaphor might suggest. A comparison
between the GAN and the GAN+D in terms of the mean
number of superficially similar and superficially dissimilar
BAs showed that whereas the mean number of distant BAs
generated by the GAN+D (M = 1.23, SD = 1.17) clearly
surpassed the mean number of distant BAs retrieved by the
GAN (M = .28, SD = .45), t(50.48) = 4.806, p < .001,
participants of GAN+D did not retrieve a lesser amount of
superficially similar BAs than participants of GAN (M = .65,
SD = .83, vs. M = .45, SD = .50, respectively), t(64.14) =
1.299, p > .05. Rather than simply shifting the focus towards
interdomain retrieval, it seems that participants of GAN+D are
broadening the scope of their search, an operation that
boosts access to distant analogs while still retaining baseline
levels of intradomain analogizing.
Even though the educational implications of the observed
increment in interdomain analogizing are easy to foresee, an
interesting question to be asked concerns whether a
reasonable increase in the absolute and relative amounts of
interdomain retrievals can still be obtained without providing
participants with a set of promising domains within which
to search for useful BAs. In Experiment 2, we tested this
possibility by comparing the analogical argumentation
condition (i.e., the former GAN) against a pro-interdomain
argumentation condition without the provision of predefined
search areas (GANint).

1483

Experiment 2
Method
Participants and Design Fourty students at Universidad
Nacional del Comahue (Mean age = 20.71, SD = 2.05) were
randomly assigned to two experimental conditions. The
variable type of argumentation (two levels: with indication to
use analogies vs. with indication to use interdomain analogies)
received between subjects manipulation. The dependent
variables were the number and type of the proposed BAs.
Materials and Procedure The materials and procedure
applied to the GAN were a replication of those followed with
the GAN of Experiment 1. The materials and procedure
employed with the GANint were identical to those of the GAN
with the sole difference that participants were asked to base
their persuasive analogies on episodes pertaining to domains
different from that of the TA (i.e., economy). Data analysis
was identical as in Experiment 1, with judges' agreement
reaching 85% with regards to the analogical status of
proposals, and 96% regarding their intra/interdomain nature.

Results and Discussion
Experiment 2 was carried out to assess whether an
increase in the absolute and relative amounts of interdomain
retrieval could still be obtained without providing participants
with a set of interdomain search areas to look for analogous
situations. A comparison between the GAN and the GANint
showed that the relative proportion of interdomain analogies
proposed by the GANint was higher than in the GAN, Z = –
1.97, p < .05. Whereas the analogies proposed by the GAN
were 63% intradomain and 37% interdomain, the analogies
proposed by the GANint were 40% intradomain and 60%
interdomain. Though not as strong as in Experiment 1, this
reversal demonstrates that participants can voluntarily alter
the superficial bias classically obtained in experiments of
analogical retrieval with the mere intention to search for
thematically distant sources in LTM.
1.4	  
1.2	  
1	  

Intradomain
retrievals

0.8	  
0.6	  

Interdomain
retrievals

0.4	  
0.2	  
0	  

Gan

Ganint

Figure 2. Mean number or retrievals, Experiment 2
As in Experiment 1, the augmented proportion of interdomain retrievals in the pro-interdomain condition was not
obtained at the expense of missing a number of intradomain
retrievals. A comparison between GAN and GANint in terms of
the mean number of intra and interdomain retrievals showed
that whereas GANint (M = .65, SD = .98) clearly surpassed
the GAN (M = .30, SD = .46, t(55.80) = 2.05, p < .05) in the

number of interdomain retrievals, both groups retrieved
similar amounts of intradomain BAs (M = .43, SD = .59 vs.
M = .50, SD = .60, respectively, t(78) = 0.562, p > .05). Once
again, it seems that a strategic search for interdomain BAs
can powerfully boost access to distant analogs, while still
retaining baseline levels of intradomain retrieval.

General Discussion
In order to reproduce human patterns of analogical retrieval,
extant computational models have specified in great detail a
number of assumptions about the types of representations
and computations implied in retrieving BAs from LTM. In
contrast to this long-lasting preoccupation, their presentations
are ambiguous as to whether the postulated mechanisms
account for the processes of spontaneous reminding, strategic
retrieval, or both. Albeit unsystematic, the evidence related to
this matter comes mainly from studies of analogical problemsolving, and suggests that both types of search yield similar
results, since the mere disposition to find a solution to a
problem reliably elicits a search for analogous BAs in LTM.
The first experiment of the present study tackled two
interrelated issues. The first one was concerned with
spontaneous analogical retrieval, and had to do with whether
other thoughtful activities different from problem solving
(in this case, persuasive argumentation) can also elicit
spontaneous remindings reliably. Results of Experiment 1
showed that when participants are not explicitly asked to base
their arguments on analogies to prior cases, this activity
seldom occurs spontaneously. In light of the performance of
a second group that was explicitly asked to use analogies, the
low level of spontaneous retrieval obtained by the first group
cannot be attributed to a lack of available BAs in LTM.
Rather, it shows that the pragmatics of generating persuasive
arguments does not reliably elicit a search for BAs in LTM.
These results have implications for models of analogical
retrieval, since they can help specify the conditions under
which the proposed mechanisms operate.
Our second concern was related to strategic analogical
retrieval, and dealt with whether this second type of process
can potentially reverse the superficial bias observed in
behavioral studies of analogical retrieval, and simulated by
computational models. Results showed that when participants
are asked to base their arguments on analogies to known
situations, they retrieve more superficial than distant matches.
However, when provided with a series of distant domains to
focus their search, this proportion reverses—a pattern of
results that claims for an extension of Ripoll's (1998) domain
tags to the arena of voluntary analogical retrieval. It should
be noted, however, that our conclusions were based on the
use of a single TA. In future studies, it would be desirable to
replicate these results with a wider set of materials.
Albeit never implemented, the developers of MAC/FAC
left open the possibility of relaxing its superficial bias by
either suspending FAC's computation of object attributes, or
by having the system run on a subset of LTM selected via
mechanisms of spreading-activation or indexing. Given the
strong superficial constraints imposed by the MAC stage, it

1484

seems that only by running on a subset of LTM (e.g., on a
subset defined by thematic search areas, or domains) the
program might have a chance of coping with the pattern of
interdomain analogizing elicited during strategic analogical
retrieval. In relation to this possibility, the fact that in
Experiments 1 and 2 participants of the pro-interdomain
conditions still retrieved a significant amount of intradomain
matches suggests that, at least with our materials, strategic
search can be somewhat demanding, leading to recurrent
cycles of non strategic retrieval attempts.
The present results on strategic analogical retrieval also
suggest interesting instructional applications, since educators
and researchers have long strived to find ways of facilitating
cross-domain transfer. In recent times, attention has shifted
from promoting an abstract encoding of BAs (e.g.,
Catrambone & Holyoak, 1989) to improving the encoding of
TAs at retrieval time, such as providing participants with two
structurally identical TAs, and asking them to compare such
TAs prior to attempting a solution (Gentner, Loewenstein,
Thompson & Forbus, 2009; Kurtz & Loewenstein, 2007). As
Loewenstein (2010) points out, the appeal of this approach
lies in its potential to foster retrieval of BAs which might
have been encoded in suboptimal ways. However, a practical
limitation of the target-comparison method used in the above
studies lies in the fact that participants need to be provided
with a second TA for every new TA. Even though
participants of our GAN+D were also provided with targetspecific information at retrieval time (a set of promising
domains to search for BAs), the GANint of our second
experiment retrieved mostly interdomain BAs with the sole
instruction to search within domains different from the TA,
that is, without receiving target-specific information. We
believe that the austerity of this last intervention opens up
encouraging perspectives for the flexible use of analogy in
educational environments.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by Grant PICT 1461 from the
ANCyT of Argentina, Grant 076 from the National
University of Comahue, Grant PIP 0266 from CONICET,
and grant PIB from Universidad Abierta Interamericana.

References
Blanchette, I., & Dunbar, K. (2000). How analogies are
generated: The roles of structural and superficial
similarity. Memory & Cognition, 28, 108-124.
Catrambone, R., & Holyoak, K. J. (1989) Overcoming
contextual limitations on problem-solving transfer.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 15, 1147-1156.
Chen, Z., Mo, L., & Honomichl, R. (2004). Having the
memory of an elephant: Long-term retrieval and the use
of analogues in problem solving. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 133, 415-433.
Forbus, K., Gentner, D., & Law, K. (1994). MAC/FAC: A
model of similarity-based retrieval. Cognitive Science, 19,
141-204.

Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Gentner, D. (1989). The mechanisms of analogical learning.
In S. Vosniadou & A. Ortony (Eds.), Similarity and
analogical reasoning. London: Cambridge University Press.
Gentner, D., & Forbus, K. D. (1991). MAC/FAC: A model
of similarity-based access and mapping. Proceedings of
the Thirteenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society (504-509).
Gentner, D., Loewenstein, J., Thompson, L., & Forbus, K.
(2009). Reviving inert knowledge: Analogical abstraction
supports relational retrieval of past events. Cognitive
Science, 3, 1343-1382.
Gentner, D., Rattermann, M. J., & Forbus, K. D. (1993). The
roles of similarity in transfer: Separating retrievability from
inferential soundness. Cognitive Psychology, 25, 431-467.
Holyoak, K., & Koh, K. (1987). Surface and structural
similarity in analogical transfer. Memory & Cognition, 15,
332-340.
Holyoak, K. J., Novick, L. R., & Melz, E. R. (1994).
Component processes in analogical transfer: Mapping,
pattern completion, and adaptation. In K. J. Holyoak & J.
A. Barnden (Eds.), Advances in connectionist and neural
computation theory, Vol. 2, Norwood, N.J.: Ablex
Holyoak, K., & Thagard, P. (1989). Analogical Mapping by
Constraint Satisfaction. Cognitive Science, 13, 295-355
Holyoak, K., & Thagard, P. (1995). Mental leaps: Analogy
in creative thought. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hummel, J. E., & Holyoak, K. J. (1997). Distributed
representations of structure: A theory of analogical access
and mapping. Psychological Review, 104, 427-466.
Keane, M.T. (1987). On retrieving analogues when solving
problems. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
39, 29-41.
Kurtz, K., & Loewenstein, J. (2007). Converging on a new
role for analogy in problem solving and retrieval: When
two problems are better than one. Memory & Cognition,
35, 334-341
Loewenstein, J. (2010). How one’s hook is baited matters
for catching an analogy. In B. Ross (Ed.), Psychology of
Learning and Motivation, Volume 53. Elsevier.
Ripoll, T. (1998). Why This Makes Me Think of That.
Thinking and Reasoning, 4,15-43.
Thagard, P., Holyoak, K., Nelson, G., & Gochfeld, D.
(1990). Analog retrieval by constraint satisfaction.
Artificial Intelligence, 46, 259-310.
Trench, M., Oberholzer, N., & Minervino, R. (2009).
Dissolving the analogical paradox: Retrieval under a
production paradigm is highly constrained by superficial
similarity. In B. Kokinov, K. Holyoak y D. Gentner (Eds.),
New frontiers in analogy research. Sofia: NBU Press.
Trench, M., Olguín, V., & Minervino, R. (2011). Mammoth
cloning reminds us of “Jurassic Park” but storm replication
does not: Naturalistic settings do not aid the retrieval of
distant analogs. Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 2649-2654). Austin,
TX: Cognitive Science Society

1485

