UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Awareness in Decision-Making: Implicit Influences or Measurement Biases?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8hs0358m

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Konstantinidis, Emmanouil
Shanks, David

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Awareness in Decision-Making: Implicit Influences or Measurement Biases?
Emmanouil Konstantinidis (emmanouil.konstantinidis.09@ucl.ac.uk) & David R. Shanks (d.shanks@ucl.ac.uk)
Department of Cognitive, Perceptual and Brain Sciences
University College London
26 Bedford Way, WC1H 0AP, London,UK
Abstract

lected cards from the good decks before they had conscious
knowledge that those decks were the best. Importantly, the
SCRs were higher prior to selections from the bad decks, suggesting that non-conscious biases (or markers) helped participants to avoid disadvantageous selections.
The assertion that our decisions are guided by implicit influences has been extensively criticized on the basis of weaknesses in the method that Bechara et al. (1997) used to probe
awareness. Broad questions often fail to capture the rich
spectrum of conscious knowledge, and moreover participants
may not fully report their knowledge due to a conservative
response criterion (see Newell & Shanks, in press). Following these methodological considerations, Maia and McClelland (2004) developed a more sensitive test of awareness in
the form of a quantitative questionnaire. They asked their
participants to rate each deck on a numerical scale, to report
the expected wins and losses from each deck, and to indicate
which deck they would pick if they could only choose from
one deck for the rest of the task. Using this assessment, Maia
and McClelland found that optimal performance on the IGT
was accompanied by accurate reports of the decks’ payoffs,
indicating that there is little evidence that implicit or emotional biases are essential for successful learning of the task
structure.

Can our decisions be guided by unconscious or implicit influences? According to the somatic marker hypothesis, emotionbased signals guide our decisions in uncertain environments
outside awareness. However, evidence for this claim can be
questioned on the grounds of inadequate assessments of conscious knowledge. Post-decision wagering, in which participants make wagers on the correctness of their decisions, has
been recently proposed as an objective and sensitive measure
of conscious content. In the experiments reported here, we employed variations of a classic decision-making paradigm, the
Iowa Gambling Task, in combination with wagering in order
to investigate the role played by unconscious influences. We
also examined biases that affect wagering strategies such as
the definition of the optimal strategy and loss aversion. Our
results demonstrate the inadequacy of post-decision wagering
as a direct measure of conscious knowledge and also question
the claim that implicit processes influence decision-making.
Keywords: Iowa Gambling Task; decision-making; postdecision wagering; awareness; implicit learning; loss aversion.

Introduction
One of the most influential paradigms in the study of
decision-making under uncertainty is the Iowa Gambling
Task (IGT), a four-armed bandit task which requires participants to sample from decks of cards (labeled A-D) with different monetary payoffs (Bechara et al., 1994). Each card
selection yields either a win or a combination of a win and
loss. Overall, two of the decks are bad, leading to higher
immediate wins but long-term losses (a net loss of −$25 per
card) whereas the remaining two are good, leading to lower
immediate rewards but long-term wins (a net win of +$25 per
card). Another feature of the task is that the decks differ in
the probability of loss with two having infrequent (p=.1) and
two decks having frequent (p=.5) losses.
The IGT was initially designed to test empirically the somatic marker hypothesis (SMH), according to which bodily
affective signals or markers can assist decision-making processes by marking response outcomes with an emotional signal, thus facilitating the selection of the most rewarding options in situations of uncertainty (see Damasio, 1996). A major assumption regarding somatic markers is that they can inform advantageous decision-making even when participants
are not aware of the quality of their decisions.

Post-Decision Wagering
Despite the apparent evidence in favor of conscious processing in the IGT, Bechara et al. (2005) suggested that the
method of probing awareness used by Maia and McClelland
(2004) was intrusive and so may render participants more
rapidly aware of the task structure and thus undermine the
role of somatic markers. In order to avoid the methodological
inconsistencies created by verbal reports and numerical confidence ratings, Persaud, McLeod, and Cowey (2007) developed a novel non-verbal method of assessing awareness in the
IGT, in which participants are required to make wagers after
their card selections (post-decision wagering; PDW). The rationale is that if a participant maximizes her winnings through
advantageous wagering (high wager after a good deck choice
or low after a bad deck), then this is taken to indicate conscious knowledge.
Persaud et al. (2007) examined the influence of different
types of questioning in combination with wagering in three
different groups. In their version of the IGT, participants
were instructed to wager £10 or £20 after each deck selection. Selections from the bad decks yielded a win of two
times the wager whereas selections from the good decks returned the amount of the wager. The net outcome was ei-

Measures of Conscious Knowledge in the IGT
In a highly influential study, Bechara et al. (1997) assessed
participants’ knowledge by pausing the task every 10 trials
and asking them to report whatever they knew and felt about
the task. In addition, participants’ electrodermal skin conductance responses (SCRs) were measured as an index of emotional arousal. The crucial finding was that participants se-

811

Table 1: Payoff matrices for the different combinations of deck selection and wager.

ther a win of £75 (good decks) or a loss of the same amount
(bad decks) per 10 cards if participants randomly allocated
their wagers. Persaud et al. measured on which trial good
deck selection and advantageous wagering began and conjectured that if a significant difference between these measures
emerged, with performance revealing a preference for good
decks before advantageous wagering emerged, this would indicate an unconscious influence on decision-making. In fact,
the groups who were asked no questions or the questions of
Bechara et al. (1997) demonstrated a lag between good deck
selection and advantageous wagering, indicating a dissociation between performance and awareness. On the other hand,
when awareness was probed by the questionnaire of Maia and
McClelland (2004), performance and advantageous wagering developed simultaneously. These findings led Persaud et
al. to conclude that there are implicit influences on decisionmaking which are masked if the measure of awareness makes
participants aware of the nature of the task.

Wager
Low
High

Persaud et al.

Clifford et al.

Good
+1
+2

Deck Selection
Good Bad Good
+2
-1
+1
+5
-5
+10

Bad
-1
-2

Schurger & Sher
Bad
-2
-10

from wagering high all the time. This can be shown by computing the expected payoff from wagering low which is +1/2
[= (+2 − 1)/2] when deck selection is random compared to
0 [= (+5 − 5)/2] from wagering high. However, when deck
discrimination is better than chance, it is more rewarding to
wager high due to a higher payoff with a good-high combination (+5) than a good-low one (+2). Based on this matrix a
rational participant (i.e., a participant who seeks to maximize
gains) would start to wager high only when her discrimination
or level of awareness is 4/7 or .57. The latter can be computed from the differential loss of wagering on a bad decision
(5 − 1 = 4) divided by the sum of the differential loss and the
differential gain of wagering on a good decision (5 − 2 = 3).
We also addressed the question of how sensitive wagering
is compared to another measure of awareness by using the
quantitative questions of Maia and McClelland (2004).

Overview of the Experiments
Although post-decision wagering holds much promise as a
method of measuring awareness, it has received many criticisms (e.g., Clifford, Arabzadeh, & Harris, 2008; Fleming &
Dolan, 2010; Schurger & Sher, 2008). In the present study,
we will focus on two problematic and rather contradictory aspects of the method: the definition of the optimal strategy and
loss aversion. Paradoxically, the optimal strategy is always to
wager high as this strategy will give the same outcome if deck
discrimination is at chance but will increase winnings if it is
greater than chance. In this sense wagering high can be said
to be a weakly dominant strategy with Persaud et al.’s (2007)
payoff matrix, as it is either no worse than wagering low, or
better. Consequently, a rational participant would always wager high, regardless of her knowledge about the task.
A second important issue is the influence of loss aversion in wagering strategies. According to prospect theory
(Kahneman & Tversky, 1979), people have an asymmetric conceptualisation of wins and losses; for example, the
prospect of losing £5 is considered to be of greater psychological magnitude than that of winning the same amount. Subjective measures of awareness require participants to set a
criterion about, for example, whether to wager high or low.
Hence, any criterion may be modulated by cognitive biases
such as loss aversion.
The present study examines the validity and sensitivity of
post-decision wagering by looking closely at the two aforementioned problematic aspects and by measuring participants’ awareness in combination with Maia and McClelland’s
(2004) quantitative questions.

Method
Participants Twenty-one volunteers participated (13 females, age M = 23.45, SD = 3.56), all of whom were recruited via the departmental subject pool. They were paid £2
for their participation and an additional amount between £0
and £3, dependent on their performance in the task.
Task A probabilistic variation of the original IGT was employed. There were four decks of cards with identical physical appearance, labelled A-D. The payoff structure of each
deck was different to the original IGT; the matrix of Clifford
et al. (2008) was used as the basis of the payoffs received by
participants on each trial, in such a way that the amount won
or lost was dependent on card selection and wagering. Based
on the contingencies in Table 1, on the majority of trials a
payoff of +2 was associated with a good deck selection and a
low wager. Similarly, the combination of a bad deck and high
wager produced a payoff of −5. On a minority of trials the
signs of the payoffs were reversed (e.g., the payoff was −2 for
good deck selection/low wager). For decks A and C, the majority outcome occurred on a randomly-chosen 75% of trials
while for decks B and D, the majority outcome occurred on
60% of trials, resulting in different overall expected payoffs
for each deck. In contrast to the original IGT, the outcome on
each trial was either a net win or a loss and participants could
win or lose points, which translated into money at the end of
the experiment.
The task comprised 100 card selections. After each card selection, participants could place a wager, either High or Low.

Experiment 1: The Weakly Dominant Strategy
In order to overcome the problem that wagering high is
the rational strategy irrespective of the acquired knowledge,
Clifford et al. (2008) proposed a solution by modifying the
original payoff matrix used by Persaud et al. (2007) (see Table 1). In this modified matrix participants are discouraged

812

They were told that if they were confident that their choice
would give them some net winnings, then they should wager
high, otherwise, they should make a low wager. Based on
the combination of deck selection and wagering, participants
were presented with a single amount, either a win or a loss.
Along with wagering, participants’ conscious knowledge was
assessed using a modified version of Maia and McClelland’s
(2004) questionnaire, which was administered every 20 trials.

1.0
0.9

A

●

0.8

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

0.6

●

●

0.5
0.4

0.5

Proportion

Performance

0.7

0.3
●

Results

0.2

Choice and Wagering In order to examine whether
decision-making strategies in the IGT are dissociable from
awareness we computed the average proportion of good deck
selections (decks C and D) and advantageous wagering (either a high wager after a good deck or a low wager after a
bad deck) over successive blocks of 10 trials. If learning of
the good decks emerged earlier than awareness (as indexed by
wagering) then that would indicate an unconscious influence
on decision-making strategies in the IGT. However, performance exceeded the chance level on block 1 for both measures (Choice: t(20) = 2.83, p = .01, 95% CI [0.52, 0.65],
Wagering: t(20) = 3.80, p < .001, 95% CI [0.57, 0.73]) (see
Figure 1A). It is important to note that even though they use
the same scale, the two measures cannot be compared directly because advantageous wagering is dependent on the
first-order decision (e.g., deck selection) and this creates the
possibility of functional differences between the measurement scales. For example, if a participant always chooses a
good deck (with the proportion of good deck selections therefore being 1.0), but decides to make both high and low wagers
because she is more confident on some trials than others, then
advantageous wagering cannot attain a value of 1.0.
A repeated-measures ANOVA on good deck selections with polynomial contrasts revealed significant linear, F(1, 20) = 72.38, MSE = 3.12, p < .001, η2g = 0.41,
and quadratic trends, F(1, 20) = 7.34, MSE = 1.83, p =
.013, η2g = 0.04. Wagering performance closely followed
the optimal decision-making strategy as demonstrated by a
linear effect of block, F(1, 20) = 19.57, MSE = 4.26, p <
.001, η2g = 0.19. These results indicate that participants favored the good decks and became gradually capable of maximizing their winnings by placing appropriate wagers. Since
choice and wagering displayed similar patterns there is no
evidence of a dissociation between learning and awareness of
the optimal strategy, a pattern which is at odds with the main
claim of Persaud et al. (2007) about learning without awareness in the IGT.
An important feature of our task variant is that each deck
yielded different overall expected outcomes. If participants
had explicit insight about their choices, they could discriminate not only between good and bad decks but also within
each pair of decks (A vs B and C vs D). More selections from
the most rewarding of the good decks (deck C) would suggest
that participants possess substantial knowledge about the payoff structure of the task. Figure 1B shows that participants indeed selected more cards from the deck with the highest win

0.1
0.0
1

Good Deck Selection
Advantageous Wagering
Ratings
Deck Selected
Reported Net
Calculated Net
2

3

0.4

B

5

6

7

0.60

0.2
0.1

0.25

0.40

A

B

0.0

4

0.75

0.3

8

C

9

D

10

Block

Figure 1: (A) Proportion of good deck selections and advantageous
wagering across block of trials (lines) and proportion of participants
who favored the good decks in the quantitative questions (markers).
Error bars are ±1 SEM. (B) Overall proportion of deck selections.
The win probability associated with each deck is depicted on the top
of each bar.

probability (.75) and there was a significant preference over
the second best deck, t(20) = 3.98, p < .001, d = 0.87.
Questionnaire Two of the questionnaire measures, in
which participants provided a rating for each deck and indicated which deck they would select cards from for the remainder of the task (Ratings and Deck Selected in Figure 1),
reflect knowledge about the general quality of the decks. The
remaining two measures, in which participants reported the
average net outcome from each deck (Reported Net), refer to
the actual payoffs. Participants also reported the average win
and loss and the frequency of losses, based on which a net
amount for each deck is obtained (Calculated Net).
Figure 1 (markers) shows the proportion of participants
whose answers favored the good decks in each of the questionnaire measures. Participants whose verbal responses did
not discriminate between good and bad decks (i.e., they gave
the same ratings or same reported net for all decks) do not
count towards this proportion. Inspection of the figure shows
that participants exhibited substantial knowledge about the
quality of each deck even in the first assessment period (trial
20). Not only did they rate the good decks higher than the bad
decks, but also they had a firm basis for such an attribution as
revealed by their reported and calculated net payoffs.
Another way of examining the two measures is to look at
participants’ deck selections and wagering in the trials following the administration of the questionnaire (trials 21, 41,
61, 81) in order to examine whether participants who behaved
advantageously had knowledge of the advantageous strategy.
Specifically, we are interested in the verbal reports and wagers of those participants who behaved advantageously (i.e.,
selected good decks) in these trials. Figure 2 shows that the
majority of participants who made good deck selections also
demonstrated knowledge of the advantageous strategy in all
the questionnaire items. However, wagering underestimates
the acquired knowledge in all trials following the question-

813

aversion affects awareness as indexed by wagering (e.g., Dienes & Seth, 2010; Fleming & Dolan, 2010).
Schurger and Sher (2008) proposed that the design of the
payoff matrix should take into account participants’ tendency
to evaluate losses worse than equivalent wins. Unlike Clifford
et al.’s matrix, which encourages low wagers when certainty
is low, “subjects seem to need precisely quite the opposite
sort of encouragement” (Schurger & Sher, 2008, p. 209). Table 1 shows the matrix devised by Schurger and Sher as a
means to counter loss aversion. Specifically when discrimination between good and bad decks is at chance it is more
advantageous to wager high due to a negative expected payoff from wagering low [(+1 − 2)/2 = −1/2] compared to a
neutral payoff from wagering high [(+10 − 10)/2 = 0]. Following this, it can be shown that a rational participant would
switch to high wagers even when her discrimination is below
chance (50%), at 8/17 or 47%. Specifically, the differential
loss of wagering on a bad decision is 8 (= 10 − 2) divided
by the sum of the differential loss and the differential gain of
wagering on a good decision (10 − 1 = 9).
Despite the fact that this matrix discourages participants
from wagering low under uncertainty, its weights regarding
high wagers are two times bigger compared to the matrix of
Clifford et al. On the one hand, the larger loss following
a low wager after an incorrect decision discourages participants from wagering low, thus overcoming the problem of
loss aversion. On the other hand, the bigger weights for high
wagers could discourage participants from wagering high,
even when knowledge about the quality of the decks exists.
Thus, employment of this matrix might reveal that the remedy proposed to counter loss aversion cannot be achieved due
to the increased weights associated with high wagering.

naire compared to the verbal reports (the figure also shows
wagers on trial 100, immediately prior to the final set of questions). Thus, it is evident that the detailed and structured
questions revealed higher levels of awareness compared to
wagering.
1.0

% Participants

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6
Ratings
Deck Selected
Reported Net

0.5
20

Calculated Net
Wagering

40

60

80

100

Trial

Figure 2: Percentage of participants who showed knowledge of the
advantageous strategy in the questionnaire items versus in their wagers. Wagering indicates the percentage of participants who made
an advantageous wager (high on a good deck choice) on the trial
immediately following the administration of the questionnaire.

Discussion
The key point of Experiment 1 is that wagering did not lag
behind the selection of good decks, with both measures becoming reliably better than chance very early in the task. Under the conditions tested here, awareness as measured by wagering tracked deck selections quite closely. In addition, the
results of the quantitative questions revealed that there was
actually conscious knowledge that was left undetected by wagering as participants’ wagers were less sensitive than their
verbal reports. This places a question mark over the validity
of post-decision wagering as a valid and sensitive method of
assessing awareness.
An interesting finding is the early onset of learning and
awareness (Block 1) which can be primarily explained by
the probabilistic allocation of wins and losses on each trial.
Fellows and Farah (2005) found that in their shuffled IGT version (the order of the decks was changed so that losses from
the bad decks occurred immediately at the start of the task)
normal controls selected more cards from the good decks
even in the first 20 trials and they kept on choosing the good
decks throughout the task. This setup of the payoff schedule
removes the reversal learning component of the IGT which
can delay the learning of the optimal decisions.

Method
Participants We tested a total of 30 participants (24 females, age M = 25.08, SD = 4.02), recruited from UCL’s psychology subject pool. Participants were rewarded between £1
and £5, proportional to their performance on the task.
Task The payoffs of each deck were different to the original IGT, but their overall expected payoffs reflected the ratio of losses to wins of the original task. There were four
decks of cards each having 100 associated wins and losses,
one for each trial. A randomly drawn (win or loss) value was
then computed for each trial, which constituted the payoff on
that deck for that trial. Decks A and B were bad decks, with
an overall net outcome of −500 points (a net loss of −5 per
card). These decks had high rewards (from 15 − 25 points),
but large losses (from 25 − 75). Decks C and D were good
decks, with an overall net outcome of +500 points (a net win
of +5 per card). They had lower rewards (from 5 − 15), but
their losses were smaller too. Decks A, B, and C had a loss
on 50% of trials, whereas Deck D had a loss on 10% of trials. The characteristics of each deck matched the original
IGT, including the probabilities and relative magnitudes of
losses, except for deck B. The losses on deck B were dis-

Experiment 2: Dealing with Loss Aversion
Depending on the payoff matrix, participants may employ
different response criteria to place high or low wagers which
can make detection of acquired knowledge very difficult.
This leads to the possibility that the expression of awareness
via wagering may be constrained by factors other than knowledge itself. For instance, several studies have shown that loss

814

tributed over 50 trials (as against originally 10 trials only).
We did this to avoid a major loss if participants were unlucky
enough to encounter the deck B loss with a high wager. The
post-decision wagers comprised multipliers, with the payoff
schedule as proposed by Schurger and Sher (2008). Accordingly, a given IGT trial payoff was multiplied by a factor of
2 when wagering low on decks A and B, and by 1 when wagering low on decks C and D. When wagering high, all deck
payoffs were multiplied by a factor of 10.

served. On the other hand, deck D (loss probability .1) was
selected more often than deck C (loss probability .5) even
though both decks have the same expected value.

Discussion

Figure 3: (A) Proportion of good deck selections and advantageous
wagering across block of trials. Error bars are ±1 SEM. (B) Overall
proportion of deck selections.

This experiment confirms the hypothesis that loss aversion
modulates wagering strategies by making participants more
sensitive to losses. While the payoff matrix we used encourages high wagering under uncertainty, the probabilistic IGT
variant we employed was found to be easier to learn than
the classic IGT and thus participants were able to grasp the
payoff schedule in the first 10 trials, indicating that they did
not go through a phase of exploration or uncertainty. Having
learned the probabilistic structure of wins and losses early in
the task, it might be expected that wagering would simultaneously follow the optimal choices. This was the case in the
first 2 blocks where participants had learned about the good
strategy and made high wagers. Yet a random loss which may
occur from the selection of a good deck with a high wager (×
10) would result in a large amount of points being deducted
from the total sum. Hence, a “lose-less” strategy seems to
overtake the tendency to maximize winnings, and in this particular case leads to suboptimal wagering. In other words,
loss aversion constrains participants from wagering high on
their good deck selections. This is indicative of a bias regulating wagering strategies and not lack of awareness. While
good deck selections gradually increased to reach the maximum point by the end of the task, it would be unreasonable to
argue that this was the effect of an unconscious mechanism.
The present experiment also highlights the inadequacy of
post-decision wagering to measure awareness objectively and
directly. Small changes in the payoff matrix can dramatically
change the expression of awareness as cognitive or response
biases overtly influence the reasoning behind participants’
wagering strategies.

Two separate repeated-measures ANOVAs were conducted
to investigate the progression of good deck selections and advantageous wagering across blocks. Polynomial contrasts revealed a significant linear effect of block on the proportion of
good deck selections, F(1, 29) = 143.40, MSE = 2.34, p <
.001, η2g = 0.37. However, the same trend was not observed
on the proportion of advantageous wagers as the linear effect
was not significant, F(1, 29) = 2.06, MSE = 8.44, p = .16.
Even though wagering was above chance even from block 1,
it never exceeded 0.7. In a situation where high wagers have
much greater stakes than low wagers, participants may wager
conservatively throughout the task, independent of learning
and awareness, due to an aversion to large losses. Additionally, advantageous wagering was above chance in all blocks
of trials.
Figure 3B shows the proportion of deck selections throughout the task. Deck B was not selected as often as in previous studies using the IGT, a fact which reflects the change of
the loss probability. When the occurrence of losses is more
frequent (.5), the prominent deck B phenomenon is not ob-

The purpose of the present article was twofold: first, to evaluate how sensitive and direct post-decision wagering is as a
measure of awareness, and secondly to investigate whether
there are implicit influences on decision-making under uncertainty or whether past suggestive results have been the byproduct of use of insensitive measures.
We examined two main response biases, dominance and
loss aversion, which arise from the design of the payoff matrix. In both cases, there was a direct effect of the design
of the payoff matrix on the wagering strategies that participants employed. In Experiment 1, no delay was observed
in the onset of awareness relative to deck selection, as advantageous wagering closely followed learning of the good
decks. The early onset of awareness can be accounted for
by either of two factors: first, the values in the payoff matrix which may have encouraged low wagers, and secondly,
the quantitative questions which might have influenced the
development of awareness of the deck values. However, participants’ wagering performance was better than chance even

Results
Performance exceeded chance on block 1 for both measures
(Choice: t(29) = 2.39, p = .023, 95% CI [0.51, 0.64], Wagering: t(29) = 2.52, p = .018, 95% CI [0.51, 0.61]) (see Figure
3). This result indicates that participants’ optimal decisionmaking and learning occurred very early in the task, a pattern
that is not observed in previous studies which have utilised a
payoff schedule similar or identical to the original IGT.
1.0
0.9

A
●

0.8

●

0.6

●

●

●

0.5
0.4

0.5

Proportion

Performance

0.7

●

●

●

●
●

0.3
0.2
0.1

●

0.0
1

Good Deck Selection
Advantageous Wagering

2

3

0.4

B

0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

4

5

6

7

A

8

B

C

9

D

10

Block

General Discussion

815

Acknowledgments

before the first administration of the questionnaire, indicating
that the explicit nature of the questions did not make participants more aware of the decks’ payoffs.

We thank Ojas Mehta for his help in collecting the data of
Experiment 2 and for his useful comments. This work was
supported by a UCL Graduate School fellowship (EK).

In Experiment 2, we tried to control for the effects of loss
aversion on wagering strategies, mindful of the possibility
that the high values in the wagering matrix could make participants reluctant to place high wagers. The matrix proposed by
Schurger and Sher (2008) attempts to eliminate loss aversion
in situations of uncertainty, that is when knowledge about a
response option is weak. Participants were able to discriminate between the decks after a few trials. Although wagering
performance was better than chance from the beginning of
the task, it did not lead participants to maximize their earnings. One explanation lies in the design of the task: with
random losses occurring even on selections from the good
decks and wagers treated as multipliers of the actual payoffs,
the prospect of losing a significant amount could inhibit the
placement of high wagers.

References
Bechara, A., Damasio, A. R., Damasio, H., & Anderson,
S. W. (1994). Insensitivity to future consequences following damage to human prefrontal cortex. Cognition, 50,
7-15.
Bechara, A., Damasio, H., Tranel, D., & Damasio, A. R.
(1997). Deciding advantageously before knowing the advantageous strategy. Science, 275, 1293-1295.
Bechara, A., Damasio, H., Tranel, D., & Damasio, A. R.
(2005). The Iowa gambling task and the somatic marker
hypothesis: Some questions and answers. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 9, 159-162.
Clifford, C. W. G., Arabzadeh, E., & Harris, J. A. (2008).
Getting technical about awareness. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 12, 54-58.
Damasio, A. R. (1996). The somatic marker hypothesis and
the possible functions of the prefrontal cortex. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 351, 1413-1420.
Dienes, Z., & Seth, A. K. (2010). Gambling on the unconscious: A comparison of wagering and confidence ratings as measures of awareness in an artificial grammar task.
Consciousness and Cognition, 19, 674-681.
Dunn, B. D., Dalgleish, T., & Lawrence, A. D. (2006). The
somatic marker hypothesis: A critical evaluation. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 30, 239-271.
Fellows, L. K., & Farah, M. J. (2005). Different underlying impairments in decision-making following ventromedial and dorsolateral frontal lobe damage in humans. Cerebral Cortex, 15, 58-63.
Fleming, S. M., & Dolan, R. J. (2010). Effects of loss aversion on post-decision wagering: Implications for measures
of awareness. Consciousness and Cognition, 19, 352-363.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An
analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica, 47, 263291.
Maia, T. V., & McClelland, J. L. (2004). A reexamination
of the evidence for the somatic marker hypothesis: What
participants really know in the Iowa gambling task. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 101, 1607516080.
Newell, B. R., & Shanks, D. R. (in press). Unconscious influences on decision making: A critical review. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences.
Persaud, N., McLeod, P., & Cowey, A. (2007). Post-decision
wagering objectively measures awareness. Nature Neuroscience, 10, 257-261.
Schurger, A., & Sher, S. (2008). Awareness, loss aversion,
and post-decision wagering. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
12, 209-210.
Steingroever, H., Wetzels, R., Horstmann, A., Neumann, J.,
& Wagenmakers, E.-J. (2013). Performance of healthy
participants on the Iowa gambling task. Psychological Assessment, 25, 180-193.

Even though the decision-making paradigms employed in
our experiments are not identical to the original IGT, they
maintain its key characteristics such as sequential choices,
rewards, punishments, and uncertainty, while removing some
of its problematic features such as participants’ tendency to
focus on decks with infrequent losses, the lack of explorationexploitation, and the dual presentation of the outcomes.
These latter issues make the interpretation of IGT data quite
difficult (see Steingroever et al., 2013). Nevertheless, future
work could seek to determine whether advantageous deck selection and wagering develop in parallel when our probabilistic version includes the reversal learning element of the original IGT task.
The claim that unconscious biases are essential for successful performance in the IGT has not been confirmed in either
of the experiments reported here. In fact, participants’ advantageous selections developed in parallel with their conscious knowledge, as revealed by verbal reports and wagering. Learning of the task contingencies through emotional
markers cannot be ruled out, but does not seem to precede
conscious evaluation of the experienced outcomes. In other
words, the activation of an unconscious emotional system
which provides critical information for decision-making processes is not essential or sufficient to explain learning in the
IGT. Dunn, Dalgleish, and Lawrence (2006) suggested that
there is little evidence to support the view that deck contingencies are consciously impenetrable, and that what needs
to be tested is whether participants have an explicit understanding of the payoff schedule or whether they can simply
discriminate the quality of the decks. Our questionnaire results demonstrate that participants not only were able to show
a general preference for the good decks but that in addition
they could justify their preferences by accurately reporting
the average wins and losses associated with each deck. This
knowledge develops very early in the task, leaving little room
for unconscious influences.

816

