UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Beyond Synchrony: Complementarity and Asynchrony in Joint Action
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0px75509
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)
Authors
Dale, Rick
Fusaroli, Riccardo
Døjbak Håkonsson, Dorthe Døjbak
et al.
Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                 Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

            Beyond Synchrony: Complementarity and Asynchrony in Joint Action
                                                   Rick Dale (rdale@ucmerced.edu)
                                Cognitive and Information Sciences, UC Merced, 5200 N. Lake Road
                                                             Merced, CA 95343
                                                Riccardo Fusaroli (semrf@hum.au.dk)
                Center for Semiotics and the Interacting Minds Center, Aarhus University, Jens Chr. Skous Vej 2,
                                                          8000 Aarhus C, Denmark
                                              Dorthe Døjbak Håkonsson (dod@asb.dk)
                 Interdisciplinary Center for Organizational Architecture, Fuglesangs Allé 20, Building 2635 I106
                                                          8210 Aarhus V, Denmark
                                                Patrick Healey (ph@eecs.qmul.ac.uk)
       Department of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, Queen Mary University of London, Mile End Road
                                                               London E1 4NS
                                                     Dan Mønster (danm@asb.dk)
               School of Business and Social Sciences, Department of Economics and Business, Fuglesangs Allé 4
                                                          8210 Aarhus V, Denmark
                                                John J. McGraw (iksjmc@hum.au.dk)
                                                TESIS Network, Østboulevarden 11F, 2
                                                          8000 Aarhus C, Denmark
                                           Panagiotis Mitkidis (mitkidispan@gmail.com)
           Center for Advanced Hindsight, Social Science Research Institute, Duke University, 2024 West Main Street
                                                            Durham, NC 27705
                                                  Kristian Tylén (semkt@hum.au.dk)
                 Center for Semiotics and the Interacting Minds Center, Aarhus University, Jens Chr. Skous Vej 2
                                                          8000 Aarhus C, Denmark
   Keywords: Joint action; distributed cognition; social cognition;     rowing may afford interacting agents to synchronize their
   interpersonal coordination.                                          individual behaviours to reach high levels of joint
                                                                        performance, other types of joint activity – like playing a
                     Summary of Topic                                   game of baseball – rather afford complementary actions: i.e.
Recent advances in social cognition and joint action reveal             tightly coupled, reciprocal activity derived from different
the social and the mutual, rather than the individual and the           behaviours performed across an extended temporal
dichotomous aspects of cognition (Hasson, Ghazanfar,                    sequence. Shared construction tasks as well as task-oriented
Galantucci, Garrod, & Keysers, 2012). A widespread and                  dialogues, for instance, have been shown to require smooth
powerful model of socially interactive behavior is                      turn-taking, and the development of interactional routines
‘synchrony’ (Jirsa & Kelso, 2004): Numerous studies have                which might involve complementary roles (Dale, Fusaroli,
thus recently indicated how individuals through social                  Duran, & Richardson, in press; Fusaroli, Raczaszek-
interaction become increasingly entrained on multiple levels            Leonardi, & Tylén, accepted). Cultural practices dwell upon
from physiology to syntax: through interaction people                   and stabilize complementary distribution of work, to make
synchronize their heart rates, their subtle postural sways,             challenging task as the sailing of a warship or the
their gestures and gaze behaviors, align their lexicon and              construction of huge buildings possible (Hutchins, 1995;
their syntax (Fusaroli & Tylén, 2012; Louwerse, Dale, Bard,             Perry, 2010).
& Jeuniaux, 2012; Pickering & Garrod, 2004). However,                      The session will address the implications and respective
emerging scholarship is increasingly attending to many                  roles of synchrony, complementarity and asynchrony as
instances in which patterns of complementary and                        components of coordination. Different methods and
asynchronous actions rather than synchronous ones seem to               perspectives for quantifying and assessing coordinative
predict high levels of interpersonal coordination and joint             dynamics in language, behaviour and physiology will be
performance. While some activities such as expertly timed               presented conceptually and in their empirical application.
                                                                     79

                          Speakers                                Dale, R., & Spivey, M. J. (2006). Unraveling the dyad: Using
                                                                            recurrence analysis to explore patterns of syntactic
Rick Dale (moderator) is a cognitive scientist at UC
                                                                            coordination between children and caregivers in
Merced. He has worked and published extensively on
                                                                            conversation. Language Learning, 56(3), 391-430
language and social interaction developing and applying a
                                                                  Fusaroli, R., Bahrami, B., Olsen, K., Rees, G., Frith, C. D.,
range of novel non-linear statistical methods to assess
                                                                            Roepstorff, A., & Tylén, K. (2012). Coming to
dynamical properties of multimodal social coordination
                                                                            terms: an experimental quantification of the
(Dale, et al., in press; Dale & Spivey, 2006; Louwerse, et
                                                                            coordinative benefits of linguistic interaction.
al., 2012; Tollefsen & Dale, 2012).
                                                                            Psychological science, 23(8)
   Patrick Healey is a professor of human interaction and
                                                                  Fusaroli, R., Raczaszek-Leonardi, J., & Tylén, K. (accepted).
head of the Interaction Media and Communication research
                                                                            Dialogue as interpersonal synergy. New Ideas in
group at University of London. His research concerns
                                                                            Psychology, xxx(xx), xxx-xxx
experimental work on technology-mediated dialogical
                                                                  Fusaroli, R., & Tylén, K. (2012). Carving Language for
communication and – in particular – miscommunication
                                                                            Social Interaction: a dynamic approach Interaction
(Healey, Howes, & Purver, 2010; Healey & Mills, 2006;
                                                                            studies, 13(1), 103-123
Mills & Healey, 2008).
                                                                  Håkonsson, D. D., Burton, R. M., Obel, B., & Laurdisen, J.
   John J. McGraw, cognitive anthropologist (TESIS, a
                                                                            (2012). Strategy implementation requires the right
Marie Curie Initial Training Network), and Panagiotis
                                                                            executive style. Long range planning, 45(2-3), 182-
Mitkidis, cognitive psychologist (Interacting Minds Centre
                                                                            208
at Aarhus University and Center for Advanced Hindsight at
                                                                  Hasson, U., Ghazanfar, A. A., Galantucci, B., Garrod, S., &
Duke University) investigate the role of objects and material
                                                                            Keysers, C. (2012). Brain-to-brain coupling: a
structures in the coordination of behavior, cognition, and the
                                                                            mechanism for creating and sharing a social world.
enhancement of cooperation (Xygalatas et al., accepted).
                                                                            Trends in cognitive sciences
   Dorthe Døjbak Håkonsson is an associate professor at the
                                                                  Healey, P. G. T., Howes, C., & Purver, M. (2010). Does
Aarhus School of Business. As an organization scientist, her
                                                                            structural priming occur in ordinary conversation?
research focuses on how team shared emotions influence
                                                                            Paper presented at the Linguistic Evidence,
organizational decision-making (Håkonsson, Burton, Obel,
                                                                            Tübingen, Germany
& Laurdisen, 2012). Dan Mønster is a physicist and
                                                                  Healey, P. G. T., & Mills, G. (2006). Participation,
assistant professor in the Department of Economics and
                                                                            Precedence and Co-ordination in Dialogue. Paper
Business at Aarhus University. His current research interest
                                                                            presented at the 28th Annual Conference of the
is investigating interactions among team members and the
                                                                            Science Society, Vancouver, Canada
effects of these interactions on team decisions and team
                                                                  Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the Wild. Cambridge,
performance.
                                                                            Mass.: MIT Press
   Kristian Tylén and Riccardo Fusaroli are both post
                                                                  Jirsa, V. K., & Kelso, J. A. S. (2004). Coordination dynamics
doctoral fellows at the Center for Semiotics and the
                                                                            : issues and trends. Berlin ; New York: Springer
Interacting Minds Center, Aarhus University, with a
                                                                  Louwerse, M. M., Dale, R., Bard, E. G., & Jeuniaux, P.
background in semiotics and cognitive science. They have
                                                                            (2012). Behavior Matching in Multimodal
published on experimental and dynamical systems
                                                                            Communication Is Synchronized. Cognitive Science,
approaches to social coordination – in particular task-
                                                                            36(8), 1404-1426
oriented dialogue (Fusaroli et al., 2012; Fusaroli, et al.,
                                                                  Mills, G., & Healey, P. G. T. (2008). Semantic negotiation in
accepted; Fusaroli & Tylén, 2012).
                                                                            dialogue:     the    mechanisms     of    alignment.
                                                                            Proceedings of the 9th SIGdial Workshop on
                    Acknowledgments                                         Discourse and Dialogue, 46-53
                                                                  Perry, M. (2010). Socially distributed cognition in loosely
Research was supported by NSF BCS-0826825 (RD),                             coupled systems. AI & Society, 1-14
EPSRC (PH), TESIS, a Marie Curie Initial Training                 Pickering, M. J., & Garrod, S. (2004). Toward a mechanistic
Network (JJM, PM), MINDLab, Danish Ministry of                              psychology of dialogue. Behavioral and Brain
Science, Technology and Innovation (DDH, DM),                               Sciences, 27(02), 169-190
EuroUnderstanding (Eurocore) and the Danish council for           Tollefsen, D., & Dale, R. (2012). Naturalizing joint action: A
Independent Research (RF, KT).                                              process-based approach. Philosophical Psychology,
                                                                            25(3), 385-407
                                                                  Xygalatas, D., Mitkidis, P., Fischer, R., Reddish, P., Skewes,
                         References                                         J., Geertz, A. W., . . . Bulbulia, J. (accepted).
Dale, R., Fusaroli, R., Duran, N., & Richardson, D. C. (in                  Extreme        Rituals      Promote     Prosociality.
          press). The Self-Organization of Human Interaction.               Psychological Science, xx(x), xxx-xxx
          Psychology of Learning and Motivation, xxx(xx),
          xxx-xxx
                                                               80

