UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Beyond Rule versus Rote? Processing of Distinctive Dative and Genitive Case Markers in
German

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0ph2z4p9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Author
Bentz, Christian

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Beyond Rule versus Rote? Processing of Distinctive Dative and Genitive Case
Markers in German
Christian Bentz (cb696@cam.ac.uk)
Department of Theoretical and Applied Linguistics, Sidgwick Avenue
Cambridge, CB3 9DA UK

relevant for processing difficulty, depending on word
external rather than word internal factors. Along those lines,
it will be argued that a usage-based account of lexical access
can provide an alternative explanation of the processing
difficulties reflected in lexical decision tasks.
To this end, a lexical decision experiments was designed
which involved German words with -(e)n and -s plural
marking, which can additionally encode dative and genitive
case. It will be shown that forms with more grammatical
load, i.e. forms encoding both case and plural meaning,
elicited significantly longer response latencies than
unmarked forms. Crucially, these prolonged latencies can
neither be explained by token frequency effects nor by
word-internal parsing, rather, the participants seemed to
have invoked redundantly case marked articles or
prepositional phrases triggering case marking. This way
they could decide whether the case marked word is a
possible word form in German. This strategy prolongs
reaction times (RTs) for morphologically complex forms.
Therefore, this paper will argue that the distinction
between rule governed processes and memorization effects
in LDT research lacks an important aspect of language
processing: the embedding of items in phrases and
sentences, i.e. usage-based units. In the following, the case
marking and plural paradigms of nouns in German will be
sketched in section 1. In section 2 the methods and results of
the LDT will be presented and discussed in section 3.

Abstract
The rule versus rote distinction is one of the most debated
issues in recent psycholinguistics. Dual route accounts hold
that words can either be stored whole in the mental lexicon or
computationally derived by simple combinatorial rules such
as stem+affix. Within this framework, response latencies in
lexical decision tasks have been applied to point out the
difference between rote memorization, on the one hand, and
combinatorial rule manipulation, on the other. However, this
paper argues that there may be alternatives to this distinction.
It will be shown that German nouns, which can be
distinctively marked for number, case or both number and
case, do elicit differing reaction times. Crucially, this effect
can neither be explained by surface frequency effects nor by
internal morphological structure. Rather, it seems to be
triggered by the degree of embedding into usage-based units.
Keywords: Rule versus rote; lexical decision; German case
marking; usage-based units.

Introduction
The rule versus rote distinction in psycholinguistic theories
of lexical access has been fiercely debated (see Pinker &
Ullman, 2002 as well as McClelland & Patterson, 2002 for a
review). Lexical decision tasks (LDT), priming studies,
event related potentials and fMRI studies (see Clahsen,
1999 for a review) have been applied to answer the question
whether lexical processing of morphologically simplex and
complex items is rule-governed or associative, or both. It
has been argued that lexical decision latencies can help us to
distinguish processes involving abstract rule manipulation
from mere memorization effects (Pinker & Ullman, 2002;
Taft, 2004; Clahsen, 1999, Clahsen, Eisenbeiss &
Sonnenstuhl-Henning, 1997; Marslen-Wilson & Tyler,
2007, Sonnenstuhl & Huth, 2002). In this context, the
absence of frequency effects for regularly derived forms has
been explained by abstract rule manipulation, whereas the
occurrence of frequency effects was associated with rote
memorization of irregular forms (see for example Clahsen
1999: 998, but also Hahn & Nakisa 2000 for critical
remarks). If these assumptions hold, then processing
difficulties in lexical decision tasks must stem from:
a) The low frequencies of test items (in the case of
memorization);
b) The difficulty of parsing by means of grammatical
rules applied to derive the internal structure of a
morphologically complex word (symbol manipulation).
However, the study presented here suggests that the
‘grammatical load’ of inflections is another potential factor

1. German Dative and Genitive Inflections
German has four distinct case marking paradigms:
nominative, accusative, genitive and dative (Engel, 1991:
505; Griesbach, 1986: 294; Kempe & MacWhinney 1998:
549). However, since there is a fair amount of syncretism
between case markers and singular/plural markers across
different noun classes, the only markers that are distinctive
inflectional case markers1 are the -(e)s genitive marker for a
subset of singular masculine and neuter nouns as well as the
-(e)n dative marker in the plural for all genders (Griesbach,
1986: 294; Engel, 1991: 505). Hence, distinctively case
marked forms are restricted to these -(e)s and -n inflections
for some nouns.
For example, the high frequent noun Haus (house) is
inflected as Häus-er (houses) for all plural forms except for
the dative, for which Häus-er-n (houses.DAT) is the
1

Inflectional markers that are overtly distinct from the other plural
or singular forms of the same declension class and hence clearly
identify the surface form as case marked.

181

grammatically correct form. Likewise, the singular form
Haus is the same for all cases except for the genitive: Hauses (house’s).
Now, with regards to the design of a lexical decision task,
two groups of target words were distinguished: Words
ending in –n and words ending in -s (N-Group and SGroup). Furthermore, these two groups were then split up
according to the ‘grammatical load’ of the suffixes, which
renders three subgroups each (N1, N2-PL, N3-PL-DAT, S1,
S2-SG-GEN, S3-PL-GEN) as depicted in table 1.

3. Lexical Decision Experiment
3.1 Methods
Participants. A lexical decision task was performed with
26 participants volunteering to participate in the study, all of
them native speakers of German with a mean age of ~27 (14
females, 12 males).
Materials. The aforementioned 120 target words – split
up into 6 groups (N1-S3) – were selected from the
WEBCELEX database and matched for surface frequency
and length in letters within groups. Additionally, 120
random filler words were selected from WEBCELEX, as
well as 240 non-words of which 120 were produced by
manually changing two or three letters of the stem (of other
words in WEBCELEX), and 120 by changing potential
affixes. This way, subjects were prevented from relying
solely on recognition of stems for their lexical decision. All
non-words adhered to the phonotactic rules of German. All
filler words and non-words were chosen to reduce possible
priming effects with regards to the target words. Overall the
number of words and non-words added up to 480 items.
Items were presented by using the SuperLab 4.5.2
stimulus presentation software (Abboud, Heller, Matsak,
Schultz & Zeitlin, 2011). To present the stimuli, the item list
was split up into three blocks with 160 items each, which all
contained roughly the same ratio of target words, filler
words and non-words. Items were presented as black
Tahoma letters in font size 20 against a light turquoise
background. They were preceded by a black fixation point
in the center of the screen for 500ms before stimulus onset.
There was no time limit for responses. Participants
responded to stimuli by using a Cedrus response pad (model
RB-730) with green and red buttons for word and non-word
decisions.
For statistical analyses and data plotting the software R (R
Development Core Team, 2012) was used. Additionally, the
software packages lme4 (Bates & Maechler, 2010) and
languageR (Baayen, 2010; cf. Baayen, 2008) as well as
ggplot2 (Wickham & Chang, 2012) were used to construct
linear mixed-effects models and for plotting.
Procedure. In the instructions participants were told to
decide as quickly and accurately as possible whether the

Table 1: Dative and genitive groups with grammatical
load indicated by colors.
Grammatical load

Example

Group N1

-n part of stem (low)

Zahn
(tooth)

Group N2PL

-n denoting plural for all
cases (medium)

Rabe-n
(ravens)

Group N3PL-DAT

-n as distinctive dative
plural marker (high)

Group S1

-s part of stem (low)

Gleis
(platform/track)

Group S2SG-GEN

-s as genitive singular
marker (medium)

Pferde-s
(horse’s)

Group S3PL-GEN

-s as genitive singular and
plural marker for all cases
(high)

Stiefel-n
(boots.DAT)

Zoo-s
(zoos, zoo’s)

*Umlaut was avoided, except for Ästen (branches)
As can be seen in Table 1, the groups are put together
according to different functions of the final -n and -s. They
might not have any grammatical function (groups N1 and
S1), they can have one specific function, namely denoting
the plural (group N2-PL) or the genitive singular (S2-SGGEN), or they can represent two different grammatical
functions – both plural and case marking – as in groups N3PL-DAT and S3-PL-GEN.
In order to also control for potential frequency effects, the
WEBCELEX2 database was used to select 20 target words
for each of the 6 groups. These 120 target words were
matched for surface frequency (ranging from 20-1 per ~5
million) and length in letters (ranging from 3-10 letters per
word). Additionally, data on other frequency measures such
as stem frequency, type frequency, family size and family
frequency3 was also included.

been shown to play a role in reaction time experiments (Nagy,
Anderson, Schommer, Scott & Stallman, 1989; Alegre & Gordon,
1999). Moreover, the family size of a word is the stem frequency +
the number of derived words (e.g. health/health-y) and the number
of compounds (e.g. table/tablecloth) (Schreuder & Baayen, 1997;
Bertram, Baayen & Schreuder, 2000). Finally, the family frequency
of a word is the sum of frequencies of all the forms belonging to
the same morphological family.
Besides this class of token frequencies, which are used to predict
RTs for lexical entries and lemmas of words, there is the concept
of type frequencies, too, which captures the number of different
words inflected with a particular marker (e.g. the number of verbs
which are inflected with regular -ed versus the number of irregular
verbs) (Bybee, 2007; Marcus, Brinkmann, Clahsen, Wiese &
Pinker, 1995: 212).

2

Online: http://celex.mpi.nl/
Surface frequency denotes the token frequency of a word form
(such as table) (Schreuder & Baayen, 1997: 119). Stem frequency
(Schreuder & Baayen, 1997: 120) is derived by cumulating
frequencies of inflectional variants of a word, which have also
3

182

presented items are German words or not. They were
explicitly told that forms with plural and case inflections
can be part of the stimulus set. Then they were presented
with a test trial containing 8 words and 8 non-words. Both
dative and genitive marked words were represented in this
set of test items. In the test trial items remained on the
screen until the participant had pressed the correct button.
The instructor remained in the room during the test trail and
participants were able to ask questions. After that the
instructor left the room and participants were presented with
the three blocks of 160 items each (with one minute pauses
in between). The testing took 15-20 minutes.
After finishing the main experiment, participants were
presented with a questionnaire to clarify 1) whether they had
guessed what the exact purpose of the experiment is; 2)
whether they had issues with specific items; 3) whether they
had used any specific strategy to decide on words with
dative and genitive marking. Participants could use the
keyboard to type their answers, but they were also told that
they can just type “no” if they did not want to answer the
questions.

for comparisons of the original models with null models (no
fixed effects).

3.2 Results
A pre-analysis of the data revealed that 4 participants had to
be excluded from the dataset because they had guessed the
purpose of the experiment. Also, three of the items4 were
excluded because their per item error rate exceeded 50%.
The error rates per subject ranged from 1.6% to 21%. No
further subjects were excluded. This left 22 subjects and 117
items to be analyzed. Furthermore, RTs were cleaned by
excluding all RTs of less than 300ms for reasons of lower
processing bounds (Baayen, 2008: 243). Also, all RTs
longer than 3000ms were excluded because both inspection
of quantile-quantile plots (Baayen, 2008: 243) as well as
considering 2-3 standard deviations from the overall mean
(mean: 959ms; SD: 934ms) as a cut-off point suggested that
3000ms are a realistic upper bound for RTs. Moreover, for
the analysis of reaction times all incorrect responses were
excluded from the sample. These cleaning procedures
caused an additional data loss of ~8%.
In the following, the RTs for the N-Groups and S-Groups
are analyzed separately. Plotting the subgroups and
logarithmically transformed RTs for each group reveals that
there are differences in mean reaction times (see figure 1a
and 1b).
In order to check the significance of these results linear
mixed-effects models (Baayen, 2008.; Baayen, Davidson &
Bates, 2008; Barr, Levy, Scheepers and Tily, 2013) with
RTs (logarithmically transformed) as dependent variable
and group as predictor variable (fixed effect) as well as
subjects and items as crossed random effects were used. In
accordance with Barr et al. (2013) random intercepts for
subjects and items as well as random slopes for subjects
were included. P-values are based on likelihood ratio tests

4

Figure 1: Boxplots for log(RTs), inflectional categories
(x-axes), and grammatical load indicated by color.
Model validation was performed by checking homoscedasticity and normality for plots of residuals versus fitted
values.
These models reveal that subgroup membership for both
dative (N1, N2-PL, N3-PL-DAT) and genitive (S1, S2-SGGEN, S3-PL-GEN) is a significant predictor of RT (dative:
χ2(2) = 8.6, p = 0.01; genitive: χ2(2) = 13.12, p = 0.001),
longer RTs being associated with subgroups of higher
grammatical load.
Now, in order to contrast these results with the predictive
power of frequency effects on RTs, two more mixed-effects
models were designed. This time surface frequency, stem

Fries (frieze), Schahs (shahs), Gemischen (mixtures.DAT)

183

frequency and family frequency5 were added as fixed effects
besides group, again with random intercepts for subjects and
items and random slopes for groups by subjects. The
likelihood ratio tests for the full models versus the null
models (without the frequency measures but with group as
predictor) rendered a non-significant result for both the
dative data (χ2(3) = 4.19, p = 0.24) and the genitive data
(χ2(3) = 2.72, p = 0.43). This suggests that adding different
token frequencies as predictors does not render a better
model. Note that these results are not affected by potential
multicollinearity effects, since the variance inflation factor
(VIF) was < 2 for all predictors in both models.
Finally, it should be noted that all the linear mixed-effects
models presented in this section are more or less “stressed”
for longer response latencies. This follows logically from
the fact that RT distributions are somewhat skewed,
exhibiting longer right tails. However, as will be argued in
the following section, it is exactly the occurrence of nonnormally prolonged response latencies that is interesting for
the overall interpretation of the data.

route – this has been ruled out by controlling for surface
frequency in the experiment and by including other
measures of token frequencies in a post-hoc multiple
regression model; or b) The differences in RTs stem from
parsing difficulty for complex morphological structures
within the words (see parsing example in figure 2).
N
WORD INTERNAL
Nstem+Umlaut

Häus

suffix
PL

DAT

-er

-n

Figure 2: Potential word internal structure for the
morphologically complex noun Häusern (houses.DAT) with
both plural and dative marking.
However, according to this rationale we would not expect
the groups N2-PL and N3-PL-DAT as well as S2-SG-GEN
and S3-PL-GEN to exhibit differing reaction times. This is
because we chose words that do inflect for both number and
case by simply adding either –n or –s (see table 1). Hence
the word internal parsing difficulty and the decision
latencies should be the same for all these groups. However,
the RTs actually differ most between these groups.
This requires an alternative explanation: A third
possibility is that the differences in RTs are due to the
additional grammatical and conceptual load that these
suffixes carry. This means, rather than analyzing structures
within the word, it would be more interesting to analyze the
context these words are typically embedded in. See, for
example, a typical sentence involving the noun Häusern in
German (figure 3).
This figure illustrates the grammatical relationships
between the word internal and word external structure. The
dative marking is triggered by a preposition hinter (behind)
(i.e. lexical case). Moreover, the plural form needs to agree
with the DAT.PL of the article die.SG, i.e. den.DAT.PL.
Hence the word Häusern is embedded into a construction
that involves a preposition and a case marked article. We
could think of more such examples with other prepositions
(e.g. auf (on top of), in (in), mit (with)).

4. Discussion
The results reported for the lexical decision task suggest that
there are systematic differences between nouns for which
the -n and -s suffixes are grammatically meaningless (N1
and S1 subgroups in table 1) and nouns which are
grammatically highly loaded (N3-PL-DAT, S3-PL-GEN).
Moreover, subgroups which are inflected for plural or case
only (subgroups S2-SG-GEN and N2-PL) lie somewhere in
between the unmarked nouns and the heavily marked nouns
in terms of reaction times. Interestingly, the observed
patterns of reaction times per subgroup are not predicted by
measures of token frequency. Token frequencies could not
be shown to be significant predictors of RTs in post-hoc
regression analyses.
However, it is important to be aware of the fact that type
frequencies are tied with subgroups N1-S3 since they reflect
the ‘inflectional status’ of a word, which is in turn the
grouping factor for further divisions of the N-Group and SGroup. For example, all the words in N1 have a type
frequency of 15926/35315 (45% of all the nouns in
WEBCELEX), whereas all the words in N3 have a type
frequency of 3140/35315 (8.9%). Likewise, all the nouns in
N1 share the inflectional status of being unmarked for case
or plural and all the nouns in N3 share the inflectional status
of being marked for plural and case. These were basically
the search criteria for finding appropriate nouns in
WEBCELEX. Hence, type frequency and subgroup
membership are two sides of the same coin.
At this point the question arises what actually causes the
longer response latencies. According to dual route accounts
there are two possible explanations: a) Differences in token
frequencies have an impact via the direct lexical access

DAT
PL
Der Wald

hinter den

Häus-er-n
WORD INTERNAL

WORD EXTERNAL

“The wood behind the houses”
Figure 3: Grammatical relationships between elements of a
sentence involving dative marking.

5
Family size had to be excluded because it was highly
correlated with family frequency (r = -0.82). Type frequency
cannot be considered in the same model as group because type
frequencies are tied with group membership (their correlation is 1).

184

Rather, participants could just type “no” if they did not want
to bother with the questionnaire in the first place. Overall,
the insights from the questionnaire suggest that there are
systematic reasons for prolonged response latencies,
namely, whether forms are more or less embedded into
usage-based units.

Crucially, note that the type frequency of this dative plural
marker, i.e. the range of words it is applied to, hinges upon
the productivity of such prepositional constructions (plus
the productivity of dative forms in other contexts). This
would suggest that increased processing difficulty in the
LDT for grammatically loaded words stems from the
strength of embedding into common or uncommon
constructions.
Of course, there needs to be further research with and
beyond LDTs to further elaborate this hypothesis. However,
first hints suggesting that this explanation is along the right
lines can be found in the questionnaire.

5. Conclusion
In the past, lexical decision tasks have been invoked to find
out whether certain lexical items are processed as a whole or
decomposed into stem+affix. In this context, it has been
argued that for units stored whole in the lexicon there
should be surface frequency or other token-related
frequency effects observable, whereas for morphologically
complex and regular items symbolic rules will be applied.
These are not sensitive to frequency effects (Marcus et al.,
1995; Clahsen, 1999; Pinker & Ullman, 2002). However,
the results reported in this paper suggest an alternative to
this binary distinction.
First of all, it has been shown that token frequencies are
not a significant predictor when it comes to morphologically
complex nouns in German, whereas grammatical load and
type frequencies do still correctly predict longer reaction
times for these forms. Thus, instead of trying to explain
response latencies by analyzing morphological structures
within the lexical items, this study suggests that the relevant
factor is the embedding of these items in more or less
frequent phrases. This is in line with accounts arguing that
statistical learning and frequency effects are not only
relevant for “lexical entries” but also for whole
constructions (Ellis & O’Donnell, 2012).
In conclusion, there are measurable processing
differences between grammatically marked and unmarked
nouns in German. Hence, it is correct, on principal, to
distinguish between words that are perceived as “basic” or
“default” and words which are perceived as grammatically
complex. However, this does not necessarily entail that such
morphologically complex forms are composed out of
simpler units by means of symbolic rule manipulation.
Rather, such forms carrying more ‘grammatical load’ are
more likely to be associated with whole phrases and
sentences even in isolation. And this embedding in
redundant and disambiguating structures is what makes
them belong to the grammatical rather than the lexical
domain in the first place.

4.1 Questionnaire
When the first participant came across the German word
Messers (knife’s) in the trial set, he kept pressing the ‘nonword’ button several times, although this is a grammatically
correct form and the item kept occurring on the screen.
When the instructor noted that this is a genitive form of the
word Messer, the participant said: “… auf Messers
Schneide!” A German idiom directly translated as: “on
knife’s blade”, meaning: “to be on a knife-edge”.
Evaluating the post-test questionnaire revealed that this
spontaneous associative reaction might not have been a
single coincidence. When asked (question 2) whether they
had particular problems with specific items, 10 (45%) of the
participants answered “no”, 6 (27%) of the participants had
problems with either dative, genitive or plural forms, and
the rest (28%) named non-words and potential foreign
words as problematic. Most intriguingly, when subjects
were more specifically asked (question 3) whether they had
problems with case marked words (by giving them some
examples of the target set) 13 (52%) answered with “no”, 6
(24%) had imagined the correct articles to take a decision,
and 5 (20%) had even used phrases like “die Spitze des
Doms” (the cathedral’s spire) or prepositional phrases
“wegen des Kochs” (because of the cook) to take their
decision.
To test whether the strategies named here might have
prolonged reaction times, participants were post-hoc divided
into two groups: one group (no-context group) for subjects
that had negatively answered questions 2 and 3 (or who had
named other difficulties like non-words and foreign words),
and another group for subjects that had answered
affirmative and noted that they used context related
strategies to take lexical decisions (context group).
Interestingly, for these two groups the mean RTs for S3 and
N3 taken together differ: For the context group the mean
RTs for words in S3 and N3 is higher (956ms) than for the
non-context group (939ms), although this difference is not
significant (p = 0.33).
However, the fact that 12 (55%) of the participants either
had problems with dative and genitive markers or used
“minimal phrases” as disambiguation strategy suggests that
this is at least partly the reason for prolonged response
latencies. Note that the rest of the participants (10, 45%) did
not necessarily use some other strategy or no strategy at all.

References
Abboud, H., Heller, K., Matsak, E., Schultz, H., & Zeitlin,
V. (2011). SuperLab. Stimulus presentation software. San
Pedro, California: Cedrus Corporation.
Alegre, M., & Gordon, P. (1999). Frequency effects and the
representational status of regular inflections. Journal of
Memory and Language, 40, 41–61.
Baayen, H. R. (2010). languageR: Data sets and functions
with "Analyzing Linguistic Data: A practical introduction
to statistics”. Retrieved from http://CRAN.R-project.org/
package= languageR.

185

Baayen, H. R. (2008). Analyzing linguistic data: A practical
introduction using R. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Baayen, H. R., Davidson, D. J. & Bates, D. M. (2008).
Mixed-effects modeling with crossed random effects for
subjects and items. Journal of Memory and Language, 59,
390–412.
Barr, D. J., Levy, R., Scheepers, C., & Tily, H. J. (2013).
Random effects structure for confirmatory hypothesis
testing: Keep it maximal. Journal of Memory and
Language, 68, 255–278.
Bates, D. & Maechler, M. (2010). lme4: Linear mixedeffects models using S4 classes. Retrieved from
http://cran.r-project.org/package=lme4.
Bertram, R., Baayen, R. H., & Schreuder, R. (2000). Effects
of family size for complex words. Journal of Memory and
Language, 42, 390–405.
Bybee, J. (2007). Frequency of use and the organization of
language. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Clahsen, H. (1999). Lexical entries and rules of language: a
multidisciplinary study of German inflection. Behavioral
and Brain Sciencesrain sciences, 22(6), 991–1060.
Retrieved from http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/
11301574
Clahsen, H., Eisenbeiss, S., & Sonnenstuhl-Henning, I.
(1997). Morphological structure and the processing of
inflected words. Theoretical Linguistics, 23(3), 201–250.
Ellis, N. C., & O’Donnell, M. B. (2012). Statistical
construction learning. In J. N. Williams & P. Rebuschat
(Eds.), Statistical learning and language acquisition.
Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Engel, U. (1991). Deutsche Grammatik. Heidelberg: Julius
Groos.
Griesbach, H. (1986). Neue deutsche Grammatik. Berlin:
Langenscheidt.
Hahn, U., & Nakisa, R. C. (2000). German inflection: single
route or dual route? Cognitive Psychology, 41(4), 313–60.
doi:10.1006/cogp.2000.0737
Kempe, V., & MacWhinney, B. (1998). The acquisition of
case marking by adult learners of Russian and German.
Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 20(4), 543–587.
doi:10.1017/S0272263198004045
Marcus, G. F., Brinkmann, U., Clahsen, H., Wiese, R., &
Pinker, S. (1995). German inflection: The exception that
proves the rule. Cognitive Psychology, 29, 189–256.
Marslen-Wilson, W. D., & Tyler, L. K. (2007).
Morphology,
language
and
the
brain:
The
decompositional substrate for language comprehension.
Philosophical transactions of the Royal Society of
London. Series B, Biological sciences, 362, 823–836.
doi:10.1098/rstb.2007.2091
McClelland, J. L., & Patterson, K. (2002). Rules or
connections in past-tense inflections: What does the
evidence rule out. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 6(11),
456–463.
Nagy, W., Anderson, R. C., Schommer, M., Scott, J. A., &
Stallman, C. (1989). Morphological families in the

internal lexicon. Reading Research Quarterly, 24(3),
262–282.
Pinker, S., & Ullman, M. T. (2002). The past and the future
of the past tense. TRENDS in Cognitive Science, 6(11),
456–463.
R Development Core Team. 2012. R: A language for
statistical computing. R foundation for Statistical
Computing, Vienna, Austria. Downloadable at
http://www.r-project.org/.
Sonnenstuhl, I., & Huth, A. (2002). Processing and
representation of German -n plurals: A dual mechanism
approach. Brain and Language, 81, 276–290.
Taft, M. (2004). Morphological decomposition and the
reverse base frequency effect. The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 57A(4), 745–765.
Wickham, H., & Chang, W. (2012). ggplot2: An
implementation of the grammar of graphics. Retrieved
from http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/ggplot2/index
.html

186

