UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Body movements affect Counting

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7n3372gt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Lugli, Luisa
Baroni, Giulia
Anelli, Filomena
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Body movements affect Counting

Luisa Lugli (l.lugli@unibo.it)
Department of Philosophy and Communication Studies, University of Bologna,Via A. Gardino 23, 40122 Bologna, Italy
Department of Communication and Economics, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, via Allegri 9, 42121 Reggio
Emilia, Italy

Giulia Baroni (giulia.baroni4@unibo.it)
Department of Philosophy and Communication Studies, University of Bologna,Via A. Gardino 23, 40122 Bologna, Italy

Filomena Anelli (filomena.anelli@unibo.it)
Department of Philosophy and Communication Studies, University of Bologna,Via A. Gardino 23, 40122 Bologna, Italy
Department of Education Sciences, University of Bologna,Via Filippo Re 6, 40126 Bologna, Italy

Anna M. Borghi (annamaria.borghi@unibo.it)
Department of Psychology, University of Bologna, Viale Berti Pichat 5, 40127 Bologna, Italy
Institute of Cognitive Sciences and Technologies, National Research Council, Via S. Martino della Battaglia, 44 00185
Roma, Italy

Roberto Nicoletti (roberto.nicoletti@unibo.it)
Department of Philosophy and Communication Studies, University of Bologna,Via A. Gardino 23, 40122 Bologna, Italy

2944

Abstract
Aim of the present study is to investigate whether and to
what extent movements performed with the whole body
can influence calculation processes. Participants were
asked to perform additions or subtractions while
executing an ascending or descending movement in a
passive (i.e., by taking the elevator) or active (i.e., by
taking the stairs) mode. Results revealed a congruency
effect between the type of calculation made and the
direction of the movement performed, but only when
participants experienced it through a passive mode. Our
data are in line with studies providing evidence of a
strict link between numerical and spatial representations,
and between motor actions and number magnitude
processing (motor-to-semantic effect). Implications of
the results for the embodied and grounded nature of
numerical cognition will be considered and discussed.
Keywords: numerical cognition; body movement;
embodied cognition

Introduction
One of the main challenges of embodied and grounded
cognition views (e.g., Barsalou, 2008) is to account for
the representation of abstract concepts, such as
numbers. The present study focuses on numerical
cognition, an important area in which this challenge
can be addressed. The mental representation of
quantity (i.e., number magnitude) is the main focus of
an increasing number of researches. In a well known
study, Deahene and colleagues (Dehaene, Bossini, &
Giraux, 1993) demonstrated that numbers ranging from
0 to 4 and from 6 to 9 facilitate left and right responses,
respectively, even if number magnitude was a taskirrelevant feature. These results led the authors to claim
that number magnitude is visuo-spatially represented
along an horizontal mental number line (MNL) with
small numbers on the left and large numbers on the
right of a continuum (for a review, see Hubbard, Pinel,
Piazza, & Dehaene, 2005). In a recent study, Holmes
and Lourenco (2012) investigated the strength of this
Spatial Numerical Association of Response Codes
(SNARC effect), on both the horizontal (i.e., small left; large - right) and vertical (i.e., small - bottom;
large - up) MNL and found that the horizontal
organization is rather dominant. Their data also
showed, though, that the vertical organization depends
on how number are conceptualized. In other words,
the vertical organization emerged only when numbers
are conceptualized as magnitudes that elicit an
orientation (e.g., 1st floor from surface, 2nd floor from
surface, etc.).
To our knowledge, all the studies so far were aimed
at investigating whether and how the numerical
magnitude, that is the representation of the number as a
small or large quantity, impacts two processes. First,
recent studies analyzed the influence of the numerical
magnitude on the spatial representation of the
horizontal/vertical axis, that is left/low and right/high
spatial position (Fisher, Castel, Dodd, & Pratt, 2003;
Nicholls, Loftus, & Gevers, 2008; Pecher & Boot,

2011). Second, several researches focused on the
impact of the magnitude on the action related processes
investigating the bi-directional interaction between the
magnitude code and the action plans of grasping
objects with precision or power grip (Andres, Ostry,
Nicol, & Paus, 2008; Badets, Andres, Di Luca, &
Pesenti, 2007; Badets, Bouquet, Ric, & Pesenti, 2012;
Badets & Pesenti, 2010, 2011; Chiou, Chang, Tzeng, &
Wu, 2009; Ranzini et al., 2012).
Starting from this evidence, the current study aims at
investigating whether and to what extent processes
leading to numerical magnitudes, such as arithmetical
calculations of addition and subtraction, can be
influenced by real upward and downward movements
experienced with the whole body. In a study by Knops,
Viarouge, and Dehaene (2009) participants tended to
select the numerosity displayed in the upper right
location for additions, and in the upper left location for
subtractions
(Space-Operation
Association
of
Responses: SOAR). Differently from Knops and
colleagues, our task required participants to: (a) keep
adding or subtracting the same quantity from a starting
number in a given period of time; (b) repeat the result
of each calculation aloud, so that participants had to
focus on the on-line and progressive calculation
process; (c) experience an ascending or descending
movement with the whole body in a passive (i.e.,
taking the elevator) or active (i.e., taking the stairs)
mode.
In a recent research, Hartmann, Grabherr, and Mast
(2011) demonstrated that the passive displacement of
the body was sufficient to influence the magnitude of
self-generated numbers. In their Experiment 1,
participants were positioned on a motion platform and
were asked to generate numbers at random while the
platform was moving (leftward, rightward, downward,
upward, forward, and backward) or when it was
stationary. Results indicated a bias for small numbers,
which were generated more easily during leftward and
downward motions as compared to rightward and
upward motions, respectively. Differently from
Hartman et al. (2011), we asked participants to
experience the movements through an active and a
passive mode, and to make additions and subtractions
rather than generating random numbers.
To summarize, our experimental procedure is new
with respect to current literature in two aspects: first,
we focused on the processes leading to a numerical
magnitude, rather than focusing on the number
magnitude per se. Second, we asked participants to
experience real movements engaging their whole body
through passive and active modes. We hypothesized a
congruency effect between the direction of the
experienced ascending or descending movement and
the spatial orientation inferred by the type of
calculation made, that is additions-upward orientation
vs. subtractions-downward orientation. More precisely,
we predicted that participants would be facilitated
when asked to make additions while experiencing an
upward movement and subtractions while experiencing

2945

a downward movement (congruent conditions) as
compared to the opposite instructions (incongruent
conditions). Finally, we also assessed whether this
congruency effect was modulated by the passive or
active mode through which the movements were
experienced. It is crucial to say that the type of
movements and the sense of their direction were
different in these two modes. In fact, when taking the
elevator participants passively perceived themselves
moving in a given direction. Conversely, when the
stairs were taken, participants performed an overt and
real motor action with a full physical body
involvement. Moreover, the sense of the movement
was fast and clearly vertical when using the elevator,
while it was more progressive and less vertical when
using the stairs, since that the awareness of going up or
down changed progressively step by step. Hence, these
two modes can modulate results differently: if the
congruency effect requires an active motor process, we
hypothesize to find the effect only in the stairs mode.
Conversely, if the fast and vertical passive
displacement of the body is sufficient to obtain the
congruency effect, we expect the effect even when
participants take the elevator.

Method
Participants Twenty-eight undergraduate students
from the University of Bologna (15 females, age range
19-24 years) took part in the experiment in exchange of
5 Euros. The majority of them had a background in
humanities. All were naïve as to the purpose of the
experiment and gave informed consent.

Apparatus and Stimuli Participants were asked to
add or subtract 3 to a starting number (e.g., 342) for 22
seconds and to say the result of each calculation aloud
(e.g., 345, 348, 351 or 339, 336, 333 and so on, for
additions and subtractions, respectively, until 22
seconds were elapsed). In order not to make the
calculation process too easy, the starting numbers: a)
were composed by three digits; b) started with two
different digits (i.e., 3 or 5, such as 378 or 516).
Procedure The task required participants to make the
additions or subtractions while taking the elevator or
taking the stairs. In order not to mix these modes, the
task was divided in two blocks, whose order was
balanced between subjects. In one block, participants
performed the calculations while taking the elevator,
whereas in the other block calculations were performed
while taking the stairs. Within each block, four trials
were performed, resulting from the combination of the
two types of calculation, additions and subtractions,
and movement, ascending and descending. We
designed each block in order to make additions and
subtractions always alternate: an addition was always
followed by a subtraction and vice versa. At the
beginning of each trial, the experimenter explicitly
informed the participant about the type of calculation
that had to be performed and about the type of
movement that was going to be experienced. For each
trial, the experimenter spoke the starting number aloud

and then a go signal followed. Immediately after the go
signal, the passive or active movement began and, at
the same time, participants were required to repeat the
starting number and then to keep saying the result of
each calculation aloud for 22 seconds consecutively,
until the experimenter gave the stop signal. If a
calculation error was made, the trial was stopped and a
new trial began with a different starting number. No
feedback was given during the task and the importance
of accuracy over speed was stressed at the beginning of
each trial. The experimenter was present during the
whole experiment. For the passive mode, she went
up/down using the elevator together with the
participant. For the active mode, she walked close to
the participant while going up/down the stairs and
asked the participant to keep her pace throughout the
whole movement. In other words, each participant and
the experimenter went up/down the stairs together so
that the number of steps taken was held constant across
participants. Overall, the experiment lasted about 15/20
minutes.

Results
We considered the correct number of calculations made
within the 22 seconds time window as our dependent
variable. Since we predicted a congruency effect
between the direction of the movement and the type of
calculation, we divided the trials in congruent
(ascending movements – additions; descending
movements – subtractions) and incongruent (ascending
movements – subtractions; descending movements –
additions), and then we averaged the number of
calculations separately for each group of pairings.
The correct calculations were entered into a repeatedmeasures ANOVA with Congruency (congruent vs.
incongruent) and Mode (elevator-passive movement
mode vs. stairs-active movement mode) as withinsubjects factors. The Congruency [F (1, 27) = 10.20,
MSE = 7.51, n2p = 0.27, p< .01] and Mode [F (1, 27) =
32.50, MSE = 3.96, n2p = 0.55, p< .001] factors were
significant. We found a higher number of calculations:
a) for congruent pairings (M = 11.2) with respect to
incongruent ones (M = 10.7); b) when the movement
was experienced with a passive (M = 12) with respect
to an active (M = 9.8) mode. Crucially, the Congruency
x Mode interaction was significant [F (1, 27) = 5.16,
MSE = 1.36, n2p = 0.16, p = .03]. Fisher’s LSD posthoc test showed that, in the passive mode, participants
performed a higher number of calculations for
congruent pairings than for incongruent ones (Ms =
12.5 vs. 11.5, respectively, p< .01). Conversely, this
pattern failed to emerge for the active mode (Ms = 9.9
vs. 9.8, for congruent and incongruent pairings, p =
0.95, see Figure 1).

2946

ascending and descending movements with the whole
body can influence the processes responsible for
numbers representations as magnitude with an upward
and downward orientation, that is addition and
subtraction calculations.

Figure 1: Number of calculations for congruent and
incongruent pairings performed through a passive (i.e.,
elevator, leftmost panel) or active (i.e., stairs, rightmost
panel) mode. Bars are standard error of the mean.

Discussion
We investigated whether calculation processes, such as
additions and subtractions, are influenced by real
movements experienced with the whole body. Our
findings showed a facilitation, in terms of correct
number of calculations made, for the congruent
condition, that is when additions and subtractions were
performed while experiencing an ascending and
descending movement, respectively, with respect to the
opposite mapping. This result is in line with recent
behavioral findings showing the influence of the motor
process over the semantic one (i.e., motor-to-semantic
effect, see Badets et al., 2012; Badets & Pesenti, 2010,
2011; Ranzini et al., 2012).
The fact that we did not find the congruency effect
for the active mode could be due to different factors.
First, climbing the stairs required an overt movement
and a full physical body involvement. Second, the
sense of the movement direction was more progressive
and less vertical, with respect to when the elevator was
used, since the awareness of going up or down changed
step by step. Hence, the lack of a congruency effect
could be due to the higher amount of resources
required by the dual-task of climbing the stairs and
counting at the same time, as also suggested by the
lower amount of calculations yielded for this mode
compared to the passive one. In addition, the fact that
the movement was probably perceived as faster and
more vertical when taking the elevator, could have
yielded a significant effect for this mode only.
In a recent study Hartmann and colleagues (2011,
Experiment 1; see also Hartmann, Farkas, & Mast,
2012) found that the number generation process was
influenced by experiencing a passive whole body
movement. Our results are in line with these findings,
but we also obtained a congruency effect between the
body movements and the calculation processes, instead
of a given set of numbers. Moreover, participants in
our study also experienced real movements with their
whole body instead of passive movements while seated
in a chair. We claim, indeed, that experiencing

Our results can have intriguing implications for the
embodied and grounded cognition view, which claims
a close link between perception and action, due to the
influence of both our sensory-motor system and
previous experiences on the cognitive processes (e.g.,
Barsalou, 2008). Of particular relevance to our work is
the debate concerning the claim that both concrete and
abstract concepts, such as numbers, are grounded in
perception-action systems (e.g., Borghi & Pecher,
2011; Fischer, 2012; Gianelli, Ranzini, Marzocchi,
Rettore Micheli, & Borghi, 2012; Pecher & Boot,
2011). So far few studies demonstrated the grounding
of abstract concepts on sensory-motor experiences (for
reviews, see Borghi & Cimatti, 2012; Pecher, Boot, &
van Dantzig, 2011) and thus our study, by focusing on
an interesting example of abstract concepts such as
numbers, can be relevant for this issue. In fact, the
influence of whole body movements on numbers
representation can be interpreted as a proof that also
number processing can be embodied. Interestingly, our
findings are in line with a recent proposal, advanced by
Fischer and Brugger (2011) on the origin of the
Spatial-numerical associations (SNAs), that recognizes
the grounded and embodied nature of numerical
cognition, which would origin from finger counting.
To summarize, our study contributes to highlight
the close link and interaction between our everyday
activities, as movements in real-life situations, and
higher-order
cognitive
processes,
as
spatial
representation and number processing.

Acknowledgments
Many thanks to the members of the EMCO group
(www.emco.unibo.it)
and
HuCog
group
(http://www.hucog.unimore.it/site/home.html)
for
helpful comments and discussions. We would also like
to thank Prof. Roberto Bolzani for a significant help in
data analysis and results discussion.
This work was supported by grant (PRIN 2008)
from MIUR (Ministero Italiano dell’Istruzione,
dell’Università e della Ricerca) and by the European
Community,
FP7
project
ROSSI
(www.rossiproject.eu), Emergence of Communication
in Robots through Sensorimotor and Social Interaction.

References
Andres, M., Ostry, D.J., Nicol, F., & Paus, T. (2008).
Time course of number magnitude interference
during grasping. Cortex, 44, 414–419.
Badets, A., Andres, M., Di Luca, S., & Pesenti, M.
(2007). Number magnitude potentiates action

2947

judgment. Experimental Brain Research, 180, 525–
534.
Badets, A., Bouquet, C.A., Ric, F., & Pesenti, M.
(2012). Number generation bias after action
observation. Experimental Brain Research, 221, 4349.
Badets, A., & Pesenti, M. (2010). Creating number
semantics through finger movement perception.
Cognition, 115, 46–53.
Badets, A., & Pesenti, M. (2011). Finger-number
interaction. An ideomotor account. Experimental
Psychology, 58, 287–292.
Barsalou, L.W. (2008). Grounded cognition. Annual
Review of Psychology, 59, 617–645.
Borghi, A.M., & Cimatti, F. (2012). Words are not just
words: the social acquisition of abstract words. RIFL
- ISSN: 2036-6728. doi: . 10.4396/20120303.

Hartman, M., Grabherr, L., & Mast, F.W. (2011).
Moving along the mental number line: Interactions
between whole-body motion and numerical
cognition. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 38(6), 141627.
Hartmann, M., Farkas, R, & Mast, F.W. (2012). Selfmotion perception influences number processing:
Evidence for a parity task. Cognitive Processing, 13,
189-192.
Holmes, K.J., & Lourenco, S.F. (2012). Orienting
numbers in mental space: Horizontal organization
trumps vertical. The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 65, 1044-1051.
Hubbard, E.M., Piazza, M., Pinel, P., & Dehaene, S.
(2005). Interactions between number and space in
the parietal cortex. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 6,
435–448.

Borghi, A.M., & Pecher, D. (2011). Introduction to the
special topic Embodied and Grounded Cognition.
Frontiers
in
Psychology,
2,
187.
doi:
10.3389/fpsyg.2011.00187.

Knops, A., Viarouge, A., & Dehaene, S. (2009).
Dynamic representations underlying symbolic and
nonsymbolic calculation: Evidence from the
operational momentum effect. Attention, Perception,
& Psychophysics, 71(4), 803-821.

Chiou, R.Y.-C., Chang, E.C., Tzeng, O.J.-L., & Wu,
D.H. (2009). The common magnitude code
underlying numerical and size processing for action
but not for perception. Experimental Brain Research,
194, 553-562.

Nicholls, M.E.R., Loftus, A.M., & Gevers, W. (2008).
Look, no hands: A perceptual task shows that
number magnitude induces shift of attention.
Psychonomic Bullettin & Review, 15, 413–418.

Dehaene, S., Bossini, S., & Giraux, P. (1993). The
mental representation of parity and number
magnitude. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 122, 371-396.
Fischer, M.H. (2012). A hierarchical view of grounded,
embodied, and situated numerical cognition.
Cognitive Processing, 13, 161-164.
Fischer, M.H., & Brugger, P. (2011). When digits help
digits: Spatial-numerical associations point to finger
counting as prime example of embodied cognition.
Frontiers
in
Psychology,
2,
260.
doi:
10.3389/fpsyg.2011.00260.

Pecher, D., & Boot, I. (2011). Numbers in space:
Differences between concrete and abstract situations.
Frontiers
in
Psychology,
2,
121.
doi:
10.3389/fpsyg.2011.00121.
Pecher D., Boot I., & van Dantzig S. (2011) Abstract
concepts: Sensory-motor grounding, metaphors, and
beyond. In: Ross B, editor. The Psychology of
Learning and Motivation, Burlington: Academic
Press. vol. 54, pp. 217-248.
Ranzini, M., Lugli, L., Anelli, F., Carbone, R.,
Nicoletti, R., & Borghi, A.M.(2012). Graspable
objects shape number processing. Frontiers in
Human Neuroscience, 5, 147.

Fischer, M.H., Castel, A.D., Dodd, M.D., & Pratt, J.
(2003). Perceiving numbers causes spatial shifts of
attention. Nature Neuroscience, 6, 555–556.
Gianelli, C., Ranzini, M., Marzocchi M., Rettore
Micheli L., & Borghi, A.M. (2012). Influence of
numerical magnitudes on the free choice of an object
position. Cognitive Processing, 13,1, 185-188.

2948

