UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Can US sensitization account for the electrodermal variant of the Perruchet effect?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8g31x4t8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
McAndrew, Amy
Weidemann, Gabrielle
McLaren, Ian P.L.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Can US sensitization account for the electrodermal variant of the Perruchet effect?
Amy McAndrew (am375@exeter.ac.uk)a
a

Gabrielle Weidemannb

Ian P.L. McLarena

School of Psychology, College of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Exeter, UK.
b
School of Social Sciences and Psychology, University of Western Sydney, Australia
Abstract

During experiments employing Perruchet's (1985) paradigm
there are runs of reinforced (CS-US) trials and non-reinforced
(CS-noUS) trials. Conditioned responding (CR) is measured, for
example, using eyeblink responses (Perruchet, 1985), reaction
times (Perruchet, Cleeremans, & Destrebeceqz, 2006), or
changes in skin conductance (SCR; McAndrew, Jones,
McLaren, & McLaren, 2012), as well as an online measure of
expectancy for the unconditioned stimulus (US). A double
dissociation between CR and conscious expectancy of the US is
typically found, whereby expectancy of the US decreases while
the CR increases across runs of successively reinforced trials. A
gambler’s fallacy explanation can be offered for the expectancy
data, whereas an associative explanation can be used to explain
variations in the CR (consistent with the dual processing theory
of McLaren, Green, & Mackintosh, 1994). However, skeptics of
this effect have proposed nonassociative explanations of the CR
data seen in these experiments. They note that every CS-US
pairing is confounded by the presence of the US. Therefore, it is
possible that US sensitization, the phenomenon whereby
repeated US presentations leads to stronger unconditioned
responding to the US, could produce the increasing CR pattern
with successive reinforcements (Weidemann, Tangen,
Lovibond, & Mitchell, 2009). Two experiments are presented
investigating whether US sensitization can explain the recently
published electrodermal version of the Perruchet effect.
Keywords: Perruchet effect; US sensitization; Dual processing
systems

Introduction
The Perruchet effect (Perruchet, 1985, Perruchet,
Cleeremans, & Destrebeceqz, 2006) is often cited as one of
the most convincing pieces of evidence of a dissociation
between explicit, conscious, propositional processes and
implicit, automatic, associative processes (e.g. Mitchell, De
Houwer, & Lovibond, 2009). McAndrew, Jones, McLaren
and McLaren (2012) ran an electrodermal variation of the
classic Perruchet experiment in which participants saw a
visual conditioned stimulus (CS), a brown cylinder, which
was partially reinforced by an electric shock (the
unconditioned stimulus, US). The participants made online
expectancy ratings on every trial as to whether they thought
the US was going to occur. Changes in their autonomic skin
conductance response (SCR) were also measured as an
index of conditioned responding (CR).
We found that the SCR increased over successive
reinforcements, while expectancy of the US decreased
across the same sequence of trials. This mirrored the
original findings of Perruchet and colleagues in both the
eyeblink (Perruchet, 1985) and reaction time (RT;
Perruchet, Cleeremans, & Destrebeceqz, 2006) variants of
this paradigm. The gambler’s fallacy heuristic (Burns &

Corpus, 2004), an explicit, propositional phenomenon,
explained the expectancy data, implying that as participants
experienced successive runs of reinforced (CS-US) trials,
they were less likely to rate the subsequent trial as being
paired with a US. Conversely, when participants
experienced runs of successively non-reinforced (CS-noUS)
trials they rated it as increasingly likely they would
experience a US. However, this explanation did not apply to
the SCR data, but an associative account did (e.g. McLaren,
Forrest and McLaren, 2012). SCR increased over successive
reinforcements, meaning that the CR was strongest when the
participants had experienced a run of CS-US trials. In
associative terms, during this type of Pavlovian
conditioning, the link between the representation of the CS
and the representation of the US was strengthened by the
successively reinforced trials, producing a larger CR.
However, after a run of CS-noUS trials, the link between the
representations of the CS and the US was weakened by
extinction, causing smaller changes in SCR and therefore a
weaker CR. Hence, these results are consistent with a dual
processing systems account of learning, with an explicit
propositional system generating the expectancy data and an
associative system the changes in SCR.
The Perruchet effect is one of the most compelling
examples of dual processing systems due to the
simultaneous measurement of CR and expectancy. Previous
research demonstrating dissociations between these two
variables has often involved subliminal presentations of the
CS (e.g. Balderston, & Helmstetter, 2010), but this research
is often criticized about whether the presented stimuli are
truly subliminal (e.g. Mitchel, De Houwer, & Lovibond,
2009). Alternatively, researchers have attempted to use postconditioning questionnaires to assess contingency
awareness, however it has been argued this type of measure
could be subject to interference or forgetting influencing the
reliability and validity of the awareness measure (Lovibond,
& Shanks, 2002). The Perruchet paradigm however,
overcomes these problems and is a more convincing
demonstration of a double dissociation.
However, the dual processing system account of the
Perruchet effect depends critically on the assumption that
the linear trend in CRs is the result of associative learning.
Alternately the pattern of CRs could be accounted for by US
sensitization; this effect refers to the increase in
unconditioned responding (UR) seen when there is repeated
exposure to a US (Weidemann, Tangen, Lovibond, &
Mitchell, 2009). In the Perruchet experiments, every CS-US
pairing unavoidably involves presentation of the US.
Therefore, it may not be the pairing of the two stimuli (CS
and US) strengthening or weakening the associative link
between the stimuli that is causing fluctuations in the SCR.

3020

Instead, it could simply be exposure to the US driving this
effect. If this were true, this would undermine the Perruchet
effect as evidence for dual processing systems.
Research investigating US sensitization as an explanation
of CR in the eyeblink and RT variants of the Perruchet
effect has produced mixed results; with US sensitization
failing to account for data from the eyeblink paradigm (e.g.
Weidemann et al., 2009), but Mitchell et al. (2010) finding
US sensitization a plausible explanation of the RT data
despite Barrett and Livesey (2010) disagreeing. Given the
inconsistency on this point, we felt that further investigation
was important to determine whether US sensitization could
account for the variations in the CR observed in the
Perruchet effect. If it were found that US sensitization could
adequately account for these results, a single, explicit,
nonassociative processing explanation of the results would
be sufficient.
In particular, it was important to try and determine
whether US sensitization could explain the results reported
in our 2012 paper. A lot of past research within the
electrodermal domain finds a strong positive correlation
between CR and conscious contingency knowledge, for
example, if participants fail to develop CS-US contingency
knowledge they often fail to show any CR (Lovibond &
Shanks, 2002). The implication is that to see a CR using
electrodermal procedures, participants must explicitly
expect the shock to happen when they are presented with a
CS. This view is in stark contrast to our earlier findings. We
hypothesized that we were able to dissociate the CR and
expectancy of the US because of the nature of the Perruchet
task. In our experiment there was a partial reinforcement
schedule, half the trials were followed by a shock and half
were not, and the participants were made explicitly aware of
this from the beginning of the experiment. The participants
were therefore put into a state of uncertainty from the start,
as they were unable to accurately predict when the shocks
were going to happen. Consequently, given that the
participants were unable to use their rational, inferential
processes to determine when the shocks were going to
happen, this provides a context in which some reliance on
alternative processing systems, which could be implicit or
associative, might be expected. There is some evidence in
the electrodermal domain to support this hypothesis. One
example is Knight, Nguyen, and Bandettini (2003), who
presented participants with tone stimuli, one continually
reinforced by white noise (CS+) and another never paired
with white noise (CS-). They varied US predictability by
presenting the CSs above and below the perceptual
threshold and found that even in the absence of any
conscious ability to discriminate between the stimuli, there
was still evidence of higher CRs to the CS+ than the CS-.
Additionally, evidence of an implicit/explicit learning
distinction can be found within the neuroimaging literature.
Different brain structures appear to be involved in different
aspects of learning to the extent that one can differentiate
brain regions involved in conscious and unconscious
learning (e.g. Tabbert, Stark, Kirsch, & Vaitl, 2006).

Our aim here is to establish whether associative processes
govern the CR in our experiments, by checking whether US
sensitization can account for our findings. If we can rule out
this explanation of our results, then we can add our
experiment to the others that show that SCR and conscious
expectancy can dissociate.

Experiment 1
One of the simplest ways to investigate whether US
sensitization governs CR in our Perruchet experiment was to
simply remove the CSs. In this way participants would only
experience noCS-US trials and noCS-noUS trials. If the
same increasing patterns in SCR were found as in the
original experiment, this would imply that the result was not
dependent on CS-US pairings, as there are no CSs presented
in the experiment. Under these circumstances we could
conclude that US sensitization would be driving responding.
However, if SCR fails to increase over successive US
presentations, this would tend to suggest that a US
sensitization account could not explain the electrodermal
variant of the Perruchet effect.

Method
Participants
24 University of Exeter students participated in this
experiment, 16 women and 8 men; ages ranging from 18-35
(average, 21 years). All were paid £10.
	  

Stimuli
The US was a 500ms electrical impulse administered with
a PowerLab 26T generator using stainless steel electrodes
attached to the left proximal and medial phalanges of the
index finger. Participants set their own shock level between
5 and 20mA where they deemed the shock to be “definitely
uncomfortable but not painful”.
Throughout the experiment there was a black cross (5 x
5cm onscreen) in the centre of a white screen. The cross was
used to fixate participants’ attention.
Skin conductance was measured using LabChart software
via MLT116F GSR electrodes attached to the medial
phalanges on the left third and fourth fingers. Online
explicit expectancy of the US was recorded using a Contour
Shuttle Xpress device. Roughly every five seconds
participants were required to make an expectancy rating
about the extent they thought the shock would happen at
that moment in time. The device had 5 buttons and fit nicely
into participants’ hand whereby 1 button corresponded to 1
finger. The different expectancy values were: 1 “There will
definitely not be a shock”, 2 “There might not be a shock”,
3 “Not sure either way”, 4 “There may be a shock”, and 5
“There will definitely be a shock”. A continuously
available key explained which buttons represented which
expectancy ratings.

	  
Design

	  

There were two repeated-measures factors in this
experiment. The first was run length, i.e. the number of
trials of the same type in a row; there were six different run

3021

lengths: -3, -2, -1, +1, +2, and +3. The run length measure is
taken on the trial after the run itself. For example, a +1 run
length SCR is taken on the trial after a participant has
previously experienced a US trial that itself was preceded
by a noUS trial. A +2 measurement is taken on the trial
following two consecutive US trials. Whereas, a -1 run
length measurement is taken if the participant has just
experienced exactly one noUS trial, and a -2 measurement is
taken when a participant experiences two noUS trials in a
row. A switch between a positive and negative run length
measurement occurs when the trial type just experienced
switches from a US to noUS trial and vice versa. The other
factor used in the design and analysis is the presence or
absence of the US on the trials in the run, i.e. shock (+) or
no shock (-).	  	  
The trial sequences used in this experiment were matched
to the sequences used in the original McAndrew, Jones,
McLaren and McLaren (2012) experiment, using the same
trial structure and run distributions, see Table 1. In the
McAndrew et al. experiment, on shock (+) trials, a 500ms
US was administered after 4500ms of the CS being on
screen, whereas on no shock (–) trials no US occurred. SCR
recordings were taken on every trial, during the five seconds
prior to CS onset (PreCS), five seconds while the CS was on
screen and five seconds after the CS (PostCS). The intertrial interval (ITI) was randomly varied between 30 and 40
seconds on each trial in order to stop participants timing the
onset of the CS. Long ITIs were required to allow the SCR
recording to reach baseline after the previous US. This
experiment, in keeping with the procedures used in the
original experiment, was split into two blocks to allow recalibration to the shock to reduce habituation. Overall there
were 46 trials, 23 per block. An extra trial was added at the
end of each block, the 23rd trial, to take measurements from
the last experimental trial. As there were no CSs in this
experiment, on each trial, a hypothetical 5 second “CS”
period was measured (where the CS would have occurred),
and 5 seconds before this as a “PreCS” measure was taken.
On shock trials, the shock would occur in the last 500ms of
the “CS” period.
Table 1. Trial types by frequency of occurrence.
Variable
Run length
Frequency

noUS (-)
3
2

2
4

US (+)
1
8

1
8

2
4

Results
The SCR data was recorded in micro-Siemens in
LabChart and exported to Excel. For each trial the mean
SCR was taken for the hypothetical “PreCS” and “CS”
periods. The data was standardised using a log
transformation to reduce the variability between
participants. The change in SCR prior to US onset (as a
consequence of preceding runs), was calculated using the
formula “CS-PreCS”. Mean CR for each run length was
then calculated for each participant and across participants.
For the expectancy data, the rating made closest to the
hypothetical CS period was used as the participants’
expectancy of the US on that trial. A mean expectancy
rating for each run length was calculated for each participant
and then across participants. Additionally, as in the 2012
experiment, the SCR and expectancy data were collapsed to
form levels 1, 2 and 3. Level 1 averages run lengths +1 and
-3, level 2 run length +2 and -2, level 3 run lengths +3 and 1. This was done to treat the data in a similar fashion to the
2012 experiment to enable direct comparisons to be made.
Two-way repeated measures analyses of variance
(ANOVA) were carried out separately on the SCR and
expectancy data. With regards to SCR, there was no
significant linear trend over level, F(2,46) = 0.26, MSE =
0.004, p = .774, see Fig. 1, a Bayesian analysis (Dienes,
2011) confirmed that we have strong evidence for the null
hypothesis, rejecting US sensitization as an explanation of
our effect, Bayes factor = 0.32. There was a significant
effect of US presence, with a higher mean SCR after US
absent trials (-0.02) than US present trials (-0.04, see Fig.
2), F(1,23) = 5.43, MSE = 0.003, p = .029. The interaction
between level and US presence was not significant (p > .05).
There was a significantly increasing linear trend over
level in the expectancy data, F(2,46) = 5.04, MSE = 0.257, p
= .014, see Fig. 1. There was also a significant effect of US
presence with a higher mean expectancy rating for US
absent trials (3.68) than US present trials (3.17, see Fig. 3),
F(1,23) = 18.41, MSE = 0.496, p < .001. In addition, there
was a significant linear interaction between level and US
presence, F(1,23) = 14.77, MSE = 0.213, p = .001, reflecting
the fact that measures taken after US present (+) trials
increase as a function of level whereas those taken after US
absent (-) trials slightly decrease.

3
2

Procedure
The participants were told they would receive shocks
randomly throughout the experiment without any warning
they were going to occur. The participants were asked to
rate their expectancy that the shock would occur at that
moment in time roughly every 5 seconds throughout the
duration of the experiment. Expectancy ratings were made
using the Shuttle Xpress device, on the scale 1 (definitely no
shock) to 5 (definitely shock). Otherwise they were asked to
remain still to avoid motion artifacts in the SCR.

Figure 1. Graph depicting changes in SCR and expectancy
as functions of level.

3022

Corpus, 2004). Here we speculate that participants are
simply tracking runs of shocks, and once they have had two
in a row decide that the run is likely to continue. Regarding
the US presence effect, participants gave higher ratings of
shock after US absent trials where no USs occurred. This
implies participants expected shocks more when there had
not been one recently. We speculate that because
participants knew that in this experiment, the only thing that
would happen was that intermittent shocks would occur, as
time elapsed ratings for a shock occurring would tend to
increase as they knew that eventually a shock had to
happen. We recorded the expectancy ratings participants
made over each trial in 5 second bins (we had to exclude
one bin as this varied from 5 to 15 seconds due to recording
issues caused by a variable ITI). Supporting our speculation,
expectancy significantly increases as time elapses between
trials, F(1,23) = 75.41, MSE = 11.99, p < .001, i.e. once a
participant is shocked ratings of another shock occurring are
lower just after this, but as time elapses the rating increases.
In some sense this is a temporal equivalent of the gambler's
fallacy heuristic, but this time it is an entirely rational
reflection of the sequences experienced in this experiment.
By combining these two effects we can explain the
pattern of results shown in Fig. 3. The gradual increase in
expectancy with time since the last shock sets the overall
trend, and tracking of runs of USs explains the increasing
trend for positive runs superimposed on this overall effect.
This pattern of results conflicts with our 2012 expectancy
finding that expectancy of shock decreased as a function of
level. Comparing both experiments, we have two very
distinct patterns of responding, which suggests we have
fundamentally changed the paradigm and the demand
characteristics from our original experiment, leading
participants to approach the task differently. Given that both
SCR and expectancy show an overall decline across run
length in this experiment we could even claim that our data
are consistent with the conscious expectancy-driven account
of SCR often found in the literature on electrodermal
conditioning. What this pattern of effects cannot do,
however, is explain the quite different pattern found by
McAndrew et al. (2012).	  	  

Discussion
This experiment aimed to investigate the extent to which
US sensitization is a plausible explanation of the SCR result
observed in our original 2012 experiment. In that earlier
experiment participants experienced exactly the same
sequences of shocks as used here (NB. a different sequence
for each participant), but the shocks followed a CS (a
picture of a brown cylinder). This CS also occurred on noshock trials, so that it had a 50% rate of reinforcement.
McAndrew et al. (2012) found that autonomic SCR
increased significantly with level, whilst explicit expectancy
decreased significantly with level.
In the current experiment participants experienced runs
of USs and noUSs in the absence of this CS. Hence, there
was no associative structure to drive changes in SCR, and
now SCR is essentially flat across level. This indicates that
US sensitization is not occurring in this experiment, as
successive shocks are not leading to an increase in SCR as
would be expected if this were happening. This suggests
that US sensitization is not responsible for the SCR pattern
seen in the 2012 experiment, making the case that
associative processes are responsible somewhat stronger.
Supporting this analysis, a significant effect of US
presence was found in the SCR data, with higher SCRs
observed on measurements taken after noUS (-) trials.
Therefore, there were bigger changes in SCR just after nonreinforced runs (when shocks were not occurring; see Fig.
2). We conjecture that the SCR may be subject to
habituation rather than sensitization using our procedures,
because exposure to shocks appears to be causing smaller
rather than larger SCR fluctuations. Alternatively, it could
be that any learning to the temporal cues is being expressed
more in the PreCS period than the CS period, explaining the
negative difference scores.

Figure 2. Graph depiciting SCR as a function of run length.

	  

Regarding expectancy, the data is more complicated. A
significantly increasing effect of level was found as well as
a significant US presence effect such that expectancy of
shock was higher after US absent (-) trials. These two
findings at first seem paradoxical, with the latter suggesting
participants gave higher expectancy ratings if there had not
been any shocks, while the former implies the opposite (see
Fig. 3). The increase in expectancy with level is entirely
driven by the US present (+) trials, and could simply reflect
use of another heuristic, the "hot hand" effect (Burns &

Figure 3. Graph depiciting expectancy as a function of run
length.

	  

3023

	  

We hypothesise that the crucial factor causing the
difference between the results of this experiment and the
2012 experiment is the absence of the CS. In this
experiment participants only experience one stimulus (the
US) as opposed to two interacting stimuli (the CS and the
US). But can we be sure that sensitization is not a factor in
our experiment? We see two possible issues that need to be
investigated. The first stems from the possibility that any
change in SCR consequent on experience of shock is being
expressed in the PreCS period because of timing issues. If
sensitization were occurring, but manifesting in the PreCS
window, then this would have the effect of driving our SCR
measure down. In the McAndrew et al. (2012) experiment
the CS could be used to eliminate this timing issue, and so
the sensitisation would now manifest in the CS period and
drive the measure up. Weidemann et al. (2009) have also
proposed that the expression of US sensitization is
dependent on a weakly conditioned discrete cue being
present. Given this, we cannot establish that US
sensitization is not driving the SCR in our 2012 experiment
as matters stand. This is addressed in Experiment 2.

Experiment 2
This experiment uses a discrete cue to provide the correct
context for the expression of US sensitization (Weidemann
et al., 2009). Therefore, there are CS-US, CS-noUS, noCSUS and noCS-noUS trials in this experiment. The US
sequences used were mapped to those in the previous
experiments except that we added strategically placed CSs,
one per run length per block. These CSs were placed on
these specific runs to avoid the build up of associative
strength, and alternated in terms of being reinforced or not.
SCR was measured on these trials, and, due to the absence
of any associative structure during the preceding run, if an
increase in SCR across run length (and level) is found, US
sensitization would explain this. However, if we fail to find
an increasing pattern an alternative explanation for our 2012
results must be sought, perhaps an associative one.

+3 and -3 run per block so these always had a CS. A CS was
then randomly allocated to a +2, -2, +1, and -1 run. Three
additional trials were inserted at the start of each block, CSUS, CS-noUS, CS-US, in order to create the weakly
conditioned discrete cue. Thus, overall there were 52 trials.

Procedure
Participants were told that sometimes they would see a
brown cylinder come on the screen. Half the time it would
be followed by a shock and half the time not, but sometimes
they would receive a shock when the cylinder was not there.
Other procedures were as in the previous experiment.

Results
The SCR data was treated in much the same way as in
Experiment 1, with regards to data collection and log
transformation. A measure of the CR was taken for each
trial on which the CS was present using the formula, CSPreCS. A mean SCR measure was then recorded for each
run length and averaged across participants. With regards to
the expectancy data, the expectancy rating made during the
actual CS period was taken as participants' expectancy of
the US on that trial. Again, a mean rating for each run
length was calculated for each participant and then across
participants. Both data sets were collapsed to form the
variable level (see Fig. 4). 	  	  

Method

Figure 4. Graph depicting changes in SCR and expectancy
as functions of level.

24 people participated in this experiment, all University
of Exeter undergraduate students, 15 women and 9 men,
ages ranging from 18 to 24 years old (average, 19 years).
All participants were paid £10.

Two-way repeated measures ANOVAs were run on the
SCR and expectancy data separately. In the SCR data, there
was no significant linear trend over level, F(1,23) = 1.82,
MSE = .023, p = .190, Bayes factor = 0.31, so we have
strong evidence for the null hypothesis leading us to reject
US sensitization as an account for this result. Nor was there
a significant difference between the US present and US
absent trials or any interaction (p > .05). With regards to the
expectancy data, there was a significantly increasing linear
effect across level, F(1,23) = 5.52, MSE = 2.19, p = .028.
Additionally, there was a significant effect of US presence,
with a higher mean expectancy rating for US absent (3.69)
compared to US present (2.90) trials, F(1,23) = 39.35, MSE
= 22.56, p < .001, see Fig 5. However there was no
interaction between these two variables (p > .05).

Participants

Stimuli
The same stimuli were used in this experiment as in the
previous one. However, on the trials where a CS was
presented, a brown cylinder (19 x 13cm onscreen) appeared
for 5 seconds (the same as used in McAndrew et al., 2012).
Participants were asked to make explicit expectancy ratings
just as they were in the first experiment, every 5 seconds.

Design
The sequences were the same as those used in Experiment
1, however, a CS was added to 6 trials per block, one on
each of the -3, -2, -1, +1, +2 and +3 runs. There is only one

3024

	  

Discussion
Weidemann et al. (2009) proposed that in order to see the
effects of US sensitization, the experimental context had to
incorporate a discrete CS. Therefore, Experiment 2 aimed to
do this to keep the context of the experiment similar to that
of the original 2012 experiment. The CSs were strategically
placed on one of each US run length, to measure UR
without the build up of associative strength. In some sense
our manipulation has been successful, as now the SCR
changes recorded are all positive, as was the case in our
2012 experiment.
Analysis of the SCR data shows we have found another
case where SCR is flat across run length and level. There is
no sign of an increasing trend, which would be expected if
presentation of the US is sensitizing participants. This null
result strengthens the case against the nonassociative US
sensitisation account as an explanation of the SCR result
seen in the original Perruchet experiment. In the absence of
any evidence to the contrary, we propose that associative
processes are driving performance in the original 2012
paradigm, consistent with a dual processing system account
of learning (McLaren, Green, & Mackintosh, 1994).

	  

	  

Figure 5. Graph depicting changes in SCR and expectancy
as functions of run length.
With regards to the expectancy data, despite our changes
to the paradigm, we have obtained the same pattern as we
found in Experiment 1. There is a significant linear increase
in expectancy across level, yet an overall decrease in
expectancy from US absent to US present trials. The
explanation we proposed for Experiment 1 can also account
for this result. Despite CSs being present in this experiment,
participants are still instructed that shocks will happen
intermittently throughout the experiment regardless of the
presence/absence of the CS. Therefore, as time elapses
participants give higher ratings for shock, which then
decrease once a shock has occurred. Once again we
speculate that they track runs of USs, and this effect is
superimposed on the overall trend due to elapsed time.

Conclusion
In two experiments we investigated whether
nonassociative US sensitization could explain the original
result found in McAndrew et al.’s (2012) experiment. In

both cases there was no evidence for sensitization to the US,
and the pattern of results was different to that obtained in
the Perruchet paradigm. We conclude that a dual processing
system explanation (e.g. McLaren et al., 1994), appealing to
explicit, propositional processes to explain the expectancy
data as opposed to associative, autonomic accounts of the
SCR data, is still the most convincing account of
McAndrew et al.’s (2012) results.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research was funded by a studentship from the ESRC.
REFERENCES
Balderston, N.L., & Helmstetter, F.J. (2010). Conditioning with masked
stimuli affects the timecourse of skin conductance responses. Behavioral
Neuroscience, 124(4), 478-489.
Barrett, L.C., & Livesey, E.J. (2010). Dissociations between expectancy
and performance in simple two-choice reaction-time tasks: A test of
associative and nonassociative explanations. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 36(4), 864-877.
Burns, B.D., & Corpus, B. (2004). Randomness and inductions from
streaks: "Gambler's fallacy" versus "Hot hand". Psychonomic Bulletin
and Review, 11, 179-184.
Dienes, Z. (2011). Bayesian versus Orthodox statistics: Which side are you
on? Perspectives on Psychological Sciences, 6(3), 274-290.
Knight, D.C., Nguyen, H.T., & Bandettini, P.A. (2003). Expression of
conditional fear with and without awareness. PNAS, 100(25), 1528015283.
Lovibond P.F., & Shanks, D.R. (2002). The role of awareness in Pavlovian
conditioning: Empirical evidence and theoretical implications. Journal of
Experimetnal Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes, 28(1), 3-26.
McAndrew, A., Jones, F., McLaren, R., & McLaren, I.P.L. (2012).
Dissociating expectancy of shock and changes in skin conductance: An
investigation of
the Perruchet effect using an electrodermal
paradigm. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior
Processes, 38(2), 203-208.
McLaren, I.P.L., Forrest, C.L., and McLaren, R.P. (2012). Elemental
representation and configural mappings: Combining elemental and
configural theories of associative learning. Learning and Behavior, 40,
320-33.
McLaren, I.P.L., Green, R.E.A., & Mackintosh, N.J. (1994). Animal
learning and the implicit/explicit distinction. In N.C. Ellis (Ed.) Implicit
and explicit learning of languages (pp. 313-332). New York, NY:
Academic Press.
Mitchell, C.J., De Houwer, J., & Lovibond, P.F. (2009). The propositional
nature of human associative learning. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 32,
183-246.
Mitchell, C.J., Wardle, S.G., Lovibond, P.F., Weidemann, G., & Chang,
B.P.I. (2010). Do reaction times in the Perruchet effect reflect variations
in the strength of an associative link? Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 36(2), 567-572.
Perruchet, P. (1985). A pitfall for the expectancy theory of human eyelid
conditioning. Pavlovian Journal of Biological Sciences, 20, 163-170.
Perruceht, P., Cleeremans, A., & Destrebeceqz, A. (2006). Dissociating the
effects of autonomic activation and explicit expectancy on reaction times
in a simple associative learning task. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 32, 955-965.
Tabbert, K., Stark, R., Kirsch, P., & Vaitl, D. (2006). Dissociation of
neural responses and skin conductance reactions during fear conditioning
with and without awareness of stimulus contingencies. Neuroimage,
32(2), 761.
Weidemann, G., Tangen, J.M., Lovibond, P.F., & Mitchell, C.J. (2009). Is
Perruchet’s dissociation between eyeblink conditioned responding and
outcome expectancy evidence for two learning systems? Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes, 35, 169-176.

3025

