UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Can Playing Portal Affect Spatial Thinking and Increase Learning in a STEM Area?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3w0450mm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Adams, Deanne
Mayer, Richard

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Portal and Physics 1

Can Playing Portal Affect Spatial Thinking and Increase Learning in a STEM Area?
Deanne M. Adams (adams@psych.ucsb.edu)
Richard. E. Mayer (mayer@psych.ucsb.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, University of California,
Santa Barbara, CA 93106.

Abstract
Spatial skills have been associated with learning in STEM
areas and some research has shown that playing video games
could facilitate the development of spatial skills. This study
examines whether playing a game that uses a realistic physics
engine and places spatial demands on the players could
facilitate learning a subsequent physics lesson. Fifty-eight
participants viewed a brief lesson on Newton’s laws of
motion after either playing the puzzle game Tetris or the firstperson perspective puzzle game Portal, which incorporates
aspects of physics such as momentum. The groups did not
differ on subsequent tests of learning outcomes involving
physics, but the Portal group scored significantly higher on a
perspective taking test (d = 0.57). This study shows that
playing a commercial game that incorporates Newtonian
physics does not prepare students to learn physics but does
improve an important spatial cognition skill related to
physics.
Keywords: video games; physics learning; spatial orientation

Objectives
The goal of this study is to examine whether playing an offthe-shelf first-person perspective puzzle game based on
physics principles (i.e., Portal) can help prepare students to
learn physics concepts and improve their spatial skills as
measured by the perspective taking task. In the present
study, students studied a brief lesson on Newton’s laws of
motion after spending an hour playing Portal or the puzzle
game Tetris. Examining the effects of playing an off-the
shelf computer game can be called cognitive consequences
research and constitutes one of three major experimental
methodologies for game research (Mayer, 2011). In short,
the goal is to determine the cognitive consequences of
playing Portal on (a) improving a spatial skill that is related
to learning in physics and (b) enabling students to learn
physics concepts on a subsequent physics lesson.

Learning Physics and Video Games
Learning physics can often be difficult because many
learners already have misconceptions about how the
physical world works. White (1993) argued that one of the
problems with physics education is the top-down approach
in which abstract formulas are taught first, which students
later have trouble applying to every-day phenomenon.
Instead White (1993) argued that physics should be taught
using an approach in which students are presented with
concrete versions of these models in the form of computer

simulations. While the real world can be overly complex
with multiple forces acting simultaneously, a simulation can
control for these factors and allow for students to make
predictions, then test them, and to try to explain the results.
White (1993) used a group of microworlds called
“ThinkerTools” with 6th graders. The curriculum was
developed so that the initial microworlds had simple
situations (no friction and only one dimension of motion) so
that learners could develop intuitive knowledge before
dealing with more sophisticated causal relationships. White
(1993) found that, compared to high school students who
were taught using traditional methods, 6th graders who
received the “ThinkerTools” curriculum performed better on
simple force and motion problems, better retained what they
learned, and transferred what they learned to new contexts.
Similar to White’s (1993) computer simulation, some offthe-shelf video games have been developed to depict
realistic movement based on Newtonian physics and provide
simplified environments to make game play easier. In a
study by Masson, Bub, and Lalonde (2011) participants
completed 6 one-hour game training sessions playing the
video game Enigmo or the control game Railroad Tycoon 3.
During Enigmo the player must alter the trajectories of
falling droplets so that the drops land in target receptacles.
The authors proposed that the Enigmo group would benefit
from game play because the game gives repeated exposure
to the movement of falling objects and this may benefit
students by priming them to learn from formal physics
instruction. The pretest/posttest consisted of a test of
knowledge about the motion of objects with 15 items
involving objects moving freely through space based on
physics. Participants in the Enigmo group increased their
ability to produce realistic trajectories but only in terms of
the general parabolic shapes of those trajectories. After the
posttest, participants then completed a PowerPoint tutorial
on physics after which they completed 13 test problems
based on the tutorial. Masson et al. (2011) found that
students in the Enigmo group did not show a higher
improvement after viewing the tutorial compared to the
Railroad Tycoon 3 group.
Masson et al. (2011) were not able to show that
experience playing a game that uses realistic physics motion
prepares students to benefit from direct instruction in
physics, but video games may benefit science learning
through improvements in visuospatial ability. Previous
research has shown that playing video games such as firstperson shooters (Feng, Spence, & Pratt, 2007), and spatial
puzzle games (Okagaki & Frensch,1994; Subrahmanyam &,

1702

Portal and Physics 2
Greenfield,1994; Terlecki et al., 2008) can increase different
spatial cognition skills, such as mental rotation. Work by
Kozhevnikov and colleagues has shown a relationship
between spatial ability and physics problem solving
(Kozhevnikov, Hegarty and Mayer, 2002; Kozhevnikov,
Motes, and Hegarty, 2007). When looking at a factor
analysis of spatial ability tests and different types of
kinematic problems, Kozhevnikov, Hegarty, and Mayer
(2002) found that spatial ability loaded on the same factor as
problems which involved determining an object’s trajectory
based on combining two motion vectors and using a
different frame of reference to determine the characteristics
of an object’s motion. In an additional study in which
participants were classified as being either high or low
spatial, students classified as having high spatial ability
were: (1) more successful at integrating several motion
parameters versus only considering one at a time; (2) could
interpret a object’s motion based on kinematic graphs versus
seeing the graphs as picture-like representations; and (3)
understood the connection between different representations
of spatial problems versus using multiple uncoordinated
representations of the same problem (Kozhevnikov et al.
2007). Kozhevnikov et al.’s (2007) results with eye
movements also suggest that high spatials actually visualize
the movement of objects based on integrating motion
components while low spatial individuals do not. Thus,
there is evidence that certain spatial skills are related to
success in STEM subjects.
Sanchez (2012) showed that playing games can also have
a benefit on learning in science areas through priming these
visuospatial abilities. Participants either played 25 minutes
of the first-person shooter game, Halo: Combat Evolved or
the word anagram game Word Whomp before reading a
lesson on plate tectonics. Participants did not significantly
differ on prior knowledge in the subject area or spatial
skills, as measured by the first section of both the card
rotation task and the paper folding task. After playing the
game participants then read a complex text about plate
tectonics. They then completed an essay task in which they
were asked to write a causal essay about “What caused Mt.
St. Helens to erupt?” After the essay task they completed
the second part of both the card rotations task and the paperfolding task. The results found that playing the action video
game had a significant positive effect on essay quality and
rotation task performance. Sanchez (2012) proposed that
the first-person shooter game requires visuospatial skills
that are important for learning in some science areas. The
present study parallels Sanchez’s methodology, but explores
the domain of physics learning.

Current Study
In the fall of 2011, the game company Valve introduced an
educational program called Learn With Portals, which
proposed using their games Portal and Portal 2 to help
teach students critical-thinking skills and physics
(http://www.learnwithportals.com/). The games, depicted in
Figure 1, incorporate elements of physics, such as

momentum, into a problem solving game. Portal is
intended to benefit physics learning because it applies
realistic physics principles into the game experience,
therefore allowing the player to build experience with
physics concepts in a controlled environment.
It is unclear whether Portal has any effect on spatial
cognition skills similar to previous research with firstperson shooters and Tetris. If Portal does facilitate
cognitive ability development it could help students learn
physics similar to Sanchez’s (2012) work with plate
tectonics. Playing Portal requires the participant to imagine
what a room may look like from a different perspective.
Placing the portals in order to solve the puzzles within the
game may therefore require the use of the spatial skill
known as spatial orientation or the ability to visualize what
a different perspective may look like from another location
(Hegarty & Waller, 2004). Kozhevnikov, Hegarty, and
Mayer (2002) found that performance on a spatial
orientation test correlated with performance on a kinematics
questionnaire, which included items from the physics test
known as the Force Concept Inventory (FCI) (Hestenes,
Wells, & Swackhamer, 1992). In this study, Tetris is used
as the control condition because although Tetris has been
found to increase performance on mental rotation under
certain training regimes (Okagaki & Frensch,1994; Terlecki
et al., 2008), Kozhevnikov et al. (2002) showed that mental
rotation was not associated with kinematic problem solving.
Therefore, the objective of this experiment is to: (1)
determine whether playing Portal can increase performance
on a spatial cognition task; (2) determine whether an hour’s
worth of playing Portal versus Tetris can increase learning
from a subsequent lesson on physics; (3) determine whether
there is a relationship between spatial cognition skills and
performance on physics problem solving.
Participants and Design Participants were 63 (39 male, 24
female) students from the University of California, Santa
Barbara. Ages ranged from 17-23 years old with a mean
age of 19.03 (SD = 1.28). Participants received class credit
for their participation. Thirty-four participants served in the
Portal group and 29 served in the Tetris group.
Materials The pre-game paper-based materials consisted of
a participant questionnaire and pretest. The participant
questionnaire contained basic demographic items
concerning the participant’s gender, year in school, age, and
also asked participants to rate their spatial cognition ability
(i.e. being able to visualize objects or imagine rotating
items) on a 5-point scale ranging from “Very Poor” to
“Very Good”. Participants were also asked how many
hours they played video games, excluding card games and
text based games, during a typical week ranging from “I do
not play video games” to “More than 10 hours per week”.
Participants were also asked whether they had played Portal
or Tetris before. To examine prior knowledge, participants
were asked to indicate whether they had previously taken

1703

Portal and Physics 3
physics courses during high school or college, or if they
were in the process of taking a physics course.
The pretest asked participants to try to recall Newton’s
three laws of motion. Participants could receive a total of 6
points on this section, 2 points for each law if all of the
elements were correct. For example, for the 1st Law, the
Law of Inertia, participants had to state both that a body in
motion will stay in motion while a body at rest will stay at
rest and that the object’s state will not change unless acted
upon by an external force. Excluding either the “at rest” or
“in motion” element would result in the student only
receiving one point for the 1st law. The pretest also included
4 multiple-choice questions dealing with naïve physics. The
first two were the cliff problem and the ball problem from
McCloskey (1983). The cliff problem asks the learner to
determine what path a person will take if they run at a
constant rate of speed off the edge of a cliff. The correct
answer to this problem is based on the 1st law of motion,
while some of the incorrect options are consistent with
impetus theory or the idea that objects contain force that
runs out. The ball problem asks the learner to determine
where a heavy ball will land if you dropped the ball while
running forward at a constant speed. The last two questions
came from White’s (1993) testing materials and asked
participants about two balls falling from different heights.
This question was used to examine the participant’s
understanding of gravity. Students received one point for
each correct answer in this section. Overall, the pretest
scores could range from 0 to 10.
The control game used for this study was the puzzle game
Tetris. During Tetris the player must make lines of blocks
using 6 different block shapes. Every time a line is
completed the line disappears from the rectangular play area
and the player receives points. The more lines that are
completed at once, or the larger the combo, the higher the
points the player receives. The player can press a button on
the keyboard to rotate the blocks in increments of 90
degrees in order to best fit them into the available spots at
the bottom. The block shapes fall from the top of the play
area at a constant rate and as players gather more points the
falling rate increases therefore increasing the level difficulty
of the game. In the marathon mode version of the game,

Figure 1: Sample screen shot from Portal game play.
Chamber 13.

play continues until the player fills the rectangular play area
with incomplete lines.
The target game used in this study was Portal (2007), a
first-person perspective puzzle game. The narrative of the
game is that you are a test subject named Chell that has
woken up in a facility in which you must navigate through
testing chambers using portals. The player is given advice
and feedback from a computer named GLaDOS who
promises cake upon the completion of the testing regimen.
During the game the player acquires the use of a portal gun,
which shoots two portals, a blue and an orange one, which
are linked to the left and right mouse buttons respectively.
The two portals can be fired on specific surfaces during the
game and can link those two locations so that when you
enter one portal you will exit the other. The game
sometimes requires the participant to make use of
momentum so that the player can traverse large horizontal
distances. To do this a player can place one portal at the
bottom of a pit and another on a vertical wall so that falling
into the portal at the bottom of the pit will increase their
momentum using gravity and they will exit the opposite
portal with enough speed to travel horizontally over pits and
other obstacles (Chamber 10 of the game requires this
solution). Solutions become progressively harder as the
chambers continue requiring the use of more and more
portals. There are a total of 19 levels/chambers in the game.
In this experiment, participants started on the 10th chamber
of the game since it is the first one that deals with
momentum to solve the puzzle. The chamber also starts
with GLaDOS explaining momentum, in which she states
that portals do not affect forward momentum. She also
informs the player that momentum is a function of mass and
velocity. Participants were encouraged to get as far through
the chambers as possible until the hour of game play was
over.
The physics lesson consisted of an 18-slide presentation
on Newton’s three laws of motion and the law of
conservation of momentum. The presentation also
addressed the incorrect impetus theory and how it is a
common misconception in physics. The lesson included the
basic rules along with examples for each of the laws such as
a canon recoiling after firing a cannonball for Newton’s 3rd
law or “for every action this is an equal and opposite
reaction.”
There were four paper-based posttests: a retention test, a
shorten, adapted version of the Force Concept Inventory
(FCI) (Hestenes, Wells, & Swackhamer, 1992; Hestenes &
Halloun, 1995), a Portal based scenario test, and a spatial
orientation test. The retention test asked the participant to
recall the three laws of motion. This question was used to
determine whether there were basic recall differences
between the two groups. Once again, students could receive
a total of 6 points for this section, 2 points for each law with
all of the components correctly defined.
The adapted version of the FCI consisted of 24 multiplechoice items. Only items dealing with the first three laws
were included since the short physics lesson only dealt with

1704

Portal and Physics 4
these topics. This test was chosen because many of the
items deal with the movement of objects and often includes
items that could be answered incorrectly based on impetus
theory instead of using Newtonian physics. The learner
must apply what he or she knows about the three laws and
momentum in order to select the correct answer. For
example, one item asks participants to imagine that a
bowling ball had been dropped out of the cargo bay of an
airliner traveling horizontally and the participant must pick
the correct path that the ball will fall from the plane to the
ground below. There was only one correct answer for each
item with a total of 24 possible points.
The scenario test contained two questions about scenarios
taken straight from the Portal game and asked participants
to determine whether the law of conversation of momentum
had been violated. In one example, the direction of the
individual changes (from traveling vertically to
horizontally) while in the other the direction is kept constant
(vertical to vertical). Participants are asked to justify their
answers and must have the correct explanation to receive
full marks on the two items with one point for correctly
selecting whether the law had been violated or not and one
point for justifying their reason, for example, explaining
how momentum is a vector (speed and direction). The total
score could range from 0 to 4.
To determine whether playing Portal affected the spatial
skill known as spatial orientation, Hegarty and Waller’s
(2004) Perspective Taking/Spatial Orientation Test was
used. During this task participants are given an array of
7objects including a house, a cat, a tree, etc. For each
question, participants are asked to imagine that they are
standing at one object facing the direction of another. They
are then asked to “point” to the direction of a third object.
To respond, below the picture array, participants are given a
circle in which the first direction (i.e. cat facing the flower)
is given and they must then draw a line indicating which
direction the third object is relative to the other two.
Participants are given 5 minutes to complete as many items
as possible with a total of 12 possible items. Hegarty and
Waller (2004) showed that the spatial ability known as
spatial orientation is highly correlated with mental rotation
but there is a disassociation between the two, suggesting
two separate abilities.
Apparatus Both games were run on Dell computers with 17
inch color monitors, with ATI Radeon HD 2600 XT video
cards. The lesson was also administered using the
computers. All the testing materials, including the spatial
orientation task, were given using paper and pencil.
Procedure Participants were randomly assigned to groups
and tested in individual cubicles. Upon entering the lab
participants were seated at separate computer cubicles.
Participants were first asked to fill out the participant
questionnaire sheet and the pretest, at their own pace.
Participants were then informed that they were going to play
their respective game for an hour followed by a lesson on

physics, a posttest, and the spatial orientation task. Each
cubicle also had instructions for how to play the
participant’s particular game. Participants in the Tetris
condition played on “marathon” mode in which the game
becomes progressively harder as the player acquires points.
For Tetris the experimenters recorded the scores and level
reached for each of the completed games. At the end of the
hour, the Portal group had their game progress saved, which
was later accessed by the experimenter to determine how
many chambers the participant had completed.
Next, the physics lesson was initiated on the participant’s
computer. Participants were told that they had a minimum
of 8 minutes to review the physics lesson and could have
more time if they wished. Upon completing the lesson the
participants were given a packet including the retention test,
FCI items, and the Portal scenario questions and told that
they had as much time as they wanted to answer the
questions. After turning in the packet, participants were
then given the spatial orientation test. They had 5 minutes
to complete as many items as possible.

Results
For the analysis, only participants who were actively
engaged during game play were included. The reasoning
behind this decision is that only active participants who had
Portal full exposure to all the elements within the game
were of interest. Therefore participants were excluded from
the analysis if they did not get past Chamber 11 while
playing Portal or if they did not get beyond level 5 in Tetris.
Using these criteria, 4 Portal participants and 2 Tetris
participants were removed from the analysis, leaving 30
participants in the Portal group and 28 in the Tetris group.
The two groups did not differ significantly in the
proportion of males and females, X²(1, N = 58) = .009, p
=.92, the proportion of individuals who were familiar with
the game Portal, X²(1, N = 58) = 1.62, p =.20, and the
proportion of individuals who were familiar with the game
Tetris, X²(1, N = 58) = .283, p =.595. The participants also
did not differ on their self-ratings of spatial cognition
ability, t(56) = -.431, p = .67, and reported hours of video
game playing, t(56) = .037, p = .97. There was no
significant difference on pretest performance, t(56) = -1.15,
p = .26, or prior knowledge with physics, t(56) = .82, p =
.42.
Does playing Portal improve students’ spatial cognition?
The perspective taking task was scored so that any item in
which the participant was within 15 degrees of the correct
angle was scored as correct and awarded 1 point while
anything beyond 15 degrees and items that were not
attempted were not awarded any points. Participants in the
Portal condition significantly outperformed participants in
the Tetris condition on the spatial orientation test, t(55) = 2.12, p = .04, d = 0.57. This is the major new positive
finding in the study.

1705

Portal and Physics 5

Table 1: Means and standard deviations for all posttest measures.
Group
Measure

Portal

Tetris

M (SD)

M (SD)

p

d

Retention

5.27 (1.44)

5.39 (1.06)

0.71

-0.09

FCI

13.07 (5.37)

12.75 (4.45)

0.81

0.06

Portal Scenerio

1.77 (1.50)

1.39 (1.42)

0.34

0.26

Spatial Orientation

7.07 (3.03)

5.52 (2.41)

0.04

0.57

Importantly, there was a significant positive correlation
between performance on the adpated FCI (which measures
physics intuitive knowledge) and performance on the spatial
orientation test, r(57) = .323, p = .014. This finding suggests
that spatial cognition skills such as spatial orientation may
be related to success in physics learning.
Does playing Portal help students learn physics? Table 1
shows the means (and standard deviations) of the two
groups on each of the four tests. There were no significant
differences on recall of the three laws of motion in the
retention test, t(56) = .378, p = .71; applying what they had
learned to answer the FCI items, t(56) = -.242, p = .81; or
answering questions involving conservation of momentum
through portals on the scenario test, t(56) = -.972, p = .34.
Therefore, there was no evidence that playing Portal
facilitated learning about the laws of motion.

Discussion
On the negative side, playing Portal did not improve
learning of physics content, paralleling the results of
Masson et al.’s (2011) research with Enigmo. On the
positive side, playing the first-person perspective puzzle
game Portal for an hour resulted in higher performance on
an important spatial cognition skill (i.e., spatial orientation)
compared to playing the 2D puzzle game Tetris. In addition
the results showed a significant correlation between
performance on a measure of spatial cognition (i.e., the
spatial orientation test) and a measure of physics knowledge
(i.e., the adapted FCI), paralleling the results from
Kozhevnikov et al. (2002) showing a connection between
spatial skills and success in STEM learning.
This study provides evidence that spatial orientation is a
learnable skill. Games such as Portal, which require
participants to imagine taking different viewpoints, may
facilitate the development of this skill. In contrast, a game
like Tetris which can utilize mental rotation under certain
circumstances, does not tax spatial orientation therefore
causing no improvement. Overall, the results support the
idea that training of spatial skills is domain specific, such
that different kinds of computer games can promote

different kinds of spatial skills rather than improving spatial
cognition in general.
These findings support the idea that if educators want
students to improve in spatial orientation skill, they can
benefit from playing a first-person perspective puzzle game
like Portal. Improving in this skill appears to be related to
STEM learning, so in order to help students that might be
struggling in areas such as physics, perhaps developing their
spatial orientation skills could facilitate learning.
Educational physics games could incorporate both direct
instruction and spatial components to increase learning.

Limitations and Future Directions
One limitation for this study is the lack of a pretest measure
for spatial orientation. None of the pretest or demographic
measures showed any significant differences between the
two testing groups; therefore random assignment should
have balanced spatial ability between the two groups. The
spatial orientation task only has one form with 12 items and
dividing the task into 2 sections may have weakened the
power of the measure. In the future, a second version of this
test with an alternative array of objects could be used a
pretest to determine spatial orientation ability before game
play.
Although playing the off the shelf version of Portal for a
brief period of time did not benefit students when learning
physics, perhaps playing either for longer or playing
chambers created to teach specific principles would result in
higher learning gains. Our study found that there was a
significant benefit on spatial orientation scores for playing
Portal as well as a significant correlation between
performance on the spatial orientation task and performance
on the modified FCI. Perhaps with further game play
participants could increase their spatial skills, therefore
facilitating learning physics problems dealing with motion.
Previous research with video games has shown that different
cognitive skills can be improved by playing games (Green
and Bavelier, 2003). While Tetris can improve mental
rotation under some circumstances but not others (Terlecki,
et al., 2008, Sims and Mayer, 2002) it is important to
consider what skills are improved by a particular game and
what skills are associated with success in a particular STEM

1706

Portal and Physics 6
area. For example, Sanchez (2012) found improvements in
mental rotation and learning about plate tectonics from
playing a first-person shooter but no improvement in the
paper-folding task. Spatial orientation has been found to
correlate with performance on kinematic tasks, therefore a
game which trains these skills could help participants with
solving these problems.
In addition, the game company Valve has released a tool
in which players can create their own testing chambers with
the Portal 2 game software. Similar to White’s (1993)
highly controlled simulations, if the Portal 2 software could
be used to create lessons in which students build up prior
knowledge through playing the game, then perhaps physics
learning could be improved. One issue with Portal is that
participants view the game from the first-person perspective
so they are unable to see the falling trajectories of their
game avatar caused by differences in momentum.
Therefore, misconceptions about how objects fall can not be
correctly addressed. By creating special testing chambers,
other objects could be used to show how physics behaves in
a controlled environment. Further research must be done to
determine under what circumstances a lesson using the
Portal game environment could facilitate learning and the
development of spatial skills.

Acknowledgments
This project was supported by a grant from the Office of
Naval Research. We would also like to thank the game
company Valve, specifically Dr. Mike Ambinder and Leslie
Redd, for the electronic copies of Portal donated for
research purposes.

References
Chinn, C.A., & Malhotra, B.A. (2002). Children’s responses
to anomalous scientific data: How conceptual change
impeded? Journal of Educational Psychology, 94 , 327343.
Feng, J., Spence, I., & Pratt, J. (2007). Playing an action
video game reduces gender differences
in spatial cognition. Psychological Science, 18(10), 850855.
Green, C.S., & Bavelier, D. (2003). Action video game
modifies visual selective attention. Nature, 423, 534-538.
Hegarty, M., & Waller, D. (2004). A dissociation between
mental rotation and perspective-taking spatial abilities.
Intelligence, 32, 175-191.
Hestenes, D., & Halloun, I. (1995). Interpreting the FCI.
The Physics Teacher, 33, 502–506.

Hestenes, D., Wells, M., & Swackhamer, G. (1992). Force
concept inventory, The Physics Teacher, 30, 141-151.
Kozhevnikov, M., Hegarty, M., & Mayer, R. E. (2002).
Visual/spatial abilities in problem solving in physics. In
M. Anderson, B. Meyer, & P. Olivier (Eds.),
Diagrammatic Representations and Reasoning SpringlerVerlag.
Kozhevnikov, M., Motes, M.A., & Hegarty, M. (2007).
Spatial visualization in physics problem solving.
Cognitive Science, 31, 549-579.
Learn With Portals (2011). Retrieved from
http://www.learnwithportals.com/
Masson, M.E.J., Bub, D.N., Lalonde, C.E. (2011). Videogame training and naïve reasoning about object motion.
Applied Cognitive Psychology,25 (1), 166-173.
Mayer, R. E. (2008). Learning and instruction (2nd ed).
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson.
Mayer, R. E. (2011). Multimedia learning and games. In S.
Tobias and J. D. Fletcher (Eds.), Computer games and
instruction (pp. 306). Charlotte, NC: Information Age
Publishing.
McCloskey (1983). Intuitive Physics. Scientific American,
248(4), 122-130.
McCloskey, M., Washburn, A., Felch, L. (1983). Intuitive
physics: The straight-down belief and its origin. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 9(4), 636-649.
Okagaki, L., & Frensch, P. A. (1994). Effects of video game
playing on measures of spatial performance: Gender
effects in late adolescence. Journal of Applied
Developmental Psychology, 15, 33-58.
Portal (computer software) (2007). Bellevue, WA: Valve
Sanchez, C.A. (2012). Enhancing visuospatial performance
through video game training to increase learning in
visuospatial science domains. Psychono Bull Rev, 19, 5865.
Sims, V.K. & Mayer, R.E. (2002). Domain specificity of
spatial expertise: The case of video game players. Applied
Cognitive Psychology, 16, 97-115.
Subrahmanyam, K. &, Greenfield, P.M. (1994). Effect of
video game practice on spatial skills in girls and boys.
Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 15, 13-32.
Terlecki, M.S., Newcombe, N.S., & Little, M. (2008).
Durable and generalized effects ospatial experience on
mental rotation: Gender differences in growth patterns.
Applied Cognitive Psychology, 22, 996-1013.
White, B.Y. (1993) ThinkerTools: Causal Models,
Conceptual Change, and Science Education. Cognition
and Instruction, 10(1), 1-100.

1707

