UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Candle-Candle-Candle-Candy: Continuous Attraction Toward Previously Seen Phonological
Competitors

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/11c5k48v

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Falk, Jesse
Winter, Bodo
Spivey, Michael

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Candle-Candle-Candle-Candy: Continuous Attraction
Toward Previously Seen Phonological Competitors
Jesse Falke (jfalke@ucmerced.edu)
Bodo Winter (bodo@bodowinter.com)
Michael J. Spivey (spivey@ucmerced.edu)
Cognitive and Information Sciences, 5200 North Lake Road,
Merced, CA 95343 USA

Abstract
Mouse-tracking provides rich information about temporally
sensitive mental processing. In two experiments, we applied
this methodology to a phonological cohort task that can be
interpreted as a version of the A-not-B task. In the first
experiment, participants had to click a word such as “candle”
three times in a row on the same side of the computer screen.
They then had to click a phonological competitor (“candy”)
on the other side during the critical trial. This was contrasted
with a condition in which the word to be clicked three times
in a row was phonologically unrelated to the word at the
critical trial. We found that the phonological priming
increased attraction toward the competitor. In the second
experiment, mouse movements revealed attraction towards
the competitor as a function of the number of previous
presentations. The results demonstrate that phonological
competitors can exert graded influence on motor responses
even if the competitors are not simultaneously presented.
These results are predicted by and provide evidence for the
dynamic field theory of movement preparation and execution.
These results can furthermore be interpreted as evidence for
continuity underlying the A-not-B task.
Keywords: A-not-B error; deictic pointers; dynamical
systems; mouse-tracking

Introduction
The A-not-B error has been investigated with children for
over half of a century (Piaget, 1954). In the standard version
of the task, the researcher presents an object to the child and
hides it in one location (“A”). When this process is repeated
multiple times, the child will often reach for the object in
“A” even if it was moved in front of the child’s eyes to
another location, “B”. Eight to ten month old children
reliably commit this error (cf., Marcovitch & Zelazo, 1999).
Smith and Thelen (2003) and Thelen, Schöner, Scheier
and Smith (2001) conceptualize the A-not-B task in terms of
dynamic field theory (Erlhagen & Schöner, 2002), where
the decision to perform a movement towards either A or B
develops in a continuous fashion. The theory views the Anot-B error as the result of changes to an activation field,
where both A and B are represented as points on a plane. If
the researcher hides a toy under A, the point for A increases
in activation and sends inhibitory activation to B. The child
reaches for A if a threshold of activation is crossed.
Crucially, the memory of this reaching “pre-shapes” the
field for the next trial. Over multiple trials, the A region of
the field becomes stronger and increasingly exerts inhibitory

influence on the B region of the field, ultimately resulting in
the A-not-B error.
Dynamic field theory accurately predicts that if posture is
changed between A and B trials (Smith, Thelen, Titzer, &
McLin, 1999), the child does not commit an A-not-B error
as often. This follows from the assumption that changes in
posture on A and B trials decrease the similarity of
preceding memories to the current trials, thus lessening the
strength of the pre-shaping of the field.
This account is also compatible with another area of
research, deictic pointers (Ballard, Hayhoe, Pook & Rao,
1997; Chun & Nakayama, 2000; Richardson & Spivey,
2000). By associating content and locations with a deictic
pointer, a cognitive agent can reference necessary
information and use it to aid action without having to build
up a detailed model of the world. We will argue that the
formation of dynamic fields can be viewed as the formation
of deictic pointers.
In this paper, we explore how previously seen stimuli
affect perseveration in a mouse-tracking experiment.
Mouse-tracking provides a real-time stream of x, y
coordinates during movement that has been used to reveal
the continuous dynamics underlying a diverse set of
cognitive processes, including phonological competition in
lexical access (Spivey, Grosjean, & Knoblich, 2005), the
comprehension of sentence negation (Dale & Duran, 2011),
the categorization of typical and atypical objects (Dale,
Kehoe, & Spivey, 2007), and the categorization of faces
(Freeman, Ambady, Rule, & Johnson, 2008), among many
others (for a review, see Freeman, Dale, & Farmer, 2011).
In Spivey et al. (2005), participants saw two objects in
opposite corners of the computer screen, e.g. a candy and a
candle. They then heard a target word referencing one of the
objects, such as “candy”, while they executed the movement
to click it. When the two objects were phonologically
related, the mouse gravitated more toward the competitor
object than when they were phonologically unrelated.
Here, we extend the task used by Spivey et al. (2005) to
show the graded influence of phonological competitors that
are not simultaneously present on the critical trial. Similar to
the A-not-B task, we present an object such as “candy”
multiple times on one side, and then on the next trial we
present “candle” on the opposite side. Dynamic field theory
predicts that multiple memory traces of “candy” on one side
should exert graded inhibition when seeing the
phonologically related “candle" at a different spatial

2261

location. While adults may not commit the full A-not-B
error by accidentally clicking on the wrong object, their
mouse movements might still reveal continuous attraction
towards previously seen competitors.

Experiment 1
In the first experiment, we presented each participant with
phonologically related and phonologically unrelated stimuli.
Mouse movements were recorded during each trial to
investigate the effects of repeated movements to
phonological and non-phonological competitors.

Methods
Participants Thirty-three undergraduates at UC Merced
volunteered to participate to receive partial course credit.
All participants were right-handed native speakers of
English. 3 stimuli were excluded because of computer lag
(0.24 %).
Stimuli and Procedure The procedure was run using
MouseTracker (Freeman & Ambady, 2010). On each trial,
two 200 pixel-wide pictures were presented in the top
corners of the screen. Using headphones, we presented a
target word for which the corresponding object had to be
clicked (e.g., “pickle”, “pepper”). Each pair of objects was
always phonologically unrelated (e.g., “candle” vs.
“lobster”). However, there were 16 critical trials that were
preceded either by three trials to the same side without a
phonological competitor (lighting-left, pepper-left, speakerleft, candy-right) or three trials to the same side with a
phonological competitor (candle-left, candle-left, candleleft, candy-right). These two conditions are called “motor-3”
and “phonological-3” respectively. The prime was always
the target item. So, for example, a participant might have
had to click “candy” three times on the left side and then, on
the critical trial, “candle” had to be clicked on the right side
(see Fig. 1). Across participants, we balanced the position
(left vs. right) in which the target and the primes occurred,
and we also balanced which of the competitors occurred as
prime, and which as target (i.e., “candy-candy-candycandle” vs. “candle-candle-candle-candy”). In total, there
were 8 “motor-3” items and 8 “phonological-3” items (16
critical stimuli)..
There were also 24 filler trials that occurred between
critical trials and subsequent priming trials. In the analyses
below, we count these filler trials as control trials, as they
represent mouse movements toward target objects for which
there is no previous prime and no phonological competition.
There were thus 88 trials in total. These were preceded by
12 practice trials.
We instructed participants to initialize mouse movements
before they heard the sound file. To encourage this, the gain
was slowed down to 2 (MouseTracker setting), and the
sound file played the target word after a 500 ms delay.

Figure 1: Schematic depiction of experimental trials. Note
that on the critical trial, the competitor is not present.
All stimuli were spoken by a native speaker of English. For
the prime-3 condition, we recorded three different
utterances of the same word by the same speaker to reduce
the possibility of selective adaptation effects. Mouse
coordinate data was sampled at 60 Hz and was recorded
with screen display information, movement durations and
final response.
Analyses We inverted the x coordinates of left-going
responses so that left- and right-going responses had
comparable spatial metrics. We then normalized all
responses to have a common origin at (0,0). Mouse-tracking
provides a large set of potential dependent measures. We
focused on the Euclidian distance of each measured point
from the diagonal line that is defined by the origin in the
center of the screen and the corner response box. All
analyses we present were time-normalized to 101 time steps
per trial.
We analyzed our data in two ways. First, we used the R
package lme4 (Bates, Maechler & Bolker, 2012) to perform
growth curve modeling (Mirman, Dixon & Magnuson,
2008). Time step (1 to 101) entered the analysis as a fourth
order orthogonal polynomial fixed effect (including lowerorder polynomials), and the crucial effect of interest was the
interaction of condition (prime-1, prime-3, control) with
time. In the by-subjects-analysis, we included random
intercepts for subjects, as well as subject random slopes for
time and condition (following Mirman et al., 2008). In the
by-items-analysis, we did the same for items. P-values were
derived separately for each coefficient based on normal
approximated t-values.
Growth curve analysis allows modeling the precise
trajectory; however, for comparability with other mouse
tracking studies and to get the exact time points of where
trajectories differ, we present an alternative analysis
following Dale, Kehoe and Spivey (2007), who have shown
by means of simulated random trajectories that 8
consecutive t-tests may count as a significant result at α =
0.01.

2262

0.25

With mouse-tracking data, there is always the possibility
that average differences between conditions are not due to
genuine gradedness in the response, but due to averaging
over trials that head straight to a target and trials where
participants correct a categorical choice midflight. To assess
whether this could explain our results, we computed the
bimodality coefficient b (see Freeman & Ambady, 2010) on
the z-scored (by subjects and by condition) maximum
deviation from the diagonal line and the area under the
curve (measures are described in Freeman & Ambady,
2010: 229). b values over 0.555 are interpreted as evidence
for bimodality.

0.15
0.1
0

0.05

Euclidian Distance

0.2

Phonological
Motor
Control

Results

0

There were 9 errors in total (0.72% of all trials), all in the
control condition. Therefore, there was no indication of a
categorical A-not-B error. All subsequent analyses are
performed on correct trials only.
Fig. 2 shows the evolution of the Euclidian distances from
the diagonal line over time. For the growth curve analysis,
likelihood ratio tests revealed a significant difference
between the phonological and the pure motor condition by
items (p=0.025), and a marginally significant difference by
subjects (p=0.079). In both cases, there were significant
interaction effects of condition for the cubic and quadratic
components of the model (cubic by subjects, p=0.0054, by
items, p=0.02; quadratic by subjects, p=0.024, by items,
p=0.021).
The phonological competition condition was significantly
different from control by subjects and by items (p=0.009,
p=0.0065). In both cases, the intercept was higher for
phonological competition than for control (by subjects:
p=0.016, by items: p=0.027), indicating overall larger
Euclidian distances for this condition. In the subjects
analysis, there were additionally significant effects for
interactions between condition and the linear (p=0.003),
cubic (p=0.01) and quadratic (p=0.0034) components of the
model. The motor priming condition was significantly
different from control only by subjects (p=0.008) and not by
items (p=0.175). In both cases there were individual effects
for the intercept (higher in motor priming than in control, by
subjects: p=0.01; by items: p=0.048), but no effects for
higher-order polynomials.
The alternative analysis, following Dale et al. (2007),
revealed no consecutive significant differences between
phonological and motor priming that passed the 8 t-test
criterion. There were 36 significant differences between
phonological priming and the control condition in the
subjects analysis (time points 59 to 94), and 50 in the items
analysis (time points 3 to 25 and 59 to 85). The region that
is significant in both analyses is shaded in Fig. 3. There
were 29 significant differences (73 to 101) between control
and motor priming by subjects, as well as 30 by items (3 to
32). Interestingly, in this case, these regions were not
overlapping.

20

40

60

80

100

Time

Figure 2: Euclidian distance as a function of time. Gray
area indicates significant differences between phonological
competition and control (by subjects and items).
Bimodality analyses revealed no subject with b > 0.555
for the crucial phonological competition condition, neither
for the measure “maximum deviation from the diagonal”,
nor for the measure “area under the curve”. For the motor
priming condition, 1 participant had b > 0.555 for maximum
deviation (~3%), and 4 participants for area under the curve
(~12%). Again, this shows that the results are fairly
unimodal across the board.

Discussion
The results for the motor-3 and phonological-3 conditions
were interesting. In the growth curve analysis, it was
surprising that there were significant differences between
the two conditions for items, but only marginally significant
differences for subjects. This is surprising because the
items-based analyses use a smaller sample than the subjects
based analyses (N=33 in the subjects analysis and N=16 in
the items analysis). More data will need to be collected to
explain this.
Another way to look at the data is to see when and how
long the two conditions differed from the control condition
in the analysis proposed by Dale and colleagues (2007).
While both conditions displayed significant differences
from the control by subjects and items, only the
phonological priming condition displayed significant
differences by both subjects and items simultaneously. In
addition, the phonological condition resulted in more total
significant differences from the control than the motor
priming condition (86 vs. 59). If we take the number of
significant simultaneous consecutive differences as a
measure of strength of the difference (cf., Dale et al., 2007),
then the prime-3 condition showed more gravitation away
from the diagonal line (towards previously seen
competitors) than the prime-1 condition.
While this experiment has revealed that attraction toward
a previously displayed stimulus is modulated by said
stimulus being a phonological competitor, there is more to

2263

Experiment 2
In this experiment, we modified Experiment 1 slightly.
Rather than presenting three motor primes or three
phonological primes, the two critical conditions now both
used phonological primes. One condition used three primes
(“prime-3”), while the other condition used just one prime
before the critical trial (“prime-1”).

Methods
Participants Thirty-two undergraduates at UC Merced
volunteered to participate and received partial course credit.
All participants were right-handed native speakers of
English. 9 trials were excluded because of computer lag
(0.8%).

Prime-3
Prime-1
Control

0.1
0.05
0

There were 9 errors in total (0.8% of all trials), 8 in the
control condition (“fillers”) and 1 in the prime-3 condition.
Crucially, this means that there were no noteworthy
differences between the prime-3 and prime-1 error rates,
indicating that no categorical A-not-B-like error was
committed. Subsequent analyses will be performed on
correct trials only.
Fig. 3 shows the evolution of the Euclidian distances from
the diagonal line over time. There was a significant
interaction between the prime-3 and the prime-1 condition
for the linear component of the growth curve model in the
items analysis (p<0.02), and a nearly significant interaction
in the subjects analysis (p=0.053). This linear component
indicates a steeper rise for the trajectory of the prime-3
condition than of the prime-1 condition. However, a
likelihood ratio test comparing the full model with the factor
“condition” against the model without indicates an only
marginally significant overall effect of “prime-3 vs. prime1” (subjects: p=0.066, items: p=0.09).
There were, however, significant differences between
prime-3 and control both by subjects (p=0.0008) and by
items (p=0.015). This difference seems to stem from the
linear component of the model (subjects: p=0.0018, items:
p=0.026), and for the subjects analysis, there also was a
significant difference in intercept (p=0.0049), reflecting
overall larger Euclidian distances for the prime-3 condition
than for trials without phonological competition and without
previous movements towards the competitor. Finally, there
was no significant difference of the overall model between
prime-1 and the control condition (all p’s > 0.1). Comparing
this to the effect of the prime-3 condition, this suggests that

Euclidian Distance

Results

0.15

0.2

Stimuli and Procedure This experiment had a similar setup
to Experiment 1 and made use of the same stimuli. The
prime-3 condition was identical to the phonological-3
condition in Experiment 1. There were 18 filler items.

the prime-3 trials did in fact deviate more strongly from
control trials.
In terms of Dale et al. (2007)’s approach, there were 12
consecutive significant differences between prime-3 and
prime-1 (time points 90 to 101) by subjects and none by
items. There were 48 consecutive differences for prime-3
versus control (time points 54 to 101) by subjects, and 28
(74 to 101) by items. In contrast, there were 41 consecutive
differences for prime-1 versus control (time points 20 to 34,
and 64 to 101) by subjects and none by items. The shaded
gray area in Fig. 2 shows the portions of prime-3 versus
control that are significant in both the subjects and the items
analysis.
By-subject bimodality coefficients for maximum
deviation of the prime-1 and prime-3 conditions were all
below 0.555 for maximum deviations, indicating that the
present results are unlikely due to averaging over bimodal
responses. Bimodality coefficients for the area under the
curve were above 0.555 for only three participants (~9%) in
the 3-prime condition and for 4 participants (12.5%) in the
prime-1 condition.
0.25

dynamic field theory. Experiment 2 was designed to further
investigate how well dynamic field theory could be applied
to these results by varying the number of phonological
primes before the critical trial.

0

20

40

60

80

100

Time

Figure 3: Euclidian distance as a function of time. The
shaded gray area indicates where prime-3 and control are
significantly different from each other by subjects and
items.

General Discussion
In Experiment 1, we found a difference between a purely
motor priming condition and a condition that had both a
motor priming and a phonological priming aspect. This
difference seems to lie within the higher-order polynomials
of the curve fit, suggesting that complex details in the shape
of the trajectories are of importance in characterizing the
difference between the two conditions.. Experiment 2
further established that previous exposure to critical stimuli
did affect the trajectory of upcoming trials, and there was
indication that the strength of this effect was modulated by
the number of previous priming trials.
In both experiments in comparison to the control
condition, only the phonological-3 condition produced a

2264

significant deviation in both the subjects and the items
analysis simultaneously (shaded area Figs. 2 and 3). This
was regardless of the two analysis approaches that we used
above.
These results fall straightforwardly out of a dynamic field
theory account of how the brain treats memory traces of
objects and locations in general (Erlhagen & Schöner, 2002;
Spencer, Barich, Goldberg, & Perone, 2012), and the A-notB error in particular (Smith & Thelen, 2003; Thelen et al,
2001). However, in contrast to children, repeatedly clicking
on a location (“A”) did not lead to a categorical error (there
were no significant differences in error rates between the
conditions). Instead, there was evidence for a continuous,
graded attraction toward the competitor.

location (“A”). In addition, inhibitory connections between
A and B suppress the activation of the other (“B”) location,
making these peaks progressively smaller.
The observed difference between the motor priming
condition and the phonological priming condition also
provides clues as to how semantic tags get associated with
deictic pointers. In the motor condition, the only
information that is repeatedly associated with the spatial
location is the movement. In contrast, the phonological
condition had repeated phonological information and visual
content in addition to the movement. These richer
associations may help account for the greater spatial
attraction in these trials.

Conclusions

Figure 4: Schematic activation patterns of the movement
layer in a hypothetical dynamic field simulation of repeated
left-moving trials (towards “A”).
A similar type of finding comes from Diamond and
Kirkham’s (2005) adaptation of Zelazo, Frye and Rapus’s
(1996) Dimensional-Change Card Sort task, typically used
with children. After doing multiple trials with one cardsorting rule, Diamond and Kirkham’s participants were then
told explicitly that the sorting rule has changed for the next
block of trials. Children routinely make sorting errors on
the first trial of the new block. Adults do not make
categorical errors, but they do produce significantly longer
reaction times on the first trial with the new sorting rule.
Hindy and Spivey (2008) extended this finding by showing
that adults also curve their mouse movements significantly
toward the old rule’s response option.
These results can also readily be interpreted from the
theoretical perspective of deictic pointers or visual indices
(Ballard et al., 1997) – such that peaks in the dynamic field
may function as the pointers. Chun and Nakayama (2000)
state that “…memory traces interact with attentional
mechanisms to guide eye movements, cognition, and
action.” In the case of our experiment, these memory traces
are built up from preceding trials, similar to the “preshaping” done by the previous trials in the A-not-B task.
Fig. 4 provides a visual illustration of these cognitive
processes. A peak on one trial builds a memory trace in the
field that increases the activation of subsequent trials in that

In Experiment 1, we showed that presentations of
phonological cohort stimuli result in increased spatial
attraction toward the competitor’s location, even though the
cohort is not simultaneously present on the critical trial.
There was evidence that this spatial attraction increased due
to a genuine effect of phonological competition. In
Experiment 2, we modified the conditions to test the
dynamic field theory prediction that multiple presentations
of similar stimuli result in greater competition. We found
evidence that the prime-3 condition resulted in increased
spatial attraction toward the competitor in comparison to the
prime-1. This can be interpreted as showing that
phonological similarity and repeated presentations influence
the landscape of the dynamic field. Dynamic field theory as
applied to the A-not-B task readily predicts the observed
results. For Experiment 1, phonological similarity should
influence spatial attraction because the memory traces
developed during the repeated trials are stronger than those
without phonological similarity. In regards to Experiment 2,
repeated presentations should also increase the strength of
the memory trace (represented as a pre-shaped field), and
cause increased spatial attraction.
Overall, this study and its results add to the literature by
providing a indication of how dynamic field theory may be
able to account for the data of an A-not-B like task in adults,
as well as a novel way of investigating the formation of
deictic pointers. The various processes of visual cognition
and language in our experiment are spread out in time in
such a way that each experimental trial is not independent of
previous trials. The landscape of the dynamic field itself is
an important theoretical construct for understanding these
temporal dynamics. Taken together, these results are
powerful support for the value of dynamic field theory
modeling
and
the
mouse-tracking
experimental
methodology. In the future, we intend to conduct additional
control experiments within this research program as well as
model human data explicitly with dynamic field theory
simulations.

Acknowledgments
We thank Teenie Matlock for making lab space available to
us. We thank Robert Räder for helping out with figures.

2265

References
Ballard, D., Hayhoe, M., Pook, P., & Rao, R. (1997).
Deictic
codes
for
the
embodiment
of
cognition. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 20, 723-767.
Bates, D., Maechler, M., & Bolker, B. (2012). lme4: Linear
mixed-effects models using S4 classes. R package version
0.999999-0.
Chun, M., & Nakayama, K. (2000). On the functional role
of implicit visual memory for the adaptive deployment of
attention across scenes. Visual Cognition, 7(1-3), 65-81.
Dale, R., & Duran, N. D. (2011). The cognitive dynamics of
negated sentence verification. Cognitive Science, 35, 983996.
Dale, R., Kehoe, C.E. & Spivey, M.J. (2007). Graded motor
responses in the time course of categorizing atypical
exemplars. Memory & Cognition, 35, 15-28.
Diamond, A. & Kirkham, N. (2005). Not quite as grown up
as we like to think: Parallels between cognition in
childhood and adulthood. Psychological Science, 16, 291297.
Erlhagen, W., & Schöner, G. (2002). Dynamic field theory
of movement preparation. Psychological Review, 109,
545-572.
Freeman, J.B., & Ambady, N. (2010). MouseTracker:
Software for studying real-time mental processing using a
computer mouse-tracking method. Behavior Research
Methods, 42, 226-241.
Freeman, J.B., Ambady, N., Rule, N.O., & Johnson, K.L.
(2008). Will a category cue attract you? Motor output
reveals dynamic competition across person construal.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 137, 673690.
Freeman, J.B., Dale, R., & Farmer, T.A. (2011). Hand in
motion reveals mind in motion. Frontiers in
Psychology 2,59. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2011.00059
Hindy, N. & Spivey, M. (2008). Motor dynamics of task
switching. Proceedings of the30th Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society. (pp. 2474-2479).
Marcovitch, S., & Zelazo, P. (1999). The a-not-b error:
Results
from
a
logistic
meta-analysis. Child
Development, 70, 1297-1313.
Mirman, D., Dixon, J.A., & Magnuson, J.S. (2008).
Statistical and computational models of the visual world
paradigm: Growth curves and individual differences.
Journal of Memory and Language, 59, 475-494.
Piaget, J. (1954). The Construction of Reality in the Child.
New York: Basic Books.
Richardson, D. C. & Spivey, M. J. (2000). Representation,
space and Hollywood Squares: Looking at things that
aren’t there anymore. Cognition, 76, 269-295.
Smith, L.B. & Thelen, E. (2003) Development as a
Dynamic System. Trends in Cognitive Science, 7, 343348.
Smith, L. B., Thelen, E., Titzer, R. & McLin, D. (1999)
Knowing in the Context of Acting: The Task Dynamics of
the A-Not-B Error. Psychological Review, 106, 235-260.

Spencer, J. P., Barich, K., Goldberg, J., Perone, S. (2012).
Behavioral dynamics and neural grounding of a dynamic
field theory of multiple-object tracking. Journal of
Integrative Neuroscience, 11, 339-362.
Spivey, M., Grosjean, M., & Knoblich, G. (2005).
Continuous attraction toward phonological competitors
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 102,
10393-10398.
Thelen, E., Schöner, G., Scheier, C. & Smith, L. B. (2001)
The Dynamics of embodiment: A field theory of infant
perseverative reaching. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
24, 1-86.
Zelazo, P., Frye, D., & Rapus, T. (1996). An age-related
dissociation between knowing rules and using them.
Cognitive Development, 11, 37-63.

2266

