UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Categorization and Abstract Similarity in Chess

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4jr8r7x1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Leon-Villagra, Pablo
Jakel, Frank

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Categorization and Abstract Similarity in Chess
Pablo León-Villagrá (pleonvil@uos.de) Frank Jäkel (fjaekel@uos.de)
Institute of Cognitive Science, University of Osnabrück
49069 Osnabrück, Germany
Abstract
Chess experts remember meaningful chess positions better than novices (de Groot, 1978; Chase & Simon,
1973). This can be explained with a larger number
of chunks in experts’ long-term memory (Gobet & Simon, 1998). These chunks are mainly based on visual
representations—that is, pieces on squares. However,
a recent experiment highlighted that experts prefer to
group chess positions by abstract similarities that cannot be explained purely visually (Linhares & Brum,
2007). Based on these data it was claimed that chess
expertise, in addition to chunks, crucially relies on abstraction and analogies. These data and the conclusions
were heavily criticized because the instructions strongly
biased the participants to group positions in a certain
way (Bilalić & Gobet, 2009). Here, we successfully replicated this experiment with less explicit instructions. In
addition, we collected category labels for the groupings
that allowed us to explore the abstract principles that
participants used.
Keywords: Analogy, Categorization, Chess, Expertise,
Pattern Recognition, Representations, Similarity

Figure 1: The left panel shows the game RosentalisAppel before white played Qa3.
The right panel
shows the game Smyslov-Reshevsky, World Championship 1948. Rosentalis commented that his game was
similar to Smyslov-Reshevsky although there are few obvious visual similarities (Rowson, 2001).

Introduction
After a match strong chess players often comment that
aspects of their game were similar to well-known classical games. For example, after his win against Aronian
in January 2013 world champion Viswanathan Anand
stated at the press conference: “It was the same concept [...], Rubinstein’s version was even Rook takes c3
and Rook to h3, but essentially [it was] the same idea
[...].” Or take another example, Rosentalis commented
on one of his games: “When playing Qa3 the game
Smyslov-Reshevsky came to my mind” (Rowson, 2001).
The left panel of Figure 1 shows the position in Rosentalis’ game which made him remember the position from
Smyslov-Reshevsky (right panel). The two positions
share no obvious visual similarity and differ considerably with regard to the pieces and their arrangement on
the board. Nevertheless, Rosentalis perceived both positions to share some crucial aspects and based on this
similarity he considered the move Qa3 (which allowed
an exchange of queens). How do chess players represent
chess positions and what kind of similarity do expert
chess players perceive in positions that are visually very
different?
The classical conception of expertise in chess is based
on the idea that finding the right move is a process
of recognition and association (Gobet & Simon, 1998).
There are convincing data indicating that experienced
chess players have access to a large database of stored
patterns, called chunks, and these chunks are associated
with plausible plans and ideas (de Groot, 1978; Chase

& Simon, 1973). A chunk in chess is, hence, defined as
a unit of information in long-term memory containing
a meaningful grouping of pieces on squares, plus associated moves and ideas. Each chunk consists of up to five
pieces and the size of the stored chunks is positively correlated with skill. Furthermore, under the assumption
that experts and novices can both retain 7 ± 2 chunks in
short-term memory, more skilled players can make better
use of their short-term memory because they have the
right chunks available. Hence, differences in skill are,
to a great part, based on differences in the number and
the size of the chunks stored in long-term memory. In
order to accommodate various findings that were inconsistent with the original chunking theory the concept of
a chunk was later expanded to more complex structures,
so-called templates. Templates are formed if positions
reoccur frequently and in addition to the template core
(which is a classical chunk) can contain free variables
(Gobet & Simon, 1996, 1998). Even though this notion
expands classical chunking, in actual implementations of
the theory templates are still accessed via discrimination
nets and thus patterns of specific pieces on squares are
fundamental for recognition.
In the anecdotal examples mentioned above strong
players did not seem to rely on purely visual information,
such as pieces on squares, to retrieve relevant information from memory. Linhares (2008) has argued forcefully that chess research should not focus too strongly
on the visual aspects of the game. According to him,
although visual similarities between stored chunks and

2860

In other areas of expertise it is well established that
experts rely on abstract representations while novices
concentrate on superficial aspects. Chi, Feltovich, and
Glaser (1981) asked experts and novices to sort physics
problems into groups. They found that the novices
grouped problems based on superficial similarities (problems with pulleys vs problems with springs) whereas experts grouped problems based on physical, non-obvious
principles (conservation of energy vs conservation of momentum). Inspired by this work, Linhares and Brum
(2007) constructed a set of chess positions that could be
grouped either by superficial, visual similarity or based
on abstract principles. In their experiment they showed
subjects 20 positions that formed 10 pairs based on 10
abstract ideas, like “material gain due to a double attack” or “endgame with bishops of the same color.”
These pairs are fairly natural as they consist of wellestablished categories in chess. Importantly, they constructed the material in a way that there were also 5
obvious pairings based on purely visual similarity. That
is, the pieces and their respective positions on the board
were extremely similar. But these 5 pairs were strategically or tactically very different situations due to small,
but crucial, differences. Figure 2 shows an example
of positions that can be grouped either visually or abstractly.
Linhares and Brum (2007) then asked chess players
of varying strengths, from relatively strong masters to
unrated amateurs, to pair their 20 chess positions based
on strategical similarity. The expert players almost exclusively grouped the positions into abstract pairs while
the novices only matched about half of the abstract
pairs. Almost no visual pairs were chosen by the experts whereas novices often paired by visual similarity.
Linhares and Brum concluded that multiple levels of encoding of chess positions exist, from surface representations of concrete piece relations to abstract semantic or
conceptual representations consisting of abstract roles of
pieces. Expert chess players perceive positions as global
semantic arrangements and associate them with future
developments and plans. Therefore, what differentiates
experts and novices is the level of abstraction at which
positions can be represented.
Bilalić and Gobet (2009) reproduced the study by Linhares and Brum introducing a condition in which participants were not asked to pair positions based on abstract similarity but on visual similarity. They did this
because in the original study the instructions explicitly
encouraged grouping by abstract similarity and discour-

Pos.14

Pos.15

Abstract Similarity

Pos.17

Pos.18

Visual Similarity

presented positions surely play a role in chess expertise,
abstract-level relations and analogies are more important for understanding expert performance (Linhares &
Brum, 2007). Chess experts excel because their representations are on a high level of abstraction and these
representations are not explainable by chunking alone.

Figure 2: Four of the positions presented in the experiment by Linhares and Brum (2007). While positions 14
and 15 and positions 17 and 18 are visually almost identical they differ considerably in their abstract essence.
On the other hand, positions 14 and 17 and positions 15
and 18 are very similar on an abstract level. Positions 14
and 17 are examples of endgames with opposite-colored
bishops in which no side can make progress as the opponents pawns are fixed on the wrong color. In contrast,
positions 15 and 18 consist of endgames with bishops of
the same color and are easily winning for white because
the black pawns are attackable. For example, in position 18 white can immediately win the pawn on d6 and
proceed to win the game.

aged grouping by visual similarity. They argued that
this is a big methodological flaw of the original study
and wanted to demonstrate that the explicit instructions simply biased the subjects to respond as the experimenter wished. In the abstract-similarity condition
Bilalić and Gobet could replicate the original results—
experts paired more than twice as many abstract pairs as
novices. In the visual-similarity condition, in which players were instructed to group positions together based on
visual similarity, both groups matched an equally low
number of abstract pairs and a high number of visual
pairs. The point that Bilalić and Gobet wanted to make
with this experiment is that experts will group the material in any way they are instructed to. Hence, the
strong conclusions that Linhares and Brum drew from
their data are not warranted. Bilalić and Gobet argued

2861

that the original experiment did not show any evidence
that analogical reasoning or abstract similarity play an
important role in chess expertise. According to them, experts did not group abstract pairs because they thought
that was the natural thing to do but because they were
explicitly instructed to do so.
Linhares and Brum (2009) responded to this criticism
by stating that experts can of course behave like novices
if told to do so. But there is an important asymmetry: “Novices cannot behave as experts.” (Linhares &
Brum, 2009, p. 750) The original experiment was meant
to demonstrate that experts can group the stimuli by
abstract similarity whereas the novices have to rely on
superficial similarity, just like in the study by Chi et al.
(1981). We agree with this observation but still think
that Bilalić and Gobet had a valid point. The original experiment just shows that expert chess players can
group by abstract similarity if told to do so, but this in
itself does not show that noticing abstract similarities
and making analogies is as crucial for chess expertise
as Linhares and Brum claim. As participants were explicitly discouraged to pair by visual similarity we don’t
know whether expert players considered visual similarity
relevant at all—however unlikely this may seem. Visual
similarity, in any case, might still play the dominant role
in memory retrieval during a game (despite the anecdotal
evidence mentioned in the introduction). We think that
even if the link between real-world expert performance
and subjects’ pairings in the experiment by Linhares and
Brum is unclear, it is still interesting to try and directly
probe experts and novices for their intuitions about the
similarity of positions. This was also the first step in
the work of Chi et al. (1981). But similarity is a difficult notion. Unless the “respects for similarity” (Medin,
Goldstone, & Gentner, 1993) are precisely specified neither subject nor experimenter can be sure about what is
meant by “similarity.” The pairing experiment was cleverly designed to compare abstract and visual similarity
against each other and thus the material probably biased
the subjects to focus on these two aspects. In an actual
chess game there might be even more respects for similarity than the two (abstract vs visual) that Linhares
and Brum had in mind for their pairs. However, even
in their experiment participants might perceive several
notions of similarity in conflict with each other—but because of the clear instructions they use the one that was
intended by the experimenters.
The present paper tried to replicate Linhares’ and
Brum’s study once again. In our experiment less explicit instructions about the nature of pairs were provided. Therefore, every participant was able to pair the
positions based on his or her individual, intuitive understanding of similarity in chess. We think that this is the
“missing condition” in the debate. As we didn’t give
the subjects any obvious instructions on what we meant

by similarity, potentially there could be other notions of
similarity that participants might consider relevant or in
conflict with the abstract similarities that Linhares and
Brum had constructed. Visual surface similarity could
be one of them—but not the only one. Hence, if participants, even under our fuzzy instructions, grouped the
stimuli mainly as predicted by Linhares and Brum this
would be somewhat stronger evidence for their claims.
But if the experts spontaneously grouped by visual similarity or in any other way this would show that Bilalić’s
and Gobet’s methodological concerns are indeed important. In addition, we decided to go beyond Linhares’
and Brum’s original study by also asking participants to
provide a category label for each pairing. In the study
by Chi et al. (1981) the category labels proved to be very
helpful for understanding the difference in the representations of experts and novices. These category labels
will allow us to see more directly what the participants
deemed relevant for the task.

Methods
The design was based to a large extent on the original experiment and the same set of stimuli was used (Linhares
& Brum, 2007). In contrast to the original experiment,
the present study changed the instruction given to the
participants and permitted a more differentiated evaluation of the positions in the orientation phase.

Participants
32 participants were recruited at local chess clubs, of
which two participants aborted the experiment due to
fatigue. The remaining 30 participants were all at least
familiar with the rules of chess and basic strategies. The
participants’ skill is reflected in their DWZ rating. The
DWZ rating system is an adaptation of the Elo rating
system for the German national chess federation. Like
the Elo scale the DWZ rating allows a fine differentiation of skill based on the players performance at chess
tournaments. The mean DWZ rating was 1395.5 (SD =
750.3, min = 0, max = 2461), 5 players had no official
rating. On average each player had performed about 2-3
hours of chess-practice per week in the last year. The
mean age was 32.7 years (SD = 15.5, min = 12, max
= 74). Only two participants were female and both female participants were unrated. The participants were
divided into an expert and a novice group according to
the mean playing strength of all registered German players (M = 1518). The expert group was composed of 16
participants with a mean DWZ of 1945.9 (SD = 268.2,
min = 1569, max = 2461). The novice group had 14
members, with a mean DWZ of 766.4 (SD = 611.3, min
= 0, max = 1490). Splitting the participants in this
way is not ideal since both groups now contain players that are around the German average. This will blur
the differences between novices and experts, making it
harder to find an effect if there is one. However, this

2862

grouping is consistent with the grouping that was used
in previous studies and allows for a better comparison
with these studies (Bilalić & Gobet, 2009; Linhares &
Brum, 2007). In addition we also calculated and report
correlations here.

clarification of the instructions, indicating that our instruction was indeed vague, as intended. They asked in
what regard they were to interpret the similarity and
were told that this was up to them and they should follow their intuitions.

Procedure

Labels and Features The final part of the survey
consisted of ten sheets with questions about the chosen
pairs. Participants were instructed to use the overviewsheet and their response table as an aid. First of all,
participants were asked to name a headline or topic for
each chosen pair. After that, participants had to name
attributes or features which made them select the pair.
Finally, they had to rate the similarity of both positions
and the prototypicality for each of the two positions for
the chosen headline. The ratings are not easily interpretable as the labels were highly idiosyncratic and we
usually did not have enough identical pairings for a statistical analysis. We still performed an exploratory and
qualitative analysis (which had unclear results) but omit
it here due to space limitations.

At the beginning of the experiment verbal instructions
explaining the basic procedure of the survey were provided. The participants received a form of consent and
after signing it proceeded to the first part of the experiment. Each participant received a questionnaire that
asked for gender, age, and chess rating (DWZ). The final question asked for the amount of chess practice the
subject had performed per week in the last year (Scale:
0-1 hours per week, 1-2 hours per week, 2-3 hours per
week, 3-4 hours per week, more than 4 hours per week).
Familiarization Phase After these general questions
the main experiment started. Participants received a
short instruction on how to perform the survey. The
twenty chess positions were presented in random order.
The task consisted in giving an evaluation of the position and checking the particular response (“White has
a winning advantage”, “White has a minor advantage”,
“The position is equal”, “Black has a winning advantage”, “Black has a minor advantage”, “No evaluation
is possible”). For each position white was to move and
unlimited time was granted to perform the task. Nevertheless, the participants were instructed to perform like
in an over-the-board chess game and to use a reasonable time investment per position. After evaluating a
position participants had to write down the next move
for white. The familiarization phase served the purpose
of activating, for each stimulus, the representations that
would also be relevant in an actual game.
Pairing Phase The task in the second part of the experiment was to group the twenty chess positions from
the familiarization phase into pairs. Participants received overview-sheets in which the twenty positions
were displayed. The sheets were placed in front of the
participants so that they could inspect all position simultaneously. There were three types of overview-sheets
with different random arrangements of the positions. Positions were labeled with successive numbers (from 1 to
20) and each participant received one type of randomized
overview-sheet. Instructions were to pair together positions which “intuitively seemed similar.” Additionally,
participants should perform “as if they were thinking
about similar positions in a chess game.” It can be argued that this additional instruction biased participants
more than necessary. However, we decided to include
it so that subjects understand that they should use the
representations that they would use in an actual game.
Participants had to fill the position pairs into a designated table. Several of the expert players asked for

Stimulus Material
The twenty chess positions in the present study were
the same as in the original study (Linhares & Brum,
2007). The positions were constructed in a way that 10
abstract pairs (i.e., all 20 positions) could be selected. At
the same time, five control pairs (i.e., 10 positions out
of 20) consisted of visually almost identical positions.
The positions with a high visual similarity were very
different on an abstract level, while the abstract pairs
had no similarity on a visual level. An example is shown
in Figure 2. All positions displayed a middlegame or
endgame position and in all positions white was to move.
Most positions were relatively easy to solve.

Results
Pairings and Evaluations
The two groups differed significantly in the number of
abstract and control pairs that they chose. The expert
group chose a significantly higher number of abstract
pairs (M = 5.5, SE = .62) than the novice group (M
= 3.1, SE = .54, t(28) = -2.9, p = .007). The novice
group matched significantly more visual pairs (M = 3.4,
SE = .37) than the expert group (M = 1.7, SE = .38,
t(28) = 3.1, p = .004). As mentioned above, grouping
participants in this way is not ideal, therefore we also
calculated the correlation between DWZ rating and the
choices, excluding the five unrated participants. DWZ
rating correlated positively with the number of abstract
pairs, r = .52, p = .007 and negatively with the number
of control pairs, r = −.49, p = .014 (Figure 3). Not surprisingly, there was also a positive relationship between
rating and correct evaluation of the position, r = .77,
p < 10−5 .

2863

8
6
4
2
0

1. Visual Similarity [Novices: 34, Experts: 5]

5
Number of visual pairs

Number of abstract pairs

10

0

500

1000 1500
DWZ

2000

2500

2. Tactics

4
3

(a) Material Gain [N: 1, E: 3]
i. Double Attack [N: 7, E: 11]
ii. Discovered Attack [N: 2, E: 1]
(b) Check [N: 6, E: 1]
i. Checkmate [N: 4, E: 9]
• Checkmate in One [N: 5, E: 15]
• Discovered Checkmate [N: 1, E: 6]
• Smothered Checkmate [N: 2, E: 10]

2
1
0

0

500

1000 1500
DWZ

2000

2500

Figure 3: Number of chosen abstract pairs (left) and
visual pairs (right) as a function of skill.

3. Endgames [N: 3, E: 0]

Category Labels
In order to compare the labels given by each participant
to the labels of the other participants, the first author
came up with a hierarchical classification scheme for the
labels based on the abstract categories given in the original design of the material (Linhares & Brum, 2007). He
then assigned the participants’ labels to these classes.
Some additional classes were added later based on labels that were given by several participants, for example
“last pairing(s)” (the participant could not match all positions and some pairs had to be chosen randomly from
the remaining material). One other unexpected label
occurred relatively frequently: Situations described as
deadlocked, stuck, or impenetrable were summarized in
one label (“deadlocked”). This classification resulted in
the hierarchical system of labels shown in Table 1.
The most common label for the novice group was “visual similarity” (34 out of 140 labels), followed by “last
pairing” (12). This is in stark contrast to the experts
who chose these labels rarely (5, 1). The most common
labels for the expert group were “checkmate in one” (15
out of 160 labels), “endgame with opposite colored bishops” (13), “pawn endgame” (13), “passed pawn in the
pawn endgame” (13) and “endgame with bishops of the
same color” (12). Those labels were chosen much less
frequently by the novices.
Overall, novices chose a higher number of pairs based
on visual characteristics and often gave purely visual
descriptions. In addition, novices often chose general
levels of description (“check”, “endgames” or “bishop
endgame”) while most experts used more specific labels (e.g., “passed pawn in the pawn endgame”, “bishop
endgame with bishops of the same color”). Finally, various unexpected labels were given which in many cases
could not be classified using the descriptions (or more
general instances of these descriptions) of the categories
by Linhares and Brum (17 idiosyncratic labels in the
novice group and 11 in the expert group).

Label-based Reanalysis of Pairing
The material consisted of pairs of visually very similar positions that could also be interpreted as clear and
well-established instances of abstract categories. Even

(a) Pawn Endgame [N: 7, E: 13]
i. Pawn Chain [N: 2, E: 6]
ii. Passed Pawn [N: 2, E: 13]
iii. Opposition [N: 6, E: 10]
(b) Bishop Endgame [N: 8, E: 6]
i. Bishops of the same color [N: 1, E: 12]
ii. Bishops of different color [N: 1, E: 13]
4. Other Labels
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)

Last Pairing [N: 12, E: 1]
No Label [N: 0, E: 2]
Incomprehensible Label [N: 5, E: 1]
Deadlocked [N: 7, E: 9]
Advantageous Positions [N: 4, E: 2]
Drawish Positions [N: 3, E: 0]
Idiosyncratic Labels [N: 17, E: 11]

Table 1: Hierarchical classification scheme used for participants’ category labels.

though the results in preceding studies (Linhares &
Brum, 2007; Bilalić & Gobet, 2009) were very clear, in
our study several unexpected pairings could be observed.
Analysis of the labels given by the participants for particular pairings showed that unexpected abstract relations
existed in the material. Therefore, several pairs originally designed as visual pairs allowed for a plausible and
consistent abstract classification. One of the most striking examples of such an underlying unexpected abstract
similarity was the pair consisting of positions 3 and 6
(not shown). Although designed as a visual pair, this
pair was perceived as abstract by two of the strongest
participants in this study, stating that both positions
share similarity with the abstract concept of a fortress.
Also, some abstract pairs were chosen for the wrong reasons. For example, if a participant chose an abstract pair
but gave the label “last pairing without similarity” it is
very improbable that the abstract pair had been chosen

2864

based on abstract similarity.
The labeling task we used in this study allows us to reconsider for each pair whether it should be considered as
an abstract pairing or not, independent of the intended
pairings by Linhares and Brum. In total, about half of
the labels for abstract pairs in the novice group did not
contain any sort of abstract information and most explicitly stated that they were not selected due to abstract
similarity. A reevaluation of the pairings chosen by the
subjects based on their labels resulted in a slightly higher
number of abstract pairs for the expert group but did not
change the general difference considerably (M expert abstract = 6.3, SE = .67, M novice abstract = 1.8, SE =
.55). The reanalysis did increase the correlation between
rating and number of abstract pairs (r = .66, p = .0003)
considerably, while it did not change the correlation between rating and the number of visual pairs (r = −.49,
p = .01).

Discussion
The present study replicated the results obtained by
Linhares and Brum (2007) and Bilalić and Gobet (2009).
On average experienced chess players chose considerably
more abstract pairs than the novice group. On the other
hand, novice players selected about twice as many visual
pairs than the expert group.
As in our experiment no explicit instruction about the
nature of expected pairs was given, the number of chosen
abstract pairs was smaller than in the previous studies.
The results obtained in this study weaken the methodological concerns raised by Bilalić and Gobet (2009). Experts did not simply do what they were instructed to
do, but in our experiment freely chose to pair positions
based on abstract similarity. Even though the material contained a considerable amount of visually almost
identical positions, these possible pairings were not interpreted as relevant for the task by the experts.
As we have the category labels for the pairings as well,
we have very direct evidence for what the participants
deemed relevant for each pairing. The labels clearly show
that novices very often spontaneously grouped by visual
similarity whereas experts did not and preferred wellestablished abstract chess categories that, probably, simply weren’t available to many of the novices. Furthermore, even though novices sometimes also used abstract
categories, we could see that there was a tendency for
experts to use better differentiated categories. This is
a common finding in the study of expertise (Johnson &
Mervis, 1997).
The present study showed that the categorization behavior observed in Linhares’ and Brum’s study was not
simply based on the instruction but was a genuine, asymmetric characteristic of expert players. However, we still
agree with the conclusion of Bilalić and Gobet that “it
may well be that analogy is central to expert cognition

[...]. This cannot, however, be demonstrated by asking experts to look for analogy in problems.” (Bilalić
& Gobet, 2009, p. 746). Future research should therefore follow more closely the example of Chi et al. (1981).
While the stimuli that Linhares and Brum (2007) used
were cleverly designed to contrast abstract and visual
similarity, they may have biased participants to consider mostly these two aspects. The next step should
be to have subjects group a representative selection of
stimuli to avoid this bias. In addition, it remains to be
demonstrated beyond anecdotal evidence that abstract
similarity is important for actual chess playing. One
way forward could be to look for abstract categories and
analogical processes in think-aloud protocols that were
collected during actual games.

References
Bilalić, M., & Gobet, F. (2009). They do what they are
told to do: The influence of instruction on (chess) expert perception - Commentary on Linhares and Brum
(2007). Cognitive Science, 33 (5), 743–747.
Chase, W., & Simon, H. (1973). Perception in chess.
Cognitive Psychology, 4 (1), 55–81.
Chi, M., Feltovich, P., & Glaser, R. (1981). Categorization and representation of physics problems by experts
and novices. Cognitive Science, 5 (2), 121–152.
de Groot, A. (1978). Thought and choice in chess. Mouton De Gruyter.
Gobet, F., & Simon, H. (1996). Templates in chess
memory: A mechanism for recalling several boards.
Cognitive Psychology, 31 (1), 1–40.
Gobet, F., & Simon, H. (1998). Expert chess memory:
Revisiting the chunking hypothesis. Memory, 6 (3),
225–255.
Johnson, K., & Mervis, C. (1997). Effects of varying
levels of expertise on the basic level of categorization.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General , 126 (3),
248.
Linhares, A.
(2008).
The emergence of
choice:
Decision-making and strategic thinking
through analogies (Tech. Rep.).
Available from
http://cogprints.org/6615/
Linhares, A., & Brum, P. (2007). Understanding our
understanding of strategic scenarios: What role do
chunks play? Cognitive Science, 31 (6), 989–1007.
Linhares, A., & Brum, P. (2009). How can experts see
the invisible? Reply to Bilalić and Gobet. Cognitive
Science, 33 (5), 748–751.
Medin, D., Goldstone, R., & Gentner, D. (1993). Respects for similarity. Psychological Review , 100 (2),
254.
Rowson, J. (2001). The seven deadly chess sins. Gambit
Publications.

2865

