UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Chinese-speaking adults' understanding of argument structure

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7h42m9zt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Jiang, Lu
Haryu, Etsuko

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Chinese-speaking adults’ understanding of argument structure
Lu Jiang (kyouro2003@yahoo.co.jp)
Graduate School of Education, University of Tokyo
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan

Etsuko Haryu (haryu@p.u-tokyo.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Education, University of Tokyo
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan

Abstract
Syntactic constructions roughly correspond to sentence
meanings. Previous research has shown that Chinese children
can associate an SVO construction with a causative event at
age 2, but do not always map an SV construction to a noncausative event even after reaching 5 years of age. The latter
results may be attributed to the fact that Chinese allows
argument-dropping (Jiang & Haryu, 2010). This paper
investigated Chinese adults’ syntax-semantics knowledge and
found that even adults do not always map an intransitive
construction to a non-causative event, although they are likely
to use an intransitive construction to describe a non-causative
event. The results suggest that although Chinese adults
understand that causative and non-causative events should
typically be described using transitive and intransitive
constructions, respectively, the use of this knowledge in
inferring novel verb meanings seems to be regulated by the
actual usage of SV sentences in Chinese.
Keywords: argument structure; Mandarin Chinese; adults;
verb meanings; intransitive; transitive.

Introduction
It is said that for children, learning verbs is difficult (e.g.,
Gentner, 1978, 1982; Imai et al., 2008). This is due to the
fact that when a novel verb is introduced for a particular
scene, there are an infinite number of possibilities
concerning which aspect of the scene the verb refers to. For
example, if we hear the novel verb “gorping” while
watching a scene in which a girl is walking with a dog, the
verb “gorping” may refer to “walking,” “taking a dog for a
walk,” or “moving from one place to another.” Even for
adults, it is difficult to infer the meaning of a given verb if it
is presented without any syntactic information (Gillette,
Gleitman, Gleitman, & Lederer, 1999). When they are told
in what syntactic construction the verb appears, however,
adults find it much easier to infer its meaning. Thus, the
syntactic constructions in which verbs appear provide us
with a very important cue to verb meanings, since the types
of verb meanings roughly correspond to the syntactic
structures in which those verbs appear (Gleitman, 1990).
For example, a verb that appears in an intransitive
construction with a single argument (e.g., “The boy goes”)
is likely to describe a non-causative event, while a verb that
appears in a transitive construction with two arguments (e.g.,
“The girl pushed the boy”) typically refers to a causative
event.

675

Developmental psycholinguists have investigated whether
and when children are able to use syntactic constructions to
infer verb meanings. In recent studies, a forced-choice
pointing task has been used to investigate this problem. In
this task, children are typically presented with two videos
side-by-side, one showing a causative event and the other a
non-causative event, and asked to select a scene that
matches a presented sentence involving a novel verb. Two
types of test sentences are used: In one type, the novel verb
is presented in a transitive construction, and in the other
type, the novel verb is embedded in an intransitive
construction. For example, while watching two events, a
causative one in which a duck is pushing a bunny into a
squat position and a non-causative one in which a duck and
a bunny are moving one of their arms in a circle, children
hear the novel verb “blick” in a transitive sentence such as
“The duck is blicking the bunny,” or in an intransitive
construction with a conjoined noun such as “The duck and
the bunny are blicking.” The children are then asked to point
to the event that matches the presented sentence. Thus, these
studies have focused on whether children would select a
causative event for a transitive sentence, and a noncausative event for an intransitive one.
These previous studies have found that English-learning
2-year-olds associate a transitive construction with a
causative event. However, children of the same age do not
always map an intransitive construction to a non-causative
event (Arunachalam & Waxman, 2010; Noble, Rowland, &
Pine, 2011). They become able to map an intransitive
construction to a non-causative event by 3 years of age
(Noble et al., 2011). Research that examined Chineselearning children using the same method also found that
Chinese 2-year-olds were able to map a transitive
construction to a causative event. However, Chinese
children did not always associate an intransitive
construction with a non-causative event even after reaching
5 years of age (Jiang & Haryu, 2010). That is, in both
English and Chinese, children seem to have some difficulty
in acquiring knowledge of intransitive constructions, and
their acquisition of intransitive constructions is later than
that of transitive constructions.
The fact that it takes longer for children to become able to
use intransitive constructions to infer verb meanings may be
partly attributed to the fact that there are some verbs that
have a general meaning and can be used in an intransitive
construction but can refer to a causative event, not only in

English but also in Chinese. For example, the verb “play”
can be used in an intransitive construction to refer to a
causative event in which a girl makes a boy perform an
action, by saying “The girl and the boy are playing.” Thus,
the existence of such intransitive verbs may contribute to
the fact that both English- and Chinese-learning children
need more time to acquire knowledge of intransitive
constructions, compared to the time they take to acquire
knowledge of transitive constructions.
Furthermore, a certain characteristic of Chinese might
make it even more difficult for Chinese-speaking children to
learn the correspondence between an intransitive
construction and a non-causative event. Unlike English,
Chinese allows pervasive ellipsis of noun arguments. Either
or both the subject and the object can be dropped from the
sentence. Therefore, in Chinese, an SV sentence could be
either an intransitive sentence or a transitive sentence with
the object omitted. As a result, SV sentences Chineselearning children hear in their daily life do not always refer
to a non-causative event. This may also contribute to the
difficulty that Chinese children have in learning the
correspondence between an intransitive construction and a
non-causative event. Given this characteristic of the Chinese
language, it may also be the case that Chinese adults do not
associate an intransitive construction with a non-causative
event.
In the present research, two experiments were carried out
to investigate whether Chinese-speaking adults associate a
sentence with a single argument with a non-causative event
in the same way that they associate a sentence with two
arguments with a causative event. In Experiment 1, by
presenting Chinese adults with two videos, one showing a
non-causative event and the other a causative event, we
examined whether they would map an SV sentence to a noncausative event, and an SVO sentence to a causative event,
respectively. In Experiment 2, we presented Chinese adults
with a video showing either a causative or a non-causative
event, and asked them to select an appropriate sentence to
describe the scene out of two types of test sentences, an SV
sentence and an SVO sentence.

intransitive construction to a non-causative event, even
when they assign a transitive construction to a causative
event.

Method
Participants The participants were 40 undergraduate
students (20 males and 20 females, mean age 21 years,
range 20 to 24 years). The participants were randomly
assigned to two conditions: the intransitive condition and
the transitive condition. In each condition, there were the
same number of males and females. All the participants
were native speakers of Mandarin Chinese.
Materials Six sets of videos were used (see Table 1 for
details). They were the same videos that were used in the
experiment with Chinese children in the previous research
conducted by Jiang and Haryu (2010). Each set consisted of
two videos, one showing a non-causative event and the
other showing a causative one. In the non-causative event, a
young woman and a young man performed the same
repetitive action separately, side by side. In half of the
causative videos, the young woman made the young man
perform an action, while in the other half the man made the
woman perform an action (see Figure 1 for an example).
As novel verbs, six monosyllabic nonsense words, the
same ones in Jiang & Haryu (2010), “xia3,” “kao2,” “pa3,”
“de4,” “mu1,” and “tie2,” were used. Ten college students
who were native speakers of Mandarin Chinese agreed that
these words are senseless in that language. However, in the
present experiment, these novel words were all low-pass
filtered so that the sounds did not cause the participants to
remember similar-sounding verbs that already exist in
Chinese. The auditory stimuli were created by embedding
these low-pass filtered words in the verb position of SV or
SVO sentences, which were recorded clearly by a female
adult native speaker of Mandarin Chinese.
Procedure Participants were tested individually using a
forced-choice pointing task. The video stimuli were
presented on a note PC using PowerPoint. All videos lasted
about 10 seconds. In each test trial, a sentence was
presented twice using Windows Media Player while the
participant was watching two videos side-by-side, one
showing a causative event and the other a non-causative
event. The participant was then asked to point to the
matching video. Participants in the intransitive condition
heard a novel verb in an intransitive construction, such as
“A1yi2 he2 shu1shu zai4 X (The woman and the man are Xing),” while those in the transitive condition were presented
with a novel verb embedded in a transitive construction,
such as “A1yi2 zai4 X shu1shu (The woman is X-ing the
man).” Each participant received six test trials.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, we investigated Chinese adults’ syntaxsemantics knowledge using a forced-choice pointing task,
which has been used in recent studies on children. In the
current experiment, participants were presented with a novel
verb placed in a transitive construction or in an intransitive
construction with a conjoined noun (“the woman and the
man”) as the subject while they watched two events, one
causative and the other non-causative. The participants were
then asked to point to the event that matched the presented
sentence. If, as argued by Jiang & Haryu (2010), the
pervasive ellipsis of noun arguments in Chinese makes it
difficult not only for Chinese-learning children but also for
Chinese-speaking adults to map an SV sentence to a noncausative event, then the adults would not map an

Results and discussion
The selection of a causative event was scored as a
causative response. The mean proportions of causative
responses were calculated for each condition (see Figure 2).

676

Table 1: Stimulus materials used in Experiment 1
Set

Non-causative events

1
2
3
4
5
6

Causative events

A woman and a man sway side by side.

A woman tugs at a man’s hand.

A man and a woman move up and down
by bending their knees.
A man and a woman twist their torsos
from left to right.
A woman and a man bow repeatedly.

A man shakes a woman by the shoulders.

A woman and a man swing both of their
arms up and down together.
A man and a woman stamp their feet.

A woman turns a man’s body in a circle.

A man makes a woman bend down by
pressing on her shoulders.
A woman pats a man on his shoulder.

A man holds a woman’s hand and waves
it.

Novel
verb
xia3
kao2
pa3
de4
mu1
tie2

Proportion of causative responses

Figure 1: A sample set of video events used in Experiment 1 (Set 1)
selected causative events .48 of the time, which was not
different from chance (t(19) = .64, p = .53, d = .14). That is,
participants in the transitive condition matched a transitive
sentence with two arguments to a causative event, while
those in the intransitive condition did not always select a
non-causative event for an intransitive sentence.
Furthermore, an unpaired t-test revealed a significant
difference between the two conditions, t(38) = 7.64, p
< .001, d = 2.42, indicating that participants in the transitive
condition chose causative events much more frequently than
those in the intransitive condition. The above results suggest
that while Chinese adults assign a transitive construction to
a causative event, they do not always map an intransitive
construction to a non-causative event.
To summarize, when shown a non-causative and a
causative event and asked to select which of the two events
the given sentence described, Chinese adults were likely to
select a causative event in response to a transitive
construction, while they did not show a clear tendency to
choose a non-causative event over a causative event in
response to an SV construction. Their behavior was
consistent with that of the young Chinese-speaking children
in Jiang & Haryu (2010).

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Intransitive

Transitive

Figure 2: Mean proportions of causative responses in
Experiment 1
The participants in the transitive condition selected
causative events .88 of the time, which was significantly
above chance level (t(19) = 10.48, p < .001, d = 2.34).
However, the participants in the intransitive condition

677

significantly above chance. The analyses revealed that
participants were more likely to choose intransitive
sentences to describe a non-causative event than expected
by chance, t(19) = 21.14, p < .001, d = 9.11, and that they
described a causative event by using transitive sentences
more frequently than chance, t(19) = 21.14, p < .001, d =
9.11.
These results suggest that Chinese adults prefer SV
sentences to SVO sentences when describing non-causative
events, and use SVO sentences more often when referring to
causative events.

Experiment 2
The results of Experiment 1 suggest that Chinese adults
think an SVO construction describes a causative event while
at the same time they think that an SV construction can be
used to describe not only a non-causative event but also a
causative event. This belief seems to be consistent with the
usage of SV sentences in Chinese. However, does this mean
that there is no typical scene that should be described by
using an SV construction? In Experiment 2, we investigated
this problem by presenting the participants with a noncausative or a causative event and asking them to choose
which of two given sentences, i.e., an SV sentence and an
SVO sentence both containing the same novel verb,
matched the event.

General Discussion

Method
Participants Twenty undergraduate students, who were not
tested in Experiment 1, took part in this experiment. The
participants consisted of 8 males and 12 females (mean age
20 years, range 18 to 21 years), who were all native
speakers of Mandarin Chinese.
Materials and procedure The visual materials were the
same videos (six non-causative and six causative) as used in
Experiment 1. In addition to the six nonsense words (“xia3,”
“kao2,” “pa3,” “de4,” “mu1,” and “tie2”) used in
Experiment 1, another six ones (“pei3,” “ne1,” “mai1,”
“diu4,” “ka2,” and “hua3”) were also used as novel verbs.
These 12 words were all confirmed as nonsense in Mandarin
Chinese by 10 college students whose native language was
Mandarin Chinese. Unlike Experiment 1, these words were
not low-pass filtered, because participants in this experiment
were asked to select one out of two sentences involving the
same novel word, and thus the sounds of the novel words
would not affect their performance.
While a video was shown, two sentences (i.e., an SV
sentence and an SVO sentence, both involving the same
novel verb) were presented. The participants were asked to
select which sentence better matched the video. For example,
when presented with a causative event in which a woman
was tugging at a man’s hand, the participants heard the
intransitive sentence “A1yi2 he2 shu1shu zai4 Xia3 (The
woman and the man are Xia3-ing)” together with the
transitive sentence “A1yi2 zai4 Xia3 shu1shu (The woman
is Xia3-ing the man)” and were asked to choose the one that
matched the event. This procedure was repeated for 12
videos. That is, each participant received six causative trials
and six non-causative trials.

Results and discussion
We counted the number of responses in which the
participants chose an intransitive sentence in response to a
non-causative event, and a transitive sentence in response to
a causative event, respectively. The mean scores each for
the non-causative and the causative events were 5.7 (SD =
0.57) and 5.7 (SD = 0.57) out of 6, respectively. Two t-tests
were conducted to see whether these scores were

678

The present research examined Chinese-speaking adults’
understanding of argument structure through two
experiments that tested whether Chinese adults associate an
SV and an SVO construction with a non-causative and a
causative event, respectively. In Experiment 1, we found
that when shown two events (a non-causative and a
causative one) and asked to choose which one matched the
presented sentence, Chinese adults were willing to map an
SVO sentence to a causative event, while at the same time
they did not always associate a given SV sentence with a
non-causative event, which was also the case with Chinese
young children (see Jiang & Haryu, 2010). In contrast, when
given two sentences (an intransitive and a transitive one)
and asked to select which matched the given event in
Experiment 2, Chinese adults were likely to assign a
transitive sentence and an intransitive sentence to a
causative event and a non-causative event, respectively.
The results of Experiment 1, together with those of Jiang
and Haryu (2010), indicate that Chinese speakers, whether
young children or adults, do not assume that SV sentences
refer to non-causative events. At the same time, they think
that SVO sentences describe causative events. This attitude
in Chinese speakers is in contrast with what was found in
English speakers who match SV constructions to noncausative events as well as matching SVO constructions to
causative events (Arunachalam & Waxman, 2010; Noble et
al., 2011). This difference between Chinese- and Englishspeakers appears to come from the fact that English does not
allow argument-dropping whereas Chinese allows pervasive
ellipsis of noun arguments. Due to this particular property of
Chinese, SV sentences could be either an intransitive
construction or a transitive construction with the object
dropped. Therefore, it is not appropriate for Chinese
speakers to assume that a given SV sentence always refers
to a non-causative event. In this respect, the behavior of
Chinese speakers that do not automatically associate an SV
sentence with a non-causative event seems to be in
accordance to the actual usage of SV constructions in the
language, indicating the possibility that the knowledge of
argument structure is learned from the language input.
However, at the same time, as shown in Experiment 2,
when Chinese adults are asked which of two constructions,
an SV or an SVO construction, should be used to describe a

causative and a non-causative event, respectively, they
answer that an SV construction rather than an SVO
construction should be used to describe a non-causative
event. In addition, they prefer to use an SVO construction
rather than an SV construction to describe a causative event.
This belief appears inconsistent not only with the Chinese
input they have received, but also with the fact that Chinese
speakers do not always map SV constructions to noncausative events.
Two possibilities may be considered as the origin of such
asymmetrical behavior in Chinese speakers. The first
possibility is that the knowledge of argument structure may
be universal and innate, but one of the characteristics of
Chinese (the fact that it allows the pervasive ellipsis of noun
arguments) may guide people to regulate the use of this
knowledge in inferring the meaning of a given sentence.
Lidz, Gleitman, & Gleitman (2003) argued for the view that
the knowledge of argument structure is universal, based on
their findings: Children learning Kannada make use of the
number of noun arguments rather than morphological
inflections as a cue to determine whether the given sentence
refers to a causative or a non-causative event, although in
Kannada not number of arguments but morphological
inflections are definitive cues to the causativity of described
events.
The other possibility is that owing to the pragmatic
demands of communication, people independently of the
properties of their native language prefer to use an SVO
construction to describe a causative event and an SV
construction to describe a non-causative event. When an SV
construction such as “The woman and the man are playing”
is used to describe a causative event in which the woman is
making the man perform a certain action, what action the
woman is in fact making the man perform is not known. In
order to precisely convey what is happening, the different
roles played by different agents should be described
separately, using SVO constructions. On the other hand,
using SV constructions may convey that all the agents play
the same role in the event. Such pragmatic needs may guide
people to prefer to use SVO constructions to describe
causative events, and SV constructions for non-causative
events, even though SV constructions do not always
correspond to causative events in the Chinese input.
In sum, the present research has shown that although
Chinese adults prefer to use SVO and SV constructions to
describe causative and non-causative events, respectively,
they do not always use this knowledge of syntax-semantics
correspondences in deciding whether a given sentence refers
to a causative or a non-causative event. The latter result
suggests that the particular property of Chinese that allows
argument-dropping might guide Chinese speakers not to
automatically map an SV sentence to a non-causative event.
However, despite this property of the Chinese language,
why do Chinese speakers prefer to use SV and SVO
constructions to describe non-causative and causative events,
respectively? Is this because the knowledge of syntaxsemantics correspondences is universal, as suggested by

679

Lidz et al. (2003)? Or does it relate to the pragmatic
demands of communication? Further research is required to
investigate this question.

References
Arunachalam, S., & Waxman, S. R. (2010). Meaning from
syntax: Evidence from 2-year-olds. Cognition, 114, 442446.
Gentner, D. (1978). On relational meaning: The acquisition
of verb meaning. Child Development, 49, 988-998.
Gentner, D. (1982). Why nouns are learned before verbs:
Linguistic relativity versus natural partitioning. In S.A.
Kuczaj (Ed.), Language Development: Vol. 2. Language,
thought, and culture (pp. 301-334). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Gillette, J., Gleitman, H., Gleitman, L., & Lederer, A.
(1999). Human simulations of vocabulary learning.
Cognition, 73, 135–176.
Gleitman, L. (1990). The structural source of verb meanings.
Language Acquisition, 1, 3-55.
Imai, M., Li, L., Haryu, E., Okada, H., Hirsh-Pasek, K.,
Golinkoff, R., & Shigematsu, J. (2008). Novel noun and
verb learning in Chinese-, English-, and Japanesespeaking children. Child Development, 79, 979-1000.
Jiang, L., & Haryu, E. (2010, November). Young Chinesespeaking children’s understanding of the correspondence
between verb meaning and argument structure. Paper
presented at the Boston University Conference on
Language Development, Boston, MA.
Lidz, J., Gleitman, H., & Gleitman, L. (2003).
Understanding how input matters: Verb learning and the
footprint of universal grammar. Cognition, 87, 151-178.
Noble, C. H., Rowland, C. F., & Pine, J. M. (2011).
Comprehension of argument structure and semantic roles:
Evidence from English-learning children and the forcedchoice pointing paradigm. Cognitive Science, 35, 963-982.

