UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Classroom activities and off-task behavior in elementary school children

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8mx9h5hq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
GOdwin, Karrie
Almeda, Victoria
Petroccia, Megan
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Classroom activities and off-task behavior in elementary school children
Karrie E. Godwin (kegodwin@andrew.cmu.edu)
Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Psychology, 5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Ma. V. Almeda (mqa2000@tc.columbia.edu)
Teachers College Columbia University, Department of Biobehavioral Sciences, 525 W. 120th St., Box 118
New York, NY 10027 USA

Megan Petroccia (petrocm@andrew.cmu.edu)
Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Psychology, 5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Ryan S. Baker (baker2@exchange.tc.columbia.edu )
Teachers College Columbia University, Department of Human Development, 525 W. 120th St., Box 118
New York, NY 10027 USA

Anna V. Fisher (fisher49@andrew.cmu.edu)
Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Psychology, 5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Abstract
Maintaining focused attention in the classroom is considered
an important factor for successful learning. Loss of
instructional time due to off-task behavior is recognized as a
significant challenge by both researchers and practitioners.
However, there has been little research into the factors
contributing to off-task behavior. This paper reports results
from the first large-scale study investigating how elementary
school children allocate their attention in classroom
environments and how patterns of attention allocation change
as a function of gender, grade level, and instructional format.
The findings indicate that instructional format is related to
off-task behavior in elementary school students. These
findings can begin to form a foundation for development of
research-based guidelines for instructional design aimed to
optimize focused attention in classroom settings.
Keywords: Off-Task Behavior; Attention

Introduction
Loss of instructional time due to off-task behavior is a
well-established problem in educational settings, recognized
both by researchers (e.g., Baker, 2007; Karweit & Slavin,
1981; Lee et al., 1999) and practitioners (e.g., Lemov, 2010)
for over a hundred years (cf. Currie, 1884 as cited in
Berliner, 1990). The link between the quality of attention
and performance has been demonstrated in the cognitive
psychology literature (e.g., Choudhury & Gorman, 2000;
Dixon & Salley, 2007; DeMarie-Dreblow & Miller, 1988).
It has also been documented that off-task behavior has a
negative impact on performance and learning outcomes in
school settings (for reviews see Frederick & Walberg, 1980;
Goodman, 1990).
Despite considerable prior research on off-task behavior,
designing effective, easy to implement, and scalable
interventions to reduce off-task behavior has been
challenging. Roberts (2001) suggests that many existing

interventions may be unsuccessful because they do not take
into sufficient account the conditions that lead to off-task
behavior. The goal of the present study was to expand upon
prior research on off-task behavior in elementary school
students to begin to elucidate the factors involved in off-task
behavior, particularly the factors which are related to
classroom activities and thus are malleable.
Off-task Behavior
There is a variety of reasons why loss of instructional
time occurs in schools; these reasons include but are not
limited to: weather (e.g., snow days), sudden onset
interruptions (e.g., announcements over the loudspeakers),
and special events. However, it has been shown that student
inattentiveness (i.e., engagement in off-task behavior during
instructional time) is the biggest factor that accounts for loss
of instructional time (Karweit & Slavin, 1981). Prior
research examining the frequency of off-task behavior has
estimated that children spend between 10% and 50% of their
time off-task in regular education classrooms (Lee et al.,
1999; Karweit & Slavin, 1981). Classrooms employing
cognitive tutors report similar results with estimates of offtask behavior constituting 15% to 25% of instructional time
(e.g., Baker, Corbett, & Koedinger, 2004; Baker, 2007).
However, there has been limited research examining the
factors associated with off-task behavior. Recently
researchers have begun to explore the role of classroom
design on children’s off-task behavior. Godwin and Fisher
(2011) found that classroom environments that contained
relatively large amounts of visual displays (e.g., charts,
posters, manipulatives) elicited more off-task behavior in
kindergarten children compared to visual environments that
were more streamlined. These design choices were found to
hinder children’s ability to attend to the content of the
lesson and reduced learning outcomes. Related findings
were obtained by Barrett et al. (2012). Barrett and

2428

colleagues took a more holistic approach to design and
incorporated building factors (e.g., physical space,
navigation, furniture scale, etc.), environmental elements
(e.g., light, sound, temperature, air quality, etc.), as well as
classroom decor (e.g., color, organization, etc.). Barrett et
al. found that these design choices (in combination with
pupil factors) were related to students’ later academic
achievement.
Instructional format (e.g., whole-class instruction, small
group instruction, etc.) is another important aspect of
instructional design. Yet, little is known about the
relationship between instructional format and overall rates
and types of off-task behavior. The goal of the present study
was to examine whether type of instruction is related to
incidence of off-task behavior in elementary school
students.
The Present Study
This study examines whether specific instructional
strategies are associated with incidence of off-task behavior
in elementary school children, both in terms of the overall
amount of off-task behavior, and the form which off-task
behavior takes. Towards this goal we recorded patterns of
attention allocation in elementary school students during a
variety of instructional activities (e.g., whole-group
instruction, small-group work, etc.).

Method
Participants
Twenty-two classrooms participated in the present study.
Participating classrooms were selected from 5 local charter
schools. Five grade-levels were recruited: Kindergarten
through fourth-grade. The distribution across the five gradelevels was as follows: 5 kindergarten classrooms, 4 firstgrade classrooms, 5 second-grade classrooms, 2 third-grade
classrooms, and 6 fourth-grade classrooms. The average
class size was 21 students (10 males, 11 females). However,
due to absences the average number of children observed in
a single observation session was 18.9 children. The number
of children observed per session ranged from 15 to 22.
Design and Procedure
Each classroom was observed four times during the
second-half of the school year, resulting in a total of 84
observation sessions. Due to time constraints in four of the
22 classrooms only three observation sessions were
conducted. The observation sessions were staggered across
two time periods (Time 1: February-April 2012, Time 2:
May-June 2012) with two observation sessions occurring
during each time period. The average delay between
observation sessions within a single time period was 3.7
days (the delay ranged from 1 to 14 days). The average
delay across time periods was 73.2 days. Each observation
session lasted approximately one-hour.
Operationalization of on- and off-task behavior
For the present study, focused attention was defined as a
“state in which attention is directed more or less exclusively

to one target or task” (Ruff & Rothbart, 1996, p.110).
Focused attention was operationalized through visual
engagement. If children were directing their eye gaze at the
teacher (or classroom assistant), the instructional activity, or
toward appropriate instructional materials, the child was
classified as on-task. If the child was looking elsewhere,
they were classified as off-task. Eye gaze is a common
measure of visual attention (for reviews see Henderson &
Ferreira, 2004; Just & Carpenter, 1976), and it is arguably a
reasonable (albeit imperfect) measure of focused attention.
Coding
All coders were trained in the Baker-Rodrigo Observation
Method Protocol (BROMP) for coding behavioral data in
field settings (Ocumpaugh, Baker, & Rodrigo, 2012) using
software developed for the android handheld computer. All
coders received extensive training consisting of coding
videotapes and live observation sessions. Inter-rater
reliability was established prior to the study proper. Kappa
values ranged from 0.79 to 0.84. This level of reliability is
in line with past classroom research coding off-task
behavior, and exceeded the 0.75 threshold to which Fleiss
(1981) refers as “excellent” in field settings.
Children were observed using a round-robin coding
strategy, in order to reduce the tendency of observers to
attend to more salient instances of off-task behavior. The
order in which children were observed was determined at
the beginning of each session. Each time a child was
observed the observation lasted for up to 20 seconds. The
first unambiguous behavior observed during the 20-second
period was recorded. Quick glances were considered
ambiguous behaviors, and coders were instructed to wait for
a clear behavior to occur. If a behavior was noted before 20
seconds elapsed, the coder proceeded to the next child, and
a new 20-second observation period began. Coders observed
the children using peripheral vision or side-glances.
Peripheral vision was utilized in order to avoid looking
directly at the student being observed. This technique makes
it less apparent to the child that s(he) is being observed. This
procedure has successfully and reliably captured students’
behavior in prior work which assessed student behavior and
affect (cf. Baker et al., 2006; Baker et al., 2010; Ocumpaugh
et al., 2012).
Coders classified children’s behavior as on- or off-task. If
the child was looking at the teacher (or classroom assistant),
the instructional activity, and/or the relevant instructional
materials, they were categorized as on-task. If the child was
looking elsewhere, they were categorized as off-task.
Contextual clues (i.e., teacher instructions) were also taken
into consideration when distinguishing between on- and offtask behavior. For example, if a child was instructed to
discuss an idea with a partner, coders would classify
conversing with another peer as on-task unless the coders
could clearly discern that the conversation was unrelated to
the instructional task.
If the child was classified as off-task, the type of off-task
behavior was recorded. Six mutually exclusive categories of

2429

off-task behavior were logged: (1) Self-distraction, (2) Peer
distraction, (3) Environmental distraction, (4) Supplies,
(5) Walking, or (6) Other. Self-distraction entailed
engagement with something on the child’s own body, such
as an article of clothing or an appendage, as well as episodes
in which the child would close their eyes. Peer distraction
was defined as interacting with or looking at another
student(s) when not directed to do so. Environmental
distractions include interacting with or looking at any object
in the classroom that was not related to the task at hand,
while Supplies consists of inappropriately using any object
that was part of the assigned task (e.g., playing with a
writing utensil). Walking was operationalized as a student
physically walking around the classroom when it was not
considered appropriate for the task. Other distractions
included student behavior that was off-task but did not
clearly align with the five aforementioned categories. A
seventh category Unknown was also included to capture rare
instances in which it was unknown whether the child was
on- or off-task, and it was impossible or inappropriate for
the observer to relocate in order to obtain a better view of
the child. Unknown was also used when students left the
classroom for various reasons (e.g., to use the restroom).
Children in each session were treated as a different set of
students since it was not possible to link observations across
the four sessions. Thus, a total of 1,587 student-session pairs
were observed. A student-session pair refers to a specific
student observed by a coder within a specific session. The
average number of observations per session was 330.13 and
the average number of observations per child within a
session was 17.58.
Data Analysis: Variables
Using these data, we attempted to predict within an
observation session each student’s total on- or off-task
behavior as well as the type of behavior the student tended
to engage in while off-task. Two categories of predictor
variables were considered for incorporation into the models:
student characteristics and instructional design. Gender and
grade were included as student characteristics. Predictor
variables pertaining to instructional design included the
proportion of each classroom instructional format and the
variable Transitions/Duration of Instructional Format.
Instructional format was included as a predictor variable
in order to examine whether certain instructional formats
elicit differential amounts of off-task behavior. Six different
instructional formats were coded: (1) individual work, (2)
small-group or partner work, (3) whole-group instruction at
desks, (4) whole-group instruction while sitting on the
carpet, (5) dancing, and (6) testing. The proportion of time
students spent in each of the aforementioned formats was
calculated. The average duration for each instructional
format is provided in Table 1.
Transitions were noted every time the teacher paused
instruction to change from one activity to another (e.g.,
transitioning from working on a math problem to listening
to a short story). In many cases, transitions coincided with a

change in instructional format (e.g., switching from wholegroup instruction to small-group instruction); however this
was not always the case as transitions could occur without a
change in instructional format (e.g., with children rotating
from one small group activity to another). Transitions were
frequently marked by the teacher asking the children to get
out new instructional materials (e.g., “Please get out your
math binders”) or requesting students to change locations
(e.g., “Please put your notebooks away and come to the
carpet”).
Table 1. Time spent in each instructional format
Average Time Spent (sec) Per Instructional Format
Individual Work

1,424

Small Group

1,587

Whole-group Instruction at Desks

1,805

Whole-group Instruction on Carpet	  

1,263

Dancing

141

Testing	  

2,530

The primary dependent variable was the proportion of ontask behavior of a specific student within a specific session.
Additional models were also constructed in order to predict
peer off-task behavior and environment-based off-task
behavior, as these two types of off-task behavior were
common sources of distraction for elementary school
children (See Table 2). Environment-based off-task
behavior was of particular interest as it is a malleable factor
that could theoretically be targeted when designing
interventions aimed to mitigate off-task behavior.
Data Analysis: Approach
We predicted student on-task behavior using a regression
tree algorithm (cf. Witten & Frank, 2005), which sets up a
decision tree to predict a numerical value. Binary decisions
are made based on specific variables. After several decisions
are made, a numerical prediction is given. To determine
these specific variables, regression trees find breakpoints
within data, where relationships change (mostly) at a certain
value of a variable. Regression trees can find more
complicated interactions and relationships between variables
than is typically possible with linear regression methods,
while still remaining more constrained than neural networks
or support vector machines—as such, they occupy a
moderate position in the trade-off between goodness of fit
and
flexibility
of
fit/parsimony.
The
specific
implementation of regression tree used in this paper is
REPTree in RapidMiner 5.2 (Mierswa et al., 2006). This
relatively rapid algorithm builds a tree using reduced error
pruning; an approach designed to produce relatively
conservative models (Witten & Frank, 2005).
Resultant models were evaluated using six-fold student
level cross-validation. In this process, students are split
randomly into six groups. For each possible combination, a
feature is developed using data from five groups of students

2430

before being tested on the sixth “held out” group of
students. By cross validating at this level, we increase
confidence that features will be accurate for new students.
Within this paper, cross-validation (Efron & Gong, 1983)
is used instead of statistical significance testing for multiple
reasons. First, cross-validation assesses how accurate a
model is likely to be for new data, rather than assessing the
likelihood that a specific data set’s results are due to chance.
In assessing generalizability, cross-validation has the same
goal as the use of information criteria. In fact, the k-fold
cross-validation approach used here is thought to be
asymptotically equivalent to the Bayesian Information
Criterion (BiC) (Shao, 1993). Second, there is not an
appropriate statistical significance test for the data used here
for two reasons: (1) there is not a well-known statistical
significance test for regression trees, and (2) student IDs are
not connected across sessions. Testing statistical
significance without a student term would result in a bias
strongly in the direction of statistical significance;
conversely, using a student-session term would result in
having an order of magnitude more parameters, biasing
strongly against statistical significance.

Results
Consistent with prior research, children were largely on
task: 71% of children’s observed behaviors were on-task. As
seen in Table 2, three of the most common types of off-task
behavior observed were Peer distractions (45%), SelfDistractions (18%), and Environmental distractions (16%).
Table 2. Descriptive statistics for students’ on- and off- task
behavior
Proportion of Observed Behaviors
On-task Behavior

71%

Off-task Behavior

29%

Proportion of Off-task Behaviors
Self-Distraction

18%

Peer Distraction

45%

Environmental Distractions

16%

Supply Distractions	  

11%	  

Walking

3%

Other Distractions
Descriptive Statistics
Observations per session

8%
Mean (SD)
330.13 (63.6)

Observations per session per child

17.58 (3.7)

Student/Session pairs observed	  

1,587	  

Models predicting on-task behavior were fit based both
on instructional design and on limited student demographics
(e.g., grade-level and gender). The best overall model
predicting on-task behavior was found for the regression
tree when student demographics were not included. This
model obtained a cross-validated correlation coefficient of
r=0.352. The cross-validated correlation coefficients for the

“instructional design plus demographic” models were as
follows: A regression tree which added gender achieved a
cross-validated correlation of 0.322 to the frequency of
student on-task behavior and a regression tree model which
added grade-level achieved a cross-validated correlation of
0.329. As these “instructional design plus demographics”
models achieved lower cross-validated correlation than the
simpler model which only considers instructional design, we
can infer that including this demographic information does
not improve model fit in a generalizable fashion (as
mentioned above, this is akin to achieving a better BiC: the
additional fit does not compensate for the added model
complexity/flexibility of fit). As such, for determining offtask behavior it does not appear to be important whether an
elementary school student is a boy or a girl, once
instructional design is taken into account. Similarly, gradelevel does not seem to be an important factor, once the
influence of grade on instructional design is taken into
account.
In this data set, regression trees achieved generally better
performance than linear regression. A linear regression
model based on instructional design achieved a crossvalidated correlation of 0.221 to the frequency of student
on-task behavior. No linear regression model (regardless of
the feature set used) performed better than the
corresponding regression tree model.
Within instructional design, both the format and the
variable Transitions/Duration of Instructional Format were
associated with a better model. Removing either of these
variable types from the model resulted in worse crossvalidated correlation.
The final regression tree model was rather complex, with
63 leaf nodes (final decision values) and 62 decision nodes.
It can be easier to understand some of the key data
relationships by considering the cross-validated and regular
correlations for single-feature linear regression models. In
Table 3, both cross-validated correlations and regular
correlations are given. It is worth noting that cross-validated
correlations should always be positive (a negative crossvalidated correlation does not imply a negative relationship,
but that the relationship reverses direction when applied to
different parts of the data; e.g., a negative cross-validated
correlation implies that the model is worse than chance).
Directionality of the relationship should be inferred from the
regular correlation.
As seen in Table 3, the relationship between instructional
format and on-task behavior varies as a function of the type
of instructional format. Individual work and whole-group
instruction at desks were negatively associated with on-task
behavior, while small group-work, whole-group instruction
while sitting on the carpet, dancing, and testing were
positively associated with on-task behavior. It is worth
noting that the individual variables may have weak
associations, even as reasonable prediction is achieved from
a combination of variables. Note, however, that this is not
simply a case of an overly-complex model predicting noise;
the cross-validated correlation of the overall model is an

2431

indication that the model works on entirely unseen data. The
variable Transitions/Duration of Instructional Format was
also found to be positively correlated with on-task behavior.
We also generated models to predict peer off-task
behavior and environmental off-task behavior, using the
same features and modeling methods. The cross-validated
correlation of the REPtree model based solely on
instructional design was 0.244 for peer off-task behavior
and 0.161 for environmental off-task behavior. These
correlations did not increase substantially if gender or
grade-level were included. With these results, the peer
model appears to perform somewhat better than the weak
correlation achieved in the environment model, but neither
model was as effective as the model predicting the overall
amount of on-task behavior.
Table 3. Goodness of single-feature linear regression models at
predicting on-task behavior (note that cross-validated correlations
are always positive, unless the model performs worse than chance
on new data).

Feature

Direction
of
relationship

Crossvalidated
correlations

Correlations

Individual
work

Negative

.000

-.018

Small-group
work

Positive

.000

.032

Negative

.114

-.113

Whole-group
instruction
carpet

Positive

.110

.110

Dancing

Positive

.017

.043

Testing

Positive

.025

.051

Transitions/
Duration of
Inst. Format	  

Positive	  

.075	  

.075	  

Gender

Positive

.108

.109

Grade	  

Positive	  

.005	  

.039	  

Whole-group
instruction at
desks

The strongest individual feature correlation (using linear
regression and non-cross-validated correlations) for peer
off-task behavior is the amount of time spent in wholegroup instruction while sitting on the carpet (r=-0.136),
followed by the amount of time spent in small-group work
(r=0.119). Similarly, the strongest individual feature
correlation for environmental off-task behavior is smallgroup work (r=-0.115). These findings suggest that
instructional format does matter for determining specific
off-task behaviors. However, the magnitude of correlation
for the full model indicates that instructional format
determines to a greater degree whether a student will go off-

task, than exactly how they will go off-task. Clearly, the
type of instructional format may influence students’ choices
of how they will go off-task (e.g., a student may be more
likely to engage in peer off-task behavior during smallgroup work when another child is in close proximity);
however, the exact manifestation of off-task behavior may
be influenced by momentary factors (i.e., the most
interesting item/person in the classroom at a specific
moment).

Discussion
The present work is the first large-scale study of off-task
behavior in elementary school students to investigate the
relationship between features of instructional design and
incidence of off-task behavior. Specifically, we examined
whether type of instructional format (e.g., individual work,
small-group work, whole-group work, etc.) and the variable
Transitions/Duration of Instructional Format are related to
the overall rate of off-task behavior. Our findings indicate
that both variables are related to children’s engagement in
instructional activities. At the same time, children’s gender
and grade-level (K-4) made only a marginal contribution to
off-task behavior once features of the instructional design
(e.g., instruction format and variable Transitions/Duration of
Instructional Format) were taken into account.
The reported results also indicate that certain types of
instructional format are associated with more on-task
behavior than others, although further research is required to
explicate this finding. There are several possible hypotheses
that could be explored. One potential underlying factor is
variations in teacher supervision. It is feasible that
classroom management is easier for certain instructional
formats (e.g., small-group work) than others (e.g., wholegroup instruction at desks). Consequently, instructional
formats that are easier for teachers to supervise may result
in a reduction in opportunities for students to go off-task.
Secondly, student engagement in the instructional task
may also vary across instructional formats. For instance,
instructional activities that take place individually or at the
students’ desks (i.e., whole-group instruction at desks) may
be less engaging or motivating than small-group activities
which tend to be more socially oriented and include more
hands-on learning components. Instructional activities that
are more motivational may in turn increase students’ on-task
behavior. Additionally, instructional duration varies across
these formats. Thus, children may be better able to maintain
a state of focused attention when instruction consists of
small blocks of instructional activities verses instructional
activities that occur over a longer duration (cf. Ruff &
Lawson, 1990; Sarid & Breznitz, 1997). Currently these
hypotheses are speculative, and they require additional
investigation to determine their viability.
As stated previously, off-task behavior is a significant
problem in educational settings because it is thought to
impede learning. Optimizing instructional design to promote
on-task behavior is a desirable goal; however, there is a
paucity of research linking instructional design choices to

2432

attention allocation in classroom settings. The present
findings are a first-step in providing empirical evidence to
inform instructional design.

Acknowledgments
We thank Laura Pacilio for her help collecting data. We also
thank the children, parents, and teachers who made this project
possible. The work reported here was supported by a Graduate
Training Grant awarded to Carnegie Mellon University by the
Department of Education (R305B090023) and by the Institute of
Education
Sciences,
U.S.
Department
of
Education
(R305A110444). The opinions expressed are those of the authors
and do not represent views of the Institute or the U.S. Department
of Education.

References
Baker, R. S. (2007). Modeling and understanding students’ off-task
behavior in intelligent tutoring systems. Proceedings of ACM
CHI 2007: Computer-Human Interaction, 1059-1068.
Baker, R. S., Corbett, A. T., & Koedinger, K. R. (2004). Detecting
student misuse of intelligent tutoring systems. Proceeding of the
7th International Conference on Intelligent Tutoring Systems,
531 - 540.
Baker, R.S.J.d., Corbett, A.T., & Wagner, A.Z. (2006). Human
classification of low-fidelity replays of student actions.
Proceedings of the Educational Data Mining Workshop at the
8th International Conference on Intelligent Tutoring Systems,
29-36.
Baker, R.S.J.d., D'Mello, S.K., Rodrigo, M.M.T., & Graesser, A.C.
(2010). Better to be frustrated than bored: The incidence,
persistence, and impact of learners' cognitive-affective states
during interactions with three different computer-based learning
environments. International Journal of Human-Computer
Studies, 68 (4), 223-241.
Barrett, P., Zhang,Y., Moffat, J., & Kobbacy, K. (2012). A holistic,
multi-level analysis identifying the impact of classroom design
on pupils’ learning. Building & Environment, 59, 678-689.
Bloom, B. S. (1976). Human characteristics and school learning.
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Carroll, J. (1963). A model of school learning. Teachers College
Record, 64, 723-733.
Choudhury, N. & Gorman, K. S. (2000). The relationship between
sustained attention and cognitive performance in 17-24 month
old toddlers. Infant and Child Development, 9, 127-146.
Cobb, J.A. (1972). Relationship of discrete classroom behavior to
fourth-grade academic achievement. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 63, 74-80.
DeMarie-Dreblow, D. & Miler, P. H. (1988). The development of
children’s strategies for selective attention: Evidence for a
transitional period. Child Development, 59, 1504-1513.
Dixon, W. E. & Salley, B. J. (2007). “Shh! We’re tryin’ to
concentrate”: Attention and environmental distracters in novel
word learning. The Journal of Genetic Psychology, 167(4), 393 414.
Duncan, G. J., Dowsett, C. J., Claessens, A., Magnuson, K.,
Huston, A. C., Klebanov, P., Pagani, L.S., Feinstein, L., Engel,
M., Brooks-Gunn, J., Sexton, H., Duckworth, K., & Japel, C.
(2007). School readiness and later achievement. Developmental
Psychology, 43(6), 1428-1446.
Efron, B. & Gong, G. (1983). A leisurely look at the bootstrap, the
jackknife, and cross-validation. The American Statistician,
37(1), 36-48.

Frederick, W.C., Walberg, H.J., & Rasher, S.P. (1979). Time,
teacher comments, and achievement in urban high schools.
Journal of Educational Research, 73 (2), 63 - 65.
Godwin, K. & Fisher, A. (2011). Allocation of Attention in
Classroom Environments: Consequences for Learning. In L.
Carlson, C. Hölscher, & T. Shipley (Eds.), Proceedings of the
33rd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (28062811). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Goodman, L. (1990). Time and learning in the special education
classroom. SUNY Press.
Henderson, J., & Ferreira, F. (2004). In The interface of language,
vision, and action: Eye movements and the visual world.
Taylor & Francis, New York.
Hendrickson, L. (1979). The first ‘R’. Paper presented at the annual
meeting of the American Educational Research Association. San
Francisco, CA.
Hough, D. & Bryde, S. (1996). The effect of full-day kindergarten
on student achievement and affect. Paper presented at the annual
meeting of the American Educational Research Association,
New York, NY.
Just, M., & Carpenter, P. (1976). Eye fixations and cognitive
processes. Cognitive Psychology, 8, 441–480.
Karweit, N. & Slavin, R. E. (1981). Measurement and modeling
choices in studies of time and learning. American Educational
Research Journal, 18(2), 157 - 171.
Lahaderne, H.M. (1968). Attitudinal and intellectual correlates of
attention: A study of four sixth-grade classrooms. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 59 (5), 320 - 324.
Lemov, D. (2010). Teach like a champion: 49 techniques that put
students on a path to college. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Lee, S. W., Kelly, K. E., & Nyre, J. E. (1999). Preliminary report
on the relation of students’ on-task behavior with completion of
school work. Psychological Reports, 84, 267 - 272.
Leinhardt, G. (1977). Program Evaluation: An Empirical Study of
Individualized Instruction. American Educational Research
Journal, 14, 277-93.
Lloyd, J. W. & Loper, A. B. (1986). Measurement and evaluation
of task-related learning behaviors: Attention to task and
metacognition. School Psychology Review, 15(3), 336-345.
Mierswa, I., Wurst, M., Klinkenberg, R., Scholz, M., & Euler, T.
(2006). YALE: Rapid Prototyping for Complex Data Mining
Tasks. Proceedings of the 12th ACM SIGKDD International
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD
2006), 935-940.
Ocumpaugh, J., Baker, R.S.J.d., & Rodrigo, M.M.T.
(2012). Baker-Rodrigo Observation Method Protocol (BROMP)
1.0. Training Manual version 1.0. Technical Report. Manila,
Philippines: Ateneo Laboratory for the Learning Sciences.
Pagani, L., Fitzpatrick, C., Archambault, I., & Janosz, M. (2010).
School readiness and later achievement: a French-Canadian
replication and extension. Developmental Psychology, 46(5),
984–994.
Roberts, M. (2002). Research in practice: Practical approaches to
conducting functional analyses that all educators can use. The
Behavior Analyst Today, 3, 83-87.
Ruff, H. & Rothbart, M. K. (1996). Attention in Early
Development. New York: Oxford University Press.
Shao, J. (1993) Linear model selection via cross-validation,
Journal of the American Statistical Association 88(422), 486494.
Witten, F., & Frank, E. (2005). Data Mining: Practical Machine
Learning Tools and Techniques. San Francisco: Morgan
Kaufmann.

2433

