UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Cognitive Foundations of Cultural Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2728j7xx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Henderson, Annette
Kenward, Ben
Watson-Jones, Rachel
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Cognitive Foundations of Cultural Learning
Annette Henderson (a.henderson@auckland.ac.nz)
School of Psychology, The University of Auckland
Private Bag 92019, Auckland 1142, New Zealand

Ben Kenward (ben.kenward@psyk.uu.se)
Department of Psychology, Uppsala University
Box 1225, 751 42 Uppsala, Sweden

Rachel Watson-Jones (watsonjones@austin.utexas.edu)
Cristine Legare (legare@austin.utexas.edu)
Department of Psychology, The University of Texas at Austin
1 University Station #A8000, Austin, Texas 78712, USA

Harvey Whitehouse (harvey.whitehouse@anthro.ox.ac.uk)
School of Anthropology and Museum Ethnography, University of Oxford
51 Banbury Road, Oxford OX2 6PE, England
goal are critical for human survival. Food, shelter,
reproduction, protection from threats and knowledge
transfer require cooperation (Barkow, Cosmides, & Tooby,
1992; Tomasello, 2009). The ability to cooperate with
others emerges early in development (for a review see
Brownell, 2011) and plays a critical role in facilitating
children’s socio-cognitive development (Rogoff, 1990;
Sommerville & Hammond, 2007). Despite the growing
body of evidence documenting the development of
cooperative behaviour across the first few years of life, very
little is known about infants’ understanding of cooperation.
In her talk, Annette Henderson will present new findings
from a series of studies investigating the age at which
infants understand that the actions of cooperating partners
are directed towards the attainment of a common goal using
an innovative visual habituation paradigm. Identifying when
and how infants come to understand cooperation provides
valuable information about the age at which infants possess
the mental capacity to make sense out of the vast array of
cooperative actions that they witness in their everyday lives.
Annette Henderson is a Senior Lecturer in Developmental
Psychology and Director of the Early Learning Laboratory
at the University of Auckland, New Zealand. Her research
interests include the development of children’s
understanding of activities involving shared intentions,
which include linguistic and non-linguistic cooperative
activities.

Keywords: Ritual; imitation; collaboration; affiliation;
cultural learning; normativity; convention

Cognitive Foundations of Cultural Learning
The ability to learn from others is integral to sustaining and
transmitting human culture. What are the cognitive
processes that support imitative and collaborative cultural
learning? How does cultural learning contribute to group
dynamics, such as cohesion and conflict? Recent research
has focused on how children acquire instrumental skills
through causal inference (Call, Carpenter, & Tomasello,
2005; Whiten, McGuigan, Marshall-Pescini, & Hopper,
2009). However, children also need to acquire the norms
and conventions of their culture, as well as an understanding
of cooperative behavior, to become full-fledged members of
their community. This acquisition begins early in ontogeny
and is likely reliant on a unique mix of causal reasoning and
affiliative goals, triggered by the nature of the action
sequence itself and a variety of social cues. In this
symposium, we consider the emerging experimental
literature on the development of imitation and collaboration
with the goal of applying this work to broader issues of
group dynamics and the transmission of culture. Henderson
will consider the understanding of collaborative goals in
infancy. Kenward will consider the normative basis of
young children’s over-imitation.
Watson-Jones will
examine affiliative motivations underlying children’s
imitation. Whitehouse will consider how ritualized,
normative behavior and cognition impacts group dynamics
of coordination and social cohesion.

Kenward: The Mechanisms Behind Imitation of
“Unnecessary” Actions
Why do children imitate actions with unclear functions?
Copying behavior without understanding the function of the
behavior is often beneficial – you don’t need to know about
the crocodile to benefit from copying avoidance of the river.
This argument does not explain the mechanism of such
blind copying, however. Various proposals have been put

Henderson: Infants’ Understanding of Cooperative
Action
Cooperative activities in which two (or more) individuals
coordinate their independent actions to attain a common

85

forward, such as an automatic assumption of causal effect
(Lyons, Young, & Keil, 2007), and a motive to socially
affiliate (Over & Carpenter, 2012). Evidence will be
presented demonstrating that when imitating a simple action
sequence with a clear goal but including irrelevant actions,
children do not believe that the irrelevant actions are
causally necessary for achieving the goal. This evidence
speaks against the hypothesis of causal assumption.
Secondly, evidence will be presented demonstrating that
children have a sufficiently strong belief that such irrelevant
actions should be performed that they protest when a third
party does not perform them. This shows that children have
a normative belief that it is correct to copy actions
performed by adults, even when their purpose is unclear.
Kenward argues that children’s ability to encode actions as
normative without any information about what domain
determines the normativity implies that children are capable
of holding normative beliefs that are not anchored in a
specific domain, such as convention, morality, or
instrumental rationality.
Ben Kenward is a Researcher in Psychology at Uppsala
University, Sweden. He focuses on development but has
professional ADHD, having published recently on
unconsciously motivated action, moral development, social
learning, the development of decision making, and animal
tool use.

understand the forces that bind and drive human groups.
Here I describe a five-year program of research
investigating one of the most powerful mechanisms by
which groups may be formed, inspired, and coordinated:
ritual. The project examines the role of ritual in child
development, in social behavior, and in the evolution of
political systems. Studying how children learn the rituals of
their communities is shedding light on the various ways in
which rituals promote social cohesion within the group and
distrust of groups with different ritual traditions. Qualitative
field research, surveys, and controlled psychological
experiments are being conducted in a number of troubled
regions (including the Middle East and North Africa) to
investigate the role of ritual in group bonding and intergroup competition. New databases are being constructed to
explore the relationship between ritual, resource extraction
patterns, and group structure and scale over the millennia.
Harvey Whitehouse is professor of social anthropology,
director of the Institute of Cognitive and Evolutionary
Anthropology, and a fellow of Magdalen College at the
University of Oxford. His interests include recurrence and
variation in religious thinking and behavior, and he has
published many books and articles on this topic.

References
Barkow, J. H., Cosmides, L., & Tooby, J. (1992). The
adapted mind: Evolutionary psychology and the
generation of culture. NY: OUP.
Brownell, C. A. (2011). Early developments in joint action.
Review of Philosophy and Psychology, 2, 193-211.
Call, J., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (2005). Copying
results and copying actions in the process of social
learning: Chimpanzees and human children. Animal
Cognition, 8, 151-163.
Legare, C. H., Whitehouse, H., Herrmann, P. A., & Wen, N.
J. (under review). The imitative foundations of cultural
learning.
Lyons, D. E., Young, A. C., & Keil, F. C. (2007). The
hidden structure of over-imitation. PNAS, 104, 1975119756.
Over, H. & Carpenter, M. (2012). Putting the social into
social learning: Explaining both selectivity and fidelity in
children’s copying behavior. Journal of Comparative
Psychology, 126(2), 182-192.
Rogoff, B. (1990). Apprenticeship in thinking: Cognitive
development in social context. NY: OUP.
Sommerville, J. A., & Hammond, A. J. (2007). Treating
another’s actions as one’s own: Children’s memory of and
learning from joint activity. Developmental Psychology,
43, 1003-1018.
Tomasello, M. (2009). Why we cooperate. Cambridge: The
MIT Press.
Whiten, A., McGuigan, N., Marshall-Pescini, S., & Hopper,
L. M. (2009). Emulation, imitation, over-imitation, and
the scope of culture for child and chimpanzee.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 364,
2417-2428.

Watson-Jones & Legare: Affiliative Motivations
and the Development of Imitation
Imitation is used to acquire both instrumental skills (Call, et
al. 2005; Lyons et al., 2007; Whiten et al., 2009) as well as
cultural conventions, such as ritual. Legare, Whitehouse,
Herrmann, and Wen (under review) have proposed that the
causal opacity associated with cultural conventions results
in high fidelity copying and low levels of innovation. The
motivation to engage in imitation may be fundamentally
related to implicit affiliation goals (Over & Carpenter,
2012). We propose that affiliative motivations play an
important role in the transmission and learning of cultural
knowledge. Rachel Watson-Jones will present new research
in collaboration with Cristine Legare and Harvey
Whitehouse, demonstrating that affiliation goals may
differentially affect the imitation of instrumental actions
versus actions related to cultural conventions. Using
ostracism as a conceptual lens, the findings of this research
provide evidence of the affiliative basis of imitation.
Rachel Watson-Jones is a Postdoctoral Fellow at the
University of Texas at Austin within the Cognition, Culture,
and Development Laboratory. Her interests include the
development of social cognition, cultural transmission, and
the cognitive science of religion.

Whitehouse: Ritual, Community, and Conflict
Some of the greatest atrocities have been caused by groups
defending or advancing their political aspirations and sacred
values. In order to comprehend and address the wanton
violence of war, terrorism and genocide, it is necessary to

86

