UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Communicatively efficient language production and case-marker omission in Japanese

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9ct954c4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Kurumada, Chigusa
Jaeger, T. FLorian

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Communicatively efficient language production and
case-marker omission in Japanese
Chigusa Kurumada
kurumada@stanford.edu
Department of Linguistics
Stanford University

T. Florian Jaeger
fjaeger@bcs.rochester.edu
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences
University of Rochester

Abstract

of words so far (e.g., My boss said) to take a complement
clause, as in (1): when the complement clause is much expected, that is likely to be omitted; when it is less so, that is
likely to be inserted (Jaeger, 2010).

Recent studies hypothesize that language production is governed by the principle of efficient information transmission:
Speakers tend to omit elements whose information content is
contextually predictable, while providing more linguistic signal to convey otherwise less predictable information. However,
previous findings in support of this hypothesis are also compatible with alternative accounts based on production difficulty.
To distinguish between these competing accounts, we conducted experiments on speaker’s preference in optional casemarking in Japanese. The results suggest that Japanese speakers are more likely to omit the object case-marker when an
associated noun has properties (e.g., animacy) that are prototypical to a grammatical object. Moreover, case-marker omission was facilitated when other elements in a sentence made
the grammatical function assignment more predictable. The
results were obtained with all the factors related to production
difficulty held constant, and thus provide support for the models of communicatively efficient language production.
Keywords: Case-marker omission, Japanese, language production, efficiency, information transfer

Observations like these can be accounted for in terms
of communicative efficiency since the reduction/omission of
predictable material and lengthening/insertion of less predictable material results in more uniform distribution of information density across the speech signal, which is proven
to facilitate efficient -i.e. fast and robust- information transfer
(Genzel & Charniak, 2002) and to minimize processing difficulty (Levy & Jaeger, 2007). A trade-off between the amount
of information and the amount of linguistic signal expended
is also expected under models of boundedly rational communication: If speakers are rational and aim to balance production effort with communicative success, they should provide
a more perceptual signal when a word or structure is less contextually inferable (the Ideal Speaker Model in Jaeger, 2011,
see also Piantadosi, Tily, & Gibson, 2011).

Introduction
Language often offers multiple options for expressing semantically equivalent or near-equivalent messages. For example,
speakers have a choice between different word orders and
voice choices (e.g. the ditransitive alternation in English;
active vs. passive; scrambling in languages like German,
Japanese, and Hindi). Another common type of alternation
involves the choice between more or less linguistic form (e.g.,
phoneme duration, morphemes, phonological alternation) to
encode the same meaning. For example, in English sentence
like (1), speakers can, but do not have to, produce the complementizer “that”. The past psycholinguistic studies have used
these alternations as windows into the cognitive processes underlying language production.
(1)

However, for much of the evidence that has been cited
in favor of communicative efficiency accounts, it is an open
question to what extent it could be accommodated in competing accounts. In particular, it is well-established that difficulty with the retrieval, processing, or articulation of upcoming material can affect the degree of reduction/omission
of (typically immediately preceding) material. This includes
effects on phonetic reduction (Fox Tree & Clark, 1997) and
the optional production of “that” (e.g., Ferreira & Dell, 2000)
described above. For example, speakers are more likely to
produce the optional “that”, if the onset of the complement
clause (its subject) is frequent, short and has previously been
mentioned (Ferreira & Dell, 2000; Roland, Elman, & Ferreira, 2005). We follow previous work and refer to these effects as availability-based effects.

My boss said (that) we were absolutely crazy.

Recent psycholinguistics work has proposed that speakers’ preferences in such alternations provide evidence that the
computational system underlying language production is organized to facilitate efficient information transfer (e.g., Aylett
& Turk, 2004; Levy & Jaeger, 2007; Jaeger, 2010). This
line of work has focused on the observation that it seems to
be predictable linguistic material, and hence material that is
low in Shannon information, that tends to be reduced or even
completely omitted (e.g., Bell, Brenier, Gregory, Girand, &
Jurafsky, 2009; Frank & Jaeger, 2008; Resnik, 1996). For
example, whether English speakers produce the complementizer that depends on how predictable it is for the continuation

Here we investigate a morpho-syntactic alternation that
provides a less ambiguous test case for the communicativeefficiency accounts. We present three production experiments on optional case-marking in Japanese. Japanese is a
verb-final language with relatively flexible word order: in a
transitive sentence like (2), both SOV and OSV are possible word orders, although the latter is considerably less frequent. Case relations are marked with post-nominal particles
(case-markers) as shown in (2), where “-ga” is the nominative
marker and “-o” is the accusative marker. Here we focus on
the optionality of the accusative case-marker, indicated in ()
by parentheses.

858

(2)

Taro-ga
sushi-(o)
tabe-ta.
Taro-NOM sushi-(ACC) eat-PAST.
Taro ate sushi.

ences in case-marking preferences between the conditions are
predicted by availability-based production (Ferreira & Dell,
2000).
Experiment 2 and 3 put the ideal speaker model’s prediction to a stronger test. We investigate if Japanese speakers’
case-marking preference can be directly affected by the inferability of GF-assignment, beyond categorical factors like animacy, givenness, or definiteness. To this end we manipulate
plausibility of GF-assignments and investigate their effect on
the production of case markers.

Compared to languages like English or Mandarin Chinese,
the flexibility in Japanese word order implies higher uncertainty about the grammatical function assignment (henceforth
GF-assignment). In other words, it is not immediately obvious what is the subject and what is the object especially
when a case-marker is not present. While case-markers are
obligatory in written discourse, however, they are frequently
omitted in conversational speech — often, like in (2), without
change in meaning.
Such optional case-marking has received considerable attention in linguistic work (e.g., Aissen, 2003), but has
remained comparatively understudied in psycholinguistics.
Here it is of interest because it allows us to distinguish between the predictions of communicative efficiency accounts,
specifically the ideal speaker model proposed in Jaeger
(2011), and those of availability-based accounts.
The ideal speaker model predicts that speakers should be
more likely to produce case-marking when the intended GFassignment is unexpected given the other information provided in the sentence (for details, see Jaeger, 2011). This
is the prediction we test here. In the remainder of this paper, we will use the more succinct statement that “speakers
should be more likely to mark the unexpected” to refer to this
prediction. In Experiment 1, we investigate whether object
typicality, manipulated via changes in animacy, affects speakers’ preference during production of optional case-marking in
Japanese. We compare the production of sentences that only
differ in the animacy of the object, which is either a human
referent (e.g., the student) or an inanimate referent (e.g., the
fire-engine)(Figure 1-a). If speakers are more likely to mark
the unexpected, they should be more likely to produce object
case markers if the object is human [atypical] compared to if
it is inanimate [typical] (Aissen, 2003).
Preliminary evidence for this prediction comes from qualitative work (Lee, 2007), which examined optional casemarking in conversational Korean. She tested the hypothesis suggested by typological work on case-marking systems.
Lee found that both definiteness and animacy are significant
predictors of Korean speakers’ use of subject- as well as object case-markers in the direction predicted here. However,
in a similar corpus study in Japanese, Fry (2003) found no
effect of animacy in the object-case marking. While inanimate and indefinite (i.e. atypical) subjects were significantly
more likely to be case-marked than animate and definite subjects (69% vs. 64%), he found no effect of animacy on object
case-marking. It is unclear, however, whether this result indicates an actual absence of an effect of animacy, or whether
this was simply due to the sparseness of data or confounding factors, not controlled in the corpus study. Experiment 1
addresses this question by manipulating only object animacy.
Further, items were constructed such that all materials following the direct object were held constant, so that no differ-

Experiment 1
We employ a spoken recall paradigm to test if Japanese
speakers’ use of the accusative case-marker -o is sensitive to
animacy of the direct object. We manipulated the animacy of
the direct object and whether the original stimulus contained
a direct object case-marker or not. If optional case-marking is
affected by a preference for communicative efficiency, speakers should be more likely to produce responses with a casemarker for animate (atypical) objects compared to inanimate
(typical) objects.

Methods
Participants 20 native speakers of Japanese in Stanford
area participated in this study. They received $7 for their participation.
Materials In a Latin-square design, each list contained 24
items and 48 fillers. As described above, items were transitive sentences with either animate or inanimate direct objects
and with or without a case-marker. Sentence patterns for recall stimuli are illustrated in Figure 1. The nominative casemarker was always present, avoiding ambiguity about the intended GF-assignment and hence about the meaning. Additionally, all items were presented in the subject-before-object
order, which is hugely more frequent in Japanese.
Fillers were length-matched sentences with intransitive
verbs and longer adverbial phrases. There was no lexical
overlap between any of the stimuli. Stimuli were grouped into
pairs so that there were 24 item-filler pairs and 12 filler-filler
pairs, totalling 36 trials. The order of items and fillers within
a pair and the order of pairs were held constant across participants. All stimuli were recorded by a female native speaker
of Japanese, using the same prosody for all conditions. In addition, the same speaker recorded 72 recall prompts, one for
each sentence (always the verb).
Procedure Each trial consisted of an encoding phase and a
recall phase. During encoding, participants listened to pairs
of sentences and were instructed to remember them. During
recall, participants heard the verb of one of the two sentences
(the prompt). They then recalled and produced the full sentence corresponding to that verb. Subsequently, the second
prompt was played and participants produced the second sentence. In half of the trials, the sentence encoded first was
also recalled first. In the other half, the order was reversed.
Following standard procedure (Ferreira & Dell, 2000), target

859

Figure 1: Sentence patterns in a) Experiment 1 (left) and b) Experiment 2 and 3 (right).

Experiment1

Table 1: Percentage of recall error for each of the four conditions in Experiment 1.
Animate Inanimate
Present 8.9%
8.9%
Absent 15.6%
8.9%

-o present

-o absent

Proportion of case-marker use

0.8

items were never recalled directly after encoding. That is, if
an item was encoded first, it was recalled either first or second. If it was encoded second, it was always recalled second.
Across participants the recall order for each pair of stimuli
was held constant.

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

Animate

Scoring All 20 x 24 = 480 recorded items were transcribed
and coded by a native Japanese undergraduate research assistant who was unaware of the purpose of this experiment.
Sentences with recall errors anywhere in the sentence were
excluded (11.6%), leaving 424 responses for our analysis.
The error rate was doubled for sentences with animate objects without case-marker compared to the other three conditions (Table 2, χ2 (3) = .7, p < .05). Although these sentences
are technically not ambiguous (recall that all sentences contained subject case-marking), sentences with animate objects
that lack case-marking are the ones we hypothesized to be
most confusing. The high error rate indicates that the recall
production was in fact difficult with this type of sentences.
We also coded the presence of disfluency (88 out of the
424 analyzable sentences contained at least one disfluency).
There was no significant difference across sentence types
(χ2 (1) = .03, p > .8).

Inanimate

Animate

Inanimate

Figure 2: Proportion of case-marker use in Experiment 1. The
error bars represent +/ − 1 standard error.

Unsurprisingly, participants were more likely to produce
a object case-marker if the original stimulus contained a object case-marker (β = 2.3, p < .0001). Crucially, participants
were also more likely to produce a case-marker if the object
was animate (β = .45, p < .03). The two factors did not interact (p > .9). Figure 2 summarizes the two main effects.
In this recall production experiment, we thus found that
animacy of direct objects affected Japanese speakers’ casemarking preferences. This suggest that the failure to find
animacy-based effects on object case-marking in casual
speech in previous work is indeed due to a lack of power
and confounding effects of other variables that optional casemarking is sensitive to (Fry, 2003). Our results hence replicate for Japanese what has been found in corpus-based studied on Korean speech (Lee, 2007). Our findings are also compatible with the qualitative description of differential casemarking across languages of the world (Aissen, 2003).
Most relevant to the current purpose, the animacy-based
effect on case-marking support the ideal speaker model. The
effects we observe are expected under the ideal speaker model
and cannot be reduced to availability-based production since
the material following the direct object was held constant
within items. As discussed above, it is also not clear how
production-oriented (‘accessibility-based’) accounts of the
type that have been proposed for phonetic reduction (Arnold,
in press; Bell et al., 2009) would account for the observed
effects. More generally, it seems unlikely that the effects

Results and discussion
A mixed logit regression analysis with the full 2 (animacy
of object) x 2 (presence of case-marker in stimulus) design
was employed to predict the presence of a case-marker. We
report the results for the model with maximum random effect structure justified by the data based on model comparison (Jaeger, 2008), which contained random by-subject and
item intercepts as well as by-item slopes for the presence of
case-marker in stimulus. The effect of interest reported below
was robustly significant even in the full random effect model
(by-subject and by-item slopes for all factors and their interaction). All predictors were contrast coded and there were no
signs of collinearity (fixed effect rs< .07).

860

observed here are reducible to production difficulty. While
we found an increase proportion of recall errors in sentence
with animate (atypical) objects without case marker, the proportion of recall errors for animate objects with case markers was identical to that of inanimate objects. Furthermore,
the interaction observed for recall errors is not observed in
our analysis of speakers’ case-marker preferences. Finally, as
mentioned above, we did not observe any differences in the
distribution of disfluencies across the animacy conditions.

Table 2: Percentage of recall error for each of the four conditions in Experiment 2.
Plausible object Implausible object
Present 8.6%
16.7%
Absent 8.6%
12.3%

Norming studies The stimuli described below were created using an online norming study (40 native speakers
of Japanese). Participants were presented the 24 animateanimate noun pairs used in our items (e.g., doctor-patient).
Participants first rated the relative naturalness of the two potential patterns of grammatical function assignment on a 10
point rating scale (e.g., The doctor (did something to) the patient vs. The patient (did something to) the doctor). Second,
we asked them to provide verbs that would make the most
natural continuation of a given pair of nouns for each pattern
(e.g, doctor-NOM patient-ACC / patient-NOM doctor-ACC).
Among the set of verbs given by the informants, we selected
two verbs for each noun pair such that one verb maximizes the
object probability of one noun, and the other verb maximizes
the object probability of the other noun. For example, for
the “doctor-patient” pair, we chose “(to) treat”, which makes
“patient” as the plausible object, and “(to) wait for”, which
makes “the doctor” more plausible.
A second norming study (40 native speakers of Japanese;
no overlap in participants with first norming study or either
of the experiments) asked participants to rate the relative naturalness of the two patterns of GF-assignment when the verb
is present (e.g., “doctor-NOM patient-ACC hospital-roomLOC treat” vs. “patient-NOM doctor-ACC hospital-roomLOC treat”).

Experiment 2
If the animacy effect we saw in Experiment 1 was indeed due
to effect of communicative efficiency on the encoding of GFassignment, the effect should remain when the animacy of
the arguments are controlled. Using animate-animate noun
pairs, we examined if the plausibility of GF-assignment affects Japanese speakers’ use of the accusative case-marker.
In Figure 1-b (right), the GF-assignment is more plausible
when the doctor treats the patient rather than the other way
around. Hence the ideal speaker model predicts that speakers
should be more likely to produce the object case-marker when
the doctor is the object of the sentence, compared to when the
patient is the object.

Methods
Participants 32 native speakers of Japanese in Stanford
area participated in this study. They received $7 for their participation.
Stimuli There were 24 items, consisting of subject, object,
adverb, and verb. Each item consisted of eight conditions
(=192 stimuli), resulting from crossing 1) the plausibility of
GF-assignment based on the order of two noun phrases and
the verb, 2) presence/absence of the case-marker, and 3) the
identity of the verb. This is illustrated in Figure 1.
In the example in Figure 1-b, plausibility was coded as
high in “The doctor treated the patient in a hospital room” and
“The patient waited for the doctor in a hospital room” and as
low in “The patient treated the doctor in a hospital room” and
“The doctor waited for the patient in a hospital room”. Below we collapse over the 2-way within-item verb contrast and
treat the design as a 2x2 (plausibility by case-marker presence
in the input), since the identity of the verb is of no theoretical
interest here (the effects of verbs on plausibility are already
capture by our coding of plausibility). Furthermore, the verb
identity was balanced within item and within the two plausibility conditions.
As in Experiment 1, the 24 items were combined with 48
length-matched fillers in a Latin-square design that held order
of stimuli constant across lists. There was no lexical overlap
between any of the stimuli. The grouping of stimuli into pairs
was the same as in Experiment 1. All stimuli were recordings
of a female native speaker of Japanese. In addition, the same
speaker recorded 72 prompts, one for each sentence (always
the verb).

Procedure The procedure was identical to that of Experiment 1. Since some of the stimuli (e.g., The patient treated
the doctor.) were meant to be less plausible, participants were
instructed to listen to sentences carefully and produce them
faithfully to the input even when they were “somewhat surprising”.
Scoring All 32 x 24 = 744 responses were transcribed and
coded by a native speaker of Japanese. Sentences with recall
errors were excluded (11.6% [sic]), leaving 658 responses for
our analysis. Numerically, the error rate was higher for sentences with implausible GF-assignments (14.5% vs. 8.6%)
but the difference was not statistically significant (χ2 (1) =
.24, p > .62). 13% of the error free sentences contained at
least one instance of disfluency, but the occurrence rate did
not differ across conditions (χ2 (3) = .80, p > .3). As in
Experiment 1, the distribution of disfluencies did not differ
across conditions (χ2 (3) = .80, p > .3).

Results and Discussion
Using the same statistical approach as in Experiment 1, we
analyzed the remaining 2x2 design defined by the plausibility
of GF-assignment (high vs. low) and case-marker presence

861

Experiment3

Experiment2

-o present

-o absent

-o absent

0.8

0.8

Proportion of case-marker use

Proportion of case-marker use

-o present

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

Low

High

Low

High

Low

High

Low

High

Figure 3: Proportion of case-marker use in Experiment 3 by
plausibility of GF-assignment (high vs. low) and presence of
the object case marker in the recall stimulus (-o present vs.
absent). The error bars indicate +/ − 1 standard error.

Figure 4: Proportion of case-marker use in Experiment 3 by
plausibility of GF-assignment (high vs. low) and presence of
the object case marker in the recall stimulus (-o present vs.
absent). The error bars indicate +/ − 1 standard error.

in the originally presented stimuli (presence vs. absence) to
predict the presence of a case-marker in the responses. Unsurprisingly, participants were more likely to produce an object case-marker if the original stimulus contained an object
case-marker (β = 2.6, p < .0001). More importantly, they
were also more likely to produce a case-marker for implausible GF-assignment (β = 0.8, p < .003). The two factors
did not interact (p < .7). Thus, this model confirmed the predicted effect of object plausibility in the form of categorical
factor. The effects are illustrated in Figure 3.
Next, we analyzed the gradient effects of values for the
plausibility of GF-assignments as rated in the norming studies described above. The effect of two different plausibility
ratings was examined: plausibility of GF-assignment given
only the two nouns (Norming Study 1, part 1) or given the
full sentence (Norming Study 2). Plausibility ratings for full
sentences returned the expected significant effect (β = −0.43,
p < .03), namely that the speakers were more likely to use
the case-marker when the GF-assignment had been normed
to be less plausible. However, the ratings based on only the
two noun phrases returned no such effect (β = −.05, p > .9).
This suggests that what speakers assess is the plausibility of
an intended message (including the verb information) rather
than just the properties of nouns.

Methods
Participants 26 native speakers of Japanese in Stanford
area participated in this study. Data from one subject were
excluded because of a problem with the recording device.
Stimuli The stimuli and their presentation order were
mostly identical to those of Experiment 2. New recall cues
(the subject nouns of the target sentences) were recorded by
the same speaker who recorded the stimuli sentences for Experiment 2.

Results and Discussion
Using the same statistical approach as in Experiment 1 and
2, we analysed the binary predictors of the plausibility of
GF-assignment (high vs. low) and case-marker presence in
the originally presented stimuli (presence vs. absence of -o)
to predict the occurrence of a case-marker in the responses.
We replicated the finding in Experiment 2: the expected effect of the object case-marker presence in the original stimulus (β = 1.83, p < .001), and the low inferrability GFassignments (β = −1.12, p < .007). The two effects did not
interact (p > .2). Thus, this model confirmed that the effect
of object plausibility (in the form of categorical factor) remains when the recall cue was the subject of the sentence.
The effects are illustrated in Figure 4.
Also, we replicated the effects of two different plausibility ratings. Plausibility ratings for full sentences returned the
expected significant effect (β = −0.40, p < .05) whereas the
ratings based on only the two noun phrases returned no such
effect (β = −.03, p > .6). There was a negative interaction
term between the plausibility value given the full sentence
and the presence of the case-marker: Highly plausible GFassignments were even less likely to be case-marked when the
original sentences lacked the object case-marking (β = −.74,
p < .01).

Experiment 3
We replicated Experiment 2 by using the subject noun, instead of the verb, as a recall cue. This allows us to rule out
the possibility that the plausibility effect observed in Experiment 2 is an artifact of the recall cue being the verb of a sentence. As Japanese is a SOV language, it is possible that the
use of the (sentence final) verb as the recall cue in Experiment
1 and 2 forced participants to adopt task-specific production
strategies that do not reflect normal language production.

862

General Discussion

Bell, A., Brenier, J., Gregory, M., Girand, C., & Jurafsky, D.
(2009). Predictability effects on durations of content
and function words in conversational English. JML,
60(1), 92–111.
Fedzechkina, M., Jaeger, T. F., & Newport, E. L. (2012).
Language learners restructure their input to facilitate
efficient communication. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences.
Ferreira, V., & Dell. (2000). Effect of ambiguity and lexical
availability on syntactic and lexical production. Cognitive Psychology, 40, 296–340.
Fox Tree, J. E., & Clark, H. H. (1997). Pronouncing “the” as
“thee” to signal problems in speaking. Cognition, 62,
151–167.
Frank, A., & Jaeger, T. F. (2008). Speaking rationally: Uniform information density as an optimal strategy for language production. In Proceedings of the 30th annual
meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.
Fry, J. (2003). Ellipsis and wa-marking in japanese conversation. New York: Routledge.
Genzel, D., & Charniak, E. (2002). Entropy rate constancy
in text. In Proceedings of the Association of Computational Linguistics (pp. 199–206). Philadelphia, PA.
Jaeger, T. F. (2008). Categorical data analysis: Away from
anovas (transformation or not) and towards logit mixed
models. JML, 59, 434–446.
Jaeger, T. F. (2010). Redundancy and reduction: Speakers
manage syntactic information density. Cognitive Psychology, 61, 23-62.
Jaeger, T. F. (2011). Communicative efficiency and adaptiveness in the ideal speaker (ms). University of Rochester.
Lee, H. (2007). Case ellipsis at the grammar/pragmatics interface: A formal analysis from a typological perspective. Journal of Pragmatics, 39(9), 1465 - 1481.
Lee, H., & Kim, N. (2012). Non-canonical word order and
subject-object asymmetry in korean case ellipsis. In
Proceedings of the 19th international conference on
head-driven phrase structure grammar (pp. 427–442).
Stanford, CA: CSLI Publications.
Levy, R., & Jaeger, T. F. (2007). Speakers optimize
information density through syntactic reduction. In
B. Schlökopf, J. Platt, & T. Hoffman (Eds.), Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS)
(Vol. 19, p. 849-856). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Piantadosi, S., Tily, H., & Gibson, E. (2011). Word lengths
are optimized for efficient communication. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108(9),
3526.
Resnik, P. (1996). Selectional constraints: An informationtheoretic model and its computational realization. Cognition, 61, 127–159.
Roland, D., Elman, J. L., & Ferreira, V. S. (2005). Why is
that? Structural prediction and ambiguity resolution in
a very large corpus of English sentences. Cognition,
1–28.

Our results suggest that Japanese speakers prefer to produce
an object NP without case marking when grammatical function of a noun is made more predictable given the semantics of the noun (e.g., animacy) and the other linguistic elements in the sentence (e.g., plausibility of GF-assignment
given the subject, object, and verb). The plausibility effect
we saw in Experiment 2 and 3 strongly suggests that speakers have fine-grained probabilistic knowledge about the plausibility beyond categorical factors like animacy and definiteness. More generally, this is one of the first studies showing
a systematic effect of plausibility in the morpho-syntactic encoding of speech.
Recent studies have found that speakers’ use and nonuse of case-markers are interacting with the word order as
well. Speakers tend to use case-makers when the word order does not conform to an expected pattern (see Lee and
Kim (2012) in Korean, Fedzechkina, Jaeger, and Newport
(2012) for experiments using an artificial language). This is
also predictable by the assumption of efficient communication. An explicit case marking becomes more likely when
the non-canonical word order biases against an intended GFassignment pattern.
This body of research including the current study constitutes strong support for the view that language production is
optimized to maximize the efficiency of information transmission (Jaeger, 2010; Levy & Jaeger, 2007), and, in particular, the ideal speaker model (Jaeger, 2011). Unlike most
previous work, the current results cannot be accounted for
in terms of availability, even if availability-based production
is extended to include the availability of upcoming syntactic
structures.
Furthermore, our results provide broader implications for
studies investigating the effects of communicative pressure on
cross-linguistically attested phenomena such as differential
case-marking (Aissen, 2003). Our results and Lee’s (2007)
study in Korean support the hypothesis that the languages
with an optional case-marking system are sensitive to the
same factors that are known to affect more categorical caseencodings in various languages. This may suggest that the
functional pressure for efficient communication underlies at
least some of the universal features found across languages.

References
Aissen, J. (2003). Differential object marking: iconicity vs.
economy. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory,
21, 435–483.
Arnold, J. E. (in press). Reference production: Productioninternal and addressee-oriented processes. Language
and Cognitive Processes.
Aylett, M. P., & Turk, A. (2004). The smooth signal redundancy hypothesis: A functional explanation for relationships between redundancy, prosodic prominence,
and duration in spontaneous speech. Language and
Speech, 47(1), 31–56.

863

