UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Communicative biases shape structures of newly acquired languages

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3r62b674

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Fedzechkina, Maryia
Jaeger, T. Florian
Newport, Elissa L.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Communicative biases shape structures of newly acquired languages
Maryia Fedzechkina (mashaf@bcs.rochester.edu), T. Florian Jaeger (fjaeger@bcs.rochester.edu)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627 USA

Elissa L. Newport (eln10@georgetown.edu)
Department of Neurology, Georgetown University,
Washington, DC 20007 USA
Abstract

across the world share many properties that facilitate such
efficient information transfer (S.T. Piantadosi, H Tily, & E
Gibson, 2011; S.T. Piantadosi, H. Tily, & E. Gibson, 2011;
Qian & Jaeger, 2012).
The study of language universals has primarily relied on
typological and diachronic data, which has several major
limitations. First, typological and diachronic studies suffer
from data sparsity since only a small fraction of 6909
known languages (Lewis, 2009) have been sufficiently
documented. This led some researchers to suggest that there
is no evidence for language universals once common
ancestry and geographical proximity between languages are
taken into account (Dunn, Greenhill, Levinson, & Gray,
2011). Second, typological and diachronic studies do not
provide an insight into the mechanism of how the
hypothesized constraints come to shape language over time.
The aim of this study is three-fold. First, we set out to
provide direct behavioral evidence for the existence of
cross-linguistic universals. Second, we investigate the cause
of these universals. We ask, in particular, whether some
typologically frequent phenomena can be explained by
domain-general biases associated with considerations about
human communication. Finally, we explore whether
learning can provide a potential mechanism through which
these biases come to shape language structures.
We employ an artificial language learning paradigm,
where learners are exposed to miniature languages designed
to have certain properties of interest. This method has been
used to study learning biases in adults and children
(Culbertson, Smolensky, & Legendre, 2012; Hudson Kam
& Newport, 2009) and has provided behavioral evidence for
typological universals (Christiansen, 2000; Culbertson et al.,
2012; Finley & Badecker, 2008; E. Newport & Aslin,
2004). Of particular interest is a recent study by
Fedzechkina, Jaeger, and Newport (2012), who have used
this paradigm to investigate the impact of learners’
communicative preferences on language structure and
shown that language learners are biased towards efficient
case systems.
Here we focus on the correlation in a language between
the flexibility of word order and the presence of a case
system. It has long been observed that languages with rich
case-marking typically allow more word order freedom than
languages with no case-marking (Blake, 2001; Sapir, 1921).
Languages like Russian or Latin, which allow sentential
subjects and objects to be placed in a variety of positions

Languages around the world share a number of
commonalities known as language universals. We investigate
whether the existence of some recurrent patterns can be
explained by the learner’s preference to balance the amount of
information provided by the cues to sentence meaning. In an
artificial language learning paradigm, we expose learners to
two languages with optional case-marking – one with fixed
and one with flexible word order. We find that learners of the
flexible word order language, where word order is
uninformative of sentence meaning, use significantly more
case-marking than the learners of the fixed word order
language, where case is a redundant cue. The learning
outcomes in our experiment parallel a variety of typological
phenomena, providing support for the hypothesis that
communicative biases can shape language structures.
Keywords: Language acquisition; learning biases; language
universals; efficient communication.

Introduction
In his seminal paper, the American linguist Joseph
Greenberg (Greenberg, 1963) noticed that the vast majority
of patterns that recur in apparently unrelated languages, also
known as language universals, take the form of
implicational statements: If a language has property A, then
it will most likely have property B. Language universals
point towards constraints on the space of structures possible
in natural language since some of the theoretically possible
feature combinations are cross-linguistically observed more
frequently than others.
The nature of these recurrent patterns has sparked a
debate in the cognitive sciences: Are language universals
due to constraints specific exclusively to language which are
not shared by other aspects of human cognitive systems
(Chomsky, 1965), or are they due to general cognitive
constraints such as constraints on perception, memory and
learning (Hawkins, 2004; E Newport, 1981; Slobin, 1973)?
In this work, we explore the long-standing hypothesis that
domain-general pressures associated with human
communication can shape languages over time (Bates &
MacWhinney, 1989; Slobin, 1977; Zipf, 1949). Support for
this hypothesis comes from recent studies that apply
mathematical theories of communication to the study of
language structures. This work has found that speech has
many properties that strike an efficient balance between
successful and fast communication (Jaeger, 2010). Recent
cross-linguistic studies have further found that languages

430

with respect to each other and the verb, tend to have rich
case systems. However, languages that enforce strict order
of subject and object (e.g., English and French) typically
have no or only rudimentary case-marking.
Additional evidence for the correlation between word
order flexibility and the presence of case-marking comes
from studies of language change. For instance, Old English
allowed the permutation of subject and object while having
rich case-marking. This relationship between word order
and case-marking substantially changed during the history
of English, and Modern English became a language with a
fixed word order and no case-marking.
We explore whether this correlation between word order
freedom and the presence of a case system in a language can
result from a trade-off between the information content of a
cue and a the amount of effort necessary to produce this cue.
Word order is highly informative of sentence meaning (i.e.,
grammatical function assignment can be successfully
recovered based on word order alone) in a fixed word order
language. Case-marking is thus redundant in such language
and can be omitted to conserve effort without hindering
robust communication. In a flexible word order language,
however, word order is less informative of grammatical
function assignment, and situations can occur when
sentence meaning cannot be successfully recovered based
on the linear order of elements alone. The relative lack of
informativity of word order is compensated for by casemarking, which, when present, provides crucial information
about grammatical function assignment.
We expose learners to languages with optional casemarking that have either fixed or flexible word order. If
learners indeed balance the amount of information provided
by cues to sentence meaning, we predict that the relative
lack of one cue will make it more likely that learners recruit
alternative cues. In particular, we expect learners of the
flexible word order language to use significantly more casemarkers than the learners of the fixed word order language.

participant). This left 40 participants for analysis, 20 in each
of the two languages.

The Languages
Lexicon Verbs There were four verbs (geed, kleidum, shen,
zamper) that denoted simple transitive actions (HUG,
KNOCKOVER, ROCK, KICK). All verbs occurred equally
frequently in the input overall and with each word order
variant allowed by the language.
Nouns There were six nouns (glim, flugit, bliffen, norg,
spad, melnawg), all of which denoted male referents
(MOUNTIE, CHEF, REFEREE, CONDUCTOR, HUNTER, BANDIT).
There were no restrictions on nouns. All nouns occurred
equally often as subjects and objects of each of the four
verbs.
Case-marker There was one case-marker (‘kah’) that
optionally marked the object of the action.
Grammar There were two language conditions in the
experiment.
Fixed word order language did not contain word order
variation – subject-object-verb (SOV) occurred in 100% of
the input sentences. The language had optional casemarking – 67% of the input sentences contained a casemarker that marked the object of the action.
Since grammatical function assignment could be
unambiguously identified by word order in this language,
case-marking added little information to successful recovery
of sentence meaning.
Flexible word order language contained word order
variation – subject-object-verb (SOV) and object-subjectverb (OSV) word orders occurred equally frequently in the
input. The language contained optional case-marking – 67%
of sentential objects were case-marked regardless of
sentence word order.
In this language, word order was uninformative about
grammatical function assignment. Case-marking, when
present, provided important information about sentence
meaning.
Head-final languages were chosen for both language
conditions since they are cross-linguistically more likely to
have case-marking systems (Greenberg, 1963).

Experiment
Participants
Participants in the experiment were monolingual native
English speakers recruited from the undergraduate students
at the University of Rochester or their age-matched peers
from the surrounding community. All participants were
compensated $25 for their time. Participants were pseudorandomly assigned to one of the two languages: variable
word order or fixed word order language (described below).
Recruitment continued until the number of participants who
successfully learned the language reached 20 in each of the
two languages. 52 volunteers participated in the experiment.
12 participants were excluded from the analysis for the
following reasons: failure to achieve 65% accuracy on
unambiguous trials during the comprehension test (10
participants in the flexible word order language, see below),
computer error (1 participant), or being a bilingual (1

The Procedure
The procedure builds on the method developed by
Hudson Kam and Newport (2009). Participants were trained
and tested on one of the two languages during three 30-35
minute visits to the lab spread over three consecutive days,
with at most one day between the visits. The same
procedure was used on all three visits. During each session,
participants were presented with a mixture of training and
test blocks that fell into two broad categories: noun training
and sentence training.
Noun Exposure and Tests During noun exposure
participants were presented with pictures of each of the
characters accompanied by their label in the novel language

431

(12 trials total). Participants were instructed to repeat the
names of the characters aloud to help them learn. The initial
noun presentation was followed by a noun comprehension
test where participants were presented with pictures of two
characters and asked to choose the correct match for the
name they heard (12 trials total). Feedback was provided
after each trial. After completing the noun comprehension
test, participants were presented with the noun production
test where they were asked to provide the name of the
character shown on the screen (6 trials). Feedback on
performance was provided after each trial. The three noun
training blocks were repeated immediately upon completion
of the noun production test. On Day 1 noun exposure and
noun production blocks were also presented before the
sentence production test. On Days 2 and 3 participants were
only given the noun production block before the sentence
production test. Noun exposure and comprehension blocks
were also shorter on Days 2 and 3 (6 trials each).

and it was still possible to determine sentence word order,
productions were scored as overall correct but containing a
lexical error. Such productions were included in the
analyses below. Productions containing grammatical errors
were excluded from all analyses. The results presented
below still hold if productions containing lexical errors are
excluded as well.

Results
Accuracy of Acquisition Both languages were acquired
with a high degree of accuracy. On the final day of training
learners of the fixed word order language made less than 1%
lexical mistakes and no grammatical mistakes, while
learners of the flexible word order language made 1.6%
lexical mistakes and 6.2% grammatical mistakes in their
productions. These data suggest that the task was feasible
for our participants.
Word Order Use in Production One way learners of the
flexible word order language can ensure robust
communication is by fixing word order and dropping casemarking. Thus we first analyzed participants’ word order
use in the flexible word order condition, asking whether
there was a tendency to regularize word order. If learners of
the flexible word order language behave just like fixed word
order learners who use SOV in all their productions, there
will be little reason to expect differential case-marker use
between the two language conditions.
Overall, learners of the flexible word order language
maintained word order flexibility: There was no word order
regularization in participants’ productions on any day of
training (Day 1: 49% SOV word order in production, not
significantly different from the 50% input proportion [(χ2
(1)=.15, p=.7, ns]; Day 2: 45% SOV word order in
production, not significantly different from the input [(χ2
(1)=2.66, p=.1, ns]; Day 3: 49% SOV word order in
production, not significantly different from the input [(χ2
(1)=.17, p=.7, ns]).

Sentence Exposure and Tests During the sentence
exposure phase, participants viewed short computergenerated videos and heard their descriptions in the novel
language. Participants were asked to repeat the sentences
out loud to facilitate learning. On all days, exposure
sentences were presented in sets of two training blocks (24
trials each). During the first sentence exposure block on Day
1 participants were allowed to replay the videos and sounds
as many times as they wanted; replay was disabled for all
other exposure blocks throughout the study. Sentence
exposure was followed by a sentence comprehension test
(24 trials total). Participants were shown two videos
involving the same action where the order of the doer and
undergoer was reversed and were asked to choose the video
best matching the sentence they heard. No feedback on
performance was provided during the sentence
comprehension test. After the sentence comprehension test,
participants completed two more sentence exposure blocks
and one more sentence comprehension block. Each
experimental session ended with a sentence production test
(48 trials) where participants were asked to describe a
previously unseen video using the provided verb prompt.
No feedback on performance was provided.

Case-Marker Use in Production We now turn to our main
question: Do learners balance the amount of cues to the
meaning of the sentence, recruiting additional cues in those
cases when existing cues do not provide enough information
to successfully decode the intended meaning?
We used a mixed logit model to predict the use of casemarking in participants’ productions based on language
condition (flexible/fixed word order language) and day of
training (1, 2, 3) as well as the interactions between these
two factors. The model included the maximal random
effects structure justified by the data based on model
comparison. The results reported below hold when the
model with the full random effects structure was used.
There was a significant main effect of language (see Figure
1): Learners of the flexible word order language used
significantly more case-markers in their productions than
the learners of the fixed word order language throughout the
experiment (ß=1.45, z=2.24, p<.05). There was a significant

Scoring
In the comprehension test, participants’ responses were
scored as ‘correct’ if they matched the intended sentence
interpretation. This was based only on case-marked
(unambiguous) trials for both languages. Participants who
failed to achieve 65% accuracy were excluded from all
analyses. The results reported below still hold, however, if
these participants are included as well.
In the production test, we scored the word order used in
the sentence, the presence of case-marking on the object as
well as lexical (using the wrong word for a referent or an
action) and grammatical mistakes (using a word order not
allowed by the grammar or using the case-marker
incorrectly). If the name of only one referent was incorrect

432

1.0
0.8

significantly fewer case-markers in their own productions
compared to the input starting on the first day of training
(Day 1: 50% case-marking in production, significantly
lower than the 67% input proportion [(χ2 (1)=23.51,
p<.001]; Day 2: 45% case-marking in production,
significantly lower than the input [(χ2 (1)=40.6, p<.001];
Day 3: 41% case-marking in production, significantly lower
than the input [(χ2 (1)=61.87, p<.001]).
The behavior of the majority of individual subjects
followed our prediction. Out of 20 participants, 14
participants produced fewer case-markers than the input on
the final day of training; 8 of these did not use case-marking
at all in their own productions; and only 3 participants
produced substantially more case-markers than the input
proportion (see Figure 2).

Word order
fixed
flexible

1.0

Proportion of case-marking

Proportion of object case-marking

interaction between Day 2 of training and language
condition (ß=.46, z=3.4, p<.001) and Day 3 of training and
language condition (ß=.25, z=2.75, p<.01). Simple effects
test shows that learners of the flexible word order language
used significantly more case-markers than the learners of
the fixed word order language on Day 2 (ß=1.65, z=2.5,
p<.05) and Day 3 (ß=1.94, z=2.72, p<.01) of training.
As expected under our hypothesis, then, learners used
significantly more case-marking when they learned a
language where word order was uninformative of
grammatical function assignment (flexible word order
language) as compared to the language where referent-togrammatical-function assignments were reliably identified
by word order (fixed word order language).

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4
0.2

0.4

0.0
1

2
Day of Training

3

0.2
0.0

Figure 1: Case-marker use in production

AC AE BS CR EB EKEScJCJCo JS KK KL LD NG RH RK SJ SS VL WR

Participant

What is driving the observed difference in case-marker
use between the two language conditions? Under our
hypothesis, we expect learners of the fixed word order
language to gradually lose case-marking, producing fewer
case-markers than the input proportion, since case-marking
is a redundant cue to sentence meaning in a language that
does not allow word order variability. Given the design of
our flexible word order language, learners could take
advantage of case-marking to facilitate successful decoding
of the intended meaning in two ways. First, learners could
regularize case-marking in the language overall and use
more case-markers in their own productions than in the
input. Alternatively, learners could condition case-marking
on word order and use significantly more case-markers with
one word order variant than with the other. Both
possibilities will increase successful recovery of the
intended meaning, but the latter will minimize effort at the
same time (since not all sentential objects will need to be
case-marked) and would thus be a more efficient option. In
the following sections, we explored these predictions in
more detail.

Figure 2: Individual preferences in case-marker use in the
fixed word order language on the final day of training. The
dashed line indicates the input proportion of case-marking.
Case-Marker Use in the Flexible Word Order Language
Next we took a closer look at the learning outcomes in the
flexible word order language. Do learners increase
communicative success by favoring robustness but
sacrificing efficiency and regularize case-marking in the
language overall? Or do they favor efficiency to achieve the
same goal, conditioning case-marking on sentence word
order?
Learners of the flexible word order language did not use
case-markers significantly more frequently than in the input
language (Day 1: 55% case-marking in production,
significantly below 67% input proportion [(χ2 (1)=9.5,
p<.01]; Day 2: 72% case-marking in production, not
significantly different from the input [(χ2 (1)=1.78, p=.18,
ns]; Day 3: 71% case-marking in production, not
significantly different from the input [(χ2 (1)=.89, p=.3, ns]).
There was a significant tendency to condition casemarking on sentence word order throughout the experiment
(see Figure 4): Learners overtly marked objects with case
significantly more often if sentence word order was OSV
(ß=1.11, z=17, p<.001). A significantly higher proportion of

Case-Marker Use in the Fixed Word Order Language
Do learners of the fixed word order language deviate from
the input they receive and reduce the amount of casemarking in the newly acquired language? Indeed, they
showed a strong tendency to drop case-marking and used

433

object case-marking in OSV sentences compared to SOV
sentences was observed on every individual day of training
(Day 1: (ß=1.53, z=12.6, p<.001); Day 2 (ß=.9, z=8.6,
p<.001); Day 3 (ß=.91, z=8.23, p<.001)).

additional cue significantly more often in those cases when
the other cue does not provide sufficient information to
successfully parse the sentence.
Importantly, our results parallel synchronic and
diachronic typological data from natural languages. We
presented learners with languages that contained the same
amount of case-marking, but the learning outcomes
consistently differed depending on the amount of word
order flexibility allowed in the input language. While
learners of the flexible word order language retain casemarking in their own productions, as do Russian, Latin and
other free word order languages, learners of the fixed word
order language tend to lose case-marking as they acquire the
new language, mimicking fixed word order languages such
as English and French.
The learning outcomes in our experiment also parallel
diachronic phenomena such as the evolution of English
from Old English to Modern English. Our data, however,
does not speak to whether word order fixing was a result of
the loss of case-marking or whether case-marking became a
redundant cue and was lost after English word order became
fixed for independent reasons. Under our hypothesis, both
processes will yield the same outcome.
We found that learners of the flexible word order
language did not regularize case-marking uniformly across
the two possible word orders. Instead they restructured the
language to make efficient use of case-marking by
conditioning it on sentence word order, using significantly
more case-markers when sentence word order was OSV.
Why do learners preferentially case-mark objects in
sentences with OSV word order and not the other way
around? This behavior could be reflective of a cognitive bias
to mark the atypical, somewhat resembling the crosslinguistically common phenomenon known as ‘word order
freezing’ (Lee, 2001). Many flexible word order languages
(Turkish, Russian, German, Hindi, Japanese, etc.) enforce
default word order for sentences in which case-marking is
uninformative (e.g., in the absence of case-marking or in the
presence of case syncretism) and require direct objects to be
overtly case-marked if sentence word order deviates from
the dominant one. For instance, the Russian example in (1)
with case-syncretism can only be interpreted as SVO,
although Russian generally allows both SVO (dominant)
and OVS orders (non-dominant).

Proportion of case-marking

1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
AB AD BR BVEBeEH EN ER ET EW GS IS JY KMMOMRMWRA SW VB

Participant

Proportion of object case-marking

Figure 3: Individual preferences in case-marker use in the
flexible word order language on the final day of training.
The dashed line indicates the input proportion of casemarking.

1.0

Word order
OSV
SOV

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
1

2
Day of Training

3

Figure 4: Case-marker use by sentence word order in
production (flexible word order condition)
Learning outcomes in each language condition thus
support our hypothesis. As expected, learners of the fixed
word order language tend to gradually drop case-marking as
they acquire the novel language. Learners of the flexible
word order language maintain case-marking in the language
they acquire and make efficient use of it by conditioning
case-marking on sentence word order.

(1)

Mat’
ljubit doch’.
Mother-NOM/ACC loves daughter-NOM/ACC
‘Mother loves daughter’

Even though SOV and OSV are equally likely both in the
input and in participants’ productions in our experiment,
OSV word order is typologically rare and is almost always a
non-default word order cross-linguistically and thus might
attract a higher proportion of case-marking.
The second possibility is that learners prefer to put more
informative cues earlier in the sentence to allow for faster
processing, as has been hypothesized by Hawkins (2004)

Discussion
Our results provide experimental evidence that some of the
typological properties observed cross-linguistically can stem
from learners’ biases towards communicatively efficient
systems. We found that language learners have a bias to
balance the amount of information provided by two cues to
sentence meaning (case and word order) and tend to use an

434

and Nichols (1986). Preliminary support for this hypothesis
comes from Fedzechkina et al. (2012), who found that
learners of a language with object case-marking preferred to
use more case-marking in OSV sentences, whereas learners
of a language with subject case-marking used significantly
more case-marking in SOV sentences. That is, in both cases,
learners preferred case-marking on the sentence-initial
argument, thereby providing the disambiguating cue as early
as possible in the sentence.

elements. In J. Greenberg (Ed.), Universals of
human language (pp. 73-113): MIT Press.
Hawkins, J. A. (2004). Efficiency and Complexity in
Grammar. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hudson Kam, C., & Newport, E. (2009). Getting it right by
getting it wrong: When learners change languages.
Cognitive Psychol, 59(1), 30-66.
Jaeger, T. F. (2010). Redundancy and reduction: Speakers
manage syntactic information density. Cognitive
Psychol, 61, 23-62.
Lee, H. (2001). Markedness and word order freezing. In P.
Sells (Ed.), Formal and empirical issues in
optimality theoretic syntax (pp. 63-128). Stanford:
CSLI.
Lewis, M. (Ed.). (2009). Ethnologue: Languages of the
world (16th edition ed.). Dallas, TX: SIL
International.
Newport, E. (1981). Constraints on learning and their role in
language acquisition: Studies of the acquisition of
American Sign Language. Lang Scie, 10, 147-172.
Newport, E., & Aslin, R. (2004). Learning at a distance I.
Statistical learning of non-adjacent dependencies.
Cognitive Psychol, 48(2), 127-162.
Nichols, J. (1986). Head-marking and dependent-marking
grammar. Language, 56-119.
Piantadosi, S. T., Tily, H., & Gibson, E. (2011). The
communicative function of ambiguity in language.
Cognition, 122, 280-291.
Piantadosi, S. T., Tily, H., & Gibson, E. (2011). Word
lengths are optimized for efficient communication.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA, 108(9), 3526.
Qian, T., & Jaeger, T. F. (2012). Cue Effectiveness in
Communicatively Efficient Discourse Production.
Cognitive Sci, 36, 1312-1336.
Sapir, E. (1921). Language: An introduction to the study of
speech. New York: Harcourt, Brace.
Slobin, D. I. (1973). Cognitive prerequisites for the
development of grammar. First Language
Acquisition: The Essential Readings.
Slobin, D. I. (1977). Language change in childhood and in
history. In J. Macnamara (Ed.), Language Learning
and Thought (pp. 185-214). New York: Acad.
Press.
Zipf, G. K. (1949). Human Behavior and the Principle of
Least Effort. Cambridge, MA: Addison-Wesley.

Conclusions
We used an artificial language learning paradigm to ask
whether language structures are shaped by communicative
biases. We find that the cross-linguistically common
correlation between word order flexibility and the presence
of case-marking can be at least partially explained by
domain-general learning biases stemming from a preference
to balance the amount of information provided by the cues
to sentence meaning.

Acknowledgments
We thank T. Stanley and S. Krishnan for their help with data
collection and data coding; C. Anzalone and G. Smith for
their help with data coding; C. Donatelli, I. Minkina and A.
Wood for their help with video stimuli. This work was
supported in part by NSF grants BCS-0845059 and IIS1150028, as well as an Alfred P. Sloan Fellowship to TFJ,
and by NIH grant DC00167 and HD037082 to ELN.

References
Bates, E., & MacWhinney, B. (1989). Functionalism and the
competition model. The crosslinguistic study of
sentence processing, 3–73.
Blake, B. J. (2001). Case. Cambridge: CUP.
Chomsky, N. (1965). Aspects of the Theory of Syntax (Vol.
119): The MIT press.
Christiansen, M. H. (2000). Using artificial language
learning to study language evolution: Exploring the
emergence of word order universals The Evolution
of Language: 3rd International Conference.
Culbertson, J., Smolensky, P., & Legendre, G. (2012).
Learning biases predict a word order universal.
Cognition, 122, 306-329.
Dunn, M., Greenhill, S. J., Levinson, S. C., & Gray, R. D.
(2011). Evolved structure of language shows
lineage-specific trends in word-order universals.
Nature, 473(7345), 79-82.
Fedzechkina, M., Jaeger, T. F., & Newport, E. (2012).
Language learners restructure their input to
facilitate efficient communication. Proc Natl Acad
Sci USA.
Finley, S., & Badecker, W. (2008). Substantive biases for
vowel harmony languages. Paper presented at the
Proceedings of WCCFL 27.
Greenberg, J. (1963). Some universals of grammar with
particular reference to the order of meaningful

435

