UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Communication and Categorization: New Insights into the Relation Between Speech, Labels
and Concepts for Infants

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/82j4r66c

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Ferguson, Brock
Waxman, Sandra

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Communication and Categorization: New Insights into the Relation
Between Speech, Labels and Concepts for Infants
Brock Ferguson (brock@u.northwestern.edu)
Sandra R. Waxman (s-waxman@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University, 2029 Sheridan Rd.
Evanston, IL 60208 USA

Abstract
Almost two decades of research has demonstrated that labels
facilitate infants’ categorization of novel objects. Some
interpret this as evidence of an early link between infants’
linguistic and conceptual systems. Others suggest that these
effects stem exclusively from lower-level processing
mechanisms in cross-modal perception, and that words
promote categorization only because they are more familiar to
infants than non-linguistic acoustic stimuli and therefore
easier to process. Here we address these discrepant
interpretations using a novel approach. We expose infants to
unfamiliar non-linguistic stimuli (sine-wave tone sequences),
manipulating the exposure conditions. For 6-month-olds, if
the novel acoustic stimuli were embedded within a
communicative episode, they subsequently facilitated
categorization (Experiment 1), but if they were presented in a
non-communicative episode, they had no such effect
(Experiment 2). We propose a developmental model that
takes infants’ burgeoning perceptual and conceptual
capacities into account in identifying how communication and
words are linked to concepts.
Keywords: language development; words;
categorization; auditory overshadowing; infancy

concepts;

Introduction
The nature of word learning has been the focus of a
noteworthy debate in recent years. At stake is the
relationship between words and concepts: Are words merely
associated with objects by infants, as any percept might be
associated with another (e.g., Sloutsky & Fisher, 2012)? Or
might even the youngest word learners appreciate words as
symbols that refer to concepts (e.g., Waxman & Gelman,
2009)? Further, if there is a privileged link between words
and concepts in infancy, how is it established?
Evidence for this latter position, positing an early and
unique link between words and concepts, comes from
numerous studies demonstrating that infants integrate
domain-specific knowledge about words when they map
novel words to objects (Fennell & Waxman, 2010; Namy &
Waxman, 2000; Woodward & Hoyne, 1999), generalize
words to object concepts (Booth & Waxman, 2009; Booth,
Waxman, & Huang, 2005), make inferences about hidden
properties of named objects (Diesendruck & Graham, 2010;
Gelman & Heyman, 1999; Graham, Booth, & Waxman,
2012), and individuate named objects (Dewar & Xu, 2007;
2009).

There is also evidence for a developmental cascade
underlying infants’ establishment of a link between words
and concepts. Initially, infants appear to hold a broad
expectation that words refer to commonalities amongst
objects (Waxman, 2003). With development, they refine this
broad expectation to link particular types of words (e.g.,
nouns, adjectives) to particular types of categories (e.g.,
object categories, property categories) (Booth & Waxman,
2009). This increasingly precise relation between words and
concepts can be observed over the first year in object
categorization tasks. Infants hearing human language
successfully form categories, but other matched acoustic
stimuli (e.g., sine-wave tone sequences) do not (Balaban &
Waxman, 1997; Fulkerson & Haaf, 2003; Fulkerson &
Waxman, 2007; Waxman & Markow, 1995). More recent
evidence reveals that infants as young as 3- and 4-months
(who do not yet segment distinct words from fluent speech)
form object categories in the context of human speech, but
not in the context of sine-wave tones (Ferry, Hespos &
Waxman, 2010). Thus over the first year, infants’ response
to words may be a refinement of a broader and earlier
response to communicative signals.
Some researchers have argued that the influence of
language in these studies reflects cross-modal perceptual
processing alone (Robinson & Sloutsky, 2007; Sloutsky &
Robinson, 2008). Their claims are clear: (1) object
categorization tasks with paired acoustic stimuli recruit
infants’ cross-modal processing abilities, (2) unfamiliar
auditory stimuli impede visual processing through “auditory
overshadowing”, and (3) verbal labels are more familiar to
infants than the acoustic stimuli (e.g., tone sequences) to
which they are typically compared (Sloutsky & Robinson,
2008). On this account, words benefit category formation
only insofar as they are acoustically familiar.
Here we take a novel empirical approach to tease apart
these two accounts. In each experiment, infants participated
in a standard object categorization task. But instead of
pitting human language against unfamiliar sounds, all
infants heard the same unfamiliar sounds: sine-wave tone
sequences. Crucially, we introduced infants to these novel
sounds in a video before they were presented within an
object categorization task. This gave us full control over
infants’ prior exposure to these novel stimuli, which in turn
permits us to ascertain the precise exposure conditions that
enable an auditory stimulus to facilitate visual
categorization. In Experiment 1, we ask whether embedding

2267

tone sequences in a communicative episode will allow them
to subsequently facilitate object categorization. In
Experiment 2, we document that this effect cannot be
accounted for by appealing to familiarity alone.

for pause-length and duration to the labeling phrases used in
previous studies (e.g., Ferry et al., 2010).
In the test phase, infants saw two new images in silence
for 20s. One image was another member of the familiar
category (e.g., another fish), and the other a member of a
novel category (e.g., a dinosaur). The left/right position of
the novel image was counterbalanced.

Experiment 1
We introduced 6- and 12-month-old infants to novel
acoustic stimuli (sine-wave tone sequences), embedding it
in a clearly communicative episode. Next, we presented new
tone sequences, this time within the context of the standard
object categorization task. We asked whether tone
sequences would now (like speech) facilitate categorization.
If infants interpreted the novel tone sequences presented in
the video as communicative, then tones may now promote
categorization in the standard task. However, if infants do
not privilege this novel signal with communicative status, or
if they resist relating it to object categories, they should not
form object categories in the standard task.
We expected the consequences of our manipulation to
differ as a function of infants’ age. At 6 months, we
expected that embedding tones in a rich communicative
episode would be sufficient to facilitate categorization but
that, by 12 months, infants would require more specific
evidence that the signal is referential. This is consistent with
evidence that by 12 months, infants distinguish referential
from non-referential communicative utterances and only
interpret the former as referring to object categories (Fennell
& Waxman, 2010; Hollich, Hirsh-Pasek, & Golinkoff, 2000;
Waxman & Braun, 2005).

Procedure Infants sat on their caregivers’ laps
approximately 110cm from the centre of a screen. Auditory
stimuli were played through two speakers placed 85cm apart
beneath the screen.
Coding Infants’ left-right eye gaze directions were coded
frame-by-frame by trained coders blind to the hypotheses. A
second coder re-coded the videos to assess reliability
(Pearson’s r = .97, p < .0001).
Analyses We analyzed the first 10s of looking to either
EXPOSURE PHASE
Experiment 1

Experiment 2

Sine wave tones and speech
(coordinated with conversation)

Sine wave tones and speech
(uncoupled from video)

Methods
Participants Twenty-four healthy, full-term infants
participated. Participants included twelve 6-month-olds (6
males, M = 5.94 months) and twelve 12-month-olds (6
males, M = 12.08 months). Another 13 infants (seven 6month-olds, six 12-month-olds) were excluded due to
looking for less than 25% of the familiarization or test
phases (8), fussiness (3), or parental interference (2).

FAMILIARIZATION PHASE
(Experiments 1 & 2)

Stimuli The design included three phases: exposure,
familiarization, and test (see Figure 1). In the exposure
phase, infants saw a 2-minute video of two undergraduate
women sitting next to each other engaged in a
communicative exchange. The “beeper” appeared to
produce sine wave tones that had been dubbed over her
mouth movements. The “speaker” responded in infantdirected English. Both interlocutors alternated between
looking and speaking towards each other and the infant.
In the familiarization phase, infants saw 8 images of
members of a single object category (either dinosaurs or fish,
counterbalanced). Each image was presented for 20s with 4s
between images. Images were line-drawn and filled with
unique solid colours. Each image was paired with a single
sine-wave tone sequence, presented at image onset and 10s
post-onset. This sequence (2.2s), which differed in pitch
from the sequences presented in the dialogue, was matched

2268

8 images, each paired with the same sine wave tone sequence

TEST PHASE
(Experiments 1 & 2)

Familiar

Novel

Figure 1: Experimental design of Experiments 1 and 2.
Procedure for Exposure, Familiarization and Test Phases,
with a sample of representative stimuli.

object in the test phase, as in prior research. (An analysis of
the complete test trial yielded the same pattern of results in
both experiments.) For each infant, a novelty preference
score was calculated as the proportion of looking towards
the novel category member. All analyses used arcsin-root
transformed proportions.

Results
As predicted, 6-month-olds (M = .61, SD = .15) had
significantly higher novelty preference scores than 12month-olds (M = .49, SD = .19), t(22) = 1.72, one-tailed p
< .05. Planned comparisons to chance showed a clear
novelty preference (evidence of categorization) for the 6month-olds (t(11) = 2.51, p < .03) but not the 12-month-olds
(t(11) = -.19, n.s.).
There were no age differences in looking towards the
familiarization images (M6-months = .43, SD = .15; M12-months
= .53, SD = .13), t(22) = 1.71, p = .10, and no effects of
familiarized category, novel object side at test,
familiarization looking time, or gender on novelty
preference scores (all p’s > .3). All analyses collapsed
across these factors.

Methods
Participants Twelve healthy, full-term, 6-month-old infants
participated (M = 5.87 months). Another 4 infants were
tested but excluded due to looking for less than 25% of the
familiarization or test phases.

Discussion
When infants were introduced to sine-wave tones during a
brief communicative episode (dialogue phase), tone
sequences then facilitated object categorization (test phase)
for 6-month-olds, but not 12-month-olds.
This age difference is striking. We suggest that at both 6and 12-months, infants flexibly identify the candidate
communicative signals in their environment. At 6 months,
infants hold a broad expectation linking communicative
signals to object categories. But by 12 months, infants
recognize the distinct functions of different communicative
signals (e.g., speech versus gesture; Martin, Onishi, &
Vouloumanos, 2012; and naming an object versus merely
indicating it (e.g., “wow”); Fennell & Werker, 2003; Namy
& Waxman, 2000). Therefore, at 12-months, evidence of
communicative status alone is insufficient: Infants require
more precise evidence that a novel signal is one that refers
to objects and object categories.
But could an appeal to signal familiarity alone account
for these results? There are two hints that it cannot. First, the
particular pattern/pitch of the tones paired with each
category member at test were novel (i.e., not presented
during the dialogue phase). Second, although 6- and 12month-olds’ exposure to tone sequences was identical, only
the 6-month-olds showed evidence of categorization, as we
predicted
However, to further tease apart the two accounts, in
Experiment 2 we pursue this issue with another group of 6month-olds.

Experiment 2
In this experiment, we exposed infants to the very same
sine-wave tone sequences (exposure phase) as in
Experiment 1, but this time uncoupled them from the

communicative context. During the exposure phase, infants
listened to the same auditory signals as in Experiment 1, and
saw a video with the same two women, but this time the
women cooperated in a joint task in silence. Crucially,
infants’ exposure to the tones was held constant across both
experiments, but in Experiment 2, there was no indication
that the tones were part of a communicative interchange. If
6-month-olds’ successful categorization in Experiment 1
reflects nothing more than their familiarity with tone
sequences, then infants in Experiment 2 should also
categorize successfully.

Stimuli The new exposure video showed two women
silently engaged in a cooperative task (mixing ingredients
and pouring them, as if making brownies together). They
smiled to each other and the infant (as in Experiment 1), but
did not communicate verbally. The audio stream included
exactly the same “utterances” (tone sequences, English
speech) as in Experiment 1, but these were randomly
shuffled. (The goal was to remove the prosodic pattern of
turn-taking in the spoken utterances that might lead infants
to infer that the tone sequences were part of a conversation
and therefore communicative). Familiarization and test
stimuli were identical to Experiment 1.
Procedure, Coding & Analyses Identical to Experiment 1.

Results
As predicted, 6-month-olds performed differently here than
in Experiment 1 (t(22) = 2.16, p < .05). In contrast to
Experiment 1, where 6-month-olds averaged a .61 novelty
preference at test, those in Experiment 2 performed at the
chance level (M = .48, t(11) = -0.45, n.s.).
There were no effects of familiarized category, novel
object side at test, familiarization looking time, or gender on
novelty preference scores (all p’s > .4). All analyses
collapsed across these factors.

Discussion
These results reveal that mere familiarity with sine-wave
tone sequences cannot account for their facilitative effect on
object categorization in Experiment 1. Six-month-olds who
received the same exposure to these sequences, uncoupled
from the communicative episode, show no evidence of
categorization.

General Discussion
In these experiments, we introduce a novel approach for
investigating classic questions about the nature of word
learning: Are words perceptual features associated with

2269

objects? Or is there a more nuanced link between words and
concepts? And, if so, how is it established?
Waxman and colleagues (Balaban & Waxman, 1997;
Booth & Waxman, 2003; Fulkerson & Waxman, 2007;
Waxman, 2003; Waxman & Markow, 1995) have long
argued for the latter position, and cite evidence that
providing a consistent name for distinct members of an
object category highlights the commonalities among them
and promotes object categorization. On this account,
language exerts its influence because infants link language
to core conceptual capacities, including object
categorization. In contrast, others have suggested that
language facilitates categorization only insofar as it is a
familiar acoustic stimulus (Robinson & Sloutsky, 2007a;
Sloutsky & Robinson, 2008). On this account, any
adequately familiar stimulus should show facilitative
effects: the facilitative effect of an acoustic signal will vary
as a function of its familiarity.
In Experiment 1, we asked whether an otherwise inert
acoustic stimulus (sine wave tones), introduced within the
context of a communicative episode, might facilitate
categorization. Six-month-olds showed evidence of
categorization, while 12-month-olds did not. In Experiment
2, we asked whether the 6-month-olds’ successful
categorization could be attributed to their mere exposure to
the tone sequences. We provided the same amount of
exposure to the sine wave tones, but uncoupled them from
the
communicative
episode.
The
results
were
straightforward: infants in Experiment 2 revealed no
evidence of categorization in the subsequent task. Stimulus
familiarity alone cannot capture these results.

stimulus than adjectives, and thus interfere less with visual
processing (Sloutsky & Fisher, 2012). However, this
explanation cannot account for the performance of younger
infants (9 to 12 months), whose categorization improves
when both adjectives and nouns are paired with category
exemplars (Waxman & Booth, 2003; Waxman & Markow,
1995). Familiarity alone can neither explain this
developmental change nor the results of the present studies.

Communication, cognition, and “natural pedagogy”

Auditory overshadowing
Auditory overshadowing is a precise claim about low-level
cross-modal processing, and it is relevant to many studies in
infant
cognitive
development
including
object
categorization (Robinson & Sloutsky, 2007a) and
individuation (Robinson & Sloutsky, 2008). The general
processing model invoked is uncontroversial: infants have
limited cognitive resources and any stimulus that exhausts
these resources will have consequences on subsequent
processing.
Thus we do not ask whether auditory overshadowing
could, in principle, influence infants’ learning (about
categories or otherwise), but whether it alone can account
for infants’ clear patterns of behaviour. The results here join
a host of others in demonstrating that in addition to
perceptual underpinnings, there are conceptual and socialcommunicative factors that determine whether a paired
acoustic stimulus can facilitate object categorization.
Consider, for example, infants’ developing knowledge of
grammatical categories and its influence on categorization.
By 14 months, novel nouns highlight object categories, but
adjectives do not (Booth & Waxman, 2009; Waxman &
Booth, 2001). Adopting an auditory overshadowing
interpretation, Sloutsky and colleagues (Robinson &
Sloutsky, 2007a, 2008) argue that nouns are a more familiar

Previous claims about the influence of language on
categorization have focused primarily on the effect of words
presented as labels for object categories (Waxman, 2003).
More recent evidence suggests that, for younger infants,
human speech more generally can facilitate categorization
(Ferry et al., 2010). Three- and 4-month-olds show an
increased ability to categorize in the context of human
speech despite their inability to reliably segment the speech
stream into discrete words (Jusczyk & Aslin, 1995). The
present results go further to suggest that for young infants,
speech may be just one of a number of communicative
signals that facilitate categorization. Infants in the present
studies had no prior exposure to the sine wave tone
sequences we presented, and yet merely introducing them as
a human communicative signal had a powerful effect on
their contribution to infants’ subsequent categorization.
Why might communicative signals link to concepts? One
recent proposal is that ostensive human communication is
“naturally pedagogical” for infants, biasing them to interpret
new information as category-relevant and generalizable
(Csibra & Gergely, 2009; Gergely & Csibra, 2012). A
recent study by Yoon, Johnson, and Csibra (2008)
demonstrated the effect of communicative signals on
cognition in 9-month-olds: in the context of a
communicative gesture (pointing), infants most accurately
encoded the shape of the object. In a non-communicative
(grasping) context, infants most accurately encoded its
location. Another study with 9-month-olds reported object
categorization benefits from eye gaze (Wu, Gopnik,
Richardson, & Kirkham, 2010). There is also evidence that
communicative object labels enhance object recognition by
augmenting core visual processes during encoding (Gliga,
Volein, & Csibra, 2010).
If one posits that the sine wave tone sequences in
Experiment 1 were part of an ostensive communicative
exchange with the infant (see Csibra, 2010, for a discussion
of how infants recognize ostensive signals), the 6-montholds’ results align with the theory of natural pedagogy: the
presence of the communicative signal facilitated the
discovery of category-relevant information.

Tuning the perceptual and conceptual systems
Natural pedagogy cannot, however, explain the full
developmental picture. For example, it cannot account for
the results of the 12-month-olds in Experiment 1. Neither
can it explain why, for example, young infants accept
gestural labels (like words) to refer to object categories but

2270

older hearing infants do not (Namy & Waxman, 1998;
Suanda & Namy, 2012), or why young infants map both
nouns and adjectives to object categories but older infants
are more precise, mapping nouns, and not adjectives, to
object categories (Booth & Waxman, 2009). We therefore
suggest a more detailed developmental account. .
Our account builds on a substantial literature suggesting
that infants begin life with broad perceptual sensitivities in a
variety of social domains (e.g., faces, speech sounds, and
hand gestures) but rapidly tune these to make functionally
relevant distinctions (Grossmann, Missana, Friederici, &
Ghazanfar, 2012; Palmer, Fais, Golinkoff, & Werker, 2012;
Vouloumanos, Hauser, Werker, & Martin, 2010; Werker &
Tees, 1984). In language development, this process of
perceptual tuning is a critical step, for example, in focusing
infants’ attention on the signals that are potentially
communicative (e.g., human speech) and tuning out those
that are not (e.g., non-human primate vocalizations).
We suggest that infants also engage in a process of
referential tuning in which they tease apart the particular
functions of distinct communicative signals. For example,
12-month-olds expect that human speech, but not noncommunicative vocalizations (e.g., coughing) can refer
(Martin et al., 2012). And within human speech, infants
gradually distinguish between distinct types of words (nouns
and adjectives) and map them accordingly to distinct types
of meaning (e.g., to object categories and properties,
respectively) (Waxman & Booth, 2009; Waxman & Gelman,
2009). In this ongoing, constructive process, infants recruit
several knowledge systems (social, linguistic, and
conceptual) to infer the intended reference and meaning of
communicative signals. When a communicative signal is
interpreted as intending to refer to an object category, it can
serve to highlight that category and facilitate learning in
young infants.
One prediction of the present account is that 12-montholds’ object categorization abilities should benefit from a
novel communicative signal if they are given sufficient cues
(i.e., beyond mere communicativeness) that the signal is
meant to refer to an object or object category. We are
currently testing this prediction.
Several other questions remain to be explored. First, this
account posits an early expectation that communicative
signals in general will relate to meaning in the world. This is
consistent with natural pedagogy (Csibra & Gergely, 2009).
However, whether this expectation is innate or acquired
prior to 6 months is presently unclear. Second, other studies
that explore the influence of social cues in learning do not
find a consistent benefit for social cues over non-social cues
(e.g., Moore, Angelopoulos, Bennett, 1999; Theuring,
Gredebäck, & Hauf, 2007). Unlike the present experiments,
these studies pit social cues against non-social cues in tasks
with distractor and target events. Thus their failure to show
benefits from social cues may reflect younger infants’
limited capacities for inhibitory control and attention
deployment. Future research in complex environments can
examine this hypothesis and the constraints of learning in

communicative contexts. Finally, it is important to explore
the range of conditions under which infants interpret a novel
stimulus as communicative.
The present research integrates social, conceptual, and
linguistic development for a rich description of infants’
early communicative development. We suggest with others
(e.g., Noles & Gelman, 2012; Waxman & Gelman, 2009)
that words are not merely perceptual features that associate
with objects, but are communicative symbols, and the
products of early perceptual and conceptual tuning.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by a Social Sciences and
Humanities Research Council of Canada Doctoral
Fellowship to B.F., and a National Science Foundation grant
to S.R.W. (BCS-0950376).

References
Balaban, M. T., & Waxman, S. R. (1997). Do words
facilitate object categorization in 9-month-old infants?
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 64(1), 3–26.
Booth, A., & Waxman, S. R. (2003). Mapping words to the
world in infancy: Infants' expectations for count nouns
and adjectives. Journal of Cognition and Development,
4(3), 357–381.
Booth, A., & Waxman, S. R. (2009). A horse of a different
color: Specifying with precision infants' mappings of
novel nouns and adjectives. Child Development, 80(1),
15–22.
Booth, A., Waxman, S. R., & Huang, Y. T. (2005).
Conceptual information permeates word learning in
infancy. Developmental Psychology, 41(3), 491-505.
Csibra, G. (2010). Recognizing communicative intentions in
infancy. Mind & Language, 25(2), 141–168.
Csibra, G., & Gergely, G. (2009). Natural pedagogy. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 13(4), 148–153.
Dewar, K., & Xu, F. (2007). Do 9-month-old infants expect
distinct words to refer to kinds? Developmental
Psychology, 43(5), 1227–1238.
Dewar, K., & Xu, F. (2009). Do early nouns refer to kinds
or distinct shapes? Evidence from 10-month-old infants.
Psychological Science, 20(2), 252–257.
Diesendruck, G., & Graham, S. A. (2010). Kind matters: A
reply to Samuelson and Perone. Cognitive Development,
25, 149–153.
Fennell, C. T., & Waxman, S. R. (2010). What paradox?
Referential cues allow for infant use of phonetic detail in
word learning. Child Development, 81(5), 1376–1383.
Fennell, C. T., & Werker, J. F. (2003). Early word learners'
ability to access phonetic detail in well-known words.
Language and Speech, 46(2-3), 245–264.
Ferry, A. L., Hespos, S. J., & Waxman, S. R. (2010).
Categorization in 3- and 4-month-old infants: an
advantage of words over tones. Child Development, 81(2),
472–479.
Fulkerson, A. L., & Haaf, R. A. (2003). The influence of
labels, non-labeling sounds, and source of auditory input

2271

on 9- and 15-month-olds' object categorization. Infancy,
4(3), 349–369.
Fulkerson, A. L., & Waxman, S. R. (2007). Words (but not
tones) facilitate object categorization: Evidence from 6and 12-month-olds. Cognition, 105(1), 218–228.
Gelman, S. A., & Heyman, G. D. (1999). Carrot-eaters and
creature-believers: The effects of lexicalization on
children's
inferences
about
social
categories.
Psychological Science, 10(6), 489–493.
Gergely, G., & Csibra, G. (2012). Natural pedagogy. In M.
R. Banaji & S. A. Gelman (Eds.), Navigating the Social
World: What Infants, Children, and Other Species Can
Teach Us. Oxford University Press.
Gliga, T., Volein, A., & Csibra, G. (2010). Verbal labels
modulate perceptual object processing in 1-year-old
children. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 22(12),
2781–2789.
Graham, S. A., Booth, A., & Waxman, S. R. (2012). Words
are not merely features: Only consistently applied nouns
guide 4-year-olds' inferences about object categories.
Language Learning and Development, 8(2), 136–145.
Grossmann, T., Missana, M., Friederici, A. D., & Ghazanfar,
A. A. (2012). Neural correlates of perceptual narrowing in
cross-species face-voice matching. Developmental
Science, 15(6), 830–839.
Hollich, G., Hirsh-Pasek, K., & Golinkoff, R. M. (2000).
Breaking the language barrier: An emergentist coalition
model for the origins of word learning. Monographs of
the Society for Research in Child Development.
Jusczyk, Peter W, & Aslin, R. N. (1995). Infants′ detection
of the sound patterns of words in fluent speech. Cognitive
Psychology, 29(1), 1–23.
Martin, A., Onishi, K. H., & Vouloumanos, A. (2012).
Understanding the abstract role of speech in
communication at 12 months. Cognition, 123(1), 50–60.
Moore, C., Angelopoulos, M., & Bennett, P. (1999). Word
learning in the context of referential and salience cues.
Developmental Psychology, 35(1), 60.
Namy, L. L., & Waxman, S. R. (1998). Words and gestures:
Infants' interpretations of different forms of symbolic
reference. Child Development, 69(2), 295–308.
Namy, L. L., & Waxman, S. R. (2000). Naming and
exclaiming: Infants' sensitivity to naming contexts.
Journal of Cognition and Development, 1(4), 405–428.
Noles, N. S., & Gelman, S. A. (2012). Effects of categorical
labels on similarity judgments: A critical analysis of
similarity-based approaches. Developmental Psychology,
48(3), 890–896.
Palmer, S. B., Fais, L., Golinkoff, R. M., & Werker, J. F.
(2012). Perceptual narrowing of linguistic sign occurs in
the 1st year of life. Child Development, 83(2), 543–553.
Robinson, C. W., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2007). Visual
processing speed: Effects of auditory input on visual
processing. Developmental Science, 10(6), 734–740.
Robinson, C. W., & Sloutsky, V. M. (2008). Effects of
auditory input in individuation tasks. Developmental
Science, 11(6), 869–881.

Sloutsky, V. M., & Fisher, A. V. (2012). Linguistic labels:
Conceptual markers or object features? Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 111(1), 65–86.
Sloutsky, V., & Robinson, C. (2008). The role of words and
sounds in infants' visual processing: From overshadowing
to attentional tuning. Cognitive Science, 32(2), 342–365.
Suanda, S. H., & Namy, L. L. (2012). Young word learners’
interpretations of words and symbolic gestures within the
context of ambiguous reference. Child Development,
84(1), 143-153.
Theuring, C., Gredebäck, G., & Hauf, P. (2007). Object
processing during a joint gaze following task. European
Journal of Developmental Psychology, 4(1), 65–79.
Vouloumanos, A., Hauser, M. D., Werker, J. F., & Martin,
A. (2010). The tuning of human neonates’ preference for
speech. Child Development, 81(2), 517–527.
Waxman, S. R. (2003). Links between object categorization
and naming: Origins and emergence in human infants. In
D. H. Rakison & L. M. Oakes (Eds.), Early Category and
Concept Development: Making Sense of the Blooming,
Buzzing Confusion. New York: Oxford University Press.
Waxman, S. R., & Booth, A. (2001). Seeing pink elephants:
Fourteen-month-olds' interpretations of novel nouns and
adjectives. Cognitive Psychology, 43(3), 217–242.
Waxman, S. R., & Booth, A. (2003). The origins and
evolution of links between word learning and conceptual
organization: New evidence from 11-month-olds.
Developmental Science, 6(2), 128–135.
Waxman, S. R., & Braun, I. (2005). Consistent (but not
variable) names as invitations to form object categories:
New evidence from 12-month-old infants. Cognition, 95,
B59–B68.
Waxman, S. R., & Gelman, S. A. (2009). Early wordlearning entails reference, not merely associations. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 13(6), 258–263.
Waxman, S. R., & Markow, D. B. (1995). Words as
invitations to form categories: Evidence from 12- to 13month-old infants. Cognitive Psychology, 29(3), 257–302.
Werker, J. F., & Tees, R. (1984). Cross-language speech
perception: Evidence for perceptual reorganization during
the first year of life. Infant Behavior and Development,
7(1), 49–63.
Woodward, A. L., & Hoyne, K. L. (1999). Infants' learning
about words and sounds in relation to objects. Child
Development, 70(1), 65–77.
Wu, R., Gopnik, A., Richardson, D. C., & Kirkham, N. Z.
(2010). Social cues support learning about objects from
statistics in infancy. In S. Ohlsson & R. Catrambone
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1228-1233). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Yoon, J. M. D., Johnson, M. H., & Csibra, G. (2008).
Communication-induced memory biases in preverbal
infants. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
105(36), 13690–13695.

2272

