UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Computational and Cognitive Aspects of Narrative

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/14q7k2jk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Finlayson, Mark
Fisseni, Bernhard
Gentner, Dedre
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Computational and Cognitive Aspects of Narratives
Mark A. Finlayson1 , Bernhard Fisseni2,8 , Dedre Gentner3 , Richard Gerrig4 , Benedikt Löwe5,8 ,
Jeffrey Loewenstein6 , Inderjeet Mani7 , Jan Christoph Meister8 , R. Michael Young9
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology (markaf@mit.edu)
Universität Duisburg-Essen (bernhard.fisseni@uni-due.de)
3 Northwestern University (gentner@northwestern.edu)
4 Stony Brook University (richard.gerrig@stonybrook.edu)
5 Universiteit van Amsterdam (b.loewe@uva.nl)
6 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (jloew@illinois.edu)
7 Children’s Organization of Southeast Asia (inderjeet.mani@gmail.com)
Universität Hamburg ({bernhard.fisseni,benedikt.loewe,jan-c-meister}@uni-hamburg.de)
9 North Carolina State University (young@csc.ncsu.edu)
2

8

Abstract

wide range of fields including cognitive science, psychology,
computer science, artificial intelligence, sociology, anthropology, linguistics, logic, and philosophy. To foster and encourage this community, the Computational Models of Narrative1 (CMN) workshop series was founded in 2009. The
series was so titled because we believe that a true science of
narrative must adhere to the principle espoused by Herbert
Simon in his book The Sciences of the Artificial: that without
computational modeling the science of a complex human phenomenon such as narrative will never be successful, and that
computational models are the proper lingua franca of such a
diverse, inter-disciplinary community.
Because the workshop series is relatively new, and the research community is still growing and developing, it was
decided to embed the early workshops in the conferences
of different intersecting communities, in order to promote
cross-fertilization and a more diverse membership. In 2010,
the second workshop was hosted by the Association for the
Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) as one of its
Fall Symposia. In 2012, the third workshop was hosted by
the Language Resources and Evaluation Conference (LREC),
which is a part of the computational linguistics community.
In 2013, the Fourth Workshop on Computational Models
of Narrative will be held in Hamburg, Germany, directly after
CogSci 2013 as a satellite event. The symposium described
here is the on-site event associated with the workshop, and is
intended to highlight the intersection between cognitive science and the topics covered in the workshop.

Narrative, a distinctly cognitive phenomenon, has long been
of interest to the disciplines that comprise cognitive science.
The past decade has seen a resurgence of work using computational methods to understand, manipulate, generate, and
leverage narratives. This symposium, which is held in association with the Fourth International Workshop on Computational Models of Narrative (CMN’13), a satellite event of
CogSci 2013, will focus on aspects of the scientific and computational understanding of narrative that intersect with cognitive science. The speakers and moderators are drawn from
diverse fields including cognitive psychology, artificial intelligence, cognitive science, computational linguistics, and the
humanities, and they will focus on a variety of topics including: narrative and its role in analogy, education, and persuasion; challenges in the representation of syntax, discourse, and
semantics of narrative; psychological and neuropsychological
aspects of narrative; and the growing integration of computational models of narrative in humanities research.
Keywords: Computational Models of Narrative

Narratives are ubiquitous in human experience. We use them
to communicate, convince, explain, and entertain. As far as
we know, every society in the world has narratives, which
suggests they are rooted in our psychology and serve an important cognitive function. It is becoming increasingly clear
that, to truly understand and explain human intelligence, beliefs, and behaviors, we will have to understand why narrative
is universal and explain the function it serves.
Cognitive science has long recognized the importance of
narrative as an activity that engages diverse and important
cognitive facilities, as well as a phenomenon that is worthy
of study in its own right. After a long period of dormancy,
the past decade has seen a resurgence of interest in the formal
understanding and computational modeling of of narrative, as
well as a more recent boom in cognitive, psychological, and
neuroscientific studies relating to narrative. This symposium
is an attempt to catalyze the interaction between the research
community working on computation-compatible approaches
to narrative with cognitive science community proper.

Speakers
The symposium will be moderated jointly by the workshop
co-chairs, Mark Finlayson and Benedikt Löwe. Our speakers and moderators span multiple fields, highlighting the
inter-disciplinarity of this symposium. The moderators bring
expertise in artificial intelligence, computer science, philosophy, and mathematical logic. Among the speakers, Jeffrey
Loewenstein and Dedre Gentner represent cognitive science
proper, and they will discuss applying work on analogy to
advance our understanding of business practice and psychol-

The Computational Models of Narrative
Workshop Series
The research community in question aims to advance the scientific understanding of narrative through progress across a

1 http://narrative.csail.mit.edu/

81

Mani: Naturalness and Computability in
Computational Narrative Representations

ogy, a field where narratives (cases) are of great importance.
Richard Gerrig is a cognitive psychologist who has written
extensively on human subject experiments regarding people’s
experiences on reading narrative. Inderjeet Mani is a computational linguist by training, and an expert in corpus annotation and linguistic representations for capturing narratives.
Jan Christoph Meister is a humanist who seeks to apply
the many advances in computational modeling of narrative to
scholarly advances of relevance to his field. Michael Young
is a computer scientist who pursues the scientific understanding of narrative to advance the state of the art in digital games.

Humans have an astonishing ability to infer different facets of
narrative structure from a description of events. These facets
include the representation of the temporal order of events as
well as the motivation behind the actions and reactions of
agents based on their goals and beliefs. Computational representations of narrative time and plot can be assessed in terms
of their naturalness for humans to infer as well as their computability. Such an assessment suggests a number of psychological investigations that could help provide constraints on
formal aspects of these representations.

Each subsection that follows outlines the topic which will
be discussed by each speaker. The symposium is structured
to leave time for a general discussion that includes the moderators and the audience.

Meister: Statistical vs. Intelligent Modelling of
Human Narrative Processing
The former Google CEO’s Eric Schmidt’s dictum “In God
we trust—all others bring data” epitomizes the neo-positivist
underpinning of ‘big data’ approaches to complex phenomena. Search engine algorithms aim at representing such phenomena in terms of mathematical and statistical phenomena
which by-pass human intelligence. Meister’s talk will aim to
reinterpret what looks like a purely methodological decision
as an ethically problematic choice that is based on a reductionist concept of intelligent behavior. Meister will use examples from narrative to illustrate and emphasize his points.

Loewenstein & Gentner: Narrative Knowledge and
“Repetition-Break” Plot Structures
Narratives convey causal, temporal, and other kinds of relational knowledge, the sort of knowledge that comprises expertise. Comparing narratives is one of the quickest and most
powerful ways to develop expert knowledge, as indicated by
the analogy literature. Analogy provides a means for identifying commonalities, and in particular, structural commonalities, and so provides a basis for revealing narrative structure.
A further insight is the pairing of repetition with contrast to
form a plot structure that serves as a recipe for surprise. Folktales (e.g., the three billy goats gruff), jokes (e.g., three guys
walk into a bar. . . ), advertisements (e.g., MasterCard’s priceless campaign), and other types of narratives frequently make
use of these “repetition-break” plots. The repetition in the
narrative structure leads audiences to draw comparisons, perhaps learning something, and forming expectations that more
similar items will follow. The break or contrast in the narrative structure surprises audiences by deviating from their expectations. Narratives with repetition-break plots are prevalent, often well-liked, often socially-selected both by popular
attention and expert judges, and capable of influencing audiences towards adopting the narrative’s views. This is just
one example of the potential for narrative structure to yield
significant returns.

Young: Cognition as the Decider: Comprehension
and the Next Steps to Plan-Based Narrative
Generation
A range of methods for the automatic construction of narratives have been developed in the last 10 years, many of them
based on automatic planning methods drawn from AI. While
these techniques have benefited from extensions to the standard knowledge representations that target interesting aspects
of narrative structure, they often leave out the role of narrative at the discourse level. These models speak to only part
of the functional properties of narrative as a result. In this
talk, Young will point to these limitations in his own work
and describe new models being developed that focus on narrative as a means to prompt comprehension on the part of the
reader/viewer/player. These new models attempt to produce
narrative story and discourse in text, video and video games
that create experiences for their users rather than focus solely
on the creation of appropriate narrative structural elements.

Gerrig: Readers’ Participation in Narrative
Experiences

Acknowledgments
This symposium is supported by the John Templeton Foundation (JTF) via the project What makes stories similar? (Grant
No. 20565).

Gerrig will outline a participatory perspective on readers’
experiences of narratives. He proposes that readers encode
types of mental contents (called participatory responses) that
fall beyond the ordinary scope of computational models of
narrative. Readers, for example, encode responses toward
characters actions and preferences for particular outcomes.
Those participatory responses vary from reader to reader and
structure their individual experiences toward narratives.

82

