UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Complex Mental Time Travel

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/718723m7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Author
Stocker, Kurt

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Complex Mental Time Travel
Kurt Stocker (kurt.stocker@psychologie.uzh.ch)
Department of Psychology, Binzmühlestrasse 14/22
8050 Zürich, Switzerland
Abstract
This article argues that investigating the conceptual structure
underlying the use of the pluperfect and the future perfect reveals a new complex type of nested dual mental time travel:
mental time travel into posteriority embedded into mental
time travel into “anteriority in the past” (underlying the pluperfect) versus mental time travel into posteriority embedded
into mental time travel into “anteriority in the future” (underlying the future perfect). Additionally this article also offers
the following novel notions for temporal cognition: a mental
time line where past/anteriority and future/posteriority have
become nondispersible; dual temporal direct viewings at the
present moment; and looking into the future from the past (rather than the more typical looking into the future from the
present moment). Implications for cognitive modeling are
discussed.
Keywords: mental time travel; tense system; Talmyan concept structuring; Talmyan perspective point (PP); mental time
line; models

Introduction
Until recently mental time travel has mainly been characterized as mentally construing oneself as looking forward or
backward in time from the present moment (e.g., Addis et
al., 2009; Schacter & Addis, 2007; Tulving, 1972, 2002).
By synthesizing findings from cognitive psychology and
cognitive linguistics and by additionally applying cognitivelinguistic methodology, Stocker (2012a) then introduced the
idea––based on a sketch by Talmy (2000, pp. 86–87)––that
in addition to this basic type of mental time travel there
might also be more complex types of mental time travel. For
instance: a person may mentally construe herself as looking
back from the present moment to a particular point in time
in the past, but may additionally also conceptualize herself
as mentally looking forward from this past point to a “later
time” that is still in the past. Such examples have been referred to as examples of nested dual mental time travel
(“mental time travel embedded within mental time travel”)
(Stocker, 2012a, p. 408). Investigating the conceptual structure underlying the linguistic use of before/after sentences
that additionally are set in the past or future tense, Stocker
(2012a) has thus far basically identified one form of nested
dual mental time travel: mental time travel into anteriority
or posteriority (underlying before/after) embedded in mental
time travel into the past or future (underlying past/future
tense). It is important to distinguish anteriority/posteriority
(“earlierness/laterness”) from past/future since the former is
more generic and does not depend upon the present moment
as a reference point (e.g., Núñez & Sweetser, 2006, p. 404).
For instance: One event may have occurred later in time

than another event (say my first day at school versus my
birth), but both events have occurred in the past.
This article investigates how this anteriority/posteriority
versus past/future distinction can help us to reveal the temporal-conceptual structure underlying the pluperfect and
future perfect. The theoretical strategy I adopt is the same as
used in Stocker (2012a): using language as an entree to a
conceptual level that seems deeper than language itself
(Pinker, 2007; Talmy, 2000). This strategy is supported by
recent findings that many conceptualizations observed in
relation to our use of language also exist in mental representations that are more basic than language itself (e.g., Boroditsky, 2000; Casasanto & Boroditsky, 2008; McGlone &
Harding, 1998; Núñez, Motz, & Teuscher, 2006). In the
present investigation language can assist us to identify complex forms of mental time travel––complex forms of how
we can mentally project through time.
The basic theoretical framework used is Talmyan concept
structuring (Talmy, 2000), with the further refinement for
temporal cognition by Stocker (2012a). There are many
other basic theoretical frameworks that one could adopt
when investigating the conceptual structure underlying the
tense system or the conceptual structure of mental time in
general––for example: formal accounts of tense (e.g., Comrie, 1985; Declerck, 1986; Jespersen, 1924; Reichenbach,
1947), conceptual semantics (Jackendoff, 1987, pp. 398–
402; cf. also Pinker 1989, pp. 205–206), formal semantics
(e.g., Bennett & Partee, 1978; Montague, 1973; Pendlebury,
1992), or temporal (tense) logic (e.g., Allen, 1984; Kowalski & Sergot, 1986; Lichtenstein & Pnueli, 2000; Prior
1967). While the current investigation is basically set in a
Talmyan framework, it also, as we will see, benefits greatly
from the formal-tense analysis of Comrie (1985).
One of the main motivations for choosing Talmyan concept structuring as a basic theoretical framework for the
present investigation is that it offers a ready means to incorporate mental temporal perspective (Stocker, 2012a; Talmy,
2000, pp. 68–76+86–87). In the other above-mentioned
approaches (formal tense, conceptual semantics, formal
semantics, temporal logic), mental perspective is usually not
considered or is only mentioned marginally, without incorporating it into the formal descriptive apparatus (e.g., in
Jackendoff, 1987, p. 399). In contrast, in Talmyan concept
structuring, perspective is an integral part of the overall
theoretical descriptive system.
The present investigation will reveal several basic novel
notions in relation to temporal cognition (as summarized in
the discussion section). It will also be discussed if the current account of complex mental time travel could be used to
refine modeling approaches which have incorporated mental

3468

temporal perspective into their models (Brown, Neath, &
Chater, 2007).

Undertaking an extensive cross-linguistic investigation, the
linguist Bernard Comrie characterizes the temporalrelational structure of the pluperfect (I had already eaten
when …) in the following way:
“The meaning of the pluperfect is that there is a reference
point in the past, and that the situation in question is located
prior to that reference point, i.e. the pluperfect can be
thought of as 'past in the past'” (1985, p. 65).
As we will see later on in this section, a still more refined
characterization of the meaning of the pluperfect––rather
than saying that it signifies “past in the past”––is to characterize it as “anteriority in the past.” To start investigating the
temporal-conceptual structure underlying the pluperfect, we
use one of Comrie's own examples for illustration (1985,
p. 66):

As has just been demonstrated, (2) can correctly predict
all temporal-relational structure of the pluperfect. The question we now turn to is: How could mental temporal perspective (Stocker, 2012a; Talmy, 2000, pp. 72–76+86–87) be
added to this basic account of the temporal-relational structure of the pluperfect? One theoretical solution to this question, the one to be adopted in this article, is to integrate
Comrie's findings into the theoretical framework of Talmyan concept structuring––because Talmyan concept structuring can describe temporal relations and temporal perspective
in one coherent theoretical framework (Stocker, 2012a;
Talmy, 2000). As a starting point, let us reformulate Comrie's pluperfect formula in Talmyan terms. In Talmyan concept structuring spatial or temporal relations are captured
with the notions of Figure (F) and Ground (G) (Talmy,
2000). In temporal Figure/Ground, one event serves as temporal reference point––G––in relation to which the temporal
location of the other event––F––is defined. Thus (2) can be
captured in the following way in Talmyan terms:

(1) John had already left when Mary emerged from the
cupboard.

(3) pluperfect: F1 before G1; F2 (G1) before G2 (G2 = present
moment)

Mental time travel underlying the pluperfect

According to Comrie the temporal relations underlying
the use of the pluperfect can be formalized in the following
terms (1985, p. 125):
(2) pluperfect: E before R before S
E stands for the event which is to be located in time. In
Comrie's example, the event of John's leaving is the event to
be located prior to Mary's emerging from the cupboard.
Hence the event in the pluperfect clause (John's leaving)
is E. R stands for the temporal reference point in relation to
which E is defined. Thus Comrie's formula correctly predicts that E (John's leaving) occurs before R (Mary's emerging from the cupboard). S stands for moment of speech (i.e.,
the present moment). Comrie's formula again correctly
predicts that R (Mary's emerging from the cupboard) occurs
before S (the present moment). 1
1
Comrie’s (1985) ERS notation for the pluperfect represents a
further development––and major departure––from the famous
tense formulations of Reichenbach (1947, pp. 287–298; cf. also
Jespersen, 1924, pp. 262–264). Comrie’s formulations are mainly
taken over because it is Comrie’s analysis that allows one to characterize the pluperfect as involving “anteriority in the past” and the
future perfect as involving “anteriority in the future”—which has
major implications when one adds mental perspective to the pluperfect and future perfect constructions, as shall be demonstrated
in this article. Taken over from Prior in the analysis in this paper,
is the argumentation that there is no need to––as Reichenbach
does––“make such a sharp distinction between the point or points
of reference and the point of speech” (1967, p. 13). This is so, as
also pointed out by Prior, because the present moment (“the point
of speech”) itself can function as a reference point. This argumentation of Prior is taken over by allowing the present moment to
function as a Ground (see below in this article). “Ground” is the
Talmyan technical term for what one might also refer to as a “ref-

We again exemplify the formalized temporal relationship
with (1). Now it is F1which stands for the event which is to
be located in time (John's leaving). G1 stands for the temporal reference point (Mary's emerging from the cupboard)
in relation to which F1 is defined. Thus (3) correctly predicts
that F1 (John's leaving) occurs before G1 (Mary's emerging
from the cupboard). However, G1 also functions as another
F, since the temporal position of G1 is also defined in relation to the present moment. Hence, one is in a position to
postulate that G1 (Mary's emerging from the cupboard) also
functions as an F (a second F in the overall temporal complex: F2) whose temporal position is defined in relation to
the present moment (which functions as a second G: G2).
Thus, (3) also correctly predicts that F2 (Mary's emerging
from the cupboard) occurs before G2 (the present moment).
Thus far, Comrie's pluperfect (2) and the Talmyan pluperfect (3) formalization are equipotent in terms of theoretical
explanatory power: they both correctly predict the complex
temporal relations that underlie our use of the pluperfect.
But having it phrased in Talmyan terms allows us now to
add mental temporal perspective (Stocker, 2012a; Talmy,
2000, pp. 72–76+86–87) to the temporal-relational description. Both Talmy and Stocker have cognitive-linguistically
argued in detail that a complex temporal sentence (a temporal sentence with a main and a subordinate clause) underlies a temporal direct viewing of the F event in relation to
the content of the main clause and a temporal indirect (prospective or retrospective) viewing of the G event in relation
to the content in the subordinate clause. Taking over this
analysis (see Stocker, 2012a; Talmy, 2000, pp. 72–76+86–
87 for argumentation), we derive at the (perspective-

erence point.” For a different theoretical approach to the notion of
a temporal perspective point see Declerck (1986, pp. 320–321).

3469

including) temporal-conceptual structure underlying our use
of the pluperfect as it is depicted in Fig. 1.

Figure 1: Mental time travel into posteriority (to G1) embedded into mental time travel into anteriority in the past (to
the F1-co-located PP), a nested dual form of mental time
travel underlying the pluperfect. This temporal-conceptual
structure (and the cognition thereof) is in many respects
identical to the one proposed by Stocker (2012a) for before/past-tense constructions (p. 408). However, the crucial
difference is that in before/past-tense constructions there are
two distinct temporal Reference Frames (anteriority/posteriority and past/future RFs) whereas in constructions
containing a pluperfect these two RFs have fused into one
larger, more complex anteriority-past/posteriority-future RF.
When taking a look at this figure, the temporal structure
(and perspectival cognition thereof) might at first glance
seem identical to the conceptual structure underlying our
use of a temporal complex sentence containing before and
the past tense (a before/past-tense construction like I
shopped at the store before I went home; cf. with Fig. 9 in
Stocker, 2012a, p. 408). This is also not surprising: Comrie's
characterization of the pluperfect clause as the “past in the
past” could also be paraphrased as “past event before another past event.” We should also note that Comrie's pluperfect
characterization of “the past in the past” just serves him as a
first rough characterization of the pluperfect (he uses the
phrase to introduce the pluperfect). Crucially, Comrie notes
that in relation to (2):
“Since the relation before is transitive (i.e. if X is before
Y and Y is before Z, then necessarily X is before Z), one
can deduce E before S from the representation of the pluperfect, but this is not part of the formal representation of the
pluperfect; the importance of this observation will become
clear when we discuss the future perfect” (1985, p. 125).
In other words, what Comrie is saying is that the pluperfect is basically speaking not “a past in the past” (i.e., this
can only be deduced), but anteriority in the past (since he
says that S––the present moment––is in no way directly
related to E). All that is inherent in (2)––or (3)––is that the
event in the pluperfect must occur earlier than its reference
event in the past. As with Comrie, we examine the importance of this observation when we examine the temporalconceptual structure underlying the future perfect (see next
section). The observation that the pluperfect signifies “anteriority in the past” also leads us to the basic temporalconceptual difference between before/past-tense construc-

tions and complex sentences containing a pluperfect in the
main clause and the simple past in the subordinate clause. In
a before/past-tense construction, one can identify two distinct temporal Reference Frames (RFs): an anteriority/posteriority RF (underlying before) that is embedded in a
past/future RF (underlying past/future-tense; as examined in
Stocker, 2012a, where the term RF is also technically defined). But in a pluperfect construction, one cannot disentangle the anteriority/posteriority RF and the past/future RF.
The observation that the pluperfect stands for “anteriority in
the past” means that the temporal conceptual structure underlying the pluperfect has fused these two RFs into a larger
complex whole: the pluperfect carries components of both
these RFs within it. Trying to tease them apart would result
in the dissolving of the sine qua non of the pluperfect: that it
refers to an event that must occur earlier than another event
in the past. It is in this sense that a pluperfect construction is
more complex than a before/past-tense construction: underlying a pluperfect structure is a more complex RF (a mental
time line) where components of two separate RF-systems
have formed a new complex whole.
Additionally cognitive-linguistic analysis of complex
temporal sentences in relation to Talmyan mental perspective points (PPs) suggests that F and G are cognized as
points (punctual events) on the mental time line and they are
mentally cognized from a distal PP (as detailed in Stocker
2012a; Talmy 2000, pp. 61–62). A distal PP means mentally
zooming out as much from an event as to collapse the entire
duration of an event to a single temporal point. The self
needs to zoom out this much in order to be able to cognize
two events––that is the relationship between the two events
—from one perspective point. Note also that the observation
that the pluperfect indicates that self travels back from the
present moment to a point in time prior to another past event
(to F1) means that the reference point in the past (G1) can
only be located in a prospective (later) direction when
viewed from the perspective of F1. Thus the self at the point
in the past that is prior to another event in the past must
mentally travel forward in order to establish the posterior
reference point (in order to establish G1). That the self travels from temporal F co-location to G (to establish a reference point at the temporal G point) has been examined in
detail for before/after temporal constructions (Stocker,
2012a).
Stocker (2012a) also argues in detail (by providing cognitive-linguistic evidence) that the schematic geometric representations, as for instance shown in Fig. 1, are not merely a
didactic aid that allows us to illustrate the underlying cognitive-temporal structure. Rather it is proposed that such geometry is actually construed in our mind when we conceptualize time. For instance: the depicted time line is proposed
to be an actual, mentally construed spatial structure in our
mind that allows for mental time travel––for instance in
relation to the pluperfect by projecting one's mental gaze
along this mentally construed line once in a retrospective
direction (to “anteriority in the past”) and once in a prospective direction (to the reference point in the past). The pro-

3470

posal that the “mental time line” is mentally construed when
we engage in mental time travel is also supported by a
growing number of recent experimental behavioral findings.
The mental time line is for instance frequently conceptualized in relation to the cognizer's body along the sagittal
(back to front) or transversal (left to right) axis
(e.g., Hartmann & Mast, 2012; Miles, Nind, & Macrae,
2010; Ulrich & Maienborn, 2010).

Mental time travel underlying the future perfect
Drawing––as in the pluperfect––extensively on crosslinguistic data, Comrie concludes that the temporalconceptual structure underlying the future perfect (I will
have eaten when …) differs to the one underlying the pluperfect in only one way: the reference point (G1 in the
Talmyan framework) is set in the future rather than in the
past (Comrie 1985, p. 69–74). Accordingly, Comrie
(p. 126) formalizes the temporal-relational structure underlying the pluperfect in the following way (cf. with (2)):
(4) future perfect: E before R after S
Reformulation in Talmyan concept structuring (cf. with
(3)); this will again enable us to integrate PP into the temporal cognition:

being that it must be prior to the reference point in the future, the sine qua non of the future perfect” (1985, p. 71).
This leads to three kinds of temporal relations that can
underlie our use of the perfect: future perfect with future
interpretation, future perfect with present interpretation, and
future perfect with past interpretation (Comrie, 1985, p. 70).
It is in this context where the anteriority/posteriority versus
past/future distinction becomes highly relevant: whereas the
structure underlying the pluperfect (by deduction) can be
characterized as a “past in the past” (but is more precisely
“anteriority in the past”; cf. previous section), this is no
longer true for the structure underlying the future perfect.
As the analysis of Comrie demonstrates, the temporal relations underlying the future perfect could not (also not by
deduction) be characterized as “past in the future” (since
this would only correctly characterize the future perfect with
past interpretation). The only characterization that can capture the sine qua non of the future perfect is “anteriority in
the future”––that is, a reference point (G1) in the future in
relation to which an earlier event (F1) is defined, an event
that can be located in the future, present, or past.
If we now add––as we did with the temporal-conceptual
structure underlying the pluperfect––mental temporal perspective (Stocker, 2012a; Talmy, 2000, pp. 72–76+86–87),
then these three possible interpretations of the future perfect
naturally lead to three different kinds (subtypes) of nested
dual mental time travel, as illustrated in Figs. 2–4.

(5) future perfect: F1 before G1; F2 (G1) after G2 (G2 = present moment)
Both formulations––(4) and (5)––encode a remarkable
finding of Comrie about the pluperfect (a finding that holds
true cross-linguistically): that all that the future perfect indicates is that there must be a reference point (G1) in the future––but while the event referred to (F1) most typically also
occurs in the future, it can also occur in the present or even
in the past. Comrie:
“Let us start with the example John will have finished his
manuscript by tomorrow. Let us suppose moreover that I do
not know whether or not John has already finished his manuscript (or at least do not wish to reveal this knowledge), but
I know (and am prepared to divulge) that he will have finished it by tomorrow – say, because he made a promise to
this effect several days ago, and is judged by me to be reliable. Then there are three sets of circumstances in which I
can felicitously and truthfully utter this statement. One set
of circumstances is where John finishes his manuscript
between the moment of my uttering this sentence and the
reference point 'tomorrow'. The second is where John is in
fact finishing his manuscript at this very moment, but I am
unaware (or wish to give the impression that I am unaware)
of this fact. The third is where John has already finished his
manuscript, but I am unaware (or wish to appear unaware)
of the fact. Thus the time reference of John's finishing his
manuscript is left open as to whether it is future, present, or
past relative to the present moment, the only stipulation

Figure 2: Mental time travel into posteriority (to G1) embedded into mental time travel into anteriority in the future
(to the F1 co-located PP), where the anterior event is also set
in the future––a nested dual form of mental time travel underlying the future perfect with future interpretation.
The temporal-conceptual structure and cognition underlying the future perfect with future interpretation (Fig. 2) is
largely identical to complex before-sentences that would
additionally be marked as occurring in the future (cf. Stocker, 2012a). However, the vital difference is again––as in
before-past-tense constructions (cf. previous section)––that
in a before-relation where both events are set in the future
there are two distinct temporal Reference Frames (anteriority/posteriority and past/future RFs) whereas in a construction containing a future perfect these two RFs have fused to
one larger, more complex anteriority/past-posteriority/future
RF where the two RFs can no longer be disentangled.

3471

Figure 3: Mental time travel into posteriority (to G1) embedded in “mental time travel” into anteriority in the future
(to the F1 co-located PP), where the anterior event is set at
the present moment, a nested dual form of mental time travel underlying the future perfect with present interpretation.
The novel finding in the temporal-conceptual structure
and cognition underlying the future perfect with present
interpretation (Fig. 3) is that computational logic requires us
to place the self twice at the present moment: the self must
be located at the present moment in order to look out at the
embedded self that is a distal distance removed from the
time line (cf. previous diagrams); the second (embedded)
self a distal distance away from the time line (but still colocated with the present moment) needs to look at the present moment on the time line so that F1 can be cognized in a
temporally direct way (cf. also previous diagrams). More
technically speaking, the novel proposal is the existence of a
dual form of temporal direct viewing, where both viewings
are located at or co-located at the present moment. Note also
that “mental time travel” into anteriority in the future is not
really mental time “travel” in the present-interpretation
case––since the anterior point happens to be at the present
moment, the self at the present moment must cognize an
embedded self a distal distance away from the timeline (but
since this all happens at the present moment, the self does
not really “travel” anywhere, at least not in a “forward/backward in time” sense).
The major novel observation in the temporal-conceptual
structure and cognition underlying the future perfect with
past interpretation (Fig. 4) is a looking forward from a past
point (from the PP that is co-located with F1) to a future
point (to G1)––that is, a prospective projection through
mental time that starts off in the past and extends (passing
by the present moment as it were) right into the future.

Figure 4: Mental time travel into posteriority (to G1) embedded in mental time travel into anteriority in the future (to
the F1 co-located PP), where the anterior event is set in the
past––a nested dual form of mental time travel underlying
the future perfect with past interpretation.

Discussion
The current investigation has––in addition to the findings of
Stocker (2012a)––identified one more complex form of
mental time travel: mental travel into posteriority embedded
into mental time travel into “anteriority in the past” (underlying the pluperfect) versus mental time travel into posteriority embedded into mental time travel into “anteriority in
the future” (underlying the future perfect). Additional novel
notions include: a mental time line where past/anteriority
and future/posteriority have become nondispersible; dual
temporal direct viewings at the present moment; and looking into the future from the past (rather than the more typical looking into the future from the present moment). The
last two of these novel notions have only been possible to
identify because the current investigation uses a basic theoretical approach (Talmyan concept structuring for time:
Stocker, 2012a; Talmy, 2000) that inherently incorporates
temporal mental perspective into the explanatory framework.
One advantage for cognitive science in general that comes
out of the current work (and of Stocker 2012a, 2012b) is
that it offers a systematic and detailed explanatory framework how mental perspective can be included in a theory of
temporal cognition. The relevance of this can for instance be
illustrated in relation to cognitive models of memory retrieval. Brown et al. (2007) have introduced a retrieval model they call SIMPLE (scale independent memory, perception, and learning):
„ … memory traces can be seen as located and individuated at least partly in terms of their position along a temporal
continuum receding from the present into the past. This time
line is logarithmically compressed, such that recent locations are more easily discriminable from one another than
are more temporally distant locations“ (p. 541).
As in SIMPLE, the current investigation has also identified a self who is looking back from the present moment
along a mental time line to multiple temporal points (locations) in the past. Furthermore, the current investigation (see
also Stocker, 2012a; Tulving, 1972, 2002) suggests that the

3472

self at the present moment also mentally cognizes an additional (remembered) self in the past itself (in Figs. 1–4 this
is always the self at the F1-co-located PP, a distal distance
away from the time line). In the current framework, it is this
remembered embedded self that looks out at the actual past
events. In addition, Stocker (2012b) has reviewed findings
that suggest how this embedded distal self in the past can
take on an embodied (field) or disembodied (observer) mental perspective. Future research could address the question,
whether it might be fruitful for temporal-perspectiveincluding models (like SIMPLE) to incorporate this „additional self“ in the past. This then would allow such models
to investigate if this embedded self (i) cognizes the memory
items in the past in a temporally direct or temporally indirect (prospective or retrospective) way and (ii) if it cognizes
the items in an embodied (field) or disembodied (observer)
perspective. Such refinements are likely to be relevant for a
recall model. For instance: In field (embodied) memories
one is known to retrieve richer accounts of affective reactions, physical sensations, and psychological states whereas
in observer (disembodied) memories one is known to retrieve richer accounts of the external environment, such as
where things were located in the remembered surroundings
(e.g, McIsaac and Eich, 2002).

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the Cogito Foundation,
Wollerau, Switzerland (R-135/12).

References
Addis, D. R., Pan, L., Vu, M. A., Laiser N., & Schacter, D.
L. (2009). Constructive episodic simulation of the future
and the past: Distinct subsystems of a core brain network
mediate imagining and remembering. Neuropsychologia,
47, 2222–2238.
Allen, J. F. (1984). Towards a general theory of action and
time. Artificial intelligence , 23, 123–154.
Bennett, M. & Partee, B. H. (1978). Toward the logic of
tense and aspect in English. Indiana University Linguistics Club.
Boroditsky L. (2000). Metaphoric structuring: Understanding time through spatial metaphors. Cognition, 75, 1–28.
Brown, G. D., Neath, I., & Chater, N. (2007). A temporal
ratio model of memory. Psychological Review, 114, 539–
576.
Casasanto, D., & Boroditsky, L. (2008). Time in the mind:
Using space to think about time. Cognition, 106, 579–
593.
Comrie, B. (1985). Tense. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Declerck, R. (1986). From Reichenbach (1947) to Comrie
(1985) and beyond: Towards a theory of tense. Lingua,
70, 305–364.
Hartmann, M. & Mast, F. W. (2012) Moving along the
mental time line influences the processing of future related words. Consciousness and Cognition, 21, 1558–1562.

Jackendoff, R. (1987). The status of thematic relations in
linguistic theory. Linguistic Inquiry, 18, 369–411.
Jespersen, O. (1924) The philosophy of grammar. London:
Allen & Unwin.
Kowalski, R. & Sergot, M. (1986). A logic-based calculus
of events. New Generation Computing , 4, 67–94.
Lichtenstein, O. & Pneuli, A. (2000). Propositional temporal
logics: Decidability and completeness. Logic Journal of
IGPL, 8, 55–85.
McIsaac, H. K. & Eich, E. (2002). Vantage point in episodic
memory. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9, 146–150.
McGlone, M.S. & Harding, J. L. (1998). Back (or forward?)
to the future: The role of perspective in temporal language
comprehension. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 24, 1211–1223.
Miles, L., Nind, L., & Macrae, C. (2010). Moving through
time. Psychological Science, 21, 222–223.
Montague, R. (1973). The proper treatment of quantification
in ordinary English. In J. Hintikka, J. Moravcsik,
& P. Suppes (Eds), Approaches to natural language.
Dordrecht: Reidel.
Núñez, R. E., Motz, B. A., & Teuscher, U. (2006). Time
after time: The psychological reality of the ego- and timereference-point distinction in metaphorical construals of
time. Metaphor and Symbol, 21, 133–146.
Núñez, R. E. & Sweetser, E. (2006). With the future behind
them: Convergent evidence from Aymara language and
gesture in the crosslinguistic comparison of spatial construals of time. Cognitive Science, 30, 401–450.
Pendlebury, M. (1992). Elementary formal semantics for
English tense and aspect. Philosophical Papers, 21, 215–
241.
Pinker, S. (1989). Learnability and cognition: The acquisition of argument structure. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Pinker, S. (2007). The stuff of thought: Language as a window into human nature. New York: Viking.
Prior, A. N. (1967). Past, present and future. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Reichenbach, H. (1947). Elements of symbolic logic. New
York: Collier-Macmillan,.
Schacter, D. L. & Addis, D. R. (2007). Constructive
memory: The ghosts of past and future. Nature, 445, 27.
Stocker, K. (2012a). The time machine in our mind. Cognitive Science, 36, 385–420.
Stocker, K. (2012b). Toward an embodimentdisembodiment taxonomy. Cognitive Processing, 13,
S347–S350.
Talmy, L. (2000). Toward a cognitive semantics. Vol. 1:
Concept structuring systems. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Tulving, E. (1972). Episodic and semantic memory. In
E. Tulving & W. Donaldson (Eds.), Organziation of
memory. New York: Academic.
Tulving, E. (2002). Episodic memory: From mind to brain.
Annual Review of Psychology, 53, 1–25.
Ulrich, R. & Maienborn, C. (2010). Left–right coding of
past and future in language: The mental timeline during
sentence processing. Cognition, 117, 126–138.

3473

