UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Comparative Evidence For Associative Learning In Task Switching

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0cn2f8dg

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Meier, Christina
Lea, Stephen E.G.
Forrest, Charlotte L.D.
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Comparative Evidence For Associative Learning In Task Switching
Christina Meier (CM374@exeter.ac.uk)

Stephen E. G. Lea (S.E.G.Lea@exeter.ac.uk)

Charlotte L. D. Forrest (CLF206@exeter.ac.uk)

Katharina Angerer (KA288@exeter.ac.uk)

Ian P. L. McLaren (I.P.L.McLaren@exeter.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Washington Singer Laboratories
Exeter, EX4 4QG, UK
Abstract
Humans can perform several different tasks on the same set of
stimuli in rapid alternation. Each task, signaled by a distinct
task cue, may require the classification of stimuli using a
different stimulus attribute. However, such "task switching"
performance comes at a cost, as expressed by weaker
performance when switching rather than repeating tasks. This
cost is often claimed to be the consequence of a mental
reorientation away from the previous task and towards the
new task, requiring executive control of behavior.
Alternatively, task switching could simply be based on the
retrieval of different cue-stimulus-response associations. In
this
experiment,
pigeons
learned
go-left/go-right
discriminations between grating patterns according to either
their spatial frequency or their orientation, depending on the
color of the pattern (the task cue). When humans solved the
same tasks on the basis of verbalizable rules, they responded
more slowly and made more errors on trials where they had to
switch between tasks than when repeating the same task.
Pigeons did not show this "switch cost"; but like humans,
their performance was significantly worse when the response
(left or right) to a given stimulus varied between tasks than
when it stayed the same (the “congruency effect”). Larger
effects of both switch costs and congruency were observed in
humans learning the tasks by trial and error. We discuss the
potential driving factors behind these very different patterns
of performance for both humans and pigeons.
Keywords: executive control; associative learning; task
switching; humans; pigeons; comparative cognition.

Introduction
Humans are able to perform two or more different tasks on
the same stimulus material when cued to do so (called “task
switching”). Typically, each task requires the classification
of a set of stimuli according to a different stimulus attribute.
The task that is to be performed in a given trial is indicated
by a specific task cue (for example, subjects might be asked
to judge a grating pattern by its spatial frequency when the
color yellow is presented, or to classify the same stimulus
according to whether it is vertically or horizontally
orientated when the color red appears).
However, it is still a matter of debate which cognitive
mechanisms underlie human task-switching ability. Humans
may classify the stimuli they see based on rules, and a
common phenomenon of task switching, namely longer
reaction times and higher error rates after switching tasks
compared to repeating the same task (“switch costs”), has
been assumed to reflect the executive control processes

associated with this rule use. For example, humans might
sort a series of stimuli based on their orientation while
ignoring other available stimulus dimensions such as spatial
frequency. In this context, switching from one task to the
next involves executive control when identifying the current
task, retrieving its specific stimulus-response rules into one's
working memory (while deleting the rules of the previous
task) and adjusting one's response reaction to the new
requirements: in short, a mental disengagement from the
previous task and preparation for the currently relevant task,
known as "task-set reconfiguration" (Vandierendonck,
Liefooghe & Verbruggen, 2010). Switch costs are thought
to reflect the need for such reconfiguration in switch trials
but not in repeat trials, for which the task-set is already
available (Monsell, 2003).
But, if we believe that humans have multiple processes
available that support learning (McLaren, Green &
Mackintosh, 1994), task-switching phenomena might be the
result of associative learning mechanisms, i.e., the retrieval
of cue-stimulus-response associations (Logan & Bundesen,
2003). Learning to respond correctly in a task-switching
paradigm could be accomplished by associating the overall
appearance of a stimulus with a certain response (Lea &
Wills, 2008). Each stimulus could be categorized by using
its combined dimensions and comparing its similarity to a
stimulus to which the correct response is known.
A task-switching phenomenon often observed in addition
to switch costs, the effects of stimulus congruency (Monsell,
Yeung & Azuma, 2000), might indeed be better explained
by associative learning processes than task-set
reconfiguration. As each task makes use of the same set of
multidimensional stimuli, stimulus values on individual
dimensions can be defined as either congruent or
incongruent in relation to the correct response towards them.
If a stimulus is congruent, it always requires the same
response regardless of the current task; learning to
discriminate between different congruent stimuli thus takes
the form of a component discrimination, in which the
correct response depends on a single element of a
multidimensional stimulus. However, when an incongruent
stimulus is shown, the correct response varies depending on
the current task in the manner of a biconditional
discrimination. Given that there is good evidence that such
discriminations are difficult to learn (Harris & Livesey,
2008), it is no surprise that on trials in which a congruent
stimulus is shown, reaction time and error rate are distinctly

1020

lower compared to trials with an incongruent stimulus, and
humans can exhibit large congruency effects (Monsell,
Yeung & Azuma, 2000). Experiments intended to elicit an
associative approach to task switching in humans, either by
only providing cue-stimulus-response contingencies instead
of full task instructions or by forcing participants to learn
how to respond by trial and error, have yielded very large
congruency effects and switch costs that were considerably
smaller than the effects of congruency (Forrest, Elchlepp,
Monsell & McLaren, 2012).
Humans can communicate the extent to which they refer
to certain rules when reacting to a stimulus. It is therefore
potentially possible to identify a group of participants who
learned the responses based on rules about the stimulus
dimensions and those who did not, and compare their
performance to that of animals, who might not have the
same cognitive mechanisms available.
Stoet and Snyder (2003) were the first to explicitly
investigate task-switching effects in nonhuman animals.
Their two rhesus macaques behaved very similarly to
Forrest et al.'s (2012) humans who were presumed to be
learning associatively: while their performance produced a
large congruency effect, switch costs were rather small, and
in fact absent in one animal. Stoet and Snyder (2003)
acknowledged that monkeys might lack at least one of the
cognitive control mechanisms necessary to solve taskswitching paradigms in the typical human way, but they did
not doubt that their subjects used some form of executive
control. However, the possibility remains that both humans
and nonhuman animals might solve a task-switching
paradigm associatively.
If humans who claim to be unaware of any rules
underlying a task-switching paradigm employ an approach
similar to that in animals assumedly solving the task by
purely associative processes, such as the pigeon
(Mackintosh, 1988), their performance would be expected to
resemble that of those animals. For this purpose, pigeons
might make a more suitable comparison than primates; they
can also be tested in larger numbers than monkeys, so more
reliable results should be obtained.
To design a paradigm suitable for use with both humans
and animals, instead of relying on language-based stimuli or
cues, we used varying values of the visual dimensions of
color, orientation and spatial frequency to indicate a correct
response. Additionally, we used trial-and-error training on
cues and stimuli that resembled the conditioning procedures
usually employed in animal testing. To investigate whether
human performance under these conditions can be compared
to that based entirely on associative-learning processes, we
trained humans and pigeons on the same paradigm.

Method
Subjects
Twenty-four Psychology undergraduate students, in
exchange for course credit, and eight pigeons (Columbia
livia) participated in this experiment. Pigeons were kept in

an indoor aviary (2 x 1 x 2.5m) that housed 15 pigeons at
the time of the experiment. They were maintained at or
above 80% of their free-feeding weight. Both humans and
pigeons were naïve to the testing stimuli, though pigeons
had previously been trained to peck at a white observing key
presented in the center of a black touch-sensitive display,
followed by a peck at a red, blue, green or yellow colored
circle appearing in the same position, and finally, to peck at
a white reward key randomly presented either to the left or
to the right of the display.

Apparatus
All experiments were carried out inside the Washington
Singer Laboratories at the University of Exeter. Pigeons
were tested in one of eight identical 71 x 50.5 x 43.5cm
operant chambers. Each pigeon was always tested in the
same chamber. One of the long walls of the chamber was
fitted with a 31 x 23.5cm (15") touch monitor (Model
1547L 1024x768pxl TFT monitor, CarrollTouch infrared
detector, ELO Touchsystems Inc.) mounted 12cm above the
grid floor of the chamber. Two 2.8 Watt white houselights
were mounted to either side above the screen; below the
screen, mounted 4cm above the chamber floor and directly
below each house light, two 6x5cm apertures gave access to
grain hoppers when solenoids were activated. The food
hoppers were illuminated by a 2.8 Watt light when activated
and contained a 2:1 mixture of hemp seed and conditioner.
Also mounted below the screen between the two food
hoppers, a 50 Ohm loudspeaker played white noise into the
box as well as indicating effective pecks to target areas with
an immediate beep. The interior of the box was monitored
by a video camera attached to the short wall of the chamber
opposite the chamber door. Contingencies were controlled
and data collected using a PC computer running the Whisker
system (Cardinal & Aitken, 2010) with client programs
written in Visual Basic 6.0. Humans were tested in a small
experimental room on an iMac. The program was written in
MatLab R2008b® using the Psychtoolbox (Kleiner,
Brainard & Pelli, 2007) add-on and run using
MatLab2011b®.

Procedure
For pigeons, each trial began with the presentation of an
observing key (100 pixels in diameter) presented in the
center of a black display. Following two pecks at the
observing key, it was replaced by one of four task cues, a
color-filled circle of 200 pixels in diameter, in the display
center. Each of the two tasks was associated with two
distinct cues: these were blue or yellow for task A, and red
or green for task B. For humans, a trial started immediately
with the presentation of the cue; that is, no observing key
was presented. Pigeons had to peck the task cue twice, after
which the task stimulus appeared, superimposed on the cue,
making both the cue and the stimulus visible
simultaneously. Humans were asked to mouse-click once on
the cue, upon which the stimulus appeared in the same way
as for pigeons.

1021

Stimuli, made up as circular Gaussian patches of 200
pixels in diameter, consisted of one of four sinusoidal
grating patterns, differing from another in two dimensions:
spatial frequency - either low (2 cycles per 100 pixels
(c/100px) for pigeons and 3 c/100px for humans) or high
(12 c/100px for pigeons and 10 c/100px for humans) - and
line orientation - either horizontal or vertical. All
combinations of cue color, spatial frequency and orientation
were used, resulting in 16 visually distinct images.
The correct response towards a stimulus depended on the
task. For example, for some participants, task A required
responding to the spatial frequency of the grating pattern,
e.g., if a stimulus, regardless of the orientation of the
pattern, had a low spatial frequency, the correct response
towards this stimulus was to choose the left reward location,
while stimuli with a high spatial frequency afforded
choosing the right reward location. Conversely, in task B,
stimuli would have to be classified according to the
orientation of the grating pattern, regardless of its spatial
frequency. That is, if a stimulus showed a horizontal pattern,
it required a response to the left reward location, while a
vertical pattern indicated a response to the right location as
the correct one. Although blue and yellow were always
assigned to task A, the stimulus attributes (spatial frequency
or orientation) that were important for classification in task
A and the reward location that was associated with any cuestimulus combination were counterbalanced across pigeons
and across humans. As each stimulus always contained both
spatial frequency and orientation information, some stimuli
always required the same response, e.g., a horizontal pattern
of low spatial frequency might always require a left
response regardless of the current task. In addition to these
congruent stimuli, responses to incongruent ones depended
on the task at hand, for example, a horizontal stimulus with
a high spatial frequency pattern might require a response to
the left reward location on the orientation task but a
response to the right location if the spatial frequency was to
be judged.
For pigeons, pecking twice at the composite stimulus in
the display center resulted in it being deleted from the center
and simultaneously reappearing 200 pixels to the left and to
the right of the display center as response keys. Pigeons
made a final response by choosing the correct reward
location (left or right) by pecking at the stimulus presented
on that side. The two response keys were effective between
3 and 6 seconds after the onset of their presentation, after
which a single peck at the correct key resulted in the
activation of the corresponding food magazine for 2.5
seconds. During training only, if a pigeon developed a
position bias, i.e., showed a strong tendency to peck one of
the two response keys, responses to the more attended side
were made ineffective for one to two (or more if necessary)
seconds longer than to the less attended side. The release of
the food magazine ended a trial. The inter-trial-interval to
the next presentation of the observing key lasted between 15
and 30 seconds. Human participants were asked to mouseclick on the stimulus in the center of the screen, which led to

the appearance of two square, white response keys to the left
and right side of the stimulus; the stimulus also remained on
display. Participants responded to the stimulus by clicking
on the response key that was associated with the present
cue-stimulus combination. If the correct response key was
chosen, the stimulus and response keys disappeared from
the screen and the word "Correct" appeared in white letters
next to a golden star for two seconds before the next trial
began. If the wrong response key was clicked, the entire
display was replaced by the phrase "WRONG!" in white
letters. Participants were asked to respond as quickly as
possible while making as few mistakes as possible.
Training Both pigeons and human participants received
training on each task separately before attempting the taskswitching paradigm. The order in which the tasks were
learned was counterbalanced across individuals of each
species.
Pigeons received daily training sessions of 3 blocks of 24
trials each, showing each possible combination of the two
cues of the task to be trained and the different variations of
spatial frequency and orientation three times per block. The
first block included a 25th trial (a repeat of the first trial of
the session), as that first trial was not included in analyses,
resulting in 73 trials per day in total. The order of cuestimuli combinations was randomized within blocks.
Discrimination of the stimuli was considered successful if
the pigeon responded correctly on at least 80% of trials
within a daily training session, in at least three consecutive
sessions. Pigeons thus received a minimum of 3 sessions, or
219 trials, on a task before starting training on the other
task. The number of sessions on each task was gradually
reduced until pigeons were able to switch between tasks
from one day to the next and still perform at or above 80%
correct responses in each session. For humans, training on
each separate task was carried out in four blocks of trials. A
block was considered successful if subjects reached the
criterion of 80% or more correct responses in the previous
trials that included each stimulus at least twice. Thus, the
criterion was based on at least eight consecutive trials, two
for each of the four different combinations of spatial
frequency and orientation. The first training block of a task
contained at least 32 trials, then, the second task was trained
in at least 32 trials. After this, the first task was repeated for
a minimum of another 16 trials until criterion was reached;
finally, the second task was repeated for at least 16 trials
until the participant reached criterion in this fourth and final
training block.
Test Once each task was trained separately to success
criterion, subjects entered the task-switching part of the
experiment, in which task A and task B trials were
intermingled. The task sequence was partially randomized
to produce a switch trial in one third of the trials; for nonswitch trials, the two task cues alternated so that the same
cue was never shown for two trials in a row. Pigeons
received 20 sessions of 73 trials each, or 1460 trials in total;
in each block, the four combinations of spatial frequency

1022

and orientation were presented three times per task. Humans
completed 24 blocks of 25 trials, a total of 600 trials, in the
same manner as described above, with each of the
combinations occurring twice on a task-repeat trial and once
on a task-switch trial per two blocks. After completion of
the task-switching procedure, we determined, via a
questionnaire, which approach they used to solve the
experiment and assessed their ability to describe the rules
that defined a correct response. If a participant was able to
correctly identify the contingencies between a task cue and
certain stimulus characteristics, he or she was considered to
have understood and successfully applied the underlying
rule. If participants could not explain any relationship
between stimuli, cues and the correct response, this was
taken as an indication that they had not used task rules.

Results
The only basis for comparing the two species was accuracy
(errors) when choosing a response key, as it was not
possible to obtain an accurate estimation of response
latencies for pigeons, although we did record each subject's
latency to peck/click on a response key. Restricting pigeons'
time to respond would have required differential
reinforcement of short response latencies, which could
potentially have impaired learning of the cue-stimulusresponse contingencies. Thus, all results reported are for
error rates when making a response. We ran four of the
birds on ten more sessions with a strongly reduced inter-trial
interval after they had completed the main study to assess
whether allowing for unrestricted response times potentially
decreased any effects, and this yielded similar results to
those reported below. Nevertheless, the possibility remains
that the particular timing requirements of the task we used
may play an important role in producing our results.
For the human data, we calculated participants' error rate
when choosing a response key as a percentage for each pair
of consecutive blocks, i.e., for 48 trials (the first trial of each
block was excluded from analysis, since it was neither a
switch nor a repeat trial), resulting in 12 block pairs per
participant. Pigeons' performance was calculated for each of
the 20 sessions, excluding the first trial of each session.
The different training methods we employed for humans
and pigeons resulted in substantially lower error rates for

pigeons. However, while it was necessary to train pigeons to
produce error rates below 20% throughout, we were
reluctant to give more training to humans as it would have
increased the chances of humans inferring the task rules. As
it was, nine of the 24 human participants were able to
verbalize the rules for both tasks at the end of the
experiment. A further eight reported having discovered one
of the two rules or having made up their own solving
strategies. Because of the ambiguity as to what mechanisms
these participants relied on to solve the tasks, we did not
include their data in any further analyses. The remaining
seven participants stated that they were not aware of any
relationships between the stimuli and the correct response,
and it is these participants that most naturally allow
comparison with performance by the pigeons on this task.
To investigate the extent to which both humans and
pigeons were influenced by switch costs or congruency
effects, we conducted a 3-way repeated measure ANOVA
using Switch/Repeat Trials, Stimulus Congruency and
Block Pair Sequence/Session as within-subject factors.
Analyses were carried out separately for humans, according
to the number of rules humans could name (No Rule and 2
Rules) and for pigeons. F and p values for the effects
mentioned below are reported in Table 1. All results were
subjected to Huynh-Feldt correction.
Humans received an average of 137 trials before entering
the task-switching stage; pigeons entered the test phase after
an average of 109 training sessions. Since the pigeons had
received substantially longer training, we conducted all
analyses on the the first half of the sessions as well as on the
full data set, to rule out potential floor effects. Results were
the same for both data sets as the pigeons did not
significantly improve their performance over time;
accordingly, the results reported are from the full data set of
20 sessions.
Performance of humans was influenced by whether they
were able to verbalize the discrimination rules or not; error
rates were significantly lower for people who were able to
verbalize both tasks (2 Rules; M=12.1%, SD=2.0) than if
No Rule (M=36.1%, SD=2.3) had been inferred (F(1, 14)=
62.20, p<.001). Pigeons' error rates were low (M=9.1%,
SD=3.7), due to the amount of they received.

Table 1: Overall F and p values for Switch/Repeat Trials, Stimulus Congruency, Block Pair Sequence/Sessions, and
significant interactions between factors for humans depending on the number of rules they named and for pigeons. P values
below .05 are marked in bold.
Factor
Block Pairs/Sessions
Switch/Repeat
Stimulus Congruency

Both Rules (N=9)
F (df)
p
8.92 (11, 88)
<.001
57.29 (1, 8)
<.001
68.06 (1, 8)
<.001

No Rules (N=7)
F (df)
p
0.59 (11, 66)
.720
18.83 (1, 6)
.005
19.10 (1,6)
.005

Pigeons (N=8)
F (df)
p
1.04 (19, 133)
.413
0.13 (1, 7)
.731
71.03 (1, 7)
<.001

Session * Switch
Session * Congruency
Switch * Congruency

2.98 (11, 88)
3.68 (11, 88)
14.18 (1, 8)

0.38 (11, 66)
1.42 (11, 66)
10.69 (1, 6)

0.62 (19, 133)
1.37 (19, 133)
0.55 (1, 7)

.002
.002
.005

1023

.574
.222
.017

.885
.155
.484

Task Repeat
Task Switch
Total

25%
10%
-5%

Pigeon

No Rule

Congruent
Incongruent
Total

40%

Error Rate

Error Rate

40%

25%
10%
-5%

2 Rules

Figure 1: Stimulus congruency effects (difference in error
rates between incongruent and congruent stimuli) in trials in
which the task repeats and those in which it switches from
the previous trial, and across all trials ('Total').

Pigeon

No Rule

2 Rules

Figure 2: Switch cost (difference in error rates between task
switch trials and task repeat trials) for congruent and
incongruent stimuli, and overall ('Total').

The factor of Stimulus Congruency strongly influenced
performance for all groups; human participants and pigeons
made more errors when faced with incongruent stimuli than
when dealing with congruent ones (Figure 1, 'Total').
Similarly, there was a highly significant effect of the
factor Switch/Repeat for humans regardless of the number
of rules verbalized: they performed less well on switch
trials, which required executing the opposite task to the one
on the previous trial, than on repeat trials (Figure 2, 'Total').
However, while the effect was present in both human
groups, pigeons demonstrated a noticeable lack of switch
costs (Figure 2, 'Total').
All human participants showed significantly higher switch
costs on trials with incongruent stimuli than on those trials
in which the stimulus was congruent, i.e. there was a
significant interaction between the two factors for all three
human groups (Figure 2).
The sequence of Block Pairs (or Sessions for pigeons)
was reliable for 2-Rules users only, implying that these
participants learned to make fewer mistakes as the
experiment carried on, while No-Rule users and pigeons
maintained their initial level of performance throughout. For
those participants who were able to verbalize the two rules,
both the effects of Switch/Repeat trials and Stimulus
Congruency declined over the course of the experiment, i.e.,
this group experienced interaction effects of Block Pairs
with the two other main factors.
Although not relevant for the species comparisons, it can be
noted that, in their reaction times, human showed a similar
pattern to what has previously been observed in humans
using different learning approaches (Forrest et al., 2012);
that is, those who inferred both rules suffered from switch
costs much more (M=149.70ms) than from congruency
effects (M=94.78ms), whereas humans who did not use any
rules were largely affected by congruency effects
(M=50.34ms) but barely showed any costs in switching
between tasks (M=0.58ms).

Discussion
Forrest et al. (2012) showed that humans in the cuestimulus-response (no rule) condition of their task-switching
experiment expressed reduced switch costs and larger
congruency effects relative to a Tasks group that were told
both of the applicable rules at the start of the experiment.
They offer this as a "signature" of associatively-based
performance on this type of task. We are not in a position to
make a direct comparison with their study, as we did not run
an equivalent of their Tasks group. Our 2-Rules participants
are perhaps an approximation to this group, but had to
induce the rules, and were not instructed to apply them.
However, these participants demonstrated significant switch
costs and exhibited a congruency effect, similar to the
effects usually found when humans are informed of the task
rules before engaging in a task-switching paradigm. This
group was the only one that significantly decreased their
error rates over the course of the experiment; it can be
assumed that this was due to participants "figuring out the
tasks": during the first few blocks, performance essentially
matched that of No-Rule users, but then it dramatically
improved to a level similar to the performance of the
pigeons, i.e., at error rates of 10% or less. A third of
participants were unable to report any task rules; these
might instead be classified as employing an associative
approach to task switching. In addition to a generally high
error rate, solving the tasks without any knowledge of their
underlying rules had considerable impact on the magnitude
of typical task-switching phenomena: while a stimulus's
congruency only moderately affected performance in those
who used both rules, it heavily influenced humans' ability to
solve the tasks if they had been unaware of the rules. This
comes to no surprise, as it will always be easier, especially
in regard to associative learning, to learn the correct
response to a given stimulus when it is the same in both
tasks - that is, when that stimulus is congruent - than when it
varies between tasks, as it does for incongruent stimuli.
Clearly, there is a significant congruency effect in the
pigeon data and no cost of switching between tasks. Similar
levels - a much bigger congruency effect than switch costs are also observed in the No-Rule humans and in Forrest et

1024

al.'s (2012) study. The typical signature for a task-based
approach in humans instructed to use tasks is the reverse, a
larger switch cost and a smaller congruency effect. Further
research will establish if this true of the tasks used here.
Although we can draw parallels between the performance
of pigeons and No-Rule-using humans, there are some very
clear discrepancies between the pigeon data and that of
either of the human groups. It is especially apparent that in
incongruent trials, there is some switch cost in each of the
human groups, which was also observed in Forrest et al.'s
(2012) results. Even the human participants who were not
using any rules exhibited some switch cost for the
incongruent stimuli, yet the pigeons show no discernible
trace of any such effect but are able to "task switch". Why is
this?
The most interesting possibility is that pigeons simply do
not suffer from a switch cost in this paradigm. That is, when
given a combination of component and biconditional
discriminations, they do not exhibit any difficulty in
switching from one hypothetical task to another, even in the
case of the biconditional discrimination (i.e., the
discrimination involving the incongruent stimuli). This
result would imply that there is no switch cost in
associatively-mediated task switching, and lead to the
conclusion that the switch costs in all our human groups
were due, in some sense, to contamination by rule use. This
would fit rather well with theories that explain switch costs
in terms of task-set reconfiguration (Monsell & Mizon,
2006) but less well with theories that attempt to explain
switch costs in associative terms (e.g., Logan & Bundesen,
2003). A potential way of testing this assumption would be
to compare the groups' performance when faced with novel
stimuli in a generalization task.
Another possibility would be that pigeons do exhibit
switch costs in this paradigm, but that we either lack the
power to detect it, or there is another factor masking it. The
former possibility cannot be ruled out given that the
predicted effect would be small, in any case, but there is
simply no evidence of any switch cost to suggest that it
would be worth running many more pigeons in an attempt to
increase the power. The latter possibility is, however, worth
investigating, especially if switch costs are potentially only
present for incongruent stimuli while there will be little or
no switch costs on congruent trials. A close examination of
the paradigm reveals the possibility of an unwanted
interaction between the difference between switch and
repeat trials and a preference for novelty (e.g. in matching to
sample, see Wright & Delius, 2005). Pigeons might
preferentially respond to trials in which there is some
change in stimulation (either in the form of a different
stimulus or different response) compared to the previous
trial, and avoid those in which both the stimulus and the
response location are the same as in the preceding trial. The
latter, for incongruent stimuli, is only possible on repeat
trials, so, other things being equal, performance on those
trials should then on average be worse than on switch trials.
A disadvantage for repeat trials over switch trials for

incongruent stimuli could potentially cancel out any switch
costs in those trials, which by definition compose a
disadvantage for switch trials over repeat trials. Whether
this is the case or not is a matter for further empirical
investigation.

References
Cardinal, R.N. & Aitken, M.R.F. (2010). Whisker: a client–
server high-performance multimedia research control
system. Behavior Research Methods, 42, 1059–1071.
Forrest, C.L.D., Elchlepp, H., Monsell, S. & McLaren,
I.P.L. (2012). Task switching without knowledge of the
tasks. In N. Miyake, D. Peebles, & R.P. Cooper (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 34th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1548-1553). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Harris, J. A. & Livesey, E.J. (2008). Comparing patterning
and biconditional discriminations in humans. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes,
34, 144-54.
Kleiner,M., Brainard, D. & Pelli, D. (2007). What's new in
Psychtoolbox-3? Perception, 36, ECVP Abstract
Supplement.
Lea, S.E.G. & Wills, A.J. (2008). Use of multiple
dimensions in learned discriminations. Comparative
Cognition and Behaviour Reviews, 3, 115-133.
Logan, G.D., & Bundesen, C. (2003). Clever homunculus:
Is there an endogenous act of control in the explicit taskcuing procedure? Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 29, 575-599.
Mackintosh, N.J. (1988). Approaches to the study of animal
intelligence. British Journal of Psychology, 79, 509-526.
McLaren, I.P.L., Green, R.E.A. & Mackintosh, N.J. (1994)
Animal learning and the explicit/implicit distinction. In
N.C. Ellis (Ed.), Implicit and Explicit Learning of
Languages. London: Academic Press.
Monsell, S. (2003). Task switching. TRENDS in Cognitive
Sciences, 7, 134-140.
Monsell, S., & Mizon, G.A. (2006). Can the task-cuing
paradigm measure an endogenous task-set reconfiguration
process? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 32, 493–516.
Monsell, S., Yeung, N. & Azuma, R. (2000).
Reconfiguration of task-set: Is it easier to switch to the
weaker task? Psychological Research, 63, 250-264.
Stoet, G. & Snyder, L.H. (2003). Executive control and
task-switching in monkeys. Neuropsychologia, 41, 13571364.
Vandierendonck, A., Liefooghe, B. & Verbruggen, F.
(2010). Task switching: Interplay of reconfiguration and
interference. Psychological Bulletin, 136, 601-626.
Wright, A.W. and Delius, J.D. (2005). Learning Processes
in Matching and Oddity: The Oddity Preference Effect
and Sample Reinforcement. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes, 31, 425-32.

1025

