UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Computational complexity analysis for cognitive scientists

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3884962n

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Van Rooij, Iris
Kwithout, Johan
Blokpoel, Mark
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Computational complexity analysis for cognitive scientists
Iris van Rooij [contact person], Johan Kwisthout, Mark Blokpoel
Radboud University Nijmegen, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour
Montessorilaan 3, 6525 HR Nijmegen, The Netherlands,
i.vanrooij@donders.ru.nl

Todd Wareham
Department of Computer Science, Memorial University of Newfoundland,
St. John’s, NL, Canada
Keywords: computational complexity theory, computational
modeling, intractability, NP-hard, scalability, algorithms, fixedparameter tractability, approximation.

computational complexity analysis, and (c) learn about the
philosophical foundations of, and debate surrounding, the
use of computational complexity theory for analyzing
computational-level theories of cognition.
The tutorial will assume a basic level knowledge of
cognitive psychology and an affinity with computational
considerations.

Aims and Motivation
Many computational- or rational-level models of cognition
postulate computations that appear to be computationally
intractable (e.g., NP-hard or worse). Formally, this means
that the postulated computations consume an exponential
amount of time. Informally, this means that the postulated
computations do not scale in any obvious way to explain
how the modeled cognitive capacities can operate in the real
world outside the lab. This problem of intractability is quite
common in cognitive science. It is observed in practically
all domains of cognition, including, for instance, perception,
language, reasoning, categorization, decision-making, and
motor planning. It is also not specific to any particular class
of models, as it can arise for symbolic, connectionist,
probabilistic (e.g. Bayesian), dynamical, logic-based, and
even heuristic models of cognition.
How can cognitive scientists effectively deal with the
intractability of their models? Several sophisticated and
well-established concepts and techniques for computational
complexity analysis have been developed in theoretical
computer science over the last decades that can be directly
utilized by cognitive scientists. Using these techniques
cognitive scientists not only can assess whether or not a
particular model is intractable, but also identify parameters
of the model that are responsible for that intractability. As a
result, these techniques can be used to generate hypotheses
about how the models can be revised so as to make them
computationally tractable, thereby improving the
computational plausibility and scalability of the models.
With this tutorial we aim to make these techniques for
computational complexity analysis available for interested
cognitive scientists.

Morning session
In the morning session, participants will learn about the
conceptual and mathematical foundations of computational
complexity analysis in the context of cognitive modeling.
The session will include a conceptual primer on several
complexity-theoretic concepts (e.g., NP-hard, fixedparameter tractability) and techniques (e.g., polynomialtime and parameterized reduction). All these notions and
techniques are also explained in: van Rooij, I. (2008). The
tractable cognition thesis. Cognitive Science, 32, 939-984.
Participants are kindly requested to read this paper prior to
attending the tutorial. During the morning session,
participants will have the opportunity to practice the
described techniques via hands-on exercises (these can be
done using paper and pencil). The lecturers will use an
interactive style of instruction to help participants work
through the exercises.

Afternoon session
In the afternoon session, we will illustrate the broad
applicability of the methodology. Wareham will guide
participants through a detailed analysis of a model of
analogy derivation based on Structure-Mapping Theory (van
Rooij, Evans, Müller, Gedge, & Wareham, 2008). Blokpoel
will do the same for a Bayesian model of action
understanding (Blokpoel, Kwisthout, van der Weide, & van
Rooij, 2010). Through interactive exercises, participants can
see why both models are NP-hard and which parameters
cause this intractability.
We then consider the important topic of approximation as
an approach to dealing with intractability, with a focus on
approximating Bayesian inferences. Kwisthout will present
various notions of approximation and illustrate novel results
on how constraining particular parameters of probability
distributions may make approximation Bayesian strategies
(like sampling or local search) successful. Our intent here is

Audience
The target audience of this tutorial consists of post-graduate
students and researchers in any subfield of cognitive science
who wish to: (a) achieve an introductory level
understanding of the basic concepts underlying
computational complexity analysis, (b) gain hands-on
experience with some of the basic proof techniques in

53

to demonstrate that approximation is neither panacea nor a
placebo when it comes to intractability (see also Kwisthout,
Wareham, & van Rooij, 2011; Kwisthout & van Rooij,
2013).
We will close the tutorial with an interactive discussion
session about questions, issues, objections and philosophical
controversies regarding the demonstrated methodology
(e.g., such as also covered by van Rooij, 2008; van Rooij,
Wright, & Wareham, 2012). Participants will be encouraged
to bring in their own questions and points of discussion.

Website and Materials
For more information about this tutorial, full details of the
schedule and extra materials, please refer to our website:
http://tcs.dcc.ru.nl/cogsci2013/. At the start of the tutorial,
print-outs of the lecture notes will be made available to all
participants in a tutorial booklet.

References
Blokpoel, M., Kwisthout, J., van der Weide, T. & van Rooij,
I. (2010). How action understanding can be rational,
Bayesian and tractable. In S. Ohlsson & R. Catrambone
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1643–1648). Austin,
TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Kwisthout, J. & van Rooij, I. (2013). Bridging the gap
between theory and practice of approximate Bayesian
inference. Cognitive Systems Research, 24, 2-8.
Kwisthout, J., Wareham, T., & van Rooij, I. (2011).
Bayesian intractability is not an ailment that
approximation can cure. Cognitive Science, 35, 779–784.
van Rooij, I., Evans, P., Müller, M., Gedge, J. & Wareham,
T. (2008). Identifying sources of intractability in
cognitive models: An illustration using analogical
structure mapping. In B. C Love, K. McRae, and V. M.
Sloutsky (Eds.), Proceedings of the 30th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, Austin,
TX: Cognitive Science Society (pp. 915–920).
van Rooij, I. (2008). The tractable cognition thesis.
Cognitive Science, 32, 939–984.
van Rooij, I., Wright, C. & Wareham, T. (2012).
Intractability and the use of heuristics in psychological
explanations. Synthese, 187,471-487.

54

