UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Competition, event comprehension, and dynamic location information in sentence
processing

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/01s613nc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Kukona, Anuenue
Altmann, Gerry T.M.
Kamide, Yuki

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Competition, event comprehension, and dynamic location information in sentence
processing
Anuenue Kukona (a.b.bakerkukona@dundee.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, University of Dundee
DD1 4HN UK

Gerry T. M. Altmann (g.altmann@psych.york.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of York
YO10 5DD UK

Yuki Kamide (y.kamide@dundee.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, University of Dundee
DD1 4HN UK
Abstract

scenes with objects like a glass (on the floor), table, and
bookshelf, followed by a blank screen, and sentences like
“The woman will put the glass onto the table. Then, she will
pick up the bottle, and pour the wine carefully into the
glass.” At the discourse-final “the glass,” they found that
listeners were more likely to fixate the glass’s new location
(the prior location onscreen of the table), consistent with the
sentence context, compared to its initial location on the
floor.

Two experiments in the visual world paradigm investigated
competition in sentence processing from dynamic eventrelated information about location. In Experiment 1, listeners
viewed visual arrays with container objects like a bowl, jar,
pan, and jug, while they heard sentences like “The boy will
pour the sweetcorn from the bowl into the jar, and he will
pour the gravy from the pan into the jug. But first/And then,
he will taste the sweetcorn.” While “But first” contexts
referred to the “source” location of the discourse-final noun
(e.g., “sweetcorn”), “And then” contexts referred to its “goal”
location. In Experiment 2, listeners always heard “And then”
contexts. We found that listeners rapidly fixated contextrelevant locations. Crucially, they also fixated locations that
were context-irrelevant, but related to the discourse-final
noun, suggesting object competition, or consistent with
abstract location information implied by “But first” (source)
or “And then” (goal), suggesting location competition.

Location-based competition?
Thus, when language comprehenders have dynamic eventrelated information about an object’s location (i.e.,
information about where an object is and/or where it was
and/or where it will be), they must resolve which locations
are relevant to a sentence context, and which are not. The
findings of Chambers and San Juan (2008) and Altmann and
Kamide (2009) suggest that language comprehenders
rapidly integrate location information with sentence context
information, and rapidly retrieve context-relevant locations.
Here, we ask a closely related question: do language
comprehenders also retrieve context-irrelevant location
information? In other words, do irrelevant locations compete
with relevant locations?
Hoover and Richardson (2008) addressed this question in
a study that used a memory recall task. Their listeners heard
spoken facts from a burrowing creature at different locations
in a visual display, followed by a question about one of the
facts. During the question, they found that listeners were
more likely to fixate the location where the queried fact had
been presented (compared to distractor locations that the
creature had not visited). However, listeners also fixated the
location where the non-queried fact had been presented.
Hoover and Richardson (2008)’s findings suggest that
location information drives competition effects in eye
movements: fixations to locations that are related to target
information, but context-irrelevant. This complements
competition observed elsewhere: for example, Huettig and
Altmann (2005) presented listeners with visual arrays with
objects like a trumpet and goat, while they heard words like

Keywords: Competition; Event comprehension; Location;
Visual world paradigm.

Introduction
Everyday, we use language in dynamic real world settings
that change along any number of dimensions. One such
dimension is location: for example, objects like car keys and
TV remotes are routinely involved in actions and events that
result in (often frustrating!) changes of location. Findings
from the Visual world paradigm (Tanenhaus, SpiveyKnowlton, Eberhard, & Sedivy, 1995), which presents
listeners with spoken language about a visual context, have
revealed that listeners’ eye movements are rapidly guided
by dynamic location information (i.e., information about the
multiple instantiations of an object at different locations
over event time) during sentence processing.
For example, Chambers and San Juan (2008) instructed
listeners to move objects around a visual array, and then
they presented listeners with sentences like “Now return
the…” They found that listeners anticipatorily fixated
previously moved objects, consistent with “return,”
compared to previously unmoved objects. Similarly,
Altmann and Kamide (2009) presented listeners with visual

834

“piano.” They found that listeners were more likely to fixate
trumpet, which was of the same category as “piano” (e.g.,
musical instrument), compared to distractors (e.g., goat).
Hoover and Richardson’s findings suggest that in addition
to effects based on long-term, semantic knowledge (Huettig
& Altmann, 2005), competition in language also stems from
short-term, situated location information.
However, Hoover and Richardson (2008)’s findings also
raise a number of new questions. First, evidence for
location-based competition is mixed. For example, Altmann
and Kamide (2009) observed no competition during “the
glass” in their study: listeners were no more likely to fixate
the glass’s (context-irrelevant) initial location on the floor
compared to distractors (e.g., bookshelf). Thus, it is unclear
how location-based competition impacts online sentence
processing.
Second, and more importantly, Hoover and Richardson
(2008)’s findings seem to depend more precisely on object,
rather than location, competition. In a second condition in
which two different creatures presented their facts, they
found no competition effects (i.e., listeners did not fixate the
location where the non-queried fact had been presented).
Thus, perhaps a more precise way of thinking about their
results is that the creature was competing with itself,
insomuch as it had to be represented at two locations, rather
than that the associated locations were competing. Indeed,
this claim is compatible with recent work by Hindy,
Altmann, Kalenik, & Thomspon-Schill (2012): they found
that conflict-associated brain regions were activated during
sentences that described a state change (e.g., “The squirrel
will crack the acorn”). They suggest that event-related
changes activate multiple instantiations of an object, and
that the representation of the object before the change
competes with (and engenders conflict with) the
representation of the object after the change.

(1b) But first/And then, he will taste the sweetcorn.
Two critical referents (e.g., “sweetcorn” and “gravy”)
were described in (1a), so that listeners could not anticipate
the discourse-final noun in (1b) (half of trials re-referred to
the first critical referent [“sweetcorn”], and half to the
second critical referent [“gravy”]). In Experiment 1,
listeners heard both “But first” contexts, which referred to
the “source” location (e.g., bowl) of the discourse-final noun
(e.g., “sweetcorn”), and “And then” contexts, which referred
to its “goal” location (e.g., jar). In Experiment 2, listeners
only heard “And then” contexts, which always referred to
the “goal” location.
Crucially, our design allowed us to disentangle locationbased and object-based competition. In both experiments,
we tested for object-based competition (e.g., competition
between sweetcorn and itself) by examining fixations to
container objects that were related to the discourse-final
noun but inconsistent with “But first/And then” (e.g., jar,
the goal location of “sweetcorn,” following “But first, he
will taste the sweetcorn”). On the other hand, we tested for
location-based competition (e.g., competition between
source/goal locations, which were not linked via an object)
by examining fixations to container objects that were
consistent with “But first” (source location) or “And then”
(goal location) but unrelated to the discourse-final noun
(e.g., pan, the source location of “gravy,” following “But
first, he will taste the sweetcorn”).

Experiment 1

Current experiments
In the current study, we tested for location-based and objectbased competition effects in sentence processing. In two
experiments, we addressed a critical difference between
Altmann and Kamide (2009) and Hoover and Richardson
(2008): the predictability of the context-relevant location
information. In Altmann and Kamide, the discourse contexts
were highly predictable (e.g., the discourse-final “the glass”
could be anticipated based on the verb selectional
restrictions of “pour”), and consequently they observed
strong anticipatory effects (e.g., listeners fixated contextrelevant locations prior to the discourse-final noun). By
contrast, Hoover and Richardson (2008) queried facts (and
their associated locations) at random. Here, we used
discourse contexts that were closely related to Altmann and
Kamide (2009), but that did not allow for anticipation.
Listeners viewed visual arrays with container objects like a
bowl, jar, pan, and jug (Figure 1), while they heard sentence
pairs like (1a,b).
(1a) The boy will pour the sweetcorn from the bowl into
the jar, and he will pour the gravy from the pan into the jug.

Figure 1: Example visual array from Experiments 1 and 2.

Methods
Participants Forty-eight individuals from the University of
Dundee community participated for course credit or £4.
Materials We constructed 48 sentence pairs like (1a,b). The
first sentence described the critical contents of two
containers moving either from their initial locations into two
new locations (1a), or into two new locations from their
initial locations. The second sentence referred to either the

835

Figure 2: Average (95% CI) proportions of fixations to source and goal locations of the sweetcorn (target
referent) and gravy (competitor referent) during “But first…” (A) and “And then…” (B) “he will taste the
sweetcorn” in Experiment 1.
first (e.g., “sweetcorn”) or second (e.g., “gravy”) of the
critical contents, and either its initial (“But first”) or new
(“And then”) location (1b). Each item had eight forms,
reflecting the crossing of movement description (from-into
and into-from), conjunction (“But first” and “And then”),
and discourse-final noun (“sweetcorn” and “gravy”), which
were rotated across participants (see Appendix A). Visual
arrays (Figure 1) depicted the container objects in the four
corners of the display, but not their contents.
For each critical referent, the “source” location was the
location of the object before the described movement (e.g.,
sweetcorn: bowl; gravy: pan), and the “goal” location was

the location of the object after the described movement
(e.g., sweetcorn: jar; gravy: jug).
Procedure We used an SR Research EyeLink II headmounted eye tracker, sampling at 500 Hz from one eye
(viewing was binocular). The experiments involved a lookand-listen task: participants were instructed to look carefully
at the visual arrays, and to listen carefully to the sentences.
The onset of the visual stimulus preceded the onset of the
spoken stimulus by 1,000 ms. A trial ended 3,000 ms after
the offset of the sentence.
The eye tracker was recalibrated after every eighth trial.
The experiment began with four practice trials, and included

836

12 filler trials (which described a single critical object,
rather than two). The experiment was approximately 40
minutes in length.

(p = .68), and fixations to sweetcorn and gravy goal
locations did not differ reliably (p = .60).
At the offset of “sweetcorn,” fixations to the (contextrelevant) sweetcorn source location were reliably greater
than to the sweetcorn goal location (p < .01), gravy source
location (p < .001), and gravy goal location (p < .001);
fixations to the sweetcorn goal location were reliably greater
than to the gravy source location (p < .001) and gravy goal
location (p < .001), capturing object competition; and
fixations to the gravy source location were not reliably
different from the gravy goal location (p = .49).
Finally, during the 500 ms time window following
sentence offset, fixations to the sweetcorn source location
were reliably greater than to the sweetcorn goal location (p
< .001), gravy source location (p < .001), and gravy goal
location (p < .001); fixations to the sweetcorn goal location
were reliably greater than to the gravy source location (p <
.001) and gravy goal location (p < .001), capturing object
competition; and fixations to the gravy source location were
reliably greater than to the gravy goal location (p < .05),
capturing location competition.

Results
Average proportions of fixations to source and goal
locations of the sweetcorn (target referent) and gravy
(competitor referent) in the visual array are plotted during
“But first, he will taste the sweetcorn” in Figure 2A and
during “And then, he will taste the sweetcorn” in Figure
2B. Eye movements were resynchronized at the onset of
each of the plotted windows (“But first/And then,” “he will
taste the,” “sweetcorn”).
We analyzed eye movements during three time windows:
during “But first/And then, he will taste the,” at the offset of
“sweetcorn,” and between sentence offset and 500 ms
following sentence offset. These windows directly precede,
and follow, the critical discourse-final noun. Average
proportions of fixations to each region of interest (ROI) are
reported within each time window in Table 1 (“But first…”)
and Table 2 (“And then…”). We submitted proportions of
fixations to planned pairwise comparisons (using paired ttests).

“And then.” During “And then, he will taste the,”
fixations to goal locations were reliably greater than to
source locations (p’s < .001). However, fixations to
sweetcorn and gravy source locations did not differ reliably
(p = .66), and fixations to sweetcorn and gravy goal
locations did not differ reliably (p = .81).
At the offset of “sweetcorn,” fixations to the (contextrelevant) sweetcorn goal location were reliably greater than
to the sweetcorn source location (p < .001), gravy goal
location (p < .001), and gravy source location (p < .001);
fixations to the sweetcorn source location were reliably
greater than to the gravy goal location (p = .05) and gravy
source location (p < .001), capturing object competition; and
fixations to the gravy goal location were marginally greater
than to the gravy source location (p = .08), capturing
location competition.
Finally, during the 500 ms time window following
sentence offset, fixations to the sweetcorn goal location
were reliably greater than to the sweetcorn source location
(p < .001), gravy goal location (p < .001), and gravy source
location (p < .001); fixations to the sweetcorn source
location were reliably greater than to the gravy goal location
(p < .001) and gravy source location (p < .001), capturing
object competition; and fixations to the gravy goal location
were marginally greater than to the gravy source location (p
= .08), capturing location competition.

Table 1: Average (SD) proportions of fixations to source
and goal locations of the sweetcorn (target referent) and
gravy (competitor referent) during “But first, he will taste
the,” at the offset of “sweetcorn,” and between sentence
offset and 500 ms past sentence offset in Experiment 1.
ROI
sweetcorn (source)
sweetcorn (goal)
gravy (source)
gravy (goal)

“But”
.19 (.07)
.25 (.08)
.20 (.06)
.26 (.08)

“sweetcorn”
.35 (.13)
.26 (.09)
.16 (.08)
.14 (.10)

+500
.41 (.16)
.26 (.10)
.14 (.07)
.11 (.07)

Table 2: Average (SD) proportions of fixations to source
and goal locations of the sweetcorn (target referent) and
gravy (competitor referent) during “And then, he will taste
the,” at the offset of “sweetcorn,” and between sentence
offset and 500 ms past sentence offset in Experiment 1.
ROI
sweetcorn (source)
sweetcorn (goal)
gravy (source)
gravy (goal)

“And”
.18 (.08)
.26 (.08)
.19 (.08)
.26 (.08)

“sweetcorn”
.23 (.10)
.36 (.14)
.14 (.08)
.18 (.11)

+500
.24 (.10)
.42 (.14)
.11 (.08)
.14 (.09)

“But first.”1 During “But first, he will taste the,”
fixations to goal locations were reliably greater than to
source locations (p’s < .001). However, fixations to
sweetcorn and gravy source locations did not differ reliably

Discussion
During the discourse-final noun, we found that listeners
were more likely to fixate context-relevant locations
compared to all other locations (e.g., see fixations to the
sweetcorn source location in Figure 2A and sweetcorn goal
location in Figure 2B). Consistent with Chambers and San
Juan (2008) and Altmann and Kamide (2009), these results
suggest that listeners rapidly integrate location and sentence

1

“But first” was ambiguous because it could refer either to the
time period before the first or the second movement. Thus, we also
performed analyses only on target referents that were mentioned
second, for whom the ambiguity did not apply, which showed a
similar pattern of results.

837

Figure 3: Average (95% CI) proportions of fixations to source and goal locations of the sweetcorn (target
referent) and gravy (competitor referent) during “And then, he will taste the sweetcorn” in Experiment 2.

context information. We also found that listeners had a
strong bias to fixate goal locations prior to the discoursefinal noun for both “And then” (in which goal information
was relevant) and “But first” (in which source information
was relevant) contexts. This result suggests that listeners
may be biased to track “current” location information:
indeed, by the end of the second sentence, the “current”
location corresponds to the goal location if one assumes that
the description of the events in the language, and the events
themselves, are closely time locked.
Crucially, we also found evidence for object-based
competition: listeners were more likely to fixate locations
that were related to the discourse-final noun but inconsistent
with “But first/And then” compared to completely unrelated
locations (e.g., see fixations to the sweetcorn goal location
vs. gravy goal location in Figure 2A and sweetcorn source
location vs. gravy source location in Figure 2B). This result
suggests that representations of the sweetcorn at contextirrelevant locations were competing with representations of
the sweetcorn at context relevant locations.
Finally, we also found evidence for location-based
competition that was independent of object-based
competition. Following “sweetcorn,” listeners were more
likely to fixate the gravy source location compared to the
gravy goal location with “But first,” which was consistent
with source locations, although both gravy locations were
unrelated to “sweetcorn.” The opposite pattern was also
observed with “And then,” although the effect was
marginal. These results suggest that source locations were
competing, based on abstract information about whether a
location was a source or a goal of an event, even though no
object was present at two source locations.
Next, we asked: can location-based competition be
reduced in a setting in which there is less uncertainty about

which referents are relevant? Thus, in Experiment 2
listeners always heard “And then” contexts, in which goal
locations were relevant.

Experiment 2
Methods
Participants Twenty-four individuals from the University
of Dundee community participated for course credit or £4.
Materials Materials were identical to Experiment 1, except
that the second sentence always referred to the goal location
(“And then…”).
Procedure The procedure was identical to Experiment 1.

Results
Average proportions of fixations to source and goal
locations of the sweetcorn (target referent) and gravy
(competitor referent) in the visual array are plotted during
“And then, he will taste the sweetcorn” in Figure 3. We
performed identical analyses to Experiment 1. Average
proportions of fixations by ROI are reported in Table 3.
During “And then, he will taste the,” fixations to goal
locations were reliably greater than to source locations (p’s
< .001). However, fixations to sweetcorn and gravy source
locations did not differ reliably (p = .19), and fixations to
sweetcorn and gravy goal locations did not differ reliably (p
= .50).
At the offset of “sweetcorn,” fixations to the (contextrelevant) sweetcorn goal location were reliably greater than
to the sweetcorn source location (p < .001), gravy goal
location (p < .001), and gravy source location (p < .001);

838

fixations to the sweetcorn source location were reliably
greater than to the gravy source location (p < .001),
capturing object competition, but not the gravy goal location
(p = .21); and fixations to the gravy goal location were
reliably greater than to the gravy source location (p < .05),
capturing location competition.
Finally, during the 500 ms time window following
sentence offset, fixations to the sweetcorn goal location
were reliably greater than to the sweetcorn source location
(p < .001), gravy goal location (p < .001), and gravy source
location (p < .001); fixations to the sweetcorn source
location were reliably greater than to the gravy goal location
(p < .001) and gravy source location (p < .001), capturing
object competition; and fixations to the gravy goal location
were reliably greater than to the gravy source location (p <
.05), capturing location competition.

two sources of competition – objects and abstract location
information – are separable, and have differential effects on
sentence processing.
But our findings also diverged from the results of
Altmann and Kamide (2009), who did not observe
competition during “the glass” (see the Introduction). As we
have suggested, a critical difference between the current
experiments and their study was the predictability of the
context-relevant location. Indeed, they did observe
anticipatory competition effects: just prior to “the glass”
(i.e., during “the wine carefully into”), listeners were
reliably more likely to fixate competitor locations than
distractors. Taken together, these findings suggest that
location information does compete, and that this
competition can precede the mention of the critical referent.

Table 3: Average (SD) proportions of fixations to source
and goal locations of the sweetcorn (target referent) and
gravy (competitor referent) during “And then, he will taste
the,” at the offset of “sweetcorn,” and between sentence
offset and 500 ms past sentence offset in Experiment 2.

Acknowledgments

ROI
sweetcorn (source)
sweetcorn (goal)
gravy (source)
gravy (goal)

“And”
.16 (.06)
.29 (.06)
.17 (.04)
.28 (.05)

“sweetcorn”
.19 (.07)
.44 (.13)
.12 (.05)
.17 (.07)

We thank Karl Smith Byrne, Aneta Lisowska, and Robert
Petrie for their help with data collection. We gratefully
acknowledge support from ESRC Grants RES-062-23-2749
to GTMA and YK and RES-062-23-2842 to YK.

+500
.22 (.08)
.48 (.14)
.09 (.05)
.13 (.06)

Appendix A
1a. The boy will pour the sweetcorn from the bowl into
the jar, and he will pour the gravy from the pan into the jug.
1b. The boy will pour the sweetcorn into the jar from the
bowl, and he will pour the gravy into the jug from the pan.
2a. But first, he will taste the sweetcorn.
2b. And then, he will taste the sweetcorn.
2c. But first, he will taste the gravy.
2d. And then, he will taste the gravy.

Discussion
The pattern of results in Experiment 2 was similar to
Experiment 1. We found that listeners were more likely to
fixate the context-relevant sweetcorn goal location
compared to all other locations. Similarly, listeners also
fixated the sweetcorn source location based on object
competition, and the gravy goal location based on location
competition. Further, these results suggest that competition
does not depend on mentioning both source/goal locations.

References
Altmann, G. T. M., & Kamide, Y. (2009). Discoursemediation of the mapping between language and the
visual world: eye movements and mental representation.
Cognition, 111, 55–71.
Chambers, C.G., & San Juan, V. (2008). Perception and
presupposition in real-time language comprehension:
Insights from anticipatory processing. Cognition, 108, 2650.
Hoover, M. A., & Richardson, D. C. (2008). When facts go
down the rabbit hole: contrasting features and objecthood
as indexes to memory. Cognition, 108, 533–42.
Huettig, F. & Altmann, G.T.M. (2005). Word meaning and
the control of eye fixation: semantic competitor effects
and the visual world paradigm. Cognition, 96, 23-32.
Tanenhaus, M.K., Spivey-Knowlton, M., Eberhard, K., &
Sedivy, J. (1995). Integration of visual and linguistic
information in spoken language comprehension. Science,
268, 1632-1634.
Hindy, N.C., Altmann, G.T.M., Kalenik, E., & ThomsponSchill, S.L. (2012). The effect of object-state changes on
event processing: Do objects compete with themselves?
The journal of neuroscience, 32, 5795–5803.

General Discussion
In two experiments, we found evidence for both locationbased and objects-based competition in sentence processing.
While our sentence contexts modulated fixations to
contextually-relevant locations, they did not fully inhibit
fixations to contextually-irrelevant “competitor” locations.
Consistent with Hoover and Richardson (2008) and Hindy
et al. (2012), our results suggest that representations of an
object (e.g., sweetcorn) before an event-related change
compete with representations of the object after the change.
In our case, the crucial event-related change was one of
location, and the impact of this competition was reflected in
eye movements to context-irrelevant locations. Critically,
we also found evidence for object-independent location
competition (e.g., between goal locations, although they
corresponded to different objects [i.e., sweetcorn vs.
gravy]). Taken together, these findings suggest that these

839

