UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Connecting Learning Goals and Component Cognitive Skills in Digital Games

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7fn396gv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Killingsworth, Stephen
Clark, Douglas

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Connecting Learning Goals and Component Cognitive Skills in Digital Games
Stephen S. Killingsworth (s.killingsworth@vanderbilt.edu)
Department of Teaching and Learning, Box 230, 230 Appleton Place
Nashville, TN 37203 USA

Douglas Clark (doug.clark@vanderbilt.edu)
Department of Teaching and Learning, Box 230, 230 Appleton Place
Nashville, TN 37203 USA
Abstract
Growing bodies of research have investigated how digital
games might be used as pedagogical tools and separately,
how playing commercial games influences basic cognitive
capacities or skills. The goal of the present research is to draw
from these separate lines of research to ask how changes in
basic cognitive capacities and formal learning gains may be
related. The present study employed a game in which a ship
moves through different environments using forces. The game
teaches the basic relationships between objects and forces in
Newton’s Laws of Motion. Students played one of two
versions of the game. The predictive version encouraged
planning and reflection, by allowing students unlimited time
to place forces along a path. In the real-time version, forces
immediately affected the player when selected. The results
suggest that learning was equivalent across the versions, but
changes in attentional capacities may differentially contribute
to learning between versions.
Keywords: Education; Psychology; Learning; Classroom
studies; Experimental research with children; Digital games

Introduction
Video games have been present in mainstream culture for
decades, but have recently become a popular topic for
research. One branch of research on video games in
Cognitive and Social Psychology, has investigated the
impact of recreational game play on basic cognition and
behavior. A second branch of research has investigated the
impact of games specifically designed to teach concepts
within a discipline. Though these divisions do not cover all
the relevant work, they do account for a majority of
publications on videogames. In the present work, we
investigate how games can train concepts and basic
cognitive capacities. Beyond this, we begin to address the
complex question of how cognitive skill training and
discipline-specific learning may each contribute to learning
gains on an assessment of students’ basic understandings of
Newton’s Laws of Motion.
Much of the recent research on videogames in Cognitive
Psychology has been connected to the somewhat surprising
finding that some of commercial action video games may
actually train basic cognitive capacities of players (e.g. Dye,
Green, & Bavelier, 2009; Feng, Spence, & Pratt, 2007). One
particularly interesting finding is that games may train
networks that control three basic aspects of visual attention
(Dye et al., 2009). There have been some concerns about the
conclusions drawn in these studies (Boot, Blakely, &

Simons, 2011). However, the possibility of a positive impact
of games that may otherwise have negative social effects
(e.g., Carnagey, Anderson, & Bushman, 2007) has been a
compelling topic for research.
Other research on videogames for learning has focused on
learning discipline specific content knowledge, skills,
processes, attitudes, and engagement (e.g., NRC, 2010).
This education-focused work spans several fields and is
often referred to as research on “serious games” or “games
for learning” although there are multiple other names as
well. Again, this work has typically focused on how games
produce learning gains in a particular discipline or skill.
The present project differs from most prior Cognitive
Psychology and Education-focused work, but is designed to
benefit from the approaches of both of those areas of
research. The present work uses a conceptually-integrated
game (Clark & Martinez-Garza, 2012) under development
called EGAME in which the target concepts are integrated
directly into gameplay mechanics, rather than being
presented through separate activities. The basic prototype of
the game involved in this study (see Figure 1) was designed
to promote an accurate intuitive understanding of Newton’s
Laws. The game provides puzzle-like scenarios in which
players use a limited palette of forces to move a ship to a
target. Unlike in many popular games, movement in this
game is controlled by combining unidirectional forces of
varying magnitudes and durations. Furthermore, the game
models realistic motion and is sensitive to the constraints of
the environment (e.g., the presence or absence of friction).
Two versions of our game prototype were used in this
study. The first, predictive, version of the game was
designed to encourage planning and reflection. In this
version, students dragged forces from a palette onto a level
map. The students would then “run” the simulation to
observe the results of their choices. This design minimized
competition between cognitive resources necessary to select
forces and the resources available to observe and evaluate
the effects of choices. The placement play phase involved
selecting locations for forces, looking at the palette, and
dragging icons with the mouse. The observation play phase
involved watching the ship respond to forces placed on the
map (and optionally stopping the simulation).
The real-time control version of the game combined
placement and observation. Students had unlimited time to
look at a level and plan before selecting a force, but as each
force icon was clicked, the ship moved accordingly. In this

2728

version, students made force selections as the ship moved
and had to time actions appropriately. Our expectation was
that this design imposed greater cognitive demands on
students. For example, the real-time game encouraged more
strategies such as memorizing available forces and
preparing actions before beginning a level. Moreover, the
real-time version required continuous monitoring of the
position of the ship and continuous shifting of attention
between the force palette and the game map [see Droll &
Hayhoe (2007) for how attention and working memory may
be coordinated in related contexts]. Due to the presumably
greater load imposed by the real-time game, we hypothesize
greater learning gains for the predictive game version
than for the real-time game version (hypothesis 1).
Neither version of game was truly an “action game,” like
those that have been shown to train cognitive capacities in
other studies, but our manipulation of game versions
allowed us to isolate certain features of typical action
games. More specifically, as in typical action games, the
real-time game type encouraged monitoring multiple
regions of the screen and timing actions with onscreen
motion. Thus, the primary differences between the game
types are in terms of how players must distribute attention
and select relevant information. Therefore, in investigating
differences in capacities that might be trained by the two
game types, we focused on changes in scores on the
attention network test (ANT) across players in each version
of the game. Based on brain imaging and behavioral
evidence, the ANT is reported to measure attentional
capacities in terms of three distinct network components: (1)
an executive component, related to inhibiting irrelevant
information, (2) an orienting component, related to shifting
the focus of attention to particular spatial locations, and (3)
an alerting component, related to preparing to process
upcoming information (see Dye et al., 2009 and Rueda et
al., 2004). In research by Dye et al. (2009), the authors find
that frequent action game players had larger scores on the
executive and orienting components of the ANT and had
faster baseline RTs with equivalent accuracy. Given these
findings and the similarities between the real-time game and
typical action games, we hypothesize that changes in
orienting and executive attention networks (and baseline
RT) after gameplay will be larger for the real-time game
group (hypothesis 2).
In addition to measuring changes in attention networks,
we investigated the relationship between gains in basic
cognitive capacities, gains on our formal assessment, and
measures of motivation. At the most basic level, we predict
that motivation will support learning and that we will
observe a positive correlation between motivation and
physics learning gains for both game types (hypothesis
3). We also predict that network scores on the ANT pretest and will be more strongly positively correlated with
learning gains on the physics test for the real-time game
(hypothesis 4). This hypothesis is based on the premise that
the real-time game imposes greater attentional demands and
thus, students with a greater initial capacities might learn

more more than others fort that game. Though we do not
have a specific prediction for how changes in basic
cognitive capacities will relate to changes in physics
understanding across versions, we also predict that changes
in ANT network scores may have different relationships
to learning gains across the two game versions
(hypothesis 5). Our final hypothesis, following Dye and
colleagues (2009) is that students that more frequently
played action video games will have higher initial
orienting and executive scores on the ANT (hypothesis
6).

Figure 1: Screenshot of EGAME level.

Method
Subjects
143 middle school students (70 female and 73 male) in
the Southeastern United states participated in this study. The
school served a racially diverse, primarily middle-class
population. Students participated together during their
normal 8th grade science class for approximately 3 hours of
game play and 1 hour of pre-post assessments spread across
one week. The sample consisted of students from 6 classes
under the same teacher. Data was only used from students
who completed the assent form. All analyses only included
students that completed the measures reflected in those
analyses.

Equipment
Students used MacBook Air computers to play the game.
The game and cognitive tests were designed using Adobe
Flash. The prototype versions of the game used in this study
as well as current versions of the game can be viewed at
www.surgeuniverse.com.

Assessments and Questionnaires
Physics Understanding Students completed pre-and posttests consisting of 12 questions based on the Force Concept
Inventory (Hestenes et al., 1992). Questions covered the
following basic concepts relevant to understanding
Newton’s Laws: vector combination and diagonal motion
(vectors); the relationship between velocity, acceleration,
and position (acceleration); the influence of friction on

2729

motion (friction); the influence of mass on motion (mass);
and the influence of gravity on motion (gravity).
Attention Networks (ANT) We administered an adapted
child-friendly version of the ANT developed by Rueda et al.
(2004). The ANT evaluates the efficiency of three distinct
attentional networks (executive, orienting, and alerting). In
the pre- and post-test, 144 critical trials were presented in a
fixed random order. On each trial (after a 1500ms ITI), a
fixation cross was presented (400 to 1600ms). Following
this, one of four cue types was presented (150ms). Cues
were gray circles occupying approximately the same area as
the target (1.7˚). Cue conditions were: no cue, a central cue
(at fixation), a double cue (at possible target locations), or a
spatial cue (at the upcoming target location). After a 450ms
delay, the target stimulus was presented either 1.9˚ above or
below the prior fixation location. The target was a spherical
furry character used in game tutorials. The target was
presented alone (neutral trials) or flanked by distractors (2 to
the left and 2 to the right). Students responded to what
direction the target was facing. On incongruent trials,
distractors faced the opposite direction of the target. On
congruent trials, all characters faced the same direction. The
critical stimuli were presented for up to 1500ms. Feedback
was provided in the following forms at fixation: correct
response: “+10 pts”, incorrect response: “oops”, and
delayed response: “too slow”.
Mental Rotation Students completed a mental rotation task
adapted from Widenbauer & Jansen-Osmann (2008). The
task required students to decide whether two images were
identical or mirrored. Because numerous students
misunderstood the instructions and for the sake of brevity,
data from this task are not discussed further.
Motivation and Engagement (QCM and GEQ) The game
engagement questionnaire (GEQ) is a measure developed by
Brockmyer and colleagues (2009). The questionnaire yields
a single composite score of engagement in terms of:
presence, flow, absorption, and immersion. Each item had
three choices: “no”, “sort of”, and “yes”. We adapted this
questionnaire to refer to our game. For more details on the
GEQ, see Brockmyer et al. (2009).
The QCM is a measure of achievement motivation. The
QCM differentiates the following factors: anxiety,
challenge, interest, and probability of success. We used a
modified version of the short form of the QCM (Freund et
al., 2011). Specifically, we replaced “task” with “game” in
all questions and removed one concerning item: “I am afraid
I will make a fool out of myself”.
Gaming Experience Survey Following Dye et al. (2009),
we asked students to list the 10 games they had played the
most frequently in the past 12 months. Using this, students
were classified as action game players or not.

Design and Procedure
The study used a pretest–intervention–posttest design.
Students were seated at lab tables mostly in pairs, though
some students were alone. Students were pseudo-randomly
assigned to one of two game versions (predictive or realtime) in each class. 79 students played the real-time game
and 64 played the predictive game. Assignment was not
random because students were allowed to sit in their typical
seats and pairs of students seated together were placed in the
same condition. This prevented students from seeing the
alternate game version and allowed them to consult one
another if they chose. All students worked individually.
Before playing the game, students completed three separate
tasks that were integrated with the game content: the physics
pre-test (adapted from the FCI), the ANT, and the mental
rotation task. After the pre-tests, students played the their
version of the game. The content of the game levels roughly
corresponded with one or more of the aforementioned
categories of questions on the FCI-based test.
Students played the game for approximately three days of
class time and completed different numbers of levels in this
period according to their abilities. Several simple tutorials
were included and two questions were included within the
first 10 levels of the game to help students connect the
material in the game to Newton’s Laws.
Students completed the questionnaire on current
motivation (QCM) after playing the first level of the game
and the game engagement questionnaire (GEQ) after
playing approximately 38 levels. Students were asked to
stop playing after approximately 20 minutes on the third
day. After playing, students first completed the FCI, ANT,
and the mental rotation post-tests, then completed the
gaming experience survey and provided feedback about the
game.

Results
Initial Equivalence of Student Groups
The distribution of students classified as action gamers on
the gaming experience survey did not significantly differ by
across the game version groups (predictive vs. real-time).
Furthermore, game type groups did not significantly differ
prior to treatment in terms of any subscales on the physics
understanding test or the ANT (i.e., Alerting, Orienting, or
Executive scores).

Measures of Motivation and Engagement
A univariate ANOVA was conducted with GEQ scores as
the dependent variable and game version as a betweensubjects variable. There were no significant differences
between student engagement ratings across the predictive
(M = 45.25, SD = 8.09) and real-time (M = 44.27, SD =
5.96) game versions, F(1, 124) = .62, p = .43, 𝜂!! = .01.
Additionally, separate univariate ANOVAs were conducted
with QCM components as dependent variables and version
as a between-subjects variable. The univariate ANOVA for

2730

QCM “probability of success” showed a significant
difference between versions, F(1, 139) = 46.57, p < .0001,
𝜂!! = .25. Students in the real-time game had significantly
higher estimates (M = 5.00 , SD = 1.08) than students in the
predictive game (M = 3.45, SD = 1.62). Thus, it appears that
students in the real-time game version may have had higher
achievement motivation to start. To note, the QCM
challenge component was dropped from covariate analyses
due to a large correlation with the interest component,
r(139) = .61, p < .0001.

Student Gains and Version Comparisons
Physics Understanding A repeated-measures MANCOVA
was conducted with test administration (pre vs. post) as a
within-subjects factor. Game version (predictive vs. realtime) was included as between-subjects factors. Each
question type (vectors, acceleration, friction, mass, and
gravity) was entered as a separate dependent measure. The
multivariate analysis showed that overall learning gains
were non-significant from pre- to post-test, F(5, 137) =
2.27, p = .05, 𝜂!𝑝 = .08. Separate univariate ANOVAs for
each question type were examined with the same factors as
above. These tests showed that only the vectors question
type showed small but significant learning gains, F(1, 141)
= 6.55, p = .01, 𝜂!𝑝   = .04, from pre- (M = .22, SD = .26) to
post-test (M = .29, SD = .29). No interactions with game
version were significant for any of these tests, so our
hypothesis of an overall advantage for the predictive game
was not supported.
Attention Networks (Baseline and Network Scores) A
repeated-measures ANOVA was used to evaluate baseline
RT (neutral trials) between test administration times. Game
version was included as a between-subjects factor. This test
did show a significant effect of test administration, F(1,
100) = 36.27, p < .0001, 𝜂!𝑝 = .27, with faster post- (M =
542, SD = 91) than pre-test (M = 582, SD = 90) RTs. The
interaction between test administration and version was not
significant, F(1, 100) = .20, p = .66, 𝜂!𝑝 = .002. A similar
ANOVA with baseline accuracy showed no significant
effects.
Following this analysis, individual repeated measures
ANOVAs were used to compare gains in network scores.
We calculated network scores from difference scores among
median RTs following Rueda et al. (2004): Executive score
= incongruent - congruent trials, orienting score = spatial single cue trials, alerting score = double - no cue trials. Test
administration was included as a within-subjects factor and
game version was included as a between-subjects factor.
The ANOVA for alerting scores showed that scores
significantly increased, F(1, 100) = 27.48, p < .0001,  𝜂!𝑝 =
.22, from pre-(M = 5.96, SD = 36.52) to post-test (M =
44.46, SD = 58.71) administration. The ANOVA for
orienting scores showed that scores significantly increased,
F(1, 100) = 100.88, p < .0001, 𝜂!𝑝 = .50, from pre-(M = -

33.75, SD = 46.54) to post-test (M = 18.53, SD = 43.08)
administration. Additionally, there was a significant
interaction between test administration and game version for
orienting scores, F(1, 100) = 7.46, p = .007, 𝜂!𝑝 = .07. This
interaction reflected that the differences (post-pre) in
orienting scores were larger for the predictive version (MDiff
=74, SDDiff = 55) than the real-time (MDiff =42, SDDiff = 60)
version.
Finally, the ANOVA for executive scores showed that
scores significantly increased, F(1, 100) = 139.40, p <
.0001, 𝜂!𝑝 = .58, from pre- (M = 32.95, SD = 36.22) to posttest (M = 96.82, SD = 55.20) administration. These findings
do not support our second hypothesis. In fact, the only
difference between the two game versions we observed was
in the opposite of the predicted direction (with larger gains
in orienting scores for the predictive game).
Attention Networks (Omnibus ANOVA, RTs and
Accuracy) To compare the specific effects of cues and
flankers, separate repeated-measures ANOVAs for RTs and
for accuracy were conducted. However, given these
analyses are not of primary importance to our research
questions, the details of these analyses are not reported here.
We note three important results from these analyses,
however. First, no interactions involving game version were
significant. Second, main effects for accuracy ANOVAs
were similar to those for RT ANOVAs. Finally, we
observed spatial cues reducing congruency effects, which
has been observed other ANT studies. Furthermore, this
effect was greater for the pre-test.

Covariate Analyses of Student Gains
Attention Networks (Gaming Experience) A univariate
ANOVA was conducted to evaluate baseline RT differences
on the ANT pre-test between recreational action game
players and others. Recreational action game playing was
included as a random factor. Action game playing did not
influence baseline RT in this comparison, F(1, 81) = .01, p
= .92, 𝜂!𝑝 < .001. Following this, separate univariate
ANOVAs were conducted for each ANT network score.
None of the network scores were significantly different for
action game players: alerting scores: F(1, 81) = .03, p = .87,
𝜂!𝑝 < .001; orienting scores: F(1, 81) = 3.17, p = .08, 𝜂!𝑝 =
.04; and executive scores, F(1, 81) = .01, p = .93, 𝜂!𝑝 <
.0001. Orienting was the only component to approach
significance [action game players (M = -27, SD = 37), non
action game players (M = -45, SD = 49)]. Overall our results
did not corroborate those of Dye and colleagues. However,
we did observe a marginally larger pre-test orienting score
for action game players.
Physics Understanding with Covariates First, to
determine how baseline measures of attention influenced
learning gains, separate repeated-measures MANCOVAs
were conducted for each game version. Test administration
(pre vs. post) was included as a within-subjects factor. ANT

2731

pre-test network scores (alerting, orienting, and executive)
were included as covariates. Each question type (vectors,
acceleration, friction, mass, and gravity) was included as a
separate measure. Neither multivariate nor univariate tests
showed any significant effects of the covariates for either
game version. Thus, our fourth hypothesis, that ANT pretest scores will be more closely correlated with learning
gains for the real-time game was not supported.
Following the above analyses with ANT pre-test scores, a
similar analysis was conducted including difference scores
between the ANT pre- and post-tests, aggregate GEQ
scores, and QCM component scores (probability of success,
anxiety, and interest). First, separate repeated-measures
MANCOVAs were conducted for each game version. For
the real-time game, there was a significant interaction
between test administration and ANT orienting score in the
multivariate test, F(5, 45) = 3.31, p = .01, 𝜂!𝑝 = .27. None of
the other effects for the real-time game were significant in
the multivariate test.
Because we were interested in the specific effects for
each question type, univariate tests were explored as well.
For the real-time game, the interaction between test
administration and ANT orienting gains was significant for
the vectors question type, F(1, 49) = 6.09, p = .02, 𝜂!𝑝 = .11,
and for the friction question type, F(1, 49) = 6.38, p = .02,
𝜂!𝑝 = .12. The interaction between test administration and
ANT executive gains was significant for the vectors
question type, F(1, 49) = 5.17, p = .03, 𝜂!𝑝 = .10, and for the
friction question type, F(1, 49) = 4.87, p = .03, 𝜂!𝑝 = .09.
Partial correlations with difference scores controlling for
other covariates showed that gains on vectors and friction
questions increased with smaller ANT orienting, r(47) = .33, p = .02, and executive gains, r(47) = -.31, p = .03.
For the predictive game, no effects were significant in the
multivariate test. In unvariate tests for the predictive game,
interactions with test administration were significant for the
mass question type with the QCM anxiety, F(1, 29) = 4.98,
p = .03, 𝜂!𝑝 = .15, and GEQ score, F(1, 29) = 4.85, p = .04,
𝜂!𝑝 = .14. Gains on the mass question increased with
increasing QCM anxiety, r(27) = .38, p = .03 and GEQ
engagement, r(27) = .38, p = .04. Similarly, gains on the
gravity question increased with increasing QCM interest
scores, F(1, 29) = 5.83, p = .02, 𝜂!𝑝 = .17. These findings
partly support our fourth hypothesis that increased
motivation would support greater physics learning gains,
however this was limited to the predictive game.
Finally, the predictive game showed a significant
interaction between test administration and ANT executive
gains for the friction question type, F(1, 29) = 4.39, p =
.045, 𝜂!𝑝 = .13. Gains on the friction question increased with
smaller executive gains, r(27) = -.36, p < .05. Together, the
differences in correlations between learning gains and ANT
gains for the real-time and predictive games support our
fifth hypothesis.

Discussion and Conclusions
Overall, few of our initial hypotheses were supported:
Players did not demonstrate better learning with the
predictive than with the real-time game (hypothesis 1),
changes in attention network scores were not greater for the
real-time game (hypothesis 2), scores on the ANT pre-test
did not predict learning gains for either version (hypothesis
4), and action videogame players did not have higher initial
network scores (hypothesis 6). However, we did observe
that motivation was correlated with learning gains, at least
for the predictive game (hypothesis 3), and we did find that
changes in ANT network scores had different relationships
to learning gains across the two game versions (hypothesis
5). The remainder of this section is devoted to discussing
specific findings of interest.
Perhaps the most interesting finding from the above
analyses is that there was a robust negative correlation
between participants’ orienting/executive ANT gains and
physics understanding gains in the real-time game. ANT
scores increased from pre- to post-test for both game version
groups, suggesting that students may have had more
attentional resources available to distribute attention after
playing either game version (see Dye et al., 2009).
However, the greater the ANT gains, the smaller were the
learning gains observed in the real-time game. One
interpretation of these findings is that learning gains for the
real-time game were greater for those students that gained
less in terms of available attentional resources though realtime game play. There may be competition for resources
between learning to spread attention quickly and widely in
the real-time game and resources for extracting disciplinespecific content from the game.
Another notable finding is that there were no overall
differences in learning between the real-time and the
predictive game. Despite the additional load presumably
imposed by the real-time game, learning was equivalent.
Several possible explanations will be explored in future
work. Students might simply replay levels more often in the
real-time game, so that load limitations are overcome.
Additionally, the real-time game may have certain
advantages over the predictive game. One possible
advantage is that students are not required to anticipate or
visualize the results of cumulative force applications to form
a coherent plan – students implement plans piecemeal, as
needed. Each decision can be made relative to the current
direction of motion and about how each force will alter the
current trajectory. Furthermore, in the real-time version,
students get immediate feedback about whether each action
undertaken results in an expected outcome.
For the predictive game, multivariate tests showed a
somewhat greater influence of motivation and engagement,
such that greater motivation/engagement was correlated
with larger learning gains. One possibility is that
performance on the predictive game was influenced by
motivation due to the time gap between planning,
execution/observation, and revision. If students failed to use
what they observed to inform a subsequent placement phase,

2732

then they may have adopted something more like a trialand-error approach at each placement phase. However, the
real-time game delivered just-in-time feedback on choices,
which may have facilitated identifying incorrect actions
even with lower motivation.
Another interesting finding was the interaction between
game version and test administration for ANT orienting
scores. Considering orienting/executive scores were both
larger for game players in the Dye study, we might expect to
see larger orienting scores for the real-time game because
the rapid responses required game are more similar to those
required in action games. However, we observed the
opposite (greater orienting score changes for the predictive
game). In the predictive game, (1) there were additional
visual landmarks (forces placed by the student) to monitor
as the ship approached and (2) attention could be devoted
exclusively to orienting to relevant landmarks in the
observation phase (as forces were not being selected). Such
differences may account for gains in ANT orienting scores.
Interestingly, these gains in orienting scores did not
correlate with learning gains for the predictive game. This
could strengthen the claim that orienting gains were
obtained from improving monitoring of relevant landmarks
during motion, which one would not expect to influence
physics learning.
A final point involves the comparison of individuals
classified as action game players to other students. Dye and
colleagues (2009) showed that action game players had
higher scores on orienting and executive ANT components
and faster baseline RTs (but with equal accuracy). In
contrast to these prior findings, we found only a marginal
relationship between prior gaming experience and ANT
orienting scores. These differences may be due to
differences in the form of the ANT administered. Another
difference that may have contributed was our testing the
ANT in a classroom whereas Dye et al. tested in the home.
Despite these differences, it is worth noting that our
participants showed increased scores from pre- to post-test
in the direction expected from Dye et al.'s results for
recreational playing. Thus, it does seem that playing our
game may induce changes in attentional networks.
One limitation of this study is that there was no baseline
condition with which to compare the game version
treatments. Therefore, gains on the physics assessment and
in the components of the ANT could result from a testing
effect. Preliminary results do indicate that EGAME
produces larger physics learning gains than a control game
with adult participants. Future research will need to address
this issue.
A second limitation of this study involves the prototype
nature of the versions of the EGAME game at the heart of
this study. EGAME is being continually improved based on
these and other findings, but the game is still a work in
progress. Our assumption (underscored here) has been that
without scaffolding, formal learning gains will be minimal.
Two future plans involve (1) introducing feedback based on
the game play and (2) incorporating dialog interactions to

support explicit articulation through self-explanation and
directed questioning. The results of the current study are an
important step toward integrating basic research on
cognition and learning with applied research informing the
design of digital games for learning.

Acknowledgments
This material is based upon work supported by the NSF
under Grant No. 1119290.

References
Boot, W. R., Blakely, D. P., & Simons, D. J. (2009). Do
action video games improve perception and cognition.
Frontiers in Psychology, 2(226), 1-6.
Brockmyer, J. H., Fox, C. M., Curtiss, K. A., McBroom, E.,
Buckhart, K. M., & Pidruzny, J. N. (2009). The
development of the game engagement questionnaire: A
measure of engagement in video game-playing. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 45, 624-634.
Carnagey, N. L., Anderson, C. A., & Bushman, B. J. (2007).
The effect of video game violence on physiological
desensitization to real-life violence. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 43, 489- 496.
Clark, D. B., & Martinez-Garza, M. (2012). Prediction and
explanation as design mechanics in conceptuallyintegrated digital games to help players articulate the tacit
understandings they build through gameplay. Steinkuhler
et al. (Eds.), Games, Learning, And Society (pp. 279-305).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Droll, J. A., & Hayhoe, M. M. (2007). Trade-offs between
gaze and working memory use. JEP: Human Perception
and Performance, 33(6), 1352-1365.
Dye, M. W. G., Green, C. S., & Bavelier, D. (2009). The
development of attention skills in action video game
players. Neuropsychologia, 47, 1780-1789.
Feng, J., Spence, I., & Pratt, J. (2007). Playing an action
video game reduces gender differences in spatial
cognition. Psychological Science,18(10), 850-855.
Freund, P. A., Kuhn, J.-T., & Holling, H. (2011). Measuring
current achievement motivation with the QCM: Short
form development and investigation of measurement
invariance. Personality and Individual Differences, 51(5),
629-634.
Hestenes, D., Wells, M., & Swackhamer, G. (1992). Force
Concept Inventory. The Physics Teacher, 30, 141-158.
NRC (Honey, M. A., & Hilton, M. Eds.) (2010). Learning
Science Through Computer Games and Simulations.
National Research Council. Washington, DC: National
Academy Press.
Rueda, M. R., Fan, J., McCandliss, B. D., Halparin, J. D.,
Gruber, D. B., Lercari, L. P., Posner, M. I. (2004).
Development of attentional networks in childhood.
Neuropsychologia, 42(8), 1029-1040.
Wiedenbauer, G. & Jansen-Osmann, P. (2008). Manual
training of mental rotation in children. Learning and
Instruction, 18(1), 30-41.

2733

