UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Constraints on Theories of Serial Order Memory Revisited: The Cases of the Fill-In and
Protrusion Effects

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/54q6s36d

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Osth, Adam
Dennis, Simon

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Constraints on Theories of Serial Order Memory Revisited:
The Cases of the Fill-In and Protrusion Effects
Adam F. Osth (adamosth@gmail.com)
Simon Dennis (simon.dennis@gmail.com)
206 Psychology Building
1835 Neil Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210 USA

Abstract
In his seminal dissertation, Henson (1996) identified a number of constraints on theories of serial order memory. Two
constraints, the fill-in constraint, in which an item that is erroneously recalled early is likely to be followed by its predecessor rather than its successor (recall of ACB is more likely
than ACD), and the protrusion constraint, in which prior list
intrusions are likely to be recalled in the same output position as their previous serial position, were considered evidence
against chaining theories. We present results from two experiments which investigate the extent to which these effects are
dependent on experimental methodology. When participants
are given an open set of items, an equal ratio of fill-in and infill errors was observed and a protrusion effect was obtained.
However, when a reconstruction of order task was used, a fillin effect was observed. Implications for theories of serial order
memory are discussed.
Keywords: serial recall; serial order memory; episodic memory; short term memory; working memory; chaining models;
positional models; memory models

The problem of understanding serial order memory is possibly the oldest problem in the field of memory studies. Over
a century of work has produced theories that can be broadly
placed into two camps: positional theories, which claim that
items in a sequence are coded with respect to their position in
the sequence, and chaining theories, which claim that order
is implicit in the associations among the items in a sequence;
retrieval consists of using retrieval retrieved items as cues for
their successors.
A watershed moment in theorization of serial order memory came with the seminal dissertation of Henson (1996).
Through a series of experiments and meta-analyses, Henson outlined the regularities of the serial recall paradigm and
dubbed them the constraints on serial order memory. The
discussed regularities were diverse and ranged from effects
of serial position to repetition errors and omissions. Of interest to the present investigation were regularities in error
patterns that were particularly problematic for chaining models of serial order memory. One such regularity was the fill-in
effect, which states that when an item is recalled one position
too early, it is more likely to be followed by its predecessor
than its successor. As an example, consider when a sequence
ABCDE is studied and a subject erroneously recalls AC, skipping over the B item. Henson found that participants are more
likely to recall ACB than ACD, as if they are “filling in” the
missing response. The latter, the ACD case, is considered an
in-fill error, and any chaining model with asymmetric associations is predicted to produce a greater incidence of in-fill
errors than fill-in errors. The fill-in effect was replicated by

Surprenant, Kelley, Farley, and Neath (2005) using a reconstruction of order paradigm.
Another such constraint was the protrusion constraint,
which states that intrusions from prior lists tend to share the
same position in both the current and prior lists. That is, if a
subject is attempting to recall to item 3 on the current list and
makes an intrusion from the prior list, the intrusion is most
likely to be the third item on the previous list. Henson (1996)
dubbed such in-position intrusions protrusions. The protrusion effect was initially discovered by Conrad (1960) and has
been cited as evidence for positional coding.
Both the protrusion and fill-in constraints along with several other regularities that Henson (1996) discovered became
canonical in the serial recall literature. Virtually every model
that has been published since has no role of inter-item associations. The majority of the recent models are positional models; these include the the model of Burgess and
Hitch (1999, 2006), Henson’s own Start-End Model (Henson,
1998), the recurrent model of Botvinick and Plaut (2006), and
the grouping model (Farrell, 2012). The constraints outlined
by Henson (1996) were benchmark phenmonena for each of
these models, as several of these models demonstrated how
both fill-in and protrusion effects could be explained by positional representations.
The role of chaining in memory for serial order was revisited by Solway, Murdock, and Kahana (2012), who conducted
a re-analysis of three serial recall studies and found a robust
in-fill effect, contrary to the analyses of Henson (1996) and
in agreement with the predictions of chaining models. They
proposed a compound chaining model which yielded a good
fit to the data, whereas the positional model of Burgess and
Hitch (2006) did not yield an adequate fit. An open question remains as to why the analysis of Solway et al. yielded
an in-fill effect whereas the analyses of Henson yielded the
opposite pattern. In response to Solway et al., Farrell, Hurlstone, and Lewandowsky (2013) presented a re-analysis of
over a dozen datasets, the vast majority of which yielded a
fill-in effect. Farrell et al. posited that the datasets used by
Solway et al. used longer list lengths than most serial recall
experiments (minimum of ten items), which might be beyond
the capacity of short-term memory and thus utilize different
representations.
However, another difference between the studies analyzed
by Solway et la. and Farrell et al. is that in the former, items
were not re-used across trials (this is referred to as an open

3199

set of items). The studies considered by Henson and Farrell et al. often used small sets of stimuli such that items
were frequently re-used across trials (referred to as a closed
set of items). This is often standard practice in serial recall
experiments, as it is believed that when a large set of stimuli
is used the participant has to remember both the items and
the order in which they occurred. If a closed set of stimuli
is employed, item memory quickly reaches ceiling and only
the order among the items has to be remembered on a given
trial (Healy, 1974). Another similar approach to obtaining a
relatively “pure” measure of order memory is to employ a reconstruction of order task, wherein the participant studies a
list of items but at retrieval they are provided with the items
and asked to place them in the correct order (Healy, Fendrich,
Cunningham, & Till, 1987); this task was used in the experiments of Surprenant et al. (2005) that demonstrated a fill-in
effect.
Closed sets and reconstruction of order tasks may yield different results than serial recall experiments with open sets in
that the former tasks are susceptible to guessing strategies and
the latter has a high incidence of omissions. When a closet
set or a reconstruction task is used, item memory is at ceiling, which may cause participants to guess as to the locations
of the items without having any knowledge of their positions.
Under some circumstances, this can lead to an artificially high
degree of fill-in errors. Consider a case in which a participant
studied a list ABCD and knows the locations of A and B, but
cannot recall the positions of C and D and guesses on the
third and fourth responses. In this circumstance, the participant can either a.) get the sequence correct (ABCD) or b.)
produce a sequence with a fill-in error (ABDC). Under this
circumstance, only fill-in errors can be produced and there is
no possibility for making an in-fill error.
However, when an open set is used in a serial recall task,
item memory is imperfect and there is a high incidence of
omissions, which can disguise a fill-in effect as an in-fill effect. Consider if sequence ABCD is represented in memory
as ACBD. This would yield a fill-in effect if all of the represented items were output, but if B is omitted at retrieval,
sequence ACD is produced. This may be especially likely in
the studies of Solway et al. since the lists in the experiments
they analzyed were quite long and the performance of the participants was relatively poor.
Even if guessing strategies are responsible for the finding
of the fill-in effect, the compound chaining model of Solway et al. has no recourse for producing protrusion errors.
Nonetheless, a number of traditional studies of serial recall
collect responses on a series of lined response grids in which
participants can see the previous responses. A simple explanation for the protrusion effect is that when participants are
not able to recall a given item, they glance at the output position from the previous trial and use that response in their
answer.
The present study attempt to control for both of these possibilites using simple means. In Experiment 1, we conducted

a serial recall experiment that used a large open set of words,
such that items are not repeated from trial to trial making it
unlikely that participants should be able to guess from a pool
of possible responses. Additionally, participants entered their
responses on a keyboard rather than on lined response grids
and were not given access to their previous responses. In Experiment 2, we used the same procedure as Experiment 1 but
employed a reconstruction task by showing the participants
the list items at retrieval in a new randomized order.
Serial recall experiments using open sets have been conducted, but to date there have been no analyses of whether
the data collected from these experiments exhibit a predominance of fill-in or in-fill errors or whether they exhibit the protrusion effect. Investigations of set size effects have instead
been concerend with other issues, such as word frequency effects (Roodenrys & Quinlan, 2000) or the phonological similarity effect (Coltheart, 1993; Conrad, 1963). We found that
the open set did affect the fill-in to in-fill ratio, as we observed equivalent levels of fill-in and in-fill errors in Experiment 1. In Experiment 2, we conducted a reconstruction of
order task and replicated the fill-in effect found by Surprenant
et al. (2005).

Experiment 1: Serial Recall
Experiment 1 was an immediate serial recall task using a large
set of words such that every list a participant received was
composed entirely of unique items. To capture different levels
of performance, we employed lists of five and six items and
list length was manipulated between subjects.

Method
Participants A total of 204 undergraduate psychology students (105 participants for the list length five condition, 99 for
the list length six condition) from The Ohio-State University
participated in this experiment in exchange for course credit
in an introductory psychology course.
Materials Participants studied words that were randomly
selected from a word pool of 625 words from the Google
search counts. Words ranged from 4 to 7 letters in length
and from 30 to 250 counts per million in word frequency.
Procedure To familiarize participants with the nature of the
task, all participants began each session with four unscored
practice lists of three, four, five, and six items in order. Participants were given feedback upon completion of each of the
practice lists. If any errors were made, participants were reminded that they have to recall the items in the order in which
they were presented. No feedback was given at any point in
the experiment after the practice session was completed.
Upon completion of the practice session, participants were
given 62 trials with lists of either five or six items. During
the study phase, participants were presented with each word
for one second followed by a blank screen for 250 ms. Following completion of the study list, participants were presented with a recall prompt that was a series of three question
marks (”???”) on the center of the screen. Participants were

3200

instructed to begin recalling the items upon seeing the prompt
by typing their respones on a keyboard and were given 20 seconds to recall the sequence. After the first key was pressed,
the question marks disappeared and replaced with the letters typed by the participant. Participants signaled completion of a word by hitting the ”ENTER” key on the keyboard.
Upon completing a response, the response disappeared from
view on the computer screen and was replaced by the question marks. Participants signaled completion of the recalled
sequence by typing the word ”done” and hitting ”ENTER.”
Upon completion of each trial, participants signified readiness to begin the next trial by hitting the ”ENTER” key.
Halfway through the experiment, participants were given a
break in which they played a digital card game for 180 seconds. Stimulus presentation and response collection was handled using the Python experimental library (Geller, Schleifer,
Sederberg, Jacobs, & Kahana, 2007).

Prop. Correct

1.0
0.6
0.4
0.2

Prop. Correct

1.0

Fill-In and In-Fill Errors Henson (1996) classified fill-in
errors by focusing on all responses following the first item
that was recalled one position too early. If the following
item was from one serial position earlier than the just recalled
item, this was considered a fill-in error. If the following item
was from one serial position later than the just recalled item,
this was considered an in-fill error. However, one need not
just consider transitions that only traverse one serial position.
Rather, the initial error could be more than one position too
early and the subsequent fill-in or in-fill could be more than
one position earlier or later, respectively. We will henceforth
refer to the one position restriction as the lag 1 analysis and
the latter case which considers longer transition as the any lag
case; both will be considered in the present analysis.
The analyses of Solway et al. (2012) and Farrell et al.
(2013) both used a strict scoring procedure in which fill-in
errors and in-fill errors are only considered for cases where
the initial skip was the first error in the trial. We follow their
example here and use strict scoring in our analyses.
The mean number of fill-in and in-fill errors for each classification style can be seen in Figure 2. Separate mixed
1 t test degrees of freedom (df) are corrected df from the WelchSatterwaithe equation.

A
Experiment 2: Reconstruction

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

Serial Position Effects The proportion of correctly items
recalled in their correct serial position are shown in Figure 1.
Performance was significantly worse in the length six condition than in the length five condition, t(201.37)1 = 8.26, p <
.001. A mixed analysis of variance (ANOVA) using serial position as a within subjects factor and list length as a between
subjects factor revealed that performance varied as a function
of serial position, F(5, 906) = 850.40, and there was a serial
position by length interaction, F(4, 906) = 34.99, both ps <
.001. Post hoc comparisons revealed a negative recency effect (poorer performance for the last item than the second to
last item) in both the length five, t(104) = -10.99, and length
six, t(98) = -14.12, conditions, both ps < .001.

Length 5
Length 6

0.8

0.0

Results

Experiment 1: Serial Recall

B
1

2

4
3
Serial Position

5

6

Figure 1: Serial position curves for Experiment 1 (A), which
used a traditional serial recall procedure, and Experiment
2(B), which used a reconstruction task. Error bars indicate
95% within subjects confidence intervals.

ANOVAs with error type (fill-in or in-fill) as a within subjects
factor and list length as a between subjects factor for both the
any lag and lag 1 transition analyses. Results indicated there
was neither a fill-in effect or an in-fill effect when transitions
of any lag were analyzed, F(1, 202) = .246, or when analyses
were restricted to lag 1 transitions, F = 1.291, both ps > .05.
Protrusion Errors All analyses on intrusion rates were restricted to immediate intrusions (intrusions from only one list
prior to the current study list). A visualization of the intrusion
rates for the serial position of each intruding item at each output position can be seen in Figure 3. As can be seen by the
spiked nature of the graph, intrusions tend to appear in the
same output position as their serial position in the prior list.
A statistical analysis was performed by calculating the proportion of immediate intrusions that were protrusions for each
participant. Because there were some participants that exhibited no prior list intrusions, this analysis was restricted to
participants that made at least one immediate intrusion error.
The proportion of immediate intrusions that were protrusions
(in-position) was above chance for both the list length five,
t(69) = 4.49, and list length six conditions, t(82) = 3.50, both
ps < .001, which is consistent with the findings of Henson
(1996) and Conrad (1960).

Discussion
We conducted a serial recall experiment that used experimental parameters that were highly similar to previous experiments with the exception that stimuli were not reused from
trial to trial in an effort to gauge the the generality of the constraints on serial recall established by Henson (1996). In contrast to Henson’s data and the analyses of Solway et al., we
observed roughly equivalent numbers of fill-in and in-fill er-

3201

12
9
6
3
0

12
9
6
3
0

Fill-In Errors
In-Fill Errors

0.8
Proportion of Errors

12
9
6
3
0

Immediate Intrusions
by Output and Serial Position

List Length 5

List Length 6

0.6

Reconstruction

Any Lag

Lag 1

List Length 5

1

0.4
0.2

0.8
Proportion of Errors

Mean # Errors

Mean # Errors

Mean # Errors

Fill-In and In-Fill Errors

0.6

3

2 45
1

12

3
34
2

5

1

2

45 1
3

4
3
2 5

List Length 6

4

123
5

4

5

1

6
3
5
2
4
1
2
4
0.2 3
34 1 45 123 56 23 6 2345
5
1
2 45
1
6
6
6
1
4
5
2
3
6
Output Position

0.4

Figure 2: Mean number of fill-in and in-fill errors for each
classification type for list length 5 (top) and list length 6 (middle) conditions of Experiment 1, along with the reconstruction task used in Experiment 2 (bottom). Error bars indicate
95% within subjects confidence intervals.

Figure 3: Proportions of immediate intrusions from each serial position in the prior list for each output position of the
current trial for both the list length five (top) and list length
six (bottom) conditions. The serial position of the prior list
intrusion is indicated by the numbers on the lines.

rors. In other words, when an item was recalled too early,
participants were equally likely to continue in a forward order or to return to the skipped item. The protrusion effect,
in contrast, was robust in our experiment. The spiked, positional nature of immediate intrusions strongly resembled the
data displayed by Henson (1996, 1998).
Nonetheless, it was still somewhat surprising that we
did not observe a fill-in effect in our experiment because
Surprenant et al. (2005) found a robust fill-in effect with both
a small and large set of items. Nonetheless, their experiments
used a reconstruction of order paradigm, and as previously
discussed, such a task might introduce guessing strategies in
the same manner as a small set size would in a standard serial recall paradigm. Thus, we repeated our experiment using
the same parameters but employed a reconstruction of order
task at retrieval and hypothesized that the results would favor
a fill-in effect.

periment in exchange for course credit in an introductory psychology course.

Experiment 2: Reconstruction of Order
Experiment 2 was identical to that of Experiment 1 with the
exception that a reconstruction of order task was used at retrieval. During the test phase, participants were presented
with all of the study list items in a randomized order and told
to recall the words in the order in which they were presented.
Because performance was far superior to that of the serial recall task in Experiment 1, we only collected data with a list
length of six items.

Method
Participants A total of 95 undergraduate psychology students from The Ohio-State University participated in this ex-

Procedure The procedure was identical to that of Experiment 1 with the exception that at retrieval, participants were
presented with all of the studied words at the top of the
screen in a randomized order. The words remained fixed on
the screen through the test and did not disappear as participants entered the corresponding words. Participants were
instructed in advance of the experiment that they would be
presented with the words and were told that they should type
out the words in the order in which they had appeared in the
study list.

Results
Due to the severe rarity of prior list intrusions in Experiment
2, analyses were restricted to serial position effects and fill-in
and in-fill errors.
Serial Position Effects A one way repeated measures
ANOVA revealed a main effect of serial position, F(5, 470)
= 225.6, p < .001. Post hoc inspection of the serial position
data revealed a positive recency effect for the last item in the
list, t(94) = 6.45, p < .001.
Fill-in and In-Fill Errors Mean number of fill-in and infill errors were calculated for each participant and can be seen
in the bottom panel of Figure 2. Fill-in errors outnumbered
in-fill errors when any lag transitions were considered, t(94)
= 14.02, and when only lag 1 transitions were considered, t
= 9.80, both ps < .001. Thus, in contrast to Experiment 1, a
fill-in effect was observed.

3202

Discussion
Consistent with our hypothesis, usage of a reconstruction of
order task at retrieval produced a robust fill-in effect. Our
results are consistent with the findings of Surprenant et al.
(2005), who found a fill-in effect with a large set size using a
reconstruction task.

General Discussion
The two experiments we conducted found that a previously
established regularity of serial order memory, the fill-in effect, depended on the type of task used to gauge serial order
memory. In Experiment 1, we used a traditional serial recall paradigm with the exception that items were not repeated
across trials and found equivalent levels of fill-in and in-fill
errors. In Experiment 2, we employed a reconstruction of order task and found the traditional fill-in effect. These results
are theoretically relevant because the fill-in effect has been
used to argue against chaining models of memory, and while
an in-fill effect was observed in the analyses of Solway et al.,
our results using shorter lists of words do not show a preponderance of in-fill errors over fill-in errors.
This begs the question as to what class of models the results in these experiments support. While an in-fill effect is
predicted by chaining models with asymmetric associations
(stronger associations in the forward than in the backward direction), chaining models with symmetric associations (equal
strength associations in the forward and backward direction,
such as in the TODAM model of Lewandowsky & Murdock,
1989) would be perfectly compatible with the equal ratios of
fill-in and in-fill errors observed in Experiment 1 and a guessing response strategy could be appended to such models to
produce fill-in effects as observed in the reconstruction task in
Experiment 2. However, one should be reminded of the fact
that the protrusion effect applied in both conditions of Experiment 1 and any simple chaining model with either symmetric or asymmetric associations has no recourse for predicting
in-position prior list intrusions without positional representations.

Is there a role of inter-item associations in serial
recall?
We reject the central claim made by Solway et al. (2012)
that participants’ recall sequences are indicative of a chaining model with asymmetric associations, as we were unable
to replicate their finding of an in-fill effect using shorter lists
of words. Nonetheless, a number of other studies in the literature have exhibited findings that are in accordance with
the predictions of chaining models. During retrieval, when
participants are given study list items in the same order as
they were presented at study, participants perform better than
when they’re given unordered list items as cues, suggesting
that they’re using the cues to retrieve neighboring items from
the list (Serra & Nairne, 2000; Basden, Basden, & Stephens,
2002). Similarly, when participants are given the same list of
words from trial to trial but the starting point of the list differs

(the spin list paradigm: Sequence ABCDE might be repeated
as CDEAB), participants are only slightly worse than when
the same list is repeated with all of the items in the same positions (Kahana, Mollison, & Addis, 2010). Positional models, in contrast, would predict a more dramatic impairment to
performance in the spin lists than in the repeating lists. While
positional models might be extended to produce both of these
sets of results, these results follow intuitively from the predictions of chaining models.
While one might be inclined to suggest a hybrid model that
incorporates inter-item associations to account for the above
findings and positional representations to account for the protrusion effect 2 , such a framework is not only inelegant but is
an ad hoc solution to the problem. A more elegant approach
is the constraint satisfaction (CS) model proposed by Dennis
(2009). In the CS model, asymmetric associations in the forward direction are stored among all of the list items. The
model differs from the aforementioned chaining models because at retrieval, the stored representation of the list is compared to all possible ordered list constructions; the distances
between the possibilities and the list representation determine
the probability of outputting a given sequence.
The basic principle behind the model is that the more differences there are between a candidate sequence and the studied sequence, the less likely it will be that the candidate sequence will be output. Dennis demonstrated that fill-in errors
are more frequent than in-fill errors for this reason because
a sequence with a fill-in such as ACBDEF only misses the
B-C connection and erroneously introduces a C-B connection (two differences from the original sequence), whereas
a sequence such as ACDEF misses all of the connections between B and its subsequent items (four differences from the
original sequence). The model might be able to produce a
lower incidence of fill-in errors if it’s assumed that list items
from the retrieved sequence are only output if they’re sufficiently strong, producing more omissions when item memory is poor and lowering the fill-in to in-fill ratio. Dennis also
demonstrated that introducing a component of similarity that
is common to all of the items allows the model to capture key
phenomena that have used to argue for positional representations, such as the protrusion effect as well as the mixed-list
phonological similarity effect (e.g.: Baddeley, 1968).

Conclusion
Our work evaluating two of the constraints on theories of serial order memory established by Henson (1996) uncovered a
generality of one (the protrusion constraint) and a limitation
of the other (the fill-in constraint). These results may indicate a need to re-evalute whether inter-item associations are
sufficient to support memory for serial order.
2 The model of Burgess and Hitch (1992) incorporated both interitem and positional associations. However, later versions of the
model did not include inter-item associations.

3203

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Gina Gerardo, Mengze Zheng,
Katherine Bubeleva, and Rebecca Kirchner for their assistance with data collection. We would also like to thank Per
Sederberg for helpful discussion about these experiments.

References
Baddeley, A. (1968). How does acoustic similarity influence short-term memory. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 20.
Basden, B. H., Basden, D. R., & Stephens, J. P. (2002). Partset cuing of order information in recall tests. Journal of
Memory and Language, 47, 517–529.
Botvinick, M. M., & Plaut, D. C. (2006). Short-term memory
for serial order: A recurrent neural network model. Psychological Review, 113, 201–233.
Burgess, N., & Hitch, G. J. (1992). Towards a network model
of the articulatory loop. Journal of Memory and Language,
31(4), 429–460.
Burgess, N., & Hitch, G. J. (1999). Memory for serial order:
A network model of the phonological loop and its timing.
Psychological Review, 106.
Burgess, N., & Hitch, G. J. (2006). A revised model of shortterm memory and long-term learning of verbal sequences.
Journal of Memory and Language, 55, 627–652.
Coltheart, V. (1993). Effects of phonological similarity and
concurrent irrelevant articulation on short-term memory recall of repeated and novel word lists. Memory & Cognition,
21(4), 539–545.
Conrad, R. (1960). Serial order intrusions in immediate memory. British Journal of Psychology, 51, 45–48.
Conrad, R. (1963). Acoustic confusion and memory span for
words. Nature, 197, 1029–1030.
Dennis, S. (2009). Can a chaining model account for serial
recall? In L. Carlson, C. Hölscher, & T. Shipley (Eds.),
Proceedings of the XXXI Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 2813–2818).
Farrell, S. (2012). Temporal clustering and sequencing in
short-term memory and episodic memory. Psychological
Review, 119(2), 223–271.
Farrell, S., Hurlstone, M. J., & Lewandowsky, S. (2013).
Sequential dependencies in recall of sequences: Filling in
the blanks. Memory & Cognition.
Geller, A. S., Schleifer, I. K., Sederberg, P. B., Jacobs, J., & Kahana, M. J. (2007). PyEPL: A crossplatform experiment-programming library. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments & Computers, 65(1), 50–64.
Healy, A. F. (1974). Separating item from order information
in short-term memory. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 13, 644–655.
Healy, A. F., Fendrich, D. W., Cunningham, T. F., & Till,
R. E. (1987). Effects of cuing on short-term retention of
order information. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 13, 413–425.
Henson, R. N. A. (1996). Short-term memory for serial order.

(Unpublished doctoral dissertation. MRC Applied Psychology Unit, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, England.)
Henson, R. N. A. (1998). Short-term memory for serial order:
The start-end model. Cognitive Psychology, 36, 73–137.
Kahana, M. J., Mollison, M. V., & Addis, K. M. (2010).
Positional cues in serial learning: The spin-list technique.
Memory & Cognition, 38(1), 92–101.
Lewandowsky, S., & Murdock, B. B. (1989). Memory for
serial order. Psychological Review, 96, 25–57.
Roodenrys, S., & Quinlan, P. T. (2000). The effects of stimulus set size and word frequency on verbal serial recall.
Memory, 8(2), 71–78.
Serra, M., & Nairne, J. S. (2000). Part-set cuing of order
information: Implications for associative theories of serial
order memory. Memory & Cognition, 28(5), 847–855.
Solway, A., Murdock, B. B., & Kahana, M. J. (2012). Positional and temporal clustering in serial order memory.
Memory & Cognition, 40, 177–190.
Surprenant, A. M., Kelley, M. R., Farley, L. A., & Neath, I.
(2005). Fill-in and infill errors in order memory. Memory,
13(3), 267–273.

3204

