UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Cooperation in Prisoner’s Dilemma Game: Influence of Players’ Social Roles

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3b94c84v

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Hristova, Evgenia
Grinberg, Maurice
Georgieva, Iskra
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Cooperation in Prisoner’s Dilemma Game:
Influence of Players’ Social Roles
Evgenia Hristova (ehristova@cogs.nbu.bg)
Maurice Grinberg (mgrinberg@nbu.bg)
Iskra Georgieva (issgeorgieva@gmail.com)
Milena Borisova (borisova_milena@abv.bg)
Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology,
New Bulgarian University, 21 Montevideo Street, Sofia 1618, Bulgaria

Abstract
The paper aims to extend the findings of a previous study
(Grinberg et al., 2012) exploring the impact of social relations
on the cooperation in the Prisoner’s dilemma game. Relations
between players are manipulated by assigning different roles.
The roles embodied the four basic types of human relations in
line with Fiske’s relational models theory (Fiske, 1991):
communal sharing, authority ranking, equality matching, and
market pricing (players are assigned roles of team mates,
chief and subordinate, partners, and opponents, respectively).
Cooperation rates, mutual cooperation, mutual defection, and
payoffs gained were subsequently analyzed and compared for
a series of forty games. As a result we identified that the
market-pricing condition is characterized by considerably
lower individual and mutual cooperation, higher mutual
defection and lower payoff in comparison to the conditions
impersonating the remaining three relational types.

C

R, R

S, T

D

T, S

P, P

Player II
C
D
Player I

Player I

Player II
C
D
C

3, 3

1, 4

D

4, 1

2, 2

Figure 1: Payoff tables for the PD game with standard
notation for the payoffs and an example with specific payoff
values. In each cell the comma separated payoffs are the
Player I’s and Player II’s payoffs, respectively.

Keywords:
Prisoner’s
Dilemma,
decision-making,
cooperation, social interaction, relational models

Introduction
Prisoner’s Dilemma Game
Games are formal tools to study social interactions. The
Prisoner’s dilemma (PD) game is one of the most extensively
studied social dilemmas as it is considered to model
interactions in many social situations and problems such as
overpopulation, pollution, energy savings, participation in a
battle, etc. (Dawes, 1980). It is used to study cooperation and
conflict in interactions between individuals, groups, and
societies (Rapoport & Chammah, 1965).
In the PD game the players simultaneously choose their moves
– to cooperate (C) or to defect (D) – without knowing the
choice of the other player. The payoff table for the twoperson PD game is presented in Figure 1. The payoffs of the
Prisoner’s dilemma game (see Figure 1) satisfy the inequalities
T > R > P > S and 2R > T+S. Because of this game structure a
dilemma appears, as there is no obvious best move. On one
hand, the D choice is dominant for both players – each player
gets a larger payoff by choosing D (defection) than by choosing
C (cooperation) no matter what the other player chooses. On
the other hand, the payoff for mutual defection (P) is lower
than the payoff if both players choose their dominated C
strategies (payoff R for each player).

As the PD game is used as a model for describing social
dilemmas and studying the phenomenon of cooperation, there
is a great interest in the conditions that could promote or
diminish cooperation. In formal game theory players are
supposed to try to maximize their payoffs in a completely
selfish manner (Colman, 2003). From this point of view the
dominant strategy in the game is defection (in one-shot or in
repeated PD games with a fixed and known number of games).
This prediction is in contrast with the behavior of the players
observed in laboratory settings or in real life situations.
In human societies, people cooperate all the time and
often cooperation is seen as one of the foundations of
human civilization (see e.g. Gärdenfors, 2003). Sally (1995)
provides a meta-review of the experiments involving PD
games published between 1958 and 1995 and shows that in
its iterated version (the game is played many times),
cooperation choices are made in 20-50 % of the games
(mean 47.4 %) and even in one-shot games many players
cooperate, although much less than in the iterated version.
Several studies have shown how cooperation can emerge
from expected utility or anticipatory reinforcement models
without any specific relations between the players (see e.g.
Grinberg, Hristova, & Lalev, 2010; and the references there in).
Other theories explain the cooperative behavior in PD
games in terms of socially established values and stress the
importance of social interaction and relationships.
Reputation building theory (Kreps et al., 1982; Andreoni &
Miller, 1993) assumes that the player is building himself a
reputation of a cooperative player to build herself the image
of trust and thus to provoke cooperation by the other player.
Trivers (1972) puts accent on reciprocity as a widespread
norm and basis of societies: people reciprocate cooperation

2578

with cooperation. Another influential theory about
cooperation in PD game is based on the concept of altruism.
It assumes that some players are not strictly self-interested
and from an altruistic perspective, cooperation can yield
higher payoffs than defection (Cooper et al., 1996).
Although these social theories of cooperation have been
proposed to explain cooperative behavior unexpected by
normative game theory, it is interesting to consider more
general social theories that are more closely related to the
game theoretic analysis of social relations. In our opinion
such a theory is the relational models theory proposed by
Alan Fiske (Fiske, 1991) which is trying to decompose any
social interaction to four basic relations and thus seems
amenable to game theoretic representation.
Moreover, as the PD game is central in the modeling of
social interactions it can be used to explore the existence
and limits of the relational social types as posited by
relational social models (see e.g. Haslam, 2004). Exploring
the potential of games like the PD game as modeling
relational types is one of the goals of this paper which is a
continuation of a first analysis presented in Grinberg,
Hristova, & Borisova (2012).

Relational Models Theory
Relational models theory (Fiske, 1992; Fiske & Haslam,
1996; Rai & Fiske, 2011) states that there are four basic
schemas that are used to build, organize and maintain
relationships and interactions among individuals in a
society. These models are supposed to be universal and all
relations could be described by these models or by
combination of them. The four types of relations generate
four modes for every aspect of the interactions between
people – resource allocation, moral judgments, decisionmaking, etc. These four relation models are the following
(Fiske, 1992):
• Communal Sharing – relations in an undifferentiated
group of people with equivalent status. Everyone in a
community - which could consist of two members or
could be very large – has some rights and some duties.
The focus is on commonalities and not on distinctions;
• Authority Ranking – implies an ordinal ranking in
society and this ranking scheme determines one’s
relative status. For instance, military hierarchy can be
considered a prototype of such relations;
• Equality Matching – relations are based on a model of
one-to-one correspondence as in turn-taking, tit-for-tat
strategies, etc. The social prototype would be friendship
networks, in which reciprocity is a norm which rules
the distribution of wealth;
• Market Pricing – based on a model of proportionality
in social relations in which people reduce their
interaction to some ratios of utility measures. Examples
of relations of this type are the ones governed by prices,
rational calculations, expected utilities, etc.

Social Interactions and Cooperation
In formal game theory payoffs, strategies and choices are
analyzed independently from any context or meaning. Most
experiments for studying PD game employ neutral
presentation of the game. I order too be able to control for
extraneous variables, game is presented in neutral
formulation, choices are labeled as ‘A’ and ‘B’, or as ‘1’
and ‘2’, etc. Participants in the game are usually called
‘players’, or ‘you’ and ‘the other’ and usually are unfamiliar
with one another, in most cases also a visual contact
between them is avoided. This is done in order to isolate
cognitive processing of information and to capture influence
of other factors.
However, we think that deeper understanding of decisions
in games should consider social relations involved in the
interactions. People behave differently in social interactions
described as formal games with similar strategies and
payoffs, depending on whom they interact with, what is the
situation, what are the possible choices.
Sally (2001) states that social interaction is essential and
the social dilemmas like PD need to be investigated from
such a perspective. In the paper the importance of closeness
between players in game strategy building is discussed.
According to this account, players change their choices if
they perceive the other player as a friend or a stranger.
Other studies focused on the influence of game
description, game title, etc. As such labels and description
give different context of the interaction, it is expected that
they change the behavior of the players.
Some studies explored the influence of the title given to
the game. Ellingsen et al. (2012) found more cooperation
when the game is labeled ‘Community Game’ vs. ‘Stock
Market Game’. Liberman et al. (2004) found a similar effect
in the first round cooperation comparing the game titles
‘Community Game’ and ‘Wall Street Game’.
Another study explored the influence of the general
interpretation context (Eiser & Bhavnani, 1974).
Participants cooperate more when they are told that the
experiments studies ‘international negotiation’ or
‘interpersonal interaction’ compared to ‘economic
bargaining’ or neutral description.
Zhong et al. (2007) manipulated several factors – game
label, choices labels, outcome labels and found that giving
interpretative labels promotes cooperation and this is
especially the case when ‘trust’ and ‘cooperation’ are used
as labels.
However, in all of these studies the influence of the
players’ roles is not explored. In all of them the players are
are labeled neutrally as ‘You’ and ‘Other person’ (Ellingsen
et al., 2012; Eiser & Bhavnani, 1974; Zhong et al., 2007) or
as ‘Player 1’ and ‘Player 2’ (Liberman et al, 2004). As
players’ labels and roles could also serve to denote social
relations, it is worth exploring their influence on cooperative
behavior.

2579

In a previous study (Grinberg et al., 2012), we made a first
attempt to apply the Fiske’s relational models theory (Fiske,
1991) to playing in PD games. In the experiment (see for
details Grinberg et al., 2012), the relational models between
players (communal sharing, authority ranking, equality
matching, and market pricing) were operationalized by
using various ways of distributing the total payoff gained by
a dyad of players in a series of Prisoner’s dilemma games:
each player receives the total payoff (communal sharing),
one of the players receives more than the other (authority
ranking), each player receives half of the total payoff
(equality matching), each player receives a portion of the
total payoff proportional to his/hers individual payoffs
(market pricing). For these four conditions, the cooperation
rates, the mutual cooperation, the mutual defection, and the
payoffs gained were analyzed and compared for a series of
forty games. The results of Grinberg et al. (2012) showed
that the market pricing distribution scheme leads to less
cooperation, less mutual cooperation, more mutual defection
and less total payoff than in the other three distribution
schemes.
This is an interesting result taking into account the fact
that in formal game theory, in many experiments, and in
many real life situations, the players are perceived as
individualistic beings. It is also evidence that the topic
deserves further exploration and has motivated the present
study.

Goals of the Study
The goal of the present study is to explore the mapping of
the Fiske’s relational models theory to Prisoner’s dilemma
game focusing on the players’ roles corresponding to the
four relational models (Fiske, 1992) as follows:
• communal sharing – group of people with strong
bonds, wherein everyone is equivalent to the other and
all resources are common;
• authority ranking – people are ordered hierarchically
and the resources are distributed according to the
person's rank;
• equality matching – a balanced relationship based on
turn-taking, tit-for-tat strategies and equal distribution
of the resources;
• market pricing – relations based on proportionality
and comparison – it is important ‘how the person stands
in proportion to others’
We aim to explore what is the influence of the role
assigned to the player on a set of game outcomes that
characterize the playing of a PD game – cooperation, mutual
cooperation, and mutual defection. It is also important to
check the influence of the assigned role on the overall
payoffs that are received – e.g. what type of model is more
beneficial in terms of payoff earned in interactions shaped
by the strategic structure of the PD game.
Based on the results obtained in Grinberg et al. (2012),
the cooperation rate is expected to be the highest if the
players are acting in a communal sharing relation and the

lowest when the players’ roles are defined according to the
market pricing model. In the latter scenario, we expect a
more individualistic behaviour of the players.

Method
Stimuli and Procedure
A sequence of 40 Prisoner’s dilemma games is used in the
current experiment. All of the games had the payoff matrix
given in Figure 2.
Player II
C
Player I

Relational models and PD game

D

C

40, 40

10, 50

D

50, 10

15, 15

Figure 2: Payoff table for the PD game used in the
experiment.
Participants were tested in pairs. After receiving the
appropriate instructions for the corresponding experimental
condition, each dyad played 5 training games (whose results
were not included in the analysis) followed by 40 games
that were further analyzed. On the computer game interface,
the cooperation move was labeled ‘1’ and the defection
move was labeled ‘2’. Matlab 7.6.0 (R2008a) was used for
presenting the game and recording the choiches of the
players. After each game the subjects got feedback about
their own and the other player’s choice and payoffs in the
current game. They could also constantly monitor their own
total payoff; the total payoff of the other player; and the
monetary equivalent of their own total payoff.
The instructions for the experiment explained in detail the
rules of the game and included several test questions to
ensure that participants understood them correctly. There
were five instructions that varied only in the description of
the players’ roles and the corresponding relations between
the players in the game.
The experimenters secured that the participants had not
visual, verbal and any kind of other contact between them
before and during the experiment. Therefore, no player knew
who the other player was before the end of the experiment.
Subjects were paid real money accordingly to the final payoff
in the game. Each session lasted about 20 minutes.

Experimental Conditions
The players’ roles are varied in accordance with the four
relational models described above in a between-subjects
design. We also added a control condition, exposed to the
most common neutral presentation of the PD game. So,
there are 5 experimental conditions as a total differing in
how players are labeled in the instructions and on the game
interface and how the sequence of games is presented (a
sentence in the instruction defines the relations between
players)
• Team condition – the players are labeled as ‘teammates’; instruction: ‘You will play a sequence of

2580

games based on team-work between players with your
team-mate’ (communal sharing relational model);
• Hierarchy condition – the players are labeled as
‘chief’ and ‘subordinate’, correspondingly; instruction:
‘You will play a sequence of games based on hierarchy
between players with your chief/subordinate’
(authority ranking relational model).
• Partners condition – the players are labeled as
‘partners’; instruction: ‘You will play a sequence of
games based on equality (parity) between players with
your partner’ (equality matching relational model);
• Opponents condition – the players are labeled as
‘opponents’; instruction: ‘You will play a sequence of
games based on competition between players with
your opponent’ (market pricing relational model).
• Players condition – the players are labeled as
‘players’; instruction: ‘You will play a sequence of
games with the other player’ (control condition).
The names for players’ roles in each experimental
condition are used consistently throughout the experimental
session – in the instructions and on the game interface.

roles on the number of cooperative moves (F (4, 73) = 3.44,
p = 0.012).
Post-hoc LSD test shows that the cooperation rate in the
opponents condition is significantly lower than the
cooperation rate in the team condition (p = 0.003), in the
hierarchy condition (p = 0.003), and in the partners
condition (p = 0.025). All other differences are nonsignificant.

Figure 3: Average percentage of cooperative choices for
different players’ roles. (‘*’ means p < 0.05).

Participants
Forty pairs (80 participants) took part in the experiment – 8
pairs in each experimental condition. Participants were
randomly assigned to their experimental condition. In the
hierarchy condition, it was randomly determined which
player will be in the subordinate role and which player in the
chief role.
Data of one dyad was removed because one of the players
reported after the game end that he has participated in a
similar experiment. Thus, we ended with 7 pairs in the
hierarchy condition and data of 78 participants was analyzed
(46 female, 32 male, mean age 24 years). For this condition,
although the players were asymmetrically labeled (chief and
subordinate) the results are not significantly different, so they
are analyzed together.

This analysis shows that the labels for the players’ roles
influence the cooperation rate and lead as expected to lower
cooperation for players labeled as ‘opponents’. In the
terminology of Fiske’s theory, the market pricing relational
model leads to diminished cooperation in comparison to the
other three relational models. While this does not seem
strange for the team and partner conditions, it is to some
extent for the hierarchy condition. For the latter, however,
detailed analysis showed that one pair of players cooperated
100 % of games which led to this strange results which is at
odds with the results of Grinberg et al. (2012) for the
corresponding condition.

Results

Average percentage of games in which there is mutual
cooperation (both players have chosen to cooperate) is
presented in Figure 4.

To explore the influence of the players’ roles on choices and
cooperation in the PD games, the following dependent
variables are analyzed: number of cooperative choices for
each player; number of games with mutual cooperation in
a pair; number of games with mutual defection in a pair.
For clarity, in the figures, the results are presented in
percentages. However, the analysis is performed using the
specified dependent variables.
The average payoff per game (in points) is considered a
measure to assess which players’ roles led to higher profits.
Each dependent variable is analyzed in ANOVA with
players’ roles as between-subject factor with 5 levels (team
vs. hierarchy vs. partners vs. opponents vs. players).

Cooperation
The cooperative choices (%) are presented in Figure
3.The analysis shows a significant influence of the players’

Mutual Cooperation

Figure 4: Average percentage of mutual cooperation in a
pair in each distribution condition (‘*’ means p < 0.05; ‘(*)’
– marginally significant difference).

2581

The ANOVA does not identify a statistically significant
influence of the players’ roles on the number of mutual
cooperative game outcomes (F (4, 34) = 2.03, p = 0.112).
However, the Post-hoc LSD test shows that a difference
exists between the opponents and hierarchy condition (p =
0.013). Marginally significant differences are observed
between the opponents and partners condition (p = 0.09),
between the opponents and team condition (p = 0.09), and
between control (players) and hierarchy condition (p =
0.074).
It turns out that mutual cooperation is the lowest (~8 %)
in the opponents condition. This result is consistent with the
assumption that the competition, distinctive for the money
pricing relational model, will induce an individualistic
participants’ behavior.
Mutual cooperation is also relatively low in the control
condition – the condition with neutral description of the
players’ roles. The interesting result is again in the
hierarchy condition for which the hire mutual cooperation is
obtained (~31 %) but as discussed earlier it is partially due
to one pair of players which cooperated throughout the
whole series of games.

rationality. However, it is interesting to note the high mutual
defection in the team condition.

Mutual Defection

Significant differences were established through post-hoc LSD
test between the opponents and team condition (p = 0.006),
between the opponents and hierarchy condition (p = 0.001),
between the opponents and partners condition (p = 0.001).
The payoff for the participants is lowest when the players
are opponents (compared to the other three relational
models). This is an interesting result especially since the
roles of opponents presumably represent the market pricing
relational model, which is related to individualistic attitude
and profit orientation. However, taking into account that the
highest number of games with mutual defection are found in
the opponents condition, the result could be explained by
the lower payoff that the players get when they both defect.

The average percentage of games with mutual defection
(both players have chosen to defect) is presented in Figure
5. ANOVA does not identify a statistically significant
influence of the players’ roles on the number of games with
mutual defection (F (4, 34) = 2.07, p = 0.106). However, a
further conducted Post-hoc LSD test identifies significant
difference between the opponents condition and partners
condition (p = 0.009), and marginally significant difference
between opponents condition and hierarchy condition (p =
0.066).

Average Payoff
The payoff analysis was conducted on the basis of the
average payoff per game (in points) (see Figure 6). ANOVA
shows a significant influence of the distribution type on the
payoff (F (4, 73) = 2.50, p = 0.049).

Figure 6: Average payoff per sequence of 40 games for a
pair in each distribution condition (‘*’ means p < 0.05).

Conclusions and Discussion

Figure 5: Average percentage of mutual defection in a pair
in each distribution condition (‘*’ means p < 0.05; ‘(*)’ –
marginally significant difference).
Therefore, it can be concluded that when the players are
labeled as opponents, mutual defection is a much more typical
choice. It should be noted that mutual defection leads to the
lowest possible payoff for the pair. Although defection is the
dominant strategy for players in one-shot PD games, here the
players play 40 games and mutual defection leads to the worst
collective payoff – thus the dilemma structure of the game
arises as the opposition between individual and collective

The presented study aims at further examining the presumable
influence of social relations over cooperative and noncooperative behavioral patterns in the Prisoner’s dilemma
game. Within our experiment subject were assigned different
roles that corresponded to the four basic relations, defined by
the Relational models theory: communal sharing, authority
ranking, equality matching, and market pricing.
The results outline a clear tendency towards lower
individual and mutual cooperation, higher mutual defection
and lower total payoff when players are directly labeled as
‘opponents’ (a role model typical for the market pricing
relation) in comparison to all other role sets. Simply put
whenever participants are led to perceive 1) the other player
as their enemy in the game; and 2) the game as a game of
open competition, they cooperate less and earn lower payoff
both individually and as a pair. This result, though logical
and intuitive in nature, questions the actual success potential
of a profit-oriented behavioral model within the Prisoner’s
dilemma game and real life situations reflecting this game.

2582

As it can be concluded competitiveness may not be the best
approach towards goal accomplishment whenever a mutual
dependency on participants’ choices is present regardless of
whether we are facing a person who we deem our opponent.
Strikingly similar results were observed in a previous
study (Grinberg et al., 2012) examining the effect of the
payoff distribution over the cooperation levels in Prisoner’s
dilemma game. Lower individual and mutual cooperation,
higher mutual defection and lower total payoff were
observed when the joint profit was divided among players
according to their individual contribution – the experimental
condition impersonating the market pricing relation. In
comparison, in both experiments the conditions reflecting
the remaining three relational models are characterized with
higher levels of individual and mutual cooperation and
payoff plus lower defection rate. What can be concluded as
a summary of both studies is that in line with our
expectations, the relational model of market pricing, no
matter how framed, “awakens” individualistic, egoistic and
concurrent behavioral tendencies among subjects resulting
in lower level of cooperation within the Prisoner’s dilemma
game. Moreover, the influence of these tendencies over
individuals seems irrespective of the influence of rationality
itself. This in its nature supports the idea that human
relations may affect our choice of behaviors in a decisive
manner irrelevant of our rational awareness.
An interesting area for exploration remains the condition
comprising the authority ranking relation. As it can be seen
in both studies this relation could lead to high cooperation
despite the different roles of the players or the inequality in
the payoffs received. Cooperation levels within the
condition are more or less the same as the ones observed in
the two “cooperative in nature” conditions – communal
sharing and equal matching. It can be thus speculated that
inequality does not trigger competition to the extent
individualism and “self-sufficiency” do. Therefore such a
relation of inequality may not be an obstacle for subjects to
perceive the game as a game of an in-team dependency and
choose a cooperative behavioral pattern.
The studies conducted produce results with broader
implication potential. The research on the effect of human
relations on the behavior in social dilemmas is fundamental
for the understanding of complex phenomena within the
field of both decision making in games and real-life
situation in economy, politics, military field etc.

References
Andreoni, J., & Miller, J. (1993). Rational cooperation in
the finitely repeated Prisoner’s dilemma: experimental
evidence. The Economic Journal, 103, 570-585.
Colman, A. (2003). Cooperation, psychological game
theory, and limitations of rationality in social interaction.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 26, 139-198.
Cooper, R., DeJong, D. V., Forsythe, R., & Ross, T. W.
(1996). Cooperation without reputation: Experimental
evidence from Prisoner's dilemma games. Games and
Economic Behavior, 12,187-218.

Dawes, R. (1980). Social dilemmas. Annual Review of
Psychology, 31, 169-193.
Eiser, J. R., & Bhavnani, K. K. (1974). The effect of
situational meaning on the behaviour of subjects in the
prisoner's dilemma game. European Journal of Social
Psychology 4 (1): 93-97.
Ellingsen, T., Johannesson, M., Mollerstrom, J.,
Munkhammar, S. (2012). Social framing effects:
Preferences or beliefs? Games and Economic Behavior,
76 (1), pp. 117–130
Fiske, A. P. (1991). Structures of social life: The four
elementary forms of human relations: Communal sharing,
authority ranking, equality matching, market pricing.
New York, NY: Free Press.
Fiske, A. P. (1992). The four elementary forms of sociality:
framework for a unified theory of social relations.
Psychological Review, 99, 689-723.
Fiske, A. P., & Haslam, N., (1996). Social cognition is
thinking about relationships. Current directions in
psychological science, 5, 143-148.
Gärdenfors, P. (2003). How Homo became Sapiens. Oxford
University Press.
Grinberg, M., Hristova, E., & Borisova, M. (2012).
Cooperation in Prisoner’s Dilemma Game: Influence of
Social Relations, Proceedings of CogSci 2012.
Grinberg, M., Hristova E., & Lalev, E. (2010). Models for
cooperative decisions in prisoner’s dilemma. In: Nefti, S.
& Gray, J. (Eds.), Advances in Cognitive Systems. IET:
London.
Haslam, N. (Ed.) (2004). Relational models theory: a
contemporary overview. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Kreps, D., Milgrom, P., Roberts, J., & Wilson, R. (1982).
Rational cooperation in the finitely repeated Prisoner’s
dilemma’. Journal of Economic Theory, 27, 245-252.
Liberman, V., Samuels, S. M., Ross, L. (2004). The Name
of the Game: Predictive Power of Reputations Versus
Situational Labels in Determining Prisoner’s Dilemma
Game Moves. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 30, pp. 1175-1185.
Rapoport, A., & Chammah, A. (1965). Prisoner’s dilemma:
a study in conflict and cooperation. Univ. of Michigan
Press.
Rai, T. S., & Fiske, A. P. (2011). Moral psychology is
relationship regulation: Moral motives for unity,
hierarchy, equality, and proportionality. Psychological
Review, 117, 57-75.
Sally, D. (1995). Conversation and cooperation in social
dilemmas. A meta-analysis of experiments from 1958 to
1992. Rationality and Society, 7, 58-92.
Sally, D. (2001). On sympathy and games. Journal of
Economic Behavior & Organization, 44, 1-30.
Trivers, R. (1972). The evolution of reciprocal altruism.
Quarterly Review of Biology, 46, 35-37.
Zhong, C.-B., Loewenstein, J., Murnighan, J. K. (2007).
Speaking the Same Language: The Cooperative Effects of
Labeling in the Prisoner's Dilemma. Journal of Conflict
Resolution, Vol. 51, No. 3, pp. 431-456.

2583

