UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Development of Semantic Knowledge and Its Role in the Development of Category-Based
Reasoning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0n72r6bv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Godwin, Karrie
Matlen, Bryan
Fisher, Anna

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Development of Semantic Knowledge and Its Role in the Development of
Category-Based Reasoning
Karrie E. Godwin (kegodwin@andrew.cmu.edu)
Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Psychology, 5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Bryan J. Matlen (bmatlen@cmu.edu)
Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Psychology, 5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Anna V. Fisher, (fisher49@andrew.cmu.edu)
Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Psychology, 5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
Abstract
Prior research indicates a protracted developmental course in
category-based reasoning. One possible explanation for the
development of this ability is the gradual reorganization of
semantic knowledge. To measure development of semantic
knowledge we developed a new paradigm, the Semantic Space
task, which uses distance in a two-dimensional space to infer
semantic similarities between two objects. Using this paradigm we
examined development of semantic knowledge in young children
(preschoolers, kindergarteners, and first-grade children) and in
adults. We also examined whether conceptual organization as
measured by the Semantic Space task is predictive of children’s
scores on a category-based reasoning task. The findings point to
the possibility that development of semantic knowledge plays an
important role in the development of category-based reasoning.
Keywords: Semantic Space; Concepts; Cognitive Development

Introduction
Category-based reasoning is a critical cognitive ability
that enables an individual to generalize from the known to
the unknown (Hayes, Heit, & Swendsen, 2010; Proffitt,
Coley, & Medin, 2000). For example, upon learning that a
chicken has 39 pairs of chromosomes, one may infer that a
dove also has 39 pairs of chromosomes because chickens
and doves are the same kind of animal (i.e., birds). Prior
research indicates that children’s category-based reasoning
undergoes a protracted developmental course (e.g., Badger
& Shapiro, 2012; Fisher, Matlen, & Godwin, 2011; Godwin,
Matlen, & Fisher, in press; Fisher, 2010; Fisher & Sloutsky,
2005; Sloutsky, Kloos, & Fisher, 2007), with marked
improvements in category-based reasoning apparent
between 4 and 6 years of age. However, it is not clear what
factors underlie this improvement. One possible explanation
for the development of category-based reasoning is
representational change: the gradual accretion and
reorganization of domain-specific knowledge (Goswami &
Brown, 1989, 1990; Rattermann & Gentner, 1998).
Representational change has been identified as a factor
that fosters cognitive development in a wide array of
domains such as numerical development (e.g., Opfer &
Siegler, 2007), problem solving (e.g., Karmiloff-Smith,
1986), and analogical reasoning (e.g., Gentner, Rattermann,
Markman, & Kotovsky, 1995).

One of the few studies to examine the relationship
between semantic development and category-based
reasoning was conducted by Chi, Hutchinson, and Robin
(1989). Chi et al. classified 6-year-old children as either
dinosaur experts or novices, based on their pre-test
performance. Subsequently, the children completed an
inference task about dinosaurs. The stimuli were digitally
modified in order to create novel dinosaurs for both experts
and novices. Chi et al. found that children who were
classified as domain experts tended to make category-based
inferences about the novel dinosaurs (e.g., “he is probably a
good swimmer … cause duckbills are good swimmers”, p.
48). In contrast, children who were classified as dinosaur
novices tended to make inferences based on a salient
attribute (e.g., [the dinosaur] “could walk real fast cause he
has giant legs”, p. 49). These findings can be taken to
suggest that category-based induction is a function of one’s
domain knowledge (also see Gobbo & Chi, 1986).
There is also converging evidence suggesting that
representational change may play a role in semantic
development. First, multidimensional scaling studies have
investigated people’s ability to classify familiar objects.
These studies provide evidence of advancement in
classification from initially classifying objects according to
more concrete characteristics to utilizing more abstract
features when making groupings (e.g., Howard & Howard,
1977; Saltz, Seller, & Sigel, 1972). For example, preschoolage children are likely to classify familiar animals on the
dimension of size, whereas school-age children are more
likely to classify animals along the dimensions of
domesticity and predativity.
Second, studies on the development of priming suggest
that associative priming (e.g., faster responding to the word
‘banana’ after ‘monkey’ is presented) appears early in
development whereas semantic priming (e.g., faster
responding to the word ‘banana’ after ‘cherry’ is presented)
develops during the school years (McCauley, Weil, &
Sperber, 1976; Arias-Trejo & Plunkett, 2011).
Finally, work in cognitive modeling points to a gradual
developmental progression in conceptual organization from
relatively undifferentiated (e.g., groupings including a
penguin, a trout, and an alligator) to more differentiated
groupings (Kemp & Tenenbaum 2008; Rogers &

2422

McClelland 2004). However, these predictions are yet to be
confirmed by empirical studies.
The present study investigates how young children
organize knowledge and whether the organizational
structure changes over the course of development. In
particular, we are interested in examining whether semantic
similarity influences how knowledge is organized. In order
to examine this issue, we developed a task in which
participants are asked to represent the semantic similarity of
animal dyads in two-dimensional space. The distance
between animal pairs is taken as a measure of how closely
the participants represented the concepts. The use of
physical distance as an indicator of representational
similarity has been successfully used in prior studies (e.g.,
Goldstone, 1994; Howard & Howard, 1977).
Unlike multidimensional studies, in which children are
free to arrange the items along any desired dimension, we
explicitly asked children to put animals of similar kind close
together on the game board. Therefore, this paradigm
allowed us to examine whether knowledge of semantic
similarity changes over the course of development in 4- to
7-year-old children. We also assessed whether children’s
semantic organization scores are predictive of their tendency
to engage in spontaneous category-based reasoning.

share a common setting or habitat (e.g., lamb-horse), (3)
unrelated dyads (lamb-swan), and (4) filler items. During
the game, the target item was paired with three different test
items (i.e., category-choice, setting/habitat match, and
unrelated item). Linguistic stimuli is provided in Table 1.

Figure 1: Schematic depiction of the Semantic Space game board.
Squares highlighted in red indicate the location of the critical trials.
Squares highlighted in yellow mark the location of the filler trials.
In the experiment proper, the location of the critical and filler trials
was not marked and all squares on the board were white.

Method

Table 1: Linguistic Stimuli for the Semantic Space Task

Participants
Participants were preschool children (N=43, Mage=4.32
years, SD=0.28 years), kindergarteners (N=22, Mage=5.41
years, SD= 0.30 years), and first-grade children (N=23,
Mage=6.96 years, SD=0.32 years) attending local preschools
and elementary schools. The preschool children were also
part of a longitudinal study examining the development of
inductive reasoning (see Godwin, Matlen, Fisher, 2012).
Adult participants were undergraduate students (N=20,
Mage=20.38 years SD=1.22 years) from a local university
who received partial course credit for participation.

Design & Procedures
Children were tested individually in a quiet room adjacent
to their classroom. Adult participants were tested in a
laboratory located on campus. Tasks were administered by
hypothesis-blind experimenters.
Semantic Space Task
This task was designed to assess children’s semantic
organization. Visual stimuli entailed a game board
consisting of a 9x9 grid (see Figure 1). Two 1” wooden
blocks were used as game pieces. The wooden blocks were
used as game pieces instead of pictures so that children
would use their knowledge about kinds rather than rely on
perceptual similarity. A similar approach has been
successfully used in prior studies (e.g., Howard & Howard,
1977).
Linguistic stimuli included 24 pairs of animal names. The
stimuli could be classified into one of four categories: (1)
semantically-similar dyads (e.g., lamb-sheep), (2) dyads that

Target
Crocodile
Chick
Lamb
Whale
Monkey
Mouse

Critical Trials
Category Setting/
Choice
Habitat
Alligator
Fish
Hen
Goat
Sheep
Horse
Dolphin
Octopus
Gorilla
Parrot
Rat
Pig

Unrelated
Grasshopper
Goldfish
Swan
Elephant
Chipmunk
Hippo

Filler Pairs
1. Zebra/Turkey; 2. Bear/Snake; 3. Panther/ Turtle;
4. Tiger/Butterfly; 5. Frog/Lion; 6. Giraffe/Seal

In the Semantic Space task, participants were asked to
help Zibbo the zookeeper organize his zoo by placing
animals of the same kind close together. At the beginning
of the task, the experimenter introduced the game and
provided the participants with two examples (Example 1: a
bunny and a rabbit were placed on adjacent squares on the
game board and the experimenter explained that they should
be placed close together because they are the same kind of
thing; Example 2: a dog and a shark were placed far apart
on the game board and the experimenter explained that they
should be placed far apart because they are not the same
kind of thing). On each test trial, the experimenter showed
the participant where Zibbo put the target animal (e.g., the
experimenter placed the first game piece on one of the
squares marked in red in Figure 1 and said, “The zookeeper
put the mouse here”). Then, the experimenter handed the
participant the second game piece and asked him or her to
identify where the test item should be placed (e.g., “Where

2423

do you think the hippo should go?”). The participant’s
response was recorded in order to calculate the distance
between the placement of the target and test item. After each
trial was administered, the game board was cleared before
the experimenter presented the next pair.
Placement of the 18 critical trials (i.e., semanticallysimilar dyads, common habitat/setting dyads, and unrelated
items) was pseudo randomized to eight central squares
(marked in red in Figure 1). The central squares were
utilized for the critical trials in order to equalize the
maximum possible distance from the square where the
experimenter placed the target. Each of the eight squares
was utilized at least twice and no more than three times. The
six filler trials were randomly assigned to one of the
remaining 24 squares in order to encourage participants to
use the entire game board. The animal dyads were presented
in one of two pseudo randomized orders. The following
stipulations were used when creating the presentation
orders: one filler trial was presented after every three critical
trials, at least three trials were required in between target
repeats, and at least two trials were presented in between
semantically-similar dyads. The presentation order was
counterbalanced across participants.
Participants’ responses were scored in the following way:
Raw scores were calculated for each trial by adding the
number of squares occupied by the game pieces plus the
number of squares between the target and test item (the
distance was based on the shortest route between the two
game pieces barring diagonal movement). A composite
score for non semantically-similar dyads was created by
averaging together participants’ raw scores for common
setting/habitat dyads and unrelated items. A Semantic Space
Difference score was calculated by subtracting the average
score for semantically-similar dyads from the non
semantically-similar composite score. Positive difference
scores indicate that participants put semantically-similar
dyads closer together and non semantically-similar dyads
farther apart. Difference scores approaching zero indicate
that participants did not reliably discriminate between
semantically-similar dyads and non semantically-similar
dyads.

conveyed by the labels. This procedure has been utilized
successfully in prior work (e.g., Fisher et al., 2011; Godwin
et al., in press).
On each test trial children were told where each object
was hiding. Children were told that the target item had a
novel property and asked to generalize this property to
either the category-choice or the unrelated lure. Concerns
regarding the working memory demands of the task are
mitigated based on Fisher et al.’s (2011) findings in which
children recalled, with high accuracy, which objects were
hiding behind each door at the end of each test trial.
All properties were two-syllable blank predicates. Two
presentation orders were created: In order 1 all trials were
randomized and the presentation order was reversed for
order 2. Presentation order was counterbalanced across
participants.
Table 2: Category-Based Reasoning Task Linguistic Stimuli
Target
Rug
Sofa
Shoe
Sea
Hill
Rock
Alligator
Rat
Lamb

Category-Based Reasoning Task
The Category-Based Reasoning task is a propertyinduction task in which children are presented with triads of
objects and asked to generalize a novel property from the
target to one of the test items. Each triad included a target, a
category-choice, and a lure (e.g., lamb-sheep-frog). Nine
label triads were administered: 3 triads referring to artifacts,
3 triads referring to inanimate natural kinds, and 3 triads
referring to animate natural kinds (see Table 2 for the
complete list of linguistic stimuli). The 3 animate natural
kind triads were also included in the Semantic Space task.
Visual stimuli were presented on the computer and
consisted of sets of three identical doors; see Figure 2. The
objects remained hidden behind the doors in order to
encourage children to rely on the category information

Category
Lure
Choice
Artifacts
Carpet
Window
Couch
Cup
Boot
Car
Inanimate Natural Kinds
Ocean
Apple
Mountain
Flower
Stone
Grass
Animate Natural Kinds
Crocodile
Butterfly
Mouse
Fish
Sheep
Frog

Property
Koski
Creighan
Troxel
Manchin
Erwin
Higa
Omat
Lignin
Matlen

Figure 2: Schematic depiction of the Category-Based Reasoning
task. All instructions were given verbally by the experimenter.

2424

Picture Identification Task
The picture identification task served to assess children’s
familiarity with the labels utilized in the Category-Based
Reasoning task. The picture identification task is a
computer-based task akin to the Peabody Picture
Vocabulary Test (Dunn & Dunn, 1997). Stimuli included
27 labels and 108 pictures. On every trial, children were
presented with 4 pictorial response options (the target object
and 3 lures). Children were asked to point to the target
object. The trials were presented in one of two orders. The
presentation order was counterbalanced across participants.
The task was administered immediately following the
Category-Based Reasoning task.
The Category-Based Reasoning task and the picture
identification task were not administered to adults; only
preschoolers, kindergartners, and first-grade children
completed this portion of the experiment. Additionally,
because preschool children were also participating in a
related longitudinal study, they participated in the CategoryBased Reasoning task twice, with approximately one week
between the two testing sessions. Repeated testing was
administered to obtain a more stable estimate of young
children’s performance. As children’s scores on both
testing sessions were within 3% (adjusted means
Mtime1=63%, Mtime2=66%), we averaged the scores across
the repeated administrations of the task. The analyses
reported below are based on these average scores.

Results
Semantic Space Task Performance
Preschool children exhibited considerable variability in
their performance on the Semantic Space task, with
Difference scores ranging from -2.58 to 5.67, and an
average Difference score of 1.37 (SD=1.88). Kindergarten
children’s performance was also highly variable, with
Difference scores ranging from -0.92 to 7.00 and an average
Difference score of 2.44 (SD=2.48). The Difference scores
of first-grade children ranged from -0.17 to 8.25 and their
average difference score was 4.23 (SD=2.08). The
Difference scores of adult participants ranged from 2.50 to
6.50 and their average Difference score was 4.99
(SD=1.13); See Table 3.
Participants’ Difference scores were analyzed in a oneway ANOVA with age as the between-subject factor. This
analysis revealed a significant effect of age, F(3,
104)=20.41, p<0.0001. This effect was further explored
through planned comparisons.
Performance on the Semantic Space task was found to
improve with age. In general, preschoolers exhibited greater
difficulties discriminating between semantically-similar and
non semantically-similar dyads compared to the other age
groups. Post-hoc Tukey tests revealed no significant
difference between mean Difference scores of preschoolers
(M=1.37) and kindergartners (M=2.44), p=0.163. At the
same time, both first graders (M=4.23) and adults (M=4.99)
exhibited superior performance compared to preschoolers
(M=1.37), both ps<0.0001. A marked improvement in

performance on the Semantic Space task was observed
between kindergarten (M=2.44) and first-grade (M=4.23),
p=0.014. There was no significant difference between the
Difference scores of first-graders and adults (p=0.583),
providing preliminary evidence that semantic differentiation
for certain animal categories may begin to reach adult levels
by 6 to 7 years of age. Taken together, the pattern of results
suggests that the ability to reliably discriminate between
semantically-similar and non semantically-similar dyads
improves with age; see Figure 3.
6	  

Semantic	  Space	  Difference	  Score	  

4	  

2	  

0	  

Preschool	  

Kindergarten	  

First	  Grade	  

Adults	  

Figure 3: Mean difference scores by age group.
Semantic Space Difference scores were calculated by subtracting
the average score for semantically-similar dyads from the non
semantically-similar composite score. Error-bars represent the
standard errors of the mean.
Table 3: Semantic Space mean scores by item type and age group.

Age Group
Mean (SD)
Semantically-Similar Dyads
Preschool
4.37 (1.35)
Kindergarten
4.09 (1.63)
First-Grade
2.91 (0.87)
Adults
2.32 (0.42)
Non Semantically-Similar Dyads
Preschool
5.74 (1.51)
Kindergarten
6.53 (1.93)
First-Grade
7.14 (1.79)
Adults
7.31 (0.99)
Common Setting/Habitat Dyads
Preschool
5.83 (1.60)
Kindergarten
6.45 (2.06)
First-Grade
6.66 (1.87)
Adults
6.13 (1.14)
Unrelated Dyads
Preschool
5.64 (1.76)
Kindergarten
6.61 (1.95)
First-Grade
7.62 (2.08)
Adults
8.48 (1.05)

2425

Picture Identification
The results from the picture identification task indicated that
children were familiar with the labels used in the CategoryBased Reasoning task (Preschoolers: M=.92, SD=.14,
Kindergarteners: M=.99, SD=.01, First-Graders: M=.99,
SD=.01). As an additional precaution, for the preschool
group the Category-Based Reasoning scores were adjusted
for their vocabulary knowledge to ensure that children
possessed the pre-requisite knowledge to perform categorybased induction. Thus, if a child missed an item on the
picture identification task, this trial was removed from this
child’s Category-Based Reasoning score. This adjustment
resulted in the increase of mean Category-Based Reasoning
scores in preschoolers from M=.62 to M=.64. Because the
picture identification scores of the other groups of
participants were nearly at ceiling, no adjustments to the
induction scores were made in the older age groups.
Category-Based Reasoning Performance
Participants’ reasoning scores were submitted to a oneway ANOVA with age as the between-subject factor. This
analysis revealed a significant effect of age, F(2, 82)=16.49,
p<0.0001. This effect was further explored through planned
comparisons.
Category-Based Reasoning performance improved as a
function of age; see Figure 4. Posthoc Tukey tests revealed
that both kindergarten and first-grade children exhibited
superior performance on the Category-Based Reasoning
task compared to the preschoolers; all ps<.0001. However,
there was no significant difference in performance on the
Category-Based Reasoning task between the kindergarten
children and the first-grade children; p=.90.

Proportion	  of	  Category	  
Responses	  

Category-­‐Based	  Reasoning	  Performance	  
Preschool	  
Kindergarten	  
First	  Grade	  

1	  

SD=.18; First-graders: M=.89, SD=.14; all ts>3.67, all
ps<0.0001. The rate of category-based responding in
preschool-age children was somewhat higher than in our
prior studies (M=.54 across Fisher et al., 2011; Godwin et
al., in press, Matlen, Fisher & Godwin, under review).
However, it should be noted that in the present study the
sample of preschool children was recruited entirely from a
laboratory campus school at a private university and our
prior research utilized more diverse community-based
samples.
Is Category-based Reasoning Related to Children’s
Semantic Space Organization?
A correlational analysis was conducted to examine the
potential relationship between children’s Category-Based
Reasoning performance and their performance on the
Semantic Space task. This analysis revealed a significant
positive correlation between the Semantic Space Difference
scores and Category-Based Reasoning scores when scores
were aggregated across preschoolers, kindergarteners, and
first-graders, r=.484, p<0.0001 (see Figure 5). When
separated by age group, there was a significant correlation
in the preschool group (r=.473; p=0.002), a marginally
significant correlation in the kindergarten group (r=.34,
p=0.12), and no correlation among first-graders (r=.10,
p=0.66).
It is perhaps not surprising that the magnitude of the
correlation between the Semantic Space Difference scores
and Category-Based Reasoning scores decreased with age,
as children’s performance on both tasks improved and
variability in performance decreased (e.g., many children
achieved ceiling scores on the category-based reasoning task
by first-grade). However, it is noteworthy that in preschoolage children, who exhibited a high degree of variability on
both tasks, there was a fairly strong relationship between
children’s category-based reasoning and semantic
organization.

0.8	  
Chance	  

0.6	  
0.4	  
0.2	  
0	  

Age	  Group	  
Figure 4: Proportion of category-based responses by age group.
Error-bars represent standard errors of the means. Line indicates
chance performance.

The final analysis compared the mean Category-Based
Reasoning scores to chance (.50) using single sample t-tests.
Participants in all age groups exhibited Category-Based
Reasoning performance that was significantly above chance;
Preschoolers: M=.64, SD=.22; Kindergartners: M=.87,

Figure 5: A scatterplot of children’s Category-Based Reasoning
scores and their Difference scores on the Semantic Space task.

2426

Discussion
The results from the present study point to several novel
findings. First, the new paradigm designed to measure
development of semantic organization successfully captured
increased differentiation among the animal concepts during
the preschool and early school years. The gradual increase
in the Semantic Space Difference scores in preschoolers,
kindergarteners, and first-graders suggests that children
increasingly become more sensitive to semantic similarity.
Second, the present findings provide preliminary evidence
that individual differences in knowledge organization, as
measured by the Semantic Space task, may be related to
developmental differences in category-based reasoning.
In conclusion, these findings indicate that children’s
semantic knowledge undergoes gradual reorganization
across development. Additionally, performance on this
measure was found to predict preschoolers’ inductive
generalization performance. This latter finding suggests
that the ability to make inductive inferences based on
categories may be related to improvements in semantic
organization.

Acknowledgments
We thank Malika Sinha, Laura Pacilio, Alyssa
Montanaro, Anna Loiterstein, Like Li, Kayoung Joung, and
Rachel Walsh for help collecting data. We thank the
children, parents, and teachers for making this work
possible. This work was supported by a Graduate Training
Grant awarded to Carnegie Mellon University by the
Department
of
Education
(R305B090023
and
R305B040063).

References
Arias-Trejo, N. & Plunkett, K. (2009). Lexical-semantic priming
effects during infancy. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society Biological Sciences, 364, 3633-3647.
Badger, J. R. & Shapiro, L. R. (2012). Evidence of a transition
from perceptual to category induction in 3- to 9-year-old
children. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 113, 131146.
Chi, M. T. H., Hutchinson, J., & Robin, A. F. (1989). How
inferences about novel domain-related concepts can be
constrained by structured knowledge. Merrill-Palmer
Quarterly, 35: 27-62.
Dunn, L. M., & Dunn, L. M. (1997). Peabody Picture Vocabulary
Test-Third Edition: Manual. Circle Pines, MN: American
Guidance Services.
Fisher, A.V. (2010). What’s in the name? Or how rocks and stones
are different from dogs and puppies. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 105, 198-212.
Fisher, A.V., Matlen, B.J., & Godwin, K.E. (2011). Semantic
similarity of labels and inductive generalization: Taking a
second look. Cognition, 118, 432-438.
Fisher, A. V. & Sloutsky, V. M. (2005). When induction meets
memory: Evidence for gradual transition from similarity-based
to category-based induction. Child Development, 76(3), 583597.
Gentner, D., Rattermann, M. J., Markman, A. B., & Kotovsky, L.
(1995). Two forces in the development of relational similarity.

In T. J. Simon & G. S. Halford (Eds.), Developing cognitive
competence: New approaches to process modeling (pp. 263313). Hillsdale, NJ: LEA.
Gobbo, C., & Chi, M. T. H. (1986). How knowledge is structured
and used by expert and novice children. Cognitive
Development, 1: 221-237.
Goswami, U., & Brown, A.L. (1989). Melting chocolate and
melting snowmen: Analogical reasoning and causal relations.
Cognition, 35, 69-95.
Goswami, U. & Brown, A.L. (1990). Higher-order structure and
relational reasoning: Contrasting analogical and thematic
relations. Cognition, 36, 207-226.
Godwin, K., Fisher, A., & Matlen, B. (In press). Development of
category-based reasoning in 4- to 7-year-old children: The
influence of label co-occurrence and kinship knowledge.
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology.
Godwin, K., Matlen, B., & Fisher, A. (2012). Development of
Category-Based Reasoning in Preschool-Age Children:
Preliminary Results of a Longitudinal Study. In N. Miyake, D.
Peebles, & R. P. Cooper (Eds.), Proceedings of the 34th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 16081613). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Goldstone, R. (1994). An efficient method for obtaining similarity
data. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers,
26, 381-386.
Hayes, B., Heit, E., & Swendsen, H. (2010). Inductive reasoning.
Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive Science, 1, 278292.
Howard, D.V. & Howard, J.H., Jr. (1977). A multidimensional
scaling analysis of the development of animal names.
Developmental Psychology, 13, 108-113.
Karmiloff-Smith, A. (1984). "Children's problem solving". In
M.E.Lamb, A.L.Brown & B.Rogoff (Eds.) Advances in
Developmental Psychology, Vol.III. New Jersey: Erlbaum, 3990.
Kemp, C. & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2008). Structured models of
semantic cognition. Behavioral and Brain Sciences. 31(6),
717-718.
McCauley, C., Weil, C. M., & Sperber, R. D. (1976). The
development of memory structures as reflected by semanticpriming effects. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology,
22, 511-518.
Opfer, J. E., & Siegler, R. S. (2007). Representational change and
children's numerical estimation. Cognitive Psychology, 55,
169-195.
Proffitt, J.B. Coley, J.D., & Medin, D. (2000). Expertise and
category-based
induction.
Journal
of
Experimental
Psychology: Learning Memory, and Cognition, 26(4), 811828.
Rattermann, M. J., & Gentner, G. (1998). More evidence for a
relational shift in the development of analogy: Children’s
Performance on a causal-mapping task. Cognitive
Development, 13, 453 – 478.
Rogers, T. T. & McClelland, J. L. (2004). Semantic Cognition: A
Parallel Distributed Processing Approach. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Saltz, E., Seller, E., & Sigel, I. E., (1972). The development of
natural language concepts. Child Development, 43, 1191-1202.
Siegler, R. S., & Opfer, J. E. (2003). The development of
numerical estimation: evidence for multiple representations of
numerical quantity. Psychological Science, 14, 237-243.
Sloutsky, V. M., Kloos, H., & Fisher, A. V. (2007). When looks
are everything: Appearance similarity versus kind information
in early induction. Psychological Science, 18(2), 179-185.

2427

