UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Development of Category-Based Reasoning: Results from a Longitudinal Study

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9ct9622k

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Godwin, Karrie
Fisher, Anna
Matlen, Bryan

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Development of Category-Based Reasoning: Results from a Longitudinal Study
Karrie E. Godwin (kegodwin@andrew.cmu.edu)
Anna V. Fisher, (fisher49@andrew.cmu.edu)
Bryan J. Matlen (bmatlen@cmu.edu)
Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Psychology, 5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
Abstract

Godwin, et al., in press; Fisher, et al., 2011; Fisher 2010;
Fisher & Sloutsky, 2005). However, it remains unclear what
leads to the development of spontaneous category-based
reasoning during the preschool years. Two classes of
explanations have been put forth to explain changes in
various areas of cognitive development, namely
Representational Change and Executive Function
development. We briefly discuss both explanations below.

Prior research on the development of category-based reasoning
indicates a protracted developmental course of this ability as well
as a high degree of individual variability. However, the sources of
this individual variability as well as the sources of developmental
change remain unclear. The present study aimed to examine these
issues, with a focus on the role of representational change and
executive function development. Across two time points spaced
approximately 7 months apart, children’s category-based reasoning
was assessed along with a battery of executive function and
representational change measures. Results replicated prior work in
that only a small proportion of children exhibited spontaneous
category-based reasoning at Time1, and this proportion increased
with development. In addition, both executive function and
representational change were found to predict the development of
category-based reasoning.

Representational Change
Representational change is “reorganization of existing
knowledge or a difference in the utilization of information,
rather than the acquisition of new information” (Nelson,
1977, p. 109). Representational change has been implicated
as an explanatory factor in several areas of cognitive
development, including analogical reasoning (e.g., Gentner
et al., 1995), problem solving (e.g., Karmiloff-Smith, 1984),
and numerical development (e.g., Opfer & Siegler, 2007).
With regards to semantic development, there are several
compelling sources of evidence pointing to representational
change in the multidimensional scaling literature (e.g.,
Howard & Howard, 1977), free association studies (e.g.,
Brown & Berko, 1960), and development of semantic
priming (e.g., McCauley, Weil, & Sperber, 1976).
Furthermore, different approaches to modeling semantic
cognition suggest that early conceptual organization is fairly
undifferentiated (such that penguin, trout, and alligator may
start out as belonging to the same cluster) with greater
differentiation emerging with development (Kemp &
Tenenbaum 2008; Rogers & McClelland 2004). At present,
there is no direct empirical evidence testing these
predictions, although Carey’s (1985) seminal work is
largely consistent with these developmental profiles.

Keywords: Category-based reasoning; inductive reasoning

Introduction
Category-based reasoning is central to mature cognition
and underlies much of our learning and functioning in the
world (e.g., Osherson et al., 1990; Sloman, 1993). Despite
early reports that even very young children spontaneously
engage in category-based reasoning (e.g., Gelman &
Markman, 1986; Gelman & Coley, 1990; Welder &
Graham, 2001), recent evidence suggests that development
of category-based reasoning follows a relatively protracted
developmental course (e.g., Badger & Shapiro, 2012;
Godwin, Matlen, & Fisher, in press; Fisher, Matlen, &
Godwin, 2011; Fisher, 2010; Fisher & Sloutsky, 2005).
One of the hallmarks of category-based reasoning is one’s
ability to make inferences based on the knowledge that two
(or more) items belong to similar kinds in the absence of
supporting perceptual information. For example, if one is
shown a picture of a rock, a sponge, and another rock and
asked to predict which two items have properties in
common, one could rely on perceptual similarity to make an
inference. Similarly, if the pictures are ambiguous (or not
presented) and labels are used to indicate category
membership, one could base their inference on matching
labels (e.g., rock–rock), not necessarily because one
understands that labels refer to kinds, but because the labels
are perceptually identical (Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004).
However, one’s ability to rely on semantically-similar labels
(e.g., rock-stone) to make inferences is commonly
interpreted as an index of category-based reasoning (e.g.,
Gelman & Markman, 1986).
Several studies have documented that the ability to
spontaneously engage in category-based reasoning appears
between 4 and 6 years of age (e.g., Badger & Shapiro, 2012;

Executive Functions
Executive Functions (EF) are psychological processes
thought to control other (typically, higher-order)
psychological processes such as planning, reasoning, and
problem-solving. Most researchers distinguish the following
EF processes: set shifting, active maintenance of
representations (sometimes referred to as working memory),
and inhibitory control (Bunge et al., 2002; Carlson et al.,
2002).
The EF system is traditionally associated with prefrontal
cortex, which is believed to be one of the slowest brain
regions to mature (e.g., Diamond, 2002). Development of
EF has been implicated in developmental accounts of
category learning (Sloutsky, 2010), and there is evidence
that representation maintenance and inhibitory control play
a role in the development of analogical reasoning (Morrison

507

et al., 2011). With regards to semantic cognition, regions of
the PFC (specifically, ventrolateral PFC or VLPFC) have
been shown to be engaged in controlled semantic access, for
instance in classification or category generation tasks. While
it remains unclear whether the role of VLPFC is to bias
retrieval of task-relevant semantic information through
maintaining task representations or to select task-relevant
representations among competing activated representations
(e.g., Wagner, 2002; Kan & Thompson-Schill, 2004),
prefrontal cortex clearly is important for controlled semantic
access.

encourage children to rely on the category information
conveyed by the labels.
Table 1: Category-Based Reasoning Task Linguistic Stimuli

The Present Study
Prior research on the development of category-based
reasoning indicates not only a protracted developmental
course of this ability, but also a high degree of individual
variability. Specifically, results aggregated across several
studies suggest that approximately 20% of 4-year-olds
spontaneously make category-based inferences with
semantically-similar labels, and this proportion increases to
approximately 40% and 65% among 5- and 6-year-olds,
respectively (Fisher, 2010; Fisher et al., 2011; Godwin et
al., in press). However, the sources of this individual
variability as well as sources of developmental change
remain unclear. The goal of the present study was to begin
the exploration of these questions, with a focus on the
putative role of representational change and executive
functions. A battery of assessments was administered over
the course of one school year. At Time1 (Fall) we collected
measures of children’s category-based reasoning, verbal
working memory, IQ, and semantic knowledge
organization. At Time2 (Spring) we collected measures of
children’s category-based reasoning, semantic knowledge
organization, inhibitory control, non-verbal working
memory, sustained attention, and category generation.

Target

Category Choice

Lure

Property

Rock
Alligator
Rug
Rat
Hill
Sea
Sofa
Shoe
Lamb

Stone
Crocodile
Carpet
Mouse
Mountain
Ocean
Couch
Boot
Sheep

Grass
Butterfly
Window
Fish
Flower
Apple
Cup
Car
Frog

Higa
Omat
Koski
Lignin
Erwin
Manchin
Creighan
Troxel
Matlen

Children were first told what objects were hiding behind
the doors and then told about a novel property of the target
item (e.g., “The rock has higa inside”). Children were asked
to generalize the novel property from the target item to
either the category-choice or the unrelated lure. The task
was administered four times (twice within each time point)
in order to obtain a more stable estimate of children’s
performance. The delay between task administrations within
a time point was one to two weeks. The trials were
administered in one of two counter-balanced orders.
Picture Identification Task
The picture identification task is similar in format to the
Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (Dunn & Dunn, 1997). It
assessed children’s familiarity with the linguistic stimuli
utilized in the category-based reasoning task. The task was
administered at Time 1 and Time 2.
Intelligence Test
The Wechsler Preschool and Primary Scale of
Intelligence (WPPSI) provided a measure of children’s
general intelligence (Full-scale IQ or FSIQ), as well as an
index of children’s Verbal IQ (VIQ), Performance IQ (PIQ),
and Processing Speed Quotient (PSQ). The WPPSI was
administered at Time 1 only.

Method
Participants
Participants in this study were 43 four-year-old children
from a local preschool (Mage=4.32 years, SD=0.28 years,
20 females, 23 males).

Semantic Space Task
The semantic space task served as a measure of children’s
semantic organization. The stimuli entailed a game board
(9x9 grid; see Figure 1) and 2 game pieces (1” wooden
cubes). Verbal stimuli included 24 animal pairs: 6
semantically-similar dyads (e.g., chick-hen), 6 dyads that
share a common setting or habitat (e.g., chick-goat), 6 dyads
that are unrelated (e.g., chick-goldfish), and 6 filler dyads
(see Table 2). Thus, throughout the task, the target animal
was paired with 3 different test items (i.e., the categorychoice, setting/habitat match, and the unrelated item). The 3
animal trials from the Category-Based reasoning task were
included in the Semantic Space task.
Children were told that they were helping Zibbo the
zookeeper organize his zoo. Children were instructed to put
animals of the same kind close together on the board. For
each trial, the experimenter put one of the game pieces on a
predetermined square on the game board and told the child
that the specified location was where Zibbo put the target
animal (e.g., “The zookeeper put the chick here”). The child

Design and Procedure
Each child participated in 13 sessions over the course of
the school year (6 sessions at Time1 and 7 sessions at
Time2). Children were tested individually in a quiet room
adjacent to their classroom by a trained research assistant. A
brief description of the task battery is provided below.
Category-Based Reasoning Task
This task included 9 label triads, 3 of which referred to
artifacts, 3 to inanimate natural kinds, and 3 to animate
natural kinds (see Table 1). All triads contained a target
item, category-choice, and an unrelated lure (e.g., ratmouse-fish). Visual stimuli consisted of sets of three
identical doors. Children were told that objects were hiding
behind doors. The objects were never revealed in order to

508

was then asked to identify where the test item (i.e., the
second game piece) should be placed (e.g., “Where do you
think the goat should go?”). After each trial the child’s
response was recorded in order to calculate the distance
between the target and the placement of the test item. Prior
to playing the game, children were given two examples
where the experimenter demonstrated that animals of similar
kind (e.g., bunny and rabbit) should be placed close together
and animals of different kind (e.g., dog and shark) should be
placed far apart.

1996). In the Forward-word span task, children were asked
to recite the words in the same order in which they were
presented; in the Backward-word span task children were
asked to repeat the words in the opposite order. If a child
made a mistake, they were given another opportunity to
recite a different list of the same word length. Children’s
score was determined by the longest list length the child was
able to recite correctly.
Inhibitory Control Measures Two common measures of
response inhibition were included in the assessment battery:
the Day-Night task (Gerstadt et al., 1994) and the Flanker
task (Rueda et al., 2004). In the Day-Night Task, children
were shown a set of cards depicting the sun and the moon.
Children were asked to provide a verbal response that
conflicts with the presented image (e.g., if the child was
shown a picture of the sun, the correct response would be
“night”. Conversely if the child was shown a picture of the
moon, the correct response would be “day”). The task
consisted of 16 trials (the moon and the sun were presented
8 times each). Two presentation orders were created: The
trials were randomized for order 1 and the sequence was
reversed for order 2.
We used the version of the Flanker Task adapted for use
with young children (Rueda et al., 2004). In this version
children are presented with arrays of fish on a computer
screen. Children are asked to feed the center fish by pressing
either the left or right button. The correct response is
dependent upon the direction the center fish is facing. The
center fish is surrounded by four other fish (two on each
side). The surrounding fish may be congruent (e.g.,
swimming in the same direction as the center fish) or
incongruent (e.g., swimming in the opposite direction as the
center fish). Neutral trials were also presented in which the
central fish appears in isolation (i.e., not flanked by other
fish). A total of 48 trials were administered: 16 neutral
trials, 16 incongruent trials, and 16 congruent trials. For the
purposes of the analyses reported below, we used the
Flanker Accuracy Difference score (calculated by
subtracting each child’s accuracy for the Incongruent trials
from the Neutral trials) and Flanker RT Difference score
(calculated by subtracting each child’s reaction time for the
Incongruent trials from the Neutral trials).

Table 2: List of Stimuli for the Semantic Space Task

Target
Crocodile
Chick
Lamb
Whale
Monkey
Mouse

Critical Trials
Category
Setting/
Choice
Habitat
Alligator
Hen
Sheep
Dolphin
Gorilla
Rat

Fish
Goat
Horse
Octopus
Parrot
Pig

Unrelated
Grasshopper
Goldfish
Swan
Elephant
Chipmunk
Hippo

Filler Pairs
1. Zebra/Turkey; 2. Bear/Snake; 3. Panther/ Turtle;
4. Tiger/Butterfly; 5. Frog/Lion; 6. Giraffe/Seal

Figure 1: Schematic depiction of the semantic space game board.
Red squares mark the location of critical trials; yellow squares
mark the location of filler trials. Note that none of the locations
were colored when the task proper was administered.

Children’s score on the semantic space task was
calculated by averaging habitat dyads and unrelated dyads
together in order to create a composite score for nonsemantically-similar dyads. Next, the average score for
semantically-similar dyads was subtracted from the non
semantically-similar composite score to obtain a difference
score. Difference scores approaching zero indicate that
children did not differentiate the placement of semanticallysimilar and dissimilar dyads. Difference scores above zero
indicate that children placed semantically-similar dyads
closer than dissimilar dyads. The semantic space task was
administered at Time1 and Time2.

Non-Verbal Working Memory & Sustained Attention
The Track-It Task (Fisher et al., 2012) was used as an index
of non-verbal working memory; this task also provided a
measure of sustained attention. In this task children watched
a set of moving objects: six distractors and one target. The
objects moved randomly across a computer screen for 10
seconds, and then disappeared. On each trial, children were
asked to select the location where the target object
disappeared; the location questions provided a measure of
sustained attention. Upon answering the location question,
children were shown a laminated card that contained an
array of 9 objects (the target object and 8 lures). Children
were asked to point to the target object that they had been
tracking; children’s responses to this question provided a

EF Measures
Verbal Working Memory Tasks Forward and Backward
word-span tasks were administered to assess children’s
verbal working memory capacity. Verbal stimuli consisted
of 60 common count nouns selected from the MacArthur
Communicative Development Inventory (Dale & Fenson,

509

measure of non-verbal working memory (WM). The Trackit task included 10 experimental trials and one practice trial.

Predicting Category-Based Reasoning We performed
linear stepwise regression to identify the best predictors of
category-based responding at Time1 and 2. Only predictors
that were significantly correlated with category-based
responding were entered into the model. Thus, three
predictors were included: Semantic Space scores Time1,
FSIQ, and Non-Verbal WM score. Overall, the model
significantly predicted children’s responses on the categorybased reasoning task, R²=.211, F(1)=11.42, p=.002.
However, only one predictor was found to be significantly
related to children’s induction performance at Time 1:
Semantic Space scores (β=.481, t(1)=3.38, p=.002).
For predicting category-based responding at Time2, only
predictors that were significantly correlated with induction
performance at Time2 were included in the model. The
following predictors were entered into the model: Semantic
Space Time2 scores, Forward Word-Span, Backward WordSpan, FSIQ, Non-Verbal WM score, Sustained Attention
score, and Day/Night score (VIQ was excluded from the
analysis due to concerns regarding colinearity based on its
high correlation with FSIQ). Overall, the two-predictor
model significantly predicted children’s responses on the
category-based reasoning task, R²=.474, F(2)=19.00,
p<.001. However, only two predictors were found to be
significantly related to children’s induction performance at
Time 2: Non-verbal WM (β=.522, t(2)=4.37, p<.0001) and
Day/Night scores (β=.352, t(2)=2.95, p=.005).
Category-Based Reasoning: What Develops? What
factors play a role in the development of category-based
reasoning? Since several children performed at nearly
ceiling level on the category-based reasoning task at Time 1,
it was not possible to address this question using gain scores
from Time1 to Time2. Therefore, to address this question
we split the sample into three groups based on the children’s
performance on the category-based reasoning task at Time 1
and Time2 (see Figure 2). Group 1 included children who
were already category-based responders at Time1 (27% of
the sample); all of these children remained category-based
responders at Time2. Group 2 included children who were
not yet category-based responders at Time1 but became
category-based responders at Time2 (40% of the sample).
Group 3 included children who were not yet category-based
responders at either Time1 or Time2 (32.5% of the sample).
Splitting the sample in this manner allowed for analyses
examining potential factors that may differentiate Groups 2
and 3 (i.e., children who became category-based responders
at Time2 from children who were not yet category-based).
Three children were missing scores for either Time 1 or 2
and were omitted from this analysis.
Importantly, children in Groups 2 and 3 obtained
comparable FSIQ scores (M=108, M=100 respectively),
t(27)=1.41, ns. This finding suggests that performance
differences between the two groups on the category-based
reasoning task were not simply a result of disparities in
children’s general intelligence. Children in Group 1
obtained FSIQ scores (M=118) that were over one standard
deviation above the population mean (M=100, SD=15;

Results
Picture Identification The results from the Picture
Identification task suggested that children were familiar
with the labels used in the category-based reasoning task:
Children’s accuracy on this task approached ceiling levels
(M=92%, SD=14% and M=96%, SD=8% for Time 1 and 2
respectively). As an additional precaution, children’s
category-based reasoning scores were adjusted for their
vocabulary knowledge to ensure that children possessed the
pre-requisite knowledge to perform category-based
induction. Thus, if a child missed an item on the picture
identification task, this trial was removed from their
category-based reasoning score.
Category-Based Reasoning Task Mean category-based
reasoning scores at Time 1a and 1b were very similar
(adjusted means: 0.63 and 0.66, respectively) and
significantly correlated (r=.483, p=0.001). Mean categorybased reasoning scores at Time 2a and 2b were also similar
(adjusted means: 0.73 and 0.80, respectively) and
significantly correlated (r=.689, p=0.0001). Consequently,
induction scores were averaged across Time 1a and 1b and
across Time 2a and 2b to yield average category-based
reasoning scores for Time1 (M=0.64, SD=0.22) and Time2
(M=0.76, SD=0.21).
The rate of category-based responding at Time1 (M=.64)
was above chance (t(40)=4.08, p<.001) and somewhat
higher than in our prior studies (M=.54 across Fisher et al.,
2011; Godwin et al., in press; Matlen et al., under review).
However, it should be noted that in the present study the
sample consisted entirely of children enrolled in a
laboratory campus school at a private university, and prior
studies utilized more diverse community-based samples.
The proportion of category-based responding at Time2
(M=.76) was also above chance, (t(41)=8.01, p<.001) and
higher than at Time1, paired-samples t(39)=3.53, p<.001,
Cohen’s d = .56. Note that the latter finding cannot be
attributed simply to children having experience with
performing the same task, as scores were not significantly
different at Time 1a (.63) and 1b (.66). Therefore, this
finding points to a developmental increase in the propensity
towards category-based reasoning.
To investigate individual patterns of responses,
participants were classified as either category-based or noncategory-based responders. A category-based responder was
defined as a participant who gave a category-based response
on at least 7 out of 9 (78%) trials (binomial p=0.09).
Analysis of the individual patterns revealed that only a small
percentage of children were classified as category-based
responders at Time1 (27%). In contrast, the majority of
children were classified as category-based responders at
Time 2 (67%). The association between responder type and
testing point (Time1 vs. Time2) was significant, McNemar's
χ²(1)=7.22, p<.005.

510

1	  

Semantic	  Space	  Difference	  
Score	  

Wechsler, 2002). FSIQ scores of children in Group 1 were
also significantly higher than children in Group 3,
t(21)=3.04, p<.01, and marginally higher than those of
children in Group 2, t(25)=1.78, p=.088. Based on IQ
scores, the group of children who were already categorybased responders on the induction task at Time1, were
cognitively advanced. However, it is important to note that
children in Groups 2 and 3 were not lagging behind as they
exhibited average intelligence compared to the general
population.
Induction	  Time-­‐1	  
Induction	  Time-­‐2	  

0.8	  

N	  =	  11	  
M=4.34	  yrs	  

0.2	  

N	  =	  16	  
M=4.30	  yrs	  

Ctg-­‐Based	  Time-­‐2	  

Semantic	  Space	  T2	  

3.00	  
2.50	  
2.00	  
1.50	  
1.00	  
0.50	  
0.00	  
Ctg-­‐Based	  T1	  
Group	  1	  

Ctg-­‐Based	  T2	  
Group	  2	  

Not	  Ctg-­‐Based	  
T2	  Group	  3	  

A stark difference was observed in children’s non-verbal
WM performance. Children in Groups 1 and 2 demonstrated
similar levels of performance on the non-verbal WM task
(M=.70 and M=.62 respectively; t(25)=.67, ns) with children
in both groups demonstrating better non-verbal WM than
children in Group 3 (M=.18); all ts>4.66, p<.0001). A
similar pattern of results was obtained for the Day/Night
task as the mean accuracy rate was superior for Groups 1
and 2 (M=.71 and M=.79 respectively) compared to Group 3
(M=.47); all ts>1.84, p<.08.
Taken together these findings corroborate the results
obtained from the regression models suggesting that
developmental improvement in working memory, inhibitory
control, and semantic differentiation underlies the
development of category-based reasoning.

N	  =	  13	  
M=4.37	  yrs	  

0	  

Ctg-­‐Based	  Time-­‐1	  

Semantic	  Space	  T1	  

3.50	  

Figure 3: Mean performance on the Semantic Space task at Time 1
and Time 2 by group.

0.6	  
0.4	  

4.00	  

Not	  	  Ctg-­‐Based	  
Time-­‐2	  

Figure 2. Proportion of category-based responses at Time 1 and
Time 2 by group.

Due to space limitations we cannot describe the
performance patterns for these three groups on all
administered tasks. However, it should be noted that on
some measures children’s performance was equivalent
across groups. For example, children’s Flanker Accuracy
Difference scores were comparable in all three groups
(MGroup1=.35, MGroup2=.38, MGroup3=.30, all ts<.75, ns).
Similarly, Flanker RT Difference scores were comparable in
all three groups (MGroup1=-127.37, MGroup2=-116.24,
MGroup3=-106.48, all ts<.21, ns). The biggest performance
differences were found on three measures: Semantic Space,
Non-Verbal WM, and the Day/Night task.
Recall that the Semantic Space task was administered
twice, once at Time1 and again at Time2. Therefore, we
were able to compare children’s performance on this task
across time. As can be seen in Figure 3, children in Group 1
exhibited equivalently high performance on the Semantic
Space task at both Time1 and Time2 (MT1=2.41, MT2=3.04,
paired-sample t(10)=.73, ns). In contrast, children in Group
2 significantly improved in their performance on the
Semantic Space task from Time1 to Time2 (MT1=1.4,
MT2=3.01, paired-sample t(15)=2.38, p=.03). Children in
Group 3 exhibited relatively low performance on the
Semantic Space task at both Time1 and Time2 (M T1=.88, M
T2=1.15, t(12)=.59, ns).
Overall, these findings suggest that children who showed
consistently high performance on the Semantic Space task
also showed consistently high performance on the categorybased reasoning task, and children who showed consistently
low performance on the Semantic Space task also showed
consistently low performance on the category-based
reasoning task. Only those children who showed improved
performance on the Semantic Space task also showed
improved category-based reasoning.

Discussion
One potential limitation of the present study is that the
assessment battery did not include a direct measure of
vocabulary size. Arguably, vocabulary may be a precursor
to category-based reasoning. Nevertheless, there is reason to
believe that the high degree of individual variability
observed in preschool children’s category-based reasoning
performance is unlikely to be explained by differences in
vocabulary. It is important to note that FSIQ is a composite
measure that includes an index of children’s verbal ability.
Recall that FSIQ scores were comparable between children
who became category-based responders at Time 2 and
children who were not yet category-based. Additionally,
children’s high accuracy rates on the Picture Identification
task suggests that children are familiar with the labels that
were utilized in the category-based reasoning task.
In line with prior work (Fisher et al., 2011; Godwin et al.
in press), the present study provides additional evidence
demonstrating that only a small percentage of preschool-age
children spontaneously engage in category-based reasoning.
Additionally, this work implicates three cognitive factors in
the development of young children’s category-based
reasoning: representational change, working memory, and
inhibitory control.
First, the strong relationship between improvements in
semantic differentiation scores and induction scores
suggests that representational change may be one underlying

511

mechanism in the development of children’s ability to
engage in spontaneous category-based reasoning. Second,
working memory may be an important cognitive factor in
the development of category-based reasoning as children
need to maintain and manipulate the task-relevant
information in working memory. Finally, sufficiently
developed inhibitory control may be required to select taskrelevant representations among competing activated
representations. These findings indicate that both general
cognitive advances (EF and working memory) and changes
in domain-specific knowledge (representational change)
contribute to the advancement of category-based reasoning.

Acknowledgments
We thank Malika Sinha, Laura Pacilio, Alyssa Montanaro, Anna
Loiterstein, Like Li, Kayoung Joung, and Rachel Walsh for their
help collecting data. We thank the children, parents, and teachers
for making this work possible. This work was supported by a
Graduate Training Grant awarded to Carnegie Mellon University
by the Department of Education (R305B090023 & R305B040063).

References
Badger, J. R. & Shapiro, L. R. (2012). Evidence of a transition from
perceptual to category induction in 3- to 9-year-old children.
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 113, 131-146.
Brown, R. & Berko, J. (1960). Word association and the acquisition
of grammar. Child Development, 31, 1-14.
Bunge, S. A., Dudukovic, N. M., Thomason, M. E., Vaidya, C. J., &
Gabrieli, J. D. E. (2002). Immature frontal lobe contributions to
cognitive control in children: Evidence from fMRI. Neuron, 33,
301-311.
Carey, S. (1985). Conceptual Change in Childhood. Cambridge, MA:
Bradford Books, MIT Press.
Carlson, S, M., Moses, L. J., & Breton, C. (2002). How specific is the
relation between executive function and theory of mind?
Contributions of inhibitory control and working memory. Infant
and Child Development, 11, 73 – 92.
Dale, P.S., & Fenson, L. (1996). Lexical development norms for
young children. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, &
Computers, 28, 125-127.
Diamond, A. (2002). Normal development of prefrontal cortex from
birth to young adulthood: Cognitive functions, anatomy, and
biochemistry. In D.T. Stuss & R.T. Knight (eds.), Principles of
Frontal Lobe Function (p. 466-503). London, UK: Oxford
University Press.
Dunn, L. M., & Dunn, L. M. (1997). Peabody Picture Vocabulary
Test–Third Edition. Circle Pines, MN: AGS Publishing.
Fisher, A.V. (2010). What’s in the name? Or how rocks and stones
are different from dogs and puppies. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 105, 198-212.
Fisher, A.V., Matlen, B.J., & Godwin, K.E. (2011). Semantic
similarity of labels and inductive generalization: Taking a second
look. Cognition, 118, 432-438.
Fisher, A.V. & Sloutsky, V.M. (2005). When induction meets
memory: Evidence for gradual transition from similarity-based to
category-based induction. Child Development, 76(3), 583-597.
Fisher, A. V., Thiessen, E., Godwin, K., Kloos, H., & Dickerson, J. P.
(2012). Mechanisms of focused attention in 3- to 5-year-old
children: Evidence from a new object tracking task. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 114(2), 275-294.

Gelman, S.A. & Coley, J.D. (1990). The importance of knowing a
dodo is a bird: Categories and inferences in 2-year-old children.
Developmental Psychology, 26, 796-804.
Gelman, S.A., & Markman, E. (1986). Categories and induction in
young children. Cognition, 23, 183-209.
Gentner, D., Rattermann, M. J., Markman, A. B., & Kotovsky, L.
(1995). Two forces in the development of relational similarity. In
T. J. Simon & G. S. Halford (Eds.), Developing cognitive
competence: New approaches to process modeling (pp. 263-313).
Hillsdale, NJ: LEA.
Gerstadt, C. L., Hong, Y. J., & Diamond, A. (1994). The relationship
between cognition and action: Performance of 3.5 – 7 years old on
a stroop-like day-night test. Cognition, 53, 129-153.
Godwin, K., Fisher, A., & Matlen, B. (In press). Development of
category-based reasoning in 4- to 7-year-old children: The
influence of label co-occurrence and kinship knowledge. Journal
of Experimental Child Psychology.
Howard, D.V. & Howard, J.H., Jr. (1977). A multidimensional
scaling analysis of the development of animal names.
Developmental Psychology, 13, 108-113.
Kan, I. P. & Thompson-Schill, S. L. (2004). Selection from
perceptual and conceptual representations. Cognitive, Affective, &
Behavioral Neuroscience, 4, 466-482.
Karmiloff-Smith, A. (1984). "Children's problem solving". In
M.E.Lamb, A.L.Brown & B.Rogoff (Eds.) Advances in
Developmental Psychology, Vol.III. New Jersey: Erlbaum, 39-90.
Kemp, C. & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2008). Structured models of semantic
cognition. Behavioral and Brain Sciences. 31(6), 717-718.
Matlen, B.J., Fisher, A.V., & Godwin, K.E. (under review).
Mechanisms of inductive generalization: The influence of cooccurrence probability.
McCauley, C., Weil, C. M., & Sperber, R. D. (1976). The
development of memory structure as reflected by semantic-priming
effects. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 22, 511-518.
Morrison, R. G., Doumas, L. A. A., & Richland, L. E. (2011). A
computational account of children’s analogical reasoning:
Balancing inhibitory control in working memory and relational
representation. Developmental Science, 14, 516-529.
Nelson, K. (1977). The syntagmatic-paradigmatic shift revisited: A
review of research and theory. Psychological Bulletin, 84, 93-116.
Opfer, J. Siegler, R. (2007). Representational change and children's
numerical estimation. Cognitive Psychology, 55, 169-195.
Osherson, D., Smith, E., Wilkie, O., Lopez, A. & Shafir, A. (1990).
Category-based induction. Psychological Review, 97, 185 – 200.
Rogers, T.T. & McClelland, J.L. (2004). Semantic Cognition: A
Parallel Distributed Processing Approach. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Sloman, S.A. (1993).
Feature-based induction.
Cognitive
Psychology, 25, 231 – 280.
Sloutsky, V.M. (2010). From perceptual categories to concepts: What
develops? Cognitive Science, 34, 1244–1286.
Sloutsky, V.M., & Fisher, A.V. (2004). Induction and categorization
in young children: A similarity-based model. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 133, 166-188.
Wagner, A.D. (2002). Cognitive control and episodic memory:
Contributions from prefrontal cortex. L. R. Squire & D. L.
Schacter (Eds.). Neuropsychology of Memory (3rd ed.), pp. 174192. New York: Guilford Press.
Welder, A.N., & Graham, S.A. (2001). The influences of shape
similarity and shared labels on infants' inductive inferences about
nonobvious object properties. Child Development, 72, 1653-1673.
Wechsler, D. (2002). WPPAI-III Technical Manual. San Antonio,
TX: Pearson, Inc.

512

