UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Different Strategies in Solving Series Completion Inductive Reasoning Problems: An fMRI
and Computational Study

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/97f5r0t9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Liang, Peipeng
Jia, Xiuqin
Taatgen, Niels A.
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Different Strategies in Solving Series Completion Inductive Reasoning Problems:
An fMRI and Computational Study
Peipeng Liang, Xiuqin Jia (ppliang1979@gmail.com, xiuqin.jia@gmail.com)
Department of Radiology, Xuanwu Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China
Brain Key Lab of Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Brain Informatics, Beijing, China

Niels A. Taatgen (niels@ai.rug.nl)
Department of Artificial Intelligence, University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands

Ning Zhong (zhong@maebashi-it.ac.jp)
Department of Life Science and Informatics, Maebashi Institute of Technology, Maebashi 371-0816, Japan

Kuncheng Li (lkc1955@gmail.com)
Department of Radiology, Xuanwu Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China
Brain Key Lab of Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Brain Informatics, Beijing, China
Abstract
Neural correlate of human inductive reasoning process is still
unclear. Number series and letter series completion are two
typical inductive reasoning tasks, and with common core
component of rule induction. Previous studies have
demonstrated that different strategies are adopted in number
series and letter series completion tasks even the underlying
rules are identical. In the present study, we examined cortical
activation as a function of two different reasoning strategies
for solving series completion tasks. The retrieval strategy,
used in number series completion tasks, involves direct
retrieving of arithmetic knowledge to get the relations
between items. The procedural strategy, used in letter series
completion tasks, requires counting a certain number of times
to detect the relations linking two items. The two strategies
require essentially the equivalent cognitive processes, but
have different working memory demands (the procedural
strategy incurs greater demands). The procedural strategy
produced significant greater activity in areas involved in
memory retrieval (dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, DLPFC) and
mental representation/maintenance (posterior parietal cortex,
PPC). An ACT-R model of the tasks successfully predicted
behavioral performance and BOLD responses in DLPFC and
PPC. The present findings support a general-purpose dualprocess theory of inductive reasoning regarding the cognitive
architecture.
Keywords: Number series; Letter series; Inductive reasoning;
Adpative control of thought-rational (ACT-R)

Introduction
Inductive reasoning, defined as inferring a general rule or
relation from specific elements, is traditionally considered
as one of the most important constitutes of human
intelligence (Spearman, 1923). Several studies were
performed to investigate the neural underpinnings of human
inductive reasoning using different types of tasks, including
sentential (e.g., House cats have 32 teeth; Lions have 32
teeth; therefore, all felines have 32 teeth. Was the given
conclusion plausible given the premises? Goel et al., 1997;
2004), figural (e.g., infer the rule underlying the figural

stimuli consisting of novel animals. Goel et al., 2000) and
numerical (e.g., number series completion tasks. Liang et al.,
2007; Yang et al., 2009; Zhong et al., 2011; Jia et al., 2011)
tasks. The recruitment of fronto-parietal regions together
with their left lateralization are convergent reported in most
of these studies, however, the detailed activation patterns
are modulated by the heterogeneousness of the experimental
task. Neural correlate of human inductive reasoning process
is still unclear, and needs more experimental studies.
The series completion problem, including letter series
(e.g., c e g ?) and number series (e.g., 3 5 7 ?), is a kind of
typical inductive reasoning task (Pelligrino, 1985;
Thurstone, 1938; Thorndike et al., 1986) and always used in
general fluid intelligence (Gf) test (Cattel, 1963; Hayslip et
al., 1995; Johnston et al., 2010; Redick et al., 2012).
However, number series and letter series completion tasks
are solved differently. Evidences demonstrated that different
strategies (by definition, a strategy is a goal-directed
procedure under the deliberate control of the participant
(Rosenberg-Lee and Anderson, 2009)) were employed in
number series and letter series completion tasks, in which
each item in one has a same-rule counterpart in the other
(Quereshi, 2001), and number series tasks are easier and
more familiar than letter series tasks (Quereshi & Seitz,
1993; Quereshi & Smith, 1998). This has been confirmed by
a recent pilot study with post-test oral report in our group, in
which subjects are required to solve the two kinds of series
completion tasks comprising items based on identical rules.
A “retrieval” strategy is used in solving number series tasks,
in which the relation between two adjacent items can be
directly attained by retrieving the corresponding arithmetic
fact from long-term memory (e.g., 11 13: 11+2=13, thus, the
rule is +2). As to letter series tasks, a “procedural” strategy
is adopted, in which participants require to step-wise count
the corresponding adjacent letter of an item in order to find
the relation linking two items (e.g., k n: k … l … m … n;
thus, the rule is +3). The investigation of strategies using
imaging has the potential to enrich our understanding the

2884

neural substrates of inductive reasoning, in terms of locus,
level, and duration of activity.
The retrieval and procedural strategy involve performing
equivalent cognitive processes (retrieving of declarative
memory to detect the relation between the adjacent two
items, internal representation and maintenance, and
response output), thus engage the same brain areas.
However, the working memory demands differ between the
two strategies. In the retrieval strategy (e.g., 11 13),
participants directly get the relation (e.g., +2) between the
adjacent two items by retrieving once the corresponding
arithmetic fact (e.g., 11+2=13); While in the procedural
strategy (e.g., k m), participants require to perform twice
retrieval step by step (e.g., l is next to k, and m is next to l)
and twice internal maintaining/updating a counter, and then
the rule can be determined according to the counter. In this
way, the procedural strategy incurs many more working
memory demands than the retrieval strategy. Thus, the two
strategies should differentially engage brain areas that are
sensitive to working memory load. It is predicted that the
two strategies can be differentiated by the extent of activity
within the same brain areas, including the left prefrontal
cortex, recruited in memory retrieval, and posterior parietal
cortex, involved in mental representation (see a
summarization in Anderson et al., 2008).
The goal of the current study was to employ
computational cognitive modeling to make specific
predictions about the strategy differences. Specifically,
based on the aforementioned specification, we expect to
demonstrate that the strategy difference can be distinguished
neurally by differential engagement of the same brain areas.
To make our predictions more precise (in terms of the
timing and level of activity), we plan to build computational
models of the experimental tasks using the adaptive control
of thought-rational (ACT-R) cognitive architecture
(Anderson, 2007). ACT-R proposes that cognitive process is
the result of the independent activity of distinct modules
which are coordinated by a central production system. The
ACT-R models automatically generate predictions for
activity in the ACT-R modules, which we could then
compare with activity in the brain areas of interest. For the
tasks in the present study, the differential engagement was
mainly due to the differences in retrieval and maintenance
demands between the two strategies. Two modules were
thus of particular interest in this study: the retrieval module,
which is responsible for the retrieval of declarative
memories and linked to the lateral inferior prefrontal cortex
(LIPFC) and the imaginal module, which is responsible for
the encoding and maintenance of internal representation of
the problems and linked to the posterior parietal cortex (PPC)
(Anderson, 2007; Qin et al., 2004). As the procedural
strategy incurs more demands of retrieval and maintenance,
thus, we expected LIPFC and PPC have a greater response
to the procedural strategy (used in letter series tasks) than
the retrieval strategy (used in number series tasks). Together,
we will test the two competitive theories empirically and
computationally.

Materials and Methods
Subjects
Twenty-three paid healthy undergraduate and postgraduate
students (11 females; 24.1 ± 3.7 years old) participated in
the experiment. Writhen informed consent was obtained
from each participant and this study was approved by the
Ethics committee of Xuanwu Hospital, Capital Medical
University.

Stimuli and experimental design
Four kinds of tasks were organized into a 2×2 factorial
design (Table 1). The first factor was Content, consisting of
two levels, number-related (24 inductions and 24 baselines)
and letter-related (24 inductions and 24 baselines) tasks. The
second factor was Task in which the first level was the
induction condition consisting of series completion tasks
(24 number series inductions and 24 letter series inductions)
and the second level was the baseline condition (24 number
judgment baselines and 24 letter judgment baselines). This
yielded four types of tasks: number series induction
(NumIR), letter series induction (LetIR), number judgment
baseline (Is10) and letter judgment baseline (IsJ). In
particular, interferential tasks, which are identical in pattern
to inductions but without common rules (e.g., “1 3 8” or “a
c f”), were included into NumIR and LetIR tasks based on a
pilot study. There were twelve interferential tasks within 60
induction tasks in the current study, with six in NumIR tasks
and another six in LetIR tasks.
For all kinds of tasks, there were three sequentially
presented numbers or letters (e.g., “1 3 5” or “a c e”).
Number-related tasks and letter-related tasks were matched
for magnitudes and operations. All the letters involved were
lowercase and within the range of a-z. Correspondingly, all
the numbers involved were within the range of 1-26. Half of
NumIR and LetIR tasks was forward (e.g., “1 3 5” or “a c e”;
the rule is: +2) while another half was backward (e.g., “13 9
5” or “m i e”; the rule is: -4). In the answer options of
NumIR and LetIR tasks, the distances between the correct
and the false answer were less than 3. Half of Is10 and IsJ
tasks were with the answer of “yes” while another half were
with the answer of “no”.
Table 1: Examples of experimental tasks.
Task
Options
Answer
NumIR 11 13 15 A. 18 B. 17
B
LetIR
tsr
A. q
B. p
A
Is10
14 23 10 A. yes B. no
A
IsJ
nwj
A. no B. yes
B

Stimuli Presentation
Stimuli from all conditions were organized into three
sessions and presented randomly in an event related design.
The order of sessions was counterbalanced among subjects.
The beginning of a trial was signaled by a cue of the task
type (“Finding a rule” for NumIR and LetIR tasks, “Is there

2885

„10‟” for Is10 tasks and “Is there „J‟” for IsJ tasks) for 2 s.
The numbers/letters then appeared on the screen with the
first number/letter appearing at 2 s, the second at 2.6 s, and
the last at 3.4 s. After the appearance of the third
number/letter, subjects were instructed to press the left or
right button (counterbalanced among subjects) when the
answer was acquired. Three numbers/letters would remain
on the screen for at most 6.6 s (since the presentation of the
third number/letter), or the button-pressing response within
6.6 s would stop it. Subsequently, two answer options were
displayed and subjects were asked to choose the correct
answer by pressing the corresponding buttons (left button
for “A”). Subjects were instructed to respond as accurately
and quickly as possible and move to the next trial if the
stimuli advanced before they could respond. The interstimulus interval (ISI) was 8 s and quick responses would
leave more rest time within the trial. Thus, reaction times
(RT) were recorded based on the first button response and
accuracies were acquired based on the second button
response.

MRI data acquisition
Scanning was performed on a 3.0 Tesla MRI system
(Siemens Trio Tim; Siemens Medical System, Erlangen,
Germany) with a 12-channel phased array head coil (see
details in Liang et al., (2007)). This acquisition sequence
generated 364 volumes for each session. The scanner was
synchronized with the presentation of every trial.

Data Analysis
Data preprocessing
Data
were
analyzed
using
SPM5
software
(http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk) and the preprocessing steps
are identical to Jia et al. (2011).

FMRI analysis
Only correct response trials were included in data analysis
(wrong response trials and interferential trials were not
included). The epoch of interest is the duration between the
presentations of the first number/letter to the first button
response. The BOLD signal was modeled using the
canonical HRF with time derivative and the RT as duration
trial by trial.
For confirmatory analysis, region of interest (ROI)
analyses focused on two predefined functional regions in
ACT-R, LIPFC (TAL., -43, 23, 24) and PPC (TAL., -23, 63, 40) (Anderson, 2007). The statistical results were based
on the beta-values (of general linear model implemented in
SPM5) averaged within the two ROIs.
For exploratory analysis, we are primarily interested in
the conjunction analysis to explore activations common to
both strategies [(NumIR-Is10) and (LetRI-IsJ)]. The Task
by Content interaction comparisons ([(NumIR-Is10)-(LetIRIsJ)] and [(LetIR-IsJ)-(NumIR-Is10)]) were also executed to
reveal the areas specific to each strategy. The activation

reported survived a voxel-level intensity threshold of p <
0.05 corrected for multiple comparisons.

Results
Behavioral performance
We carried out analyses of variance for two factors: Content
(number vs. letter) and Task (induction vs. baseline) on both
RT and accuracy. Behavioral scores indicated that subjects
performed the task in the expected manner. The main effects
of Content and Task were significant for RT and accuracy:
Response to induction tasks was significantly longer (F(1,22)
= 70.10, p < 0.001) and less accurate (F(1,22) = 61.56, p <
0.001) than that of baseline tasks; Response to letter tasks
was significantly longer (F(1,22) = 68.38, p < 0.001) and
less accurate (F(1,22) =69.94, p < 0.001) than that of
number tasks. The interaction effect between Task and
Content was significant for RT (F(1,22) = 69.24, p < 0.001)
and accuracy (F(1,22) = 66.75, p < 0.001): The difference
between LetIR and IsJ (i.e., LetIR-IsJ) (RT: F(1,22) = 30.59,
p < 0.001; accuracy: F(1,22) = 73.81, p < 0.001) than the
difference between NumIR and Is10 (i.e., NumIR-Is10) (RT:
F(1,22) = 6.39, p < 0.05; accuracy: F(1,22) = 2.89, p =0.10).
This indicated that the significant interaction effect is
primarily driven by the strategy difference, i.e., the
difference between LetIR and NumIR.

Imaging results
Confirmatory analysis We performed repeated measures
Task by Content for the two ROIs. The two ROIs showed
the identical patterns. The main effect of Content (F(1,22) =
35.46, p < 0.001 for LIPFC and F(1,22) = 14.23, p < 0.001
for PPC), Task (F(1,22) = 67.10, p < 0.001 for LIPFC and
F(1,22) = 35.45, p < 0.001 for PPC) and the Task by
Content interaction effect (F(1,22) = 29.64, p < 0.001 for
LIPFC and F(1,22) = 4.60, p < 0.001 for PPC) were all
significant. The post-hoc multiple comparisons showed that
the interaction effect was driven by the strategy difference,
i.e., the difference between letter series reasoning tasks and
number series reasoning tasks (F(1,22) = 46.58, p < 0.001
for LIPFC and F(1,22) = 13.51, p < 0.001 for PPC). There
were no significant difference between the two kinds of
baselines (i.e., IsJ versus Is10; F(1,22) = 3.98, p =0.06 for
LIPFC and F(1,22) = 1.85, p =0.19 for PPC).
Exploratory analysis Conjunction analysis indicated that
both strategies showed common activation in the left
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC, BA 46, 9) and
bilateral superior parietal lobe (SPL, BA 7) extending to left
inferior parietal lobe (IPL, BA 40) (Figure 1). Regions
specific to LetIR [(LetIR-IsJ)-(NumIR-Is10)] were found in
the left middle frontal gyrus (BA 9, 46), bilateral superior
frontal gyrus extending into anterior cingulate cortex/medial
frontal gyrus (BA 6, 8, 9, 32), inferior frontal gyrus/insula
(BA 13, 45, 47), and bilateral superior parietal cortex (BA
7). No significant activations were found specific to NumIR
[(NumIR-Is10) - (LetIR-IsJ)].

2886

function, D(t), which has a value of 1 when the module
associated with that region is active, and 0 otherwise:
𝑡

𝐵 t =

𝐷(𝑥)𝐻(𝑡 − 𝑥)𝑑𝑥
0

Figure 1: Activations common to both strategies.

The model
Having now reviewed the result of the experiment, we come
to the question whether we can understand them in the
frame work of the ACT-R theory. The model we
constructed primarily depends on the visual module to
perceive the stimuli, the manual module to respond, the
retrieval module to retrieve a fact from memory, and the
imaginal module to encode and update its stored
representation. Figure 2 presents the sequences of activity in
the four modules, for a “+2” NumIR problem or a
“backward next” relation LetIR problem solved by each of
the strategies. Specifically, the underlying productions
driving these modules are not shown. As the fronto-parietal
network plays an important role in inductive reasoning, the
retrieval and imaginal module are of special interest in the
present study, in the following, we would illustrate the
prediction of BOLD responses in the two modules.
The fit of the predictions of the model to the RT and ACC
data are presented in Figure 3. The parameters were
estimated to fit the behavioral data: a factor that scaled the
time to retrieve a declarative memory fact (0.3 sec) and the
time to modify the contents of the imaginal module (i.e., 0.2
sec). This leads to a predicted effect size (605.42 ms for
NumIR, 2116.17 ms for LetIR, 551.25 ms for baseline
conditions) that is highly similar to the observed effect size
(586.4 ms for NumIR, 2221.4 ms for LetIR, 530.4 ms for
Is10, and 606.1 ms for IsJ). Only the deviation of data is
presented because the model makes identical predictions. It
can be seen that the model produced a reasonable fit to the
behavioral data.
In order to generate BOLD predictions, we convolved the
module activity with a gamma function. As is typical (e.g.,
Boyton et al., 1996; Glover, 1999), if the module is engaged,
it will produce a BOLD response t time units later according
to the function:

Once the timings of buffers actions are all set, we can
predict the BOLD functions by estimating the magnitude
parameter m, the exponent α, and the latency scale s for
each brain region. The estimates of these parameters and
measurement of the quality of the prediction are given in
Table 2. Figure 4 displays percent change of BOLD
response (relative to the baseline defined by the average
BOLD response of the first two scans and the last two
scans), along with the prediction of the ACT-R model to be
presented.
Table 2: ACT-R parameters and the BOLD predictions.
Imaginal
Retrieval
3
3
Exponent (𝜶)
Scale (s)
2.2
1.8
Magnitude
5.6
5.5
M (  1)*
Correlation (r)
0.94
0.92

𝐻 𝑡 = 𝑚(𝑡/𝑠)𝛼 𝑒 −(𝑡/𝑠)

The parameter m is the magnitude parameter and determines
the height of the function; the parameter s is the scale
parameter and determines the time scale, and the parameter
is the shape parameter and determines the narrowness of the
function. The cumulative BOLD responses in a particular
module is the sum of the individual BOLD responses driven
by a module‟s activities. This can be modeled by
convolving the hemodynamic response, H(t), with a demand

Figure 2: A schematic representation of the ACT-R
model‟s solution to the number- and letter-series problem of
“11 13 15” and “t s r”, solved by retrieval strategy and
procedural strategy, respectively.

2887

Discussion
The primary purpose of the current study was to investigate
the neural correlates of the two cognitive strategies in series
completion inductive reasoning tasks. Both confirmatory
and exploratory analysis indicated that DLPFC (L.>R.) and
PPC (bilaterally) were commonly recruited in the two kinds
of tasks, but with different extent. Additionally, the
exploratory analyses identified additional regions in
dorsomedial prefrontal cortex (DMPFC) and ventrolateral
prefrontal cortex (VLPFC) was active for the procedural
strategy but not for the retrieval one. These results suggest
that some aspects of the behavioral signatures of strategies
may be recovered from imaging data. We constructed the
computational model to simulate participants‟ behavior. The
results showed that there was reasonable fitness between the
model prediction and the empirical data.

Figure 3: Data (red solid lines) and model fits (black
dashed lines) for NumIR, LetIR, Is10, and IsJ.
In the current study, the significant co-activation of the
left DLPFC and bilateral PPC is identified to be strategyindependent. These results replicated a recent fMRI study of
number series completion task in our group (Jia, et al.,
2011), and were consistent with previous studies of
sentential inductive reasoning task (Goel and Dolan 2004)
and figural inductive reasoning tasks (Induction minus
Perceptual baseline; Goeland Dolan, 2000). This implies
that these two regions may be the key regions involved in
inductive reasoning. Moreover, the left DLPFC is more
specific to sentential induction, as contrast to deduction
(Goel and Dolan, 2004). The activity of the DLPFC is right
lateralized in Goel et al. (2000), but is left lateralized in the
other studies (Jia, et al., 2011; Goel and Dolan, 2004) and
the current study, which may be ascribed to the different
kinds of experimental materials (figure versus number,
sentences).
As to the functional role of DLPFC and PPC, different
interpretations were proposed. In the domain of inductive
reasoning, the left DLPFC was related to the use of world

knowledge in the generation and evaluation of hypotheses
(Goel and Dolan, 2004), rule identification and
extrapolations (Jia, et al., 2011), and the fronto-parietal
network was more specific to rule identification (Jia, et al.,
2011). (Note: In Goel and Dolan (2000), the authors are
interested in bilateral hippocampus, which is specifically
associated with rule inference, and right lateral orbital
prefrontal cortex, which is associated with the task by
difficulty interaction. The former is interpreted in terms of
semantic encoding of novel stimuli, and the latter in terms
of hypothesis selection. While the DLPFC (R.>L.) and
bilateral PPC, identified in Rule Induction minus Perceptual
Baseline, is not explained of their functional roles.) It is not
surprise of these different explanations, as different domain
and context were situated in.

Figure 4: The BOLD signals obtained for the prefrontal
and parietal regions for NumIR and LetIR condition and the
prediction of the ACT-R model of the task.
In this study, with the help of computational modeling,
we made a more general account. The DLPFC and PPC
regions identified in the exploratory analysis, are largely
overlapped the regions involved in the ACT-R LIPFC and
ACT-R PPC. Therefore, consistent with the explanation in
ACT-R theory, it was inferred that the left DLPFC is
associated with memory retrieval of semantic
information/knowledge and PPC is associated with mental
representation of problem states (Anderson, 2007; Danker &
Anderson, 2007). In the current study, although the
procedural strategy and the retrieval strategy commonly
recruited the left DLPFC and bilateral PPC, the strategy
variation can be distinguished by the extent of cortical
activity within these regions. The procedural strategy incurs
more working memory demands (both the retrieval and
maintenance demands) than the retrieval strategy. The ACTR model fitted well with the experimental behavioral and
imaging data, which demonstrated the validity of this
general account.

2888

In summary, by coupling this empirical work with
computational modeling, we have deepened our
understanding of what constitute the strategy variation (the
retrieval strategy versus the procedural strategy) and
quantify their predictions. These results support the generalpurpose dual-process theory of inductive reasoning.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Natural Science Foundation
of China (No. 61105118), Beijing Nova Program (No.
Z12111000250000).
ACT-R code can be accessed by logging in
ccmureasoninglab@gmail.com (userid: ccmureasoninglab;
password: peipengliang).

References
Anderson JR. (2007). How can human mind occur in the
physical universe ? New York : Oxford University Press.
Anderson JR, Carter CS, Fincham JM, Qin YL, Ravizza SM,
Rosenberg-Lee M. (2008). Using fMRI to test models of
complex cognition. Cognitive Science, 32, 1323-1348.
Barbey AK, Barsalou LW. (2009). Models of reasoning and
problem solving. In Squire L, editor, Encyclopeida of
Neuroscience. Oxford: Academic Press. 8, 35-43.
Boyton GM, Engel SA, Glover GH, and Heeger DJ. (1996).
Linear systems analysis of functional magnetic resonance
imaging in human V1. Journal of Neuroscience, 16, 42074221.
Chein JM, Moore AB, Conway ARA. (2011). Domaingeneral mechanisms of complex working memory span.
Neuroimage, 54, 550-559.
Danker JF and Anderson JR. (2007). The roles of prefrontal
and posterior parietal cortex in algebra problem solving :
A case of using cognitive modeling to inform
neuroimaging data. Neuroimage, 35, 1365-1377.
Feeney A, Shafto P, Dunning D. (2007). Who is susceptible
to conjunction fallacies in category-based induction?
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 14(5), 884-889.
Glover GH. (1999). Deconvolution of impulse response in
event-related BOLD fMRI. Neuroimage, 9, 416-429.
Goel V, Dolan R. (2000). Anatomical segregation of
component processes in an inductive inference task.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 12, 1-10.
Goel V, Dolan R. (2004). Differential involvement of left
prefrontal cortex in inductive and deductive reasoning.
Cognition, 93, B109-B121.
Goel V, Gold B, Kapur S, Houle S. (1997). The seats of
reason: A localization study of deductive & inductive
reasoning using PET (O15) blood flow technique.
NeuroReport, 8, 1305-1310.
Jia XQ, Liang PP, Lu J, Yang YH, Zhong N, Li KC. (2011).
Common and dissociable neural correlates associated with
component processes of inductive reasoning. Neuroimage,
56, 2292-2299.
Johnston A, Gradisar M, Dohnt H, Billows M, Mccappin S.
(2010). Adolescent sleep and fluid intelligence
performance. Sleep and Biological Rhythmes, 8, 180-186.

Liang PP, Zhong N, Lu SF, Liu JM, Yao YY, Li KC, Yang
YH. (2007). The neural mechanism of human numerical
inductive reasoning process: A combined ERP and fMRI
study. LNAI 4845, Springer, 223-243.
Pelligrino JW. (1985). Inductive reasoning ability. In
Sternberg RJ (Eds.), Human abilities: An informationprocessing approach. New York: Freeman.
Prado J, Chadha A, Booth JR. (2011). The brain network for
deductive reasoning: a quantitative meta-analysis of 28
neuroimaging studies. J Cogn Neurosci., 23(11), 34833497.
Qin YL, Cameron SC, Silk EM, Stenger VA, Fissell K,
Goode A, Anderson JR. (2004). The change of the brain
activation patterns as children learn algebra equation
solving. PNAS, 101(15), 5686-5691.
Quereshi MY. (2001). Factorial similarity of letter and
number series comprising identical rules. Current
Psychology: Developmetal, Learning, Personality, Social
Spring, 20(3), 278-286.
Quereshi MY, Seitz R. (1993). Identical rules do not make
letter and number series equivalent. Intelligence, 12, 110119.
Quereshi MY, Smith H. (1998). Reasoning ability in older
adults measured through letter and number series. Current
Psychology, 17, 20-27.
Redick TS, Shipstead Z, Harrison TL, Hicks KL, Fried DE,
Hambrick DZ, Kane MJ, Engle RW. (In press). No
evidence of intelligence improvement after working
memory training: A randomized, placebo controlled study.
J. Exp. Psychol. Gen.
Rosenberg-Lee M, and Anderson JR. (2009). Neural
correlates of arithmetic calculation strategies. Cognitive,
Affective, & Behavioral Neurosicence, 9(3), 270-285.
Spearman C. (1923). The nature of inteUigence and the
principles of cognition. London: Macmillan.
Thorndike RL, Hagen EP, Sattler JM. (1986). The StanfordBinet Intelligence Scale: Fourth Edition. Guide for
administering and scoring. Chicago: Riverside Publishing
Company.
Thurstone LL. (1938). Primary mental abilities. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Yang YH, Liang PP, Lu SF, Li KC, Zhong N. (2009). The
role of the DLPFC in inductive reasoning of MCI patients
and normal agings: An fMRI study. Sci China Life Sci.,
52(8), 789-795.
Zhong N, Liang PP, Qin YL, Lu SF, Yang YH, Li KC.
(1983). Neural substrates of data-driven scientific
discovery: An fMRI study during performance of number
series completion task. Sci China Life Sci., 54(5), 466473.

2889

