UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Dilution Effects in Perceptual Information Integration

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8nb515fp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Hotaling, Jared
Cohen, Andrew
Busemeyer, Jerome
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Dilution Effects in Perceptual Information Integration
Jared M. Hotalinga (jhotalin@indiana.edu), Andrew L. Cohenb (acohen@psych.umass.edu), Jerome R.
Busemeyera (jbusemey@indiana.edu), & Richard M. Shiffrina (shiffrin@indiana.edu)
a

Department of Psychological & Brain Sciences, Indiana University
1101 E. Tenth St., Bloomington, IN 47408 USA
b
Department of Psychology, University of Massachusetts
Amherst, MA 01003 USA

optimal (Gilovich, Griffin, & Kahneman, 2002). The
conjunctive fallacy, unpacking effects, and the dilution
effect are just a few of the many common findings that
violate normative models of information integration. These
deviations from rational behavior are so numerous that it is
now common to assume sub-optimal integration as a
starting point for theories of decision making.

Abstract
In cognitive science there is a paradox: Researchers studying
decision making have repeatedly shown that people employ
simple and often less than optimal strategies when integrating
information from multiple sources. However, researchers
working in fields such as categorization, memory, and
perception have had great success using optimal models to
account for information integration. Is this conflict due to the
use of different materials and procedures? We test the
hypothesis that stimuli requiring more controlled information
integration lead to suboptimal performance, while stimuli that
lend themselves to more automatic processing produce more
optimal integration. We test for one canonical example of
sub-optimal information integration, the dilution effect, using
stimuli more commonly found in perception experiments.
Dilution was indeed reliable across several conditions. The
largest effects occurred in stimuli manipulated so as to
discourage automatic processing. We use the Multicomponent Information Accumulation model to explain how
stimulus presentation influenced cognitive processing.

Optimal Integration in Perceptual Domains
In contrast, there are numerous successful applications of
optimal or rational models of information integration in
domains such as perception (Oden & Massaro, 1978;
Tenenbaum, 1999), categorization (Ashby & Maddox, 1990,
1992; Nosofsky, 1986), and memory (Anderson, 1991;
Shiffrin & Steyvers, 1997). Researchers in these more
perceptual fields begin with an assumption of optimal
integration and only later investigate sub-optimal or
heuristic-based strategies.

Keywords: dilution effect; information integration; models

The Dilution Effect

Introduction
Information integration is the combining of evidence from
multiple sources. Many tasks, from speech comprehension
to medical decision making, require such integration. Each
source of information on its own provides some evidence,
but integrating all information yields the best performance.
This article investigates the manner in which information is
combined. While the literature provides numerous examples
of near-optimal information integration, there are just as
many examples where it is far from optimal. The types of
stimuli and procedures used often determined the pattern of
results. Tasks involving quantitative stimuli, like probability
judgments (Tversky & Kahneman, 1974), seem to implicate
heuristic strategies, more than perceptual tasks, like speech
comprehension (Oden & Massaro, 1978). Our research tests
the hypothesis that even perceptual information can produce
suboptimal integration if it is displayed in a way that
discourages automatic processing.

Suboptimal Integration in Decision Making
Many studies of judgment and decision making suggest that
information from multiple sources is integrated via simple
heuristics. Sometimes these studies produce behavior
approaching optimal decision making (Gigerenzer & Todd,
1999), but in many other cases, performance is well short of

Although information integration is an object of study by
researchers in both decision making and perceptual
domains, these fields often seem to operate independently of
each other. One reason is the difference in experimental
paradigms. Decision making research focuses mainly on
linguistic and quantitative stimuli, and is concerned with
how individuals use information to form explicit inference
or preferences. Perceptual research typically relies on more
perceptual stimuli, and concentrates on how the information
is produced from external stimulation. Even when words are
used as stimuli, as in memory research, the focus of
information integration often includes perceptual aspects of
the stimuli. The present research aims to bridge this divide
through a novel experimental paradigm that combines
aspects of each research tradition.
We focus on one example of sub-optimal information
integration: the dilution effect. This effect refers to a
situation where adding null or weak positive evidence to
what is already strong positive evidence reduces the overall
belief in a hypothesis. The effect has been replicated in
numerous studies (LaBella & Koehler, 2004; McKenzie,
Lee, & Chen, 2002; Nisbett, Zukier, & Lemley, 1981; Peters
& Rothbart, 2000), but Shanteau (1975) gives one of the
clearest demonstrations of the dilution effect. In his study,
an experimenter drew samples of red (R) and white (W)

2572

beads, with replacement, from one of two boxes. Box A was
70% W and 30% R. Box B was 30% W beads and 70% R.
The participants did not know from which box the beads
were drawn. In one condition, the experimenter drew the
sequence WWWRWR from one of the boxes. After every
two beads, participants estimated the probability that the
beads came from Box A. The mean judgments after WW,
WWWR, and WWWRWR were 69.3%, 64.0, and 60.6,
respectively. The WW sample provides diagnostic
information, information that clearly points to Box A.
However the subsequent samples were nondiagnostic; they
could have come from either box with equal probability, and
should not have changed the estimated likelihood that the
entire sequence came from Box A. Yet this non-diagnostic
information caused the estimated probability to drop.

Why Faces?
Although the dilution effect has only been explored using
traditional judgment and decision making stimuli, it easily
lends itself to perceptual stimuli. We use weak and strong
evidence from different parts of a face to investigate the
effect. For example, imagine you are asked to identify a face
captured on a security camera. The top half of the face is
relatively clear, but the bottom half is in shadow and harder
to see. The top and bottom halves of the face then lend
strong and weak evidence to the decision. The primary goal
of this research is to determine whether the information
from these sources is combined in an optimal fashion, or
sub-optimally as exemplified by the dilution effect.
A benefit of using perceptual stimuli is that issues of
interpretation and language understanding do not come into
play. For example, the conjunction law is violated less if
participants interpret “Linda is a bank teller” to mean that
she is a bank teller and not a feminist (Sides, Osherson,
Bonini, & Viale, 2002). People also often misinterpret
probabilities, but perform more optimally when information
is presented as frequencies (Gigerenzer & Hoffrage, 1995).
The present task employs perceptual stimuli, thereby greatly
reducing any undesirable influence of language conventions.

Testing Models of the Dilution Effect
In addition to testing for the dilution effect, we evaluate
three models of information integration. The Simple
Bayesian model combines evidence from the two sources of
information optimally, according to Bayesian statistical
methods, and predicts additive effects. The Averaging
model calculates a weighted arithmetic mean of the
evidence produced by each source, and always predicts
dilution. Finally, we use the Multi-component Information
Accumulation model to explain how information is sampled
from multiple sources, and accumulates during deliberation.
This model accounts for the behavior we observed in our
experiment, and provides insight into how stimulus
presentation affects information processing.
The goal of our experiment was to replicate the dilution
effect using perceptual stimuli and to determine the role of
stimulus presentation on performance. In particular, we

tested if images that encouraged more automatic perceptual
integration yield reduced dilution effects than images that
required more controlled combination of evidence.
In the experiment, participants categorized a test series of
faces into two families (Jones or Smith). The test faces were
created by morphing together two target faces (representing
the patriarch of each family) along a continuum. Different
parts of the faces were morphed independently, allowing us
to test how individual combined various levels of evidence.
In direct analogy to standard work on the dilution effect, the
top and bottom halves of a face act as two sources of
information. Based on the many studies showing nearoptimal combination of perceptual information it would be
natural to expect two halves from the Jones side of the
morph continuum to produce even stronger responses in
favor of Jones. Alternatively, weak evidence might dilute
strong evidence to produce a dilution effect.
To investigate factors controlling the size and reliability
of the dilution effect, two manipulations differentially
encouraged automatic and controlled integration of
information. It is fairly common to distinguish automatic
and controlled processing, both in theory and empirical
research. Most often automatic processing is assumed to be
fast and independent of conscious manipulation, and
controlled processing is assumed to be slow and conscious.
Automatic processing is usually assumed to be more robust,
less prone to large errors, less based on heuristics, and
closer to optimal than controlled processing. This line of
thinking suggests that the dilution effect is less likely when
processing is automatic, and more likely when processing is
controlled. We use the automatic/controlled language of
Schneider & Shiffrin (1977) for convenience sake, rather
than to make strong claims that information integration is
ever entirely automatic or controlled.
In the present experiment we used conditions that
manipulated face images so as to bias processing toward or
away from automatic processing. In the Together condition
the two half faces are shown atop one another, in a normal
configuration. Because identification of faces is overlearned, this should promote automatic processing and
produce less dilution. That is, weak evidence, when added
to strong evidence from the same category, should increase
accuracy. In the Split condition the two half faces were
separated horizontally. In the Inverted condition the images
were displayed upside-down. Because our perceptual
systems have rarely needed to recognize split or inverted
faces, each half face might be processed separately, with the
results later combined using more deliberate strategies. That
is, weak evidence should combine less optimally with
strong evidence and produce more dilution.

Method
Participants
Nineteen students from Indiana University (undergraduate
and graduate) were paid $16 to participate in this study. All
participants had normal or corrected-to-normal vision.

2573

Stimuli

Procedure

All of the stimuli used in the experiment were derived from
two “target faces” (A and B) selected from the FERET
database (Philips, Moon, Rizvi, & Rauss, 2000). After
cropping the image to remove hair and head outline, the
faces were warped so that their major facial features
aligned. Once the faces are aligned, a morph is essentially a
linear combination of the grayscale values of the two faces
at each pixel. The cropped areas of the 256 × 384 pixels,
grayscale images were filled with a sinusoidal grating.
Upside-down copies of the two target faces were also made
for the Inverted conditions. The four resulting images were
used to construct all experimental stimuli.
The experiment began with two short blocks of trials that
calibrated morphs levels to the individual. On each trial a
half face was presented and participants chose the target that
it most closely resembled. The test faces were created by
morphing Target A and Target B together along a
continuum. Faces favoring A and B were initialized to
94.44% Target A and 5.56% Target A, respectively. A
staircase algorithm was used to find top and bottom half
face morphs for each target and each orientation that
produced an intermediate level of accuracy (approximately
72%). These morphs became the medium (M) strength half
faces, while weak (W) and strong (S) morphs were derived
by extrapolation. Weak halves use the morph coefficient
halfway between the medium morph and 0.5. Strong halves
used the morph two thirds of the distance between the
medium morph and the target.
Having calibrated all morphs levels, test stimuli were
created as follows. For each orientation, the W, M, and S
top half faces for Target A were crossed with the W, M, and
S bottom half faces for Target A. The same procedure was
followed for Target B. As a manipulation check, the W and
M half faces for A were also paired with the M and W half
faces for B, respectively. Whole faces were presented either
in a normal configuration (directly above or below the other
half face or background) or horizontally split by 60 pixels.
The W, M, and S top and bottom half faces were also
presented in isolation with a continuation of the background
presented instead of the other half of the face. Pilot testing
showed no performance differences between Together and
Split half faces, so the latter were omitted. Sample stimuli
are shown in Figure 1. This procedure was done separately
for upright and inverted faces, yielding 56 test stimuli for
each orientation.

Participants completed two sessions of the experiment on
separate days. They were told that they would see a series of
faces, each of which belonged to either the Jones or Smith
family. They were instructed to use the test face’s
resemblance to each patriarch to determine the correct
family. After several example trials, participants completed
two blocks of calibration trials. The first consisted of 72
upright half face trials, interspersed with 48 upright whole
face filler trials included to discourage strategies tailored to
half faces. Auditory feedback was given after each response,
with a high beep for correct and a low beep for incorrect.
After calibration, participants began an integration phase
consisting of two blocks of trials in Session 1 and six blocks
in Session 2. Each block contained 68 trials. Each test face
appeared once per block, with the exceptions of W/W,
M/M, and S/S stimuli, which appeared twice. Upright faces
appeared in odd numbered blocks. Inverted faces appeared
in even numbered blocks.
Each trial began with a test face appearing in one of nine
random positions near the middle of the screen. After two
seconds the face was masked with one of two scrambled
sets of features from the target faces. After 250ms the mask
disappeared and the two target faces appeared, one on each
side of the screen. Participants chose the family to which the
test face belonged. They were then asked, “What is the
likelihood that you are correct?”, and responded on a 6point scale from 50% to 100%. A fixed number of points
were awarded for each correct choice and the individual
with the highest final score received a $20 bonus.

Figure 1: Example test faces.

Results
The present analysis focuses on participants’ choice
proportions, though mean confidence judgments showed a
similar pattern of results. We began by removing data from
trials in which individuals indicated no confidence in their
decision (likelihood judgment of 50%), or responded too
fast (less than 150 ms), or too slow (greater than 5 sec). This
procedure removed approximately 12% trials, across all
participants.
Next, we labeled morphs according to the accuracy they
produced on half face trials. That is for example, an
individual’s half face trials determined which Jones top half
morphs were strong, medium, and weak. This relabeling
proved unnecessary in most cases because accuracy order
matched the physical morph order.
A choice response was considered correct if the test face
provided stronger evidence for that target than the
alternative. For half faces and most whole faces (i.e. those
where top and bottom both favored the same target) this was
straightforward. On trials where top and bottom halves
favored opposite targets the stronger of the two halves
indicated the correct response.
Orientation had almost no effect on accuracy, confirming
that calibration successfully equated upright and inverted
half face morphs strengths. There were also no significant
effects of orientation on the dilution effect, so we present

2574

results collapsed across upright and inverted orientation in
order to concentrate on evidence level and split. Mean
accuracy, collapsed across target, half (top vs. bottom), and
orientation is shown in Figure 2. Accuracy tends to increase
with evidence strength, providing a coarse check that the
stimuli were appropriately calibrated. Accuracy with M/oW
faces was below that of even the weak half faces,
confirming that these opposite halves were indeed taken as
evidence for the alternative category.

Figure 3: Mean dilution scores across whole face conditions.

Figure 2: Mean accuracy across evidence levels for whole
faces (bars) and half faces (lines).
Our primary research question dealt with how people
would combine the two halves of a face and when they
might show something akin to the dilution effect. To
address this question we compared accuracy with each
whole face to that with the stronger half alone. Deviation
scores were calculated within individuals by subtracting the
mean accuracy given the stronger half face from the
response (coded as correct or incorrect) given for whole
face. A value greater than 0 indicates additive integration,
qualitatively in line with the predictions of a simple
Bayesian model. A result less than 0 indicates a dilution
effect because additional weak positive evidence decreased
accuracy. Figure 3 shows mean deviation scores.
A t-test showed mean deviation scores to be significantly
below 0, t(6767) = 18.61, p < .01. As expected Split faces
produced greater dilution effects than Together faces. A 2
(Orientation) x 2 (Split) repeated measures analysis of
variance (ANOVA) confirmed this, with a main effect of
Split, F(1,18) = 12.36, MSE = .015, p < .01. No other effects
were significant. Dilution was greatest for W/S faces, where
the difference in top and bottom half strengths was largest.
Additive effects were largest in the W/W condition,
suggesting that some near-optimal information sampling
may have occurred.

Figure 4: Predicted deviation scores for the McIA model.

Discussion
These findings are rather surprising given that the dilution
effect had not previously been observed in a perceptual
context. The bulk of the existing literature suggested that
performance would probably resemble that of a nearoptimal integration process, but we found that participants
were often less accurate with two pieces of diagnostic
evidence than one. Clearly sub-optimal information
integration is not limited to the numerical or linguistic
stimuli found in traditional judgment and decision making
research. Additionally, our results provide insight into how
people processed information in the task. As predicted,
dilution was greater when automatic perceptual integration
of top and bottom halves was made more difficult by
splitting the face. Surprisingly, the dilution effect was

2575

present to an equal extent in both Inverted and Upright
orientations. Since, inversion was meant to interfere with
strategies tailored to upright faces, this may suggest that
participants did not treat the stimuli as they would normal
faces. In contrast, the split manipulation may have operated
at a lower level where splitting disrupted general purpose
whole-object automatic processing in either orientation.

Models of Perceptual Dilution
The obtained pattern of results poses problems for two of
the candidate models introduced earlier. The Simple
Bayesian model posits that information from top and bottom
halves is combined optimally. Consequently, the model
predicts additive effects in all conditions, except M/oW, and
cannot account for the large dilution effects observed when
a W half was paired with a S half.
The Averaging model, on the other hand, assumes that
individuals always integrate top and bottom halves of face
by taking the average of the evidence produced by each. The
model predicts dilution effects whenever top and bottom
evidence strengths are unequal, but it predicts deviations
scores near 0 for conditions where top and bottom are of the
same strength. Thus, the large additive effects in the W/W
condition cannot be explained through averaging alone.
As an alternative we propose the Multi-component
Information Accumulation model (McIA). This model
represents information integration as a process of
accumulating evidence to a decision threshold, θ. According
to the model, on each trial a participant repeatedly samples
information from one of three sources of evidence: the top
half, the bottom half, or the whole face. Each sample
provides evidence causing preference to move toward one
of two decision bounds. These boundaries represent the
amount of preference required to make each response. At
one moment a sample may favor the Jones response,
causing the preference state to take a step toward the Jones
boundary. However, the next sample may favor Smith,
causing the preference state to step away from the Jones
boundary and toward the Smith boundary. In this manner
preference evolves as a noisy random walk process until a
decision threshold for one response is reached. The model is
thus capable of making predictions for both accuracy and
response times.
The probability of sampling whole face evidence is a free
parameter, α, representing the likelihood that the perceptual
system would automatically combine the top and bottom
halves into a single whole face. Since splitting the halves
apart increased the size of the dilution effect, α, was
estimated separately for Split and Together faces. The
probabilities of sampling the top or the bottom half were
then each (1 - α)/2. The probability of stepping toward the
correct decision boundary after a sample is given by the rate
parameter, δ. Since the rate of evidence accumulation
should vary with stimulus strength, six rate parameters were
estimated. These corresponded to W, M, and S morphs for
both top and bottom half faces. For half face trials there is
only one δ to sample at each moment. However, on whole

face trials one of three sources of evidence is sampled at
each moment. For example, if a stimulus was comprised of
a W top and S bottom, the three sources would be δWeak Top,
δStrong Bottom, and whole face evidence produced by
automatically integrating the two halves. If the whole face
evidence is sampled, an evidence accumulation rate is
calculated as the Bayesian optimal combination of top and
bottom rates, assuming independence. This represents the
idea that automatic perceptual integration of top and bottom
halves produces additional, perhaps configural, evidence for
the correct response. The value of θ proved relatively
unimportant for fitting choices, and was arbitrarily set to 10.
In the future we plan to use the McIA model to
simultaneously fit choices and response times, which will
allow for better estimation of θ.
The best fitting parameters of the McIA model are given
in Table 1. Deviation scores based on the model’s prediction
are shown in Figure 4. The model does a remarkable job of
capturing the basic qualitative patterns in the data. It
produces dilution effects because deliberation is sometimes
driven by the evidence in the weaker half, producing more
errors than with the stronger half alone. In the W/S
condition this produces very large dilution effects because,
for example, δWeak Bottom is much smaller than δStrong Top.
However, unlike the Averaging model, the McIA model
does not always predict dilution. Instead it posits that on
some trials the perceptual system automatically combines
the top and bottom halves into a configural whole, yielding
high accuracy. This explains the additive effects for W/W,
as well as the difference between Split and Together
conditions. According to the model whole face evidence
was sampled 63% of time for Together faces, but only 37%
of time for Split faces. This supports our hypothesis that
separating the top and bottom halves of face encourages
more controlled, less optimal strategies.
Table 1: Best Fitting Drift Rate and Attention Parameters
of the McIA Model.
δWeak Top
δMedium Top
δStrong Top
δWeak Bottom
δMedium Bottom
δStrong Bottom
αTogether
αSplit

0.522
0.549
0.586
0.518
0.525
0.594
0.627
0.365

Conclusion
The present results represent a synthesis of two divergent
trends in the extant literature. We used the stimuli and
procedures of a perceptual categorization study to
investigate a central decision making phenomenon. Unlike
in many previous studies using perceptual stimuli, we found
widespread and reliable sub-optimal integration, in the form
of the dilution effect. Informative differences in the size of
this effect were also found. The Together condition, which

2576

encouraged automatic face processing, yielded relatively
little dilution compared to the Split condition, which
encourages more controlled integration.
Note that we do not see processing mode as a binary
concept, but rather a continuum between the extremes of
fully automatic and fully controlled integration. To the
degree that deviation scores were higher for Together
conditions than for Split conditions, we posit a greater
degree of automatic integration. The McIA model
instantiates this idea through a random walk process with
three sources of evidence, the top half alone, the bottom half
alone, and the whole face, which represents instances where
the perceptual system automatically combines the evidence
from the two halves. The model explains how processing
was modulated by stimulus presentation. Since Together
faces were more naturalistic stimuli, participants were able
to sample whole face information more often, yielding
greater accuracy.
We also found interesting differences in the size of the
dilution effect across levels of evidence strength. For
conditions where the top and bottom halves were very
unequal, significant dilution was observed. The McIA
model produces this result by switching attention between
top and bottom halves as it repeatedly samples information.
Over time, this effectively averages the evidence in each
half. In contrast, additive effects were observed in several
conditions where top and bottom strengths were equal. The
McIA model also predicts this result because averaging the
evidence strengths of these two halves (as described above),
produces deviation scores near 0. However, when whole
face evidence is sampled, the probability of stepping toward
the correct boundary is the Bayesian optimal combination of
the two half face δ values. These whole face samples push
accuracy above that of the stronger half alone.
These results pose a serious challenge to the idea that
integration of perceptual information is always well
described by rational models. The prevalence of dilution
effects for even the most natural of stimuli suggests that
there is still more work to be done to fully bridge the span
between optimal integration in perceptual and sub-optimal
integration in judgment and decision making. This work is a
first step toward determining the conditions under which
sub-optimal information integration is to be expected. In
future work we plan to extend this experimental paradigm to
investigate other paradoxical phenomena, such as the
conjunctive fallacy, the disjunction effect, and availability
effects.

References
Anderson, J. R. (1991). The adaptive nature of human
categorization. Psychological Review, 98(3), 409-429.
Ashby, F. G., & Maddox, W. T. (1990). Integrating
information from separable psychological dimensions.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 16(3), 598-612.
Ashby, F. G., & Maddox, W. T. (1992). Complex decision
rules in categorization: Contrasting novice and

experienced performance. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 18(1),
50-71.
Gigerenzer, G., & Hoffrage, U. (1995). How to improve
bayesian reasoning without instruction: frequency
formats. Psychological Review, 102, 684-704.
Gigerenzer, G., & Todd, P. M. (1999). Simple heuristics
that make us smart. New York: Oxford University Press.
Gilovich, T., Griffin, D., & Kahneman, D. (Eds.). (2002).
Heuristics and biases: The psychology of intuitive
judgment. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
LaBella, C., & Koehler, D. J. (2004). Dilution and
confirmation of probability judgments based on
nondiagnostic evidence. Memory & Cognition, 32(7),
1076-1089.
McKenzie, C. R., Lee, S. M., & Chen, K. K. (2002). When
negative evidence increases confidence: change in belief
afer hearing two sides of a dispute. Journal of Behavioral
Decision Making, 15, 1-18.
Nisbett, R. E., Zukier, H., & Lemley, R. E. (1981). The
dilution effect: nondiagnostic information weakens the
implications of diagnostic information. Cognitive
Psychology, 13, 248-277.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1986). Attention, similarity, and the
identification-categorization relationship. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 115(1), 39-57.
Oden, G. C., & Massaro, D. W. (1978). Integration of
featural information in speech perception. Psychological
Review, 85(3), 172-191.
Peters, E., & Rothbart, M. (2000). Typicality can create,
elimate, and reverse the dilution effect. Personality and
Social Psychology Bulletin, 26(2), 177-187.
Philips, P. J., Moon, H., Rizvi, S. A., & Rauss, P. J. (2000).
The FERET evaluation methodology for face-recognition
algorithms. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and
machine intelligence, 22(10), 1090-1104
Schneider, W., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1977). Controlled and
automatic human information processing: I. Detection,
search, and attention. Psychological Review, 84(1), 1-66.
Shanteau, J. (1975). Averaging versus multiplying
combination rules of inference judgment. Acta
Psychologica, 39, 83-89.
Shiffrin, R. M., & Steyvers, M. (1997). A model for
recognition memory: REM--retrieving effectively from
memory. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 4(2), 145166.
Sides, A., Osherson, D., Bonini, N., & Viale, R. (2002). On
the reality of the conjunction fallacy. Memory and
Cognition, 30(2), 191-198.
Tenenbaum, J. B. (1999). Bayesian modeling of human
concept learning. In M. S. Kerns, S. A. Solla & D. A.
Cohn (Eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems (Vol. 11, pp. 59-68). Cambridge, MA: The MIT
Press.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under
uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science, 185, 11241131.

2577

