UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Do walking pedestrians stabily interact inside a large group? Analysis of group and subgroup spatial structure

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/03s4x9st

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Zanlungo, Francesco
Kanda, Takayuki

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Do walking pedestrians stabily interact inside a large group? Analysis of group
and sub-group spatial structure
Francesco Zanlungo (ZANLUNGO@Atr.Jp)
Takayuki Kanda (KANDA@Atr.Jp)
Intelligent Robotics and Communication Laboratories, ATR, Kyoto, Japan &
JSPS CREST, Tokyo, Japan
Abstract
We combine video recording and laser range tracking to analyse the geometrical structure of groups of walking pedestrians socially interacting. By recording their relative position
and observing their social interaction for a large enough time
span we can analyse the stability and universality of their spatial structure. We find that while 2-pedestrian and 3-pedestrian
groups have a relatively “time stable” and “universal” geometrical structure (an abreast formation for pairs, and a “V” formation for triads, with the central pedestrian walking slightly
behind), no such structure emerges for larger groups. Nevertheless, these larger groups result to be composed of time stable two or three people sub-groups with the same “universal”
geometrical structure of isolated pairs and triads.
Keywords: Group dynamics; proxemics.

Introduction
The spatial relationship of socially interacting people, i.e
proxemics, has been largely studied, starting from the seminal
works of (Hall, 1969) and (Kendon, 1990) in which the distances between and spatial distribution of people participating
in social activities have been investigated. At the same time
other researchers have investigated the size of social groups
(by size of a group we mean the number of its components)
and the probability distribution of these sizes (James, 1953;
Coleman & James, 1961). Many of the aforementioned studies are based on “ecological” observations, i.e. studies in
which people are observed in their natural environment while
reducing as much as possible the effect of observations on
their behaviour. While these studies are obviously based on
observations of people behaviour in public spaces, until recently they did not focus on one of the main components of
public spaces population (at least in modern urban areas), i.e.
walking pedestrians. Here by pedestrian we mean a person
in a public space moving between two locations for practical
or recreational purposes, or even “wandering around” an environment without any particular goal. Pedestrians are often
part of social groups with a specific proxemics determined by
their dynamical constraints (the fact that they are walking),
but the study of these groups has been traditionally made difficult by the fact that they are moving and located inside a
crowd, which makes the observation of their behaviour more
troublesome. Nevertheless, lately a few works have focused
on the behaviour of these groups (Moussaı̈d, Perozo, Garnier,
Helbing, & Theraulaz, 2010; Costa, 2010), due also to the
growing interest in crowd behaviour of which groups are a
non negligible component (Aveni, 1977). This interest is due

to the necessity of simulating crowd behaviour to design better pedestrian facilities (Helbing, Farkas, Molnar, & Vicsek,
2002), but also to reproduce faithfully the behaviour of virtual
crowds for the entertainment industry (Karamouzas & Overmars, 2012).
While (Moussaı̈d et al., 2010) report that the spatial structure
of a freely walking (i.e. not environmentally constrained) npedestrian group is a line of abreast walking pedestrians, that
tends to be bent into “V” or “U” formations (i.e., the pedestrians on the sides walk ahead) when the crowd density grows,
(Costa, 2010) reports different spatial structures, suggesting
for example that the “V” structure is the most occurring one
for three people groups (regardless of crowding), and that
larger groups tend to split into smaller sub-groups. Nevertheless (Costa, 2010) does not analyse the possible effects of
environmental constraints on observed behaviours (the width
of the sidewalks pedestrians were observed in was comparable to the group spatial sizes), and does not provide a quantitative study of 2D space structures, nor follows groups for a
time interval long enough to analyse their change in time.
The difference between these observations leads us to two related problems in walking group proxemics, to which we try
to bring insight in this work:
• Do n-pedestrian groups (i.e. groups composed of n
members) have a prevalent geometrical structure? Here
by prevalent we mean universal (common to almost all
groups, or at least present in a large majority of them) and
time stable (i.e. the positions of pedestrians in an unconstrained group will be given by small oscillations around
those of the prevalent structure).
• If such an overall structure does not exist for a n-pedestrian
group, is it possible to find it at the sub-group level?
In order to analyse these issues, we have to observe pedestrians in a situation in which collision avoiding and environmental constraints are not very strong (otherwise it would
be impossible to identify the “universal” structure). Furthermore, we have to combine the need to measure with good
detail (and for long enough time) the position of pedestrians,
with that of observing their social interactions, in order to
analyse the group structure. If a large pedestrian group is
divided into smaller sub-groups we may expect social interaction inside sub-groups to be more frequent than between
different sub-groups, and for this reason in many cases the

3847

belonging of sub-groups to a larger group structure may be
determined only if the observation is long enough. To attain
this goal we combine a laser range finder tracking technology,
that allows us to determine with good precision the position
and velocity of each pedestrian in a large public environment,
with frontal view (face level) video recordings, that allow us
to analyse their social interactions (Fig. 1). As a result, we
can follow pedestrian groups for a relatively long time while
examining both their social and spatial interactions from a
(respectively) qualitative and quantitative point of view. We
performed these observations in a large area completely dedicated to pedestrian motion, and in a location and time in
which the pedestrian density was relatively low, in order to
be able to observe the behaviour of “unconstrained” groups.

Figure 1: Video camera frame of the experimental area. A
sensor pole is visible in the bottom-right corner.

Methodology and definitions
Data collection
We tracked pedestrian motion in two areas of a pedestrian
underground facility in Umeda, Osaka (Japan), for a total
time of 6 hours in each area. The pedestrian areas consist
of a few corridors connecting a railway station to a shopping
mall, each area being around 500 m2 . The environments are
described in detail in (Zanlungo, Chigodo, Ikeda, & Kanda,
2012; Zanlungo, Ikeda, & Kanda, 2012), and the pedestrian
tracking data are available at (Zanlungo, 2012). The average
pedestrian density in the environment resulted to be ≈ 0.03
pedestrians per square meters while the width of the corridors varied between 4 and 7 meters, meaning that the average
distance from a pedestrian to another pedestrian outside their
group, or to a wall, is expected to be larger than the spatial
size of the group (for example a group of 4 people walking
in an abreast formation, assuming an interacting distance of
1 meter between first neighbours, should be 3 meters wide,
compared to an expected distance between pedestrians > 5
meters at such a density). We can thus assume pedestrians to
be fairly “unconstrained” by the environment and freely walk
in their preferred spatial formation for most of the time.
We used 16 Hokuyo UTM sensors (situated on poles close to
the environment walls not to hinder pedestrian motion, Fig.
1) and the tracking algorithm (Glas, Miyashita, Ishiguro, &
Hagita, 2009) to determine pedestrian positions at times intervals δt ≈ 50 ms with precision ≈ 50 mm. We smoothed
the tracked positions on time windows ∆t = 500 ms, to fur-

ther improve the tracking precision. Pedestrian velocity is
computed as the ratio of the displacement vector between two
(smoothed) consecutive tracking positions (eq. 2), and has an
expected precision ≈ 50 − 100 mm/s. As we will see (see
also the discussion in (Zanlungo, Chigodo, et al., 2012)) this
tracking precision is negligible with respect to the typical interaction distances and velocities of pedestrians.
We also video recorded each experimental area with two different “frontal view” cameras (Fig. 1), located in such a way
to allow observing the social interaction between the pedestrians for a sufficient long time (pedestrians are usually tracked
and observed for a time of the order of tens of seconds). This
camera based observation of social interaction was possible
because the cameras are not needed for tracking and the density was relatively low. A “coder” (a non-technical staff member of our laboratory), was asked to identify all the pedestrian social groups in the environment and their members.
In order to do that, she was asked to use all the information available from the videos, such as relative position, coherent motion, and social clues including conversation, gaze
exchange and even age, sex and clothing (for example she
identified a relatively large flock of coherent moving people
as a single group because they were all dressed for and carrying similar hiking equipment). She was asked to identify
only groups of which she could establish the nature without
any reasonable doubt (i.e. she was asked to strongly avoid
false positives, while false negatives were allowed). Furthermore, the coder was asked to annotate the groups, and the
individuals in each group, for which she could without any
doubt identify explicit social interaction clues (namely conversation, or explicit gaze exchange). Table 1 shows the number and size of labelled groups, distinguishing between “fully
connected” groups (FCG) for which she could observe explicit social interaction between all the members, and “disconnected” groups (DG) that seemed to be related on the
basis of other visual clues but for which explicit interaction
could not be observed (or was observed only in smaller subgroups). To avoid false positives, only FCG are analysed in
this paper. (The coder identified also six 5-pedestrian groups,
six 6-pedestrian groups, one 7-pedestrian group and one 18pedestrian group, not analysed in this work due to the small
size of the samples).
Size
FCG
DG

n=2
1126
91

n=3
114
34

n=4
17
14

Table 1: Observed fully connected (FDG) and disconnected
groups (DG) for each group size n.

Definitions
In order to identify the existence of an “universal” structure
in a pedestrian group, it is necessary to study it in the correct
reference frame. The most natural candidate is the group’s

3848

“centre of mass frame” (see Fig. 2). Let us call
tk = k ∆t

xe (tk ) = (xe (tk ), ye (tk ))

(1)

the position of a pedestrian in the “environment” reference
frame, smoothed on regular ∆t = 500 ms time windows, and
ve (tk ) ≡

xe (tk+1 ) − xe (tk )
∆t

(2)

the corresponding pedestrian velocity. Let us consider a npedestrian (from now on n-p) (sub-)group with position and
velocities
{xei (tk ), vei (tk )}
i = 1, ..., n,
and define the group “centre of mass” position and velocity
X(tk ) =

∑i xei (tk )
n

V(tk ) =

∑i vei (tk )
.
n

(3)

Let us name GCMF the group centre of mass frame (at time
tk ) with origin in X(tk ) and the y axis aligned to V(tk ), i.e.
with axis versors


Vy (tk ) Vx (tk )
V(tk )
êy (tk ) =
,−
(4)
êx (tk ) =
V (tk )
V (tk )
V (tk )
(from now on we remove t from notation for simplicity’s
sake). The position of pedestrian i in the GCMF is then
xi = (xi , yi ) with
xi = (xei − X) · êx

yi = (xei − X) · êy .

(5)

We also define the polar coordinates (ri , θi ) through
xi = ri sin θi

yi = ri cos θi ,

(6)

p

where r = x2 + y2 represents the distance of the pedestrian
from the centre of mass (for 2-p groups 2r is the distance
between pedestrians). Fig. 2 illustrates the previously defined
quantities in the 2-p case, for which the following holds
y2 = −y1 , θ2 = π + θ1 .

r2 = r1 , x2 = −x1 ,

(7)

It is important to quantitatively study the structure of the
y

direction towards their current sub-goal, which is identified
by the velocity of the group. The geometrical structure of
the pedestrian groups is determined by the necessity to maintain the focus on the walking direction, and for this reason
we will not consider non-moving pedestrian groups (i.e., data
points in which at least a group member has vi (tk ) < 500 ms,
a threshold that corresponds to a velocity 3 standard deviations smaller than the typical pedestrian velocity (Daamen
& Hoogendoorn, 2006); see also (Zanlungo, Chigodo, et al.,
2012) for a discussion of this threshold). Since we collected
data in a passing point between a station and a shopping
centre without attraction points (Zanlungo, Chigodo, et al.,
2012), only ≈ 5% of data are not considered.
It is clear that if a universal and time stable n-p formation
exists, then at (almost) all times and for (almost) all groups,
the GCMF pedestrian positions should be close to those determined by such a structure. We will compute the empirical
2D probability distribution function (pdf) ρ(x, y) for each n
averaging on all groups, pedestrians i and and times tk , and
state that such a universal and stable formation exists only
if ρ(x, y) has n well defined maxima. The formation will be
then empirically determined by the position of these maxima.

Results
Whole group GCMF structure for n-p groups
Fig. 3 shows the pedestrian pdf ρ(x, y) for 2-p, 3-p and 4-p
groups. The 2-p and 3-p groups have a well defined geometrical structure in the GCMF, i.e. their ρ has, respectively, 2 and
3 well defined maxima, one for each pedestrian. Such a structure is not present for 4-p groups, whose pdf has many local
maxima. As we will see, a well defined structure emerges for
4-p only after the whole group is properly divided in two 2-p
sub-groups.

2-p groups
Let us identify the leftmost (x < 0) pedestrian as P1 and the
rightmost one as P2 . Figs. 4 a) and 4 b) respectively show
the ρ(r1 ) and ρ(θ1 ) pdfs, while Table 2 shows the average
values and standard deviations of all variables. While ρ(y1 )
and ρ(θ1 ) are well described by a Normal distribution (i.e. a
von Mises (Mardia & Jupp, 2009) one for the circular variable θ), ρ(x1 ) and ρ(r1 ) are not, and for this reason we report also the (approximate) value of their maxima. Our data

vi
i

ri

θi

V

xj

vj

yj

<>
σ
max

x
j

ρ(x1 )
-387
87
-360

ρ(y1 )
-2
166
0

ρ(r1 )
417
105
365

ρ(θ1 )
-89
17
-90

Figure 2: GCMF variables definition.

Table 2: Average values (< >), standard deviations (σ) and
maxima for the ρ(x1 ), ρ(y1 ), ρ(r1 ) and ρ(θ1 ) pdfs (linear
variables in mm, circular in degrees).

group in the GCMF, because the distinctive feature of walking groups is the presence of a centre of attention, namely the

show that 2-p groups walk abreast at a distance smaller than
twice the average shoulder width (Pheasant, 1986). Such a

3849

Figure 3: ρ(x, y) for 2-p, 3-p and 4-p groups (respectively, from the left). Blue corresponds to maximum density, red to
minimum density (colour bar on the right). Each figure covers a 2 × 2 meters area.

<>
σ
max

ρ(x12 )
-342
104
-350

ρ(x13 )
-686
155
-680

ρ(x23 )
-344
112
-350

0.008

a)

1.5

0.004

<>
σ
max

ρ(r12 )
437
125
365

ρ(r13 )
738
132
700

ρ(r23 )
441
169
365

ρ(θ12 )
-74
23
-80

ρ(θ13 )
-89
15
-90

ρ(θ23 )
-105
25
-110

Table 3: Average values (< >), standard deviations (σ) and
maxima of the pdf ρ for the polar 3-p group variables (r in
mm, θ in degrees).
very similar to the 2-p distance distribution, while the second
neighbour distance distribution ρ(r13 ) may be very well rep-

ρ(y13 )
1
278
0

ρ(y23 )
-112
263
-110

b)

0.75

ρ

3-p groups
0
0

200

400

r(mm)

600

0
−π

800

−3π/4

π/2

θ (rad)

π/4

0

Figure 4: a): 2-p pdf for r1 . b): 2-p pdf for θ1 , compared to a
best fit von Mises distribution.

0.008

a)

1.6

b)

0.8

0.004

ρ

ρ

Let us name the pedestrians P1 , P2 and P3 starting from the
leftmost to the rightmost (x1 < x2 < x3 ). It is easier to understand the relation between 2-p and 3-p group structures
if we analyse the 3-p variables in all possible 2-p sub-group
GCMFs. A variable with subscript i j will denote the position
of Pi in the (Pi , Pj ) GCMF. In this way, for example, 2r12 is
the relative distance between the leftmost pedestrian and the
central one (first neighbours), and so on for each variable and
pedestrian pair i, j with i < j (the i > j case can be obtained
through eq. 7). Tables 3 and 4 report the values of all such
variables, while Fig. 5 a) compares the ρ(r12 ) and ρ(r13 ) pdfs
to the ρ(r1 ) distribution of the 2-p case. The same comparison is performed for θ in Fig. 5 b).
The first neighbour distance distributions ρ(r12 ), ρ(r23 ) are

ρ(y12 )
114
257
70

Table 4: Average values (< >), standard deviations (σ) and
maxima of the pdf ρ for the Cartesian 3-p group variables (in
mm).

ρ

configuration is determined by the need of maintaining both
partners in each other’s field of view (or better at the border
of it) while keeping the main attention focus on the walking direction. By walking abreast the partner is reachable for
gaze exchange and conversation through a torsion of the neck
(pedestrians can go on walking towards their goal with no
gait modification) while the distance allows for conversation
without collision or excessive proximity. This configuration
is the most comfortable one for walking and interacting socially, but it cannot be extended to larger groups, because in
a n > 2 abreast configuration the position of first neighbours
would hinder gaze contact and conversation with second or
larger neighbours. As clear from Fig. 3 and discussed below,
this affects larger group configurations.

0
0

300

600

r(mm)

900

1200

0−π

−3π/4

−π/2

θ

−π/4

0

Figure 5: a): ρ(r12 ) distribution (blue) compared to the ρ(r13 )
distribution in green and to the 2-p ρ(r1 ) distribution in orange. b): ρ(θ12 ) distribution (blue) compared to the ρ(θ13 )
distribution in green and to the 2-p ρ(θ1 ) distribution in orange.

resented by a Normal one. Defining r as the value r for which
ρ(r) is maximum, we see that r13 ≈ 2r12 ≈ 2r23 ≈ 2r1 , i.e.
3-p groups members try to maintain between them the same
distances that occur between 2-p groups members, which we
interpret as a strong sign of social interaction involving all

3850

three members. The similarity between the ρ(θ13 ) and the
(2-p) ρ(θ1 ) distributions is particularly striking, suggesting
direct social interaction between P1 and P3 . This interaction
would hardly be possible if we had the same angle distribution for θ12 and θ23 , because the central pedestrian would hinder the communication. As a result, the central pedestrian
steps slightly back (so that their partners remain in the vision
field), and the angle between the three of them is, in average, ≈ 150 degrees. This “V” configuration had already been
reported as the most often occurring one for walking triads
(Costa, 2010). (Moussaı̈d et al., 2010) explain this configuration as the effect of a trade-off between easiness of communication and collision avoiding efficiency, assuming that the
free-walking triads walk abreast. On the basis of our data,
that as we already stated should not be strongly influenced by
environmental constraints, we suggest that the “V” configuration is attained for maximum easiness of communication
between the three partners, and occurs even for freely walking pedestrians.

The average values and standard deviations for these distributions are shown in Table 5, while Fig. 6 shows the ρsg (x, y)
2D pdf, presenting two clear maxima. Fig. 7 a) shows the
comparison between the pdf ρsg (r) with the (2-p) r1 distribution. Fig. 7 b) performs the same comparison for θ variables, including also the ρ f n (θ) (abreast hypothesis) distribution. The presence of two clear maxima in ρsg (x, y) suggests

<>
σ
max

ρsg (x)
-403
180
-360

ρsg (y)
-54
347
0

ρsg (r)
530
195
370

ρsg (θ)
-97
33
-90

Table 5: Average values (< >), standard deviations (σ) and
maxima of the pdfs ρsg (x), ρsg (y), ρsg (r) and ρsg (θ) (linear
variables in mm, circular in degrees).

4-p groups
(Moussaı̈d et al., 2010) report that freely walking 4-p groups
assume an abreast configuration, that tends to bend in a “U”
one with growing pedestrian density, in order to avoid collisions. According to this abreast hypothesis, we should see
four clear maxima in a row in Fig. 3 on the right. Furthermore, if we name the pedestrians P1 , ..., P4 with x1 < x2 <
x3 < x4 in the GCMF, the first neighbour variable distributions, such as
(8)

p2 = x1 + rint êx

0.008

a)

1.5

b)

0.75

0.004

ρ

and the analogously defined ρ f n (r), ρ f n (x) and ρ f n (y),
should resemble the 2-p group distributions. This hypothesis is clearly not supported by our data (Figs. 6, 7 b)). On the
opposite, (Costa, 2010) reports different geometrical structures for 4-p groups, but none of these seems prevalent in our
data (no clear maxima in Fig. 3 right).
We may then use a different sub-group hypothesis, assuming that the 4-p group may be divided in two sub-groups of
2 pedestrians, with “strong interaction” inside the sub-group
and weaker interaction outside it. According to this hypothesis, we may find a universal and time stable structure only
at the sub-group level. Let us rename the pedestrians in the
following way. We name P1 the pedestrian with the minimum
x value in the 4-p GCMF, and compute the point

ρ

ρ f n (θ) = (ρ(θ12 ) + ρ(θ23 ) + ρ(θ34 ))/3

Figure 6: ρsg (x, y) under the sub-groups hypothesis. The figure covers a 2 × 2 meters area.

0
0

300

600

r(mm)

900

1200

0−π

−3π/4

−π/2

θ (rad)

−π/4

0

Figure 7: a): Comparison between the 2-p pdf for ρ(r1 )
in orange and ρsg (r1 ) (sub-group hypothesis) in blue. b):
Comparison between the 2-p pdf for ρ(θ1 ) in orange; ρ f n (θ)
(abreast hypothesis) in red; and ρsg (θ1 ) (sub-group hypothesis) in blue.

(9)

where rint = 730 mm is the maximum for the pdf of distances
for 2-p groups (i.e. twice the GCMF r value reported in Table
2). We then name P2 the pedestrian whose euclidean distance
to p2 is minimum, and P3 and P4 the remaining two. Let us
finally name ρsg (r), ρsg (x), ρsg (y) and ρsg (θ) the pdfs for the
corresponding variables when averaged over all subgroups,
as in
ρsg (r) = (ρ(r12 ) + ρ(r34 ))/2.
(10)

that a universal and stable structure is indeed present at the
sub-group level. The ρsg (r), ρsg (x), ρsg (y) and ρsg (θ) distributions in a 4-p group result to be a “perturbed version” of
the “proper” 2-p variable distributions, the perturbation being
determined by the interaction with the members of the other
sub-group. We can give different interpretations for the absence of a universal 4-p spatial configuration, that probably
act as con-causes. Since the completely abreast configuration
results to be uncomfortable even in the 3-p configuration, it

3851

results to be even more problematic for 4 pedestrians. A solution is to, in a way similar to the “V” 3-p configuration, walk
in a “U” or in a “staggered” configuration. Another solution
would be to walk on two different abreast rows, for example
roughly on the corners of a square. While this configuration
has the shortcoming that the members on the back are not in
the field of view of, nor can be comfortably watched by, the
pedestrians on the front, it has the strong point that reduces
the maximum distance between members of more than a factor 2, and it is more efficient in case of collision avoiding
or other environmental influences. If we observe particular
groups for a short time, as done by (Costa, 2010), we may
observe all these occurrences, but, as shown by Fig. 3 (right)
none of them is universal and time stable. What is stable
(Fig. 6) is the association of pedestrians in pairs. This does
not mean that this pairwise association is invariant (i.e. that
the pair composition does not change in time) but the data
suggest that this association is far more stable than the wholegroup structures. Even though we do not report a quantitative
analysis, we qualitatively observed a few 5-p and 6-p groups,
and noticed also for these groups the tendency to part in stable
2-p or 3-p sub-groups.

Conclusions and future work
Our observations lead us to the conclusion that the dynamical constraints make social interaction between members of
walking groups difficult to attain for subgroups larger than
two units. For this reason, larger groups have a tendency to
form relatively stable 2-p subgroups. Obviously, since odd-p
groups cannot be divided in pairs without excluding a pedestrian, for 3-p (sub-)groups we find a configuration almost as
stable as the 2-p one.
Regarding the difference between our observations and those
of (Moussaı̈d et al., 2010), we could speculate on cultural
and environmental features. Nevertheless we believe that the
main difference may be operational, i.e. that our experimental setting using cameras and laser sensors allowed us to identify sub-groups of pedestrians as part of larger groups, even if
their interaction was limited in time. On the contrary, observation methods based on shorter time windows may be biased
towards large spatial configurations, because they would tend
to consider sub-groups as separate entities. For this reason,
despite these differences with previous works, and the limited amount of data for large groups, we may speculate that
our work is universal in showing that 2-p and 3-p sub-groups
are far more stable than larger configurations, with possible
effects on the behaviour of crowds.
In our future work we plan to analyse the dynamical features
that have been ignored in this work. In detail we want to
study: 1) how pedestrians in (sub-)groups behave away from
the equilibrium configuration, and 2) the time stability of, and
interaction between, sub-groups inside a larger group. Such
an analysis should bring further insight on the social dynamics of walking pedestrians and allow us to extend pedestrian
group models in such a way to describe the findings of this

work.

Acknowledgements
We thank Tetsushi Ikeda for the organisation of the data collection experiments and Kanako Tomita for labelling the social interactions of pedestrians from video recordings. We
also thank the anonymous reviewers whose comments helped
in improving the quality of our paper.

References
Aveni, A. (1977). The not-so-lonely crowd: Friendship
groups in collective behavior. Sociometry, 96–99.
Coleman, J., & James, J. (1961). The equilibrium size distribution of freely-forming groups. Sociometry, 24(1), 36–
45.
Costa, M. (2010). Interpersonal distances in group walking.
Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 34(1), 15–26.
Daamen, W., & Hoogendoorn, S. (2006). Free speed distributions for pedestrian traffic. In TRB-annual meeting.
Glas, D., Miyashita, T., Ishiguro, H., & Hagita, N. (2009).
Laser-based tracking of human position and orientation using parametric shape modeling. Advanced robotics, 23(4),
405–428.
Hall, E. (1969). The hidden dimension. Anchor Books.
Helbing, D., Farkas, I., Molnar, P., & Vicsek, T. (2002). Simulation of pedestrian crowds in normal and evacuation situations. Pedestrian and evacuation dynamics, 21.
James, J. (1953). The distribution of free-forming small
group size. American Sociological Review;.
Karamouzas, I., & Overmars, M. (2012). Simulating and
evaluating the local behavior of small pedestrian groups.
Visualization and Computer Graphics, IEEE T., 18(3),
394–406.
Kendon, A. (1990). Conducting interaction: Patterns of behavior in focused encounters (Vol. 7). Cambridge.
Mardia, K., & Jupp, P. (2009). Directional statistics
(Vol. 494). Wiley.
Moussaı̈d, M., Perozo, N., Garnier, S., Helbing, D., & Theraulaz, G. (2010). The walking behaviour of pedestrian social groups and its impact on crowd dynamics. PLoS One,
5(4), e10047.
Pheasant, S. (1986). Bodyspace: anthropometry and design.
London: Taylor and Francis.
Zanlungo, F.
(2012).
Available from https://
sites.google.com/site/francescozanlungo/
pedestriandata
Zanlungo, F., Chigodo, Y., Ikeda, T., & Kanda, T. (2012).
Experimental study and modelling of pedestrian space occupation and motion pattern in a real world environment.
Pedestrian and evacuation dynamics.
Zanlungo, F., Ikeda, T., & Kanda, T. (2012). A microscopic
social norm model to obtain realistic macroscopic velocity and density pedestrian distributions. PloS one, 7(12),
e50720.

3852

