UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Effector specific response activation during word processing

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/09c2488g

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Ahlberg, Daniela
Dudschig, Carolin
Kaup, Barbara

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Effector specific response activation during word processing
Daniela K. Ahlberg (daniela.ahlberg@uni-tuebingen.de)
Department of Psychology, University of Tübingen,
Schleichstr. 4, 72076 Tübingen, Germany

Carolin Dudschig (carolin.dudschig@uni-tuebingen.de)
Department of Psychology, University of Tübingen,
Schleichstr. 4, 72076 Tübingen, Germany

Barbara Kaup (barbara.kaup@uni-tuebingen.de)
Department of Psychology, University of Tübingen,
Schleichstr. 4, 72076 Tübingen, Germany

Abstract
Theories of embodied cognition suggest that sensorimotor
processes are involved in language comprehension processes.
Recent studies suggested that sentences referring to actions
that involve a typical effector (e.g. “He kicks the ball”) can
systematically activate motor cortex areas that are involved in
performing such actions (Hauk, Johnsrude & Pulvermüller,
2004). In behavioral studies, there is mixed evidence
regarding the effects of effector-specific words on
corresponding actions. In the current study, we investigated
the effect of four word groups on subsequent motor responses
involving the hand or the foot. The four word groups were (a)
action verbs (e.g., kick, grasp) (b) nouns containing the
lexeme ‘hand’ or ‘foot’ (e.g., handball, football) (c) nouns
referring to objects that are typically manipulated by hand or
foot (e.g., cup, shoe), and (d) as control items, nouns that have
a spatial association with the upper or lower space (e.g.,
eagle, root) and which are known to activate locational
information in paradigms where no reading is required. We
found strong effector-specific compatibility effects revealing
a facilitation effect in all noun-groups. Surprisingly, this
effect was not present for the action-verbs. Implications of
these findings will be discussed.
Keywords: Embodied Cognition; Language Comprehension;
Effectors

Introduction
Many of our daily activities involve language. We speak,
we listen to people speaking, we read or we write at various
occasions every day. However, in research on language
processing there is still no agreement on theoretical
assumptions concerning the processes and representations
that are involved in language processing. For a long time,
the propositional, amodal theory of language comprehension
was the predominant view (Kintsch & van Dijk, 1978;
Kintsch 1988; McKoon & Ratcliff, 1992). According to this
view, the result of language comprehension is a meaning
representation in an amodal propositional format that
captures the content of the linguistic input and integrates it
with the reader’s background knowledge which is also
available in this format. Typically, embodied models of
language understanding are viewed as the counterpart to
these amodal theories of language processing (Barsalou,

1999). The main assumption of this approach is that
language processing is closely connected to other cognitive
systems, such as perception and action. There is a
tremendous number of empirical studies providing evidence
for the embodied view of language comprehension (for an
overview, see Jirak, Menz, Buccino, Borghi & Binkofski,
2010). However, in many cases the individual results are
somewhat inconsistent, and cannot be integrated into a
coherent processing model. As a result, important
theoretical questions concerning the embodied view are still
unsolved, as for instance the question whether all kinds of
sensorimotor activations are functionally relevant for
comprehension or in contrast sometimes constitute a kind of
epi-phenomenon. Before turning to these important issues,
research first needs to investigate in more detail the
individual phenomena, with the goal of arriving at more
definite conclusions concerning the boundary conditions for
the observed effects. In the present study, we aim to address
the question, whether motor activation occurs in a specific
manner when processing action related verbs (e.g., kick,
grasp), or nouns referring to objects that are typically
manipulated with the hand or the foot (e.g., brush, shoe).
Evidence for an embodied view of language
understanding has been reported in behavioral and
neuroimaging paradigms. In the behavioral domain,
observed interactions between language and visualprocessing, and between language and motor processing are
typically taken as strong evidence for an embodied model of
language comprehension. For example, Zwaan, Stanfield
and Yaxley (2002) reported that sentence processing can
activate very specific visual representations. In their study,
participants had to process sentences such as “The girl saw
the egg in the frying pan” and subsequently respond to
pictures of the target entity (egg). The pictures could either
match the shape of the entity described in the sentences
(e.g., a fried egg sunny side up) or mismatch the shape (e.g.,
an unbroken egg). Responses were faster in the matching
than in the mismatching conditions, suggesting that readers
had available a visual representation of an egg in the frying
pan when reading the corresponding sentence.
Evidence for the reactivation of motor representations
during language comprehension was reported by Glenberg

133

and Kaschak (2002) in the so-called action sentence
compatibility effect. In their study, participants had to read
sentences and judge the sensibility by moving their arm
away or towards their body. Responses were faster if the
movement direction implied by the sentence matched the
response movement (e.g., “You opened the drawer” and a
movement toward the participants) compared to when there
was a mismatch (e.g., “You closed the drawer” and a
movement away from the participants). These results
suggest that participants reactivated the described
movements when processing the sentences and thus primed
the response movements in the matching conditions.
Interestingly, if language understanding indeed relies on
motor activation and the reactivation of experiential traces,
these language-action compatibility effects should occur in a
very specific manner. In other words, reading sentences
such as “He throws the ball” versus “He kicks the ball”
should result in rather distinct activation in the motor cortex.
That is, when processing sentences such as “He throws the
ball” hand related motor areas should be active, whereas
when processing sentences such as “He kicks the ball” foot
related motor areas should be involved. Indeed, Hauk,
Johnsrude and Pulvermüller (2004) reported in an fMRI
study such effector-specific motor activation during
language understanding (for an EEG study, see
Pulvermüller, Härle & Hummel, 2001). They compared the
brain areas activated while performing finger, feet and
tongue movements with the activation in a passive reading
task of face-, foot- and arm-related sentences. This study
revealed clear activation in the motor cortex and in the
primary motor cortex during language processing, with the
activation being similar to the conditions where the
participants actually performed the corresponding actions.
In addition to neuropsychological studies, some
behavioral studies reported evidence for effector-specific
motor activation during language processing. Marino,
Gough, Gallese, Riggio and Buccino (2011) investigated the
effects of words on hand movements. Their stimuli
consisted of Italian nouns referring to concrete objects,
which were both hand- or foot-related, and abstract entities.
Participants had to decide whether a presented word referred
to a concrete object (e.g., pencil) or whether the word
referred to an abstract content (e.g., jealousy). Only in case
of concrete objects, participants had to press the response
key with their index finger. In case of abstract words, they
had to withhold responses. Additionally, participants had to
wait with their response until a go-signal was delivered, and
this could occur early or late after word presentation. The
results showed that participants (all right-handed) responded
slower with their right-hand to hand-related words
compared to foot-related words. In contrast, with their left
hand, they were faster to hand-related words than to footrelated words. Those effects were only found in the early
go-signal condition. Marino et al. (2011) explained those
results with a left hemispheric specialization for language
processing. In case of right hand responses, interference
took place due to the left hemisphere being activated by

both, language processing and motor response activation,
whereby they compete for common resources. The authors
argued that this kind of interference was not present for left
hand responses because the motor activation took place in
the right hemisphere and thus did not overlap with
activation from language processing. The authors
themselves state that this explanation cannot account for the
facilitation effect of the left hand, because no difference
between hand and foot-related words would be predicted.
Scorolli and Borghi (2007) also reported influences of
sentence understanding on effector-specific behavioral
responses for sentences that imply the usage of a specific
effector (e.g. hand vs. mouth). Their participants had to
judge the plausibility of sentences with nouns and verbs that
refer to objects and actions associated with specific
effectors, e.g., to unwrap vs. to suck the sweet. In the first
block, hand and mouth sentences, and in the second block,
hand and foot-sentences were tested. Half of the participants
had to react by saying “yes” into a microphone and the other
half had to press a foot-pedal. As predicted, they found
match effects with mouth- and foot-responses for mouthand foot-sentences, but not for hand sentences However,
Scorolli and Borghi (2007) did not differentiate between
word-based and sentence-based effects, thus leaving open
whether the reported compatibility effects were triggered by
single words or the processing of the whole sentence.
In summary, there is evidence supporting the hypothesis
that language can activate effector-specific motor processes,
but at the same time it seems difficult to come up with a
consistent explanation regarding the underlying mechanisms
causing facilitation or interference. We therefore consider it
worthwhile to investigate this issue in a very basic
behavioral paradigm with the focus being on the influence
of single words on responding.
In the current study, we will investigate whether
processing of single nouns and verbs with an association to
the effectors hand and foot, will result in effector-specific
compatibility effects if implemented in a task that does not
require active reading. This task will be an alternated
version of the original color-naming experiment conducted
by Stroop (1935). In our experiment, all words will be
presented in a color, and the color will determine the
response effector, either hand or foot. According to the
Stroop literature any meaningful word can potentially cause
interference in a color-response task because wordprocessing is seen as more automatic and faster than
responding to the word color (for a review, see MacLeod,
1991). Importantly, interference should only be found if
automatic word processing interacts with the required
response and can result in response conflict (Botvinick,
Braver, Barch, Carter, & Cohen, 2001). For example, in
case of action verbs (e.g., kick), this word might
automatically activate effector-specific responses (e.g., foot
responses) and thus facilitate compatible responses or
interfere with incompatible responses (e.g. hand responses).
Indeed, there is a debate regarding the automaticity of
effects reflecting interactions between language processing

134

and motor responses. For example Bub and Masson (2008)
only find an effect of words on subsequent reaching tasks if
the words have to be actively processed by the participants.
In our study, we compare four different kinds of word
categories: First, action-verbs, using the stimulus-set of
Pulvermüller et al. (2001). Second, nouns directly related to
one specific effector, involving the lexeme ‘hand’ or ‘foot’
(e.g., handball vs. football). Third, nouns referring to
objects that are typically manipulated by hand or foot (e.g.,
paint brush vs. stirrup). Forth, nouns referring to objects
with a typical location in the vertical space (e.g., bird, root).
The fourth word category consists of a reduced set of
up/down words used by Lachmair et al. (2011) and
Dudschig et al. (2012, 2013). We will use those words as a
control in our paradigm, because they can be expected to
show strong compatibility effects with responses differing
with respect to the vertical dimension (here: hand = up, foot
= down) even in tasks that do not demand active reading. As
described above, words will be presented in a color, and the
color determines the response effector (hand vs. foot). We
predict compatibility effects for all word categories, with
possibly stronger effects for the verbs, as well as possibly
for the nouns involving the lexemes ‘hand’ and ‘foot’.

We used 192 German nouns and verbs as stimuli, which
could be subdivided into four groups: (a) The verbs were
adapted from Pulvermüller et al. (2001) (N=64) consisted of
32 hand- and 32 foot-related action-verbs (e.g., grasping vs.
kicking). (b) The “explicit nouns” group (N=32) consisted
of 16 nouns containing the lexeme ‘hand’ and 16 nouns
containing the lexeme ‘foot’ (e.g.; handbag, footprint). (c)
The “associated nouns” group consisted of 16 nouns
referring to an object that was typically manipulated with
the hand and 16 nouns referring to an object that is typically
manipulated with the foot (e.g., cup, stirrup). (d) Finally,
the “up/down nouns” group (N=64) consisted of a shortened
set of up/down words from the study of Lachmair et al.
(2011) with 32 words referring to an entity typically located
in the upper part of the world and 32 referring to an entity
typically located in the lower part of the world (e.g., root,
roof). See Table 1 for mean frequencies and mean length
(number of characters) of the two sets in each group.
Frequencies were retrieved from the “Wortschatz Portal” of
the University of Leipzig (http://wortschatz.uni-leipzig.de).
Words were presented in the colors blue (rgb, 0, 0, 255),
orange (rgb, 255, 128, 0) brown (rgb, 140, 80, 20) and lilac
(rgb, 150, 0, 255) on a white background.

Method

Table 1: Mean length and mean frequency of the two sets
of words in each word group.

Participants were presented with words displayed in one of
four colors in each trial. Their task was to respond to the
font color. Depending on the color, they either pressed a key
with their hand which was located at chest height or a pedal
with their foot which was located at the ground.

Participants
A total of 30 students (9 males) of the University of
Tübingen, aged from 19 to 34 years (M = 22.8 years, SD =
3.5) participated in this study. Twenty-three of the students
were right-handed and 7 were left-handed. All participants
had normal or corrected-to-normal vision; none of them had
impaired color-vision. They were asked to fill in a form of
consent before doing the experiment and received course
credit for their participation.

Apparatus and stimuli
Stimuli were presented in center position on a CRTMonitor in size 12 Courier New bold. Responses were
recorded via a PST Serial Response Box, Model Number
200A with a foot pedal. The experiment was programmed
with E-Prime® (Psychology Software Tools Inc.,
www.pstnet.com/E-Prime/e-prime.htm).
The participants stood in front of a height-adjustable table
with the possibility of leaning against a wall with their
backs. Prior to the experiment, the height of the table and
with it the monitor was adjusted such that stimulus words
were presented at eye-level of the participants. The foot
pedal was also adjusted and fixed in a proper distance to the
participant. The response box was situated on the table.
Every participant reacted with their dominant body side.

Word group

Length

verbs (hand)
verbs (foot)
explicit (hand)
explicit (foot)
associated(hand)
associated (foot)
up-down (up)
up-down (down)

6.88
6.91
9
7.4
8.1
8
6.25
6.13

Frequency
(SE)
1073 (266)
8385 (3313)
1811 (1458)
1682 (1186)
442 (133)
367 (152)
2734 (880)
2747 (972)

Procedure and design
Each trial started with a fixation cross, displayed in the
center of the screen for 800ms. Then the stimulus word was
presented until response. Between trials a white screen was
shown for 1000ms. Each word was presented 4 times,
resulting in a total amount of 768 trials, which were
subdivided into 4 experimental blocks. The experiment
started with a practice block, in which 8 practice words were
presented two times in different colors. Participants received
feedback on speed and accuracy in the practice block (but
not in the experimental trials). Reaction times were
measured.
Participants were instructed to respond as quickly and
accurately as possible to the font color of the word. The
mapping of colors to response direction was balanced across
participants: All possible color pairs occurred equally often.
For the analyses, we collapsed across the two compatible
conditions in each group and the two incompatible

135

conditions in each group. For hand-related words and upwords, compatible conditions consisted of trials in which
the correct response involved a key press with the hand at
chest height. For foot-related words and down-words,
compatible conditions consisted of trials in which the
correct response involved pressing the foot pedal on the
ground.
The design thus was a 4 (word group) x 2 (compatibility
of the response) design with repeated measurement on both
variables.

Results
Responses faster than 200ms or slower than 2500ms, as well
as errors were excluded from further analyses. This reduced
the data by less than 5%. Mean error rate was 3.9%. Mean
RTs are displayed in Figure 1.

Figure 1: Mean response times of correct responses as a function
of response compatibility and word group.

The analyses revealed a main effect of group, F(3,87) =
5.3, = .002, a main effect of compatibility, F(1,29) = 5.30,
= .006, and a compatibility-by-group interaction, F(3, 87)
= 3.32, = .024. Separate analyses for the four word groups
revealed significant compatibility effects for the three noun
groups (explicit nouns: F(1,29) = 7.42, p < .05; associated
nouns: F(1,29) = 4.64, p < .05; up/down nouns: F(1,29)
= 8.56, p < .01) but no significant compatibility effect for
the verb group (F<1).
To investigate the different compatibility effects in more
detail we compared the different pairs of word groups with
each other. The verb group differed significantly from all
other groups with respect to the size of the compatibility
effect (verbs vs. up/down nouns: F(1,29) = 6.41, p < .05,
verbs vs. explicit nouns: F(1,29) = 8.46, p < .01, verbs vs.
associated nouns: F(1,29) = 4.63, p < .05). The analysis
revealed no significant difference between the different

noun groups with respect to the size of the compatibility
effect (all Fs < 1.04).

Discussion
In the present study, we investigated whether processing of
single words with an association to the hand or foot results
in effector-specific motor activation if implemented in a
task that does not require active reading. Our results clearly
show such effector-specific compatibility effects which is in
line with the view that effector-specific information is
automatically activated during word processing. Our results
therefore fit well with the idea that readers re-activate
experiential traces during word processing that stem from
interactions with the respective referents of these words.
In our experiment we compared four different word
groups. As predicted we observed compatibility effects for
all noun groups. For the up/down nouns we had predicted
such an effect because the two responses in this paradigm
(hand vs. foot) differed with respect to the location of the
response key in vertical space (up vs. down). In previous
studies involving hand responses with up- versus down-keys
strong compatibility effects were also observed, even in
tasks that did not require active reading (Lachmair et al.,
2011). Finding a compatibility effect with these nouns in the
present paradigm shows that the up/down-effect generalizes
to an experimental situation involving responses with
different effectors. As such these results provide further
evidence for the stability of this effect.
For the remaining two noun groups we had predicted
compatibility effects on the basis of the view that readers
activate experiential traces during word processing that stem
from interacting with the objects these words refer to. If
these objects are typically manipulated with one of the
respective effectors, then this effector should be primed
during processing and a response involving this effector
should be facilitated. Interestingly, the observed
compatibility effects were equally strong in these two
groups, although the association with the effectors was
linguistically specified in the explicit noun group but not in
the associated noun group. Thus, if linguistic
representations had played a prominent role during
processing one could have expected stronger compatibility
effects for the explicit noun group compared to the
associated noun group. The fact that this was not observed
can be taken as further evidence for an experiential-trace
view of language understanding.
In contrast to our predictions, we did not observe
compatibility effects for the action verbs. This is surprising
for several reasons. First, in our view the association
between these words and the two effectors seems
particularly strong, and for this reason we had even
expected to find the strongest compatibility effects in this
group. Second, and more importantly, neuro-scientific
studies involving the exact same set of stimuli repeatedly
found evidence for an effector-specific activation during the
processing of these words (e.g., Pulvermüller, et al. 2001).
What then may be the reason for not finding effector-

136

specific compatibility effects with verbs referring to actions
that are typically performed with the hands or the feet?
Several possibilities come to mind.
First, in German, nouns begin with a capital letter, but
verbs do not. To present the words in their natural
appearance, we presented the nouns with a beginning capital
letter, and the verbs in small letters throughout. In principle
it seems possible that this difference could account for the
different results obtained with nouns and verbs in the
present experiment, especially if one considers that active
reading was not required by the experimental task. Maybe
participants were more successful at ignoring the words
when they homogeneously involved small letters than when
there was a capital letter at the beginning. But this seems
unlikely as the standard Stroop effect and several variants
thereof have been observed in different sets of tasks,
involving various types of word displays. Thus, we regard it
as unlikely that the pure difference in word display,
specifically concerning the first letter, can account for the
differences between nouns and verbs in the present
paradigm.
Another explanation for the missing influence of verbs on
responding might be a different time course of verb
processing in contrast to noun processing. We consider it
conceivable that verbs require more processing effort than
nouns, for instance due to differences in breadth of meaning
(Gentner, 1981). If it takes relatively long to process verbs,
then the information in the verb that potentially triggers the
conflict may become active only after the response decision
(responding with hand vs. foot) has already been made. This
would explain why verbs did not influence responding. If
indeed differences in processing times are responsible for
the missing effects in verbs, we might find compatibility
effects for verbs if a lexical-decision task was being
employed instead of a Stroop color-response task (e.g.,
Mirabella, Iaconelli, Spadacenta, Federico, Gallese, 2012).
Critically, in studies using verbs referring to upward or
downward directed motion (e.g., rise, fall) similar effects
were observed as in a study implementing nouns (e.g., bird,
ground), even if implemented in a Stroop-like colorresponse paradigm (e.g., Dudschig, Lachmair, De Filippis,
de la Vega & Kaup, 2012). Thus, a general difference
between verb and noun processing cannot fully account for
our findings.
Finally an alternative explanation may be that verbs
referring to actions are associated with very specific motor
plans. Maybe no compatibility effect was observed for the
verb group because the overlap between the motor
activation involved in understanding these words and
pressing a key with the hand or the foot simply was not
large enough. After all, a movement such as kicking is a
quite different foot movement than pressing a foot pedal,
and grasping is quite different from pressing a key with the
index finger. If this hypothesis is correct, compatibility
effects should be observed with verbs that refer to actions
that are similar to the response actions in the experiment.
Indeed, the embodied language processing account predicts

that words become associated with experiential traces (e.g.,
Zwaan & Madden, 2005). Such an account would predict
that experiential traces are rather specific, such that
activating a specific effector might not be sufficient for
facilitating language understanding.
In summary, our results provide clear evidence for
effector-specific activation during single word processing in
a very basic color-response paradigm. Especially,
participants did not have to actively process the words’
meaning and nevertheless subsequent responses were
affected. However, this compatibility effect is limited to
certain word categories and does not seem to occur in case
of verb processing (e.g., kick, grasp). Our results suggest
that conflict between words and effector-specific motor
responses is not a general effect between words referring to
foot or hand related entities and actions, but is rather
specific to certain word categories. These results are of
interest to both, the embodied language processing models
(e.g., Glenberg & Kaschak, 2002) but also for the conflict
monitoring model (e.g., Botvinick et al., 2001). Future
studies will be needed to investigate whether difference in
processing times are responsible for these effects, or
whether the missing effect of action verbs on subsequent
responses is due to the fact that very specific motor-plans
are activated by the verbs.

Acknowledgments
This project was supported by a Margarete-von-Wrangell
Fellowship appointed to Carolin Dudschig (European Social
Fund and the Ministry Of Science, Research and the Arts
Baden-Württemberg) and by the SFB833/B4 project of
Barbara Kaup (German Research Foundation).

References
Barsalou, L. W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 577-660.
Botvinick, M. M., Braver, T. S., Barch, D. M., Carter, C. S.,
& Cohen, J. D. (2001). Conflict monitoring and cognitive
control. Psychological Review, 108, 624-652.
Bub, D. N., Masson, M. E. J. & Cree, G., S. (2008).
Evocation of functional and volumetric gestural
knowledge by objects and words. Cognition, 106, 27-58.
Dudschig, C., Lachmair, M., de la Vega, I., De Filippis, M.,
& Kaup, B. (2012). From top to bottom: spatial shifts of
attention caused by linguistic stimuli. Cognitive
processing, 13, 151-154.
Dudschig, C., Lachmair, M., de la Vega, I., De Filippis, M.,
& Kaup, B. (2012). Do task-irrelevant directionassociated motion verbs affect action planning? Evidence
from a Stroop paradigm. Memory & Cognition, 40, 10811094.
Dudschig, C., Souman, J., Lachmair, M., de la Vega, I., &
Kaup, B. (2013). Reading “Sun” and Looking Up: The
Influence of Language on Saccadic Eye Movements in the
Vertical Dimension. PloS ONE, 8, e56872.

137

Gentner, D. (1981). Some interesting differences between
verbs and nouns. Cognition and brain theory, 4, 161-178.
Glenberg, A. M. & Kaschak, M. P. (2002). Grounding
language in action. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9,
558-565.
Hauk, O., Johnsrude, I. & Pulvermüller, F. (2004).
Somatotopic representation of action words in human
motor and premotor cortex. Neuron, 41, 301-307.
Jirak, D., Menz, M. M., Buccino, G., Borghi, A. M., &
Binkofski, F. (2010). Grasping language–A short story on
embodiment. Consciousness and Cognition, 19, 711-720.
Kintsch, W. (1988). The role of knowledge in discourse
comprehension: a construction-integration model.
Psychological Review, 95, 163.
Kintsch, W., & Van Dijk, T. A. (1978). Toward a model of
text comprehension and production. Psychological
Review, 85, 363.
Lachmair, M., Dudschig, C., De Filippis, M., de la Vega, I.
& Kaup, B. (2011). Root versus roof: Automatic
activation of location information during word
processing. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 18, 11801188.
McKoon, G., & Ratcliff, R. (1992). Inference during
reading. Psychological Review, 99, 440.
Marino, B. F. M., Gough, P.M., Gallese, V., Riggio, L. &
Buccino, G. (2011). How the motor system handles
nouns: a behavioral study. Psychological Research. DOI
10.1007/s00426-011-0371-2
MacLeod, C. M. (1991). Half a century of research on the
stroop effect: An integrative review. Psychological
Bulletin, 109, 163-203.
Mirabella, G., Iaconelli, S., Spadacenta, S., Federico, P.&
Gallese, V. (2012). Processing of hand-related verbs
specifically affects the planning and execution of arm
reaching movements. PLoS ONE 7: e35403.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0035403
Pulvermüller, F., Härle, M. & Hummel, F. (2001). Walking
or talking? Behavioral and neurophysiological correlates
of action verb processing. Brain and Language, 78, 143168.
Scorolli, C. & Borghi, A. M. (2007). Sentence
comprehension and action: Effector specific modulation
of the motor system. Brain Research, 1130, 119-124.
Stroop, J. R. (1935). Studies of interference in serial verbal
reactions. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 18, 643662.
Yeung, N., Botvinick, M. M., & Cohen, J. D. (2004). The
Neural Basis of Error Detection: Conflict Monitoring and
the Error-Related Negativity. Psychological Review, 111,
931-959.
Zwaan, R. A. & Madden, C. J. (2005). Embodied Sentence
Comprehension. In D. Pecher & R. A. Zwaan (Eds.)
Grounding cognition: The role of perception and action
in memory, language, and thinking (pp. 224-245).
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Zwaan, R. A., Stanfield, R. A., & Yaxley, R. H. (2002).
Language comprehenders mentally represent the shapes
of objects. Psychological Science, 13, 168–171.

138

