UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Embodied Approaches to Interpersonal Coordination: Infants, Adults, Robots, and Agents

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1q87j26x

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Dale, Rick
Yu, Chen
Nagai, Yukie
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Embodied Approaches to Interpersonal Coordination: Infants, Adults, Robots, and Agents
Rick Dale (rdale@ucmerced.edu)
Cognitive and Information Sciences
University of California, Merced
Merced, CA 95343 USA

Chen Yu (chenyu@indiana.edu)
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences
Indiana University
Bloomington, IN 47401 USA

Yukie Nagai (yukie@ams.eng.osaka-u.ac.jp)
Department of Adaptive Machine Systems
Osaka University
2-1 Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871 Japan

Moreno Coco (mcoco@staffmail.ed.ac.uk)
Institute of Language, Cognition, and Computation
University of Edinburgh
10 Crichton Street, Edinburgh EH8 9AB UK

Stefan Kopp (skopp@techfak.uni-bielefeld.de)
Sociable Agents Group, Cognitive Interaction Technology (CITEC)
Technische Fakultät, Universität Bielefeld
Morgenbreede 39 33615 Bielefeld, Germany
Keywords: human interaction; language learning; human-agent
interaction; dynamics; robotics.

semi-automatic extraction

event alignment and exploration

Workshop Background and Relevance
Humans interact with other humans. They do so frequently,
in a wide variety of circumstances, to accomplish many
different goals. This interpersonal interaction, especially in
face-to-face circumstances, requires coordination (Clark,
1996). This involves many subtle behaviors, controlled
carefully in the context of another person, from eye
movements and gestures, to choice of words. The
characteristics of the cognitive system that give way to this
coordination have been a matter of debate recently in the
cognitive sciences. Yet there remain many open questions
about how the cognitive system functions in human
interactions. How does interpersonal coordination emerge in
the dyad? What behaviors are coordinated between persons,
and in what manner? How can we model dyads and their
interactions?
One challenge to advance our understanding of how
human participants utilize social-cognitive cues in everyday
communication is that the empirical evidence is based on
macro-level behaviors in constrained unnatural contexts and
tasks. To truly understand mechanisms of interpersonal
coordination, however, we may need to focus on more
micro-level behaviors as they unfold in real time, and in free
flow interaction, for example, changes in eye gaze and shifts
in body position as they are linked to objects, events, and
actions of the social partner. Several new directions have
pursued this microstructure of interpersonal interaction.
First, with advances in sensing and computing
techniques, now we have the capabilities to process visual,
audio and other sensory data collected from real-world
interactions. This data-intensive approach provides a unique
opportunity for new discoveries from various advanced data
analysis techniques. These methods have leveraged
visualization techniques to mine the temporal relationships
between behaviors of two people (Yu et al. , 2009; see Fig.
1). This has shed light on the timing of interpersonal
interaction, and how two individuals adapt to each other,
both in infant-adult dyads (e.g., Smith et al., 2010; Yu &

Figure 1: Visualization software for extracting,
aligning and mining large multivariate time series of
behaviors to uncover coordination (adapted from Yu
et al., 2009).
Smith, 2012; Nagai et al., 2012), and in two adults (Coco et
al., 2012; Richardson & Dale, 2005).
Second, researchers in developmental robotics have
investigated mechanisms of interpersonal coordination, to
model and implement social systems. In developmental
robotics, recent progress has been achieved in developing
robots that elicit human scaffolding (Nagai, Nakatani, &
Asada, 2010). This progress has been possible by
implementing underlying processes that could be involved
in the dynamic control of interpersonal coordination. For
example, implementing a model of a mirror neuron system
can help basic skills in robots like self-other discrimination,
and can support more complex abilities, such as imitation
(Nagai et al., 2011; see Fig. 2, left). By grounding highlevel theories into robotic systems, we can address different
aspects of how social-cognitive capabilities, such as gaze
following and face preference, can be learned through
sensorimotor interactions.
Third, research on virtual agents has developed new
models of embodied human-agent interaction. This offers
new ways to explore processes of interpersonal
coordination. This has included, for example, the role of
gesture and nonverbal behavior (Sadeghipour & Kopp,
2011), attentive speaking (Buschmeier & Kopp, 2011), and
feedback (Kopp et al., 2008). Virtual embodied agents
provide a foundation for testing theories of adult-adult
interaction, and developing exciting social tools to support
interpersonal coordination (see Fig. 2, right).

24

developed by Coco & Dale, in preparation). Nagai and Kopp
will offer details of developing robotics and artificial agents.

Schedule
Duration Topic (Speaker)
0-5 minutes Introduction to the workshop (Dale)

Figure 2. Left: Human-robot interaction; robot
equipped with emergent mirror-neuron system
(adapted from Nagai et al., 2011). Right: Humanagent interaction to explore models of gesture
(adapted from Sadeghipour & Kopp, 2011).

40 minutes Infant-caregiver coordination through software visualization (Yu)
40 minutes Adult coordination and cross recurrence analysis (Dale & Coco)
5 minutes Break
40 minutes Social and developmental robotics and interpersonal interaction (Nagai)
40 minutes Virtual social agents, human-agent interaction, and coordination (Kopp)
20 minutes Discussion

Together these strands of research offer new insight into
human social dynamics, and the means to implement and
test theories in robotics and virtual agents. Bringing them
together in one workshop is an opportunity to convey these
new methods, and find shared interests and synergies among
different approaches and different fields, These are the
primary goals of the workshop.

Total: ~ 3 hours

Further Materials
The first author of the workshop will maintain a website to
distribute publications and software for attendees.

References
Buschmeier, H., & Kopp, S. (2011). Towards conversational
agents that attend to and adapt to communicative user
feedback. In Intelligent Virtual Agents (pp. 169–182).
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using language. Cambridge University
Press.
Coco, M. I., Dale, R., & Keller, F. (2012, September).
Cognitive dynamics of alignment in dialogue games. Talk
presented at Architectures and Mechanisms for Language
Processing (AMLaP), Riva Del Garda, Italy.
Kopp, S., Allwood, J., Grammer, K., Ahlsen, E., &
Stocksmeier, T. (2008). Modeling embodied feedback with
virtual humans. Modeling communication with robots and
virtual humans, 18–37.
Nagai, Y., Kawai, Y., & Asada, M. (2011). Emergence of
mirror neuron system: Immature vision leads to self-other
correspondence. In Development and Learning (ICDL),
2011 IEEE International Conference On (Vol. 2, pp. 1–6).
Nagai, Y., Nakatani, A., & Asada, M. (2010). How a robot’s
attention shapes the way people teach. In Proceedings of
the 10th International Conference on Epigenetic Robotics.
Nagai, Y., Nakatani, A., Qin, S., Fukuyama, H., MyowaYamakoshi, M., & Asada, M. (2012). Co-Development of
Information Transfer within and between Infant and
Caregiver. In Proceedings of the IEEE ICDL-EpiRob.
Richardson, D. C. & Dale, R. (2005). Looking to understand:
The coupling between speakers' and listeners' eye
movements
and
its
relationship
to
discourse
comprehension. Cognitive Science, 29, 39-54.
Sadeghipour, A., & Kopp, S. (2011). Embodied gesture
processing: motor-based perception-action integration in
social artificial agents. Cognitive Computation, 3, 419-435.
Smith, L. B., Yu, C., & Pereira, A. F. (2011). Not your
mother’s view: the dynamics of toddler visual experience.
Developmental Science, 14(1), 9–17. doi:10.1111/j.14677687.2009.00947.x
Yu, C., & Smith, L. B. (2012). Embodied attention and word
learning by toddlers. Cognition, 125(2), 244–262.
doi:10.1016/j.cognition.2012.06.016
Yu, C., Zhong, Y., Smith, T., Park, I., & Huang, W. (2009).
Visual data mining of multimedia data for social and
behavioral studies. Information Visualization, 8(1), 56–70.
doi:10.1057/ivs.2008.32

Objective and Overview
The aim of this workshop is to introduce these approaches in
an integrative fashion, and offer some basic demonstrations of
relevant software, data analysis, and development.
Broad
audience.
Given
the
international
and
interdisciplinary composition of the workshop, we expect to
attract broad interest from several domains, from cognitive
and language development, to language processing and
discourse; from human cognition to artificial intelligent
systems; and from human babies, to adult, and to both
physical social robots and virtual agents.
Activities. The organizers of the workshop will first offer a
series of presentations on relevant research projects (see
Schedule). These topics form a coherent collection of new
approaches to interpersonal interaction, shown below in Table
1. Talks will include concrete details regarding data
collection, system design, and so on; where appropriate,
source code or software will be demonstrated and distributed
to attendees (e.g., Coco & Dale’s R toolbox for recurrence).
The workshop organizers will together lead a discussion with
the attendees on limitations, future directions, and so on.
Table 1: Thematic organization of workshop
organizers covering domains of interpersonal
coordination.
infant

adult

humannnn

Nagai, Yu

Kopp, Coco, Dale

robot / agentnnn

Nagai, Yu

Kopp

Outcomes. Attendees will gain a basic understanding of
human data analysis in the case of large-scale multivariate
behavioral data mining (Yu et al., 2009, 2012), and the
application of a particular technique referred to as cross
recurrence analysis (Dale et al., 2011) which serves as a
simple quantification over behavioral channels (R toolbox

25

