UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Emotional Priming of Sentence Comprehension: Effects of a Speaker’s Static Emotional
Expression and Listener Age

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4783t5jd

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Carminati, Maria Nella
Knoeferle, Pia

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Emotional Priming of Sentence Comprehension: Effects of a Speaker’s Static
Emotional Expression and Listener Age
Maria Nella Carminati (mcarmina@techfak.uni-bielefeld.de)1,3
Pia Knoeferle (knoeferl@cit-ec.uni-bielefeld.de)1,2,3
1 SFB 673 “Alignment in Communication”
2 Cognitive Interaction Technology Excellence Center
3 Department of Linguistics
Universitätsstr. 25, Bielefeld University,
33615 Bielefeld, Germany

Abstract
We report two visual-world eye-tracking experiments that
investigated how and with which time course emotional
information from a speaker’s face affects younger (N = 32,
Mean age = 23) and older (N = 32, Mean age = 64) listeners’
visual attention and language comprehension as they
processed emotional sentences in a visual context. The age
manipulation was aimed at testing predictions by socioemotional selectivity theory of a positivity effect in older
adults. After viewing the emotional face of a speaker (happy
or sad) on a computer display, participants were presented
simultaneously with two pictures depicting opposite-valence
events (positive and negative; IAPS database) while they
listened to a sentence referring to one of the events.
Participants’ eye fixations on the pictures while processing
the sentence were enhanced when the speaker’s face was
emotionally congruent with the sentence/picture compared to
when it was not. The enhancement occurred from the early
stages of sentence-reference disambiguation; importantly, it
was modulated by age, in that for the older adults it was more
pronounced with positive faces, and for the younger ones with
negative faces. These findings demonstrate for the first time
that emotional facial expressions, similarly to previously
studied speaker cues such as eye gaze and gestures, are
rapidly integrated into sentence processing. They also provide
new evidence for positivity effects in older adults in online
incremental situated sentence processing.
Keywords: sentence processing; visual-world paradigm;
emotional processing; speaker cues; positivity effect;
facial expressions

Visual Context Effects on Language Processing
The study of context effects on language processing has
been a major topic of investigation in psycholinguistic
research, and since the development of the visual world
paradigm in the mid-nineties, psycholinguists have had at
their disposal a powerful tool to investigate a potentially
rich source of context effects on language processing, that
of the visual context. Among other things, findings from
this research have demonstrated how information such as an
object’s size, color, or shape, depicted clipart events, realworld action events, action affordances, and the spatial
location of objects are all rapidly integrated during sentence
comprehension and can affect a listener’s visual attention

while processing sentences (for a recent review, see Huettig,
Rommers, & Meyer, 2011).
In recent years the scope of research on the languagevision interaction has been extended to more complex and
subtle aspects of naturalistic, visually-situated language
events, such as dialogue interactions. One topic has been
how visually-perceivable speaker-based cues, for example,
speaker gaze and gestures, affect language processing.
Results suggest that a speaker’s gaze is incrementally
integrated into language processing by listeners (e.g., Hanna
& Brennan, 2007).
Another potentially powerful cue that could be used by a
listener is a speaker’s emotional facial expression. The
question of how such a cue is used in language processing is
particularly relevant to current psychological research,
especially in light of the recent surge in interest in embodied
and situated cognition, and the increasingly available
evidence supporting a close interaction between emotions
and language (e.g., Havas, Glenberg, & Rinck, 2007).
However, to the best of our knowledge there is todate no
study that has examined effects of a speaker’s facial
expression
on
spoken
sentence
comprehension.
Additionally, evidence for visual context effects in sentence
processing comes almost exclusively from studies with
young adults (ca. 19-31 years). By contrast, the extent to
which visual context affects sentence comprehension in
older adults is less clear. The present research addresses
these two open issues in two eye-tracking experiments that
examined (a) the time course with which a speaker’s
emotional
facial
expressions
can
influence
a
comprehender’s visual attention to target pictures during
spoken sentence comprehension; and (b) the nature of this
influence in young versus older adults.

Emotion Processing and Emotional Priming
Ekman’s (1972) proposal of a set of six basic universal
emotions associated with distinct facial emotional
expression configurations (happiness, sadness, fear, anger,
disgust, and surprise) has been widely tested over the years
and assumed by many scholars in the field of emotion
research (e.g., Lundqvist, Flykt, & Öhman, 1998). Within
this view, the basic facial expressions are associated with a

1976

distinctive meaning, so they could, in principle, be used by a
speaker to strengthen the meaning of her utterances. There
is evidence that emotional faces such as happy or angry
ones, are attended to faster and are processed more deeply
than neutral ones (Palermo & Rhodes, 2007). Generally, the
same attention advantage enjoyed by emotional faces
(compared to nonemotional, neutral ones) is found for
emotional stimuli in different modalities, for example,
emotional words, pictures and sounds (e.g., Hermans, De
Houwer, & Eelen, 2001).
Not only do emotional stimuli attract more attention and
are remembered better than corresponding neutral ones, they
can also influence how other stimuli (e.g., words, pictures)
are processed. This influence has been demonstrated in
emotional priming studies (Fazio, 2001), where responses to
a target stimulus are facilitated (i.e., faster) when prime and
target have the same emotional valence (e.g., positivepositive, negative-negative), compared to when they have
opposite valence. Interestingly, priming occurs not only
when prime and target belong to same modality and
category (e.g., when they are both faces, pictures or words)
but also across modalities. e.g., from a picture to a face
(Carroll & Young, 2005, Expt 2), or from a picture or facial
expression to a word (Carroll & Young 2005, Expt 1 and 4).

while they listened to the sentence were recorded. In line
with the usual findings from the visual world paradigm,
when participants begin processing the sentence, we expect
them to look at the target (the IAPS picture described in the
sentence) from the time it becomes clear which picture the
sentence is about (i.e., a sentence effect).

Figure 1: Sequence of events in an experimental trial

Emotional Priming of Sentences: Current Study
With regard to the issue of whether a speaker’s emotional
facial expression can influence not just lexical but also
sentence processing, the just-mentioned findings on
emotional priming from faces to words suggest that it
should: Just as the perception of a happy face (the prime)
produces a faster response to a positive (vs. negative) target
word, so a smile on a speaker’s face might facilitate a
listener’s processing of a positive (vs. negative) sentence.
To our knowledge, no research has so far investigated the
emotional priming of whole sentences (as opposed to
isolated words) using emotional facial expressions. In the
current study, we used the visual world paradigm to
examine the time course of emotional priming in sentence
processing. We employed a design typical of many visualworld experiments on sentence comprehension: Participants
listened to sentences relating to visual material displayed on
a computer screen (see Fig.1, for the sequence of events in
an experimental trial). Before hearing the sentences, our
participants saw either a smiling or a sad face (see Fig. 1,
Display 1). They were told that this was the face of the
speaker of the ensuing sentence (thus simulating a speakerhearer scenario). Then two emotional pictures from the
International Affective Picture System database (IAPS,
Lang, Bradley, & Cuthbert, 1999), one positive and one
negative, were displayed side by side on the screen. After
1500 ms the sentence was played and referenced either one
or the other picture; accordingly, the sentence also had a
positive or negative emotional content (see Fig. 1, Display
2). Thus, the speaker’s facial expression could be
emotionally congruent or incongruent with the sentence.
Participants’ eye movements to the display on the monitor

However, for us the more interesting question is whether
and how the facial prime affects (i.e., primes) the processing
of the sentence, in other words, the face x sentence
interaction. In line with findings from emotional priming
research, we expect facilitation when the prime (i.e., the
face) is emotionally congruent with the target (i.e., the
sentence/picture) compared to when prime and target are
incongruent. In our experiment the dependent variable is
fixations on the pictures while incrementally processing the
sentence; so we expect that looks to the target picture
should be facilitated when the emotional face is valencecongruent (vs. incongruent) with the sentence. This
facilitation should be reflected in more and longer fixations
to the target picture in congruent than in incongruent
conditions (cf. Arai, Van Gompel, & Scheepers, 2007).
Furthermore, the timing of this facilitation is of particular
interest to us, as it would reveal details about the time
course of integrating emotion information into language
processing. Earlier findings (see above) suggest that
emotional information enjoys privileged attention, so this
would predict that facilitation effects should occur from the
early stages of processing the sentence. Alternatively,
considering the specifics of our experimental task,
facilitatory effects may not surface until later or not occur at
all during the processing of the sentence. This is because for
facilitation to take place perceivers need to integrate cues
from the visual, linguistic and emotional modalities and this
may be a complex task to perform on the fly. In addition to
facilitating the processing of the sentence itself (face x
sentence interaction), the face may affect the fixations that
listeners make on the pictures independently of the sentence

1977

valence. This would be reflected in a preference to look at
the picture which is emotionally congruent with the face,
i.e., a face-picture congruence effect. To be triggered, this
face-picture congruence effect does not require linguistic
input from the sentence (but only information from the face
and the pictures), so it could occur earlier, before sentence
disambiguation, as well as later, after disambiguation. Note
that a face x sentence interaction, which is the effect of
primary interest to us, cannot be reduced to a face-picture
congruence effect, as it requires the additional input from
the sentence to occur.

Emotion Processing in Younger and Older Adults
The age group manipulation in our study was inspired by
research showing that emotion processing changes across
the life span (for a review, see Ruffman et al., 2008).
According to socio-emotional selectivity theory (Mather &
Carstensen, 2003), as people grow older, they realize that
their time is limited and focus more on emotionallysatisfying experiences in the present moment. This change
arguably leads to the so-called ‘positivity effect’, observed
in studies where young and older adults were compared on
emotional processing. For example, when presented with
pairs of pictures (a neutral face, and a positive or negative
face), older people spent less time inspecting the negative
than positive face; i.e., they displayed an attentional bias
away from the negative and towards the happy expression.
Younger people, by contrast, showed no preference (Mather
& Carstensen, 2003), or preferred negative faces (Isaacowitz
et al., 2006). Positivity effects have also been found in the
recall of pictures and facial expressions (e.g., Mather &
Carstensen, 2003), or of long-term life events (Kennedy,
Mather, & Carstensen, 2004). In recent years, researchers
have discussed the proper characterization of the positivity
effect and the experimental conditions under which it can be
observed. This has led to a broadening of the definition of
the effect, which now includes, not only an increased focus
on positive compared to negative information in older
versus younger adults, but also a reduced focus on negative
information in older adults (see especially Langeslad & van
Strien, 2009; Scheibe & Carstensen, 2010).
In light of this, given that our study involves the
processing of emotional faces and emotional pictures and
sentences, we should see differences in the way younger and
older adults integrate the information from a negative or
positive face with the processing of a negative or positive
target sentence and corresponding picture (i.e., a face x
sentence x age interaction). A prediction is that older people
should find it easier to integrate a positive face with a
positive sentence than a negative face with a negative
sentence (i.e., facilitation only for positive sentences, or
greater facilitation for positive than negative sentences). For
younger people, on the other hand, one may expect equal
facilitation for positive and negative sentences, only
facilitation for negative, or greater facilitation for negative
than positive sentences. Similar modulations by age are
predicted for the face-picture congruence effect.

Methods
Participants
Thirty-two older (60-72 years, M = 64.37, SD = 3.57) and
32 younger (19-29 years, M = 22.90, SD = 2.73) adults took
part in the experiment in return for a monetary reward; all
gave informed consent.

Materials
Materials consisted of photographs of emotional facial
expressions, emotional pictures and auditorily presented
sentences. There were 28 experimental and 56 filler items.
Each experimental item consisted of a facial expression
(happy/sad), a display showing a positive and a negative
picture taken from the IAPS database (Lang et al., 1999)
and a sentence describing either the positive or negative
picture. The emotional faces were selected from 15 sets of
Bielefeld-University student portraits, each set depicting a
neutral, a sad and a happy expression. From these sets we
selected the 4 best sets (2 male, 2 female) based on the
results of a valence-rating study (N=18).
The positive and negative images were selected on the
basis of the valence ratings in Lang et al., 2008, (negative
images: range 2.42 - 5.07, M = 3.46, SD = 1.69; positive
images: range 5.51 - 8.22, M = 7.19, SD = 1.55). Arousal
scores of negative and positive images were similar (paired
t-test t(27) = -.84, p = .41).
The sentences for each of the two images of the 28
experimental item-picture pairs fulfilled constraints specific
to length, structure and content. All started with an
introductory main clause containing a verb of opinion in the
first person singular (e.g., I think/believe/am of the opinion
that…). This was followed by a subordinate clause about the
event depicted in one of the two IAPS images of an item.
The subordinate clause contained a subject noun phrase
(N1), followed by an object noun phrase (N2), an adverb
(Adv) and a final finite verb (Verb). Examples of the
positive and negative sentence for an item are given in
Figure 1. Care was also taken to match the sentences, so far
as possible, by lemma frequency of nouns and adverbs,
using frequency counts from the CELEX database (Baayen,
Piepenbrock, & Gulikers, 1995).
The sentences were recorded by 4 native speakers of
German, two female and two male, and the speakers
assigned to the faces, with 1 male being used for half of the
experimental items (14) and 1 female for the other half (14).
The sound files of the two experimental sentences
associated with an experimental picture pair were edited
using professional sound editing software, to ensure that the
onsets of the critical words (N1, N2, Adverb) occurred
exactly at the same point in time from sentence start in the
positive and corresponding negative sentence (to achieve
this, pauses were shortened or between-word breaks were
lengthened slightly as necessary). The combination of the
experimental faces, pictures and sentences yielded a 2
(Face: positive vs. negative) x 2 (Picture: positive vs.
negative) x 2 (Sentence: positive vs. negative) design.

1978

For the 56 distractor item picture-pairs, we constructed a
sentence that matched one of the two IAPS pictures. The
content of half of the distractor sentences (28) was neutral,
while 14 contained at least one positive word (e.g., The
talented artist is drawing the nice portrait) and the remaining
half one negative word (e.g., It is obvious that today the
weather will be unbearable). The 56 filler items further
differed from the experimental items as follows: the facial
expression was either neutral (28 items), positive (14 items)
or negative (14 items); both IAPS images had mid-range
valence (3.5 - 6.5); there was only 1 sentence per filler item.

Procedure
The experimental session started with the collection of
demographic details from the participants, and with the
administration of some cognitive tests and of a mood
questionnaire. Eye movements were recorded using an SR
Research Eyelink 1000 Desktop head-stabilised eye tracker
(SR Research, Mississauga, Ontario, Canada). Participants
were told that the study investigated language
comprehension in relation to a visual display: They would
first see the face of a person who was thinking about
something and was about to speak, and after that they would
hear him/her utter a sentence which described one of the
two pictures shown on the screen. The task was to look,
listen and understand the sentence, and decide whether the
valence of the face matched the valence of the sentence
(“Does the face match the sentence?”) by pressing one of
two buttons. The sequence of events in an experimental trial
is illustrated in Fig. 1.

divided by the probability of looking at the positive picture
(ln(p(neg picture)/p(pos picture)). This measure expresses
the strength of the visual bias towards the negative versus
positive picture. It is particularly suited for eye tracking data
analyses with parametric tests (such as ANOVAs) because it
violates neither independence nor homogeneity of variance
assumptions (cf. Arai et al., 2007). The log ratio is
symmetrical around zero: A positive log ratio indicates
more looks to the negative than the positive picture; a
negative log ratio indicates more looks to the positive than
the negative picture; and a value of zero means the two
pictures get an equal number of looks.
Fig. 2 (a)-(b) plots the time course of fixations for the
Post-N1 onset region for the two age groups. These graphs
are based on log gaze probability ratios (henceforth ‘log
ratios’) computed on successive 20-ms time slices.

Analyses and Results
The data of interest were the participants’ fixations on the
pictures during sentence processing, i.e., during the time
listeners inspect Display 2 (see Fig. 1). Because the initial
part of the sentence (cf. Fig. 1, “Ich meine dass”) was
neutral between the negative and positive sentence,
disambiguation towards the positive or negative picture
occurred from the initial NP (N1) of the embedded sentence
onwards (cf. Fig. 1, “die Mechaniker/die Vorstadtkinder”).
Therefore any possible facilitation in the processing of the
sentence (face x sentence interaction) due to having seen a
congruent face can only be expected to occur after N1 onset.
By contrast, a face-picture congruence effect (i.e., looks
to the pictures as a function of prime face) can occur both
before and after sentence disambiguation. We thus defined
two time periods: the Post-N1 (onset) region (from the onset
of N1 until sentence end (average duration 4016 ms, SD =
456) and the Pre-N1 (onset) region (including, in addition to
the initial, neutral part of the sentence, the last 1200 ms of
the 1500-ms picture preview period, for a total duration of
3000 ms). Because our main focus is the face x sentence
interaction (and its possible modulation by age), we will
first present the findings for the post-N1 onset region.
The measure we used to analyze fixations on the pictures
is the mean log gaze probability ratio, i.e., the log of the
ratio of the probability of looking at the negative picture

Figure 2: Mean log gaze probability ratios for young and
older participants in the Post-N1 onset region, from the
onset of N1.
In Fig. 2 the sentence effect can clearly be seen in the two
sets of lines moving apart from about 500 ms after the onset
of N1: The red lines (for the two negative sentence
conditions) rise steadily above zero, indicating an increasing
preference for the negative picture, while the black lines (for
the positive sentence conditions) go in the opposite
direction, indicating an increasing preference for the
positive picture in these conditions.

1979

A face-priming effect on the processing of the sentence
(i.e., the facilitatory effect occurring from having seen a
sentence-congruent emotional face) emerges in the relative
distance between the solid and the dotted line of each
sentence condition: If having seen a face of the same
valence as the sentence facilitates sentence processing, the
congruent condition (solid line) should be associated with a
greater absolute value than the incongruent condition
(dotted line).
The log-ratio means for the post-N1 region were
submitted to 2 x 2 x 2 (Face x Sentence x Age) repeatedmeasures ANOVAs with participants and items as random
effects. The ANOVAs revealed a significant effect of facepicture congruence (ps < .001), with a negative picture
preference when the face was negative (M= .15) and a
positive picture preference when the face was positive (M =
-.11). This effect was not modulated by age (both F’s < 1).
As expected, there was a highly significant sentence
effect (ps < .001): When the sentence was negative, there
was a preference for looking at the negative picture and the
opposite was true when the sentence was positive (Ms =
1.65 vs. - 1.61). Importantly, the sentence effect was
significantly modulated by age (ps < .002). This Sentence x
Age interaction is due to the fact that older adults, when
hearing a negative sentence, look less at the negative picture
(vs. the positive one) than the younger adults; in other
words, they are less “responsive” to the negative sentence
than the younger group.
Crucially for our experimental hypotheses, the 3-way
Face x Sentence x Age interaction was fully significant by
participants (p1 = .025, p2 = .13). For our hypotheses, this
interaction reflects the facilitating effect of the face on the
processing of the sentence and the modulation of this effect
by age. Post-hoc pairwise comparisons on participants and
items means of the individual groups (i.e., for each age
group) compared the two negative sentence conditions and
the two positive sentence conditions (Bonferroni correction
for 4 comparisons, p = 05/4 = .0125). These comparisons
can tell us if younger and older participants show different
sensitivities to the negative or positive prime face during the
processing of the sentence. In the comparisons for the
younger participants, only the difference between the two
negative sentence conditions was significant (ps < .02),
while the corresponding comparisons for the older adults
yielded only a significant difference between the two
positive sentence conditions (ps < .02).
Thus, for younger participants a negative prime face (vs. a
positive one) significantly enhanced looks to the negative
picture during the processing of a negative sentence. By
contrast, a positive face had no enhancing effect on younger
adults’ processing of a positive sentence. For the older
group however, the opposite pattern emerged: A negative
face had no effect on the processing of a negative sentence,
but a positive (vs. negative) face elicited more looks to the
positive picture when the positive sentence was processed.
To assess the time course of this facilitation, we
performed pairwise comparisons (similar to the ones

reported above for the whole Post-N1 region) on mean log
ratios for the individual word regions, i.e., N1, N2, Adverb
and Verb (see Fig. 2). For the N1 region, these comparisons
yielded a similar pattern of results as in the previous
analyses, i.e., older participants showed a facilitation from
the positive prime face in the positive sentence conditions
(ps < .01), but not in the negative sentence conditions. By
contrast, young participants showed significant facilitation
in the negative sentence condition (ps < .002), while in the
positive sentence condition facilitation was fully significant
only in the item analysis (p1 = .06; p2 = .02). The only other
(nearly) significant comparison occurred for the positive
sentences in the adverb region (ps < .05): For older adults a
positive (vs. negative) face, facilitated the processing of a
positive sentence, but a negative face was of no advantage
in processing a negative sentence. The fact that results were
significant in the early, N1 region for both age groups
suggests that the integration of the visual context with facial
and linguistic information occurs early and that the time
course of this integration does not substantially differ
between the two age groups.
In the pre-N1 onset region, the ANOVA analyses on the
log ratios revealed a face-picture congruence effect (ps >
.02), not modulated by age: The negative picture was fixated
longer when the face was negative and the positive picture,
when the face was positive. There was also a significant
picture effect, with the negative picture attracting overall
more looks than the positive one (ps < .02). However, this
general bias for the negative picture was weaker for the
older participants (the interaction with age was marginally
significant in the participants’ analysis (p1= .069; p2= .18).

Discussion and Conclusion
These eye-tracking results are important for the following
reasons. First, they demonstrate for the first time that
priming from an emotional face occurs during sentence
comprehension in a visually-situated task (i.e., when
language is about objects and actions in the visual context).
Moreover, priming effects were found from the early stages
of sentence-reference and valence disambiguation (i.e., N1),
showing that the seemingly complex integration of visual
information from an emotional face, a picture and a
sentence happens rapidly and without particular effort.
Previous research in visually-situated comprehension tasks
has demonstrated that speaker-based information such as
gaze is rapidly integrated into sentence processing (e.g.,
Hanna & Brennan, 2007; Knoeferle & Kreysa, 2012).
Importantly, our results provide evidence that a speaker’s
emotional facial expression also has a rapid influence on
sentence interpretation.
Crucially also, our results provide new evidence for age
differences in the processing of emotional information. All
of the age-based modulations that we observed are
compatible with a positivity effect, i.e., either an increased
focus on positive compared to negative information by older
versus younger adults, or a reduced focus on negative
information by older adults (Langeslad & van Strien, 2009;

1980

Scheibe & Carstensen, 2010). The fact that positivity effects
were found in the early stages of sentence processing using
a highly time-sensitive methodology such as eye tracking
has also implications for the question of the mechanisms
underlying the positivity effect, and the level(s) of
processing at which these mechanisms operate.
A central tenet of socioemotional selectivity theory is that
emotion regulation improves with age and that the positivity
effect occurs because older people are capable (consciously
or unconsciously) to selectively regulate their emotions in
order to enhance positivity and well-being. According to
this view, the positivity effect should be strongest in tasks
and situations that require controlled processing with
associated exertion of cognitive effort, and less so in tasks
that measure automatic or initial processing (Scheibe &
Carstensen 2010). Although evidence from several studies
suggests that positivity effects require deliberate use of
mood regulation strategies to occur (e.g., Isaacowitz, Toner,
& Neupert, 2009), recent evidence has shown that
controlled processing and cognitive effort are not necessary
to trigger positivity effects in older adults (e.g., Allard,
Wadlinger & Isaacowitz, 2010). We suggest that the
positivity effects found in early processing in the eye
tracking measures of our experiment are also more likely to
be a result of an early and non-strategic emotion processing
mechanism.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by the German Research
Foundation (DFG) within the SFB-673 Project. We thank
Katja Glados and Katja Münster for their help.

References
Allard E.S., Wadlinger H.A. & Isaacowitz, D.M. (2010).
Positive gaze preferences in older odults: Assessing the
role of cognitive effort with pupil dilation. Aging,
Neuropsychology, and Cognition, 17.3, 296-311.
Arai, M., Van Gompel, R.P.G., & Scheepers, C. (2007).
Priming ditransitive structures in comprehension.
Cognitive Psychology, 54, 218-250.
Baayen, R.H., Piepenbrock, R., & Gulikers, L. (1995). The
CELEX lexical database [CD-ROM]. Philadelphia:
University of Pennsylvania, Linguistic Data Consortium.
Carroll, N.C., & Young, A.W. (2005). Priming of emotion
recognition. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 58A, 1173-1197.
Ekman, P. (1972). Universals and cultural differences in
facial expressions of emotion. In J. Cole (Ed.), Nebraska
Symposium on Motivation, 1971 (Vol. 19). Lincoln:
University of Nebraska Press.
Fazio, R.H. (2001). On the automatic activation of
associated evaluations: An overview. Cognition and
Emotion, 15, 115–141.
Hanna, J., & Brennan, S. (2007). Speakers’ eye gaze
disambiguates referring expressions early during face-to-

face conversation. Journal of Memory and Language, 57,
596-615.
Havas, D.A., Glenberg, A.M., & Rinck, M. (2007). Emotion
simulation during language comprehension. Psychonomic
Bulletin and Review, 14, 436-441.
Hermans, D., De Houwer, J., & Eelen P. (2001). A time
course analysis of the affective priming effect. Cognition
and Emotion, 15, 143–165.
Huettig, F., Rommers, J., & Meyer, A.S. (2011). Using the
visual world paradigm to study language processing: A
review and critical evaluation. Acta Psychologica, 137,
151- 171.
Kennedy Q., Mather M., & Carstensen L.L. (2004). The role
of motivation in the age-related positivity effect in
autobiographical memory. Psychological Science, 15,
208–214.
Knoeferle, P. & Kreysa, H. (2012). Can speaker gaze
modulate syntactic structuring and thematic role
assignment during spoken sentence comprehension?
Frontiers in Psychology, 3:538.
Isaacowitz, D.M., Wadlinger, H.A., Goren, D., & Wilson,
H.R. (2006). Selective preference in visual fixation away
from negative images in old age? An eye tracking study.
Psychology and Aging, 21, 40– 48.
Isaacowitz, D.M., Toner, K., & Neupert, S.D. (2009). Use
of gaze for real-time mood regulation: Effects of age and
attentional functioning. Psychology and Aging, 24, 989–
994.
Langeslag, S.J., & van Strien, J.W. (2009). Aging and
emotional
memory:
The
co-occurrence
of
neurophysiological and behavioral positivity effects.
Emotion, 9, 369–377.
Lundqvist, D., Flykt, A., & Öhman, A. (1998). Karolinska
directed emotional faces. Stockholm: Karolinska Institute
and Hospital, Section of Psychology.
Mather, M., & Carstensen, L.L. (2003). Aging and
attentional biases for emotional faces. Psychological
Science, 14, 409-415.
Palermo R., & Rhodes G. (2007). Are you always on my
mind? A review of how face perception and attention
interact. Neuropsychologia, 45, 75–92.
Ruffman, T., Henry, J.D., Livingstone, V., & Phillips, L.H.
(2008). A meta-analytic review of emotion recognition
and aging: Implications for neuropsychological models of
aging. Neuroscience & Bio-behavioral Reviews, 32, 863881.
Scheibe S., & Carstensen L.L. (2010). Emotional aging:
Recent findings and future trends. Journals of
Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social
Sciences, 65B.2, 135-44.
Trueswell, J.C., Sekerina, I., Hill, N., & Logrip, M.L.
(1999). The kindergarten-path effect: studying online
sentence processing in young children. Cognition, 73, 89134.

1981

