UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Evaluating Two Mechanisms of Flexible Induction: Selective Memory Retrieval and Evidence
Explanation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4qw5c1zb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Vasilyeva, Nadya
Coley, John

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Evaluating Two Mechanisms of Flexible Induction: Selective Memory Retrieval and
Evidence Explanation
Nadya Y. Vasilyeva (Nvasil@Brandeis.Edu)
Department of Psychology, Brandeis University
415 South Street, Waltham MA 02454 USA

John D. Coley (j.coley@neu.edu)

Department of Psychology, Northeastern University
360 Huntington Avenue, Boston MA 02115 USA
on induction that use argument evaluation task, we
employed inference generation task: participants were given
an inductive premise and asked to generate their own
conclusions. Coley & Vasilyeva (2010) demonstrated that
this task provides a particularly sensitive measure of
participants’ spontaneous use of different kinds of relevant
knowledge, in the context of an ecologically valid inductive
problem.

Abstract
We report three studies examining mechanism of propertysensitive induction. First, we demonstrate that, contrary to a
common assumption, property does not influence retrieval of
knowledge about premise categories. Second, we introduce
property-driven explanations as a possible source of property
effects and provide first evidence for this proposal.
Keywords: induction; property effects; retrieval; explanation.

Generating hypotheses about uncertain outcomes from
limited evidence – inductive inference - is a pervasive
cognitive activity. In order to be successful, inductive
inference must be flexible. For example, if you learn that a
new influenza virus has been discovered in chickens, you
may reasonably get concerned about your own health; but if
chickens were announced to carry a certain defective gene,
you are much less likely to worry about catching one during
your next meal. Indeed, a vast body of empirical evidence
demonstrates that people make systematically different
inferences when they project different properties (see Coley
& Vasilyeva, 2010, for a review). Heit and Rubinstein
(1994) proposed that property affects induction by
indicating different subsets of features as relevant for
evaluating premise-conclusion similarity. Goodman (1972)
provided a logical argument for constrained recruitment of
features: since any category has a potentially infinite set of
features and can be infinitely similar to any other category,
it is a necessary logical requirement for inductive inference
to impose some initial constraints to limit a subset of
relevant features.
Although it is generally agreed that induction requires
constrained recruitment of prior knowledge, and there is
evidence that projected property may provide one such
constraint (Coley & Vasilyeva, 2010; Heit & Rubinstein,
1994), the mechanism of property-based constrained
recruitment remains unclear. Existing models of induction
either do not specify the psychological mechanism of
property effects (McDonald, Samuels, & Rispoli, 1996;
Medin, Coley, Storms, & Hayes, 2003; Rips, 1975;
Osherson, Smith, Wilkie, Lopez, & Shafir, 1990; Sloman,
1993; Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004), or acknowledge the
computational nature of their account that may not
correspond to actual psychological processes involved in
inductive inference (e.g. Tenenbaum, Kemp, & Shafto,
2007; Heit, 1998).
We report three studies that examine two candidate
psychological mechanisms of property effects in induction:
property-moderated retrieval of relevant knowledge about
premise categories from long-term memory, and generating
explanations of why premise categories might have the
property to begin with. In contrast to the majority of studies

Property-Moderated Knowledge Retrieval as a
Mechanism of Property Effects
Generation of an inductive hypothesis is inherently
knowledge driven; when one learns that A has a novel
property X, one uses what they know about A and its
relations to other things to form guesses about what else is
likely to have X. One source of input to inductive inference
is knowledge about premise categories. When such
categorical knowledge is accessed, a probabilistically
determined subset of features and relations that comprise the
representation of that concept becomes available as a raw
material for the inference. For example, if A turned out to be
a duck, such features as “is a bird”, “flies”, “lives in
ponds”, “quacks” and “eaten by foxes” may come to mind.
Although there are many different types of knowledge,
knowledge about living things is commonly divided into
two broad classes: taxonomic knowledge is based on
relations of intrinsic similarity between members, whereas
contextual, or ecological knowledge, is based on extrinsic
relations between members and other entities. For example,
ducks belong to the taxonomic category of birds and
ecological categories of aquatic animals and fox prey. Each
of these types of knowledge can serve as a basis for an
inductive projection from ducks – to other birds, or other
aquatic animals, or things that eat ducks.
In addition to the premise category, knowledge about the
property can also serve as a source of information. If X in
the example above is replaced with a more specific
property, such as “carries a certain disease” or “has a certain
gene”, new knowledge is brought to the table: independently
of what we know about ducks, we also know something
about diseases and genes: what they are, whether they can
be transmitted via contact, etc. How can property influence
what projections people end up making? One possibility is
that property constrains what types of premise knowledge
are used to produce an inductive hypothesis.
A premise category label, as any word, is connected to a
vast amount of conceptual knowledge; this knowledge is
unlikely to be retrieved in its entirety on any given occasion
(McElree, Murphy & Ochoa, 2006). Rather, retrieval of
conceptual information from long term memory is selective
and depends on context (e.g. Barsalou, 1982; Swinney,

3645

1979). Within an inductive problem, property may serve as
context for the premise category(-ies), and it could affect
what information about these categories is retrieved. For
example, in response to a premise like “ducks have gene X”,
one may be more likely to retrieve taxonomic knowledge
about ducks (bird, have feathers whereas for (“ducks have
parasite X”), one may be more likely to retrieve ecological
knowledge about ducks (aquatic, prey to foxes). This
mechanism is consistent with the flexible similarity
proposal by Heit and Rubinstein (1994) and the Bayesian
model of induction by Heit (1998). The advantage of this
proposal is that it is more specific, it focuses on describing
the underlying psychological process rather than on
modeling outcomes of such a process, and it can be tested
with behavioral data.
To evaluate this proposal, we conducted two studies.
Study 1 examined knowledge recruitment: how knowledge
about premise categories predicts outcome inferences about
different properties. Study 2 examined knowledge retrieval:
how knowledge about premise categories is activated in
context of different properties during inference generation.

Study 1: Property-Specific Knowledge
Recruitment
To begin to specify the role of property in inference
generation, we examined how it affects recruitment of
category knowledge, or the extent to which available
knowledge about premise categories ends up being used in
the outcome inferences. For example, if among many facts
about ducks, one knows that they live in water, and one uses
this knowledge to project a property from ducks to other
aquatic animals, we can say that the knowledge has been
recruited. The question is whether the nature of the property
affects the likelihood of recruiting ecological versus
taxonomic knowledge about premise categories.
To address this question, we measured available
knowledge about a set of animal categories and examined
the predictive relationship between this knowledge and
inferences generated about the same set of animal categories
(i.e. knowledge recruitment). Most critically for evaluating
the first proposal, we manipulated the property in the
inference generation task between ecologically-biasing,
neutral, and taxonomically-biasing. If property moderates
recruitment of knowledge about premise categories, the
predictive relationship between category knowledge and
inferences should vary with the property. Based on Coley &
Vasilyeva (2010), we expected that property could facilitate
recruitment of congruent knowledge, and/or inhibit
recruitment of incongruent knowledge. For example,
taxonomic properties should facilitate recruitment of
taxonomic knowledge, and inhibit recruitment of ecological
knowledge; ecological properties should show the converse
pattern.

Method
Feature-Listing Task Twenty nine participants were
given a list of 421 animal names and for each animal were
asked to write down anything they could think of that was
“generally true of that animal”.
Inference-Generation Task One hundred participants
were given 42 open ended-induction questions about same
1

Feature-listing data from 1 animal were lost.

42 animals; each stated that a property was true of a single
animal species, and asked what other species were likely to
have the property. For example, “GENE T5 is found in
DUCKS. What else is likely to have gene T5? Why?”
Property was manipulated within subjects; participants saw
two examples of three kinds of properties: ecological (flu,
parasite), taxonomic (gene, cell) and neutral (substance,
property).2 Each participant was presented with seven
questions about each property—each with a different animal
premise—in random order. The dependent variables were
the frequencies of taxonomic and ecological inferences.

Results
Data Coding Four or five trained coders coded features and
inferences into two broad classes. Taxonomic (Tax) features
and inferences invoked category membership, perceptual
features, or non-interactive aspects of behaviors and
physiology (e.g. Tax-feature: “bird”; Tax-inference: “other
birds will have it”). In contrast, ecological (Eco) features
and inferences invoked animals’ diet, habitat, or other
interactions with entities in their environment (e.g. Ecofeature: “lives in water”; Eco-inference: “other animals that
live in water”). Each feature and inference was coded as
taxonomic, or ecological, or both, or neither3. For every
animal, the mean counts of features coded as Tax or Eco
were taken as the measures of the amount of salient
taxonomic and ecological knowledge about that animal. To
quantify inferences, relative frequencies of participants
making Tax and Eco inferences about that animal were
calculated separately for each property type resulting in 6
means per animal.
Property effects Results showed strong property effects.
Eco-inferences were generated most frequently when the
property was ecological, followed by neutral and taxonomic
properties (F(2,82)=95.05, p<.001, η2p=.70); this pattern
was reversed for Tax-inferences (F(2,82)=64.644, p<.001,
η2p=.61; all planned pairwise comparisons p’s<.001).
Knowledge recruitment We examined relations between
premise category knowledge and property in predicting
inferences in 12 simple linear regressions. In one triplet of
regressions, ecological premise category knowledge served
as a predictor of Eco-inferences, separately for ecological,
neutral and taxonomic property. The other triplets covered
the three remaining combinations between knowledge type
and inference type, broken down by the property. The
standardized regression coefficients are shown in Figure 1.
Eco-inferences For Eco-inferences (Fig. 1a) the
predictive power of knowledge varied with the property.
Eco-knowledge was overall a positive, albeit nonsignificant, predictor of Eco-inferences when participants
were reasoning about a neutral (R2=.057, β=.239, p=.132) or
taxonomic (R2=.034, β=.242, p=.128) property, but its
2
The 6 properties were selected from a larger pool of properties
based on a norming study measuring participants’ beliefs about the
distribution of properties across taxonomic and ecological
categories.
3
Coding categories were not mutually exclusive; a given
response could receive multiple codes if it unambiguously invoked
multiple codable kinds of relations.
4
Data were scored and analyzed by item. All the analyses on
proportions reported below were conducted on arcsine-transformed
data, while the reported means are non-transformed and presented
as percentages.

3646

contribution was stronger in the presence of an ecological
property (R2=.124, β=.352, p=.024). When we examined the
contribution of Tax-knowledge to Eco-inferences, overall
larger amounts of Tax-knowledge were associated with
lower frequency of Eco-inferences (all β’s are negative),
and this relationship again varied with property. Taxknowledge inhibited Eco-inferences marginally when the
property was neutral (R2=.076, β= -.276, p=.08), and
reliably so when it was reinforced by a taxonomic property
(R2=.12, β= -.346, p=.027). Relative to taxonomic and
neutral properties, ecological property largely neutralized
the inhibitory effect of Tax-knowledge on Eco-inferences
(R2=.007, β= -.083, p=.605).
Tax-inferences Although, as shown in Fig. 1b, the sign
and ordering of predictors generally follow the predicted
pattern of strengthening effects of congruent knowledge and
weakening effects of incongruent knowledge (with two
exceptions), Tax-inferences were not significantly predicted
by category knowledge (all p’s >.121).
a. Ecological inferences predicted by the
mean number of ecological and
taxonomic features

b. Taxonomic inferences predicted by the
mean number of ecological and taxonomic
features.

Figure 1: Eco- and Tax-knowledge about animals predicting
relative frequency of Tax- and Eco-inferences about these
animals, in the context of ecological, neutral and taxonomic
properties. *p<.05, +p<.1, °p<.15

Study 2: Property-Specific Knowledge
Retrieval

Even though this demonstration of property effects in
knowledge recruitment provides a useful constraint on the
general underlying retrieval process, it does not specify it
completely. Study 2 directly examines knowledge retrieval
by measuring activation of premise category knowledge in
real time, as it is accessed during inference generation. We
borrowed a cross-modal priming paradigm from Swinney
(1979). Participants were auditorily presented with a
taxonomic, ecological or neutral property and an animal
premise, and were asked to generate possible conclusions.
In addition, upon hearing the property and animal,
participants were presented with a lexical decision task
involving targets related to salient taxonomic or ecological
knowledge about the premise animal. For example, a
participant might hear a property, gene, followed by the
animal, duck, and, after a varying time interval, see on the
screen a taxonomic target bird, or an ecological target pond,
or an unrelated target sofa, or a non-word soach. The task
was to decide whether the letter sequence was a word. The
time to respond to the related targets was taken as a measure
of activation of Tax- or Eco-knowledge about the premise
animal. If knowledge about duck is activated, we expect
decisions about related targets (bird and pond) to be faster
than about unrelated targets (sofa). If property moderates
knowledge retrieval, we would expect decisions about
ecologically related targets (pond) to be faster in the
presence of an ecological property and/or slower in the
presence of a taxonomic property relative to a neutral, or
non-biasing property context. Similarly, we would expect
decisions about taxonomically related targets (bird) to be
faster in the presence of a taxonomic and/or slower in the
presence of an ecological property compared to neutral.

Method

Discussion
Overall, property had a profound effect on the inferences
participants generated, and category knowledge predicted
ecological, but not taxonomic inferences. Eco-inferences
were facilitated by congruent (ecological) knowledge about
premise categories, and inhibited by incongruent
(taxonomic) knowledge. Most importantly, the relation
between knowledge and Eco-inferences varied with the
property: property strengthened effects of congruent
knowledge, and weakened effects of incongruent
knowledge. The overall pattern of congruent facilitation and
incongruent inhibition held for Tax-inferences as well,
although it was weaker and did not reach significance. Even
though evidence of a relationship between knowledge and
inferences was present for Eco-inferences but absent for
Tax-inferences, it is sufficient in order to provide an
“existence proof” for moderating effect of property on
knowledge recruitment. These results are consistent with
Heit and Rubinstein’s (1994) proposal about a flexible
similarity metric, but they go beyond similarity relations
and demonstrate flexible recruitment of ecological
knowledge about contextual and interaction-based relations
among animals.

Materials The stimuli for the induction task were 36
animal premises, each belonging to one salient taxonomic
category (mammal, bird, reptile, fish, insect) and one salient
habitat-based ecological category (forest, desert, pond,
ocean, savannah). Each of the animals was presented in the
context of an inductive problem about one of the six
properties from Study 1 (flu, gene, etc., presented with
unique alphanumeric codes (X5, Z9)). All the animal names
and properties were recorded in the voice of a female native
speaker of English.
Thirty-six words and 36 pronounceable non-words were
used as targets for the lexical decision task. The targets
(derived from feature responses in Study 1) were
taxonomically related, ecologically related, or unrelated to
the animals used as premise categories in the induction task.
The strength of association of the taxonomic, ecological,
and unrelated targets to the corresponding animals, as well
as lack of direct associations between properties and target
words, were normed with another group of 18 native
speakers of English.
Participants and Procedure One hundred eleven native
speakers of English were tested individually, on a MacBook
laptop running Superlab 4.0.4 software and set up with
headphones and a microphone. The experiment consisted of
an open-ended induction task with intervening lexical
decision task. Participants were instructed that they would
be listening to utterances that would introduce a property,
followed by an animal that possesses that property, and their

3647

task was to say out loud (at a cued moment) other species
likely to share that property, along with a short justification.
Participants were also informed that at “random” moments a
sequence of characters would appear on the screen, and their
task was to identify it as a word or a non-word as quickly as
possible without sacrificing accuracy, using the response
buttons. Each trial began with a 2000msec pause; then a
participant heard the property to be projected (e.g., flu M3),
followed by a pause of 1000msec, followed by the name of
the premise animal (e.g., bear), followed by a pause and a
signal to start speaking. At varying SOAs (stimulus onset
asynchrony: 400, 900, or 1650msec from the onset of the
animal name), a target for lexical decision appeared on the
screen and stayed there until the participant responded or for
3500msec, whichever came first. No accuracy feedback was
provided. After a 2000msec pause following the
participant’s response or the end of lexical decision target
presentation, a short beep signaled that the participant could
start saying their inference. Participants had 15 seconds to
say their response, after which the experiment automatically
moved on to the next trial.
Design The main independent variable was property type
(taxonomic: gene, cell; ecological: flu, parasite; neutral:
substance, property). The second independent variable was
the target word type (taxonomic vs. ecological vs.
unrelated). Each non-filler animal was yoked to one target
word type (taxonomic, ecological, or unrelated). We also
varied SOA, but for the sake of brevity, this manipulation
will not be discussed here. All the reported analyses were
collapsed across SOA.

Results
Does property moderate retrieval of knowledge about
premise animals? If so, property type should facilitate
responses to property-congruent targets and/or interfere with
responses for property-incongruent targets.
Accuracy A 3(target type: eco, tax, unrelated) x
3(property: eco, tax, neutral) repeated measures ANOVA on
accuracy in lexical decision task showed no main effect of
property (F(2,220)=.145, p=.865). The effect of target type
was significant (F(2,220)=4.33, p=.014): eco- and taxtargets were verified more accurately than unrelated targets
(t(110)=2.63, p=.010; t(110)=2.58, p=.011); the former two
did not differ (t(110)=.33, p=.744). Most importantly, the
effect of target type did not interact with property
(F(4,440)=.57, p=.683). This suggests that participants were
retrieving category-relevant knowledge, but that such
retrieval was not moderated by property.
Reaction Time. Reaction time results were consistent
with the accuracy analyses. A 3 (target type: eco, tax,
unrelated) x 3 (property: eco, tax, neutral) repeated
measures ANOVA on RT showed no main effect of
property (F(2,218)=.44, p=.656) and a significant effect of
target type (F(2,218)=4.73, p=.010): eco-targets were
verified faster than unrelated targets (t(110)=3.20, p=.002);
and tax-targets were verified marginally faster than
unrelated targets (t(110)=1.80, p=.074); the former two did
not differ (t(110)=1.46, p=.148). Again, most importantly,
the effect of target type did not interact with the property
(F(4,436)=1.24, p=.293), suggesting that property does not
moderate knowledge retrieval.
Surprisingly, the speed of lexical decisions about filler
items (non-words) was affected by the property
(F(2,220)=14.95, p<.001): decisions were slower in the

presence of ecological (1343msec, t(110)=4.88, p<.001) and
taxonomic (1320msec, t(110)=3.99, p<.001) than neutral
property (1253msec); the former two did not differ
(t(110)=1.45, p=.151).

Figure 2: Effect of target type and property on lexical
decision accuracy and reaction time. Verification of related
targets (eco, tax) was more accurate (a) and faster (b) than
unrelated targets. This effect did not depend on property
(panels c and d). Error bars: 1 SEM.

Discussion
Based on the results of Study 1, we expected to find effects
of property on knowledge retrieval: specifically, facilitation
of property-congruent knowledge and inhibition of
property-incongruent knowledge. However, we found no
evidence of property moderating knowledge retrieval. Of
course, we cannot completely rule out the possibility that
the lack of property effects was caused by some procedural
flaws of the study. However, because we did see property
effects on some lexical decisions about filler words, we
know that the method is in principle capable of detecting
property effects. And because the premise category did
differentially prime related vs. unrelated targets, we know
that the method is capable of detecting differential priming.
Therefore, it is likely that we failed to see property effects
on retrieval because property does not moderate retrieval of
knowledge about premise categories from long-term
memory.

Study 3: Property-Moderated Explanation as a
Mechanism of Property Effects
Study 1 demonstrated selective property-moderated
recruitment of categorical knowledge to inform inferences.
However, Study 2 found no moderating effects of property
on knowledge retrieval in real time. If, as we argue, this
finding reflects the actual absence of property effects on
retrieval rather than an experimental failure, we need to look
for another mechanism whereby property can guide
selective recruitment of taxonomic and ecological
information by inferences. The mechanism that we examine
in Study 3 is based on property-moderated explanation of
evidence.
As suggested by Sloman’s (1994) work, explanation of
evidence may affect evaluation of inductive arguments.
Even when the similarity between premise and conclusion is
held constant, if both can be explained by reference to the

3648

same principle, the perceived strength of an inductive
argument can be higher than when premise and conclusion
statements require different explanations.
Several features of explanation make it a good candidate
mechanism for property effects in induction. For instance,
explanation is flexible: there are multiple ways to explain
any given observation. A formal explanation refers to
categories or inherent properties; a causal explanation refers
to the proximal mechanisms of change; and a teleological
explanation refers to ends, goals or functions (Lombrozo,
2006). On the subsumption account proposed by Williams
& Lombrozo (2010), explaining an observation involves
identifying a larger pattern of which the observation is a
part. In this sense, explanation identifies a relevant subset
of knowledge about the observation that can serve as a basis
for generalizing to other cases – thus satisfying the logical
prerequisite for induction stipulated by Goodman (1972).
How might explanation provide a mechanism for property
effects in induction? If different properties lend themselves
to different explanations, and if explaining consists of
identifying an observation as a part of a larger pattern or
regularity, then different properties might determine
whether a premise of an inductive argument is viewed as a
part of one regularity or another (e.g. formal explanations
might highlight taxonomic relations, whereas causal
explanations might highlight ecological relations). Thus,
construction of different explanations could engender
differential recruitment of knowledge, and ultimately
different hypotheses about how a property might generalize
without the necessity of differential retrieval of knowledge.
In Experiment 1, although asked to explain why they
generated particular conclusion categories, participants
often spontaneously provided explanations for why a
premise category exhibited a given property. To evaluate the
explanation mechanism, we examined these spontaneous
explanations to determine whether different properties were
associated with different types of explanations. We expected
taxonomic properties to provoke predominantly formal
explanations referring to classes of objects (that would
eventually translate into category-based, or taxonomic
inferences) and ecological properties to lead to
predominantly causal explanations, referring to interactions
between animals and/or their environment (that would
eventually translate into ecological inferences). We had no
specific predictions about teleological explanations.
Method
Three trained coders independently re-coded all the
inferences collected in Study 1 for the presence of formal,
causal and teleological explanations. Twelve percent of
inferences (467 out of 3920 codable responses) contained
spontaneous explanations. These explanations were coded
as formal (explanations that referred to kind membership,
e.g. “mammal gene”, or “this is a bird flu”), causal
(explanations describing a “story” of interactions between
animals and other entities, or a sequence of events resulting
in the premise category having the property, e.g. “ vultures
may get flu E5 from the dead and decaying animals they
feed off of” or “[the gene will be found in] fish since
pelicans eat them, the pelicans might develop that gene from
the fish”), teleological (explanations referring to goals,
functions or purposes of properties, e.g. “these cells are to
protect them from the cold” or “perhaps B6-cells defend
deer from particular viruses that they are exposed to”), or

other (idiosyncratic or vague explanations that could not be
assigned to any of the three categories).

Results
Scoring. For each animal, we calculated the percentage of
subjects who generated each type of explanation out of total
number of participants who reasoned about that animal,
separately for each property type. This yielded 12
percentages, or relative frequency scores, per animal (3
property types x 4 explanation types), that were arcsinetransformed for the analyses. Uncodable explanations were
rare (less than 2% of participants per animal) and were
excluded from the following analyses.
Analyses To provide support for the proposal that
property affects inferences via explanation, we need to show
that different properties are associated with different
explanations, and that different explanations are associated
with different inferences.
Relations between property and explanation. The main
question, whether different properties trigger different types
of explanations, was addressed by a 3 (property: eco, tax,
neutral) x 3 (explanation: formal, causal, teleological)
ANOVA on relative frequency of explanations. The overall
likelihood of providing an explanation did not vary with the
property (F(2, 82)=.044, p=.957). However, explanations
differed in frequency (F(2,76)=18.836, p<.001, η2part=.315):
causal explanations were more frequent (5.3%) than formal
(2.8%, or teleological explanations (2.4%, t(41)≥4.59,
p<.001, d≥.71), which did not differ from each other.
Of most theoretical interest was the significant interaction
between property and explanation type (F(4,164)=34.442,
p<.001, η2p=.457, see Fig 3a). Explanations clearly varied
with property: for ecological properties, causal explanations
were more frequent than formal explanation, which were
more frequent than teleological explanations (t(41)≥4.52,
p<.001, d≥0.70). For neutral properties, causal explanations
were also more frequent than formal or teleological
explanations, which did not differ from each other
(t(41)≥3.00, p≤.005, d≥0.45). In contrast, for taxonomic
properties, formal and teleological explanations were more
frequent than causal explanations (t(41)≥3.42, p≤.001,
d≥0.52). These results demonstrate a link between property
and explanation type.

Figure 3: a. Percentage of explained inferences involving
causal, formal, and teleological explanations for ecological,
neutral and taxonomic properties. b. Percentage of Tax- and
Eco-inferences for responses with formal, teleological, and
causal explanations.
Relations between explanation and inference To
examine the link between explanation and inference, we
again focused on the subset of responses from Study 1 that
included spontaneous explanations. We calculated the
percentage of Tax- and Eco-inferences that accompanied

3649

each type of explanation. There was a clear association
between explanation type and inference (Fig. 3b): responses
that included formal or teleological explanations were much
more likely to result in Tax- than Eco-inferences
(t(41)≥4.38, p<.001, d≥0.68). In contrast, responses that
included causal explanations were much more likely to
include Eco- than Tax-inferences, t(41)=8.61, p<.001,
d=1.33). This systematic relationship between explanation
type and inferences, taken together with the evidence for the
relationship between property and explanation type, is
consistent with the proposal that explanations mediate the
effect of property on inferences.
Discussion
To examine whether explanations might moderate property
effects in induction, we asked whether different properties
were associated with different explanations, and then
whether different explanations were associated with
different inferences. We have answered both questions in
the affirmative. First, different properties triggered different
types of explanations. When participants were reasoning
about ecological properties, the majority of explanations
they provided were causal, referring to a mechanism that
could have endowed the animal with the property (e.g.,
“Owls eat mice and could contract the flu from the mice that
it eats”). In contrast, when participants were reasoning about
taxonomic properties, they were less likely to use causal
explanations, preferring formal explanations (“this cell
could be specific to jaguars”) or teleological explanations
(“T5 is something to keep them warm”). Second, different
explanations were associated with different inferences.
Causal explanations were more likely to accompany
ecological inferences, whereas formal and teleological
explanations were more likely to accompany taxonomic
inferences.
These findings are consistent with the idea that
explanations serve as a mediator between properties and
inferences. We acknowledge that these analyses are
correlational, and therefore do not provide direct evidence
that explanations play a causal role in property-specific
inductive inference. Nevertheless, an informal comparison
of effect sizes indicates that the mean effect of explanations
on inferences (d=1.18) is larger than the mean effect of
properties on inferences (d=0.92). This suggests that
property-driven explanations are likely to affect inferences
directly, rather than being a mere correlate of properties.

General Discussion
We provided evidence that property effects do not take
place in retrieval. This questions the existing, but not tested,
assumption in the field about the mechanism of property
effects based on context-dependent retrieval of information
from semantic memory (Heit & Rubinstein, 1994). We also
provided some promising evidence that property effects may
result from participants generating explanations for the
presence of the property in the premise category. If this
finding persists, it could strengthen connections between
research on explanations and on induction. Most researchers
agree that these are related, but very little supporting
empirical work exists, although it is increasingly
acknowledged that the presence of an available explanation
can reduce reliance on overall similarity and override effects
of similarity and diversity on induction (see Lombrozo,
2006, for a review). In this project we demonstrated that

explanations do not just “mess up” existing regularities in
induction, but may in fact be an important part of the
mechanism of one such established regularity – property
effects in induction.
To sum up, this project makes a step towards specifying
the mechanism of property effects in induction in two ways.
First, it suggests that property effects do not work via
property-based retrieval of knowledge about premise
categories from memory. Second, it introduces propertydriven explanations as a possible source of property effects.
Of course, these proposals are not mutually exclusive, and
our main suggestion for the further research would be not to
abandon studying knowledge retrieval in induction, but to
expand research on the mechanism of property effects to
include explanations.

References
Barsalou, L.W. (1982). Context-independent and context-dependent information in concepts. Memory & Cognition, 65, 15-32.
Coley, J.D. & Vasilyeva, N.Y. (2010) Generating inductive
inferences: premise relations and property effects. In Ross, B.
(Ed.) The Psychology of Learning and Motivation (53).
Burlington: Academic Press.
Goodman, N. (1972). Seven structures on similarity. In Problems
and Projects. New York, NY: Bobbs-Merrill.
Heit, E. (1998). A Bayesian analysis of some forms of inductive
reasoning. In M. Oaksford & N. Chater (Eds.), Rational models
of cognition. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Heit, E. & Rubinstein, J. (1994). Similarity and property effects in
inductive reasoning. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 20, 411-422.
Lombrozo, T. (2006). The structure and function of explanations.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 10(10), 464-470.
McDonald, J., Samuels, M., & Rispoli, J. (1996). A hypothesis
assessment model of categorical argument strength. Cognition,
59, 199-217.
McElree, B., Murphy G.L., & Ochoa T. (2006). Time course of
retrieving conceptual information: A speed-accuracy trade-off
study. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 13, 848-853.
Medin, D. L., Coley, J. D., Storms, G. & Hayes, B. K. (2003) A
relevance theory of induction. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review,
10, 517-532.
Osherson, D.N., Smith, E.E., Wilkie, O., Lopez, A., & Shafir, E.
(1990). Category-based induction. Psychological Review, 97,
185-200.
Rips, L. J. (1975). Inductive judgments about natural categories.
Journal of Verbal Learning & Verbal Behavior, 14, 665-681.
Sloman, S.A. (1993). Feature-based induction. Cognitive
Psychology, 25, 213-280.
Sloman, S.A. (1994). When explanations compete: the role of
explanatory coherence on judgments of likelihood. Cognition,
52, 1-21.
Sloutsky, V.M.,
& Fisher, A.V. (2004). Induction and
categorization in young children: A similarity-based model.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 133, 166-188.
Swinney, D. (1979). Lexical access during sentence
comprenension: (Re)consideration of context effects. Journal of
Verbal Learning & Verbal Behavior, 18, 645-659.
Tenenbaum, J. B., Kemp, C., and Shafto, P. (2007). Theory-based
Bayesian models of inductive reasoning. In Feeney, A. & Heit,
E. (Eds.), Inductive reasoning. Cambridge University Press.
Williams, J.J. & Lombrozo, T. (2010). The role of explanation in
discovery and generalization: evidence from category learning.
Cognitive Science, 34, 776-806.

3650

