UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Evidence for nonconscious behavior-copying in young children

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/34b237sh

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Van Schaik, Johanna E.
Van Baaren, Rick
Bekkering, Harold
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Evidence for nonconscious behavior-copying in young children
Johanna E. van Schaik (J.E.vanSchaik@donders.ru.nl)
Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition, and Behavior, Radboud University
Montessorilaan 3, 6525HR, Nijmegen, the Netherlands

Rick van Baaren (R.vanBaaren@psych.ru.nl)
Behavioral Science Institute, Radboud University
Montessorilaan 3, 6525HR, Nijmegen, the Netherlands

Harold Bekkering (H.Bekkering@donders.ru.nl)
Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition, and Behavior, Radboud University
Montessorilaan 3, 6525HR, Nijmegen, the Netherlands

Sabine Hunnius (S.Hunnius@donders.ru.nl)
Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition, and Behavior, Radboud University
Montessorilaan 3, 6525HR, Nijmegen, the Netherlands

Abstract
Behavioral mimicry is the nonconscious copying of an
interaction partner’s behavior and is affected by social
dynamics. Whereas it has been studied extensively in adults,
little is known about the development of mimicry. The aims
of this study were twofold, first to identify whether young
children demonstrate mimicry and, second, to investigate
whether young children’s mimicry displays sensitivity to
social dynamics. Using a video-based paradigm, 40-monthold children observed six types of behaviors (i.e. yawning,
laughing, frowning, cheek-scratching, mouth-rubbing and
head-wiggling) performed by a model which they had
previously seen either helping or hindering another model.
Results indicate that children carried out five of the six
behaviors more often while watching the behavior videos
than during baseline. However, no differences were found
between the two social manipulations. We conclude that
young children demonstrate mimicry like that reported in
adults and discuss the possible causes of the absence of a
social effect.
Keywords: behavioral mimicry; development; action; social
dynamics; social interaction.

Introduction
An often unnoticed component of social interactions is
behavioral mimicry. Mimicry can be defined as
nonconsciously adopting the behaviors of an interaction
partner (van Baaren et al., 2009). In one of the first
comprehensive studies of mimicry, participants were
exposed to foot-shaking or face-rubbing confederates with
smiles or neutral expressions on their faces. Chartrand and
Bargh (1999) showed that participants were more likely to
carry out the modeled behaviors and expressions than the
non-modeled behaviors and expressions. Importantly,
replicating these behaviors occurred outside of the
participants’ awareness (Chartrand & Bargh, 1999).
In contrast to the extensive adult literature on mimicry
(for a review see Chartrand & van Baaren, 2009),
exceptionally few studies have investigated the development

of mimicry. Some authors have documented neonatal
imitation (e.g. Meltzoff & Moore, 1977; Meltzoff & Moore,
1983). Others, however, note the lack of breadth of these
behaviors and have been unable to replicate original
findings with older infants and young children (e.g.
Anisfeld, 1996; Jones, 2007). Additionally, in such studies,
infants and young children are encouraged to replicate
modeled behaviors (e.g. Jones 2007), which stands in
contrast to the uninstructed mimicry reported in adults. In
one study that did not give replication instructions, children
saw video stimuli in which someone often yawned, but
children under the age of five did not demonstrate instances
of yawning (Anderson & Meno, 2003). In a live paradigm,
only three out of 40 children under the age of four
demonstrated contagious yawning (Helt et al., 2010).
Similarly, Over and Carpenter (2009) report that, in a pilot
study, 5-year-old children who interacted with an adult who
repetitively touched her face failed to mimic this behavior.
Notably, the authors posited that there was little evidence to
suggest that children under the age of five exhibit mimicry
of the sort found in adults (Over & Carpenter, 2009).
Not only do adult studies indicate the uninstructed nature
of mimicry, but they also bring to light its sensitivity to
social dynamics. For example, liking one’s interaction
partner has been shown to increase mimicry rates, both
when liking was preexistent and manipulated (Likowski et
al., 2008; McIntosh, 2006). Although there is no evidence of
uninstructed mimicry in young children, a form of imitation
has been shown to be affected by social dynamics.
Overimitation (also called affiliative imitation) is the
replication of actions shown during a task demonstration
that are unrelated to achieving the desired end-state of the
task (Over & Carpenter, 2012). In a conceptual replication
of an adult study by Lakin, Chartrand and Arkin (2008)
which showed that being socially excluded lead to higher
mimicry rates, Over and Carpenter (2009) found that
priming 5-year-olds with social exclusion increased
overimitation rates (Over & Carpenter, 2009), indicating

1516

that non-mimicry forms of behavior replication are sensitive
to social factors in young children.
Children’s sensitivity to social dynamics is also manifest
in other behavioral measures. One study showed that 3-yearolds helped helpful adults more than destructive adults
(Vaish, Carpenter, & Tomasello, 2010). Kenward and Dahl
(2011) demonstrated that, when given an uneven number of
biscuits, 4.5-year-olds distributed more biscuits to puppets
they saw helping another puppet than to puppets they saw
violently hindering the other puppet. Three-year-olds did
not distinguish in their biscuit-distribution but the authors
suggest this was because they were shocked by the violent
nature of the events and were not sure which puppet was
which (Kenward & Dahl, 2011).
Thus far, no studies have reliably found uninstructed
mimicry during early childhood, and it is hence also
unknown if children’s mimicry is affected by social
dynamics. In the present study, we first aimed to identify
whether young children demonstrate mimicry like that
found in adults. Importantly, we incorporated a range of
behaviors, such as facial expressions and manual behaviors,
to investigate the generality of young children’s mimicry.
Also, as past adult studies have successfully used videos to
elicit mimicry (e.g. Lakin & Chartrand, 2003; Platek et al.,
2003), we chose to present the stimuli as videos to ensure
that all children saw identical behaviors. Moreover, this
provided the children with a ‘task’, namely to watch TV,
which is in line with the contention of van Baaren and
colleagues (2009) that during mimicry experiments the
focus should not be on the behaviors specifically. We
incorporated a baseline measure so as to compare natural
behavior rates with those elicited by observation within
participants, because past studies indicate that individual
differences influence mimicry rates (e.g. Chartrand &
Bargh, 1999; Platek et al., 2003; Sonnby-Borgström, 2002).
We hypothesized that children would demonstrate the
behaviors at greater frequencies while watching the
behavior videos than during baseline.
The second aim was to address whether mimicry is
sensitive to social dynamics at three years of age. As past
studies demonstrated that children around three and four
years of age show differential treatment of helpers versus
hinderers (Kenward & Dahl, 2011; Vaish et al., 2010), we
used a similar paradigm to manipulate the social dynamics.
We designed the models’ interactions such that the helper
would come across as a nice individual whereas the hinderer
would be seen as a mean but not violent individual. In this
manner, we aimed to implement a similar effect as in the
manipulated-liking designs of adult mimicry studies
(Likowski et al., 2008; McIntosh, 2006). Due to possible
carry-over effects from previous interactions (e.g. Lakin &
Chartrand, 2003), we used this social manipulation as a
between-participants factor, such that half of the children
were randomly assigned to the helper condition and half to
the hinderer condition. We hypothesized that children would
mimic helpers more than hinderers, replicating the pattern of
higher mimicry rates for liked individuals in adult studies.

Methods
Participants
Participants were recruited through the database of
volunteer families of the Baby Research Center Nijmegen.
Signed consent was obtained from parents beforehand.
Thirty-three children participated in this study (mean age:
39.7 months, range: 39.2-40.2; 23 girls). Seven children
were excluded due to not wanting to watch the videos
(N=1), technical error (N=1), and not meeting the inclusion
criteria of having attended to at least 40% of the behavior
videos (N=3) or having watched each behavior video at
least once (N=2). Thus, the final sample consisted of 26
children (19 girls).

Stimuli
The stimulus videos for the experiment were made using a
digital video camera (Sony Handycam, DCR-SR190E) and
were digitally muted. Two types of videos were recorded,
social manipulation videos and behavior videos.
Figure 1.2 shows the final scene of the helper video, and
gives an indication of the scene composition used in the
social manipulation videos. In both the helper and hinderer
videos, a stuffed animal was initially positioned in the left,
front corner of the table, and the helper or hinderer (H)
walked in from the left and the neutral model (N) from the
right, each sitting down at their respective sides of the table.
After N failed to reach the stuffed animal from her position,
H reached over to get the stuffed animal and held it out to N
who reached for it. At this point the videos differed; in the
helper videos, H passed the stuffed animal to N who held it
as in Figure 1.2, whereas in the hinderer videos, H pulled
the stuffed animal back and held it to her chest.
Three adult female models were used. Two models were
used for H (i.e. H1 and H2), who each played both the
helper and the hinderer in order to control for possible
idiosyncrasies of each model. The model for H was kept
consistent within participants, such that children who saw
H1 during the social manipulation video also saw the
behavior videos of H1, and the same for H2. The H models
wore a colored shirt to aid subsequent identification while N
wore black. Since N never reappeared in the behavior
videos, only one model played her role.
Six different behavior videos were made. The first,
yawning, was selected for its contagious qualities (Figure
1.3; Platek et al., 2003). Two emotional facial expressions,
laughing and frowning (i.e. a sad facial expression), were
used as they have successfully elicited mimicry in adult
studies (Lakin & Chartrand, 2003; Moody & McIntosh,
2011; Sonnby-Borgström, 2002) and recently also in schoolaged children (Deschamps et al., 2012). Two manual
behaviors were loosely based on those used in interactive
adult studies (e.g. Chartrand & Bargh, 1999; Lakin &
Chartrand, 2003), namely using the fingertips to scratch the
cheek (i.e. cheek-scratching) and rubbing the fingertips back
and forth across sealed lips (i.e. mouth-rubbing; Figure 1.5).
Finally, in the head-wiggling clip the model moved her head

1517

from side to side while looking forwards. Each behavior
video showed the model in a neutral position for the first
and last 500 milliseconds. Pilot data indicated that children
of this age were capable of replicating all behaviors.

group there were two presentation orders of behavior videos
(i.e. eight in total), which were constrained such that at least
three different behavior types had to be presented before the
same behavior could be shown again, and these presentation
orders were counterbalanced across participants.

Procedure
Following a short play session, the child and parent were led
to the experiment room. Children were seated in front of an
eye-tracker (T120, Tobii Technology, Stockholm, Sweden,
Tobii Studio software) either alone or on their parent’s lap.
A video camera (Sony Handycam, DCR-SR190E) was
positioned to the side of the child such that it was not in her
direct visual field but still obtained the most frontal
recording angle possible. The only instructions given were
to watch the videos. Upon conclusion, the participants were
allowed to select a storybook or were given 10 Euros for
participating in the experiment.

Coding and Reliability

Figure 1: Experimental design.

Design
This experiment consisted of three types of stimuli: the
baseline, the social manipulation and the behavior videos.
For the baseline, a non-social video (73.7sec.) from an
unrelated experiment was shown displaying a single racecar
driving through a racetrack (Figure 1.1; Immens, 2011).
Next, the social manipulation video (average duration
23sec.), depending on the condition the participant was
assigned to, was shown twice (Figure 1.2). The behavior
videos (average duration 7sec.) were presented after the
social manipulation videos (Figure 1.3 and 1.5). Each of the
six behaviors was presented five times, resulting in 30
behavior videos in total, and after every 5 behavior videos
an attention grabber video (2 sec.) was shown. After half of
the behavior videos were played, the same social
manipulation video was shown a third time (Figure 1.4) and
was announced via a recording of a voice saying in Dutch,
“Look! Again this video.” Children’s behavior during the
third repetition of the social manipulation video was not
included in the behavior rate calculations. Together, the
baseline, the three repetitions of the social manipulation
video and the 30 behavior videos lasted approximately six
minutes. At the end of the experiment, the experimenter
asked the children if they remembered the social
manipulation video, if they could describe what had
happened and whether the model was nice or mean, as well
as whether the child remembered copying the model’s
behaviors.
Randomization and counterbalancing. The (pseudo)randomizations were done using Mix (van Casteren &
Davis, 2006). Participants were randomly assigned to one of
the two conditions (i.e. helper or hinderer) and one of the
two models (i.e. H1 or H2); hence there were four groups,
one for every combination of condition and model. For each

The children’s behavior was coded using ELAN Linguistic
Annotator (4.3.3, http://tla.mpi.nl/tools/tla-tools/elan, Max
Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands; Lausberg & Sloetjes, 2009). The coder was
blind to condition and the order of stimulus presentation.
Although the experiment was presented on an eye-tracker
so that attention could be measured precisely, the percentage
of looking time according to the output was often
considerably lower than the amount of time that the child
actually attended the screen (for comparable eye-tracking
discrepancies, see Morgante, Zolfaghari, & Johnson, 2012).
For this reason, attention was coded by hand. If the child
looked away for more than five seconds, turned to interact
with the parent or experimenter, or was not clearly visible
on the video, that duration was coded as not-attending.
Pilot data was used to create the coding scheme for the
behaviors so as to accommodate how children carry out
each behavior. If the child verbally labeled a behavior right
before, during or after carrying it out, it was not coded as
mimicry. Also, behaviors that started while the child was
not attending were not coded as these might have been
externally triggered. The exact coding scheme is available
from the first author, with the required characteristics as
follows. Yawns were coded when the lips were parted
forming an O-shape. For laughing, the corners of the mouth
needed to be turned upwards (i.e. smiles were also counted)
while for frowns they needed to be turned downwards. A
cheek scratch was coded if the child brought her hand to her
cheek or forehead and made scratching movements with her
fingers. If the child rubbed her fingers over her mouth or
chin it was coded as a mouth rub. Lastly, the head-wiggle
was coded when the child tilted her head to the left or right
and then to the other side at least once.
To ensure coding-reliability, a random sample of 20
percent of the participant videos was re-coded. The mean
intraclass correlation coefficient between behavior rates of
the first and second coding was r = .98.

1518

Behavioral Measures
The timing of all events (e.g. onset and offset times of
stimuli and the participant’s behaviors) were synchronized
and rounded to the nearest 100 milliseconds. The baseline
and behavior videos period were separated; the baseline
consisted of the duration of the racecar animation and the
behavior videos period was defined as starting when the first
behavior video started and ending after the last behavior
video, but with the social manipulation video in between
excluded. Participant’s behaviors that occurred during the
behavior videos period but before the first attended behavior
video of that type were excluded.
Behavior rates. Per participant, it was counted how often
each behavior was carried out, and rates were calculated
separately for the baseline and behavior videos period. Total
behavior rates were calculated by dividing the total behavior
count by the duration in minutes that the screen was
attended. Similarly, behavior rates were calculated per
behavior type using the count of just one behavior. For these
separate behavior rates, the duration attended in minutes for
the behavior videos period was adjusted to start from the
beginning of the first behavior video of that behavior type,
resulting in the separate behavior rates being lower than the
overall behavior rate. Hence, per participant, per baseline or
behavior videos period, seven behavior rates (i.e. behaviors
per minute attended) were calculated: the overall rate and
one rate for each of the six behavior types.

Since it first needed to be investigated whether the two
conditions (i.e. groups of participants) differed, the
hypothesized difference between the helper and hinderer
condition during the behavior videos period was tested.
However, a Mann-Whitney U-test revealed no significant
difference in total behavior rates between conditions (p>.4).
Hence, for the subsequent comparisons the participant
groups were collapsed across conditions.
To investigate whether behavior rates differed between
baseline and the behavior videos period, a paired-samples ttest was used to compare total behavior rates. Children
carried out the behaviors significantly more often during the
behavior videos period (M=2.38 behaviors per minute,
SE=0.24) than during the baseline (M=0.92 behaviors per
minute, SE=0.33; t(25)=-4.3, p<.001, r=.65).
Subsequently, each separate behavior was investigated
using Wilcoxon signed-rank tests, and alpha was corrected
for multiple comparisons using a Bonferroni correction 1
(Figure 2). During the behavior videos, the rates of
yawning, frowning, mouth-rubbing and head-wiggling, were
significantly higher than the baseline rates of yawning
(z=3.18, r=.44), frowning (z=2.74, r=.38), mouth-rubbing
(z=2.61, r=.36) and head-wiggling (z=2.93, r=.41; all
ps<.008), respectively. Cheek-scratching occurred more
often during the behavior videos period than during the
baseline at a level of marginal significance (p=.011).
Laughing did not differ significantly between the two
periods.

Analysis
Several comparisons were run to check that the models and
the presentation orders did not have an effect on behavior
rates during the behavior videos period and were run
separately for the two conditions. The helper condition
consisted of 12 participants, five of whom saw the videos of
model H1, while the hinderer condition had 14 participants,
7 of whom saw model H1. Independent-samples t-tests and
Mann-Whitney U-tests compared the effect of model (e.g.
H1 or H2) on total behavior rates and separate behavior
rates, respectively, and Kruskal-Wallis H-tests compared the
effect of the presentation orders on both total behavior rates
and separate behavior rates. There were no effects of model
or presentation orders for total or separate behavior rates in
either condition (all ps >.1). Therefore, the models and
presentation orders were collapsed in the subsequent
analyses. Additionally, Mann-Whitney U-tests revealed no
differences in behavior rates between children sitting on
their parents’ laps and those sitting alone on the chair during
either the baseline or the behavior videos period (all ps >.2).

Results
Out of the 26 participants, 25 participants demonstrated at
least one of the six behaviors during either the baseline or
the behavior videos period, and 23 participants carried out
the behaviors more often while watching the behavior
videos than during baseline.

Figure 2: Mean behavior rates of each behavior type for the
baseline and behavior videos period. Error bars indicate one
standard error above the mean; **p<.008, *p=.011.
For the five behaviors with significant and marginally
significant effects, it was investigated post hoc whether any
one behavior was more likely to be replicated than the other
behaviors. A Friedman’s ANOVA was used to compare the
difference in behavior rates between baseline and behavior
videos period (i.e. behavior videos period behavior rate
1
The Bonferroni correction was calculated by dividing the alpha
level (one-tailed) by the number of comparisons (i.e. six). Hence,
adjusted alpha levels were 0.008 for significance values of p<.05
and 0.017 for marginal significance values of p<.1.

1519

minus baseline behavior rate) between the behaviors. No
differences between the behaviors were found (all ps>.7).
A Mann-Whitney U-test showed that the children’s
answers to the question of whether they consciously
replicated the model’s behaviors were not predictive of their
behavior rates during the behavior videos period (p>.6).

Discussion and Conclusion
This study aimed to identify and investigate mimicry in 40month-old children. We found that children carried out the
behaviors significantly more often while watching the
behavior videos than while watching the baseline video.
This was evident across individuals, as 23 out of 26
participants showed higher behavior rates during the
behavior videos period than during baseline, and across
behavior types, as five of the six behaviors were mimicked.
Yawning, frowning, mouth-rubbing, and head-wiggling all
occurred at significantly greater rates during the behavior
videos than during baseline and cheek-scratching showed
this effect at a level of marginal significance. Of the
mimicked behaviors, no one behavior was more likely to be
mimicked than others, while controlling for baseline rates.
Mimicry of these behavior types have, to the best of our
knowledge, not been tested during early childhood before,
with the exception of yawning. Helt and colleagues (2010)
report very low rates of yawning in live paradigms under the
age of four and Anderson and Meno (2003) did not find any
instances of yawning during video watching in three-yearolds. In their video-based study, children were instructed to
clap whenever they saw a yawn; as also suggested by Helt
and colleagues (2010), the disparity between their findings
and ours may be a result of the assigned tasks, since our
simple instructions to watch the videos better resemble the
uninstructed nature of adult mimicry studies. Indeed, the
behavior rates during the behavior videos period of our
study are similar to the behavior rates measured during live
interactions in adults. For example, Chartrand and Bargh
(1999) found an average rate of .57 face-rubs per minute,
which closely corresponds to the children’s average
behavior rate of .51 for mouth-rubs.
The only behavior that did not demonstrate a mimicry
effect in the current study was laughing. This was likely
caused by the children’s enjoyment of the baseline video, as
average laughing rates during the baseline far exceeded
those of the other behaviors’ baseline rates. Although the
baseline video was selected for its neutrality and non-social
nature, the animation still needed to be, and in fact was,
attractive enough for children to attend to it.
An important characteristic of mimicry is that it occurs
outside of the awareness of both the individual mimicking
and the individual being mimicked (Chartrand & van
Baaren, 2009). Children were asked at the end of the
experiment whether they copied the model while watching
the behavior videos, and their answers were not related to
their actual mimicry rates. Additionally, during a pilot study
children were instructed to copy the behaviors, but it
became apparent that they found it unusual to consciously

replicate the behaviors of a non-responsive model, even
when encouraged by their parents. Furthermore, our coding
scheme ensured that the few cases in which children
verbally labeled a carried-out behavior, indicating that they
were focusing on doing that behavior, were not counted as
mimicked behaviors. Anecdotally, several parents remarked
that they were surprised to see their child replicate the
behaviors seemingly automatically. Altogether, there is
sufficient evidence to indicate that the children
nonconsciously replicated the behaviors, in line with the
definition of behavioral mimicry.
This study further investigated whether children’s
mimicry is sensitive to social dynamics. To influence the
social dynamics, a helper-hinderer manipulation was used in
a between-participants design. However, no significant
differences between the conditions were found. Given that
past studies have linked mimicry with social perspective
taking skills (e.g. Chartrand & Bargh, 1999; Platek et al.,
2003), it might be that the sensitivity of mimicry to social
factors gradually develops during childhood as an effect of
increasing social cognition and experience. However, it
should be considered whether the social manipulation could
have been ineffective. A limitation of the present study was
that the social manipulation and behaviors were recorded as
separate video clips with different background settings.
Since Kenward and Dahl (2011) reported that their
participants had difficulty later identifying the puppets, we
allocated the helper and hinderer models a colored shirt to
aid later identification. Nonetheless, the different setting of
the two video types may have prevented children from
making the link between the model in the social
manipulation video and the model in the behavior videos.
More support for this notion comes from recent pilot data
with 5½-year-olds, which indicated that children older than
those in this study often failed to relate the model in the
behavior videos to the model in the social manipulation
video seen before. A similar limitation was that video
presentation prevented participants from actually affiliating
with the model, thereby possibly preventing an affiliationdriven social effect, as suggested by Over and Carpenter
(2012) regarding an overimitation study by Nielsen,
Simcock and Jenkins (2008).
The findings of this study highlight avenues for further
research into the neural and cognitive underpinnings of
mimicry. Whereas a perception-action matching system
founded in imitation research has been suggested to also
underlie mimicry (Chartrand & van Baaren, 2009), it is
unclear whether neural differences exist between
nonconscious mimicry and instances of conscious motor
observation and replication. Additionally, cognitive
mechanisms have been suggested to contribute to imitative
behaviors (e.g. Meltzoff, 2007; Woodward et al., 2009), and
future studies should investigate whether similar
mechanisms, and the development thereof, are involved in
mimicry’s reported social sensitivity.
In conclusion, this study is the first to identify
uninstructed behavioral mimicry in 40-month-old children.

1520

The spectrum of behaviors for which this was the case
reflects the repertoire of mimicked behaviors in the adult
literature (Chartrand & van Baaren, 2009), and provides a
basis for future research investigating the underlying neural
and cognitive processes. It is unclear whether the lack of
social modulation of mimicry was a result of experimental
design or an effect of social-cognitive development, and this
posits further investigation.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the volunteer families of the Baby
Research Center, Nijmegen; Angela Khadar; Loes Immens;
Claudia Lüttke, Lianne Scholtens, and Ricarda Braukmann;
and Claire Monroy, Sarah Gerson, and the anonymous
reviewers for valuable comments on the manuscript.

References
Anderson, J. R. & Meno, P. M. (2003). Psychological
influences on yawning in Children. Current Psychology
Letters: Behaviour, Brain and Cognition, 11,
http://cpl.revues.org/document390.html.
Anisfeld, M. (1996). Only tongue protrusion modeling is
matched by neonates. Developmental Review, 16, 149–
161.
Chartrand, T. L., & Bargh, J. A. (1999). The chameleon
effect: The perception-behavior link and social
interaction. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
76, 893-910.
Chartrand, T. L. & van Baaren, R. B. (2009). Human
mimicry. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology,
41, 219-273.
Deschamps, P. K. H., Schutte, I., Kenemans, J. L., Matthys,
W., & Schutter, D. J. L. G. (2012). Electromyographic
responses to emotional facial expressions in 6-7 year olds:
A feasibility study. International Journal of
Psychophysiology, 85, 195–199.
Helt, M. S., Eigsti, I.-M., Snyder, P. J., & Fein, D. A.
(2010). Contagious yawning in autistic and typical
development. Child Development, 81, 1620-1631.
Immens, L. (2011). Do people predict more rationality for
an agent who is in a hurry? (Unpublished Bachelor’s
thesis). Radboud University, Nijmegen.
Jones, S. S. (2007). Imitation in infancy: The development
of mimicry. Psychological Science, 18, 593-598.
Kenward, B., & Dahl, M. (2011). Preschoolers distribute
scarce resources according to the moral valence of
recipient’s previous actions. Developmental Psychology,
47, 1054-1064.
Lakin J. L., & Chartrand, T. L. (2003). Using nonconscious
behavioral mimicry to create affiliation and rapport.
Psychological Science, 14, 334-339.
Lakin, J. L., Chartrand, T. L., & Arkin, R. M. (2008). I am
too just like you: The effects of ostracism on
nonconscious mimicry. Psychological Science, 19, 816822.
Lausberg, H., & Sloetjes, H. (2009). Coding gestural
behavior with the NEUROGES-ELAN system. Behavior

Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 41, 841849.
Likowski, K. U., Muhlberger, A., Seibt, B., Pauli, P., &
Weyers, P. (2008). Modulation of facial mimicry by
attitudes. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 44,
1065-1072.
McIntosh, D. N. (2006). Spontaneous facial mimicry, liking
and emotional contagion. Polish Psychological Bulletin,
37, 31-42.
Meltzoff, A. N. (2007). ‘Like me’: A foundation for social
cognition. Developmental Science, 10, 126-134.
Meltzoff, A. N., & Moore, M. K. (1977). Imitation of facial
and manual gestures by human neonates. Science, 198,
75–78.
Meltzoff, A. N., & Moore, M. K. (1983). Newborn infants
imitate adult facial gestures. Child Development, 54, 702–
709.
Morgante, J. D., Zolfaghari, R., & Johnson, S. P. (2012). A
critical test of temporal and spatial accuracy of the Tobii
T60XL Eye Tracker. Infancy, 17, 9-32.
Moody, E. J., & McIntosh, D. N. (2011). Mimicry of
dynamic emotional and motor-only stimuli. Social
Psychological and Personality Science, 2, 679-686.
Nielsen, M., Simcock, G., & Jenkins, L. (2008). The effect
of social engagement on 24-month-olds’ imitation from
live and televised models. Developmental Science, 11,
722-731.
Over, H., & Carpenter, M. (2009). Priming third-party
ostracism increases affiliative imitation in children.
Developmental Science, 12, F1-F8.
Over, H., & Carpenter, M. (2012). Putting the social into
social learning: Explaining both selectivity and fidelity in
children's copying behavior. Journal of Comparative
Psychology, 126, 182-192.
Platek, S. M., Critton, S. R., Myers, T. E., & Gallup Jr., G.
G. (2003). Contagious yawning: The role of selfawareness and mental state attribution. Cognitive Brain
Research, 17, 223–227.
Sonnby-Borgström, M. (2002). Automatic mimicry
reactions as related to differences in emotional empathy.
Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 43, 433-443.
Vaish, A., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (2010). Young
children selectively avoid helping people with harmful
intentions. Child Development, 81, 1661-1669.
Van Baaren, R., Janssen, L., Chartrand, T. L., &
Dijksterhuis, A. (2009). Where is the love? The social
aspects of mimicry. Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society B, 364, 2381-2389.
Van Casteren, M., & Davis, M. H. (2006). Mix, a program
for pseudorandomization. Behavior Research Methods,
38, 584-589.
Woodward, A. L., Sommerville, J.A., Gerson, S.,
Henderson, A. M. E., & Buresh, J. S. (2009). The
emergence of intention attribution in infancy. In B. Ross
(Ed.) The Psychology of Learning and Motivation,
Volume 51. Academic Press.

1521

