UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Evidence for cognitively controlled saccade targeting in reading

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/44k516h6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Bicknell, Klinton
Higgins, Emily
Levy, Roger
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Evidence for cognitively controlled saccade targeting in reading
Klinton Bicknell1 (kbicknell@ucsd.edu), Emily Higgins1 (ehiggins@ucsd.edu),
Roger Levy2 (rlevy@ucsd.edu), & Keith Rayner1 (krayner@ucsd.edu)
1 Department
2 Department

of Psychology, UC San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA
of Linguistics, UC San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA

Abstract

of the center, and Rayner initially suggested that readers may
intentionally send their eyes to this position because it is the
most efficient location from which to process the word (cf.
O’Regan, 1981). However, Rayner, Well, Pollatsek, and Bertera (1982) found evidence from a display change paradigm in
which they controlled the amount of preview – visual information available about the next word – by replacing some
letters with Xs that readers send their eyes further into the
following word when they had received more preview. They
suggested a cognitive account of character-level saccade targeting, in which readers target a position further into a word
when they have already processed more of the word. For example, if readers are able to identify initial letters in a word,
they no longer need visual information about those letters,
and it is an efficient reading strategy to target the eyes at the
latter, still-unidentified part of the word (Rayner, McConkie,
& Zola, 1980). However, it is possible that Rayner et al.’s
(1982) results do not reflect normal reading behavior, and
may instead reflect an experiment-specific strategy, e.g., making shorter saccades when the next word contains more Xs.

It is generally assumed that the character position targeted
within a particular word is not under direct cognitive control, but is rather determined by oculomotor processes sensitive only to word length and distance. An alternative view is
that readers target more distant characters in words when they
have parafoveally processed these words more. These possibilities are difficult to distinguish because the actual landing site
within a word has large effects on subsequent word processing
measures. In two experiments, we decoupled the targeted location from the actual landing site by shifting the text 3 characters during the saccade into a target word. Results show that
subsequent word processing time given a particular landing
site was lower/higher when the eyes would have landed further
forward/backward in the word. This effect remains significant
in some cases when controlling for saccade launch site. These
data provide evidence against the oculomotor theory and support a cognitive account of saccade targeting.
Keywords: eye movements; reading; display change

Introduction
Reading is a complex process that requires the combination
of language processing with visual information to make decisions about when and where to move the eyes. These decisions are made very rapidly: saccades in reading take around
150 ms to program (Rayner, Slowiaczek, Clifton, & Bertera, 1983), yet fixation durations in reading are around 200–
250 ms, leaving only 50–100 ms to decide when and where to
send the eyes next. Given these temporal requirements, one
central question of reading research is the extent to which
these decisions are made by the cognitive system – and thus
are sensitive to ongoing linguistic processing – or made by
faster, low level oculomotor heuristics. Much of this debate
has focused on how readers decide when to make a saccade,
e.g., investigating the sensitivity of the distribution of fixation
durations to the linguistic properties of a fixated word such as
its frequency or predictability (Staub, White, Drieghe, Hollway, & Rayner, 2010; Staub, 2011; Feng, 2009b). It is generally assumed, however, by researchers on both sides of this
debate that it is via oculomotor heuristics that readers decide
where within a word to target their eyes.1 In this paper, we
provide evidence against this view, suggesting that characterlevel saccade targeting decisions are under cognitive control,
and thus supporting a view in which even the fine details of
eye movements are sensitive to ongoing linguistic processing.

McConkie, Kerr, Reddix, and Zola (1988) investigated this
issue with an analysis of the effect of preview on saccade targeting in a corpus of naturalistic reading. To assess the effect of preview, McConkie et al. investigated the effect on
landing position of launch site, the distance of the previous
fixation from the beginning of the word. Because the quality
of visual information rapidly decreases away from the fovea,
nearer launch sites would be expected to yield more preview, and – under Rayner and colleagues’ cognitive account
– landing positions further into the word. McConkie and colleagues’ results confirmed this prediction, showing that the
modal landing position was more rightward for nearer launch
sites. However, McConkie et al. presented analyses suggesting that this result was not best explained by the cognitive
account. Specifically, they presented evidence that the relationship between launch site and modal landing position was
linear, and argued that an account that explains the shift in
modal landing position in terms of parafoveal preview should
predict a non-linear relationship. Because readers only obtain significant information about letter identities from 7 or
so characters away (Underwood & McConkie, 1985), they
argued that a preview account would predict that the effect of
launch site on landing site should asymptote by launch sites
of 7 characters. McConkie and colleagues presented evidence
that the shift in modal landing position was well modeled as
a linear function of launch sites from 1 to 7 characters, with
no evidence of becoming smaller near 7 characters. Neverthe-

Character-level saccade targeting
It has been known since Rayner (1979) that the eyes’ modal
landing position in (medium and long) words is slightly left
1 This is specifically the case for decisions about where within a
word to target the eyes. The control of decisions about which word
to target is known to reflect cognitive processing.

197

Experiment 1

less, because they did not analyze launch sites past 7 characters, this is not strong evidence against the cognitive account.
Based on their evidence, however, McConkie et al. (1988)
proposed an oculomotor account of character-level saccade
targeting, in which the functional target of the eyes is always
the center of the word, but in which systematic error biases
saccade lengths toward 7 characters (and happens to do so
linearly). They further suggested that this systematic error is
related to range error found in other saccadic (Kapoula, 1985)
and manual (Poulton, 1981) tasks, which biases saccades toward the mean saccade length. This oculomotor account of
saccade targeting has since become the dominant theory, and
is encoded in all major models of eye movement control in
reading (e.g., Reichle, Pollatsek, Fisher, & Rayner, 1998; Engbert, Nuthmann, Richter, & Kliegl, 2005).

We use a sentence-shifting paradigm (McConkie, Zola, &
Wolverton, 1980; O’Regan, 1981; Inhoff, Weger, & Radach,
2005; Nuthmann, 2006; Feng, 2009a) to tease apart effects
of intended landing site from actual landing site. In our first
experiment, we shift the sentence to the right during the saccade into a target word, as described below. This paradigm
allows us to align actual landing sites and compare two cases:
(1) when the actual site was the intended landing site (when
no shift occurred), and (2) when the intended landing site
was, instead, further into the target word (when the sentence shifted to the right). The cognitive account predicts that
the latter case – when more distant locations were targeted
– is more likely to reflect instances in which readers had
parafoveally processed the word to a greater extent. Thus,
the account predicts that word processing times on the target word should be reduced compared with the control, no
shift condition. The oculomotor account may make this same
prediction, but only as mediated by effects of launch site,
since under this view landing position is strictly a function of
launch site, and closer launch sites may yield more parafoveal
preview. We thus seek to answer two questions: (1) whether
any information about upcoming word processing can be recovered from original landing site, as measured by whether
there is an effect of shift on subsequent eye movement measures aligned by actual landing site, and (2) whether this effect is completely mediated by launch site.

Goals
In the present work, we tease apart the cognitive and oculomotor accounts by testing their predictions for word processing that occurs after landing on a new word. This is difficult
to disentangle in natural reading, because there are large effects of the actual landing site on eye movement measures
that indicate word processing time, such as gaze duration and
refixation rates (e.g., O’Regan, 1981; McConkie, Kerr, Reddix, Zola, & Jacobs, 1989; Rayner, Sereno, & Raney, 1996).
Here, we experimentally decouple intended landing site from
actual landing site using a sentence shift paradigm, which allows us to investigate the relationship between target word
processing and where a reader would have landed in the word.
The cognitive account, in which readers direct their eyes to
later character positions in upcoming words when they have
performed more parafoveal processing of the beginnings of
these words already, predicts that – when controlling for actual landing site – readers will require less time to finish processing a word when they had targeted a later character. The
oculomotor account, which holds that where a reader lands in
a word is purely a function of launch site, does not obviously
make this prediction. However, because parafoveal preview
should be larger when the eyes are closer to the word (i.e., for
closer launch sites), the oculomotor account may also make
this prediction, because it predicts that landing sites are correlated with launch site. Crucially, though, in the oculomotor
account, all effects of original landing position (i.e., the position at which the eyes would have landed had we not shifted
the sentence) must be mediated by launch site. The cognitive
account by contrast, under the assumption that the amount of
parafoveal processing performed is variable even for a constant launch site, predicts that word processing times will be
smaller when the eyes would have landed further into the
word, even when controlling for effects of launch site. (Note,
however, that a large amount of the amount of parafoveal preview obtained is likely to be correlated with launch site even
on this account). We test these predictions in the following
two experiments.

Method
Subjects All subjects were students at the University of
California, San Diego who received course credit for participation. All were naive to the purpose of the experiment
and reported that they were native speakers of English with
normal or corrected-to-normal vision. Data from 40 subjects
were included in our analyses. Five additional subjects participated in the experiment but were excluded from analysis
for reasons discussed below.
Apparatus Eye movements were monitored with an SR
Eyelink 2000 eye tracker (SR Research Ltd., Kanata, Ontario, Canada) sampling at 1000 Hz. The system was configured in ‘tower mode’ and equipped with a chin rest. While
subjects read binocularly, only one eye (the right eye by default) was tracked. Sentences were displayed on an HP p1230
20 in. CRT monitor with refresh rate set to 150 Hz and resolution set to 1024 × 768 pixels. Viewing distance was approximately 60 cm. Approximately 2.4 characters were encompassed by 1° of visual angle. We used custom software
(EyeTrack, developed at the University of Massachusetts,
Amherst) to present and update the display.
Materials One hundred and sixty experimental sentences
were included in this study. Eye movement measures were
obtained from a single, pre-selected target word (always a 7letter verb) within each sentence, which was immediately preceded by a 3- or 4-letter noun. Each sentence appeared alone

198

	  

Pre-shift:
No shift:
Right shift:
Left shift:

The seasoned fig couples well with goat cheese.
The seasoned fig couples well with goat cheese.
The seasoned fig couples well with goat cheese.
The seasoned fig couples well with goat cheese.

Figure 1: Example sentence. The first line depicts an experimental sentence and a boundary (invisible to subjects but shown
here after the pre-target word ‘fig’) that, when crossed, will trigger a display change. The target word is ‘couples’. The second
line shows the control condition in which the sentence remains in place after the boundary has been crossed. The final two lines
depict rightward (Experiments 1 and 2) and leftward shifts (Experiment 2 only) respectively.
pared the two shift conditions at only these four positions.3
Finally, in order to increase the probability that all fixations
were intended for the target word, and not mislocated fixations intended for the previous word, we also excluded cases
in which the previous word was skipped. Note that it is possible that two classes of unintentional fixations of the target
word remain in the data: (a) fixations intended to be refixations of the previous word and (b) fixations that were intended to skip over the target word and fixate a subsequent
word. However, each of these possibilities is unlikely to represent a substantial portion of the dataset, as the refixation
probability for words of length 3–4 is very low (about 13%
for words of length 4 and even lower for words of length 3;
McConkie et al., 1989) and the probability of skipping over a
7-letter word is only about 10% (Drieghe, Brysbaert, Desmet,
& De Baecke, 2004).4
We analyzed two measures of word processing: (1) gaze
duration, defined to be the summed duration of all fixations
made on a region prior to leaving it and (2) refixation probability, defined as the probability of making more than one
fixation on a region prior to leaving it. We analyzed the effect
of shift on gaze duration with linear mixed-effects regression
(Pinheiro & Bates, 2000) and on refixation probability with
logistic mixed-effects regression (Agresti, 2002). In addition
to a fixed effect of shift, all models included random intercepts and random slopes for shift for both subjects and items.
As a control variable, the actual (post-shift) landing site was
included as an unordered categorical fixed effect, and random
slopes for landing site were included for subjects and items.
In cases of nonconvergence, we iteratively removed random
slopes of landing site until the model converged. We do not
report control variable effects. Outlier gaze durations were
excluded by removing all gaze durations more than 2 standard deviations from a subject’s mean, without respect to experimental condition.
We report two analyses to answer the two questions described above. The first analysis seeks to determine whether
any information about upcoming word processing can be recovered from original landing position by testing for an ef-

on a single line of the screen in Courier New 14 pt. font.
Procedure After giving informed consent and receiving experimental instructions, subjects placed their heads in the chin
rest and performed a 3-point horizontal calibration. Subjects
then read 6 practice sentences, all without display changes,
before beginning the experiment. Subjects read each experimental sentence silently for comprehension. For each subject,
the order of sentence presentation was randomly and independently selected. After one third of trials, a simple comprehension question was presented to encourage attentive reading.
Breaks were offered approximately halfway through the experiment and were available at any other time upon request.
We used the gaze-contingent boundary technique (Rayner,
1975) to update the display when subjects’ eyes crossed an
invisible boundary placed after the last letter of the pre-target
word. When this boundary was crossed, on half of the trials the display was re-drawn so that the entire sentence was
shifted 3 characters to the right (the Right Shift condition, see
Figure 1). In the remaining half of trials, the sentence was
simply re-drawn in its original location (No Shift). The assignment of items to shift conditions was counterbalanced.
Analysis Data were processed using a suite of custom software developed at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst
and the University of California, San Diego. Fixations shorter
than 80 ms that occurred within a single character width
(11 pixels) of an adjacent fixation were combined, and those
that did not were removed. Trials containing a fixation longer
than 1000 ms or a blink on or immediately preceding or following the target word region were also excluded.2 Trials
were also excluded if the display change completed more than
9 ms after the beginning of the following fixation. Subjects
were excluded from analysis for excessive data-loss, defined
as 25% or more of trials being excluded for blinks or 50% or
more of trials being excluded for late display changes. Trials
were also excluded if the eyes (1) would not have landed on
the target had no shift taken place, or (2) would have landed
on the target under natural circumstances but were ‘thrown
off’ by the shift. This requirement meant that all data from the
shift condition was limited to actual landing positions 1–4.
In our statistical analysis of the effect of shift, we thus com-

3 The

space prior to the word (position 0) was thus excluded.
probabilities come with a caveat: on the standard oculomotor account, many attempts to refixate a short word and many
attempts to skip a long word will fail. Thus, on the standard account,
these probabilities underestimate the true rate of unintentional target word fixations, which may be a substantial portion of trials. We
return to this point in the Conclusion.
4 These

2 As

the target word moved to different absolute positions on the
screen depending on the shift condition, for the purposes of blink
exclusion, we used a target word region defined as the union of the
locations occupied by the target word across all shift conditions.

199

cant 10 ms (t = −1.4), and the effect on refixations remained
similar (−0.2 logits, z = −1.1).

Gaze duration

400

Discussion

cond

350

The results of Experiment 1 confirmed that original landing position does provide some information about upcoming word processing, as cases in which the eyes would have
landed further forward in the word result in 19 ms shorter
gaze durations. While this result is predicted by the cognitive
account, the oculomotor account can also predict it, but only
to the extent that it is completely mediated by launch site.
In analyses controlling for launch site, the results from this
experiment were unclear, however, and there was only an insignificant trend for gaze durations to be 10 ms shorter when
the eyes would have landed further forward in the word. Thus,
the results of this experiment are consistent with both models.

None
300

Right

250
2

4

6

Landing position

Refixation rate

0.8
0.6
cond
None

0.4

Experiment 2

Right

One limitation of the design of Experiment 1 is that it is possible that the effects we saw on gaze duration and refixation
rate were merely low-level responses to shifting the sentence
rather than true effects of prior processing of the target word.
To allay this concern, in Experiment 2, we tested both right
and left shifts of the sentence. While a simple, low-level response to the detection of a shift may be expected to affect
eye movement measures similarly for leftward and rightward
shifts, the cognitive account of saccade targeting makes opposite predictions for these two conditions. By the same logic
as described for Experiment 1, this account predicts that gaze
duration and refixation rates should be reduced in the rightward shift condition relative to the no shift condition when
aligning on actual landing site. This is because the saccades
in the rightward shift condition were directed further into
the word, which on this account is caused by readers having
performed more parafoveal processing. Analogously, this account predicts that these measures should be increased in the
leftward shift condition relative to the no shift condition when
aligning on actual landing site, since the leftward shift saccades were directed further back in the word than those in the
no shift condition. The oculomotor account once again makes
the same predictions as the cognitive account, but again requires that these effects be solely mediated by launch site.
Experiment 2 thus allows us to test two predictions. First, if
the simple, low-level shift effect is correct, we should find
similar patterns of data for leftward and rightward shifts. Second, if we instead find opposite patterns of data for leftward
and rightward shifts (as outlined above), examining whether
these effects are solely driven by launch site will allow us to
distinguish between the oculomotor and cognitive accounts
of saccade targeting.

0.2
0.0
2

4

6

Landing position

Figure 2: Effect of shift on gaze duration and refixation rates
by actual (post-shift) landing site for Experiment 1. Error bars
show the standard error of the mean, computed after aggregation by subjects. Note that effects mediated by launch site
have not been parceled out of this figure.
fect of shift on word processing controlling for actual landing site. The second tests whether this effect is completely
mediated by launch site (as predicted by the oculomotor account) by including launch site as an unordered, categorical
control predictor. To assess significance for the linear gaze
duration models, we report the t statistic. For datasets of this
size, this statistic will be approximately normally distributed
(Baayen, Davidson, & Bates, 2008), meaning that |t| > 1.96
indicates a significant effect (p < .05) and 1.64 < |t| < 1.96
indicates a marginal one (.10 < p < .05). For logistic refixation models, we report the z statistic, which has the same
interpretation, and also give effect sizes in logits, which is
the difference in the log-odds of making a refixation between
conditions (Agresti, 2002).

Results
The effects of shift are plotted in Figure 2, aligned by actual, post-shift landing position. There is an effect of shift
on gaze duration: gaze durations are estimated to be significantly faster (−19 ms, t = −3.1) when the eyes would originally have landed further into the word (i.e., after a rightward
shift). Refixations are estimated to be 0.2 logits less likely
after a rightward shift, but this is not significant (z = −1.1).
In analyses including launch site as a control predictor, the
effect of shift on gaze durations was reduced to an insignifi-

Methods
Experiment 2 was identical to Experiment 1 with two exceptions. First, while 40 subjects were again included in our analysis, 7 were excluded (for reasons explained above). Second,
while sentences remained static, once again, in half of trials,

200

analysis revealed insignificant effects on gaze duration (3 ms,
t = 0.3) and refixation rates (−0.3 logits, z = −1.4). The effect of left shifts controlling for launch site was estimated to
be slightly smaller than when not controlling for launch site
(18 ms, 0.5 logits), but still robust (t = 2.9; z = 4.5).
To gain more power to assess the possible effects of rightward shifts, we performed a further, post-hoc analysis on
the pooled data from for landing positions 1–4 from Experiments 1 and 2. This analysis revealed a significant effect of
rightward shifts for gaze duration (−16 ms, t = −3.2) and
a marginal trend for refixation rate (−0.2 logits, z = −1.8).
An analysis controlling for effects of launch site revealed an
insignificant 6 ms trend on gaze durations (t = −1.0) and a
marginal effect on refixation rates (−0.2 logits, z = −1.8).

Gaze duration

400
cond
350

None
Right

300

Left

250
2

4

6

Landing position

Refixation rate

0.8
0.6

cond

Discussion

None
0.4

This experiment revealed, first, that leftward and rightward
shifts produced opposite patterns of results, contrary to the
predictions of the simple, low-level shift detection account:
gaze duration and refixation rate were lower and higher in the
rightward and leftward shift conditions respectively as compared with the static control condition, although this was only
significant for the leftward shift condition. Because both the
cognitive and the oculomotor accounts predicted this pattern
of data, we also analyzed the data when controlling for launch
site, a factor that should, according to the oculomotor view,
entirely account for these results. These analyses revealed results more consistent with the cognitive account than the oculomotor account. In the leftward shift condition, gaze duration and refixation rate were significantly elevated even when
controlling for launch site. For rightward shifts, pooling data
across the two experiments also provided suggestive evidence
in favor of the cognitive account of saccade targeting, suggesting that the effect was not entirely driven by launch site.

Right
Left

0.2
0.0
2

4

6

Landing position

Figure 3: Effect of shift on gaze duration and refixation rates
by actual (post-shift) landing site for Experiment 2. Error bars
show the standard error of the mean, computed after aggregation by subjects. Note that effects mediated by launch site
have not been parceled out of this figure.

they shifted 3 characters to the right in one quarter of trials
and shifted 3 characters to the left in the remaining quarter.
An example is given in Figure 1.
Analysis Analysis was similar to that in Experiment 1 except that we now separately analyze the effect of left and right
shift, comparing each to the no shift condition. Because we
again exclude cases in which the eyes would have skipped
the target or were ‘thrown off’ the target by the shift, this
means that the data from the right shift condition are at actual
landing sites 1–4 and the data from the left shift condition are
at actual landing sites 4–7. We thus analyzed data from only
these landing site ranges in each analysis.

Conclusion
In summary, we described two alternative accounts of how
readers decide where, precisely, to aim their eyes when planning a saccade to an upcoming word. According to the cognitive account, readers send their eyes further into a word after
having parafoveally processed it more. According to the oculomotor account, readers always target the center of a word,
but are subject to systematic error, which is a function of
launch site. We presented evidence in favor of the cognitive
account from two sentence-shift experiments. As predicted by
the cognitive account, the word processing measures of gaze
duration and refixation rate suggested that readers perform
less subsequent processing of a word when they would have
landed further into it, and more subsequent processing of a
word when they would have landed further back, controlling
for actual landing site. This was a significant effect for rightward shifts in Experiment 1 and for leftward shifts in Experiment 2. Crucially, we found evidence that this effect was not
fully mediated by launch site, as required by the oculomotor account. When controlling for launch site, in Experiment
2, the effect of leftward shifts was fully reliable, and when

Results
The effects of shift are plotted in Figure 3, aligned by actual,
post-shift landing position. For right shifts, the effect on gaze
durations and refixation rates is again estimated to be in the
predicted direction (−7 ms, −0.3 logits), but neither effect is
significant (t = −0.7; z = −1.5). For left shifts, the effects are
in the opposite direction, and are larger (20 ms, 0.6 logits)
and significant (t = 3.7; z = 6.1).
As before, we also performed analyses in which launch
site is a control predictor, to determine whether these effects
are exclusively mediated by launch site. For right shifts, this

201

pooling data across Experiments 1 and 2, the effect of rightward shifts was marginal for refixation rate. This evidence
thus suggests that readers decide where to target their eyes
within a word based on how much processing of the word
they have accomplished, and not just based on the current position of their eyes. Such an account requires that the details
of saccade targeting are sensitive to ongoing cognitive, linguistic processing.
There is, however, one way in which the oculomotor account may still be able to accommodate these findings. As
was pointed out above (see Expt. 1, Analysis), some trials included in our analysis may represent unintentional fixations
on the target word: failed attempts (a) to refixate the pretarget
word and (b) to skip the target word. If these trials represent a
substantial portion of our data, the oculomotor account could
also predict our findings, since (a) failed refixations would
tend to land at the beginning of the target word and represent
cases in which the target word was not yet the focus of processing and (b) failed skips would tend to land at the end of
the target word and represent cases in which the target word
was already processed. Further analyses will be required to
determine whether the likely rates of such possibilities would
be sufficient to render this account of our data plausible.
The data are certainly consistent, however, with the view
that character-level saccade targeting is under cognitive control. Specifically, these results are predicted by an account in
which readers send their eyes further into a word when they
have obtained more parafoveal preview of it. Since this effect is not mediated by launch site, this means that where a
reader’s eyes land in a word provides information about how
much they processed the word on that particular trial, which
is not only a function of the location of their eyes on the previous fixation. If this account is correct, it would support the
notion that fine-grained eye movements decisions in reading
are tightly linked to the details of ongoing linguistic processing, suggesting that readers do not merely rely on heuristic
strategies to guide their eyes. More generally, our results support a view in which humans optimize the fine details of their
behavior to maximize their efficiency in linguistic tasks such
as reading (Bicknell & Levy, 2010; Lewis, Shvartsman, &
Singh, in press) and in cognition more broadly.

(Eds.), Proceedings of the 48th annual meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (ACL) (pp. 1168–1178). Uppsala,
Sweden: Association for Computational Linguistics.
Drieghe, D., Brysbaert, M., Desmet, T., & De Baecke, C. (2004).
Word skipping in reading: On the interplay of linguistic and visual
factors. European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 16, 79–103.
Engbert, R., Nuthmann, A., Richter, E. M., & Kliegl, R. (2005).
SWIFT: A dynamical model of saccade generation during reading. Psychological Review, 112, 777–813.
Feng, G. (2009a). Mixed responses: Why readers spend less time
at unfavorable landing positions. Journal of Eye Movement Research, 3, 1–26.
Feng, G. (2009b). Time course and hazard function: A distributional
analysis of fixation duration in reading. Journal of Eye Movement
Research, 3, 1–23.
Inhoff, A. W., Weger, U. W., & Radach, R. (2005). Sources of information for the programming of short- and long-range regressions
during reading. In G. Underwood (Ed.), Cognitive processes in
eye guidance (pp. 33–52). New York: Oxford University Press.
Kapoula, Z. (1985). Evidence for a range effect in the saccadic
system. Vision Research, 25, 1155–1157.
Lewis, R. L., Shvartsman, M., & Singh, S. (in press). The adaptive nature of eye-movements in linguistic tasks: How payoff and
architecture shape speed-accuracy tradeoffs. Topics in Cognitive
Science.
McConkie, G. W., Kerr, P. W., Reddix, M. D., & Zola, D. (1988).
Eye movement control during reading: I. the location of initial
eye fixations on words. Vision Research, 28, 1107–1118.
McConkie, G. W., Kerr, P. W., Reddix, M. D., Zola, D., & Jacobs,
A. M. (1989). Eye movement control during reading: II. frequency of refixating a word. Perception & Psychophysics, 46,
245–253.
McConkie, G. W., Zola, D., & Wolverton, G. S. (1980). How precise
is eye guidance in reading? Paper presented at the 1980 meeting
of the American Educational Research Association, Boston, MA.
Nuthmann, A. (2006). The “where” and “when” of eye fixations in
reading. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Potsdam.
O’Regan, J. K. (1981). The “convenient viewing position” hypothesis. In D. F. Fisher, R. A. Monty, & J. W. Senders (Eds.), Eye
movements: cognition and visual perception (pp. 289–298). Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Pinheiro, J. C., & Bates, D. M. (2000). Mixed effects models in S
and S-Plus. New York: Springer Verlag.
Poulton, E. C. (1981). Human manual control. In Handbook of
physiology (Vol. II, pp. 1337–1389). Bethseda, MD: American
Physiology Society.
Rayner, K. (1975). The perceptual span and peripheral cues in reading. Cognitive Psychology, 7, 65–81.
Rayner, K. (1979). Eye guidance in reading: fixation locations
within words. Perception, 8, 21–30.
Rayner, K., McConkie, G. W., & Zola, D. (1980). Integrating information across eye movements. Cognitive Psychology, 12, 206–
226.
Rayner, K., Sereno, S. C., & Raney, G. E. (1996). Eye movement
control in reading: a comparison of two types of models. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 22, 1188–1200.
Rayner, K., Slowiaczek, M. L., Clifton, C., Jr., & Bertera, J. H.
(1983). Latency of sequential eye movements: Implications for
reading. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 9, 912–922.
Rayner, K., Well, A. D., Pollatsek, A., & Bertera, J. H. (1982).
The availability of useful information to the right of fixation in
reading. Perception & Psychophysics, 31, 537–550.
Reichle, E. D., Pollatsek, A., Fisher, D. L., & Rayner, K. (1998). Toward a model of eye movement control in reading. Psychological
Review, 105, 125–157.
Staub, A. (2011). The effect of lexical predictability on distributions
of eye fixation durations. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 18,
371–376.
Staub, A., White, S. J., Drieghe, D., Hollway, E. C., & Rayner, K.
(2010). Distributional effects of word frequency on eye fixation
durations. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 36, 1280–1293.
Underwood, N. R., & McConkie, G. W. (1985). Perceptual span for
letter distinctions during reading. Reading Research Quarterly,
20, 153–162.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by NIH grant T32-DC000041
from the Center for Research in Language at UC San Diego
to K.B., NSF grant 0953870 to R.L., and NIH grant R01HD065829 to R.L. and K.R. We thank Araceli Cervantes,
Georgina Chen, Tiffany Lai, Hannah Johansen, and Vinny Uy
for assistance with data collection and stimuli development.

References
Agresti, A. (2002). Categorical data analysis (Second ed.). New
York, NY: John Wiley & Sons.
Baayen, R., Davidson, D., & Bates, D. (2008). Mixed-effects modeling with crossed random effects for subjects and items. Journal
of Memory and Language, 59, 390–412.
Bicknell, K., & Levy, R. (2010). A rational model of eye movement
control in reading. In J. Hajič, S. Carberry, S. Clark, & J. Nivre

202

