UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Experimental insights on the origin of combinatoriality

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/72t1507c

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Roberts, Gareth
Galantucci, Bruno

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Experimental insights on the origin of combinatoriality
Gareth Roberts (gareth.roberts@yu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Yeshiva University
2495 Amsterdam Avenue
New York NY 10033 USA

Bruno Galantucci (bruno.galantucci@yu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Yeshiva University
2495 Amsterdam Avenue
New York NY 10033 USA
Abstract
Combinatoriality—the recombination of a small set of basic
forms to create an infinite number of meaningful units—has
long been seen as a core design feature of language, but its origins remain uncertain. Two hypotheses have been suggested.
The first is that combinatoriality is a necessary solution to the
problem of conveying a large number of meanings; the second is that it arises as a consequence of conventionalisation.
We tested these hypotheses in an experimental-semiotics study.
Our results supported the hypothesis based on conventionalisation but offered little support for the hypothesis based on the
number of meanings.
Keywords: Experimental semiotics; Human communication;
Language.

In the vast majority of languages, a small set of basic meaningless forms (typically phonemes) are recombined to create an infinite number of meaningful units (typically morphemes). This property, which we shall refer to as combinatoriality, has been identified as a core design feature of language (Abler, 1989; Hockett, 1960; Hurford, 2002; Jackendoff, 1999; Martinet, 1960; Studdert-Kennedy & Goldstein,
2003). Its origins, however, are unclear.

Explaining combinatoriality
Set-size
Any communication system must employ a set of signs: mappings between signals (such as vocalisations or manual gestures) and referents (the things in the world to which the signals refer). A long-standing explanation for combinatoriality
concerns the size of this set. If the signals in the set are distinguished on the basis of analogue contrasts, it will become
harder to distinguish them as the set increases in size; restructuring the system in terms of discrete forms is an efficient solution to this problem (Hockett, 1960; Nowak, Krakauer, &
Dress, 1999; Studdert-Kennedy, 2000). If this is the case,
we should expect combinatoriality to increase as set-size increases.

Mimesis and transparency
Recent research on Al-Sayyid Bedouin Sign Language
(ABSL) raises a problem for explanations of combinatoriality based on set-size. ABSL is a fully fledged language,
which does not differ substantially from other languages in
terms of set-size, but which exhibits very little combinatoriality (Sandler, Aronoff, Meir, & Padden, 2011). Furthermore,

while other known sign languages do exhibit combinatoriality, they tend to employ sets of basic forms that are an order
of magnitude larger than those employed in spoken languages
(Liddell & Johnson, 1989).
Another difference between spoken and signed languages
is the degree to which they afford mimesis—that is, the degree to which signals are intuitively motivated by what they
refer to. In sign language mimesis is both richer and much
more frequent than in speech (Fusellier-Souza, 2006; Perniss,
Thompson, & Vigliocco, 2010; Meier, 2002; Taub, 2001).
Sandler et al. (2011) suggested that the beginnings of combinatorial structure in ABSL may be explained by conventionalisation, whereby the signals becomes less transparently
mimetic. The ABSL sign for LEMON involves a transparently
mimetic signal, in which the signer mimes the act of squeezing a lemon. Since there is more than one way to squeeze a
lemon, the form of the signal varies among signers (Sandler et
al., 2011, p. 519), but this does not hinder communication so
long as the signal remains transparently mimetic. If this transparency is lost, however, the form of the sign can no longer
vary to the same extent, but also no longer needs to be constrained by the referent. It is then more efficient to structure
signals according to basic sensory-motor constraints, which
are best satisfied by a small set of forms (Studdert-Kennedy
& Goldstein, 2003).

Two pathways
It should be noted that the two explanations for the emergence of combinatoriality illustrated above are not mutually
exclusive. It is possible that the emergence of combinatoriality is related to both set-size and transparency and that
there is a complex relationship between the three. Since
signs are easier to establish if there is greater opportunity
for grounding them in something familiar (Galantucci, 2005;
Scott-Phillips, Kirby, & Ritchie, 2009), and transparent signs
are by definition grounded, greater transparency should allow
rapid growth in set-size, which—as suggested above—may in
turn encourage greater combinatoriality. On the other hand,
Sandler et al. (2011) explain combinatoriality as a response
to low transparency. In other words, there is reason to expect both low transparency and high transparency to lead ultimately to combinatoriality, albeit by different routes. This
may go some way to explaining the ubiquity of combinato-

3299

rial structure in the world’s languages. Moreover, given that
the route from high transparency to combinatoriality is more
indirect, it seems likely that combinatoriality takes longer to
arise in systems that afford highly transparent signs. This may
explain why ABSL still exhibits so little combinatoriality.

Investigating combinatoriality in the laboratory
It is very rare for linguists to have the opportunity to observe
and record a new language in its early stages, making such insights as Sandler et al.’s on the origin of combinatoriality very
hard to come by. Moreover, new languages tend to emerge in
unusual cultural settings, making generalisation difficult. An
alternative approach, which has been referred to as Experimental Semiotics, is to study the emergence of novel communication systems under laboratory conditions (Galantucci,
Garrod, & Roberts, 2012). Del Giudice (2012) and Verhoef
(2012), for example, examined the emergence of combinatoriality in sign systems in diffusion chains, but without any
pressure to communicate. Here we present data from a laboratory study in which combinatoriality emerged in sign systems used by pairs of participants to communicate with each
other.

Figure 1: Screenshot from early stage of game. The screen on
the left was the Sender’s screen; the screen on the right was
the Receiver’s.

shown which image the receiver had selected. After the feedback phase, the next round began. Players swapped sender
and receiver roles after each round.
The referents were presented as targets in a random order:
Pairs iterated through four referents twice every eight rounds
(in random order). A performance score was kept updated for
each referent, based on the proportion of successful rounds in
the cycle. If a pair had at least 75% success on each of the four
referents, the number of referents in the set was increased to
eight, and the cycle length was increased accordingly to 16
rounds. The referent set and cycle length continued to be
incremented in this way until either players had mastered a
set of 20 referents or two hours of playing had elapsed.

Method
Participants 12 pairs of participants (4 female-female; 4
male-male; 4 mixed) participated in the study for course
credit or monetary compensation.
The game Participants played a cooperative guessing
game, sitting in separate locations with the same set of four
images (henceforth referents) displayed in random locations
in a 5-by-5 grid on a video monitor (see Figure 1). The game
consisted of a series of rounds. In each round, one player
would play as “sender” and the other as “receiver”. The
sender was informed of a target referent and had to convey
this referent to the receiver so that the receiver could select
it on their screen. If the receiver selected the correct target
the round was counted as successful; if not, the round was
counted as unsuccessful. Since the players played in separate locations over the internet, they could not speak to each
other directly. Instead, the sender could communicate with
the receiver exclusively through the use of a digitising pad
and a magnetic stylus. The tracings that the sender made on
this pad were transformed into on-screen signals in a systematic way: While the horizontal component of the tracings determined the horizontal component of the signal seen on the
screen, the vertical component of the tracing was ignored and
replaced by a simple downward movement at a constant rate
(Figure 2a). The resulting signals were relayed to the screens
of both players in real time. Players could not use this pad as
an effective drawing or writing device (Figure 2b), even after
prolonged practice, and to succeed at the task pairs of players
had to cooperatively develop novel forms of communication
(Galantucci, 2005).To help them in this, both players received
feedback after each selection. Specifically, the receiver was
shown what the target image had been and the sender was

(a)

(b)

Figure 2: (a) How the drawings players produced on the digitising pad appeared on screen. (b) How common graphic symbols drawn on the digitising pad appeared on the screen
Referents The referents used were black silhouettes of animals (see Figure 3). These silhouettes afforded the opportunity to develop signals with some degree of transparency, in
which, for example, features of the silhouette (e.g. the trunk
of the elephant) could be represented by a feature of the signal (e.g. a long curved line). However, the way in which their
tracings were transformed did not allow players to reproduce
the animal silhouettes or even to create simple drawings. In
terms of the hypotheses described above, in other words, it
was biased towards relatively low-transparency signals.

3300

Figure 3: Referents used in the game. The top row shows the
referents that were visible to players at the start of the game.

Results
Measures
All of the events in the game were recorded and three measures were derived from this data set: Set-size, Transparency,
and Combinatoriality.
Set-size Following the experiment, a sign-set was constructed for each player. This consisted of every referent on
which the dyad had reached at least 75% success, paired with
the last successful signal the player in question had used to
communicate it. The Set-size for a pair was computed as the
mean of the Set-sizes for the two players in the pair. The
mean Set-size for the 12 pairs was 14.67 (SD = 3.75); the
smallest sign-set contained six signs, and the largest contained 20.
Transparency The more transparent the relationship between a signal and a referent, the easier it should be for an independent judge to match them up. Four judges, who had no
previous familiarity with the signs or with the purpose of the
study, matched signals with referents. This was done as follows. First, the judges gained an understanding of the game
by playing a few rounds themselves (as both sender and receiver, with pictures of faces as referents). Then they were
shown a display containing one player’s signals (as playable
videos) along with the referents they referred to. Their task
was to match the former with the latter. To give them as much
opportunity as possible to detect relationships between signals and referents, judges were permitted to take as long as
they liked and to change their minds as often as they liked.
Once they had finished, another player’s sign-set would appear. (The order in which the sign-sets appeared was randomised.) Each judge evaluated one sign-set from every pair
of players (12 sets in total) and every sign-set was shown to
two judges. The number of correct matches made by each
judge for each player’s sign-set provided an indication of the
set’s Transparency to that judge. This was converted to a zscore by subtracting the mean number of correct matches we

Figure 4: Correlations between: a) Transparency (T) and
Set-size (S); b) Combinatoriality (C) and Set-size; c) Transparency and Combinatoriality; d) Transparency and Combinatoriality, with Set-size partialled out.
would expect, for that size of set, by chance and dividing the
result by the standard deviation of that mean. Since every
player sign-set was rated by two judges, the mean of the zscores for the two judges was taken as the Transparency index for the set in question. Finally, the Transparency for a
pair sign-set was computed as the mean of the Transparency
for the two players in the pair. The overall mean Transparency
for the 12 pairs was .73 (SD = .76), ranging from −.25 to 2.5.
Combinatoriality Combinatoriality was measured using a
slightly modified version of the Form Recombination Index
used by Galantucci, Kroos, and Rhodes (2010). This measure breaks a sign into forms (parts of a sign divided by empty
space). Forms within the sign are then compared with each
other to remove duplicates, and the remaining forms are compared with all other forms in the system. The number of
matches among these forms is then divided by the total number of comparisons to produce an index ranging from 0 to 1
(where 0 corresponds to a complete absence of Combinatoriality and 1 corresponds to maximal Combinatoriality). A
system in which a small number of unique forms are reused
many times will have higher Combinatoriality than a system
in which a large number of forms are reused little. The mean
Combinatoriality for the 12 pairs was .06 (SD = .04), ranging
from .01 to .17.
Correlations As can be seen in Figure 4, there was a strong
positive correlation between Set-size and Transparency, r(10)
= .65, p = .02, a weak positive correlation between Set-

3301

size and Combinatoriality, r(10) = .33, p = .3, and a negative correlation between Transparency and Combinatoriality, r(10) = −.26, p = .42. The strong correlation between
Set-size and Transparency supports the hypothesis suggested
above that more transparent signs are easier to ground, leading sign systems to grow faster. The presence of this correlation, however, poses a problem for interpreting the correlation between Transparency and Combinatoriality. That is, the
positive correlation between Set-size and Combinatoriality
interferes—via the positive correlation between Set-size and
Transparency—with the negative correlation between Transparency and Combinatoriality. We therefore partialed out Setsize from the latter, and this revealed a much stronger correlation, r(9) = −.65, p = .01. This result is consistent with the hypothesis that Combinatoriality emerges as a response to low
Transparency. The general pattern of results is also consistent
with the hypothesis that high Transparency leads to Combinatoriality via Set-size, but the correlation between Set-size
and Combinatoriality is too weak to say anything conclusive
in this regard.

Conclusion
Theoretical work and research on ABSL suggest two hypotheses to explain the emergence of combinatoriality. The
first is that it arises as a solution to the problem of conveying a large number of meanings (Hockett, 1960; Nowak et
al., 1999; Studdert-Kennedy, 2000). The second is that it
arises as a consequence of conventionalisation, as mimetic
signs lose transparency (Sandler et al., 2011). As in other
experimental-semiotic studies (Galantucci et al., 2010; Del
Giudice, 2012) our analysis of laboratory data did not lend
much support to the first hypothesis (although, as suggested
by Galantucci et al., 2010, it is possible that set-size exercises an effect on combinatoriality only after some threshold
is reached). Our analysis lends the most support to the second hypothesis: Combinatoriality arises when signals lose—
or never possess—a mimetic link with their referents.

References
Abler, W. L. (1989). On the particulate principle of selfdiversifying systems. Journal of Social and Biological
Structures, 12(1), 1–13.
Del Giudice, A. (2012). The emergence of duality of patterning through iterated learning: Precursors to phonology in a
visual lexicon. Language and Cognition, 4(4), 381–418.
Fusellier-Souza, I. (2006). Emergence and development of
signed languages: From a semiogenetic point of view. Sign
Language Studies, 7(1), 30–56.
Galantucci, B. (2005). An experimental study of the emergence of human communication systems. Cognitive Science, 29(5), 737–67.
Galantucci, B., Garrod, S., & Roberts, G. (2012). Experimental Semiotics. Language and Linguistics Compass.
Galantucci, B., Kroos, C., & Rhodes, T. (2010). The effects
of rapidity of fading on communication systems. Interaction Studies, 11(10), 100–111.

Hockett, C. F. (1960). The origin of speech. Scientific American, 203, 88–96.
Hurford, J. R. (2002). The role of expression and representation in language evolution. In A. W (Ed.), The transition to
language (p. 311-334). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Jackendoff, R. (1999). Possible stages in the evolution of
the language capacity. Trends in Cognitive Science, 3(7),
272–279.
Liddell, S. K., & Johnson, R. E. (1989). American sign language: The phonological base. Sign Language Studies, 64,
195–278.
Martinet, A. (1960). Elements of general linguistics.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Meier, R. (2002). Why different, why the same? explaining
effects and non-effects of modality upon linguistic structure in sign and speech. In R. Meier, K. Cormier, &
D. Quinto-Pozos (Eds.), Modality and structure in signed
and spoken languages (pp. 1–25). New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Nowak, M. A., Krakauer, D. C., & Dress, A. (1999). An
error limit for the evolution of language. Proceedings of
the Royal Society of London Series B-Biological Sciences,
266(1433), 2131–2136.
Perniss, P., Thompson, R. L., & Vigliocco, G. (2010). Iconicity as a general property of language: Evidence from spoken and signed languages. Frontiers in Psychology, 1, 1–
15.
Sandler, W., Aronoff, M., Meir, I., & Padden, C. (2011).
The gradual emergence of phonological form in a new language. Natural Language & Linguistic Theory, 29(2), 503–
543.
Scott-Phillips, T. C., Kirby, S., & Ritchie, G. R. S. (2009).
Signalling signalhood and the emergence of communication. Cognition, 113(2), 226–233.
Studdert-Kennedy, M. (2000). Evolutionary implications
of the particulate principle: Imitation and the dissociation
of phonetic form from semantic function. In C. Knight,
M. Studdert-Kennedy, & J. R. Hurford (Eds.), The evolutionary emergence of language (pp. 161–176). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Studdert-Kennedy, M., & Goldstein, L. (2003). Launching language: The gestural origin of discrete infinity. In
S. Kirby & M. H. Christiansen (Eds.), Language evolution
(pp. 235–254). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Taub, S. F. (2001). Language from the body. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Verhoef, T. (2012). The origins of duality of patterning in artificial whistled languages. Language and Cognition, 4(4),
357–380.

3302

