UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Expert marker of Chinese character recognition: Left-side bias versus holistic processing?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6s90624m

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Tso, Ricky Van-yip
Au, Terry Kit-Fong
Hsiao, Janet Hui-wen

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Expert marker of Chinese character recognition:
Left-side bias versus holistic processing?
Ricky Van-yip Tso (rickytso@hku.hk)
Center for Advancement of Chinese Language Education and Research, University of Hong Kong
608, Meng Wah Complex, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong

Terry Kit-fong Au (terryau@hku.hk)
Janet Hui-wen Hsiao (jhsiao@hku.hk)
Department of Psychology, University of Hong Kong
627 Jockey Club Tower, Centennial Campus, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong SAR
Abstract
Holistic processing and left-side bias are both behavioral markers of
expert face recognition. In contrast, expertise in Chinese character
recognition involves left-side bias but reduced holistic processing
(Hsiao & Cottrell, 2009). Here we examine whether the reduction in
holistic processing associated with expert Chinese character
recognition can be better explained by writing rather than reading
experience. Compared with non-Chinese readers (novices), Chinese
readers who had limited writing experience (Limited-writers)
showed increased holistic processing, whereas Chinese readers who
could also write characters fluently (Writers) showed reduced
holistic processing. These results suggest that writing/sensorimotor
experience can modulate holistic processing effects, and that the
reduced holistic processing observed in expert Chinese readers may
depend on writing rather than reading experience. By contrast, both
Writers and Limited-writers showed a similar level of left-side bias
in processing symmetric Chinese characters, left-side bias may
therefore be a consistent expertise marker for object recognition
uninfluenced by motor experience.
Keywords: Chinese character recognition, holistic processing,
reading, writing, left-side bias

Introduction
Holistic processing (HP) is the tendency to process
separate features of an object as a single whole unit (Richler,
Wong, & Gauthier, 2011), and it is shown to be a behavioral
marker of face recognition expertise. Some have speculated
that HP applies to other types of expert-level object
recognition because it facilitates within-category
discrimination by incorporating featural and configural
information beyond individual parts (e.g., Bukach et al.,
2006; but for a contrasting view, see McKone et al., 2007).
For example, training participants to recognize novel
artificial objects, Gauthier and colleagues (1998) found a
positive correlation between HP and expertise in
within-category object recognition. Wong and colleagues
(2009) also showed that participants had an increase in HP
when trained to individualize an artificial object type.
Left-side bias (LSB) is also consistently reported in face
perception; it refers to the effect that a chimeric face made
from two left half-faces is usually judged more similar to the
original face compared with one made from two right
half-faces from the viewer’s perspective (Brady, Campbell,
& Flaherty, 2005; Fig. 1), perhaps due to right hemisphere
(RH) involvement in face recognition (Burt & Perrett, 1997).

Fig. 1. Examples of chimeric face stimuli. Two left
halves of an original face (middle) were combined to
form the left chimeric face (left), and the two right
halves formed the right chimeric face (right).
Chinese characters, sharing many visual properties with
faces, may induce similar processing effects for expert
readers in face recognition (McCleery et al., 2008). More
specifically, the Chinese writing system is logographic;
Chinese characters have a homogenous, square configuration,
and each character is a grapheme that maps onto a morpheme
(Shu, 2003). Strokes are the basic units of Chinese characters
which combine to form more than 200 basic stroke patterns
in the Chinese writing system (Hsiao & Shillock, 2006);
these stroke patterns in turn form the characters. A typical
literate recognizes 3,000 to 4,000 characters. In addition,
Chinese characters are generally recognized regardless of
variations in font and handwriting style, similar to face
recognition regardless of differences in facial expressions
(Hsiao & Cottrell, 2009), and experts recognize Chinese
characters individually like faces (Wong & Gauthier, 2006).
Indeed, similar to face recognition, Hsiao and Cottrell
(2009) showed that expert Chinese readers demonstrated left
side bias when viewing mirror-symmetric Chinese characters,
whereas novices did not. Their finding suggests that LSB is
an expertise marker for both face and Chinese character
recognition and was consistent with research suggesting a
RH involvement in Chinese orthographic processing (e.g.
Yang & Cheng, 1999). However, unlike face perception, the
expertise marker for Chinese character recognition turned out
to be reduced HP (Hsiao & Cottrell, 2009). Experienced
Chinese readers engage in less HP than novices in perceiving
Chinese characters; perhaps they are more sensitive to the
constituent components of Chinese characters and can more
readily ignore some configural information unimportant for
character recognition, such as exact distances between
features (Ge et al., 2006). Such constituent components may
not look easily separable to novices, probably because
novices are less able to distinguish individual features and

1492

components in Chinese characters (Ho, Ng, & Ng, 2003).
Hsiao and Cottrell (2009) have therefore suggested that HP is
not a general expertise marker for object processing; it
depends on the features of the stimuli and the tasks typically
performed on the stimuli (see also Wong et al., 2009).
Note however that learning to read Chinese characters is
different from learning to recognize faces—for instance,
while a typical Chinese reader can read and write characters
proficiently, one is not expected to draw out all the faces seen
every day. Thus, the reduced HP effect in expert Chinese
character processing, in contrast to expert face processing,
may be related to expert readers’ writing rather than reading
experience. Unlike writing alphabetic words, which only
requires recalling a few dozens of letters in an alphabet
together with the specific combinations corresponding to
their sounds, writing Chinese characters requires retrieving
more than a thousand pieces of script information from long
term memory. One may have to attend analytically to
detailed stroke patterns of individual Chinese characters in
order to memorize and write them. Perhaps expert Chinese
readers in Hsiao and Cottrell’s (2009) study had reduced HP
because of their writing experience. Indeed, Zhou and
colleagues (2012) found that artists with face drawing
experiences had reduced holistic face processing compared
with ordinary observers.
In Hong Kong, although the internal structures of Chinese
characters are not explicitly emphasized in formal lessons,
Chinese children acquire better orthographic awareness as
they progress to higher grades (Ho et al., 2003). One
explanation has to do with motor programming through
extensive copying and reading at school (Tan et al., 2005).
Copying performance (McBride-Chang et al., 2011; Tan, et
al., 2005), and dictation performance (McBride-Chang et al.,
2011) is correlated with reading performance. Writing
performance may predict reading performance because
children may consolidate knowledge of orthographic
structures of characters with graphomotor memory of strokes
as they copy the stroke sequences (Tan et al., 2005).
Learning to write indeed seems to strengthen Chinese
character recognition (Guan et al., 2011); writing experience
also seems to shape the neural representation specialized for
reading (e.g. James & Atwood, 2009; Longcamp et al., 2003).
Together, these results suggest a close relationship between
increasing sensory-motor integration through writing
practice and reading skills development.
However, Tso, Au and Hsiao (2011) identified some
Chinese readers who have high reading proficiency but far
poorer writing ability – whom we will call “Limited-writers
(LW)”. They are usually students or graduates of
international schools who have learned to “write” in Chinese
using computer software that converts input in a phonic
alphabet (e.g., the Pinyin system) into Chinese characters,
expatriates living in Chinese speaking countries, or overseas
Chinese immigrants who learned to read in Chinese from
environmental prints including Chinese mass media. Because
writing in Chinese is more complex and resource-intensive
than writing in an alphabetic language (Chan et al., 2006;

Chung & Ho, 2010), marked discrepancy between reading
and writing performance in Chinese is possible. With limited
writing practice but plenty of reading experience, LW may
recognize the holistic structures of characters similarly to
face recognition, with limited analysis of the constituent
structures. Thus, the cognitive processes involved in Chinese
reading for LW may be different from readers who have
received intensive character writing training (Writers).
Without extensive writing experiences, these LW may still
process Chinese characters holistically.
Here we aim to investigate whether perceptual expertise
effects such as holistic processing (HP) and left-side bias
(LSB) effects can be modulated by motor experience through
examining how novices, Chinese Writers and limited-writers
(LW) process Chinese characters. We first examine whether
Writers perceive characters less holistically than LW, and
whether the reduced HP effect is related to their reading and
writing performance. Since writing practice may enhance
orthographic awareness of characters and de-emphasize
configural information in character recognition, Writers may
perceive characters less holistically than LW, and this effect
may be related to their difference in writing rather than
reading performance – contrary to what the research
literature suggests. The ability to perceive characters
analytically (less holistically) may also be the underlying
mechanism for how writing experience enhances Chinese
character recognition. We also predict that compared to
novices, increase in HP marks expert Chinese character
recognition in LW whereas Writers show reduced HP.
We then examine whether LW and Writers have a similar
LSB effect in Chinese character perception. Brady et al.
(2005) showed that the LSB effect in face perception was
stronger when viewing familiar faces compared with
unfamiliar faces; this phenomenon suggests that the LSB
effect may be related to familiarity with the stimuli. Since
both Writers and LW are proficient readers and thus are
familiar with Chinese characters, we predict that Writers and
LW will have a similar degree of LSB in perceiving Chinese
characters, while no LSB is shown in novices.
Methods
Participants
60 participants in Hong Kong participated in our study. 20
participants reported having no prior experiences in reading
Chinese characters (i.e. novices); the remaining 40 were
Cantonese native-speaking Chinese readers: 20 of them had
always attended traditional local schools and reported to have
fluent reading and writing proficiency (i.e., Writers), while
20 had either studied overseas or at international schools and
had not received formal Chinese lessons that prepared
students for the local public Chinese examinations (i.e.,
Limited-writers, LW). All LW reported being capable of
reading Chinese but with limited writing ability. Writers’ and
LW’s reading and writing abilities were tested by a
word-naming and a dictation task respectively (see
Procedures); their performance was used to corroborate their
self-reports. That is, LW were expected to have similar

1493

performance in the word-naming task as Writers, but have
poorer performance in the dictation task (see Results). They
were all right-handers, had normal or corrected-to-normal
vision and similar college-level education background.
Procedures
Test for holistic processing
We adopted procedures from Hsiao and Cottrell (2009). 80
pairs of medium to high frequency Chinese characters in
Ming font were chosen (character frequency information was
obtained from Ho and Kwan, 2001). In each trial, participants
were presented with two characters and instructed to attend to
only half (either top or bottom) of each character and judge
whether they were the same or different. Twenty pairs were
presented in each of the four conditions (Fig. 2a): same in
congruent trials, different in congruent trials, same in
incongruent trials, and different in incongruent trials. The
complete composite paradigm (Gauthier & Bukach, 2007)
was adopted so that in congruent trials, the attended and
irrelevant halves corresponded to the same response (i.e.,
both were the same or different) while in incongruent trials,
the attended and irrelevant halves corresponded to different
responses. Holistic processing was operationalized as the
performance difference between the congruent and
incongruent trials; it reflected the amount of interference
from the irrelevant parts in the matching of the attended parts.
This paradigm was adopted to avoid response biases that may
occur in the partial composite design in which the irrelevant
halves are always different (see Richler, Cheung, & Gauthier,
2011).

1999). The A' difference between incongruent and congruent
trials (i.e., Holistic A') measures HP—a more positive value
marks a stronger HP effect.
Test for left-side bias
We adopted the procedure from Hsiao and Cottrell (2009). 80
Chinese mirror-symmetric characters of high frequency were
selected (Ho & Kwan, 2001). There were a total of 160 trials
with each character presented twice: once in Ming font (a
common font in print) and once in Feng font (an unfamiliar
font that simulates handwriting; Fig. 3). For characters
presented in each font, mirror images were used in half of the
trials; if a character was presented in Ming font, then the
mirror image of the character was presented in Feng font, and
vice versa; this was to counterbalance any differences
between the two sides of each character. For each character,
we counterbalanced the fonts used for the original and
mirror-image characters across participants.

Fig. 3.An example of a Ming font (a) and a Feng font
(b) character.

Fig. 4. (a) Examples of the stimuli, and (b) the test
sequence in the LSB experiment(note that the
chimeric characters are still legal Chinese characters).

Fig. 2. (a) Illustration of stimulus pairs in the
complete composite paradigm; the attended
components are shaded in red. (b) Trial sequences.
After 1,000 ms of central fixation in each trial, participants
were cued with a symbol that directed their attention to the
particular halves of the stimuli. The pair of characters was
then presented, with one above and one below the initial
fixation point, followed by a mask. During the 500ms
presentation time, participants looked at each character once
and responded as quickly and accurately as possible by
pressing corresponding buttons to judge if the character parts
were the same or different (Fig 2b). We measured
participants’ discrimination sensitivity A' as:
|
|
[
]
H and F are the hit rate and false alarm rate, respectively. A'
is a bias-free nonparametric measure of sensitivity; we did
not use d' because response biases may affect its
measurement when assumptions of normality and
homogeneity of variance are not met(Stanislaw & Todorov,

For each character image, the left chimeric character was
created from two left halves and the right chimeric character
was created from two right halves of the character (Fig. 4a),
similar to chimeric faces. Each character spanned about 6.7
degree of visual angle with a viewing distance of 55 cm. In
each trial, after 1,000 ms of a central fixation, the original
character was presented randomly either on the left or right
side of the screen, at about 7.2 degree of visual angle away
from the center. The left and right chimeric characters were
presented along with the original image, with one above and
one below an arrow at the center; the arrow directed the
location of the original character at which participants were
told to look first. Each character was about 3 degree of visual
angle away from the center. The stimuli stayed on the screen
until participants’ response. Participants judged which of the
two chimeric characters looked more similar to the original
one by pressing the corresponding buttons (Fig. 4b). We
measured the LSB effect as the percentage of trials in which
the left chimeric character was selected.
Tests for reading and writing performance:
Naming and dictation tasks were administered to assess,
respectively, reading and word recalling/writing abilities.

1494

Naming task: Participants read aloud 40 two-character
words arranged from high to low frequency (According to
Taiwan Ministry of Education, 1997) as quickly and
accurately as possible. Each trial started with a central
fixation cross for 500ms, followed by the character
presentation. After the response, the screen turned blank and
the experimenter pressed a button to record the accuracy and
to start the next trial. The response time was measured as the
time difference between the stimulus onset and the onset of
the pronunciation, detected by a microphone.
Dictation task: Participants wrote down 40 two-character
words (same words as in the naming task) as quickly and as
accurately as possible when they heard each word said in a
female voice presented by a computer. Two-character words
were used instead of characters to reduce ambiguity due to
the many homophonic characters in the Chinese lexicon.
Each trial started with the words “Get ready” on the screen
for 500 ms. After hearing the word, participants pressed
buttons to indicate whether they could recall the word or not,
before they started writing. After they finished writing, the
experimenter pressed a button to indicate accuracy and to
reveal the next word. Accuracy was recorded.
These experiments were all conducted using E-prime v2.0
(Psychology Software Tools, Pittsburgh, PA).

p < .001, while both Writers and novices recorded similar
response times in congruent (M = 476ms and M = 569ms
respectively) and incongruent trials ( M = 488ms and M =
611ms respectively), ts(19) = 0.894, n.s.
These results reveal an inverted U-shape pattern in which
Writers perceived Chinese characters less holistically than
LW, while novices perceived Chinese characters more
holistically than Writers1 but less holistically than LW.

Fig.5. (a) Accuracy rate of Limited-writers and
Writers for the dictation and word naming task (***p
< .001). (b) A’ of Limited-writers and Writers in
congruent and incongruent trials of the holistic
processing task (**p < .01).

Results
Chinese reading and writing proficiency (Writers vs. LW)
ANOVA revealed that Writers and LW did not differ in word
naming accuracy, F(1,38) = .471, n.s., suggesting that both
groups had high reading proficiency for words. Nevertheless,
Writers had significantly shorter response times (RT) in word
naming than LW, F(1,38) = 12.365, p < .01. In the dictation
task, Writers were significantly more accurate than LW, F(1,
38) = 140.53, p < .001. Fig. 5a contrasts the discrepancy
between dictation (word writing) and word naming accuracy
in Writers and LW (i.e., they had similar word reading
accuracy but differed in dictation/writing accuracy).
Holistic Processing
Repeated-measures ANOVA was used to investigate HP
effects (congruency: congruent vs. incongruent x group:
novices vs. LW vs. Writers). On A', we found a main effect of
congruency, F(1,57) = 21.83, p < .001, and an interaction
between congruency and group, F(2,57) = 5.421, p < .01, but
no main effect of group, F(2,57) = .433, n.s. Both novices
and LW had a significantly smaller A' in incongruent trials
than in congruent trials (t(19) = 3.592, p < .01, and t(19) =
5.001, p < .001, respectively), while this difference was not
significant for Writers, t(19) = 0.390, n.s. In a post-hoc
analysis, novices had a larger Holistic A' than Writers, t(38) =
2.160, p < .05, but a marginally small Holistic A' than LW,
t(38) = 1.58, p = 0.089. LW had a larger Holistic A' than
Writers t(38) = 2.832, p < .01 (Fig. 5b). For RT, we found a
main effect of congruency, F(1, 57) = 13.05, p < .01, and an
interaction between congruency and group, F(2, 57) = 4.18, p
< .05, but no main effect of group, F(1, 57) = 2.26, n.s. LW
responded significantly more slowly in incongruent trials (M
= 592ms) than in congruent trials (M = 499ms), t(19) = 5.489,

Left-side bias
We found that both Writers and LW had a stronger LSB
effect in Ming font than in Feng font (t(19) = 2.111, p < .05:
and t(19) = 2.778, p < .05, respectively), while this font effect
in novices was not significant (t(19) = .693, n.s.). There was a
significant LSB effect in Ming font in both Writers, t(19) =
2.378, p < .05, and LW, t(19) = 2.271, p < .05, whereas no
significant LSB was found in Feng font in either Writers or
LW. Novices neither showed LSB in Ming font nor Feng font
(Fig 7).When we compared Writers with LW, there was no
group or font effect, nor interaction between group and font;
this showed that both Writers and LW had a similar degree of
LSB in perceiving Chinese characters in either font. On the
other hand, when we compared novices with either Writers or
LW, novices had a smaller LSB in Ming font than Writers,
t(38) = 2.394, p = .022 and LW, t(38) = 2.396, p = .022.
These results suggested that expert readers exhibited LSB for
Chinese characters only in a familiar font (Ming) but not in
1
To examine whether their difference in holistic processing was
due to their difference in writing or reading abilities, we analyzed
Holistic A' with their reading and writing performance measures put
as covariates (ANCOVA). The difference in holistic processing
between Writers and Limited Writers was still significant even
when word naming accuracy, F(1, 38) = 9.744, p< .01, or word
naming response time, F(1, 38) = 7.916, p< .01, was used as a
covariate. However, when dictation accuracy was used as a
covariate, the effect became insignificant, F(1, 38) = 2.235., n.s.
These results suggest that the difference in holistic processing
between Writers and Limited-writers was largely due to their
writing performance, as reflected in the dictation task (i.e., the
ability to recall and write down words). We also put all the reading
variables simultaneously as covariates and the group difference of
HP was still significant, F(1, 38) = 5.365, p< .05. Similar effects
were obtained using RT.

1495

an unfamiliar font (Feng), and LSB is a consistent expertise
marker for Chinese character recognition unaffected by
writing experience.

Fig. 6. Preference for left chimeric characters in
Novices, Writers and Limited-writers in Ming and
Feng fonts (*p < .05).
Discussion
Here we investigated how different learning experience
modulates perceptual expertise effects, including HP and left
side bias, through examining whether the following groups
differ in how they process Chinese characters: Chinese
Writers, who read and write Chinese proficiently; LW, who
had similar Chinese reading proficiency as Writers (as
measured by word naming accuracy) but much poorer
writing performance than Writers (as measured by word
dictation accuracy); and novices of Chinese characters.
Compared with novices, LW processed Chinese characters
more holistically, whereas Writers processed Chinese
character less holistically. This U-shape pattern suggests that
the reduced HP observed in expert Chinese readers (i.e.,
Hsiao & Cottrell, 2009) may be related to writing rather than
reading performance, or more specifically, the ability to
recall and write Chinese characters. These results are
consistent with Zhou et al.’s (2012) findings that artists with
face drawing experiences had reduced holistic face
processing compared with ordinary observers. These effects
suggest a close relationship between writing/motor
experience and reduced HP in the recognition of Chinese
characters/faces/visual stimuli. LW perceived Chinese
characters more holistically than novices, consistent with the
expertise hypothesis. It seems that HP is still an expertise
marker for Chinese character recognition for experts with
little or no writing experiences with Chinese characters.
Consistent with previous evidence for sensorimotor learning
influencing perception (James & Atwood, 2009; Longcamp,
et al., 2003), here we showed how writing experiences could
be associated with reduced HP in Chinese character
recognition. Note however that LW had slower naming time
for Chinese words compared with Writers; thus, they were
not as expert at reading Chinese as Writers, given that
naming RT has been frequently used as a measure of
perceptual expertise (e.g., Tanaka, Curran, & Sheinberg,
2005). A larger HP observed in LW may indicate an
intermediate perceptual change from novices to
high-performing experts in Chinese character recognition.
Future work will further examine the relationship between
HP and writing/motor experience by training novices to

recognize Chinese characters/visual stimuli under different
instruction conditions and observe their changes in HP.
Our study also showed that both Writers and LW had a
significant left side bias effect in perceiving characters in
Ming font (a familiar font) but not those in Feng font (an
unfamiliar font); while novices showed no LSB effects. The
LSB in Chinese character perception seems to depend on font
familiarity. Since both Writers and LW exhibited a similar
degree of LSB, writing/motor experience does not seem to
modulate the LSB effect. The font familiarity effect is
consistent with Brady et al.’s (2005) finding that people
showed stronger perceptual asymmetries for familiar faces
than for unfamiliar faces; however, their participants showed
LSB even in the perception of unfamiliar faces, whereas in
our study, the participants did not have significant LSB in an
unfamiliar font. This may be due to processing differences
between face and Chinese character recognition. In particular,
configural information, i.e., distances between parts have
been shown to be important in face recognition (Farah et al.,
1998) but not in Chinese character recognition, since changes
in distance among character components do not change the
character identity (e.g., Ge et al., 2006). Recent literature has
also suggested a link between configural processing and RH
lateralization (see Hsiao & Cheung, 2011). Thus, face
recognition may involve more RH processing than Chinese
character recognition, and this involvement of RH configural
processing may be transferable to the processing of
unfamiliar faces/novel exemplars of a category. In contrast,
the LSB/RH lateralization of Chinese character processing
may be specific to familiar stimuli; this effect is consistent
with the literature showing that the left visual field/RH
advantage in tachistoscopic Chinese character identification
was only found in real characters, but not in non-existing
characters such as pseudo- or non-characters (Cheng & Yang,
1989). This difference between face and Chinese character
recognition also suggests that the RH lateralization in face
and Chinese character processing may involve different
cognitive processes (Hsiao & Cheung, 2011).
In conclusion, our study is the first to report on the
community of proficient Chinese readers with limited writing
ability and to suggest a close relationship between writing
experience – rather than reading experience as suggested by
prior research – and reduced HP in Chinese character
recognition. We uncovered an inverted U-shape pattern:
compared with novices, increased HP marked the expertise in
LW, while reduced HP marked a higher level of expertise in
Writers. In contrast, the LSB effect of Chinese characters
depended on font familiarity and is uninfluenced by writing
experiences. Our results offer a window on HP and LSB in
relation to expertise of complex object recognition by
showing that HP can be modulated by both visual and motor
experiences, whereas the LSB seems to be a reliable
expertise marker not affected by motor experience.
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to the Research Grant Council of Hong
Kong (project code: HKU 745210H to J.H. Hsiao) and the
HKU Foundation (Seed Grant #10401359 to J.H. Hsiao).

1496

References
Bukach, C.M., Gauthier, I., & Tarr, J.M. (2006). Beyond
faces and modularity: The power of an expertise
framework. T.I.C.S., 10, 156-166.
Brady, N., Campbell, M., & Flaherty, M. (2005). Perceptual
asymmetries are preserved in memory for highly familiar
faces of self and friend. Brain Cognit., 58, 334-342.
Chen, Y.P., Allport, D.A., & Marshall, J.C. (1996). What are
the functional orthographic units in Chinese word
recognition: The stroke or the Stroke pattern? . Q. J. Exp.
Psychol-A, 49, 1024-1043.
Cheng, C.M., & Yang, M.J. (1989). Lateralization in the
visual perception of Chinese characters and words. Brain
Lang., 36, 669-689.
Chung, K.K.H., & Ho, C.S. (2010). Second language
learning difficulties in Chinese children with dyslexia:
What are the reading-related cognitive skills that
contribute to English and Chinese word reading? J. Learn
Disabil., 43(3), 195-211.
Farah, M.J., Wilson, K.D., Drain, H.M., & Tanaka, J.N.
(1998). What is “special” about face perception? Psychol.
Rev., 105, 482–498.
Ge, L., Wang, Z., McGleery, J.P., & Lee, K. (2006).
Activation of face expertise and the inversion effect.
Psychol. Sci., 17, 12-16.
Guan, C.Q., Liu, Y., Chan, D.H.L., Ye, F., & Perfetti, C.A.
(2011). Writing strengthens orthographic and
alphabetic-coding strengthens phonology in learning to
read Chinese. J. Educ. Psychol., 103(3), 509-522.
Gauthier, I., Williams, P., Tarr, M.J., & Tanaka, J. (1998).
Training "Greeble" experts: Aframework for studying
expert object recognition processes. Vision Res., 38,
2401-2428.
He, A.G., Tan, L.H., Tang, Y., James, A., Wright, P., &
Eckert, M. A. (2003). Modulation of neural connectivity
during tongue movement and reading. H.B.M., 18,
222-232.
Ho, C.S., & Kwan, T.W. (2001). Hong Kong, Mainland
China & Taiwan: Chinese character frequency-A
trans-regional, diachronic survey. Retrieved December 30,
2011, from http://arts.cuhk.edu.hk/Lexis/chifreq/
Ho, C.S., Ng, T., & Ng, W. (2003). A radical approach to
reading development in Chinese: The role of semantic
radicals and phonetic radicals. J. Lit. Res., 35, 849-878.
Hsiao, J.H., & Cheung, K.C.F. (2011). Computational
exploration of the relationship between holistic
processing and right hemisphere lateralization in featural
and configural recognition tasks. Proceedings of the 33rd
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Hsiao, J.H., & Cottrell, G. (2009). Not all visual expertise in
holistic, but it may be leftist: The case of Chinese
character recognition. Psychol. Sci., 20(4), 455-463.
Hsiao, J.H., & Shillock, R. (2006). Analysis of a Chinese
phonetic compound databse: Implications for
orthographic processing. J. Psycholinguist. Res., 35,
405-426.

James, K.H., & Atwood, T.P. (2009). The role of
sensorimotor learning in the perception of letter-like
forms: Tracking the causes of neural specialization for
letters. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 26, 91-110.
Longcamp, M., Anton, J.L., Roth, M., & Velay, J.L. (2003).
Visual presentation of single letters activates a premotor
area involved in writing. NeuroImage, 19, 1492-1500.
McBride-Chang, C., Chung, K.K.H., & Tong, X. (2011).
Copying skills in relation to word reading and writing in
Chinese children with andwithout dyslexia. J. Exp. Child
Psychol., 110, 422-433.
McCleery, J.P., Zhang, L., Ge, L., Wang, Z., Christiansen, E.
M., Lee, K. (2008). The roles of visual expertise and
visual input in the face inversion effect: Behavioral and
neurocomputational evidence. Vision Res., 48, 703-715.
McKone, E., Kanwisher, N., & Duchaine, B. C. (2007). Can
generic expertise explain special processing for faces?
T.I.C.S., 11, 8-15.
Richler, J. J., Wong, Y. K., & Gauthier, I. (2011). Perceptual
expertise as a shift from strategic interference to
automatic holistic processing. Curr Dir. Psychol. Sci.,
20(2), 129-134.
Shu, H. (2003). Chinese writing system and learning to read.
International Journal of Psychology, 38, 274-285.
Siok, W.T., Perfetti, C.R., Jin, Z., & Tan, L.H. (2004).
Biological abnormality of impaired reading is constrained
by culture. Nature, 431, 71-76.
Stanislaw, H., & Todorov, N. (1999). Calculation of signal
detection theory measures. Behav. Res. Meth. Inst. C., 31,
137-149.
Taiwan Ministry of Education (1997). Report on frequently
used vocabulary in 1997 (in Chinese). Retrieved
December 30, 2010 from
www.edu.tw/files/site_content/M0001/86news/ch2.html
Tan, L.H., Spinks, J.A., Eden, G.F., Perfetti, C.A., & Siok,
W.T. (2005). Reading depends on writing, in Chinese.
PNAS, 102, 8781-8785.
Tanaka, J.W., Curran, T., & Sheinberg, D. (2005). The
training and transfer of real-world, perceptual expertise.
Psychol. Sci., 16(141-151).
Tso, R.V.Y., Au, T.K., & Hsiao, J.H. (2011). The influence
of writing experiences on holistic processing in Chinese
character recognition. Proceedings of the 33rd Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, Boston.
Wong, A.C., & Gauthier, I. (2006). An analysis of letter
expertise in a levels-of-categorization framework. Visual
Cognition, 15, 854-879.
Wong, A.C., Palmeri, T.J., & Gauthier, I. (2009). Conditions
for face-like expertise with objects: Becoming a ziggerin
expert-but which type? Psychol. Sci., 20, 1108-1117.
Zhou, G., Cheng, Z., Zhang, X., Wong, A.C.-N. (2012).
Smaller holistic processing of faces associated with face
drawing experience. Psychon. B. Rev., 19(2), 157-162.
Yang, M.J., & Chen, C.M. (1999).Hemisphere differences in
accessing lexical knowledge of Chinese characters.
Laterality, 4, 149-166.

1497

