UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Experiments in dynamic group action and decision making: How crowds of people can walk
a tightrope together and survive a zombie attack

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6qp777nq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Richardson, Daniel C.
Riefer, Peter
Love, Bradley
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Experiments in dynamic group action and decision making:
How crowds of people can walk a tightrope together and survive a zombie attack
Daniel C. Richardson (dcr@eyethink.org)
Peter Riefer (peter.riefer.11@ucl.ac.uk)
Bradley Love (b.love@ucl.ac.uk)

Cognitive, Perceptual & Brain sciences, University College London
Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, United Kingdom

Beau Lotto (lotto@ucl.ac.uk)
Richard C. Clarke (richard.clarke@ucl.ac.uk)

Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London,
11-43 Bath Street, London EC1V 9EL, United Kingdom

Rick Dale (rdale@ucmerced.edu)

Cognitive & Information Sciences
University of California, Merced, CA 95343, USA

John Rogers (john@delosis.com)
James Ireland (james@delosis.com)

Delosis, 8 Grosvenor Road, Twickenham, Middlesex TW1 4AE, United Kingdom
Keywords: joint action; wisdom of crowds; group behaviour,
situated cognition; decision making; public goods games

Tightrope walking: a cooperative action game

1

0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02

Proportion anticipation responses

0.10

In our first, action-based game participants saw on a
projection screen a picture of a man holding a pole,
balanced on rope (Figure 1). Each participant held a handset
and pressed one of two buttons. A laptop computer collected
the responses and controlled the movements of the tightrope
walker. Each time one of the participants pressed a button, it
sent a small nudge to the tightrope walker, sending him left
or right. A game ended when the tightrope walker fell.
Analysing the time he stayed aloft and tracking individual
responses, we found that on successful games participants
were able to anticipate and compensate for the behaviour of
the group. This conclusion was supported by agent based
simulations. In later conditions we instructed the
participants to vocalise their button presses as they made
them. The evidence is that they made use of this
information, and were better able to predict and compensate
for each others’ actions.

0.00

We present results from a new paradigm: mass participation
games. In our experiments, hundreds of people can play a
computer game simultaneously using audience response
handsets. We can collect responses from a lecture hall full of
people with the precision of a laboratory cubicle. We have
studied two games: continuous, action games where
participants cooperate to achieve a goal; and decisionmaking paradigms in which participants make repeated
choices to maximise their own or the group’s rewards. We
address a range of theoretical questions with experimental
manipulations and computer modelling. Do participants
play as if they were alone, or as a group? If so, do they
represent the group as a single entity, or a collection of other
agents? What are the dynamics of these behaviours, with
learning across many trials? Lastly, what does it feel like to
act in concert, or in competition, with a room full of people?
There is wisdom in a crowd. The averaged response of a
crowd usually betters any of the individual guesses, whether
they are guessing the weight of a cow (Galton, 1907),
predicting the stock market or making bets about
geopolitical events (Surowiecki, 2004). But is the
superiority of crowds restricted to single, static decisions?
There may be wisdom in a crowd but what happens when
they have to act together? What happens when they have to
make decisions - pervasive in society - that trade off their
own interests with those of the group? For these actions and
decisions to be made, how do they learn to predict the
behaviour of the group? We addressed these questions by
developing mass participation games, in which participants
cooperate or compete, maximising their own rewards or
those of the group 1.

5

10

15

20

25

Figure 1. The tightrope walker game, the participants and
the correlation between performance and anticipations

If this paper is presented as a talk at the Cognitive Science conference, then the audience will of course be invited to play these games

1682

30

Trial time (s)

Feedback

We continue to collect data with these paradigms to answer
a range of questions. Does the size of the group influence
the group dynamics? How are participants learning about
each others’ behaviour and shaping their actions? We are
answering these question by manipulating the information
participants have about each other, and by developing
computer models of the process. Lastly, we are interested in
the social phenomenology of group dynamics. What social
forces might shape group cohesion? How does it feel to be
part of a successful, coordinated group? Anecdotal evidence
suggest that there are complex issues at play. During one
zombie game, a small group stood up and shouted,
‘Everyone fight! Stand up if you are fighting!’. But later, in
debriefing, members of the group admitted they were all
choosing to hide and maximise their individual rewards.
Clearly, though the games themselves are simple, more
research is required to understand the choices made when
they are played in the context of mass participation.

fight

58

68
13
20

feedback about switching
absent
present

6

30

hide

Our second mass participation game studied decisionmaking in a public goods game. A contribution tin in an
office kitchen is a public goods game. If everyone
contributes money each week, it will pay for everyone’s
coffee. But a single person could chose not to contribute:
they would get free coffee. If everyone followed this
strategy, then the whole system would collapse and there
would be no coffee. The trade-off between private and
public gain is at the heart of public goods games. They are a
standard tool in economic theories, used as a model for a
huge range of activity from traffic patterns to tax returns.
Most empirical studies of public goods games use a small
number of participants or have a small number of trials. We
believe these miss the essential character of decisions made
outside of the laboratory. People make these choices
continuously throughout their lives, within the context of a
social interaction. To understand how they learn to
anticipate the actions of others, to see how social forces
sway the choice to be selfish or cooperative, we argue it is
vital to study the behaviour of a large group of people,
present in a room together, playing repeated trials over time.
In our Zombie attack game, participants made a binary
choice on each trial (Figure 2). They pressed one button to
hide from the zombies, and another to fight. Rewards for the
individual and the group decreased as more people chose to
hide, but increased as more people chose to fight. Feedback
on groups’ decisions and rewards were shown. In one
condition, they were told how many people had changed
their choice from the previous game. Over the course of 25
games, we found that the switching feedback influenced
strategies: without it, more people chose to fight. Though
fighters always score less than hiders individually, group
scores increased across the no feedback group. This was
because the higher number of fighters increased the scores
of those who chose to hide too. This pattern of results shows
that participants are not just making a rational decision
about the relative rewards, but also making a social decision
that is shaped by the perceived actions of others.

Future Directions

Each Person on the
Battlefield receives:

Each Person in the
Hiding Place receives

proportion choosing

Zombie attack: A public goods game

trial number

Figure 2. The zombie feedback screen, participants
playing the game, and the relationship between feedback on
switching behaviour and group decisions.

Relevant publications of authors
Decision making and modelling
Knox, W.B., Otto, A.R., Stone, P., & Love, B.C. (2012). The
Nature of Belief-Directed Exploratory Choice in Human
Decision-Making. Frontiers in Psychology,2,398.
Otto, A.R., & Love, B.C. (2010). You Don't Want To Know
What You're Missing: When Information about Forgone
Rewards Impedes Dynamic Decision Making. Judgment and
Decision Making, 5, 1-10.
Otto, A.R., Gureckis, T.M., Markman, A.B., & Love, B.C.
(2009). Navigating through Abstract Decision Spaces:
Evaluating the Role of State Generalization in a Dynamic
Decision-Making Task. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 16,
957-963.
Gureckis, T. M., & Love, B. C. (2009). Short Term Gains, Long
Term Pains: Reinforcement Learning in Dynamic
Environments. Cognition, 113, 293-313.
Gureckis, T. M., & Love, B. C. (2009). Learning in Noise:
Dynamic Decision-Making in a Variable Environment.
Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 150, 180-193.
Interpersonal coordination
Richardson, D.C., Dale, R., & Kirkham, N.Z. (2007). The art of
conversation is coordination: Common ground and the
coupling of eye movements during dialogue. Psychological
Science, 18(5), 407-413.
Richardson, D.C., Dale, R., & Tomlinson, J.M. (2009).
Conversation, gaze coordination, and beliefs about visual
context. Cognitive Science, 33(8), 1468-1482.
Richardson, D. C., Street, C. N. H., Tan, J. Y. M., Kirkham, N.
Z., Hoover, M. A., & Ghane Cavanaugh, A. (2012). Joint
perception: gaze and social context. Frontiers in Human
Neuroscience, 6
Dale, R., Kirkham. N.Z., & Richardson D.C. (2011). The
Dynamics of Reference and Shared Visual Attention, Frontiers
in Cognition.
Richardson, D. C., Dale, R., Rogers, J., & Ireland J. (2011). How
do 100 people walk a tightrope together? An experiment in
large scale joint action. In L. Carlson, C. Hölscher, & T.
Shipley (Eds.), Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society, Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society.

1683

