UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Exploring the role of verbal category labels in flexible cognition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1pz3k3n9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Tolins, Jackson
Colunga, Eliana

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Exploring the Role of Verbal Category Labels in Flexible Cognition
Jackson Tolins (jtolins@ucsc.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1156 High St.
Santa Cruz, CA 95064 USA

Eliana Colunga (colunga@psych.colorado.edu)
Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, 345 UCB
Boulder, CO 80309 USA
Abstract
Research under the paradigm of the label feedback hypothesis
has proposed a causal role for verbal labels in the online learning
and processing of categories. Labeled categories are learned faster,
and are subsequently more robust. The present study extends this
research paradigm by considering the relationship between verbal
labels and flexible categorization. Flexibility is a key trait of
human cognition, and flexible categorization is important in a
number of tasks. Participants learned to categorize ‘friendly’ and
‘unfriendly’ aliens either with or without names, followed by a
transfer task. While selective attention to a particular dimension
slowed relearning, no effect of label was found for either category
learning or relearning with one exception; labels facilitated
flexibility when selective attention was not involved in the transfer.
The inability to replicate effects of verbal labels in category
learning using similar methodologies raises interesting theoretical
issues, questioning the extent to which this relationship applies.
Keywords: Categorization; Label Feedback Hypothesis;
Flexible Cognition; Selective Attention

Introduction
Language, along with use in communication, provides a
symbolic system of representation through which a speaker
contemplates the world around them. The emergence of the
capacity for symbolic representation transformed human
cognition (Deacon, 1997; DeLoache, 2004), permitting
abstract thought and making possible cultural transmission
of knowledge. Yet the relationship between language and
other cognitive processes is still controversial. For many
who view language as a distinct mental module (Gleitman &
Papafragou, 2005; Pinker, 1995), language is merely a
formal medium that is used to describe mental
representations, while remaining independent of the
concepts they express (Li & Gleitman, 2002). Recent work
in understanding the relationship between language and
thought has provided evidence against this disassociation.
Instead, it has been suggested that language is best
understood as built upon domain general cognitive
processes, and thus potentially in a mutually transformative
relationship with these processes (Bowerman & Choi, 2001;
Gumperz & Levinson, 1996).
With habitual use of the specific set of conceptual
symbolic representations afforded by a language, an
individual may be biased towards these representations in
problem-solving and other cognitive tasks. How a language
may accomplish this is not well understood. One possibility

is that language reduces the ability to flexibly adjust
categories outside the structure provided for by the words of
a particular language. As such, it is important to consider
the influence of language on the ability to dynamically
activate and modify the cognitive process of categorization
in response to changing task demands. The ability to think
and act adaptively, while not a uniquely human trait, is a
mental capacity uniquely well developed in human
cognition and intelligent behavior (Deák, 2003). For the
purposes of the current study, flexible cognition will be
defined as a property of the cognitive system, rather than a
specific mechanism or process (Deák, 2003; Ionescu, 2012).
This definition allows for the consideration of flexible
cognition in the interaction of interest; that between
categorization and language, specifically verbal labels.
Recent work lead by Gary Lupyan and colleagues on the
role of labels in categorization has demonstrated a special
status afforded to verbal labels (see e.g. Lupyan, Rakison, &
McClelland, 2007; Lupyan & Thompson-Schill, 2011).
Verbal labels participate in the learning of categories,
facilitating learning, creating mental categories that are
more robust than when the categories are learned without
words (Lupyan, Rakison, & McClelland, 2007), and
encouraging selective attention (Brojde, Porter, & Colunga,
2011). However, no study has looked directly at the
influence of verbal labels on the perceptual and attentional
processes that underlie flexibility after learning. Similarly,
while a number of studies have looked at how language
aides in an individual’s ability to flexibly adjust the level of
categorization, or switch from taxonomic to thematic
(Blaye, Bernard-Peyron, Paour, & Bonthoux, 2006), no
previous research has investigated how individuals flexibly
adjust their categorization strategies in regards to the same
domain, on the same level. The present investigation seeks
to illuminate further the relationship between verbal labels
and the cognitive processes underlying categorization. In
developing an understanding of the role that verbal labels
play in the construction and maintenance of categories, we
further our understanding of the relationship between
language and the domain general cognitive processes, such
as categorization, upon which language is built.

1468

Background

Categorization and Verbal Labels

Flexibility in Categorization
Categorization, the process by which discriminably different
things are classified into groups and therefore responded to
in kind, is a ubiquitous cognitive operation relevant to all
aspects of human life. How categories are learned is a key
issue in understanding the relationship between verbal
category labels and flexibility in cognition. A number of
studies have demonstrated that the relationship between
perceptual descriptions, how the category or concept is
defined, and conceptual representations, such as verbal
labels, are mutually influential (Goldstone, 2000; Lin &
Murphys, 1997). It is widely accepted that adults tailor the
categories they form to the current demands of the task or
situation (Barsalou, 1983), and can spontaneously group
objects in several ways (Ross & Murphy, 1999). Categorical
flexibility is thus a within-subject variable corresponding to
the ability to switch, (or relearn), between different
representations of a given object or set of objects.
Related work has focused on the way that categorization
influences perceived similarities (e.g. Goldstone, Lippa, &
Shiffrin, 2001). According to these studies, conceptual and
categorical flexibility must be accompanied by flexibility in
perceptual and attentional processes (Goldstone 1998). Two
mechanisms are considered key to perceptual category
learning and flexibility: selective attention and
differentiation of dimensions (Goldstone & Steyvers, 2001).
Selective attention refers to the process by which, in
categorization learning, individuals learn to attend to some
features of the objects and ignore irrelevant features.
Selective attention is key to models of categorization such
as Nosofksy’s (1986) exemplar model, in which an object is
measured in similarity compared to a stored category
member in a multidimensional space. The distances between
points along dimensions within this space compress and
expand depending on the attention given to particular
dimensions. Dimensional differentiation refers to the
psychological process by which previously unified
dimensions become perceptually and cognitively distinct.
For example, in developing categories for circles and
squares one must first learn to separate the dimension of
shape from task-irrelevant dimensions such as color or size.
In order to study these mechanisms, Goldstone & Steyvers
(2001) applied a learning/transfer task, wherein subjects
first learned to distinguish between two categories, and then
at transfer had to relearn the categories based on altered
relevance of dimensions. By making dimensions that were
previously diagnostic for categorization unimportant, or the
reverse, allows for a measure of the role of selective
attention in categorical flexibility. Similarly, new
dimensions may exist in the transfer stimuli set that did not
exist in the training set, allowing a separate measure of
dimensional differentiation.

The processes of selective attention and dimensional
differentiation in categorization lead stimuli to be
considered more similar when in the same category, and
more easily distinguishable when in different categories
(Harnad, 1987). Recent studies have demonstrated that
verbal labels influence categorization, speeding up the
attentional processes that focus in on diagnostic properties
of categorized objects. It has been suggested that simply
sharing a label, defined as a name for a category, causes two
objects to be perceived as more similar than those that do
not (Lupyan et al., 2007).
There are a number of explanations for this relationship.
Researchers have provided evidence that labels offer more
maximally informative feedback during categorization
learning, making rule-based categories, those categories that
are learned explicitly with diagnostic rules that are easily
verbalized (Ashby & Maddox, 2005), easier to learn
(Maddox et. al, 2008). Others consider labels as physical,
external symbols upon which our categories are hung
(Clark, 2006; Lupyan et al., 2007). In this sense, language is
viewed as a self-constructed cognitive niche, with words
providing the material scaffolding required to promote
abstract thought and reason, by providing a target for more
basic capacities such as statistical and associative learning
(Clark, 2006). These latter theories have been generalized
by Lupyan within the Label Feedback Hypothesis
framework (Lupyan, 2007).
Labels have been implicated in the learning of categories,
but what of their maintenance and adjustment? Lupyan,
Rakison, and McClelland (2007) provided evidence that
categories associated with verbal labels are not only learned
faster, but are maintained more robustly after initially
training. If one of the main uses of language is the creation
of associations between concepts and words in such a way
that the labeled concepts are learned fast and remain more
robust, it is possible that a verbal label will also reduce the
categorical flexibility by strengthening selective attention to
a diagnostic dimension. In contrast, if labels, as suggested
by Maddox et al. (2008), simply aid in categorization of
rule-based categories by providing a more maximally
informative feedback mechanism, it is possible that labels
may also positively affect categorical flexibility.

The Current Investigation
The present study seeks to add to the literature on labels and
categorization by investigating the rigidity of categorization
both with verbal labels and in their absence. When an
individual needs to restructure the categorical divisions of a
particular domain, especially when this restructuring
requires a shift in attention to a previously non-diagnostic
dimension, having verbal labels for categories already
established could slow down the relearning curve. The
influence of verbal labels on learned sensitivity to
dimensions was tested using a category-learning paradigm
in which participants received an initial category learning
followed by a relearning transfer task, in which either the

1469

diagnostic dimension changed, requiring a shift in selective
attention, or the behavioral response but not the diagnostic
changed (see Transfer Procedure below).

Methodology
Subjects 192 participants were drawn from the
undergraduate psychology subject pool at CU, Boulder, in
exchange for course credit. Subjects were randomly
assigned to either label or no label training conditions and
one of three transfer conditions, giving six total conditions.
Materials Categories were organized based on the kind of
eyes “aliens” exhibited. To this end, 36 gabor patches were
created, varying along the dimensions of frequency and
orientation (figure 1); these patches were embedded in the
stimuli as the aliens’ eyes.

Figure 1: Example stimuli demonstrating the range of
frequencies across and orientation downward.
Training Procedure Following the procedure from
Lupyan, Rakison, & McClelland (2007), participants were
told that they were to take part in a NASA training program
before traveling to a newly found planet. In training, it was
explained that previous explorers to the planet had
discovered two aquatic alien species, one of which was
friendly and could be approached, and one that was
dangerous and should be avoided. In the label conditions,
the participants were told that the explorers had decided to
name the aliens, and that the friendly aliens were named
‘Gowachi’, while the dangerous aliens were named
‘Caleba’. Thus, participants were asked to learn to
distinguish between two categories within a set of novel
stimuli. This distinction was based on either the orientation
or the frequency of the alien’s giant eye. Individual trials
began with a fixation marker in the middle of the screen,
presented for 500 milliseconds. For each trial, an alien was
presented briefly, (500 ms), before a scuba diver appeared in
one of four locations; above, below, or on either side of the
alien. The participant then decided whether to approach or
escape the alien using the directional keys on a standard
keyboard. For example, if a scuba diver appeared on the left

of a friendly alien, the participant should press the “right”
key to move the scuba diver closer. After a response was
made, feedback was provided in either minimal (a chime for
correct, a buzz for incorrect) or maximal (minimal feedback
+ correct category label) conditions. If the participant
waited for longer than 3 seconds, feedback was given
without response. After the feedback, the alien and scuba
diver remained on the screen for additional 800 ms before
the start of the next trial and the representation of the
fixation marker. Each unique alien + diver trial was
presented once in random order, for a total of 144 trials of
training (36 alien exemplars x 4 diver locations). All
subjects received the same number of categorization
learning trials and had equal exposure to the stimuli across
conditions.
Transfer Procedure After training was complete the
participants were told that they were now ready to travel to
the Planet Teeb. In all but the control, or 0 degree, transfer
conditions, upon arrival on the planet the participants were
alerted that something has gone wrong, and that the aliens
are not behaving as expected. Participants in these
conditions faced two distinct relearning tasks. In the 90
degree transfer condition, the diagnostic dimension
changed, requiring a modulation in selective attention.
Participants who learned during training that the friendly
aliens had thick bands in their eyes, and the unfriendly
aliens thin ones, here had to learn to categorize the friendly
and unfriendly aliens based on the steepness of the
orientation of the bands, ignoring thickness. This meant that
half of each category learned during the first phase
subsequently became part of the new category structure
learned during transfer testing, or that half of the Gowachi
must now be considered Caleba and the reverse. For the 180
degree transfer condition, the diagnostic dimension
remained the same, but the escape/approach responses were
switched. Here, participants who first learned that aliens
with steeply oriented bands in their eyes were friendly now
had to learn to treat them as unfriendly, or that the Gowachi
and Caleba were opposite what had been learned. These two
transfer conditions were compared to the 0 degree transfer
condition, in which no change between the training and
testing occurred.
Having all conditions transfer to the same
categorization allowed for a clear relationship between
initial categorization and participants’ ability to relearn
categorization strategies flexibly (see e.g. Goldstone &
Steyvers 2001). The post-transfer phase consisted of a
second set of 144 randomized trials. During the transfer
phase trials only minimal feedback (chime or buzz) were
given in all conditions, whether label or no label.

Results
Trials were grouped into blocks of 36, giving four blocks
each for training and transfer phases. Each correct trial was
scored as 1, each incorrect trial as 0, and each trial in which
the participant did not answer was dropped. Accuracy across

1470

block was then calculated. The data from those participants
who did not reach at least 50% accuracy by the end of
training were not included (13 participants in total). Data
was then entered into a mixed factor ANOVA.
First, we tested for an effect of label on training,
collapsing across transfer type, to see if previous findings on
the advantage of having a label would replicate, (Lupyan,
Rakison & McClelland, 2007). However, while participants
did learn to categorize correctly F(3, 438) = 103.42 (p <
.001), there was no main effect of label type on this learning
trajectory (p = .312). A similar pattern was seen in the
testing phase, with a significant effect of block (F(3,438) =
13.140 p < .001), without an effect of label, or a label by
block interaction (F(3, 438) = 1.263, p = .287), (See Figure
2). There was one significant four-way interaction involving
label that will be discussed below.
1

0.9

Of final interest was a significant four-way interaction
between phase, block, label type, and transfer type (F(6,
438) = 2.18, p < .05). As this was the only significant
interaction involving label, this interaction was pursued
further, with the analysis first involving separating out each
transfer type. For the 0 and 90 degree transfer conditions,
there were the expected effects of block and phase (all ps <
.01), but no main effects or interactions involving label (all
ps > .05). In the 180 degree transfer condition, however, a
significant interaction of phase*block*label type was found,
(F(3, 132) = 4.527, p < .05. Using a general linear model to
explore this interaction further, we found that for the first
two blocks of transfer in the 180 degree transfer condition,
there was an interaction between block and label type (F(1,
44) = 11.595, p < .001), (see figure 4). Thus, there was
evidence for an effect of label on transfer learning in the
condition that required not a shift in attention, but a shift in
the behavioral response from what had been learned in
training.

0.8

0.7
Label
No _Label

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3
Block1

Block2

Block3

Block4

Block5

Block6

Block7

Block8

Figure 2: Average accuracy by block for label and no
label conditions collapsing across transfer type.
Turning from label to transfer type, while there was no
main effect of transfer type (F(2, 146) = .104, p = .901),
there as a significant interaction between phase (whether
training or transfer) and transfer type (F(2, 146) = 80.553, p
< .001), with accuracy worse when transfer required a
switch in selective attention, (see figure 3).

0°	  transfer	  
180°	  
transfer	  
90°	  transfer	  
Block	  1	  
Block	  2	  
Block	  3	  
Block	  4	  
Block	  5	  
Block	  6	  
Block	  7	  
Block	  8	  

1	  
0.9	  
0.8	  
0.7	  
0.6	  
0.5	  
0.4	  
0.3	  

Figure 3: Learning (blocks 1 – 4) and transfer (blocks 5 – 8)
trajectories for the 0 degree, 90 degree, and 180 degree
transfer conditions.

Figure 4: Average accuracy by block for participants in the
label and non-labeled conditions of the 180 degree transfer.

Discussion
The results of the present experiment did not find support
for a general advantage for learning categories with labels
over categories without labels as seen in previous similar
experiments (Lupyan et al., 2007). One important difference
between the stimuli used here and that used by Lupyan and
colleagues is that their aliens were categorized by shape
features, whether the ones in the present study were
categorized by what could be seen as textural features. The
lack of a label advantage in learning is in line with previous
work showing that the effect of labels depends on the sort of
categorization being learned (Brojde et al., 2011).
More interesting to the question of this paper, however, is
the way labels influenced performance at transfer. In the
180 degree condition, when participants had to relearn that
those aliens who had been approachable were now not
approachable and vice versa, there was a significantly faster
recovery after transfer for those participants who were
provided with labels during training. Our results suggest
that labels play a positive role in the relearning of

1471

categorization when the boundaries of the categories do not
change, and the relevant dimension does not change, but the
categorical behavioral responses do, (i.e. whether the
astronaut should approach or retreat from the alien). Having
verbal labels for the categories allowed the participants to
more flexibly adapt to the changing task demands. It is
possible that since verbal labels become attached to the
categories which they are used to express (Lupyan &
Thompson-Schill, 2011), that when the categories
themselves do not change, but only the responses change,
these labels continue to act as more easily computed
symbolic abstractions of the categories for which they stand.
It then becomes possible for the participants in the 180
degree transfer condition to switch from ‘Gowachi’ and
‘Caleba’ to ‘not Gowachi’ and ‘not Caleba’.
The visibility of this effect of label on transfer flexibility
seems to be made possible by the low cost of transfer when
the transfer does not involve modulation of selective
attention. The cost of transfer, however, was much larger for
those who had to relearn their categorization strategies
based on a previously unimportant dimension. Those
participants who learned during training to categorize based
on frequency of the lines of the eyes and discovered on the
planet that the aliens were either friendly or unfriendly
based on the orientation demonstrated reduced ability to
flexibly adjust to this new categorization strategy. While
selective attention is an important process in the
development of accurate categorization (Goldstone, 1998),
it also reduces the degree of flexibility present in
categorization cognitive processes.
At transfer, these participants must not only learn to pay
more attention to the previously ignored dimension, they
must also inhibit attention to the previously diagnostic
features (Goldstone & Steyvers, 2001). This is demonstrated
by the comparison of the four blocks of training for the
identification condition with the four blocks of transfer for
those participants whose transfer included a change in the
diagnostic dimension, despite having had 144 trials more
experience than those approaching the task for the first time.
This is a clear indication of the cost that comes with
increased attention to one historically predictive dimension
combined with decreased attention to all other dimensions.
This is in contrast with Goldstone and Steyvers (2001), who
found that when the categorization rules are orthogonal,
participants do no differently than those learning a
completely new set. Their analysis of this finding was to
posit an equalizing effect of negative transfer from selective
attention with positive transfer from dimensional
differentiation, meaning that regardless of the type of
transfer, it helps to have practice in separating the two
perceptual dimensions of the stimuli. By matching the same
categorization strategy across training, taken as a control,
and transfer, rather than having participants relearn a
completely new category during transfer, we demonstrate
that the positive effect of dimensional differentiation is not
large enough to make the performance of those participants

who transferred across dimensions on par with those coming
to the same task without any previous experience.
This role of selective attention in reducing flexibility was
not, however, modulated by the presence of verbal labels
corresponding to the categories being learned. While
participants did learn the correct categories over the course
of training, across all conditions this learning trajectory was
not modulated by the presence or lack of label as feedback
on individual trials. Similarly, transfer-learning trajectories
were not significantly affected for those participants whose
initial training included verbal labels, for better or for worse.
The inability of the current data to replicate previous
findings on the influence of verbal labels in category
learning draws into question the extent to which the Label
Feedback Hypothesis can be extended into categorization.
Previous studies that have demonstrated a positive
influence of verbal labels have focused mostly on shapebased categories, including the study upon which the present
study is based (e.g. Lupyan et al., 2007; Lupyan &
Thompson-Schill, 2011). Very early in language learning,
English-speaking children develop a bias towards
categorizing labeled object categories based on shape
(Yoshida & Smith, 2005; Colunga & Smith, 2005). It’s
possible that, as shape-based categories are based on
dimensions that are historically predictive for English
language speakers, the effect of labels during this type of
categorization would be stronger than for other types of
learning. This is supported by findings from Brojde, Proter,
and Colunga (2011), who demonstrated that verbal labels
hinder category learning defined by texture or brightness.
They argue that the advantage of label comes about only
when the relevant dimension aligns with the relevant
dimensions in previous similar tasks, which in the case of
our English-speaking participants would be shape over
features such as orientation and frequency of line.

Conclusion
The purpose of the current investigation was to assess the
effect of verbal labels on the ability to flexibly adjust
categorization strategies when faced with changes in the
environment. Previous literature (Lupyan et al., 2007;
Lupyan & Thompson-Schill, 2011) has demonstrated that
verbal labels influence category learning, improving both
speed of learning and strength of representation. Some have
argued that this effect of verbal labels is a demonstration of
the top-down modulation of labels during learning and
therefore shows that verbal labels are directly involved in
the learning of concepts and categories (Lupyan, 2009). In
this theory, labels work as material symbols upon which
categories are attached (Clark, 1996), and so take part in the
category learning process, possibly by modulating selective
attention (Goldstone, 1998; Goldstone & Steyvers, 2001).
Others, however, have argued that verbal labels are simply a
more maximal form of feedback, and are therefore simple a
form a facilitation, separate from the categories themselves
(Maddox et al., 2008). In order to tease these two views
apart, the present study considered the role of verbal labels

1472

in flexible cognition, more specifically the ability of
individuals to flexibly adjust their categorization strategies.
Despite a replication of the effect of selective attention
across stimuli dimensions, the previous finding of the
positive effect of labels as feedback for category learning
was not replicated. The failure to replicate a positive effect
of label on category learning raises questions as to the
generalizability of the label feedback hypothesis. Given the
issues raised in the current study above, it appears that not
all types of category learning benefit from the presence of
verbal labels (see also Brojde et al., 2011). Similarly, there
is no evidence that labels modulate selective attention in a
way that would either help or hinder flexibly adjusting one’s
categorization strategies. There was however, an effect in a
single transfer condition that demonstrates that labels may
aid in recovery from transfer when the type of transfer does
not involve a change in selective attention. In the 180
degree transfer condition, while labels did not have a
positive effect on learning during training, labels did interact
with accuracy immediately after transfer, allowing those
who learned with labels to recover faster. Future endeavors
could continue to develop an understanding of the
relationship between concepts, categories, and the words we
use to invoke them.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Bhuvana Narasimhan, Claire Sims
for their comments on an earlier draft, and the members of
the CU language project for assistance in collecting data.

References
Ashby, F. G. & Maddox, W. T. (2005) Human category
learning. Annu. Rev. Psychol., 56, 149-178
Barsalou, L. W. (1983). Ad hoc categories. Memory and
Cognition, 11, 211–227
Blaye, A., Bernard-Peyron, V., Paour, J., & Bonthoux, F.
(2006) Categorical flexibility in children: Distinguishing
response flexibility from conceptual flexibility, the
protracted development of taxonomic representations.
European journal of devel. psych., 3, 163-188
Bowerman, M. & Choi, S. (2001) Shaping meaning for
language: Universal and language-specific in the
acquisition of spatial semantic categories. In: M.
Bowerman & S. C. Levinson (Eds.) Language acquisition
and conceptual development. Cambridge University
Press, pp. 475-522
Brojde, C. L., Porter, C., & Colunga, E. (2011) Words can
slow down category learning. Psychon Bull Rev.
Clark, A. (2006) Language, embodiment, and the cognitive
niche. TRENDS in cognitive sciences, 10, 8, 370-374
Colunga, E. & Smith, L. B. (2005) From the lexicon to
expectations about kinds: A role for associative learning.
Psychological Review, 112, 347-382
Deacon, T. W. (1997) The symbolic species: The coevolution of language and the brain. W.W. Norton
Deák, G. (2003) The development of cognitive flexibility
and language abilities. In: Kail, R. (Ed.) Advances in child

development and behavior. Sand Diego: Academic Press.
Pp. 271-327
DeLoache, J. S. (2004) Becoming symbol-minded. Trends
in Cog. Sci., 8, 66-70
Gleitman, L. & Papafragou, A. (2005) Language and
thought. In: K. Holyoak & B. Morrison (Eds.) Cambridge
handbook of thinking and reasoning. Cambridge,
University Press, pp. 633-661
Goldstone, R. L. (1998) Perceptual learning. Annu. Rev.
Psychol., 49, 585-612
Goldstone, R. L. (2000) Unitization during category
learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
perception and performance, 26, 86-112
Goldstone, R. L. & Steyvers, M. (2001) The sensitization
and differentiation of dimensions during category
learning. Journal of experimental psychology: General,
130, 1, 116-139
Goldstone, R. L., Lippa, Y., & Shiffrin, R. (2001) Altering
object representations through category learning.
Cognition, 78, 27-43
Gumperz, J. J., & Levinson, S. C. (1996) Rethinking
linguistic relativity. Cambridge, Endlang: Cambridge
University Press
Ionescu, T. (2012) Exploring the nature of cognitive
flexibility. New ideas in psychology, 30, 190-200
Li, P., & Gleitman, L. (2002). Turning the tables: Language
and spatial reasoning. Cognition, 83, 265–294
Lin, E. L., & Murphy, G. L. (1997). The effects of
background knowledge on object categorization and part
detection. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 23, 1153-1169
Lupyan, G. (2007). The label feedback hypothesis:
Linguistic influences on visual processing. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, Carnegie Mellon University,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
Lupyan, G., Rakison, D. H., & McClelland, J. L. (2007)
Language is not just for talking: Redundant labels
facilitate learning of novel categories. Psychological
Science, 18, 12, 1077-1083
Lupyan, G. & Thompson-Schill, S. L. (2011). The evocative
power of words: Activation concepts by verbal and
nonverbal means. Journal of Experimental Psychology
Maddox, W. T., Love, B. C., Glass, B. D., & Filoteo, J. V.
(2008) When more is less: Feedback effects in perceptual
learning. Cognition, 108, 578-589
Nosofsky, R. M. (1986) Attention, similarity, and the
identification-categorization relationship. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 115, 39-57
Pinker, S. (1995) The language instinct: The new science of
language and mind. Penguin Books
Ross, B. H. & Murphy, G. L. (1999) Food for thought:
Cross-classification and category organization in a
complex real-world domain. Cognitive Psychology, 38,
495-553
Yoshida, H. & Smith, L. B. (2005) Linguistic cues enhance
the learning of perceptual cues. Psychological Science,
16, 564-577

1473

