UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Eye movement optimization in visual search

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0xb0x9rt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Hope, Ryan M.
Gray, Wayne D.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Eye movement optimization in visual search
Ryan M. Hope and Wayne D. Gray
Cognitive Science Department
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute

Abstract

Background

In the present study we investigated whether eye movements
in visual search are optimized to reduce time on task. Subjects task was to find a target object in a large field of objects
that differed based on shape, color, size and numeric label.
The target specification was manipulated, directly influencing
the average number of fixations it took subjects to find the target object. Although a microstrategy that allowed for parallel
saccade programming and information processing was found
to be more efficient in terms of time, a serial microstrategy
where saccade programming always follows information processing was found to be the more prevalent microstrategy.

The key characteristic of visual search for an active vision
task (Findlay & Gilchrist, 2003), is one of moving the eyes
from one location to another until we find our search target.
But what does this really entail and can we bring to bear
strategies in this task that cannot be applied to the simpler
case of being tachistoscopically presented with a single item
and asked whether that is our search target or not?
The case of a serial sequence of single items, each of which
demands a “yes” or “no” answer before we are shown the
next item, seems to define a procedure in which we perceptually process the visual object, semantically process the results of that perception, and decide whether the current object is a member of the target set defined for us by the experimenter. This strategy or procedure seems well suited for
the given task environment and maybe defines the optimal
strategy in this environment. Indeed, this procedure could
be applied when I am searching my dresser top or searching
for the large-red-star in Figure 1. Indeed, vision researchers
often describe searches that entail the visual scanning of a
busy screen in exactly these terms (e.g., Deubel & Schneider,
1996; Henderson, 1992). From this point forward we will
refer to this strategy as the serial microstrategy.
An alternative strategy differs from the serial microstrategy only in that the programming and subsequent execution
of the next eye movement does not wait for the semantic processing and decision processing to complete. Programming
of the next eye movement could start as soon as the previous
saccade is completed, in parallel with information processing
and decision making processes. From this point forward we
will refer to this strategy as the parallel microstrategy.
Evidence for the parallel strategy comes from a number of
visual search studies (Engel, 1977; Gould, 1973; Hooge &
Erkelens, 1996) where it was reported that subjects often fixated the target, made an eye movement away from the target,
and then, on the next fixation, returned to the target (return
saccades). Hooge and Erkelens (1996) also reported a number of missed targets. This evidence implies that the fixation
durations can be too short to recognize the target. The occurrence of return saccades and missed targets suggest that saccade preparation may start before foveal processing is complete and that complete foveal processing is not necessarily
the trigger for the subsequent saccade. For further details of
both serial and parallel models of eye movements in visual
search see Hornof and Halverson (2003), Hornof and Kieras
(1997).

Keywords: visual search, eye movements, microstrategy,
optimization, return saccades

Introduction
Visual search may well be our most ubiquitous cognitive
task. Many (dozens? hundreds?) times a day we scan our
desk for books or memos, our fridge for eggs or beer, the
streets for oncoming traffic, cable television for shows we
want to watch, and crowded rooms for faces we recognize.
Although our natural scan environments are seldom completely novel, the objects in them and their places in these
environments are seldom constant.
How do we do such searches? Most of them have the flavor of being a “one off” on at least one of several dimensions.
Even the clutter on top of my dresser varies, if only slightly,
from day to day. Do we develop optimal search strategies for
each environment? – My fridge? Driving on I-87? Looking
for friends to sit next to during Cognitive Science talks in
Sage 4101? This strikes us as a likely possibility, meaning
that there may be no general high level strategy for scanning
my dresser top, the fridge, and I-87. But what about lower
level strategies? What about the process of moving our eyes
to a location, fixating that location, processing the perceptual and semantic information at that location, and deciding
whether that location contains the target of our search, or
whether we need to saccade to the next location? Can this
strategy be optimized? Can it be optimized for all or many
search environments? What would such an optimization strategy optimize?
Although in such a small paper it is obvious that we cannot
address most of these issues, we believe we have a good start
on addressing the later; namely, what would an optimized fixation and saccade strategy look like – this is the subject of our
paper.

609

The parallel and serial microstrategies can also be differentiated based on their temporal costs. Since the parallel strategy allows for the concurrent processing of information and
saccade preparation, fixation durations could be shorter when
the parallel strategy is used than when the serial strategy is
used because target identification can continue during the saccade. However, Becker and Jürgens (1979) showed that it
is possible for saccades to be aborted during the preparation
phase. This could lead to someone using the parallel strategy with apparent fixation durations closer to those observed
in the serial strategy. On the other hand, since saccades in
the parallel strategy do not necessarily wait for a decision of
target presence, the parallel strategy could involve two extra
saccades and fixations as a result of return saccades. Therefore in the extreme cases, the parallel strategy has a fixed cost
of 2 saccades and 2 fixations whereas the serial strategy has
a cost that grows with each fixation. Therefore there exists
some threshold, in terms of number of fixations, where the
parallel strategy will eventually become more efficient than
the serial strategy.

trial) should be shorter on trials that exhibit return saccades
(indicating the use of the parallel microstrategy) than on trials
that do not exhibit return saccades.
3. For trials that do not contain return saccades, fixation
durations should increase as a function of number of cue features due to increasing processing requirements.
4. Subjects will satisfice by using the microstrategy that
results in the most time savings across all trial types.
Method
Subjects
Subjects were 15 undergraduate students at Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute (10 men, 5 women) who were given
course credit for their participation. Subjects were prescreened for their dependence on eyeglasses or contact lenses;
only subjects that reported needing neither were allowed to
participate in the experiment.
Apparatus

The task used in the present study is a visual search task
first used by Williams (1966). In the Williams search task,
subjects have to find a target object in a very large field of
objects that differ by size, shape, color and a numbered label (e.g., “11”, “25”, etc). Williams found that when he manipulated which target features were known (e.g., “large blue
circle” versus “small yellow” versus “triangle”), a high proportion of fixations were on objects of the specified color and
only a moderate proportion of fixations were on objects of
the specified size or shape. When two or more characteristics were specified, fixations were generally based on a single
characteristic. Additionally, the average number of fixations
required to find the target differed based on the target specifications. This aspect of the task makes it perfect for eliciting the use of different microstrategies as the optimal strategy
should depend on target specifications.

The experiment was displayed on a 22" Dell widescreen
LCD with a resolution of 1680 × 1050 (pixels) and physical
dimensions of 473.76 × 296.1 (mm). Eyetracking was performed with a SensoMotoric Instruments RED500 eyetracker
running at a sample rate of 500 Hz. On average, subjects were
positioned 700 ± 100 mm away from the LCD.
Task
Subjects task on each trial was to find a target in a field
of 48 randomly dispersed objects. Each object had a unique
combination of shape (4 levels), color (4 levels) and size (3
levels). On each shape was a randomly assigned numeric id
which ranged from 01 to 48. Each trial starts with the search
objects masked and a cue at the center of the display. The cue
was a text description of the target object. The probe always
contained the numeric id and up to three other features (shape,
size and color). The particular features shown in the cue, in
addition to the numeric id, was systematically manipulated
throughout the experiment such that each subject experienced
one trial of each object and cue combination. The non-id cue
features were ordered randomly with the id always showing
last (see Figure 1 for an example of the cue). The 48 objects
and 8 cue combinations results in 384 unique trials. Because
of the random dispersion of objects on each trial, no subjects
experienced identical trials. Subjects were instructed to study
the cue until they felt they had memorized it, at which point,
they were instructed to press spacebar on the keyboard to reveal the search field and begin searching for the target. The
cue remained on screen during the search phase. Once subjects find the target, they end the trial by using the mouse to
click on the target. Search time was measured as the time
between the spacebar press and the first correct click on the
target object. Subjects were given no explicit instruction to
emphasize speed, their task was simply to find the target.

It seems likely that at least some subjects on at least some
trials used a mix of serial and parallel microstrategies. However, the parallel and the serial strategies predict the same
pattern of saccades for all but the last two saccades to and
from target object. Hence, for this initial report, we make the
simplifying assumption that if we find a return saccade, that
we can classify the entire trial as having been accomplished
using the parallel strategy. Likewise, the absence of return
saccades were used to classify trials as having been accomplished using a serial strategy. Based on this classification
scheme we had the following hypotheses:
1. Due to the temporal costs of the serial microstrategy
with increasing number of fixations, the proportion of trials
with return saccades (indicating the use of the parallel microstrategy) should be higher on trials where search is inefficient
than it is on trials where search is efficient. Here efficiency
corresponds to the number of fixations need to find a target, a
function of the target specification or number of cue features.
2. The average fixation duration (all fixations on a given

610

1. Convert the x,y screen coordinates from pixels to degrees of visual angle relative to the center of the screen.
2. Compute smoothed first and second order derivatives of
the x,y visual angle components.
3. Label gaze samples with corresponding velocity and
acceleration components that both exceed their respective
thresholds as saccades, the rest are labeled as fixations.
4. Identify saccades that last for less than 20 ms, reclassify
them as fixations.
Velocity and acceleration (first and second order derivites) were calculated using a Savitzky-Golay filter (as recommended by Nyström and Holmqvist (2010)) for its ability to
preserve local minima and maxima. The Savitzky-Golay filter used was a second order filter with a window length of
11 samples which allowed for accurate detection of saccades
down to 20ms in duration (Nyström & Holmqvist, 2010). The
velocity and acceleration thresholds used in the present study
were 30°/s and 8000°/s2 respectively and were based on the
“cognitive configuration” of the EyeLink software (SR Research Ltd. 2007).
Figure 1. An example of a trial search display that contains
an end of trial return saccade. In this trial, the cue is “large
18”. The target is the large yellow oval in the bottom right
corner. Eye gaze data is overlaid; red dots correspond to samples that belong to saccades, black dots correspond to samples
that belong to fixations. Circles with a 1 degree visual angle
radius have been drawn around the center of mass for each
fixation. As indicated by the grid formed by the x and y axes,
the scanpath for this Ss is: e4, f4, h5, h5, f7, e8, c7, b9, i8, h2,
f2, i2. Notice how the last 3 fixations include 2 fixations on
the target object separated in time by a fixation on a different
object. Neither the grid nor the light gray circles around each
object were visible during the trial.

Results
Number of Fixations
Our first hypothesis stated that the proportion of return saccades should increase with number of fixations and that number of fixations was directly related to the cue specification
(trial type) and number of cues. Therefore, in order to evaluate our first hypothesis we first need to show that trial type has
an impact on number of fixations. In order to accomplish this
we performed one-way repeated measures analysis of variance. The analysis of variance revealed a significant effect of
trial type on proportion of return saccades, F(7, 98) = 76.56,
p < .001, ηg 2 = 0.73. The means and standard errors can be
seen in Figure 2. The general trend revealed from this analysis is that the number of fixations decreased as the number
of cue features increased. We performed a second analysis
of variance to test the effect of number of cues on number of
fixations. As expected by hypothesis 3, the greater the number of cues, the fewer fixations, F(3, 42) = 96.62, p < .001,
ηg 2 = 0.76. The effect size of number of cue was stronger
than the effect of trial type on number of fixations.

Stimuli
The four shapes used in the task were star, oval, crescent
and cross. The four colors used in the task were red, yellow,
green and blue and had hue values (in HSV space) of 0, 72,
144 and 216 respectively. The saturation and value of all four
colors was set to 50 and 100 respectively. The search field
was a 1050 ×1050 (pixel) square centered on the screen and
had 65% gray background color. See Figure 1 for an example
of the shapes and colors used in this task. The three object
sizes were small (48 pixels), medium (119 pixels), and large
(191 pixels) and correspond to visual angles of 1.1, 2.7 and
4.4 degrees with a potential error up to 15% depending on
head position.

Return Saccades
Return saccades were identified through scanpath analysis.
First, the search field was divided into a 9 × 9 array which resulted in 81 total cells. The width and height of each cell was
approximately 2.6 degrees of visual angle. Second, fixations
were recoded as belonging to one of the 81 cells based on
their center of mass. After recoding, consecutive fixations
occurring in the same cell were combined. This effectively
removes any microsaccades and other small amplitude corrective saccades. Finally, for scanpaths of length 3 or greater,
the last fixation was compared to the fixation 2 back. In order
for a trial to be classified as containing a return saccade two

Gaze Data Classification
Raw gaze data were classified into events (saccades and
fixations) by an algorithm that uses both velocity and acceleration thresholds. The algorithm followed the following general procedure:

611

of return saccades a one-way repeated measures analysis of
variance was performed. The analysis of variance revealed
a significant effect of trial type on proportion of return saccades, F(7, 98) = 12.62, p < .001, ηg 2 = 0.33. The means
and standard errors can be seen in Figure 3. The general trend
revealed from this analysis is that the proportion of return
saccades decreased as the number of cue features increased.
In order to confirm this trend we performed a second oneway repeated measures analysis of variance to test the effect
of number of cue features on the proportion of return saccades. The analysis of variance revealed a significant effect
of number of cue features on proportion of return saccades,
F(3, 42) = 25.57, p < .001, ηg 2 = 0.46. Similar to the analysis of variance involving number of fixations, the effect size
of number of cues was stronger than the effect of trial type for
proportion of return saccades. In addition, the correlation between proportion of return saccades and number of fixations
with respect to trial type, which can be seen by comparing
Figure 2 and Figure 3, is strong; r = .90, n = 8, p = .002.

Number of Fixations

60

40

20

0

id

e ape ape
lor size ape ape
siz
id id sh ze sh id co olor or sh ze sh
l
i
c
si
id id co lor s
id
o
c
id

Fixation Durations
In order to test the effect of return saccades and number of
cue features on average fixation duration (all fixations within
a trial) we performed a 2 × 4 (return saccade by number of
cue features) repeated measures analysis of variance. The
analysis of variance revealed a significant main effect of return saccade, F(1, 14) = 27.44, p = .001, ηg 2 = 0.22; a
significant main effect of number of cues, F(3, 42) = 6.68,
p < .001, ηg 2 = 0.11; and a marginally significant interaction
effect F(3, 42) = 2.62, p = .063, ηg 2 = 0.02. The means and
standard errors can be seen in Figure 4.

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

Average Fixation Duration

Proportion of Return Saccades

Figure 2. The average number of fixation for each trial type.
Error bars represent standard error. The dashed line represents the threshold where the parallel strategy becomes more
efficient than the serial strategy, determined empirically using
Equation 5.

0.0

id

e ape
lor ape size ape ape
siz
id id sh id co ze sh olor or sh ze sh
si
si id c
col
id
id color
id

Figure 3. The average proportion of return saccades for each
trial type. Error bars represent standard error.

0.15

0.10

0.05
Trials w/o Return Fixations
Trials w/ Return Fixations
0.00
1

criterion had to be met. First, the fixation 2 back from the final
fixation had to be in the same cell, or any of the surrounding
cells, as the last fixation. Second, the fixation 1 back from the
last fixation could not be on the center cell where the cue was
located (see center of Figure 1). Of the 5939 total trials, 2273
trials contained a return saccade.
In order to test the effect of trial type on the proportion

2

3

4

Number of Cue Features
Figure 4. The average fixation duration (all fixations within
a trial) for each level of number of cue features. Error bars
represent standard error.

612

Comparison of Search Strategies

By using a value of 213 for F serial and 189 for F parallel (computed from Equation 3) and a value of 45 for S, the threshold
turns out to be 21.5 fixations. This threshold is depicted as
the dashed horizontal line in Figure 2. Interestingly, for all
trials in which color is available as a probe feature, the average number of fixations is less than this threshold. In other
words, when color is not available, the parallel search strategy
will be more efficient in terms of time.

The serial strategy search time T serial can be approximated
by the following equation:
T serial = (N − 2) ∗ (F serial + S )

(1)

where N is the average number of fixations on a given trial
type, and S is the average saccade duration. Similarly, the
parallel strategy search time T parallel can be approximated by
the following formula:
T parallel = N ∗ (F parallel + S )

Discussion
The goal of this study was to determine if people optimize
their eye movements during visual search. In order to accomplish this goal we had subjects perform a difficult visual
search task where they had to find a target object in a field
of objects that differed in size, shape color and numeric label. We hypothesized that subjects would optimized their
eye movements by using the more efficient of two microstrategies: the serial and parallel microstrategies. We used the
presence of return saccades as a marker of the parallel microstrategy. Consistent with our first hypothesis, the proportion
of trials that contained return saccades were higher on trials
that required lots of fixations to find the target as well as on
trials where there were few target cues compared to trials that
required only a few fixations to find the target or trials that
had many target cues. One interpretation of this result is that
subjects are indeed sensitive, consciously or unconsciously,
to the temporal costs of serial strategy which ensures a target
presence decision before the eye is moved to the next location.
Our second hypothesis predicted that fixation durations
would be shorter on trials that contained return saccades that
on trials that did not contain return saccades. This indeed
was the case. We also predicted in our third hypothesis that
on trials that did not include a return saccade that fixation durations should increase with respect to the number of known
target features. This prediction was mildly supported by the
marginally significant interaction we found in our analysis of
variance involving return saccades and number of cue features on fixation duration.
Our conservative cost analysis of the serial and parallel
microstrategies does show that the parallel microstrategy can
more cost effective in terms of time on task. However, return
saccades were only observed on 38% of the trials in our experiment. This could be interpreted as evidence that subjects
did not or could not optimize their eye movements. However,
we are not positive that is the case. It’s possible that return
saccades are just not a good enough measure of the parallel
search strategy since it is possible for early eye movement
programming (that would have cause the eye to move before
target analysis) to be aborted in the parallel strategy. This
could not only potentially reduce the number of observed return saccades but it could also affect the average fixation durations in trials with and with out return saccades. It is possible
that someone could be using the parallel strategy throughout
most of a trial but then abort an eye movement that would

(2)

In order to approximate the values for F serial and F parallel ,
we first performed mixed effects regression on mean fixation
duration with return saccade and number of cues as fixed factors and with subjects as a random factor. The regression
yielded the following equation (rounded to the nearest millisecond):
F = 213 − E ∗ 24 + C ∗ 5
(3)
where F is fixation duration, E is 1 for return saccade trials
(0 for non-return saccade trials) and C is the number of cues.
The intercept value of 213 ms is consistent with previous research on average fixation durations in visual search (Rayner,
2009; Salthouse & Ellis, 1980). The 24 ms difference between trials with and with out return saccades (assumed to
be associated with the time required to make a decision of
target presence) is psychologically plausible (Neisser, 1963;
van Diepen, De Graef, & D’Ydewalle, 1995). In addition, the
5 ms per cue feature seems psychologically plausible. Using Equation 3 we can compute the average fixation duration,
F serial and F parallel , for a given trial type and search strategy
by using the average number of fixations, N, as shown in Figure 2. The value of S was set to 45 ms in all computations
based on the average of saccade durations in the empirical
data.
The time savings (or loss) from using the parallel search
strategy can then be computed as follows:
T di f f = T serial − T parallel

(4)

The results of Equation 1 and Equation 2 applied to each of
the 8 probe combinations applied to Equation 4 is shown in
Figure 5. The parallel search strategy saved more time than
the serial search strategy for all trials where color was not an
available cue feature. The sum of all T di f f values was 972.02
ms indicating that overall, the parallel strategy could be more
efficient.
This analysis can be taken one step further by setting F serial
equal to F parallel and solve for N, resulting in Equation 5, to
find the threshold in terms of number of fixations where the
parallel strategy becomes more efficient than the serial strategy.
2 ∗ F serial + 2 ∗ S
N=
(5)
F serial + F parallel

613

Approximate Time Saved (ms)

from the Office of Naval Research, Dr. Ray Perez, Project
Officer.
References

900

Becker, W. & Jürgens, R. (1979). An analysis of the saccadic
system by means of double step stimuli. Vision research.
Deubel, H. & Schneider, W. X. (1996). Saccade target selection and object recognition: evidence for a common attentional mechanism. Vision research, 36(12), 1827–37.
Engel, F. (1977). Visual conspicuity, visual search and fixation tendencies of the eye. Vision research, (June).
Findlay, J. M. & Gilchrist, I. D. (2003). Active vision. Oxford
Univ. Press.
Gould, J. D. (1973). Eye movements during visual search
and memory search. Journal of experimental psychology,
98(1), 184–95.
Henderson, J. M. (1992). Visual attention and eye movement
control during reading and picture viewing. In K. Rayner
(Ed.), Eye movements and visual cognition: scene perception and reading (pp. 260–283). New York: Springer.
Hooge, I. T. C. & Erkelens, C. J. (1996). Control of fixation
duration in a simple search task. Attention, Perception, &
Psychophysics, 58(7), 969–976.
Hornof, A. J. & Halverson, T. (2003). Cognitive strategies
and eye movements for searching hierarchical computer
displays. In Proceedings of ACM CHI 2003: Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems. New York,
NY: ACM.
Hornof, A. J. & Kieras, D. E. (1997). Cognitive modeling reveals menu search is both random and systematic. In Acm
chi’97 conference on human factors in computing systems
(pp. 107–114). ACM.
Neisser, U. (1963). Decision-Time without Reaction-Time:
Experiments in Visual Scanning. The American Journal
of Psychology, 76(3), 376–385.
Nyström, M. & Holmqvist, K. (2010). An adaptive algorithm
for fixation, saccade, and glissade detection in eyetracking data. Behavior Research Methods.
Rayner, K. (2009). Eye movements and attention in reading,
scene perception, and visual search. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 62(8), 1457–1506.
Salthouse, T. & Ellis, C. (1980). Determinants of eye-fixation
duration. The American journal of psychology.
SR Research Ltd. (2007). EyeLink 1000 User Manual
(9/13/2007).
van Diepen, P. M., De Graef, P., & D’Ydewalle, G. (1995).
Chronometry of foveal and peripheral information encoding during scene perception. In J. M. Findlay, R. Walker,
& R. W. Kentridge (Eds.), Eye movement research: mechanisms, processes and applications (pp. 349–362). Amsterdam: North Holland.
Williams, L. G. (1966). The effect of target specification on
objects fixated during visual search. Perception and Psychophysics, 1(5), 315–318.

600

300

0

-300

id

id

e
or
ze
pe
pe
pe
pe
col d sha lor si e sha r sha e sha
id
i
o
z
z
o
l
c d si co
si
id
i
id color
id

siz

Figure 5. The estimated difference (T di f f ) in time from using the parallel or serial microstrategy, computed using Equation 4. Positive values favor the parallel strategy, negative
values favor the serial strategy.

have resulted in a return saccade. This would result in the
lowering of the average fixation duration for trials with out
a return saccade due to improper strategy classification. Additionally, a trial that shows a return saccade could still have
contained many aborted early saccades inflating the average
fixation duration of return saccade trials.
Conclusion
Our study has provided evidence that eye movements in visual search can be sensitive to millisecond level cost-benefit
trade-offs. Whether or not people can actually optimize their
eye movements to take advantage of these cost-benefit tradeoffs is still not clear. In addition, the fact that the parallel strategy could under some circumstances appear as if it were actually a serial strategy allows for the possibility that the serial
strategy does not even exist. This idea is consistent with the
findings of Hornof and Kieras (1997) and Hornof and Halverson (2003). Further research on this topic will need to find
better ways to quantify the prevalence of parallel processing
in eye movement microstrategies.
Acknowledgments
The work was supported, in part, by grants
N000140910402 and N000141310252 to Wayne Gray

614

