UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Face age and social status exert different modulatory effects on gaze following behaviour

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0mg1j9np

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Ciardo, Francesca
Marino, Barbara F.M.
Rossetti, Angela
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Face age and social status exert different modulatory effects on gaze following
behaviour
Francesca Ciardo (francesca.ciardo@unimore.it)
Department of Communication and Economics, Viale Allegri, 9
42121 Reggio Emilia, Italy

Barbara F.M. Marino (barbara.marino@unimib.it)
Department of Psychology, Edificio U6 Piazza dell’Ateneo Nuovo, 1
20126, Milano, Italy

Angela Rossetti (a.rossetti5@campus.unimib.it)
Department of Psychology, Edificio U6 Piazza dell’Ateneo Nuovo, 1
20126, Milano, Italy

Rossana Actis-Grosso (rossana.actis@unimib.it)
Department of Psychology, Edificio U6 Piazza dell’Ateneo Nuovo, 1
20126, Milano, Italy

Paola Ricciardelli (paola.ricciardelli@unimib.it)
Department of Psychology, Edificio U6 Piazza dell’Ateneo Nuovo, 1
20126, Milano, Italy
Abstract
The aim of the present study was to investigate whether face
age and social status information associated with faces have
different effects on gaze following behaviour as an index of
joint attention. Participants were instructed to perform goaldirected saccades towards a peripheral stationary target, while
a task-irrelevant face with averted gaze was presented. Faces
of three different age groups (younger adults; middle-aged
adults; and older adults) were associated with fictional
résumés which could describe distracters as high or low social
status people. Results showed that face age affected both
saccade accuracy and latencies. Social status did not have an
effect on accuracy and only affected correct saccades with
higher latencies by modulating the face age effect. It is argued
that the overt orienting of joint attention could be affected
both by perceptual and higher order socio-cognitive factors,
but at different stages of processing.
Keywords: Joint attention, Social Status, Face Age, Gaze
Following, Social cognition, Automaticity.

Introduction
Understanding what a co-specific sees is necessary for
social cognition. The gaze of others allows the rapid
extraction of socially relevant information such as their
mental and attentional states (i.e. the focus of their attention;
e.g. Baron-Cohen 1995), and allows us to understand and
predict their future actions (e.g. Pierno et al. 2006; Innocenti
et al., 2012). Several studies have shown that perceiving
averted gaze leads the observer to automatically shift his/her
attention in the same direction or towards the same object
that the other person is looking at (Friesen and Kingstone,
1998; Driver et al., 1999; Frischen, Bayliss and Tipper,
2007). For example, an uninformative cue by a centrally-

presented face gazing to one-location reliably reduces
reaction time to targets presented peripherally at the location
consistent with the gaze (i.e. gaze cueing effect, e.g. Driver
et al., 1999).
The automatic shift of attention in the direction of another
person’s gaze - known as joint or social attention, can be
achieved both overtly, through eye movements (gazefollowing behaviour), and/or covertly without eye
movements. Gaze following behaviour (i.e. overt orienting
of joint attention), which is considered an early and a direct
index of joint attention orienting, is present early in
development (Morales et al., 1998; Mundy and Newell,
2007) in humans and studies have shown that many species,
including non-human primates, orient gaze in the direction
of a co-specific’s gaze and use it for interaction (for a
review see Shepherd, 2010).
In adults the automatic nature of gaze following
behaviour has been shown by Ricciardelli and colleagues
(2002) who by using an oculomotor task reported a
significant increase in the number of erroneous saccades
matching the direction of the distracting gaze (gaze
following errors, GFE). This was taken as evidence that
perceiving a gaze shift can interfere with the execution of an
oculomotor task by affecting oculomotor programming.
However, recent studies have shown that attention
orienting driven by gaze is likely to be a product of both
stimulus-driven and top-down attentional mechanisms (e.g.
Greene et al., 2009). Therefore, modulatory effects on joint
attention should be possible. It is more likely, in fact, that
some gaze shifts are more important than others depending
on face features, environment relevance or current task.

2058

Age is known to be one of the sources of information that
is rapidly extracted from faces and is an important
dimension that influences how face are attended to (e.g.
Slessor et al., 2010), encoded and retrieved from memory
(Wiese et al., 2008). Several studies, using different kinds
of face processing-task, reported that young adults show an
advantage for faces within their own age group compared to
elderly faces (for a review see Anastasi & Rhodes, 2012). In
a recent study, Slessor and colleagues (2010) reported a
greater gaze cueing effect in younger adults for own-age
face distracters than for distracters with elderly faces.
Moreover, recent studies have shown that the automatic
and reflexive nature of gaze-mediated attentional orienting
can be modulated by a number of high-order cognitive
variables, such as the task context (Ricciardelli et al., 2012),
social identification (Cesario, 2006; Liuzza et al., 2011),
social status (Dalmaso et al., 2012¸ Shepherd et al., 2006),
emotional expression (Tipples, 2006; Bonifacci et al., 2006)
and familiarity (Deaner et al., 2007). In particular, Dalmaso
and colleagues (2012) showed a greater gaze cueing effect
for faces associated with high-status information. Although
these authors (2012) did not report differences related to
face age (younger vs. older adults) on gaze mediated
attention orienting, there is evidence of both differences in
interference from emotional faces of different ages (Ebner
and Johnson, 2010), and of face-age effects in overt
orienting of attention (Ciardo et al., 2012).
A possibility that has not been investigated before is
whether they affect overt orienting of joint attention
differently when combined together. This stems from the
different nature of face age and the information regarding
social status associated with the face (perceptual vs.
cognitive). In particular, it is reasonable to expect that their
distracting/cueing effect may vary as a function of task
accuracy and response speed. In other words, given that age
is a perceptual feature that is extracted rapidly from the face,
one may expect that it affects early stages of saccade
programming and the execution of eye movements with
lower latencies. By contrast, since the processing of social
status information is a more complex and time-consuming
higher-order cognitive process, it should play a role later on
and its effect should be more evident, for example, in the
execution of eye movements with higher latencies.
In the present study we tested this hypothesis by
investigating in young human adults the impact of
distracting face age and associated social status information
on performance in a goal-directed oculomotor task.

Methods
Participants
Thirty-two right-handed undergraduates (23 female, 9 male,
mean age = 22.8 years, SD = 2.0) from the University of
Milano-Bicocca participated, in exchange for course credits.
All had normal or corrected to normal vision and were
unaware of the experiment’s purpose. The study was

conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki
and approved by the local ethical committee.

Stimuli
Grayscale photographs (7.98 × 15.76 degrees of visual
angle) of the faces of 4 younger adults (2 females and 2
males, age range: 18-23 years), 4 middle-aged adults (2
females and 2 males, age range: 34-40 years), and 4 older
adults (2 females and 2 males, age range: 74-85 years),
bearing a neutral expression and a straight gaze, were used.
All the photos were taken from the Productive Aging Lab
Face Database (Minear and Park, 2004). The gaze direction
of each photo was manipulated using Adobe Photoshop,
creating face pictures with gaze-averted 0.75 degrees of
visual angle both to the left and to the right.

Procedure
The experiment was carried out in a sound-attenuated room,
dimly illuminated. Participants sat in front of a 19-inch LCD
monitor (Samsung Syncmaster 943; 1280 × 1024 pixels; 60
Hz), with their head supported by a chin rest in order to
maintain a stable eye-to-screen distance of 50 cm. At the
beginning of the experimental session, participants were
invited to read 12 fictional résumés associated with the
photographs selected as stimuli. The résumés indicated
either a relatively high social status or a relatively low social
status.
Social
status
was
mainly
related
to
educational/professional information (e.g., high status: She
was recently admitted to the faculty of Medicine/He is a
Public Prosecutor of the Supreme Court of Palermo; low
status: He did not complete Secondary school/She was
dismissed as a worker for incompetence; for a similar
manipulation see Dalmaso et al., 2012). The résumés could
be considered as brief biographies (hereafter biography).
Participants were randomly divided into two groups. For
participants in the first group, 6 faces (a male and a female
of each age range) were displayed along with biographies
indicating a relatively high social status, and the remaining
6 faces to biographies indicating a relative low social status.
For participants in the second group, the same faces were
displayed along with biographies indicating the opposite
social status to that used for the first group. The biography
presentation order was randomized. After the biography
presentation, the associations created by participants
between social status information and faces were tested by
means of a true/false questionnaire composed of 12 items
(one for each biography). The items were randomly selected
from one of two lists (one containing true items and the
other containing false items). Item presentation order was
randomized. If participants gave a wrong answer to an item,
they were immediately presented again with the biography
to which the item was related. At the completion of the
questionnaire, the biography procedure was restarted for
those participants whose accuracy was less than 90%.
Biography presentation and response collection were
controlled using the software package E-Prime2
(Psychology Software Tools, Inc.).

2059

Having successfully completed the biography procedure,
participants took part in an instructed saccadic eye
movement task (Figure 1). Each trial started with the
presentation of a black fixation circle (diameter: 0.51
degrees of visual angle) centrally presented on the betweeneyes point of a stimulus face, bearing a straight gaze, on a
grey background. The face was flanked by two black target
circles (diameter: 0.89 degrees of visual angle), one to the
left and the other to the right of the horizontally aligned
fixation circle (eccentricity: 10.66 degrees of visual angle).
After a delay of 1500 ms, the color of the fixation turned
either green or red. 100 ms before the fixation color change,
the stimulus face bearing the straight gaze was replaced by
the same face with the gaze averted either to the left or to
the right. This face replacement created a dynamic gaze,
shifting towards the left or the right target. Participants were
required to perform a fast and accurate saccade towards the
left or right target, depending on the change in color of the
fixation. The correspondence between color instruction and
saccade direction was inverted for half of the participants.
The direction of the dynamic gaze could be congruent or
incongruent with the instructed direction. Since it was task
irrelevant participants were explicitly instructed to ignore
the distracting face. The stimulus face, the fixation and the
two targets remained on the screen until a response was
given. Immediately after a response was given a new trial
was presented.

recorded the movement of the dominant eye. Stimulus
generation and presentation were controlled by the SR
Research Experiment Builder software (version 1.10.56).
Throughout the test block, participants took a break every
80 trials (a total of 3 breaks). During the second break, the
biography procedure was repeated to maintain the
association between stimulus faces and their fictional social
status.
At the end of the experimental session, participants were
asked to rate the age of each distracting face with a value
between 1 and 99, in order to verify that they perceived the
faces as belonging to the 3 age groups of interest (age
manipulation check). Participants were also asked to rate the
social status associated during the biography procedure to
each distracting face with a value between 1 and 5 (social
status manipulation check).
The experiment used a 3 × 2 × 2 repeated measures
factorial design with Distracter Age (younger adults,
middle-aged adults, and older adults), Distracter Social
Status (high and low), and Congruency between gaze
direction and instructed direction (congruent and
incongruent) as the within-subjects variables.

Results
Age manipulation check
Age rating scores were entered in a one-way repeated
measures ANOVA with Distracter Face (DF1, DF2, DF3,
DF4, DF5, DF6, DF7, DF8, DF9, DF10, DF11, and DF12)
as the within-subjects factor. The analysis revealed that the
effect of Distracter Face was significant [F(11,341) = 734.9,
MS = 17215.9, p < .001]. Post-hoc tests with Bonferroni
correction showed significant differences (all ps < .05)
among distracter faces belonging to different age
manipulation levels (i.e. younger adults, middle-aged adults,
and older people). Furthermore, post-hoc tests revealed that
the faces belonging to each age manipulation level did not
differ from each other, confirming our manipulation.

Social status manipulation check
Figure 1: Experimental procedure.
Participants performed a training block, comprising 12
trials, and a test block, comprising 240 trials, with each of
the 12 faces being randomly presented 20 times. In 120 test
trials (10 replications of the male and the female belonging
to each age range and social status), the direction of the
dynamic gaze was congruent with the instructed direction.
In the remaining 120 test trials (10 replications of the male
and the female belonging to each age range and social
status), the direction of the dynamic gaze was incongruent
with the instructed direction.
The participants’ eye positions and movements were
recorded monocularly in real-time by an infrared video gaze
tracking system (EyeLink II, SR Research Ltd.,
Mississauga, Ontario, Canada). For all participants, we

A two-way mixed ANOVA, with Distracter Face (DF1,
DF2, DF3, DF4, DF5, DF6, DF7, DF8, DF9, DF10, DF11,
and DF12) as the within-subjects factor and Subject Group
(Group 1 vs. Group 2) as the between-subject factor, was
used to determine whether or not participants considered the
distracter faces as having the same social status as in the
biography procedure. The analysis revealed that the
interaction between Distracter Face and Subject Group was
significant [F(11,330) = 107.97, MS = 68.126, p < .001,
Figure 2b]. Post-hoc tests, performed as before, showed
significant differences between distracter faces associated
with biographies emphasizing different social status levels
(high vs. low). Furthermore, post-hoc tests revealed that the
faces associated with biographies belonging to the same
social status level did not differ from each other, confirming
our manipulation.

2060

Saccadic eye movement errors
Practice trials were discarded from the analyses. Saccadic
eye movements were defined as correct if landing within ± 2
degrees of visual angle of the instructed target along the
horizontal dimension. Saccadic eye movements landing
within ± 2 degrees of visual angle of the non-instructed
target along the horizontal dimension were defined as Gaze
Following Errors (GFE) in the incongruent trials (i.e.
incongruency between distracter’s gaze direction and
instructed direction), or as Generic Errors (GE) in the
congruent trials (i.e. congruency between distracter’s gaze
direction and instructed direction). Saccadic eye movements
landing outside ± 2 degrees of visual angle of either the
instructed or not-instructed target along the horizontal
dimension were defined as Saccades to Nothing Errors
(SNE, 14.5 % of total trials) and were excluded from the
analysis.
The first focus of interest was the difference between
GFE and GE since it provides a direct and early measure of
the automatic tendency to follow the distracting gaze
direction. Mean percentages of GFE and GE across subjects
were computed for each combination of Distracter Age and
Distracter Social Status. These data were entered in a threeway repeated measures ANOVA, with Error Type (GFE and
GE), Distracter Age (younger adults, middle-aged adults,
and older adults), and Distracter Social Status (high and
low) as within-subjects factors. Post-hoc comparisons were
performed using the Duncan’s test with an alpha level of
.05. The analysis revealed that the main effect of Error Type
was significant [F(1,31) = 35.59, MS = 10385.44, p < .001],
indicating that participants made more GFE than GE (13.40
% vs. 2.99 %). This confirmed the automatic tendency of
participants to follow the distracter’s gaze (for similar
results see e.g., Ricciardelli et al., 2002). The analysis also
showed a significant main effect of Distracter Age [F(2,62)
= 6.01, MS = 244.37, p < .005] and a significant Error Type
× Distracter Age interaction [F(2,62) = 12.80, MS = 833.07,
p < .001], indicating that the age of the distracter critically
modulated GFE but not GE. Specifically, GFE measured for
middle-aged distracters (17.25%) were higher than GFE
measured for both younger (13.55 %, p < .02) and older
distracters (9.39 %, p < .001), which were also significantly
different from each other (p < .006). No other main effects
or interactions were significant.

Saccadic eye movement latencies
The second focus of interest was the reaction times (RTs) of
correct saccadic eye movements, since they could provide
an indirect measure of the interference/cueing effect of the
distracting gaze. Indeed, although people may be able to
suppress the automatic tendency to make saccades in the
direction of the distracting gaze, one might expect a higher
latency for saccades in the incongruent trials than in the
congruent trials. Moreover, if the social status of the
distracter exerts an effect on joint attention through a more
cognitive/higher-level mechanism than that related to the
age of the distracter, as we had hypothesized, then a

different modulation of saccadic eye movements over time
should be observed by these two factors. Specifically, the
magnitude of the distracter social status effect should
increase as the latency of correct saccadic eye movements
increases, whereas the magnitude of the distracter age effect
should decrease.
To this end, we computed median RT values of correct
saccades for the first to the second bin of the individual
rank-ordered raw data, separately for each combination of
Distracter Age, Distracter Social Status, and Congruency
between gaze direction and instructed direction. One subject
was excluded from the analysis since the number of his
correct saccades was not sufficient to appropriately compute
median values of RTs for each combination of the
experimental factors. An index of the interference effect of
the distracting gaze was then obtained by subtracting the
median RT values in the congruent trials from the median
RT values in the incongruent trials for each of the Distracter
Age and Distracter Social Status conditions, and each
participant. These data were entered in a three-way repeated
measures ANOVA, with Distracter Age (younger adults,
middle-aged adults, and older adults), Distracter Social
Status (low and high), and Bin (first and second) as within
subjects-factors. Post-hoc comparisons were performed
using the Duncan’s test with an alpha level of .05. The
ANOVA showed a main effect of Distracter Age [F(2,60) =
8.56, MS = 10482, p < .001], indicating a higher
interference index for both the younger (30.15 ms, effect
size = .56) and middle-aged distracters (23.94 ms, effect
size = .44) compared to the older distracters (12.05 ms,
effect size = .21, p < .001, p < .01, respectively). In addition,
the analysis showed a significant two-way interaction
between Distracter Age and Distracter Social Status
[F(2,60) = 4.35, MS = 5150, p < .02], and a significant
three-way interaction between Distracter Age, Distracter
Social Status and Bin [F(2,60) = 3.64, MS = 2441, p < .04],
Noticeably, as specifically suggested by the three way
interaction (Figure 2), the social status of the distracter had
an effect on saccadic eye movements with higher latency
only. Indeed, post-hoc comparisons showed that, for trials
belonging to the second bin, younger distracters with a low
social status produced a higher interference index (42.76
ms, effect size = .64) than the same distracters with a high
social status (24.32 ms, effect size = .34, p < .02). By
contrast, middle-aged distracters produced a higher
interference index when they were associated with a high
social status (33.83 ms, effect size = .45) than a low one
(9.93 ms, effect size = .13, p < .01). No difference between
high and low social status was found for older distracters.
For trials belonging to the first bin, post-hoc comparisons
indicated a higher interference index for both the younger
(low status = 29.10 ms, effect size = .68; high status = 24.41
ms, effect size = .59) and middle-aged distracters (low
status = 23.74 ms, effect size = .52; high status = 28.26 ms,
effect size = .66) compared to older distracters (low status =
9.61 ms, effect size = .21; high status = 14.88 ms, effect size
= .31), independent of social status (all ps < .05).

2061

Figure 2: Mean index of the interference effect exerted by
the distracting gaze (median RT values of correct saccades
in the incongruent trials minus median RT values of correct
saccades in the congruent trials) as a function of Distracter
Age (younger, middle-aged, and older adults), separately for
each Distracter Social (and Bin. Error bars represent the
standard errors of means across participants.
Finally, to confirm the finding that the distracter social
status modulates joint attention only at a later stage, we
focused on the RTs of GFE. Since no effect of the distracter
status was found on GFE percentage, one might predict that
GFE latencies squarely match those of correct saccades
which were placed in the first bin. To this end, we computed
the number of GFE with latencies falling in the correct
saccades’ first bin, separately for each subject. A chi-square
test revealed that GFE had latencies which fell in the first
bin more frequently (85.3 %) than would be expected (χ2 =
110.75, df = 30, p < .0001), further supporting the idea that
the social status of the distracter exerts a high-level effect on
gaze following behaviour.

Discussion
In this study, we investigated the impact of face age and
social status information on gaze following behaviour in
young adults performing an oculomotor task. This was
achieved by presenting distracters of different ages whose
faces were associated with a fictional biography which
could describe the distracter as a high or low status person.
Our results confirmed the automatic nature of gaze
following behaviour as the percentage of gaze following
errors was higher than the percentage of generic errors
(Ricciardelli et al., 2002; 2012). Interestingly, participants
made less GFE with older distracters compared to all other
distracters. Older distracters also interfered less with the
execution of correct saccades, suggesting that older
distracting faces are easier to ignore. This result is in line
with previous studies that investigated the effect of
distracter’s age on gaze cueing in young adults (Slessor et
al., 2010; Ebner et al. 2010), and reported less distracting
effect of averted gaze for elderly faces. It has been proposed
that young adults may find it easier to ignore gaze cues from
elderly distracters as they are less familiar with their facial
features (Deaner et al., 2007). Similar differential results
have been observed also for face recognition and processing
(for a review see Anastasi & Rhodes, 2012).
In addition, we found that young adults made more GFE
with middle-aged distracters than with younger distracters,
indicating a general other-age bias on gaze following

behaviour, rather than an own-age bias. The lack of an ownage bias was confirmed also by the results relative to
saccadic eye movement latencies. The occurrence of a
super-ordinate categorization (Gaertner & Dovidio, 2000) of
younger and middle-aged distracters may provide a viable
explanation of this unpredicted pattern of results. According
to Gaertner and Dovidio’s (2000) common in-group identity
model, when people perceive others as out-group members
on the basis of a certain identity cue, and, simultaneously,
can form, together with these out-group members, a
common super-ordinate super-ordinate group on the basis of
another identity cue, the favouritism these people have for
their in-group members would be redirected toward outgroup members included within the super-ordinate superordinate group. Therefore, we can surmise that participants
of our study classified younger and middle-aged distracters
as in-group and out-group members, respectively, on
account of face age estimation, and as members of the same
super-ordinate group on account of another facial cue
estimation, such as facial similarity.
The novel result of our study is that face age, but not
social status information, affects GFE. Social status has an
effect on saccadic eye movements with higher latency only.
Previous studies investigating the role of social status on
gaze-mediated covert orienting of attention (Dalmaso et al.,
2012) reported that high status individuals produced a
stronger gaze cueing effect (Dalmaso et al., 2012); by
contrast, our results indicate that in young adults gaze
cueing is facilitated (i.e. slower saccadic reaction times) by
own-age low-status distracters. The contrast between our
results and those of Dalmaso et al.’s (2012) study could be
due to differences in the stimuli used. In Dalmaso et al.’s
(2012) work, photos depicting only male faces were used as
stimuli, while in our study we used both female and male
distracters. Indeed, gender is an element from which social
status could also be perceived implicitly, and it was
established that male faces are perceived to be more
dominant (i.e. higher social status) than female faces (Jones
et al., 2010). It is possible that the influences on gaze
following behaviour of information about social status may
also depend on how it is induced, i.e. whether explicitly or
implicitly. Alternatively, own-age low status faces could
represent a threat to the social identity of high-status groups
(Scheepers et al., 2004); as a source of threat, such lowstatus individuals should be monitored continually.
In conclusion, our findings extended previous joint
attention studies by indicating that the overt orienting of
attention driven by gaze could be differently modulated both
by perceptual features and high-order socio-cognitive
factors of the seen face. Taken together, our results indicate
that a perceptual manipulation of an identity cue (i.e. age),
exerts an effect on gaze following parameters in the early
stages of saccade programming and execution. By contrast,
higher-order manipulation of another identity cue (i.e. social
status) affects gaze following parameters at the later stages
of saccade programming and execution. This could be due
either to the kind of manipulation (perceptual vs. higher-

2062

order) or to the kind of identity cue (age vs. social-status).
Future studies are needed to clarify the role of different
identity cues (such as age, race, gender, celebrity or political
affiliation) and manipulations on the time course and
patterns of gaze following parameters, in order to explore
the possibility that different identity cues fit into a few
broad categories or continua, such as identity valence,
which have different effects on overt orienting of attention.

Acknowledgments
We thank Natale Vincenzo Maiorana and Roberta
Capellini for their help in collecting data. This research was
supported by a grant from the Ministero dell'Istruzione,
dell’Università e della Ricerca (PRIN project
2008ZN5J5S_004).

References
Anastasi, J. S., & Rhodes, M. G. (2012). The own-age bias
in face recognition: A meta-analytic and theoretical
review. Psychological Bulletin, 138, 146–174.
Baron-Cohen, S. (1995). Mindblindness: An Essay on
Autism and Theory of Mind. MIT Press, Cambridge.
Bonifacci, P., Ricciardelli, P., Lugli, L., & Pellicano, A.
(2008). Emotional attention: Effects of emotion and gaze
direction on overt orienting of attention. Cognitive
Processing, 9, 127-133.
Cesario, J. F. (2006). Regulatory fit from nonverbal
behaviours: How source delivery style influences message
effectiveness. Dissertation Abstracts International, 67,
2276.
Ciardo, F., Rossetti, A., Actis-Grosso, R., & Ricciardelli, P.
(2012). How old are you? The effect of face age on gazefollowing behaviour. Perception, 41 (supplement), 129.
Dalmaso, M., Pavan, G., Castelli, L., & Galfano, G. (2011).
Social status gates social attention in humans. Biology
Letters, 16, 450-452.
Deaner R. O., Shepherd, S. V., & Platt, M. L. (2007).
Familiarity accentuates gaze cuing in women but not men.
Biology Letters, 3, 64–67.
Driver, J., Davis, G., Ricciardelli, P., Kidd, P., Maxwell, E.,
& Baron-Cohen, S. (1999). Gaze Perception Triggers
Reflexive Visuospatial Orienting. Visual Cognition 6,
509-540.
Ebner, N. C., & Johnson, M. K. (2010). Age-group
differences in interference from young and older
emotional faces. Cognition and Emotion, 24, 1095–1116.
Friesen, C., & Kingstone, A. (1998). The eyes have it!
Reflexive orienting is triggered by nonpredictive gaze.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 5, 490-495.
Frischen, A., Bayliss, A. P., & Tipper, S. P. (2007). Gaze
cueing of attention: Visual attention, social cognition, and
individual differences. Psychological bulletin, 133, 694724.
Gaertner, S. L., & Dovidio, J. F. (2000). Reducing
intergroup bias: The common ingroup identity model.
Philadelphia: Psychology Press.

Greene, D. J., Mooshagian, E., Kaplan, J., Zaidel, E., &
Iacoboni, M. (2009). The neural correlates of social
attention: automatic orienting to social and non-social
cues. Psychological Research, 73, 499-511.
Jones, B. C., DeBruine, L. M., Main, J. C., Little, A. C.,
Welling, L. L., Feinberg, D. R. & Tiddeman, B. P. (2010).
Facial cues of dominance modulate the short-term gaze
cuing effect in human observers. Proceedings of Royal
Society B 277, 617–624.
Innocenti, A., De Stefani, E., Bernardi, N. F., Campione, G.
C., & Gentilucci, M. (2012). Gaze Direction and Request
Gesture in Social Interactions. PLoS ONE, 7, e36390.
Liuzza, M. T., Cazzato, V., Vecchione, M., Crostella, F.,
Caprara, G. V., & Aglioti, S. M. (2011). Follow my eyes:
the gaze of politicians reflexively captures the gaze of
ingroup voters. PLoS One, 6, e25117.
Minear, M., & Park, D. C. (2004). A lifespan database of
adult facial stimuli. Behaviour Research Methods,
Instruments, & Computers, 36, 630-633.
Morales, M., Mundy, P., & Rojas, J. (1998). Following the
direction of gaze and language development in 6-montholds. Infant Behaviour and Development, 21, 373–377.
Mundy, P., & Newell, L. (2007). Attention, joint attention,
and social cognition. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 16, 269-274.
Pierno, A. C., Becchio, C., Wall M. B., Smith A. T.,
Turella, L., & Castiello, U. (2006). When gaze turns into
grasp. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 18, 2130-2137.
Ricciardelli, P., Bricolo, E., Aglioti, S. M., & Chelazzi, L.
(2002). My eyes want to look where your eyes are
looking: Exploring the tendency to imitate another
individual’s gaze. NeuroReport, 13, 2259-2263.
Ricciardelli, P., Carcagno, S., Vallar, G., & Bricolo, E.
(2012). Is gaze following purely reflexive or goal-directed
instead? Revisiting the automaticity of orienting attention
by gaze cues looking. Experimental Brain Research, 224,
93-106.
Scheepers, D., & Ellemers, N. (2004). When the pressure is
up: The assessment of social identity threat in low and
high status groups. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 41, 192-200.
Shepherd, S. V., Deaner, R. O., & Platt, M. L. (2006).
Social status gates social attention in monkeys. Current
Biology, 16, R119-120.
Shepherd, S. V. (2010). Following gaze: gaze-following
behaviour as a window into social cognition. Frontiers in
Integrative Neuroscience, 4, 1-11.
Slessor, G., Laird, G., Phillips, L. H., Bull R., & Filippou,
D. (2010). Age-related differences in gaze following:
does the age of the face matter? The journals of
Gerontology. Series B, Psychological sciences and social
sciences, 65, 536-541.
Tipples, J. (2006). Fear and fearfulness potentiate automatic
orienting to eye gaze. Cognition & Emotion, 20, 309-320.
Wiese, H., Schweinberger, S. R., & Hansen, K. (2008). The
age of the beholder: ERP evidence of an own-age bias in
face memory. Neuropsychologia, 46, 2973-2985.

2063

