UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Framing effects in evaluation of accuracy of others' predictions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3vk0d3g2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Author
Yeung, Saiwing

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Framing effects in evaluation of accuracy of others’ predictions
Saiwing Yeung (saiwing.yeung@gmail.com)
Institute of Education, Beijing Institute of Technology, China

Abstract
Most predictions can be partitioned into two components: the
predicted outcome, and the chance that one considers the outcome will happen. We studied how people evaluate predictions
with binary outcomes. These predictions can be conveyed in
two equivalent ways: one predicting an outcome with some
probability, and the other predicting the other outcome with the
probability of the complement of the first outcome. Although
these two ways of stating the predictions are mathematically
interchangeable, we hypothesized that people would judge the
congruently stated prediction, one that has the same qualitative component as the actual outcome, as more accurate. We
tested this hypothesis in four experiments. Results suggested
that this effect is consistent across a number of domains; depends on the frame in which the prediction is stated; is robust
regardless of whether the ratings were elicited in positive or
negative terms; holds for both rating and choice tasks.
Keywords: framing effects; probabilistic judgment; decision
making.

Probabilistic predictions are frequently encountered in everyday life. For example, weather forecasts are often made
in probabilistic terms (e.g. “chance of rain is 80%”). By
comparing these statements against the actual outcomes, we
can assess the predictors’ skills at predicting these events. It
is important to be able to accurately evaluate other people’s
predictions because it would then allow us to learn how good
the predictors are in making predictions, to judge whether or
to what degree should we trust the predictions, and to make
decisions accordingly. For example, if a certain investment
analyst predicts that there is a 99% chance that Acme Company will declare bankruptcy, and that we consider this analyst to be a good predictor, then it would be advantageous to
sell stocks of Acme Company that we are holding.
In this paper, we focus on one particular aspect of evaluating predictions — how framing of predictions affect people’s
evaluations. Framing effect is an extremely well-researched
topic and has led to numerous scholarly work. It refers to a
phenomenon in which people’s judgment, decisions, and actions are influenced by frames, or presentation of information
and its context.
Framing effects have been found to influence people in various ways in different contexts. Levin, Schneider, and Gaeth
(1998) proposed a typology that categorized them into three
main types. The first type, risky choice framing effect, induces a choice reversal effect between two logically equivalent gambles (Tversky & Kahneman, 1981). In a prototypical
setup, participants see one of the two gambles: either choosing between a sure gain and a risky gain, or choosing between
a sure loss and a risky loss. Previous research has found that
a majority of the people would prefer the sure gain choice in
the gain condition, and risky loss choice in the loss condition.
The second type of framing effects was called attribute
framing effects, as a single attribute within a given context
presented in two logically equivalent frames has been shown

to change people’s evaluations about the subject. For example, in Levin and Gaeth (1988), beef that was labeled as “75%
lean” was rated as better tasting and less greasy than beef that
was labeled as “25% fat.”
Goal framing effects is the third type in Levin et al.’s typology. Here negatively framed messages are found to be
more persuasive than positively framed messages. Works by
Meyerowitz and Chaiken (1987) demonstrated a typical setup
of this problem. They found that women are more likely to
perform breast self-examination (BSE) if they are told of the
negative consequences of not performing BSE, compared to
being told of the positive consequences of performing one.
In the present study we report a new type of framing effect,
in which people’s evaluation of a prediction with respect to
the outcome is influenced by the frame in which the prediction is presented. We will focus on predictions in which there
are clearly two possible outcomes (e.g. coin flips) and are
stated with the subjective probability of said event happening
(e.g. “80%”). Because there are exactly two outcomes, any
predictions can be stated in two ways that are logically equivalent. For example, to say that there is a 99% chance that the
world will be destroyed at end of 2012 is equivalent to a 1%
chance that the world will not be destroyed at end of 2012.
We argue, however, that people evaluate these predictions
differently. As demonstrated by the framing effects literature described earlier, people’s judgments are often influenced by how information is presented. In the context of prediction evaluation, we suggest that people would overweight
the qualitative component of the prediction (the stated outcome), relative to its quantitative component (the chance that
one considers the outcome will happen). To differentiate this
from previously discovered types of framing effects, we will
call this probabilistic statement framing effect (PSFE). We
will next describe four experiments that were carried out to
investigate this hypothesized effect.

Pilot Experiment
The main objective of the Pilot Experiment was to establish
initial evidence about PSFE. To ensure the realism of the
stimulus, we used a cover story about the 2012 U.S. presidential election which had just ended a few weeks prior.

Methods
The participants were recruited using Amazon Mechanical
Turk (MTurk). Only workers who were residing in the U.S.,
were at least 18 years old, and had a lifetime acceptance rate
with MTurk of 95% or over were allowed to participate1 .
1 The same requirements applied to all experiments in this paper.
Moreover, we disallowed participants from participating in more
than one experiment in this paper (except for two participants who

1623

In order to detect participants who might have been bored
or inattentive during the experiment, an attention check (AC)
was employed in the experiment (Oppenheimer, Meyvis, &
Davidenko, 2009). The AC took place before the actual experiment, and consisted of a paragraph of instruction followed by a question. The instruction began by asking participants to enter their favorite sports in the space below. However, at the end of the instruction we asked the participants to
enter a different response: “To show that you have read this
far, please enter candle below. To repeat, enter the word candle no matter what your favorite sports is.” If participants had
read the entire instruction, then they should have responded
with the target word (“candle”). The other experiments in this
paper employed AC’s with exactly the same format with the
exception of different target words.
The key content of the experiment would be next. The
instructions were as follows, with the conditions marked by
parentheses, and the differences between conditions marked
by double brackets (J and K) and vertical lines (~):

The congruent group rated prediction accuracy (M “
4.58, s.d. “ 2.21) significantly higher than the incongruent
group did (M “ 3.17, s.d. “ 1.83; tp80q “ 3.15, p ă 0.01,
Cohen’s d “ 0.71). The congruent group also rated prediction usefulness (M “ 4.30) higher than the incongruent group
did (M “ 3.45), although the difference was only marginally
significant (tp80q “ 1.75, p “ 0.09, Cohen’s d “ 0.39).
As the stimuli in this experiment involved a question in
politics, we also tested whether subjects’ political orientation
influenced their responses. There were more self-reported
Democrats than Republicans, with 22 (26.8%) self-identified
as strongly Democrat and 35 (42.7%) as moderately Democrat. Nonetheless, the participants’ political orientations had
a low correlation with their evaluation of accuracy at r “
0.084 and was insignificant (tp80q “ 0.75, p “ 0.45).

Discussion

Acme inc. is a company that conducts public opinion polls about the 2012 presidential election between
Barack Obama and Mitt Romney. Before the election
it had predicted that J (congruent) Mitt Romney had a
20 percent chance of winning ~ (incongruent) Barack
Obama had an 80 percent chance of winningK.

All participants were then asked “If Romney had won, was
Acme inc. wrong?” in a forced-choice question. The two
conditions in this experiment represented the different ways
in which predictions were framed. In the congruent condition,
the qualitative component of the prediction was the identical to
the hypothetical result stated in the stimuli (Romney winning),
whereas it was the opposite in the incongruent condition.
We then asked participants to rate the prediction using a 9point Likert scale on “How accurate was the prediction?” and
“How useful was the prediction?” The participants then filled
in a demographics survey, which included a question about
their political orientation.

Results
There was a total of 93 responses. Eleven of them failed the
attention check question and their data were discarded. Out of
the resulting 82 data points, 56.1% were female, 81.7% had at
least some college education. We recorded age information in
brackets. Almost half of the participants were in the youngest
bracket of under 25 (48.8%), but there were also significant
portion of the participants in older brackets (22.0% between
26 and 35; 18.3% between 36 and 50; 11.0% 51 or over).
We first examined the forced-choice question on whether
the participants regarded the prediction as wrong. Relatively
fewer participants in the congruent group rated the prediction as wrong (16{40 “ 40%) than in the incongruent group
(22{42 “ 52.4%). However, the differences were not significant (χ2 p1, N “ 82q “ 1.26, p “ 0.26, φ “ 0.12).

In this experiment we found initial evidence supporting
PSFE: Participants in the congruent frame rated the prediction as more accurate, although they did not consider the prediction less wrong. Nonetheless, there remains a number of
unresolved issues. The two conditions represent differences
at multiple attributes, including the prediction frame (whether
the prediction was described in terms congruent with the actual result), framing of the result (whether the results were
described using the same agent as the prediction frame), and
valence of the evaluation (whether the evaluation is elicited in
positive or negative terms). It remains to be established which
of these attributes underlie this phenomenon. Moreover, the
scenario used was based on a real event and this might have
interfered with people’s reasoning, especially because most
of our participants self-identified as liberal. Therefore, we
conducted the next two experiments to tease apart the pathways involved in bringing about this phenomenon.

Experiment 1
The first objective of Experiment 1 was to investigate PSFE
using an artificial cover story in which the participants do not
have a preference towards one of the two possible outcomes.
The second objective was to investigate whether PSFE is
driven by the prediction frame or result frame.

Methods
Participants were again recruited from MTurk. The experiment used a between-subject 2 ˆ 2 design, crossing the prediction frame and the result frame. The stimuli in this experiment used the cover story of a college (American) football
game. The stimuli were as follows:

participated in two experiments because of a programming error).
This ensures a broader representativeness of our samples.

1624

Imagine that you have just arrived a little early for a new
class on the first day of the semester. Another student
was already there. The two of you started talking and
the conversation turned to an upcoming college football
game between universities A and B. The other student
predicted that J (Prediction frame: congruent) University
B has a 30% chance of winning ~ (Prediction frame: incongruent) University A has a 70% chance of winning K.

*

5

The game took place later that week and J (Result frame:
A) University A lost to University B ~ (Result frame: B)
University B defeated University AK.

4

3

3

2

2

1

1

1

0

0

4
3
2

The conditions in the two prediction frames are so named
because if we ignore the confidence levels in the predictions,
the prediction in the congruent prediction frame (B winning)
is congruent with the result (B won in all conditions in this
experiment), while the prediction in the incongruent prediction frame (A winning) is incongruent. The conditions in the
result frames are simply named after the agent in the frame.
The participants were then asked to state whether the predictions wrong, and how accurate was the prediction (9-point
Likert scale). Finally the participants answered a demographics survey similar to that in the Pilot.

*

*
4

Congru. Incongru.

Prediction frame

Frame A Frame B

Result frame

0

Same

Different

Same agent-ness

Figure 1: Results of Experiment 1. Each graph plots a comparison
of accuracy ratings for a different factor. Error bars represent s.e.

Results
There were a total of 112 participants (41.1% female), after discarding data from eight others for failing the attention
check (6.7%). Average age was 28.62 (s.d. “ 11.95) and
84.8% had at least some college education.
The main objective of Experiment 1 was to investigate
whether the prediction frame or the result frame is driving the
PSFE, and whether there is interaction. To examine the effect
of the prediction frame, we performed a t-test to compare the
evaluation of prediction accuracy between the two prediction
frames. The mean rating in the congruent prediction frame
was 4.91 (s.d. “ 1.79), higher than that of the incongruent
prediction frame at 3.34 (s.d. “ 1.47), and the difference was
significant (tp110q “ 5.08, p ă 0.01, Cohen’s d “ 0.97). This
replicated the results from the Pilot.
In the Pilot, there was no significant difference between
the two conditions in whether participants consider the predictions were wrong. Interestingly, this was significant in Experiment 1, in which 12 of 56 (21.4%) participants in the congruent condition judged the prediction as wrong, compared to
29 of 56 (51.8%) of those in the incongruent condition did so
(χ2 p1, N “ 112q “ 11.12, p ă 0.01, φ “ 0.32).
One alternative hypothesis is that the differences were
caused by the different result frames. We found the mean
accuracy ratings to be 4.25 (s.d. “ 1.96) for frame A and 4.00
(s.d. “ 1.66) for frame B, respectively. There were no significant difference (tp110q “ 0.74, p “ 0.46, Cohen’s d “ 0.14).
For the question on prediction wrong-ness, there were no
significant difference between different result frames either
(χ2 p1, N “ 112q “ 0.20, p “ 0.66, φ “ 0.04). Moreover,
there were no interaction between prediction framing and result framing (Fp1q “ 0.32, p “ 0.57, η2 “ 0.00). Figure 1
plots the results from Experiment 1.
Another alternative hypothesis is that having the same
agent in the prediction frame and result frame would lead
to higher accuracy ratings. We found this to not be the
case. Mean accuracy ratings for participants who had the
same agent in both frames was lower (4.05, s.d. “ 1.69)
than those with different agents (4.20, s.d. “ 1.94), and the
differences were not significant (tp110q “ 0.43, p “ 0.67,

Cohen’s d “ 0.08). There were no significant differences
in the forced-choice question either (χ2 p1, N “ 112q “ 0.00,
p “ 0.96, φ “ 0.01).
Self-reported football knowledge was evenly spread over
the 4-point scale. There were 32, 33, 23, and 24 responses,
from the least knowledgeable to the most knowledgeable. To
investigate whether there is an interaction between football
knowledge and prediction frame, we carried out an ANCOVA
analysis. The results indicated that there was no significant
interaction (Fp1q “ 0.696, p “ 0.41).

Discussion
Results of Experiment 1 suggested that framing of predictions significantly changes people’s evaluation of predictions,
whereas framing of results and whether the same agent is
used in both frames has little effect. This not only replicated
the results of the Pilot, but also suggested that prediction
frame is what underlies the difference in how people evaluate how accurate predictions are. The results of this experiment correspond to the compatibility effects (Slovic, Griffin,
& Tversky, 1990), which states that stimuli attribute that is
compatible with the response mode would be overweighted.

Experiment 2
In both the Pilot and Experiment 1, the forced-choice question on evaluations were elicited in negative terms, i.e. we
asked the participants whether the predictions were wrong.
Therefore in Experiment 2 we tested whether PSFE also holds
when the evaluations had a positive valence.

Methods
Participants were again recruited from MTurk and the procedures were mostly the same as the previous two experiments.
The instructions were:

1625

Imagine that you have just arrived a little early for a new
class on the first day of the semester. Another student was
already there. The two of you started talking and the conversation turned to an upcoming college football game
between universities A and B. The other student predicted
that J (congruent) University B has a 30% ~ (incongruent)
University A has a 70% K chance of winning.

The game took place later that week and J (congruent)
University B defeated University A ~ (incongruent) University A lost to University B K.

As can be seen from the instructions, there were two conditions: congruent and incongruent. The major departure of
Experiment 2 from the previous two lies in how we elicited
the forced-choice response on about the prediction: we asked
“Was the prediction made by the other student right?”
Note that in both condition, the agent remains the same in
both the prediction frame and the result frame.

the influences of these two factors, we also assessed perception of overconfidence and participants’ numeracy.

Methods

Results
Experiment 2 had a total of 78 participants (34.6% female),
after discarding data from nine of them for failing the attention check (10.3%). Mean age was 29.03 (s.d. “ 12.73) and
88.5% had at least some college education.
The main objective of this experiment was to test whether
PSFE could be replicated when evaluations were elicited in
positive terms. We first analyzed results of the forced-choice
question in which the participants were asked whether the
prediction was right. In the congruent condition, 22 of 40
(55.0%) responded affirmatively; whereas in the incongruent
condition, 8 of 38 participants (21.1%) responded affirmatively. χ2 -squared test showed that the difference was significant (χ2 p1, N “ 78q “ 9.49, p ă 0.01, φ “ 0.35). The
quantitative accuracy ratings for the two conditions reflected
a similar picture. The mean accuracy rating for the congruent
condition was 5.05 (s.d. “ 2.06), compared to that of the incongruent condition of 3.39 (s.d. “ 1.72). The difference was
significant (tp76q “ 3.84, p ă 0.01, Cohen’s d “ 0.88).

Similar to the previous three experiments, all participants
were recruited through MTurk. However, because this experiment is slightly longer than the previous three, we increased
the reward from US$0.15 to US$0.20.
In the previous experiments, predictions in the two frames
were given logically equivalent probability estimates (e.g.
75% vs. 100% ´ 75% “ 25%). However, in Experiment 3 the
participants would see both frames side-by-side, and therefore such a setup might seem contrived. Moreover, we wanted
to test whether the congruent frame would be favored even
when it is logically inferior. Hence we parameterized the
congruent frame with a probability estimate of 15% (in the
direction of the actual result), and the incongruent frame with
80% (opposite the direction of the actual result). The congruent frame is now logically superior because it predicts the
outcome that turns out to be correct with 100% ´ 80% “ 20%
confidence, compared to 15% in the congruent frame. Additionally, in order to make the scenarios more realistic, we
added two detractor predictions to each option. The instruction for one of the conditions was as follows:
Imagine that you are an analyst at an investment firm.
Currently you are evaluating predictions made a year
ago by two of your subordinates concerning a technology company called Acme Corp.

Discussion
Experiment 2 focused on whether PSFE holds when the people are asked to evaluate the predictions in positive terms.
Results indicated that this is indeed the case, suggesting that
PSFE to be robust regardless of the valence in which evaluations were elicited.

Analyst A predicted that in the coming year:
• Acme would buy out their supplier SuperTech Company.
• Acme would expand into the European Union.
• There was an 80% chance that Acme would become
a public company.

Experiment 3
The first three experiments in this paper demonstrated that
when people give accuracy ratings to predictions, predictions
presented in a congruent frame as the actual result would be
rated as more accurate. Experiment 3 investigated whether
this phenomenon could be extended to choice tasks — when
the two frames (congruent and incongruent) are presented at
the same time as two choices and people are asked to judge
which one is the more accurate one.
We also tested two factors that might shed light on the
mechanism of PSFE. First, one potential reason that people
rated predictions in the incongruent condition as less accurate
might have been that the quantitative components of these
predictions involve higher numerical probabilities (compared
to those in the congruent condition), and this might have been
perceived as being overconfident, which in turn led to participants down-adjusting their accuracy ratings. Second, many
prior works have suggested that numeracy plays an important
role in judgment and decision making. For example, Peters et
al. (2006) found that participants who are higher in numeracy
are less susceptible to attribute framing effects. To investigate

Analyst B predicted that in the coming year:
• Acme would license crucial technology patents from
their competitor CompX Company.
• Acme would build another manufacturing plant
within the U.S.
• There was a 15% chance that Acme would not become a public company.
The probabilistic prediction shared by both analysts was
whether Acme would become public or not. Each of the two
analysts also made two detractor predictions additionally.
The participants then read about what actually happened.
There were five total predictions: two unique detractors from
each analyst, plus the common prediction. In all conditions,
Acme would not become public. However, one of the two
detractors from each of the analysts would come true.
In this counter-balance condition shown above, Analyst A
predicted that there was an 80% chance of the target event
(Acme became a public company) happening. Analyst B, in
contrast, predicted that there was a 15% chance of the target

1626

event not happening. If probabilistic statements could be inverted algebraically, it would mean Analyst B predicted that
there was an 85% chance of the target event happening. As
the target event did not happen, Analyst A should be evaluated as being more accurate, if prediction frames have no
influence on people’s judgment.
There were two counter-balancing conditions. First, the
order of the congruent and incongruent options was randomized between subjects. Second, the detractors that came true
were counter-balanced. For roughly half of the participants
the supplier buy out and new U.S. manufacturing plant turned
out to be true, while for the other half it was the opposite.
We then asked participants “Which analyst do you think
made the better predictions?” and “Which analyst do you
think was more confident about the predictions?” This was
followed by a memory test. We asked the participants to indicate whether each of the five events happened in the actual
outcome. Then to investigate the influence of participants’
numeracy on their judgments, we added the 8-item abbreviated numeracy scale from Weller et al. (2012). After the
numeracy section, participants answered a few demographics
questions, including two questions about their level of knowledge concerning stock trading and technology.

Results
There were a total of 85 participants (60% female; one declined to self-identify). We discarded data from 29 (25.4%)
participants: 27 for failing the AC and 2 for leaving over 80%
of the answers blank2 . Mean age was 33.1 (s.d. “ 12.87) and
87.1% had at least some college education.
The portion of workers who failed the AC was higher than
the previous experiments. We ran a 4 (experiment) ˆ 2 (number of AC pass/failure) χ2 -squared test of independence and the
results were significant (χ2 p3, N “ 414q “ 19.33, p ă 0.01,
φ “ 0.22). However, there was no a priori reason to suspect
that the workers in this experiment were different from those in
the previous ones. In all four experiments, the AC was the second question in the entire experimental procedure, after only
the question that elicited their MTurk ID. Therefore up to the
AC, the experimental procedures of all four experiments were
essentially the same. The monetary reward was the only difference between this experiment (US$0.20) and the previous ones
(all three at US$0.15). However, Mason and Watts (2009) have
found that financial incentives do not significantly impact the
quality of MTurk experiments, even for amounts that differ by
as much as 10 times. To further confirm the quality of the data,
we checked the result of the memory test. The range of the memory score was from 0 to 5 (remembered perfectly). The mean
memory score across all participants was 4.25, indicating that
the participants remembered the details of the experiment well.
Hence, we attribute the high AC failure rate to coincidence.
The main objective of this experiment was to test whether
the PSFE could be extended to a choice task. More partic2 No other participants left more than one of the nondemographic answers blank.

ipants (56; 65.9%) chose the analyst in the congruent condition (15%) as more accurate, compared to the one in the
incongruent (80%) condition (29; 34.1%). A χ2 -squared
test indicated that it was significantly different from chance
(χ2 p1, N “ 85q “ 8.58, p ă 0.01, φ “ 0.32).
We then examined whether perception of overconfidence
was related to PSFE. There were 35 (41.2%) and 50 (58.8%)
participants who judged the congruent and incongruent option, respectively, as more confident. The result was close
to reaching significance (χ2 p1, N “ 85q “ 2.65, p “ 0.10,
φ “ 0.18). This suggests that perception of predictors’ overconfidence might play a small part in this effect and deserves
further investigation.
The order of presentation had a big effect on choice. In
conditions where the incongruent option was presented first,
there were about the same number of participants who chose
the congruent option (N “ 21) as those who chose the incongruent option (N “ 20) as more accurate. However, if
the congruent option was presented first, 35 (vs. 9) participants judged the congruent option as more accurate. The
interaction was significant (χ2 p1, N “ 85q “ 7.58, p ă 0.01,
φ “ 0.30). This suggests that order of presentation significantly influenced evaluation of accuracy. However, order of
presentation did not have a significant effect on evaluation of
confidence (χ2 p1, N “ 85q “ 0.24, p “ 0.62, φ “ 0.05). The
other counter-balancing condition — which pair of distractors turned out to be correct — had no significant effect on
evaluation of accuracy (p “ 0.37) nor confidence (p “ 0.79).
We also investigated the effect of numeracy on people’s
judgments. As there are eight questions in Weller et al.’s numeracy scale, the range of the numeracy scores is from 0 to
8. No participant answered the mammogram question correctly. In fact, no answer came within 3 percentage point of
the correct answer. This is not surprising because this question has been found to be a very difficult question (see Weller
et al., 2012). The percentage of participants who answered
each question correctly (Table 1) was in fact quite close to
the result obtained by Weller et al. (2012). This suggests that
the numeracy and motivation of the participants in this experiment were comparable to those in their experiment. This
result also partly mitigated the concern raised by the high percentage of participants failing the AC.
The mean (and s.d.) of the numeracy score for participants
who chose the congruent or incongruent options as more accurate were 4.43 (1.45) and 5.41 (1.45), respectively. We fitted a logistic model using the numeracy score as the independent variable, and participants’ choices as dependent variable.
Results indicated that the influence of numeracy was significant (β “ 0.75, z “ 2.74, p ă 0.01). This suggested that
participants who were lower on numeracy are more likely to
consider the analyst in the congruent option — the normatively less accurate of the two — the more accurate predictor.
The effect of self-reported knowledge about stock trading
and technology on choice of more accurate prediction was not
significant in either case (p “ 0.80 and p “ 0.56).

1627

Table 1: Percentage of participants correctly answering each item
of the numeracy scale in Experiment 3 (E3), compared to the results
from Weller et al. (2012).
E3
W

Q1

Q2

Q3

Q4

Q5

Q6

Q7

Q8

0.0
11.0

27.1
26.5

45.9
39.8

57.6
42.1

80.0
60.4

81.2
70.2

96.5
73.8

88.2
84.8

Discussion
The key objective of this experiment was to investigate
whether PSFE would hold in a choice task. We also put PSFE
to a stronger test because the congruent option was presented
vis-à-vis a logically superior option. Our results found that
significantly more participants would choose the congruent
option, suggesting the robustness of PSFE. We also found that
perception of overconfidence did not explain PSFE. However,
numeracy was found to be a moderating factor. Like Peters et
al. (2006), we found that people who are higher in numeracy
to be less susceptible to framing effects.

General Discussion
We proposed a new phenomenon, probabilistic statement
framing effect (PSFE), that occurs when predictions made in
congruent frames (relative to eventual outcomes) are judged
as more accurate, compared to logically equivalent or even
superior predictions made in incongruent frames. Across four
experiments, we found that this effect holds regardless of real
world based event (Pilot Experiment) or hypothetical events
(Experiments 1 to 3), and rating (Pilot and Experiment 1 &
2) or choice (Experiment 3) task. The effect held even when
the congruent option was logically inferior (Experiment 3).
Finally, we found numeracy to be a moderating factor.
The results from these experiments suggest that a majority of people do not evaluate the goodness of predictions in
a normative manner. They overweight the qualitative component of a prediction while underweighting its quantitative
component. This is especially true for people who are low
in numeracy. The findings in this paper might have important
implications in domains such as personal finance, medical decision making, and corporate strategic planning.
Among the three major types of framing effects, PSFE
might be most closely related to the attribute framing effects.
However, we argue that it is distinct for one major reason.
Levin et al. (1998) demonstrated that attribute framing effects
occurs because positive frames evoke favorable associations
in memory; and vice versa for negative frames. However,
PSFE can favor evaluations of negative frames (e.g. losing
a game in sports), as long as the predictions are congruent
to the outcome. This cannot be explained using the above
framework and therefore we suggest that PSFE should be regarded as a separate phenomenon.
Although the effect seems to be robust across a broad range
of conditions, its causal mechanism and cognitive processes
are not well understood. Moreover, prior research has suggested that important personal decisions are less influenced
by frames (Marteau, 1989). We are currently examining what

roles information leakage (Sher & McKenzie, 2006), selective attention (Levin, 1987), and encoding of information
(Levin & Gaeth, 1988), might play in relation to this effect.
All experiments here have been carried out through MTurk.
This enabled us to collect data from a subject pool more diversified than one that of a university sample. Moreover,
MTurk has been found to be able to yield high quality data
(Buhrmester, Kwang, & Gosling, 2011), and be able to replicate a number of classical findings (Crump, McDonnell, &
Gureckis, 2013). However, it might be interesting in the future to study this phenomenon in lab-based and field studies.
The findings in this paper demonstrate the psychological
impact of prediction frames on how people evaluate predictions with respect to outcomes. When predictions are described in congruent frames as the eventual result, people
consider them as more accurate than if they were described in
incongruent frames. This observation is not captured by the
previous literature on framing effects and highlights the need
for a better understanding of the processes that underlies this
phenomenon.
Acknowledgments. We thank the very helpful comments from four
anonymous reviewers.

References
Buhrmester, M., Kwang, T., & Gosling, S. D. (2011). Amazon’s
Mechanical Turk: A new source of inexpensive, yet high-quality,
data? Perspectives on Psychological Science, 6(1), 3–5.
Crump, M. J. C., McDonnell, J. V., & Gureckis, T. M. (2013). Evaluating Amazon’s Mechanical Turk as a tool for experimental behavioral research. PLOS ONE, 8(3), e57410.
Levin, I. P. (1987). Associative effects of information framing.
Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 25(2), 85–86.
Levin, I. P., & Gaeth, G. J. (1988). How consumers are affected by
the framing of attribute information before and after consuming
the product. Journal of Consumer Research, 15(3), 374–378.
Levin, I. P., Schneider, S. L., & Gaeth, G. J. (1998). All frames
are not created equal: A typology and critical analysis of framing
effects. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes,
76(2), 149–188.
Marteau, T. M. (1989). Framing of information: Its influence upon
decisions of doctors and patients. British Journal of Social Psychology, 28(1), 89–94.
Mason, W., & Watts, D. J. (2009). Financial incentives and the
performance of crowds. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGKDD
workshop on human computation (Vol. 15, pp. 77–85).
Meyerowitz, B., & Chaiken, S. (1987). The effect of message framing on breast self-examination attitudes, intentions, and behavior.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52(3), 500–510.
Oppenheimer, D. M., Meyvis, T., & Davidenko, N. (2009). Instructional manipulation checks: Detecting satisficing to increase statistical power. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 45(4),
867–872.
Peters, E., Västfjäll, D., Slovic, P., Mertz, C. K., Mazzocco, K., &
Dickert, S. (2006). Numeracy and decision making. Psychological Science, 17(5), 407–413.
Sher, S., & McKenzie, C. R. M. (2006). Information leakage from
logically equivalent frames. Cognition, 101(3), 467–494.
Slovic, P., Griffin, D., & Tversky, A. (1990). Compatibility effects
in judgment and choice. In Insights in decision making: A tribute
to Hillel J. Einhorn (pp. 5–27). University of Chicago Press.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1981). The framing of decisions and
the psychology of choice. Science, 211(4481), 453–458.
Weller, J. A., Dieckmann, N. F., Tusler, M., Mertz, C. K., Burns,
W. J., & Peters, E. (2012). Development and testing of an abbreviated numeracy scale: A Rasch analysis approach. Journal of
Behavioral Decision Making. doi: 10.1002/bdm.1751

1628

