UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Gender and Sex: The Experiential Basis of Grammar

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3tx5k0rt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Author
Andonova, Elena

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Gender and Sex: The Experiential Basis of Grammar
Elena Andonova (eandonova@nbu.bg)
Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology, 21 Montevideo Street
Sofia, 1618 Bulgaria

Abstract
There have been contradictory reports of sex differences in
language processing. A novel approach is adopted here which
explores the experiential basis of such differences. Two
studies examine the auditory processing of grammatical
gender in Bulgarian in a gender decision (gender monitoring)
task and a cued shadowing (word repetition) task. Reaction
times in both experiments reveal significant two-way
interactions between the grammatical gender of words
(masculine vs. feminine) and the sex of the voice (male vs.
female). The sex of participants in the gender decision task
also interacted with word gender in terms of decision
accuracy. Women were relatively more accurate on their
“own reference” word gender (feminine) and less accurate on
masculine gender words. A two-way interaction between
word gender and participant sex on response latencies in the
cued shadowing task supports the view that these effects are
not strategic but have a highly automatic nature instead.
Findings are interpreted in terms of individual differences in
the experience of grammatical gender in such gender-marking
languages.
Keywords: grammatical gender, participant sex/gender,
individual differences.

Introduction
Over the past decades a number of studies have claimed to
reveal sex differences in language performance, language
ability and underlying brain cortical areas and hormonal
levels. For example, Shaywitz, Shaywitz, Pugh, Constable,
Skudlarski, Fulbright, et al. (1995) have suggested
differences in language lateralization, Weiss, Kemmler,
Deisenhammer, Fleischhacker, & Delazer (2003) in verbal
fluency tasks, Kramer, Kaplan, Delis, O’Donnell, &
Prifitera (1997) in verbal learning, etc., and theoretical
accounts of such differences may attempt to explain them in
terms of evolutionary origins and advantages and/or
hormone level variation. Although sex differences may
disappear in later childhood, large-scale studies have found
robust evidence for the effects of gender on early language
development, including vocabulary comprehension and
production using the MacArthur Bates Communicative
Development Inventories (Fenson, Dale, Reznick, Bates,
Thal, & Pethick, 1994). On the other hand, in a critical
review of the research presented in numerous studies,
Wallentin (2009) concludes that there is not much clear and
uncontroversial evidence for sex differences in language

processing with the exception of the early language
development advantage for girls and that although certain
language-related deficits exhibit clear sex differences, such
as stuttering, dyslexia, and autism whose occurrence is
much higher in males, a causal link and a good theory of
why and how such differences may arise are still lacking.
In this paper, an entirely different aspect of human
experience with language is explored, which may lead to
sex differences in language processing, more specifically
grammar. Even if grammatical categories are learned and
used by all typically developing speakers of a language,
both men and women, the specific individual experiences
with these categories may differ. The use of grammatical
gender is a case in point here. Individuals vary on the
dimension of sex and in at least some languages this
individual characteristic is important in selecting the
appropriate grammatical gender form used in reference to
that individual. In the relatively poor morphology of the
English language, this variation is observed in very few
forms such as the personal pronouns in the 3rd person,
Singular (he vs. she), in the richer morphology of the
German language it is found in noun phrases referring to
both animate and inanimate entities encoded in pronouns
and articles (der, die, das), and in Slavic languages even
further on word categories such as adjectives, verb forms,
numerals, etc. Grammatical gender may furthermore be not
as arbitrary as it is habitually seen. In a study of gender
processing and lexical access in Bulgarian, Andonova,
D’Amico, Devescovi, & Bates (2004) discovered a
significant contribution of semantic gender to processing in
Bulgarian in contrast with previous findings for Italian.
Particularly interesting, however, was another finding of this
research, namely, an interaction between sex of the subject
and noun gender, reflecting a bias toward one’s own
grammatical gender “counterpart” (especially for females)
in Bulgarian. Triggered by this novel finding, a reanalysis of
data from a prior study in Italian showed a similar
interaction. How could such differences emerge? In contrast
with biological and/or cultural explanations, we offer here
an experiential account.
Both men and women produce gender-marked words
(nouns, adjectives, verbs, etc.) in Bulgarian in large
quantities on a daily basis, and so both sexes have a largely
equivalent experience in terms of frequency of usage of the
three genders. However, a woman’s individual experience
with gender-marked forms matching her own sex, i.e.,
Feminine gender words, would be different in some ways
from the experience of a man with the same feminine
gender forms, all else being equal. The difference is both in

1738

the quantity and quality of the experience. Women speaking
Slavic and Romance languages (for example) would
produce a higher number of Feminine gender forms than
men given that they use such forms in situations of selfreference, in which men would have to use Masculine
gender forms, and vice versa. For example, a Bulgarian
woman may express her feeling of fatigue by saying
уморена съм (Eng., I am tired_Fem), an Italian woman
would say sono stanca (Eng., I am tired_Fem) while in
Italian, a man would have to admit sono stanco (Eng., I am
tired_Masc). The individual experience women and men
have with gender-marking forms is not only different in
quantity (frequency of usage) but also in the degree to
which there is personal relevance to the individual (in selfreference). Thus, a lifetime of using gender marked forms in
a sex-specific way would lead to the accumulation to
differences in the sensitivity to such forms in the two sexes.

Experiment 1
This first experiment had the following objectives. First, it
aimed at testing for an interaction between participant sex
and word gender in the gender decision task and extending
previous somewhat limited findings with Bulgarian and
Italian speakers performing a gender monitoring (decision)
task on nouns in their native language (Andonova et al.,
2004).
Second, every noun typically has only one gender, i.e.,
Masculine, Feminine or Neuter, for example, стол (Еng.,
chair) is a Masculine noun, маса (Eng., table) is a Feminine
noun, and куче (Eng., dog) is a Neuter noun, that is,
grammatical gender is invariant. However, adjectives and
some verb forms in Bulgarian have all three gender forms,
for example, бавен, бавна, бавно are the translation
equivalents of the English word slow but in three different
forms, one for each of the three genders (slow_Masc,
slow_Fem, slow_Neut). The second research objective was
to test whether a participant sex by grammatical gender
interaction would also emerge in the processing of
adjectives and verb forms that can vary across gender
categories. Note that in Bulgarian, there is typically a
regular and transparent mapping between word form
endings and the category of gender. This applies to nouns as
well as the adjectives and verb forms included in the stimuli
materials for this experiment.
The third objective was to examine the possibility of an
interaction between grammatical gender and speaker sex in
addition to participant sex. The motivation for this follows a
somewhat similar rationale as that concerning the
interaction of participant sex and grammatical gender and its
possible explanation on the basis of the difference in the
quantity and kind of experience the two sexes have with
gender-marking word forms, as elaborated in the examples
above. Speakers of gender-marking languages such as
Slavic and Romance languages not only produce owngender matching word forms more frequently but they also

hear such forms more frequently in verbal interactions, viz.,
in situations where their interlocutor refers to them, for
example, asks them whether they are tired, etc. (Note
though later – that it is confounded without situational
context – speaker talking about 1st or 2nd person etc.)
Therefore, one might expect to find such an interaction
between speaker sex (the voice for the auditory stimuli) and
the grammatical gender of the words. This possibility was
tested by presenting stimuli in the auditory modality instead
of in writing and recording stimuli in two voices – male and
female – to be used as an experimental variable.

Method
The design of the experiment included Participant Sex (men
vs. women), Grammatical Gender of the word (Masculine
vs. Feminine) and Voice Gender (male vs. female voice) as
independent variables and mean percent errors and response
latencies as the dependent variables.
Participants 40 participants (20 men and 20 women) took
part in the experiment. They were university students within
the 19-30 age range who were paid a modest amount for
their participation. All were native speakers of Bulgarian.
Stimuli and Procedure The experimental stimuli consisted
of 3 different gender forms each of 62 verbs and adjectives
in Bulgarian presented in a different randomized order for
each participant in the auditory modality by two speakers of
Bulgarian, i.e., in two voices (a male and a female voice).
Words of all three grammatical genders in Bulgarian were
included in the list of stimuli in order to make the task more
natural and the research objectives less obvious so that
participants would not be tempted to follow a simple binary
choice strategy. The analyses, however, focused on the two
critical grammatical genders (Masculine and Feminine) in
line with the research hypotheses.
Participants were tested individually in a sound proof
booth and were asked to listen to stimuli one at a time and
press one of three available buttons to indicate the
grammatical gender of the word they have just heard
(Masculine, Feminine, or Neuter). Accuracy and speed in
completing the task were both emphasized in the
experimental instruction.
Presentation of stimuli and registration of participants’
responses were controlled by Psyscope and a button box.
Before the experiment began, participants did four to six
practice trials to familiarize themselves with the task and
procedure. In addition, since gender in Bulgarian is a threemember grammatical category, and in order to avoid bias,
participants were assigned randomly to one of six spatial
configurations of the three buttons in the gender-monitoring
task, i.e., m-f-n, m-n-f, f-n-m, f-m-n, n-m-f, or n-f-m.
The 186 word forms were recorded by a female and a
male speaker of Bulgarian in a neutral intonation with a
falling tone. They were digitized using the Macintosh
SoundEdit system, and were placed in a sound file within

1739

the PsyScope experiment preparation package developed by
Cohen, MacWhinney, Flatt, and Provost (1993) at Carnegie
Mellon University. For each item, reaction times (RT) were
measured from the offset of the stimulus word to the
participant’s response (the button press in the gender
decision task).

Results
All participants had a mean accuracy higher than 90% and a
mean RT below 900 msec. RTs for trials on which
participants made a decision error were dropped from
further analysis. The following outlier procedure was used.
The means (M) and standard deviations (SDs) for each
participant were computed, and all RTs less than three SDs
below the mean of the participant or greater than three SDs
above the mean were considered outliers. This resulted in
the rejection of 1.58% of all RT data. Here first the results
of analyses run on participant means will be presented.
The data were analyzed in two 2 (Participant Sex: men vs.
women) x 2 (Grammatical Gender of the word: masculine
vs. feminine) x 2 (Voice: male vs. female) repeated
measures ANOVAs on participant means of mean percent
gender decision error and on mean response latencies
measured from the end of presentation of the auditory
stimuli with participant sex as a between-participants
variable and word gender and voice as within-participant
variables.
Accuracy In the analysis of the mean percent gender
decision error, a main effect of words’ grammatical gender
was found, F (1, 38) = 6.77, p = .013, ηp2 = .151.
Participants overall (n = 40) had a lower error rate in their
gender decision when responding to Feminine gender words
(Mean = 0.89%, SD = 9.38%) than Masculine gender words
(Mean = 1.81%, SD = 13.34%). There were no main effects
of participant sex or voice. There was, however, a
statistically significant two-way interaction between
participant sex and word gender, F (2, 38) = 6.20, p = .017,
ηp2 = .140. Whereas men’s error rate did not differ on the
two grammatical genders (M = 1.29% and M = 1.25% for
masculine and feminine words, respectively), women
produced more inaccurate gender responses on words of
masculine grammatical gender than of feminine
grammatical gender (M = 2.34% for masculine and M =
0.52% for feminine words). This interaction is illustrated in
Figure 1. There were no further interactions.

Figure 1: Mean percent error of male and female
participants in the gender decision task for words of
Masculine and Feminine gender.
Response Times In the analysis of the mean reaction times,
a main effect of words’ grammatical gender was found
again, F (1, 38) = 23.31, p < .001, ηp2 = .380. Participants
overall responded slower to words of masculine
grammatical gender (M = 576 ms, SD = 218 ms) than to
words of feminine grammatical gender (M = 525 ms, SD =
194 ms). In addition, there was a main effect of participant
sex, F (1, 38) = 6.26, p = .017, ηp2 = .141. On average,
women’s decisions took longer (M = 582 ms, SD = 201 ms)
than men’s (M = 512 ms, SD = 208 ms). However, there
was no participant sex by grammatical gender interaction on
the mean reaction times.
Finally, in the analysis of reaction times, a main effect of
voice emerged, F (1, 38) = 125.33, p < .001, ηp2 = .767.
Participants’ decisions took longer for stimuli pronounced
by the male voice (M = 557 ms, SD = 205 ms) than by the
female voice (M = 536 ms, SD = 209 ms). This gender
difference is likely due to acoustic characteristics of the
voices such as baseline pitch, for example. More
importantly, however, there was a significant two-way
interaction between the independent variables of
grammatical gender and voice, F (1, 38) = 36.22, p < .001,
ηp2 = .488, such that responses to masculine gender words
did not differ in latency with respect to the gender of the
voice (M = 582 ms for male voice stimuli and M = 570 ms
for female voice stimuli) but, on the other hand, participants
responded slower to the male voice pronouncing feminine
gender words (M = 556 ms) than to the female voice saying
feminine gender words (M = 493 ms). This interaction is
illustrated in Figure 2. There were no further interactions.

1740

Experiment 2

Figure 2: Mean response times in the gender decision task
for words of Masculine and Feminine gender spoken by a
male or a female voice. Note: RTs are measured from the
offset of the auditory stimuli.
Analyses on Item Means A second set of analyses
examined data patterns in item means. It yielded the same
pattern of results as described above and will not be
presented here in detail.

The first experiment established the interaction of word
gender decision times with speaker voice gender and the
interaction of gender decision accuracy with the sex of
participants. However, one might argue that these findings
are task-specific. After all, participants were asked to reveal
their linguistic competence by making a judgment on a
clearly grammatical aspect of the stimuli. Although the
participants in Experiment 1 performed the task with the
kind of ease that shows them to be fully competent (low
error rates) and highly efficient (low RTs) in making a
gender decision, the question remains – would we find an
interaction between word gender and each of the two extralinguistic variables of participant sex and speaker voice sex
in a different task, especially one that is even more
automatic and requires no conscious effort in everyday
experience? One such highly automatic experimental task is
cued shadowing in which participants listen to and repeat
words as fast as they can. This was the task used in
Experiment 2.

Method
Discussion
The data from Experiment 1 support the research hypothesis
of an interaction between word gender and participant sex in
the gender decision task. The results have shown that men
and women respond in a different manner to the same
stimuli in the Masculine and Feminine grammatical genders.
The pattern of errors in this task is particularly revealing –
whereas men’s gender decisions are equally accurate on
both Masculine and Feminine gender words, women tend to
make more errors on Masculine gender words than
Feminine, a pattern that is in line with the expectation that
after a lifetime of personal experience in a gender-marking
language they have become sensitized to word forms that
match their own gender in referential expressions. It remains
to be studied further why the pattern is not mirrored clearly
in the case of men and Masculine forms. One possibility is
that their “own” referential gender overlaps with the
unmarked, default member of the grammatical category
while Feminine forms are also the marked member of the
category and thus more salient generally but at this point it
is hard to offer an explanation of sufficient specificity.
Secondly, a two-way interaction between word gender
and voice/speaker sex on reaction times was also
established. This is a novel and intriguing finding that
deserves future investigation. Participants reached their
gender decision faster when there was a match between the
sex of the female voice and the grammatical gender of the
words being heard. It appears that saliency of the feminine
forms in combination with a matching ‘speaker perspective’
facilitated responses in this task.

The design of the second experiment was exactly the same
as the first experiment but this time the experimental task
was cued shadowing. Participant sex (men vs. women) was
a between-participant independent variable; voice (male vs.
female) and word gender (Masculine vs. Feminine) were
within-participant independent variables. No decision was
required in this task and error rates were not of interest. The
analyses were conducted on participant means and on item
means of response times measured from voice onset
registered by the Psyscope button box used as in
Experiment 1.
Participants Another 40 participants (20 men and 20
women) took part in Experiment 2. They were university
students within the 19-30 age range who were paid a modest
amount for their participation. All were native speakers of
Bulgarian.
Stimuli and Procedure The experimental stimuli consisted
of two different gender forms each of 100 verbs and
adjectives in Bulgarian presented in a different randomized
order for each participant in the auditory modality by two
speakers of Bulgarian, i.e., in two voices (a male and a
female voice). As the cued shadowing task is a highly
automatic and non-strategic one, there was no need to
include neuter gender words to make the task more natural
and the research objectives less obvious. Again, the analyses
examined the two critical grammatical genders (Masculine
and Feminine) in line with the research hypotheses.
Participants were tested individually in a sound proof
booth and were asked to listen to stimuli one at a time and
repeat each word. Accuracy and speed in completing the
task were both emphasized in the experimental instruction.

1741

Presentation of stimuli and registration of participants’
responses were controlled by Psyscope and a button box.
Before the experiment began, participants did four to six
practice trials to familiarize themselves with the task and
procedure.
The 200 word forms were recorded by a female and a
male speaker of Bulgarian in a neutral intonation with a
falling tone. They were digitized using the Macintosh
SoundEdit system, and were placed in a sound file within
the PsyScope experiment preparation package developed by
Cohen, MacWhinney, Flatt, and Provost (1993) at Carnegie
Mellon University. For each item, reaction times (RT) were
measured from the offset of the stimulus word to the
participant’s response (voice onset as registered by the
button box).

ηp2 = .850. Participants’ responses took longer for stimuli
pronounced by the male voice than by the female voice.
Again here, this gender difference is likely due to acoustic
characteristics.
More importantly, however, there were two significant
two-way interactions. One of them was an interaction
between the independent variables of word gender and
participant sex, revealing that women responded particularly
fast to Feminine gender words, F (2, 38) = 5.51, p = .024,
ηp2 = .127. This interaction is illustrated in Figure 3.

Results
Hardly any errors were made by participants in this task
except for fifty individual trials with false starts or where no
response was registered by the button box. Data cleanup
was accomplished in a two-step outlier procedure for the
RTs of correct responses, following Balota, Yap, Cortese,
Hutchison, Kessler, Loftis, et al. (2007). First, all negative
response latencies, i.e., where voice onset preceded in time
the end of the auditory stimulus, and all latencies longer
than 1,500 msec were identified as outliers. Second, for the
remaining RTs, the means and SDs were computed for each
participant, and all RTs less than three SDs below the mean
of the participant or greater than three SDs above the mean
were considered outliers as well. This resulted in the
rejection of 1.87% of all reaction time data.
Here the results of the statistical analyses of participant
means will be presented. The pattern of results from the
analyses of the item means was the same and would be
redundant to describe.
The data were analyzed in a 2 (Participant Sex: men vs.
women) x 2 (Grammatical Gender of the word: masculine
vs. feminine) x 2 (Voice: male vs. female) repeated
measures ANOVAs on participant means of response
latencies measured from the end of presentation of the
auditory stimuli with participant sex as a betweenparticipants variable and word gender and voice as withinparticipant variables.
Response Times In the analysis of participants’ mean
reaction times, a main effect of words’ grammatical gender
was found again, F (1, 38) = 93.68, p < .001, ηp2 = .711.
Participants overall responded slower to words of masculine
grammatical gender than to words of feminine grammatical
gender. This result is consistent with the data pattern
observed in the gender decision task. Since a decision was
not involved in this task at all, however, the main effect of
word gender in both experiments is likely due to the
measurement of reaction times from the offset of the
auditory stimuli.
There was no main effect of participant sex. In addition, a
main effect of voice emerged, F (1, 38) = 214.78, p < .001,

Figure 3: Mean response times by men and women in the
cued shadowing task as a function of word gender. Note:
RTs are measured from the offset of the auditory stimuli.
The second significant two-way interaction was between
the independent variables of word gender and speaker voice,
F (2, 38) = 59.33, p < .001, ηp2 = .610. This interaction is
illustrated in Figure 4. Participants responded to Feminine
gender words particularly fast again when they were spoken
by a female voice.

Figure 4: Mean response times in the cued shadowing
task for words of Masculine and Feminine gender spoken by
a male or a female voice. Note: RTs are measured from the
offset of the auditory stimuli.

Discussion
The results of experiment 2 mirror those of experiment 1
remarkably. Even though the two tasks were different in

1742

their nature and task demands, participants’ responses were
strikingly similar in terms of speed of processing and the
emergence of significant interactions between word gender
as a grammatical feature and participant sex and speaker
voice sex as extra-linguistic information sources.

References

Conclusion
The studies reported here were guided by the research
question whether the individual language experience of
speakers may influence the way they process language
online and offline, and how linguistic and extra-linguistic
categories may interact as a result of this experience. In two
studies with different language processing tasks and a total
of 80 participants, the grammatical category of gender was
found to interact with participant sex and with voice sex in
the expected direction revealing the impact of individuals’
usage of gender-marking forms throughout their lifetime on
the speed and accuracy of gender decisions and on the
efficiency of processing lexical items in a word repetition
task.
It is worth pointing out here that these interaction effects
were observed in the analyses of both participant means and
item means and in both tasks, making them robust findings.
The second task, word repetition, was particularly important
in establishing the automatic, non-strategic nature of the
effects, a finding that speaks in favor of extensive habitual
use implicated in the emergence of these novel phenomena.
These findings have important implications of a
methodological nature. Future studies of lexical processing
in at least heavily gender-marking languages such as those
from the Slavic and Romance language groups need to take
into account the possibility of participant sex interactions
with the grammatical category of gender, and implement the
necessary control and counterbalancing mechanisms.
More importantly, however, the results from the two
studies indicate the importance of studying individual
differences in language processing and have further
theoretical implications in line with the current growth of
interest in embodiment and its experiential aspects and in
alignment with our understanding of language and language
usage being at least partially dependent on specific
individual human experience instead of being an entirely
arbitrary symbolic system without intrinsic or extrinsic
motivation.

Andonova, E., D’Amico, S., Devescovi, A., & Bates, E.
(2004). Gender and lexical access in Bulgarian. Attention,
Perception, & Psychophysics, 66(3), 496-507.
Balota, D. A., Yap, M. J., Cortese, M. J., Hutchison, K. A.,
Kessler, B., Loftis, B., et al. (2007). The English Lexicon
Project. Behavior Research Methods, 39, 445-459.
Cohen, J., MacWhinney, B., Flatt, M., & Provost, J. (1993).
PsyScope: An interactive graphic system for designing
and controlling experiments in the psychology laboratory
using Macintosh computers. Behavior Research Methods,
Instruments, & Computers, 25, 257-271.
Fenson, L., Dale, P. S., Reznick, J. S., Bates, E., Thal, D. J.,
& Pethick, S. J. (1994). Variability in early
communicative development. Monographs of the Society
for Research in Child Development, 59, 1–185.
Kramer, J. H., Kaplan, E., Delis, D. C., O’Donnell, L., &
Prifitera, A. (1997). Developmental sex differences in
verbal learning. Neuropsychology, 11(4), 577–584.
Shaywitz, B. A., Shaywitz, S. E., Pugh, K. R., Constable, R.
T., Skudlarski, P., Fulbright, R. K., et al. (1995). Sex
differences in the functional organization of the brain for
language. Nature, 373(6515), 607–609.
Wallentin, M. (2009). Putative sex differences in verbal
abilities and language cortex: A critical review. Brain and
language, 108(3), 175-183.
Weiss, E. M., Kemmler, G., Deisenhammer, E. A.,
Fleischhacker, W. W., & Delazer, M. (2003). Sex
differences in cognitive functions. Personality and
Individual Differences, 35(4), 863–875.

Acknowledgments
I would like to thank Elizabeth Bates for support and
inspiration, Radu Luchianov for assistance with the
Psyscope script and Armina Janyan for consultations.

1743

