UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Generic Priors Yield Competition Between Independently-Occurring Causes

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8mj424fq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Powell, Derek
Merrick, Alice
Lu, Hongjing
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Generic Priors Yield Competition Between Independently-Occurring Causes
Derek Powell1 (derekpowell@ucla.edu)
M. Alice Merrick1 (m.a.merrick@gmail.com)
Hongjing Lu1,2 (hongjing@ucla.edu)
Keith J. Holyoak1 (holyoak@lifesci.ucla.edu)
Departments of Psychology1 and Statistics2, University of California, Los Angeles
Los Angeles, CA, USA
Abstract

relying on domain-specific knowledge. Some Bayesian
models have assumed uninformative priors (e.g., Griffiths &
Tenenbaum, 2005); however, other models have
incorporated substantive generic priors about the nature of
causes. In particular, Lu et al. (2008) proposed that people
have a preference for causes that are sparse and strong: i.e.
a preference for causal models that include a relatively small
number of strong causes (rather than a larger number of
weak causes). Such priors can be viewed as a special case of
a more general pressure to encourage parsimony (Chater &
Vitanyi, 2003), which implies a combination of simplicity
and explanatory power. The preference for parsimony has a
number of expressions elsewhere in causal learning
phenomena and theory. For instance, causal learners appear
to make the default assumption that causes act
independently in producing an effect, rather than interacting
(Cheng, 1997; Novick & Cheng, 2004). Moreover, people
generally prefer simpler explanations to equally accurate but
more complex explanations (Lombrozo, 2007).

Recent work on causal learning has investigated the possible
role of generic priors in guiding human judgments of causal
strength. One proposal has been that people have a preference
for causes that are sparse and strong—i.e., few in number and
individually strong (Lu et al., 2008). Evidence for the use of
sparse-and-strong priors has been obtained using a maximally
simple causal set-up (a single candidate cause plus
unobserved background causes). Here we examine the
possible impact of generic priors in more complex, multicausal set-ups. Sparse-and-strong priors predict that
competition can be observed between candidate causes even
if they occur independently (i.e., the estimated strength of
cause A will be lower if the strength of uncorrelated cause B
is high rather than low). Experiment 1 revealed such a cue
competition effect in judgments of causal strength.
Experiment 2 showed that, as predicted by a Bayesian
learning model with sparse-and-strong priors, the impact of
the prior diminishes as sample size increases. These findings
support the importance of a preference for parsimony as a
constraint on causal learning.
Keywords: causal learning; generic priors; causal strength;
parsimony; Bayesian modeling

Generic Prior: Sparse-and-Strong (SS) Causes

Introduction
Prior Beliefs in Causal Learning
Humans (and other intelligent organisms) are able to extract
causal knowledge from patterns of covariation among cues
and outcomes. Viewed from a Bayesian perspective, causal
inferences are expected to be a joint function of likelihoods
(the probability of observing the data given potential causal
links of various possible strengths) and priors (expectations
about causal links that the learner brings to the task). For
relatively simple causal set-ups involving binary variables,
human causal judgments can be described quite accurately
by the power PC theory (Cheng, 1997), which uses a noisyOR likelihood function to integrate the influences of
multiple generative causes (Griffiths & Tenenbaum, 2005;
Lu et al., 2008; see Holyoak & Cheng, 2011, for a review).
Prior beliefs about causal relationships can also be
formulated within a Bayesian framework for causal
learning. Generic causal priors can be thought of as
preferences for certain types of causal explanations, without

Lu et al. (2008) formalized the “SS power” model with
sparse-and-strong (SS) priors for simple causal models with
a single candidate cue and a constantly-present background
cause. When the candidate cause generates (rather than
prevents) the effect, there is an expectation that the
candidate cause is strong (strength close to 1) and the
background is weak (strength close to 0), or vice versa. A
single free parameter, α, controls the strength of the prior
(when α = 0, the distribution is uniform).
The possible role of generic priors in causal strength

1157

Table 1. Contingency learning data for one experimental
block (44 trials) by trial type
Conditions
Weak-B
Strong-B

C

AC

BC

ABC

E absent

1

6

3

7

E present

10

5

8

4

E absent

1

6

9

10

E present

10

5

2

1

Competition Between Causes

Figure 1: Sparse-and-strong prior distribution over
causal strengths of three causes. Colors indicate the
values of prior probability (red corresponds to highest
probability).
judgments has so far only been examined for very simple
causal graphs (e.g., one generative candidate cause and a
constantly-present background cause). Lu et al. (2008) fit
several causal learning models to parametric data for human
strength judgments. They found the best fit was provided by
a Bayesian implementation of the power PC theory that
incorporated SS priors with an α value of 5 (not 0),
implying a human preference for sparse-and-strong causes.
When α value is set to zero, the prior distribution would be
equivalent to a uniform distribution.
The generalization of the sparse-and-strong prior for more
than two causes is straightforward. For the experiments
reported here, the SS prior is constructed on the basis of
three candidate causes, A, B, and C, which are all
generative. The SS prior can be defined as,
𝑃 𝑤! , 𝑤! , 𝑤! ∝
𝑒 !!

!!! ! !!! ! !!! !

+ 𝑒 !!!! !!(!!!! )!!!! + 𝑒 !!!! !!!! !!(!!!! ) .

(1)

in which w denotes causal strength for different causes.
Figure 1 illustrates the sparse-and-strong prior in the
three-cause situation. A signature of SS priors is the
preference for one strong cause coupled with other weak
causes, i.e., a set of “ideal” causal strengths for the three
causes might be wA=1, wB=0 and wC=0. This preference
instantiated in SS priors implies a key empirical prediction:
competition effects in judgments of causal strength when
multiple causes co-occur. Strength competition implies that
if a candidate cause appears along with another cause of
greater strength (as defined by likelihoods), then the
strength of the weaker candidate cause will be
underestimated. This prediction goes beyond competition
effects predicted by the likelihood function alone (i.e., a
model assuming uninformative priors). The goal of the
present paper is to test this key empirical prediction in a
situation requiring inference based on multiple causes.

Various competitive dynamics are commonly observed in
causal learning paradigms, including blocking (e.g., Shanks,
1985), overshadowing (e.g., Waldmann, 2001) and unovershadowing (De Houwer & Becker, 2002). However, in
all these paradigms the competition is between cues that cooccur in a systematic way. For example, blocking is
typically obtained when cue A is first shown to produce the
effect by itself, and then the compound cue AB is
introduced and also followed by the effect. From a Bayesian
perspective, a lower causal strength judgment for the
blocked cue, B, is entirely rational, as the learner has no
opportunity to observe what happens when B is presented
without A (i.e., there will be greater uncertainty about the
strength of B than of A). More generally, Bayesian models
with uniform priors can readily account for a wide range of
competition effects that involve cues occurring in a
correlated fashion (Carroll, Cheng & Lu, in press).
However, sparse-and-strong priors are unique in
predicting competition between independently-occurring
causes (e.g., the occurrence of cue A is uncorrelated with
the occurrence of cue B). We will show simulation results
confirming that when alternative causes A and B occur
independently, a Bayesian model with uniform priors
predicts that judgments of the strength of A will not be
influenced by the strength of B, or vice versa (also see
Busemeyer, Myung & McDaniel, 1993a). In contrast, an
otherwise-identical model incorporating sparse-and-strong
priors predicts that early in learning (when the impact of
priors is maximal), independently-occurring causes will
compete for strength (e.g., the strength of A will be judged
to be lower if B is strong rather than weak).
The present experiments include two conditions based on
a set of contingency data, D, shown in Table 1. The
occurrences of causes A and B are independent in both
conditions. The causal power of A is held constant across
the two conditions (0.5), but the causal power of B varies
from one condition (0.2, weak-B condition) to the other
(0.8, strong-B condition).
For this set of contingency data the model computes the
mean of estimated causal strength derived from the posterior
distribution:
1

w A = ∫ w A P( w A | D) .

(2)

0

The posterior distribution P(wA | D) is obtained by applying
Bayes rule to combine likelihood function and priors as

1158

P(wA | D) =

∫∫

P(D | wA , wB , wC )P(wA , wB , wC )
dwB dwC .
P(D)

(3)

In our simulations, we employed the noisy-OR likelihood
function (Cheng, 1997), since binary causes and effects
were used in the experiments:
𝑃 𝐸 = 1 𝐶! , 𝐶𝑩 , 𝐶! ; 𝑤! , 𝑤𝑩 , 𝑤!
= 1 − 1 − 𝑤! 𝐶! 1 − 𝑤𝑩 𝐶𝑩 1 − 𝑤! 𝐶! (4)

where E and C indicate the presence or absence of effect
and causes, respectively.
Figure 2 shows the model predictions for causal strength
of A in the two conditions. The Bayesian model with SS
prior (center bards in Figure 3) predicts different estimates
of wA across conditions due to competition between causes
A and B, even though the two cues occur independently. In
contrast, a model with uniform prior (right bars in Figure 3)
predicts that wA will not vary across the two conditions. The
latter simulation result confirms that a Bayesian model with
uniform priors does not predict competition between
independently-occurring causes when the likelihood
function is a noisy-OR, extending the similar negative
conclusion for the case in which the likelihood function is
linear (Busemeyer et al., 1993a).
Testing these opposing predictions provides a means to
discriminate between alternative possible priors for causal
inference with multiple cues. The prediction of competition
between independently-occurring causes has never been
clearly tested. Busemeyer et al. (1993b) reported an
experiment that obtained competition between uncorrelated
cues, in a paradigm that may have drawn on causal learning
mechanisms. However, this competition effect was observed
only when participants were informed that the two cues
would be of different strengths, one strong and one weak
(see their Footnote 5, p. 194). It is possible that this
instruction suggested to subjects that the cues were expected
to be competitive. In general, relatively few studies of
causal learning have used complex causal set-ups involving
more than one or two candidate causes. The present
experiments were designed to determine whether multiple
candidate causes would compete for causal strength, and
whether such effects can be modeled by assuming people
have priors that causes will be sparse and strong.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants Participants were 90 undergraduate students at
the University of California at Los Angeles (UCLA) who
participated for class credit (80% female, mean age = 20
years). Half were assigned to the strong-B condition and
half to the weak-B condition.
Procedure Participants read a cover story, as follows:
“Imagine that you are assisting a doctor at a new island
resort. Many of the guests at this new resort have become
ill, and you are charged with helping to determine the cause

of the illnesses. Every day, at dinner, the resort provides a
complimentary salad for its guests. The salads can be made
with different exotic vegetables. The salads always have at
least one exotic vegetable, and can be ordered with up to
three different exotic vegetables. The resort's doctor thinks
one or perhaps several of these exotic vegetables may be
causing the illness <pictures of three vegetables are shown>.
You will be reviewing a number of case files that describe
what a guest ate and whether they became sick. After
viewing these files you will be asked to give your
assessment of which vegetable or vegetables are the culprits.
Please pay attention to each case…. When you are done
reviewing the cases you will be asked to estimate how many
people each vegetable is likely to affect negatively.”
These vegetables were labeled A, B, and C, and were
shown as photographs of exotic vegetables (see Figure 2,
top). These photographs depicted the actual vegetables
radicchio, bitter melon, and black garlic. The assignment of
vegetables to the labels A, B and C was randomized across
participants. During the learning phase, participants viewed
“case files” for individual guests, showing which
combination of vegetables they had eaten, and whether or
not they had fallen ill.
There were four possible combinations of fruits: each
guest had either eaten vegetable C alone, vegetables A and
C, vegetables B and C, or all three vegetables A, B, and C.
These four combinations were presented in equal number,
such that A and B both occurred 50 percent of the time, and
the correlation between the occurrence of A and B was 0. A
total of 44 cases (11 of each type) was the minimum number
required to reflect the underlying causal powers in the
presented distribution of cause combinations and their
associated outcomes.
The numbers of guests who became sick after eating each
combination were determined by the causal powers assigned
to each vegetable, calculated according to the noisy-OR
likelihood function under the default assumption that each
cause acts independently to produce the effect (Cheng,
1997). In both conditions, vegetable A was assigned a
causal strength of .50, and vegetable C was assigned a
causal strength of .10. In the strong-B condition, vegetable
B was assigned a causal strength of .80, whereas in the
weak-B condition, vegetable B was assigned a causal
strength of .20. Cause A was the focus of the study, as we
were interested in whether its judged strength would be
influenced by the variation in the strength of cause B. Cause
C served as an observable “background” cause, as it was
shown to be present on every trial. The resulting
contingency data is summarized in Table 1.
The 44 cases were presented sequentially in a different
random order for each participant. After viewing all 44
learning trials, participants were asked to give a causal
strength rating for all three vegetables. Participants were
shown a picture of each vegetable along with text that read,
“Imagine 100 healthy people ate this vegetable; how many
do you estimate would get sick?” Participants then made

1159

Figure 3: Observed human strength ratings (0-100 scale)
and predictions based on sparse-and-strong (SS) versus
uniform priors for cause A (0-100 scale) in Experiment 1.

Figure 2: Example trial showing a guest who ate A, B,
and C vegetables and became sick (top). Example
response trial (bottom).
their rating using a slider, inputting a value between 0 and
100 (see Figure 3, bottom). The order of the three questions
was randomized for each participant. After making all three
ratings, participants were shown a summary of their
responses and were asked to confirm that they had correctly
entered their ratings. Participants were randomly assigned to
one of two experimental conditions (weak-B or strong-B).

Results and Discussion
Data from two participants were excluded due to technical
issues. Data from another eight were excluded because they
entered responses of zero to both cause A and cause B,
suggesting errors or a lack of engagement with the task.
Figure 4 shows the data for the critical A cue, along with the
predictions derived from the SS power model and an
otherwise-identical model with uniform priors. Participants
in the strong-B condition underestimated the strength of
cause A relative to participants in the Weak-B condition
(mean of 34.05 versus 46.95), t(79) = 2.17, p < 05. The data
Table 2. Observed human strength ratings (0-100 scale)
and predictions based on sparse-and-strong (SS) priors
for three different cues in Experiment 1.
A (.50)

B (.20, .80)

C (.10)

Pred.

Obs.

Pred.

Obs.

Pred.

Obs.

Weak-B

52

47

16

34

13

18

Strong-B

35

34

78

63

16

18

were fit using Lu et al.’s (2008) “SS power” model, which
provides a Bayesian formalization of sparse-and-strong
priors. For modeling purposes we simply set α = 5 (the
value estimated for the data sets reported by Lu et al., 2008),
thus avoiding any need to fit a free parameter to the present
data. The SS power model predicts the observed difference
in the judged strength of A in the weak-B versus strong-B
conditions, whereas the model with uniform priors does not.
Table 2 presents the mean ratings of causal strength
obtained for three different cues, and Figure 3 plots the
human data with predictions from the two models assuming
different priors. Across all cues and conditions, the SS
power model provides a good overall fit to the human data
(R = .95, root mean square deviation, RMSD = 9.1).
Although the overall fit of the SS power model is quite
good, it bears noting that the predictions of the SS power
model for cue B were more extreme than the estimates
given by participants. That is, when B was weak participants
overestimated its strength relative to the model with SS
priors; when B was strong participants underestimated it
relative to SS priors. The estimates of the model using
uniform priors deviate from the observed data in a similar
(though marginally smaller) fashion. We speculate that
these discrepancies may be due to memory limitations.
Whereas the models assume perfect memory for
contingency data, participants are likely to forget presented
instances on some proportion of the trials, and therefore to
have greater uncertainty in their strength estimates than
predicted by the models. The models’ estimates are
computed from the mean of the posterior distribution, so
increased uncertainty would lead to less extreme strength
estimates for cue B (i.e., estimates closer to 50). Uncertainty
would be expected to have less impact on estimates for cue
A, for which the veridical strength in fact corresponds to a
rating of 50.

1160

Experiment 2
It is a natural feature of Bayesian models that the influence
of priors diminishes as learners gather more data. Thus, the
SS power model (Lu et al., 2008) predicts that competition
between causes should be strongest when participants have
made few observations, and will diminish as participants are
exposed to more data.
Experiment 2 examined competition between causes after
varying amounts of experience. The design was identical to
that of Experiment 1, but added a second independent
variable: sample size. Participants in both strong- and weakB conditions were asked to make judgments of causal
strength three times, after viewing 44, 88 and finally 132
total cases. This resulted in a 2 x 3 factorial design, with one
between-subjects factor (causal strength of cue B) and one
within-subjects factor (number of cases observed).
The cover story was the same as it in Experiment 1,
except for one sentence: “The resort's doctor thinks one or
perhaps several of these exotic vegetables may be causing
the illness” (Experiment 1) was revised to read, “The
resort's doctor thinks these exotic vegetables may be causing
the illness.”

Method
Participants Participants were 114 UCLA undergraduate
students who participated for class credit (76% female,
mean age = 20 years).
Procedure Experimental materials were identical to those
used in Experiment 1. Participants in Experiment 2 went
through three blocks of learning trials, making causal
strength estimates after 44, 88 and 132 learning trials. The
distribution of types of cases (combinations of causes and
outcome) were identical within each block. Order of
presentation was randomized for each participant.

Results and Discussion
One participant gave the same response on every trial, and
six responded with extreme ratings of 0 or 100 for cause A,
or ratings of 100 for Cause C. Data from these seven
participants were excluded from analyses.
Figure 4 shows mean causal strength ratings for each
vegetable at the end of each of the three learning blocks. A
factorial repeated-measures ANOVA found no overall effect
of increasing sample size, F(2, 210) = 2.31, p = .10, or of
condition, F(1, 105) = 1.16, p = .28). However, the analysis
revealed a significant interaction between condition and
learning block, F(2, 210) = 5.61, p < .01. As shown in
Figure 4, Experiment 2 replicated the competition effect
observed in Experiment 1 after 44 trials. After the first
block, participants underestimated the strength of A when it
was paired with a strong B cause, relative to when it was
paired with a weak B cause (means of 56 versus 46; t(105) =
2.26, p < .05). As predicted, this difference disappeared with

Figure 4. Observed human strength ratings (0-100 scale,
top) and predictions of SS power model (bottom) for
cause A across blocks in Experiment 2.
an increase in sample size, supporting the hypothesis that
the observed competition effect is due to people’s priors.
The effect of the strength of B on ratings of A was not
significant after 88 or 132 trials, t(105) = 0.75, p = .46, and
t(105) = -0.26, p = .79, respectively. Assuming α = 5 as
before, the SS power model (Lu et al., 2008) provides a
good fit to the human data across all cues and conditions (R
= .96, RMSD = 12.87). For cause A, the human data for the
weak-B and strong-B conditions converge on the veridical
value (50) more quickly than does the model’s predictions
(see Figure 4), perhaps reflecting the additional uncertainty
participants experienced due to their fallible memory for the
observations.
Causal strength estimates for all three vegetables were
somewhat higher in Experiment 2 than Experiment 1. This
difference may be due to a small change in instructions,
which in Experiment 2 emphasized the doctor’s belief that
the vegetables were indeed causing the illness.

General Discussion
The experiments reported here provide evidence for
competition between independently-occurring causes in
causal strength judgments, as predicted by a Bayesian

1161

model of causal learning that assumes sparse-and-strong
priors. After participants had made a relatively small
number of observations, a cause of moderate strength was
judged to be weaker when a competing (but uncorrelated)
cause was strong than when the competing cause was weak.
After additional cases were presented, the two conditions
converged. This competition dynamic cannot be explained
by naïve Bayesian models that assume uninformative priors
(Busemeyer et al., 1993a), nor can such models explain why
the competition effect diminishes as data is accumulated.
The present results support the hypothesis that causal
learners have generic prior expectations about causal
relationships, and that a sparse-and-strong prior accurately
characterizes these expectations.
The experiments presented here go beyond most previous
investigations on causal learning by examining a more
complex causal situation, one that included three observed
generative causes. Examining a causal situation with
multiple causes enabled a novel test of predictions that
discriminated between alternative possible priors. Moreover,
the relatively complex situation examined here may be more
representative of the actual situations that causal learners
encounter in the real world.
Using an iterative-learning method, Yeung and Griffiths
(2011) empirically derived a different (but non-uniform)
prior that was suggestive of a preference for strong causes,
but that lacked the competitive pattern associated with the
sparse prior. However, since the iterative method did not
fully converge for the background cause, their results are
open to multiple interpretations. Our task with multiple cues
may provide a good way to further evaluate the
generalization of empirical priors derived from the iterativelearning paradigm.
Lu et al. (2008) formalized sparse-and-strong priors for
both generative and preventive causes. However, the
preference for “sparseness” only applies across causes of the
same polarity. In the generative case, sparseness is an
influential factor even for simple causal set-ups, in which a
single observed cause competes with an unobserved
background cause (assumed by default to be generative).
However, in the preventive case of the sparse-and-strong
prior, competition dynamics are not evident when there is
only a single preventive cause, as the observed cause is
preventive whereas the background cause remains
generative. The influence of sparseness, and hence the
possibility of competition, is also predicted to arise in
complex causal situations involving multiple preventers. As
previous investigations have only examined the simplest
cases, further research with more complex causal set-ups is
needed to examine the possible impact of sparse-and-strong
priors for preventive causes.

Acknowledgments
Preparation of this paper was supported by grant
N000140810186 from the Office of Naval Research.

References
Busemeyer, J. R., Myung, I. J., & McDaniel, M. A. (1993a).
Cue competition effects: Theoretical implications for
adaptive network learning models. Psychological Science,
4, 196–202.
Busemeyer, J. R., Myung, I. J., & McDaniel, M. A. (1993b).
Cue competition effects: Empirical tests of adaptive
network learning models. Psychological Science, 4, 190195.
Carroll, C., Cheng, P. W., & Lu, H. (in press). Inferential
dependencies in causal inference: A comparison of beliefdistribution and associative approaches. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General.
Chater, N., & Vitányi, P. (2003). Simplicity: A unifying
principle in cognitive science? Trends in cognitive
sciences, 7, 19-22.
Cheng, P. W. (1997). From covariation to causation: A
causal power theory. Psychological Review, 104, 367405.
De Houwer, J., & Beckers, T. (2002). A review of recent
developments in research and theories on human
contingency learning. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 55B, 289–310.
Holyoak, K. J., & Cheng, P. W. (2011). Causal learning and
inference as a rational process: The new synthesis. Annual
Review of Psychology, 62, 135–63.
Griffiths, T. L., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2005). Structure and
strength in causal induction. Cognitive Psychology, 51,
334–384.
Lombrozo, T. (2007). Simplicity and probability in causal
explanation. Cognitive psychology, 55, 232–57.
Lu, H., Yuille, A. L., Liljeholm, M., Cheng, P. W., &
Holyoak, K. J. (2008). Bayesian generic priors for causal
learning. Psychological review, 115, 955-84.
Novick, L. R., & Cheng, P. W. (2004). Assessing interactive
causal influence. Psychological Review, 111, 455–85.
Shanks, D. (1985). Forward and backward blocking in
human contingency judgment. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology Section B: Comparative and
Physiological Psychology, 37, 1–21.
Waldmann, M. R. (2001). Predictive versus diagnostic
causal learning: Evidence from an overshadowing
paradigm. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 8, 600–8.
Yeung, S., & Griffiths, T. L. (2011). Estimating human
priors on causal strength. In L. Carlson, C. Hoelscher, &
T. F. Shipley (Eds.), Proceedings of the 33rd Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 17091714). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.

1162

