UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Geographical Estimates are Explained by Perceptual Simulation and Language Statistics

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8cc570h2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Tillman, Richard
Hutchinson, Sterling
Louwerse, Max

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Geographical Estimates are Explained by Perceptual Simulation and Language
Statistics
Richard Tillman (rntllman@memphis.edu)
Department of Psychology/ Institute for Intelligent Systems, University of Memphis
365 Innovation Drive, Memphis, TN 38152 USA
Sterling Hutchinson (schtchns@memphis.edu)
Department of Psychology/ Institute for Intelligent Systems, University of Memphis
365 Innovation Drive, Memphis, TN 38152 USA
Max M. Louwerse (maxlouwerse@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology/ Institute for Intelligent Systems, University of Memphis
365 Innovation Drive, Memphis, TN 38152 USA
Tilburg Centre for Cognition and Communication (TiCC), Tilburg University,
PO Box 90153, 5000 LE, Tilburg, The Netherlands

Abstract
Several studies have demonstrated that language encodes
geographical information. That is, the relative longitude and
latitude of city locations can be extracted from language.
Whether people actually rely on these linguistic features is
less clear. Recent studies have suggested that language
statistics plays a role in geographical estimates, but these
studies rely on map drawings, a fundamentally perceptual
task. The current study investigated the extent to which
people rely on map representations and statistical linguistic
frequencies by using a linguistic task. Participants saw U.S.
city pairs in their iconic positions (a more northern city is
presented above a more southern city, or a more western city
is presented to the left of a more eastern city), and in their
reverse-iconic positions (a more southern city is presented
above a more northern city, or a more eastern city is presented
to the left of a more western city). For iconic city pairs both in
the east – west (Seattle – Boston) and north – south (Memphis
– Miami) configurations, RTs were determined by the
iconicity. No effect was obtained for statistical linguistic
frequencies. However, when city pairs were presented in a
reverse-iconic configuration, for both horizontal (Boston –
Seattle) and vertical (Miami – Memphis) orientations, both
perceptual and linguistic factors explained RTs. These
findings support the idea that cognition relies on a shallow
heuristic, a linguistic system, and a fine-grained and more
precise perceptual simulation system.
Keywords: embodied cognition;
geography; spatial cognition

symbolic

cognition;

Introduction
Is San Francisco close to New York? Is Boston close to
Miami? Judging the distance between cities can be
approached in more than one way. This judgment can be
deep and precise, as with perceptual simulation, or quick
and shallow, as with symbolic representation. For instance,
humans can make geographical estimates on the basis of
their perceptual experiences from locomotion and stationary

viewing, from static pictorial representations, such as
diagrams, paintings and photos, provided on a map, and
they can acquire information via dynamic pictorial
representations, including animations, and videos
(Freundschuh & Mercer, 1995).
The importance of a perceptual simulation system has
been strongly advocated by accounts of embodied cognition
(Barsalou, 1999; Barsalou, 2008; Glenberg & Kaschak,
2002; Pecher & Zwaan, 2005; Semin & Smith, 2008).
According to Barsalou, Solomon, and Wu (1999),
perceptual states are transferred into memory and function
symbolically, rather than an arbitrary representation such as
language. As an example, overwhelming evidence in favor
of an embodied cognition account has accumulated,
showing that processing within modalities is faster than
having to map across modalities, and suggesting that
modality switching comes at a price (e.g., Marques, 2006;
Pecher, Zeelenberg, & Barsalou, 2003; Spence, Nicholls, &
Driver, 2001). Furthermore, language comprehension seems
to be influenced by action representations primed in
experimental tasks (e.g., Glenberg & Kaschak, 2002;
Kaschak et al., 2005; Klatzky, Pellegrino, McCloskey, &
Doherty, 1989; Zwaan, Stanfield, & Yaxley, 2002), and
visual representations get activated during language
comprehension (see also Boroditsky, 2000; Fincher-Kiefer,
2001; Matlock, Ramscar, & Boroditsky, 2005).
One particular study nicely illustrates the embodied
cognition account. Zwaan and Yaxley (2003) presented
iconic word pairs either as they occur in the real world, such
as attic over basement, or the reverse-iconic orientation,
such as basement over attic. They found significant
differences between the iconic and reverse-iconic
configurations of these word pairs. They concluded that the
explanation for the iconicity effect was that words activate
their perceptual representations (attics presented above
basements are processed faster than basements above attics,
because of their iconic relationship in the real world).

3557

Louwerse (2008) questioned whether the Zwaan and
Yaxley (2003) finding should be solely attributed to
perceptual simulation. Statistical linguistic frequencies, the
co-occurrence of words in a given frame, showed that items
that are normally high in space preceded items that are
normally low in space more frequently than vice versa,
suggesting that language encodes spatial information (e.g.,
we say up and down, top and bottom, knees and toes, rather
than down and up, bottom and top and toes and knees).
Moreover, statistical linguistic frequencies explained RTs
better than the perceptual factor. These findings demonstrate
that there is a complementary linguistic explanation to a
perceptual simulation explanation.
Louwerse and Jeuniaux (2010) showed that the extent to
which cognitive processes can be explained by perceptual
simulation or language statistics (frequency of word cooccurrence) depends on a variety of factors, including the
nature of the stimulus (e.g., words versus pictures) and the
cognitive task (e.g., shallow or deep cognitive task). In
Louwerse and Jeuniaux (2010), participants saw either
pictures or words in their natural orientation (e.g., ceiling
above floor), or in their reverse orientation (e.g., floor above
ceiling). Statistical linguistic frequencies were better able to
explain RTs than perceptual ratings when the word pairs
were used, with the reverse result when picture pairs were
used. Similarly, when participants were asked to make a
real-world judgment task, the effect for perceptual ratings
on RTs was larger than that for statistical linguistic
frequencies, with the opposite result for a semantic
judgment task. Importantly, effects for both language
statistics and perceptual simulation were found for both
stimulus types and both cognitive tasks, however, their
relative dominance was modified by task and stimulus.
These findings have been captured through the Symbol
Interdependency Hypothesis, which proposed that
conceptual processing can be explained by both symbol and
embodied mechanisms (Louwerse, 2007; 2008; 2011).
When we encounter a word, a rough meaning is elicited by
using the linguistic, that is symbolic, neighbors. This is
accomplished by using language statistics, where words that
often appear together are related in important ways that can
facilitate initial cognitive processing. In order to fully
ground the word, we can mentally simulate the features of
the word in order to process the word in a deeper way.
Human beings can use the fuzzy sense of words by a
linguistic (symbolic) short-cut when processing language as
it occurs. In addition, language is encoded with sensorimotor and spatial information. The Symbol Interdependency
Hypothesis is composed of three components. First,
language encodes perceptual information. Second, during
cognitive processes users of language rely on language
statistics and perceptual simulation. Finally, the dominance
of either language statistics or perceptual simulation is
dependent on the type of task and stimulus.
Do these three claims also hold for spatial cognition
within geographical representation? Using newspapers such
as the New York Times and the Wall Street Journal

Louwerse and Zwaan (2009) were able to estimate the
longitude and latitude of the largest cities in the US
computationally, based on the idea that “cities that are
located together are debated together.” That is, by
computing the n x n frequencies of the co-occurrence of city
names
in
the
newspapers,
a
two-dimensional
multidimensional scaling analysis yielded correlations with
the longitude and latitude of the cities. The Louwerse and
Zwaan (2009) findings are not limited to the English
language. Louwerse, Hutchinson, and Cai (2012) found
similar results using Arabic for predicting cities in the
Middle East, and Chinese for predicting cities in China. It is
interesting to note the presence of this effect was found for
three languages each with different writing directions
(English- left to right, Arabic- right to left, and Chinese, at
least historically- top to bottom). This shows, at the least,
that it is possible to map out cities in different locations,
within different writing systems, by using the frequency of
co-occurrences of city names within a large corpus.
Language encodes geographical information. The
question is whether this also means that humans use these
encodings. Louwerse and Zwaan (2009) stated that between
16% and 35% of the latitude and longitude variance in
human location estimates can be attributed to linguistic
coding. These percentages were found by using a
bidimensional regression analysis correlating human and
computational longitude and latitude estimates (by a large
newspaper corpus). However, it is unclear whether 84% and
65% and of the latitude and longitude variance in human
location estimates can be attributed to spatial information.
Moreover, given that language encodes spatial information,
it is difficult to disentangle linguistic and perceptual
processes. It could be argued that proximity can explain
estimation bias when determining distance between two
locations (Tobler, 1970). However, Friedman, Kirkman, &
Brown (2002) tested this hypothesis by comparing latitude
estimates by participants in Canada and Texas. Their
ﬁndings did not support the proximity hypothesis, whereas
participants in Texas exhibited greater bias in their estimates
of Mexican locations than the participants from Canada. The
explanations proposed by Friedman et al. included
cognitively based beliefs, geopolitically based beliefs, and
socio-culturally based beliefs. It was also argued by Brown
(2002) that seeding effects can affect real-world judgments,
such as proximity and size estimation of two cities.
However, many of the experiments contained in Brown
(2002) were designed for numerical estimates such as
population, or how many square kilometers is for a given
country. While they were robust and interesting effects, they
do not necessarily apply here, because the tasks in the
present study utilize the distance between two cities, not
estimations of numbers about those locations.
Louwerse and Benesh (2012) investigated to what extent
geographical estimates could come from language statistics
and from perceptual simulations by comparing readers who
had read Tolkien’s Lord of the Rings trilogy and The Hobbit
with participants who studied a map and had never seen the

3558

text. As in Louwerse and Zwaan (2009), computational
estimates of co-occurrence of the location of the cities in
Middle Earth were determined. Participants were asked to
draw the location of the cities on a piece of paper. Again,
computational estimates of co-occurrence for cities
mentioned in the text correlated with the longitude and
latitude of cities in Middle Earth. Interestingly, estimates
from those who studied a map correlated with the actual
geographical location in Middle Earth more than the
estimates from those who had read the text did. On the other
hand, estimates from those who had read the text correlated
more with the computational estimates of co-occurrence
than the estimates from those who studied a map did. These
results support the claims made by the Symbol
Interdependency Hypothesis: 1) Language (Lord of the
Rings) encodes geographical (Middle Earth) information; 2)
Those who read Lord of the Rings and those who studied the
map relied both on language statistics and perceptual
simulation in their estimates; 3) the relative dominance of
language statistics and perceptual simulation factors is
modified by whether participants read the text or studied the
map.
Importantly, human estimates in Louwerse and Zwaan
(2009) and Louwerse and Benesh (2012) were derived from
an experimental setting in which participants were asked to
draw the location of cities on a piece of paper, which is a
perceptual task. Given that the cognitive task determines the
effect of language statistics and perceptual simulations
(Louwerse & Jeuniaux, 2010), the estimates how much of
human geographical estimates come from language statistics
and come from perceptual simulations is likely to be biased.
We therefore conducted an experiment in which
participants were not asked to draw a map (a perceptual
task) but to estimate geographical distances from words (a
task that better justifies linguistic processing).

Experiment
In a between subjects design, participants viewed United
States city pairs in either a horizontal or vertical orientation.
These city pairs randomly appeared in either their natural
orientation (i.e., a more northern city was presented above a
second city, or a more western city was presented to the left
of a second city), or the opposite of their natural orientation.
In this iconic orientation, we predicted that participants
would rely on perceptual information. Conversely, when the
location of the city pairs was reversed (i.e., reverse-iconic),
we predicted that participants would rely on language
statistics.

Methods
Participants Ninety-three undergraduate native English
speakers at the University of Memphis (67 females)
participated for extra credit in a Psychology course. Fortyfive participants were randomly assigned to the vertical
presentation condition and forty-eight participants were
randomly assigned to the horizontal presentation condition.

Materials The experiment consisted of the largest 50
cities in the United States using the U.S. Census data from
2000 and were presented in 2,450 name pairs.
Procedure In two presentation conditions (horizontal or
vertical), we presented subjects with city pairs in their
iconic configuration and their reverse iconic configuration.
Participants were randomly assigned to view either the
vertical or horizontal configuration. To reduce order effects,
participants were counterbalanced across four groups per
condition.
The city pairs were presented on a 1280x1024 computer
screen. Participants were asked whether the named United
States cities were closely located. The vagueness of the
question intentionally left open the question of closeness for
the participant to decide. A more specific question would
have added a number of constraints that would influence the
judgment in unintended ways. The center of the screen was
positioned at eye level. Each trial began with the
presentation of a fixation cross for 3000ms. The participants
would select their choice (yes or no) by designated buttons
on a keyboard then a fixation cross would appear on the
screen for the next trial.

Results
Outliers were defined as response times (RTs) that were 2.5
SD above the mean per subject per condition and were
removed from the analysis. This affected less than 5% of the
data.
The perceptual factor was operationalized as the
differences in latitude or longitude of the cities. Language
statistics was operationalized as the log frequency of a – b
(e.g., for North – South: New York – Miami; for East –
West: Los Angeles – Boston), or b – a (e.g., for North –
South: Miami – New York; for West – East: Boston – Los
Angeles) order of word pairs using the large Web 1T 5-gram
corpus (Brants & Franz, 2006). This corpus consists of 1
trillion word tokens (13,588,391 word types) from
95,119,665,584 sentences. Using the log frequency of the
co-occurrence of word pairs enables linear regressions to be
performed comparing frequencies with other types of data,
because raw frequencies of those co-occurrences are
extremely skewed (Gries, 2010).
A mixed-effect regression analysis was conducted on RTs
with linguistic frequency and the perceptual factor as fixed
factors and participants and items as random factors
(Baayen, Davidson, & Bates, 2008). The model was fitted
using the restricted maximum likelihood estimation
(REML) for the continuous variable (RT). F-test
denominator degrees of freedom were estimated using the
Kenward-Roger’s degrees of freedom adjustment to reduce
the chances of Type I error (Littell, Stroup, & Freund,
2002). Participants and items were treated as random factors
in the analysis.
Note that the strength of a model association is
represented as a weighted ratio of the F statistic. R2 and F
used in ordinary regression analysis are closely related,
since where k is the number of model parameters and N is

3559

the number of cases, such that F has (k, N - k - 1) df. See
also Pedhazur (1997, p. 105) and Louwerse and Jeuniaux
(2010). See Figure 1.

Figure 1. Weighted ratio of the F statistic.
Vertical Configuration The perceptual factor explained
RTs in the iconic pairs, F(1,964.821) = 17.7, p < .001, with
larger distances yielding lower RTs. The linguistic factor,
however, did not explain RTs for the iconic word pairs,
F(1,960.549) = 0.45, p = .50.
For the reverse iconic configuration the perceptual factor
also explained RTs, F(1,984.502) = 8.382, p = .004, except
that the effect was considerably smaller. Importantly, for
these reverse-iconic word pairs a significant effect on RTs
was obtained for the linguistic factor, F(1,970.543) = 6.18, p
= .013, with higher frequencies yielding lower RTs. Figure
2 gives an estimate of effect sizes, which are calculated by
differences between groups as opposed to within the two
original groups.

Figure 2. Absolute t-values of the linguistic frequency and
latitude differences in reverse-iconic and iconic orientation
in the vertically positioned city names.

Horizontal Configuration For the horizontal configuration,
a similar pattern emerged as for the vertical configuration.
That is, the perceptual factor explained RTs for city pairs in
their iconic order, F(1,962.735) = 9.645, p < .002, but no
significance found for language statistics when the position
of the city pair was in the iconic order, F(1,995.626) =
1.254, p = .263.
For the reverse-iconic order the perceptual factor again
explained RT, F(1,987.520) = 9.565, p = .002. Importantly,
an effect for language statistics was obtained when city pairs
were presented in their reverse-iconic order, F(1,1012.479)
= 4.068, p = .044 (Figure 3).
Figure 3. Absolute t-values of the linguistic frequency and
longitude differences in reverse-iconic and iconic
orientation in the horizontally positioned city names.

Discussion
The goal of the present study was to determine to what
extent humans rely on language statistics and on perceptual
simulation in spatial cognition. Previous work has found
that language encodes geographical information, so much so
that by computing the rates of co-occurrence of city names
in the text, multidimensional scaling techniques allow for
estimating the relative longitude and latitude of cities.
Experiments have shown that humans rely on perceptual
simulation, for instance, a perceptually grounded memory of
the text. However, there is also evidence humans rely on
language statistics, similar to those obtained from
computational estimates. Because the existing literature
used human estimates from map drawings, the current paper
investigated to what extent linguistic and perceptual factors
would affect cognitive processes in a more linguistic task.

When city pairs were presented to participants in their
iconic order, their distance best explained RTs. The larger
the distance, the larger the RTs. No effect was obtained for
language statistics in the iconic order. For the reverse-iconic
order, the perceptual factor again explained RTs, but
language statistics did so as well. This suggests that when
the task or the stimulus invites for perceptual simulation,
humans rely on perceptual simulation. When perceptual
simulation is harder, other heuristics, such as language
statistics are used. This finding lies fully in line with the
results obtained by Louwerse and Jeuniaux (2010) showing
that linguistic and perceptual factors dominate in conceptual
processing when they are relevant.

3560

Further research should investigate the weaker effects for
the horizontal condition compared to those for the vertical
condition. Barsalou (2008) argues that locating objects on a
left/right axis is more difficult possibly due to the symmetry
of the body and less salient cues to differentiate those
objects. Perhaps this weaker effect is due to embodiment
factors. However, this difference might also be explained by
linguistic factors. When reporting two spatially related
words in English, such as up-down or left-right, the top or
the left most word is most often reported first. There is the
possibility that there are less instances of the left-right
phenomenon found in language. Future study of the nature
of this phenomenon could illuminate why this weaker effect
has been found. In the past, it has been shown that the
linguistic system is used more often when quick decisions
are made, and the perceptual system is used when slower
decisions are made (Louwerse & Connell, 2011). However,
more specific investigation is recommended in the future as
to the exact mechanisms of these speed differences and to
what degree they affect decisions.
These findings reported in this paper are also in line with
the Symbol Interdependency Hypothesis, which claims that
cognitive processes rely both on language statistics and
perceptual simulation. Because language encodes spatial
information, including geographical information, language
users can utilize these cues in their comprehension process.
Geographical judgments then rely on both a shallow
heuristic, called the linguistic system, and a fine-grained and
more precise perceptual simulation system.

References
Baayen, R. H., Davidson, D. J., & Bates, D. M. (2008).
Mixed-effects modeling with crossed random effects for
subjects and items. Journal of Memory and Language,
59(4), 390–412.
Barsalou, L. W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems.
Behavior and Brain Sciences, 22, 577–660.
Barsalou, L. W. (2008). Grounded cognition. Annual
Review of Psychology, 59, 617-645.
Barsalou, L. W., Solomon, K. O., & Wu, L. L. (1999).
Perceptual simulation in conceptual tasks. In M. K.
Hiraga, C. Sinha, & S. Wilcox (Eds.), Cultural,
typological, and psychological perspectives in cognitive
linguistics: The proceedings of the 4th conference of the
International Cognitive Linguistics Association, Vol. 3.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Boroditsky,
L.
(2000).
Metaphoric
structuring:
Understanding time through spatial metaphors. Cognition,
75(1), 1-28.
Brants, T., & Franz, A. (2006). Web 1T 5-gram Version 1.
Philadelphia, PA: Linguistic Data Consortium.
Brown, N. R. (2002). Real-world estimation: Estimation
modes and seeding effects. Psychology of Learning and
Motivation, 41, 321-359.
Fincher-Kiefer, R., (2001). Perceptual components of
situation models. Memory & Cognition, 29, 336-343.

Freundschuh, S. M., & Mercer, D. (1995). Spatial cognitive
representations of story worlds acquired from maps and
narrative. Geographical Systems, 2, 217–233.
Friedman, A., Kirkman, D. D., & Brown, N. (2002). Spatial
location judgments: A cross-national comparison of
estimation bias in subjective North American geography.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9, 615–623.
Glenberg, A. M. & Kaschak, M. P. (2002). Grounding
language in action. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9,
558-565.
Gries, S. Th. (2010). Useful statistics for corpus linguistics.
In Aquilino Sánchez & Moisés Almela (Eds.), A mosaic
of corpus linguistics: selected approaches. Frankfurt am
Main: Peter Lang.
Kaschak, M. P., Madden, C. J., Therriault, D. J., Yaxley,
R.H., Aveyard, M. E., Blanchard, A. A., & Zwaan,
R. A. (2005). Perception of motion affects language
processing. Cognition, 94, B79–B89.
Klatzky, R. L., Pellegrino, J. W., McCloskey, B. P., &
Doherty, S. (1989). Can you squeeze a tomato? The role
of motor representations in semantic sensibility
judgments. Journal of Memory and Language, 28, 56–77.
Littell, R. C., Stroup, W. W., & Freund, R. J. (2002). SAS
for linear models. Cary, NC: SAS Publishing.
Louwerse, M. M. (2007). Symbolic or embodied
representations: A case for symbol interdependency. In T.
Landauer, D. McNamara, S. Dennis, & W. Kintsch (Eds.),
Handbook of latent semantic analysis. Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Louwerse, M. M. (2008). Embodied relations are encoded in
language. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 15(4), 838–
844.
Louwerse, M. M. (2011). Symbol interdependency in
symbolic and embodied cognition. TopiCS in Cognitive
Science, 3, 273-302.
Louwerse, M. M., & Benesh, N. (2012). Representing
spatial structure through maps and language: Lord of the
Rings encodes the spatial structure of Middle Earth.
Cognitive Science, 36(8), 1556–1569.
Louwerse, M. M., & Connell, L. (2011). A taste of words:
Linguistic context and perceptual simulation predict the
modality of words. Cognitive Science, 35(2), 381–398.
Louwerse, M. M., & Jeuniaux, P. (2010). The linguistic and
embodied nature of conceptual processing. Cognition,
114(1), 96–104.
Louwerse, M. M., & Zwaan, R. A. (2009). Language
encodes geographical information. Cognitive Science,
33(1), 51–73.
Louwerse, M. M., Hutchinson, S., & Cai, Z. (2012). The
Chinese Route Argument: Predicting the Longitude and
Latitude of Cities in China and the Middle East Using
Statistical Linguistic Frequencies. In N. Miyake, D.
Peebles, & R. P. Cooper (Eds.), Proceedings of the 34th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.

3561

Marques. J. F. (2006). Specialization and semantic
organization: Evidence for multiple semantics linked to
sensory modalities. Memory & Cognition, 34, 60-67.
Matlock, T., Ramscar, M., & Boroditsky, L. (2005). The
experiential link between spatial and temporal
language. Cognitive Science, 29, 655-664.
Pecher, D., Zeelenberg, R., & Barsalou, L. W. (2003).
Verifying different-modality properties for concepts
produces switching costs. Psychological Science, 14,
119–124.
Pecher, D. and Zwaan, R. (Eds.) (2005). Grounding
cognition: The role of perception and action in memory,
language, and thought. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Pedhazur, E. J. (1997). Multiple regression in behavioral
research. Fort Worth, TX: Harcourt Brace.
Semin, G. & Smith, E. (Eds.) (2008). Embodied grounding:
Social, cognitive, affective, and neuroscientific
approaches. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Spence, C., Nicholls, M. E., & Driver, J. (2001). The cost of
expecting events in the wrong sensory modality.
Perception & Psychophysics, 63(2), 330–336.
Tobler, W. (1970). A computer movie simulating urban
growth in the Detroit region. Economic Geography
Supplement, 46, 234–240.
Zwaan, R. A., Stanﬁeld, R. A., & Yaxley, R. H. (2002). Do
language comprehenders routinely represent the shapes of
objects? Psychological Science, 13, 168–171.
Zwaan, R. & Yaxley, R. (2003). Spatial iconicity affects
semantic relatedness judgments. Psychonomic Bulletin
and Review, 10, 954-958.

3562

