UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Glushko Dissertation Prize Symposium

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3qr93632

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Bemis, Douglas Knox
Cohn, Neil
Kachergis, George
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Glushko Dissertation Prize Symposium
Participants
Douglas Knox Bemis (doug.bemis@gmail.com)

Neil Cohn (neilcohn@emaki.net)

George Kachergis (george.kachergis@gmail.com)

Andrew Lovett (andrew@cs.northwestern.edu)

NSERM-CEA Cognitive Neuroimaging Unit
CEA/SAC/DSV/DRM/Neurospin Center
F-91191 Gif-sur-Yvette Cedex, FRANCE

Center for Research in Language
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093-0526, USA

Cognitive Psychology Unit
Leiden Institute for Brain and Cognition
NL-2333 AK Leiden, The Netherlands

Dept. of Electrical Engineering & Computer Science
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208-3118, USA

Chair
Robert L. Goldstone (rgoldsto@indiana.edu)

Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, and Program in Cognitive Science
Indiana University
Bloomington, IN 47405
Keywords: language;
cognitive modeling.

narrative;

statistical

learning;

Simple Composition During Language
Processing: An MEG Investigation

Motivation

Douglas Knox Bemis – 2012 PhD from New York
University
Keywords: language; minimal phrases; magnetoencephalography.
Abstract: Language derives its expressive power from the
ability to combine simple elements into complex ideas. To
date, however, the vast majority of neurolinguistic
investigations into combinatorial language processing have
focused not on this transition from simple to complex, but
rather on manipulations of complexity itself or measuring
neural activity related to expectation violation. In this talk, I
will present a novel neurolinguistic paradigm designed to
isolate brain activity related to simple compositional mechanisms by combining the fine spatio-temporal resolution of
MEG with the processing of minimal adjective-noun
phrases (e.g. “red boat”). First I will demonstrate the ability
of this paradigm to identify neural correlates of basic
combinatorial processes that underlie the comprehension of
such phrases. Then, I will present several experiments that
probe the scope of these core processes both within
language – comparing comprehension to production – and
beyond – investigating combinatorial processing within both
the pictorial and mathematical domain.

The Annual Glushko Dissertation Prize in Cognitive
Science was established in 2011 as a way to promote future
growth in cognitive science, and encourage students to
engage in interdisciplinary efforts to understand minds. The
prize is jointly sponsored by the Cognitive Science Society
and the Robert J. Glushko and Pamela Samuelson Foundation, and honors young researchers conducting ground
breaking research in cognitive science. The immediate goal
is to recognize outstanding efforts to bridge between the
areas that impinge on cognitive science and create theories
of general interest to the multiple fields concerned with
scientifically understanding the nature of minds and
intelligent systems. Encouraging junior researchers to
engage in these enterprises is one of the best ways to assure
a robust future for cognitive science. The overarching goal
is to promote a unified cognitive science, consistent with the
belief that understanding how minds work will require the
synthesis of many different empirical methods, formal tools,
and analytic theories.
This symposium showcases the PhD research projects
of the 2013 winners of the Glushko Dissertation Prizes.
2013 marks the first year that a symposium has been formed
to assemble and showcase Glushko Prize winners’ research.
The prize-winning projects involve research on linguistic
compositionality, understanding pictorial narratives, learning object-to-name mappings from complex environments,
spatial problem solving, and visual awareness. The recruited
research methods include neuroimaging, computational
modeling, formal linguistic modeling, corpus analysis,
psychological experiments, and theoretical analysis. Taken
as a whole, the research projects strongly reinforces the
view that contemporary cognitive science research is highly
diverse, rigorous, creative, and fertile.

Structure, Meaning, and Constituency in
Visual Narrative Comprehension
Neil Cohn – 2012 PhD from Tufts University
Keywords: narrative; grammar; comics.
Abstract: Narrative has been formally studied for at least
two millennia, dating back to the writings of Aristotle.
Contemporary research on the structure and comprehension
of narratives has examined the discourse of spoken
language. However, visual narratives in the form of

63

Spatial Routines: A Framework for Modeling
Visual Problem-Solving

sequential images have also been pervasive throughout
history, from cave paintings to contemporary comic books
and strips. Yet, compared with the study of discourse in
verbal language, the study of sequential image
comprehension has been relatively impoverished. Just what
are the structures motivating visual narratives and how are
they processed?
I will explore this question using experiments guided by
an overall theory that sequential images at the narrative
level are structured and processed analogously to sequences
of words at the sentence level. The main idea is that a
narrative “grammar” organizes the structure of sequential
images in the visual language used in comics, similar to the
way that syntax organizes words into coherent sentences.
We focus here on two salient parts of this analogy. First, I
will explore the idea that visual narrative comprehension
involves a system of narrative structure and a system of
semantic coherence that contribute to comprehension. This
correspondence is akin to the interaction between syntax
and semantics at the sentence level. Second, I explore the
idea that narrative structure is a hierarchic system that
organizes images into constituents, analogous to the phrase
structures of syntax in sentences. I will conclude by
discussing the overall implications for the analogy between
narrative structure in sequential images and syntax in
sentence.

Andrew Lovett – 2012 PhD from Northwestern University
Keywords: cognitive modeling; qualitative representation;
visual problem-solving.
Abstract: Visual problem-solving tasks are an effective tool
for evaluating cognitive abilities and predicting future
performance. For example, Raven’s Progressive Matrices is
an intelligence test in which participants compare sequences
of images to solve for a missing image. To better understand
these tasks and the abilities they evaluate, I developed
Spatial Routines, a general computational framework for
modeling visual problem-solving. The framework is based
on three psychological claims: 1) When possible, people
reason about space using qualitative representations (e.g.,
identifying that one object is right of another), rather than
absolute quantitative values. 2) Spatial representations are
hierarchical. A given image might be represented as object
groups, individual objects, or the parts within each object.
3) Qualitative spatial representations can be compared via
structure-mapping: aligning their relational structure to find
the corresponding elements.
The models generate symbolic representations from
sketched input. They manipulate and compare these
representations to determine an answer. They are useful for
evaluating theories of perception, comparing problemsolving strategies, and identifying sources of difficulty for
test-takers. Because the models must construct their own
representations, they can highlight difficulties in
representation-building and abstraction not identified by
other computational models.
Three task models were constructed: Raven’s Progressive
Matrices, geometric analogy, and the visual oddity task. All
three models perform as well as human adults, and problems
that are difficult for the models are also difficult for people.
Furthermore, by ablating a model’s ability to perform
certain operations and examining the resulting error pattern,
one can generate new hypotheses about human reasoning.

More Naturalistic Cross-situational Word
Learning
George Kachergis – 2012 PhD from Indiana University
Keywords: statistical learning; cross-situational learning;
language acquisition.
Abstract: Language acquisition is a ubiquitous, challenging
problem involving fundamental cognitive abilities of
attention, learning, and memory. Previous research has
found that people can use word-object co-occurrences from
ambiguous situations to learn word meanings. A recent
associative model can account for a wide variety of wordlearning results using competing biases for familiar pairings
and for stimuli with uncertain associates (Kachergis, PhD
thesis). However, most studies of cross-situational learning
present an equal number of words and objects in each
learning situation, which is likely unrealistic. Moreover,
displaying an equal number of words and objects may
encourage learners to use assumptions such as each word
going with one object, which may simplify the problem.
This paper (Kachergis & Yu, 2013) presents several
conditions in which the number of words and objects do not
match: either additional objects appear at random, or objects
appear sometimes without their intended words. These
manipulations do generally hurt learning in comparison to
balanced conditions, but people still learn a significant
proportion of word-object pairings. The results are explored
in terms of statistics of the training trials—including
contextual diversity and context familiarity—and with the
uncertainty- and familiarity-biased associative model.
Parametric differences between conditions hint at hidden
cognitive constructs.

References
Kachergis, G. & Yu, C. (2013). More naturalistic crosssituational word learning (this volume).

64

