UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Half Day Tutorial on Using Quantum Probability Theory to Model Cognition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3185v0qx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Pothos, Emmanuel
Wang, Zheng
Busemeyer, Jerome

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Half Day Tutorial on Using Quantum Probability Theory to Model Cognition
Emmanuel M. Pothos (Emmanuel.pothos.1@city.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, City University London,
London, EC1R 0JD, UK

Zheng Wang (wang.1243@osu.edu)
School of Communication, Derby Hall,
The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210 USA.

Keywords: probability theory, Bayesian probability, quantum
theory, decision making, probabilistic models.

General Purpose
This tutorial introduces why and how to build cognitive
models using quantum probability (QP) theory. In the
tutorial, we will show that QP is inherently consistent with
deeply rooted psychological conceptions and intuitions. It
offers a fresh conceptual framework for explaining some
puzzling empirical findings of cognition, and provides a rich
new source of alternative formal tools, compared to classical
probability (CP) theory, for cognitive modeling.
CP models, including Bayesian models, have had an
enormous influence in cognitive science (e.g., Griffiths et
al., 2010). Such formal models are appealing for many
reasons. First, CP theory provides an integrated, coherent,
self-consistent set of principles, which can be flexibly
applied in any inductive inference situation. Second, such
approaches are more falsifiable. Core principles of CP
theory are inter-dependent, and identifying an empirical
violation of one principle in a setting could invalidate the
applicability of CP theory as a whole in that setting. Third,
CP principles are intuitive. In the words of Laplace (1816,
cited in Perfors et al., 2011), “probability theory is nothing
but common sense reduced to calculation.”
However, human cognition often goes against the
description and prescription from CP theory. In one of the
most influential empirical traditions in cognitive
psychology, Kahneman, Tversky, and colleagues have
reported persistent, clear violations of CP principles in
decision making (e.g., Tversky & Kahneman, 1974). For
example, consider the famous conjunction fallacy.
Participants are told of a person, Linda, looking very much
like a feminist and unlike a bank teller. Then, they are asked
to judge probabilities of some events. Violating CP rules,
people think the probability that Linda is a bank teller and a
feminist is higher than the probability that she is just a bank
teller. According to CP theory, it is a fallacy to think P(A
and B)>P(A). Importantly, even when we become aware of
our “fallacy,” we cannot shake off the impression that Linda
is indeed more likely to be a bank teller and a feminist, than
to be just a bank teller.
Important findings like this have led to intense and
extensive controversy about the mechanisms which guide
human cognition and decision making. The inspiration for

Jerome R. Busemeyer (jbusemey@indiana.edu)
Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University,
Bloomington 47468 Indiana, USA.

exploring QP theory in cognitive modeling partly arises as a
way to resolve this controversy.
The physical theory of quantum mechanics is a marriage
between a framework for how to assign probabilities to
events and assumptions regarding the nature of the physical
world. We can call the former QP theory (or just quantum
theory). Can it be applied outside of physics? The
motivation for doing so is twofold. First, QP theory is a
highly rigorous framework for probabilistic inference. It has
been developed over several decades by some of the most
brilliant scientists of all time (e.g., Bohr, Dirac, von
Neumann, Planck) and has been intensely scrutinized ever
since. Thus, the application of QP theory in cognitive
modeling has exactly the same formal advantages as that of
CP theory. Second, quantum theory allows us to consider
the possible relevance in cognitive modeling of several
novel concepts. For example, in quantum theory, a cognitive
system can be in a superposition state. This means that
relative to a question or measurement, the system is in an
indefinite state, with all definite states having potential to be
expressed. This provides an intrinsic formal representation
of the conflict, ambiguity, or uncertainty that people
experience in cognitive processes. For another example:
states can be entangled, which means a change in one part
of the system inexorably and instantaneously affects another
part. Entanglement is a form of extreme association, which
can be helpful for formalizing important cognitive
processes, such as holism, cognitive dissonance, and social
projection.
Fundamental quantum conceptions, such as superposition,
entanglement, interference, and complementarity, have no
formal counterparts in cognitive theory. We are part of a
growing group of researchers who have been intensely
exploring their applicability in understanding human
cognition. Quantum theory reveals alternative intuitions in
probabilistic models of cognition. The quantum cognition
research program aims to explore whether these alternative
intuitions can explain paradoxical findings in decision,
memory, and other areas of cognitive processing.
The tutorial introduce the basic principles of quantum
theory, in the context of well-known empirical findings in
psychological literature. The basic elements of QP theory
will require only some knowledge of linear algebra. No
background in physics or quantum theory is assumed. The
tutorial will be self-contained. It will show how probability

45

computations can be carried out in quantum theory, how one
can build quantum cognitive models, and what the nature of
probabilistic intuition is in such models. The tutorial will be
useful to all researchers interested in modeling cognition.

Previous Tutorials and Symposia
Similar tutorials have been presented regularly at the
CogSci meetings in Nashville (2007), Washington DC
(2008), Amsterdam (2009), and Sapporo (2012), and the
Society of Mathematical Psychology meeting (2012).
Around 30-50 participants attended each of the tutorials,
with an increasing number of attendees over the years. We
have been invited to present short workshops at various
universities, such as University of Osnabruck, university of
Cincinnati, and Cornell University. At the 2011 CogSci
meeting, we co-organized a symposium covering recent
progress in the quantum cognition research program. Other
tutorials were organized for the annual meetings of
Quantum Interaction (since 2009; about 40 participants).

Presenters
The main presenters, Pothos and Wang, have both
contributed extensively to the quantum cognition research
program. They both have multiple publications on quantum
cognitive models in psychological journals targeting a broad
audience. Their presentation will be rigorous, clear,
relevant, and accessible. Notably, Pothos has recently coauthored a Behavioral & Brain Sciences target article,
summarizing progress with the quantum cognition research
program. Wang has co-edited a special issue of Topics in
Cognitive Science that synthesizes current research on
quantum cognitive models. Also, both Pothos and Wang
have good experience with traditional cognitive models and
are currently associate editors for the Frontiers in Cognitive
Science journal. Finally, Busemeyer is one of the pioneers
of the quantum cognition research programme and has
extensive relevant publication and editorial experience.

Material to be covered
The tutorial will be organized in two parts: (1) an
introduction to the key concepts and mathematical modeling
tools in QP theory; and (2) an overview of successful
cognitive applications, with concrete examples of cognitive
models and corresponding MATLAB codes.
In the first part, we will provide a working definition of
QP theory. What is it? Why should it be relevant to a
cognitive scientist? What are its main characteristics in
comparison to CP theory? We will then introduce the basic
elements of QP theory (state vector, Hilbert spaces, how to
compute simple and conjunctive probabilities) using simple
illustrative models of well-known decision and judgment
fallacies. We will explain the differences in how probability
is computed in the classical vs. quantum way and how these
differences give rise to QP theory’s unique properties
(superposition, incompatibility, interference).

An important question we will address is: is it possible to
achieve some sort of isomorphism between (limited cases
of) QP and CP models and, if yes, at what price?
We will then introduce structured representations and the
idea of entanglement, another unique feature in QP. Time
evolution in quantum models will be compared with time
evolution in classical models and we will discuss how
interference effects can arise in the former, but not the latter,
correspondingly leading to violations of the law of total
probability, or not.
In second part, we will review successful applications of
QP to explain puzzling empirical results in human cognition
and decision. We will present some simple MATLAB code
illustrating the implementation of QP models in example
situations. Perhaps contrary to the common impression of
being mysterious and difficult, quantum cognitive models
are intuitive. They can be very simple as well, based mostly
on linear algebra. We will focus on recent quantum
cognition work on probabilistic judgment, measurement
order effects, memory, and conceptual combination. What
these areas have in common is that they all led to empirical
insights which have been hard to reconcile with a CP
perspective. Yet, as we will discuss, the unique properties of
QP have enabled natural, compelling, and falsifiable
accounts of these empirical results. Finally, the tutorial will
outline directions for future research.

References
Busemeyer, J. R., Pothos, E. & Franco, R., Trueblood, J. S.
(2011). A quantum theoretical explanation for probability
judgment ‘errors’. Psychological Review, 118, 193-218.
Busemeyer, J. R., Wang, Z., & Townsend, J. T. (2006).
Quantum dynamics of human decision making. Journal of
Mathematical Psychology, 50, 220-241.
Griffiths, T. L., Chater, N., Kemp, C., Perfors, A., &
Tenenbaum, J. B. (2010). Probabilistic models of
cognition: exploring representations and inductive biases.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 14, 357-364.
Perfors, A., Tenenbaum, J. B., Griffiths, T. L., & Xu, F.
(2011). A tutorial introduction to Bayesian models of
cognitive development. Cognition, 120, 302-321.
Pothos, E. M. & Busemeyer, J. R. (in press). Can quantum
probability provide a new direction for cognitive
modeling? Behavioral & Brain Sciences.
Pothos, E. M. & Busemeyer, J. R. (2009). A quantum
probability explanation for violations of “rational”
decision theory. Proceedings of the Royal Society B, 276,
2171-2178.
Tversky, A. & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under
uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science, 185, 1124–
1131.
Wang, Z., Busemeyer, J. R., Atmanspacher, H., & Pothos,
E. (in press). The potential of using quantum theory to
build models of cognition. Topics in Cognitive Science.
Wang, Z., & Busemeyer, J. R. (in press). A quantum
question order model supported by empirical tests of an a
priori and precise prediction. Topics in Cognitive Science.

46

