UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Help-Seeking As A Cause of Young Children’s Collaboration

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4w51w7v7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Vredenburgh, Christopher
Kushnir, Tamar

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Help-Seeking As A Cause of Young Children’s Collaboration
Christopher Vredenburgh (cv92@cornell.edu)
Department of Human Development, Cornell University
Ithaca, NY, 14850, USA

Tamar Kushnir (tk397@cornell.edu)
Department of Human Development, Cornell University
Ithaca, NY, 14850, USA

Abstract
Young children’s collaboration is a topic of great interest, yet what
causes children to initiate collaboration in some circumstances but
not others is unclear. In this research, we analyzed preschoolers’
collaboration as an information gathering activity in a toy
assembly activity.
We independently assessed children’s
competency at a similar building task and, using a separate group
of children, the difficulty of each step of the activity. We
hypothesized that children would request collaborative assistance
when they needed assistance (that is, when they were less
competent and/or the task was more difficult), but act
independently when capable.
The results confirmed that
preschoolers were more likely to request collaborative assistance
as the difficulty of the activity increased and more so if they were
initially less competent. The results suggest that preschoolers’
collaboration may be profitably viewed as an information
gathering activity.
Keywords: Collaboration; help-seeking; social learning;
preschool children; play.

Introduction
Recently, there has been considerable interest in
children’s early-emerging social learning abilities, including
their reliance on social information (Koenig & Harris, 2005)
and their propensity to learn through collaboration (Duran &
Gauvain, 1993; Foley, Ratner, & House, 2002; Paradise &
Rogoff, 2009; Sommerville & Hammond, 2007). Indeed, it
has even been argued that these social learning abilities, in
particular collaboration and the psychological motivations
underlying collaboration, are what distinguish humans from
nonhuman primates (Tomasello, Call, Behne, & Moll,
2005).
Recent research on children’s collaboration has
emphasized the importance of children’s tendency to
appreciate joint goals and commitment to collaborators.
This research has demonstrated that children collaborate
even when doing so does not gain them any explicit benefits
(Warneken, Gräfenhain, & Tomasello, 2012). Nonetheless,
what causes children to initiate collaboration is still widely
debated. Researchers have proposed a range of factors that
highlight complementary processes that are generally
consistent with one another (Tomasello et al 2005). The
range of suggested factors includes a general motivation to
share cognitive states with others, a “curiosity” to
understand psychological and physical causes, and a social
game theoretic distinctively rewarding to humans

(Tomasello et al, 2005). These possible causes are clearly
not mutually exclusive. Moreover, many of them make a
similar prediction: when children are offered the opportunity
to involve others in tasks, they will do so regardless of
whether they need help at all.
Intriguingly, research on people’s help-seeking
could shed light on why children collaborate in some
circumstances, but not all.
Specifically, help-seeking
involves a help seeker signaling to a helper a desire for them
to assist in attaining a goal. Help-seeking often occurs when
an individual is not confident in their ability to
independently complete the task (Nelson-Le Gall et al,
1990). Interestingly, requests for assistance can result in a
range of collaborative exchanges of information and action.
For instance, responses can vary from indirect verbal hints
that facilitate the help seeker to direct coordination of
actions between the help seeker and helper. Indeed, help
seekers often prefer to avoid receiving too much help, so as
to remain actively involved (Nelson-Le Gall, 1986). Thus,
help-seeking generally occurs in relation to uncertainty
about independently carrying out the task, and can lead to a
variety of collaborative exchanges of information and
action.
In this research, we examined children’s helpseeking as a proximate cause of collaboration that may
contribute to children’s learning. From this perspective,
children face information gathering trade-offs in acting
alone versus collaborating. Relatedly, empirical studies
show that children often prefer to play on their own, and
indeed there are learning benefits to such autonomous
exploration (Schulz & Bonawitz, 2007). Children at times
learn more from acting than from watching someone else
perform an action (Berry, 1991; Sommerville, Hildebrand &
Crane, 2008; Kushnir, Wellman, & Gelman, 2009).
However, when a child is cognitively or motorically unable
to perform an activity, they gain little or no information by
acting. Therefore, in this case the child may seek assistance
instead of struggling alone. We hypothesized that, rather
than always involving others in their play, children will be
more likely to request collaborative assistance only when
they need assistance. More specifically, we ask whether the
difficulty of the activity and the competence of the
individual child will predict changes in the frequency and
nature of their collaborative interactions.
The empirical investigation of our hypotheses
required permitting children to choose to act independently

3705

or request collaborative assistance. In permitting children to
act spontaneously, we needed to form and apply definitions
of collaboration in our coding scheme. To do this, we
referenced past research on children’s collaboration to
attempt to remain consistent in the definition of the
phenomenon. In past research, collaboration has been
defined as actively coordinating actions, verbally planning
towards a goal, and taking turns with another person (Foley,
Ratner, & House, 2002; Warneken, Chen, & Tomasello,
2012). As is described below, we adopted the standard that
in order for an event to be described as collaborative, the
child needed to coordinate actions and/or verbally plan with
the collaborator. Furthermore, to account for and analyze
the varied involvement of the child and collaborator in their
spontaneous interactions, we ranked each interaction using
defined levels of collaboration, as described below.
Our empirical investigation also required an
activity which had multiple parts, each with different
degrees of difficulty, and measured children’s ability to
independently complete the activity. To this end, we
designed a toy assembly task in which children built toys by
following sequences of instructive pictures. To assess
children’s initial competency children completed an
Assessment Toy that provided an estimate of their ability to
independently construct the toys, termed the Competency
Score. To assess the difficulty of the stimuli, a group of
children constructed all of the toys independently without
help, and were scored on their ability to complete each step.
In this way, we measured the two factors we hypothesized
to contribute to children’s initiation of collaboration.

Method
Participants. Participants were forty preschoolers
(M= 52.44 months, SD= 9.7 months; twenty-one females).
Children were recruited from preschools and from a
database of research participants whose parents expressed
interest in participating in research. The children were all
from the surrounding region of a rural university town and
were predominantly Caucasian and middle class. Three
additional children were excluded from the final sample;
one due to experimenter error, one due to
uncooperativeness, and one due to teacher interruption.
Stimuli. The stimuli were Edushape Interstar rings.
In the current experiment, numerous rings were connected
with one another so as to resemble larger objects. Children
were shown laminated instructive pictures depicting each
step of construction for four different toys.
Apparatus. Testing sessions occurred at a childsized table in a quiet room in the laboratory or in a quiet
room in the child’s preschool. The interactions were
recorded with two Sony DCR-SR68 digital cameras.

Procedure
Warm-up Toy. The Warm-up Toy, termed the
Key, was completed to teach children how to manipulate the
toy pieces and make them look like the instructive pictures.
The experimenter told the child that they had some toys and

some pictures, and they could make the toys look like the
pictures. The experimenter told the child to watch him/her
as they completed the first step. After completing the first
step, the experimenter asked the child, “Does that look like
the picture?” If the child said no, the experimenter explained
that the color, position, and number of pieces all made it
look like the picture. The child and experimenter then took
turns making the Key. Corrective feedback was given for
mistakes.
Assessment Toy. Next the child completed an
Assessment Toy, termed the Boat, which provided a graded
assessment of the child’s competence in independently
constructing the toys as shown in the instructive pictures.
The experimenter asked the child to do the Boat
independently, saying, “You can do this one by yourself by
making it look like the picture. Start with the first picture.
Each time you need a new picture, just move the picture.
Now go ahead and make it look like the picture.” As the
child completed the Boat, the experimenter quietly watched
the child and did not provide assistance or corrective
feedback. The child had up to five minutes to complete the
Boat.
Test Toys. The child then completed the two Test
Toys, Sally and Sally’s House. Twenty-two of the children
were randomly sorted into the Collaboration Group and
eighteen into the Non-collaboration Group.
In both
conditions, half of the children did Sally first and half did
Sally’s House first. Children had as long as needed to finish
the Test Toys.
In the Collaboration Group, the experimenter
looked at the child and said, “Now I can help you make
Sally, so just let me know when you want me to do some,
OK? So if you want help, I’m right here.” The experimenter
sat and watched, and did not intervene or provide any sort of
verbal feedback unless the child initiated collaboration (see
“Collaborative Responses” below for details on how the
experimenter responded to bids).
In the Non-collaboration Group, the experimenter
said, “You can do this one by yourself by making it look
like the picture. Now go ahead and make it look like the
picture.” The experimenter sat quietly and watched the child
complete the toy. The experimenter did not intervene or
provide any sort of verbal feedback, and responded to
requests for assistance as in the Assessment Toy.
Bids for Collaboration. Based on prior work and
our own pilot observations in preschools, children initiate
collaboration by establishing eye contact, remarking that the
activity is difficult, and directly asking for assistance. We
therefore accepted these as bids for collaboration. The
experimenter responded to 2 seconds of eye contact and
remarks of difficulty by asking, “Do you want me to help?”
If the child declined assistance, no collaboration occurred.
If the child assented, the experimenter collaborated. The
experimenter responded to direct requests for assistance by
collaborating with the child without further questioning.
Limits of Collaboration.
The experimenter
always provided helpful, unhesitating, and accurate

3706

assistance. The experimenter collaborated for a single step
at a time, unless the child asked for further assistance on the
following step. If the child asked the experimenter not to
intervene further, the experimenter stopped collaborating. If
the child had made mistakes in steps prior to the one at
which they asked for assistance, the experimenter aided in
correcting the past mistakes. In this way, the experimenter
did not condone errors, functioned as an ecologically valid
adult collaborator, and avoided the potential complication of
inconsistent experimenter responses across children to
vague requests for assistance.
Collaborative Responses. If the child structured
the experimenter’s response by specifying a particular
motoric or cognitive difficulty, the experimenter addressed
the particular problem. For example, if the child was
struggling to fit two pieces together and commented that it
was difficult to put them together, the experimenter assisted
the child in pushing them together. In this case, both the
child and experimenter would be involved in physically
fitting them together. If the child simply asked if one piece
went on top of the other, the collaborator provided the
information and permitted the child to physically carry out
the actions. In response to vague requests for collaboration
without child action, for instance looking at the step and
stating “This is too hard,” the experimenter gathered the
correct pieces, carried out the step, and provided an
explanation. Likewise, if the child simply asked for verbal
clarification, the experimenter’s response was limited to
verbal clarification. In this way, the experimenter’s
collaboration was contingent upon the extent to which the
child structured it.

competency on each step of the test toy construction was
used as a means of computing the difficulty of the Test
Toys’ steps in the absence of collaboration. The scoring
was the same 0 to 5 scale that was used to measure
children’s competency during assessment. But, this time we
did not sum across steps; instead we used the average
competency of the Non-Collaboration group at each step as
an index of step difficulty in our analysis (below). .
Collaboration initiated?: A binary response code
for each step on which children in the Collaboration Group
initiated any collaboration. Reliability coding performed on
55% of the sample produced 100% concordance.
Level of collaboration: For the Collaboration
Group, collaborative interactions at each step were rankordered in five categories from lowest to highest levels of
collaborative assistance: (0) no collaboration, (1) the child
performed the action and the experimenter provided verbal
feedback about the child’s action, (2) the child provided
information about how the pieces assemble and the
experimenter performed the action, (3) both the child and
the experimenter provided information about how the pieces
are assembled and both were involved in assembling them,
and (4) the experimenter performed the actions and
provided the information about how the pieces are
assembled. If multiple levels of collaboration were present
during one step, the step was coded by the highest level
present. Reliability coding performed on 55% of the sample
produced 92% concordance, indicating high reliability.

Results

Coding
Children’s Competency- Assessment Toy (Boat).
We assessed children’s competency in constructing the
Assessment Toy. Five parameters assessed for each step of
the toys whether children: (1) added the correct number of
pieces, (2) made the correct number of connections with
those pieces, (3) made the correct type of connection(s), (4)
added pieces of the correct color(s), and (5) connected the
pieces to the correct part of the existing structure. For each
step, children earned from 0-5 points; each parameter was
worth a minimum of 0 and a maximum of 1 point. Partial
credit (e.g. ½ points) was given for partial completion.
Children’s performance score on each step of the
Assessment Toy therefore had a minimum of 0 and a
maximum of 5 multiplied by the toy’s number of steps (8
steps; range 0-40).
Children’s performance on the Test Toys (Sally
and Sally’s House) during collaboration. The same
coding as above was used to assess children in the
Collaboration Group as they completed the Test Toys.
Once again, children’s performance score for each Test Toy
had a minimum of 0 and a maximum of 5 multiplied by the
toy’s number of steps (10 steps each; range 0-50).
Step difficulty of the Test Toys (Sally and
Sally’s House).
The Non-Collaboration Group’s

Children’s Competency.
Overall, on the
Assessment Toy children averaged a Competency Score of
29.83 out of 40 with a standard deviation of 10.49. There
were no systematic differences at assessment between
children in each group (Collaboration: M = 30.17, Noncollaboration: M = 29.84, t(38) = .591, p = ns). Thus, our
entire sample of children displayed sufficient variation in
competency to further investigate our hypotheses.
Collaboration Initiated. Our hypothesis predicted
that children would collaborate when they were unable to
perform the activity independently, and conversely that they
would not collaborate when they could construct the toys
independently. Our principal analysis therefore assessed
whether the difficulty of the Test Toy steps, as measured by
the Non-collaboration Group’s average performance, and
children’s competence, as measured by children’s
Competency Scores, predicted children’s choices to
collaborate. There were no order effects (Sally first vs.
Sally’s House first) in either the Collaboration or Noncollaboration Group, so results were collapsed across order
for further analysis.
In assessing our predictions of children’s
collaboration, we needed to properly account for the
dependence amongst children’s repeated measurements at
each step. We therefore employed a General Estimating
Equation (GEE), which is a common form of logistic
regression analysis, with children as the repeated effect.

3707

Our first dependent variable was the binary variable:
whether children selected to collaborate on each step (1 =
yes, 0 = no). We first performed an analysis with step
difficulty, children’s Competency Scores, age, and toy type
(Sally =0, Sally’s house = 1) as the predictors. We included
children’s gender as a factor (female = 0, male = 1).
According to the model, the log of the odds of a child
collaborating was significantly positively related to step
difficulty (p = .000) and significantly negatively related to
children’s competence (p = .001). As depicted in Table 1,
neither age, gender, nor the particular toy related to
children’s collaboration. This indicates that when the step
was more difficult and the child less competent, children
were significantly more likely to collaborate than act
independently. Similarly, when the steps were simple and
the child competent, children were more likely to act
independently.
However, it was possible that children selected to
collaborate more as they became tired of the activity as
opposed to the difficulty of the steps. We performed a
second GEE analysis with toy step and step difficulty as the
predictors, and collaboration as the dependent variable.
Step difficulty was a statistically significant predictor of
collaboration, but toy step was not (Step difficulty: β = .717,
Wald’s χ2 = 20.345, p = .000; Step: β = -.003, Wald’s χ2 =
.017, p = .896). This result helped to specify that step
difficulty, as opposed to the order of the toy steps and/or
ordering of the toys, related to children’s collaboration.

*** Indicates statistically significant at the .001 level.
While these logistic regression results were
encouraging, we desired a direct assessment of how the two
factors in our conceptual model of collaboration compared
with children’s observed behavior. To do so, we divided the
children into three categories of competency and the steps
into three categories of difficulty. The majority of children
had a Competency Score in the range of 35-40 out of a
maximum of 40, with only one child scoring below 10. We
therefore developed the following categories of Competency
Scores: Less Competent (0-20), More Competent (21-35),
and Very Competent (36-40). As for step difficulty, the
lowest step score was 1.87 and the majority of step scores
were above 3.5. To account for the lack of difficult steps,
we defined the following three categories of step difficulty:
Simple (0-1.0), Somewhat Difficult (1.1-2.0), and More
Difficult (2.1-5).
Based on the categories defined above, we
calculated the observed probability of children collaborating
for each category of competency and difficulty. The
observed probabilities are displayed in the line graph in
Figure 1a. As shown, collaboration was more likely as the
step difficulty increased and children’s competency
decreased. This result was consistent with our hypotheses.

Table 1: Cumulative Logistic Regression Analysis of
Children’s Choices to Collaborate

Predictor

β

SE β

Wald’s
χ2

Constant

6.01

2.88

4.34

Toy

-.05

.34

Gender

.00

Step
Difficulty

P

OR

.00***

405.
48

.02

.89

.95

.73

.00

.90

1.00

.84

.14

36.18

Competency

-.08

.02

10.39

Age

-.41

.62

.44

.00***
.00***
.51

Figure 1a: Children were categorized into three
competency categories and the toy steps into three difficulty
categories.
The graph shows children’s observed
probability of collaboration for each category of children
and steps. Standard error bars are displayed.

2.31
.93
.66

Table 1: Table 1 shows the results of the parameter
estimates for a logistic regression analysis performed with a
General Estimating Equation. The model assesses which
variables relate to children’s choice to collaborate or act
independently. Toy (Sally = 0, Sally’s House = 1) and
gender (female = 0, male = 1) were entered as factors. Step
difficulty, competency, and children’s age were entered as
covariates. Degrees of freedom = 1.

We were unable to assess a GEE model based on
categorical variables representing the categories because
some of the cells would contain 0 (the less competent
group’s children collaborated on all of the more difficult
steps). Instead, we assessed how our statistical logistic GEE
model’s predictions, based on the continuous values of
competency and step difficulty, compared with the observed
probabilities. Critically, this provides evidence as to how
well the occurrence of children’s collaboration coheres with
the two factors in our conceptual model: step difficulty
(represented by “D” below) and competency (represented by

3708

“C” below). Computing the probabilities from the logistic
GEE model consisted of applying the following equation:

P = ⅇ Constant + .D*MD + C*MC / (1+ ⅇ Constant + .D*MD + C*MC)
We selected the means (represented by “M” above)
of the observed values of each category to be the
representative covariate values. We then computed the
probability of collaboration using the parameter estimates
provided by the logistic GEE model. The results are
displayed in Figure 1b.

action and information sharing from the adult collaborator
as the difficulty of the steps rose and children’s Competency
Scores decreased. Neither age nor any of the factors related
to the character of children’s collaboration. This model
furthers our understanding by suggesting that not simply the
occurrence of collaboration, but also the character of the
collaborative interactions relate to the difficulty of the
activity and children’s ability to independently execute the
activity.
Table 2: Cumulative Logistic Regression Analysis of
Children’s Level of Collaboration
Predictor

Figure 1b: As outlined in the text, three categories of child
competency and step difficulty were defined.
The
probability of collaborating was then computed from our
logistic GEE model consisting of step difficulty and
competency. Standard error bars are displayed.
Figures 1a and 1b, that is, the observed and
computed probabilities of children collaborating on a given
step, are remarkably similar. The congruence of the cell
values and direction of change augment the logistical
regression analyses by providing a direct demonstration that
children’s behavior was consistent with our predictions.
Most importantly, this analysis suggests a large portion of
children’s decisions to collaborate may be a function of two
factors: children’s competency and the difficulty of the
activity.
Levels of Collaboration. We also investigated
whether the character, or magnitude, of the collaborative
interactions differed as a matter of step difficulty and
children’s competency. We performed a multinomial
distribution GEE in which the dependent variable was the
level of collaboration, with no collaboration being level 0.
The specific toy (Sally = 0, Sally’s House = 1) and
children’s gender (female = 0, male = 1) were the factors.
The three predictors were step difficulty, children’s
competency, and age. The resulting analysis indicated that
the log of the odds of raising the level of children’s
collaboration was significantly positively related to step
difficulty (p = .000) and significantly negatively related to
children’s competency (p = .000; Table 2). This indicates
that the collaborative interactions tended to involve more

Constant
(Level = 0)
Constant
(Level = 1)
Constant
(Level = 2)
Constant
(Level = 3)
Toy
Gender
Step
Difficulty
Competen
-cy
Age

β

SE β

Wald’s
χ2

P

OR

-2.76

2.28

1.47

.23

.06

-2.28

2.28

1.0

.32

.10

-1.86

2.30

.66

.42

.16

-.79

2.27

.12

.73

.46

-.15
-.06

.39
.66

.15
.01

.70
.92

.86
.94

.94

.15

37.04

-.11

.02

45.81

-.41

.49

.72

.00***
.00***
.40

2.56
.90
.66

Table 2: Table 2 shows the results of the parameter
estimates for a cumulative logistic regression analysis
performed with a General Estimating Equation. The model
assesses which variables are predictive of the character of
children’s collaboration. Toy (Sally = 0, Sally’s House = 1)
and gender (female = 0, male = 1) were entered as factors.
Step difficulty, competency, and age were entered as
covariates. The levels of collaboration, described above,
refer to different categories and magnitudes of collaborative
interactions. Degrees of freedom = 1.
*** Indicates statistically significant at the .001 level.
Again, it was possible that children involved the
collaborator more because of fatigue of the activity as
opposed to step difficulty. We therefore performed another
analysis to evaluate whether differences in the character of
children’s collaboration resulted from the order of the steps
as opposed to step difficulty. The regression indicated that
step difficulty, not the order of steps, related to the character
of children’s collaboration (Step difficulty: β = .744, Wald’s
χ2 = 20.989, p = .000; Step: β = .015, Wald’s χ2 = .228, p =
.633). This provided further evidence that the difficulty of
the activity, as opposed to some other aspect inherent in the
order of steps, related to the manner in which children
collaborated.

Discussion
The results show that the probability of a child
requesting collaborative assistance on a given step was

3709

predicted both by the child’s initial competency in
constructing similar toys and the difficulty of constructing
the same toys without adult assistance. Indeed, a statistical
model consisting of those two predictors alone provided a
comparable match to children’s observed probability of
collaborating (Figures 1a and 1b). Second, the character of
children’s collaborative interactions, that is, the extent to
which children were involved, was predicted by children’s
competency and step difficulty. This indicates that these
two factors are not only related to the occurrence, but also to
the substance of collaborative interactions.
These results support an “information gathering”
perspective of children’s collaboration related to their helpseeking. This can be best appreciated by understanding the
link between the difficulty of the activity and the
information to be gained by independent versus
collaborative behavior. Indeed, children are implicitly
motivated to seek more information through active search
when evidence is ambiguous or complex (Schulz &
Bonawitz, 2007). Initiating collaboration may have a
similar motivation. Indeed, seeking collaborative assistance
may be the optimal strategy in circumstances in which
independent exploration is not providing the necessary
information to overcome difficulty.
Of course, this by no means precludes the
importance of other factors, such as a species-wide prosocial disposition (Tomasello et al, 2005). Indeed, it is
certain that other factors contribute to young children’s
collaboration. However, our results suggest that, in the
motivation to accomplish a goal (complete a task, learn a
new skill, etc.), aspects of the environment – including the
type of goal or task, the competency, skill or knowledge of
any individual child – may serve as powerful influences on
whether collaboration is initiated, if at all. Future work is
needed to examine how the various “proximate causes” of
collaboration interact in children’s everyday behavior and in
different contexts, such as peer collaboration.
Our results also suggest a way in which social
learning and learning through exploratory play may be fully
integrated. That is, children are neither “stubborn
autodidacts” (Harris, 2002) when they learn nor are they
passive recipients of social information. Rather, through
their own activity, children trade between exploring by
themselves and exploiting the knowledge of others. By
addressing both the nature and the immediate causes of
collaborative vs. non-collaborative behavior, future work
may shed light on the many ways in which they relate, and
how collaboration contributes to children’s impressive early
learning abilities.

Acknowledgments
We thank Yue Yu, Felix Thoemmes, and Francoise
Vermelyan for their helpful feedback.

References
Berry (1991). The role of action in implicit learning. The
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology A: Human

Experimental
Psychology,
43A(4),
881-906.
doi:10.1080/14640749108400961
Duran, R. T., & Gauvain, M. (1993). The role of age versus
expertise in peer collaboration during joint planning.
Journal Of Experimental Child Psychology, 55(2), 227242. doi:10.1006/jecp.1993.1013
Foley, M., Ratner, H., & House, A. (2002). Anticipation and
source-monitoring errors: Children's memory for
collaborative activities. Journal Of Cognition And
Development, 3(4), 385-414.
Harris, P. L. (2002). What do children learn from
testimony? In P. Carruthers, M. Siegal, & S. Stich. (Eds.),
Cognitive bases of science. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511613517.018
Koenig, M. A., & Harris, P. L. (2005). The role of social
cognition in early trust. Trends In Cognitive Sciences,
9(10), 457-459.
Kushnir, T., Wellman, H. M., & Gelman, S. A. (2009). A
self-agency bias in preschoolers' causal inferences.
Developmental Psychology, 45(2), 597-603.
Nelson-le Gall, S. A. (1987). Necessary and unnecessary
help-seeking in children. The Journal Of Genetic
Psychology: Research And Theory On Human
Development,
148(1),
53-62.
doi:10.1080/00221325.1987.9914536
Nelson-Le Gall, S., Kratzer, L., Jones, E., & DeCooke, P.
(1990). Children's self-assessment of performance and
task-related help seeking. Journal Of Experimental Child
Psychology,
49(2),
245-263.
doi:10.1016/00220965(90)90057-F
Paradise, R., & Rogoff, B. (2009). Side by side: Learning by
observing and pitching in. Ethos, 37(1), 102-138.
doi:10.1111/j.1548-1352.2009.01033.x
Schulz, L. E., & Bonawitz, E. (2007). Serious fun:
Preschoolers engage in more exploratory play when
evidence is confounded. Developmental Psychology,
43(4), 1045-1050. doi:10.1037/0012-1649.43.4.1045
Sommerville, J. A., & Hammond, A. J. (2007). Treating
another's actions as one's own: Children's memory of and
learning from joint activity. Developmental Psychology,
43(4), 1003-1018.
Sommerville, J. A., Hildebrand, E. A., & Crane, C. C.
(2008). Experience matters: The impact of doing versus
watching on infants' subsequent perception of tool-use
events. Developmental Psychology, 44(5), 1249-1256.
doi:10.1037/a0012296
Tomasello, M., Carpenter, M., Call, J., Behne, T., & Moll,
H. (2005). Understanding and sharing intentions: The
origins of cultural cognition. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences,
28(5),
675-735.
doi:10.1017/S0140525X05000129
Warneken, F., Gräfenhain, M., & Tomasello, M. (2012).
Collaborative partner or social tool? New evidence for
young children’s understanding of joint intentions in
collaborative activities. Developmental Science, 15(1),
54-61. doi:10.1111/j.1467-7687.2011.01107.x

3710

