UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Hierarchical Control and Sense of Agency: Differential Effects of Control on Implicit and
Explicit measures of Agency

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1ms9r3q9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Kumar, Devpriya
Srinivasan, Narayanan

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Hierarchical Control and Sense of Agency: Differential Effects of Control on
Implicit and Explicit measures of Agency
Devpriya Kumar (devpriyak@cbcs.ac.in)
Centre of Behavioural and Cognitive Sciences, University of Allahabad
Allahabad 211002, India

Narayanan Srinivasan (nsrini@cbcs.ac.in)
Centre of Behavioural and Cognitive Sciences, University of Allahabad
Allahabad 211002, India

Abstract
While recent studies show dissociation between the implicit
and explicit aspects of ‘sense of agency’, the mechanisms
underlying these different aspects of agency are not yet
clearly understood. We argue that the control achieved at
different levels of hierarchy is important for different aspects
of agency. In the current study, we investigate how changes
in control at the perceptual-motor level and at goal level
influence implicit and explicit measures of sense of agency.
In a given trial, participants were first required to aim at a
target in a noisy environment and then shoot at the target.
After certain interval, a circle flashed at the location where
participant aimed while pressing the trigger. Participants
estimated the interval between action and presentation of the
circle that acted as a measure of intentional binding, an
implicit measure of agency and also rated an explicit sense of
authorship. The results suggest that different aspects of
agency and dissociation between implicit and explicit aspects
of agency are mediated by control achieved at various levels.
Keywords: Sense of agency; event-control approach;
intentional binding; control; hierarchical system; interval
estimation.

Introduction
With every action that we perform, we not only influence
our environment but also modify our conscious mental state
of being the agent of the action. This feeling is known as
sense of agency (Pacherie, 2011). While elusive, this sense
of agency (SoA) is central to our conscious experience and
has recently gained popularity among philosophers as well
as scientists (see Gallagher, 2006, for a review and insight
on related issues).
Sense of agency is a complex, multifaceted, phenomenon
(Pacherie, 2011). In general two aspects of SoA have been
emphasized and studied in detail. Firstly, sense of Agency
as first order experience, in which agency is generally
linked to the intentional aspect of task. Here an action is
considered to be self-generated when the effect of an action
matches the intention of the participant (Moore, Lagando,
Deal, & Haggard, 2009; Farrer & Frith, 2002), or when
agency is linked to bodily movement as in the famous
rubber hand illusion (Farrer, Frank, Georgieff, Frith,
Decety, & Jeannerod, 2003). This aspect of agency is also
called pre-reflective or implicit sense of agency. Secondly,
sense of agency as reflective attribution (or sense of

authorship), in which participant is asked to report his/her
subjective sense of belief in causing an action (Ebert &
Wegner, 2010; Haggard & Moore, 2010). Recent models of
‘self’ (Synofzik, Vosgerau, & Newen, 2008) take into
account these two aspects of agency.
An important measure of agency that has gained
prominence in the last decade is intentional binding.
Intentional binding refers to the finding that participants
perceive the self-generated action and its effect to be
temporally closer to each other (Haggard, Clark, &
Kalogeras, 2002b). The concept of intentional binding has
been linked in the literature strongly to the sense of agency,
that is, the experience of agency is greater when intentional
binding is stronger. A recent review (Moore & Obhi, 2012)
suggests that intentional binding has been associated with
implicit measures of agency like efference, sensory
feedback, causal feedback, and intentionality. Haggard and
Clark (2003) have suggested that when motor cortex is
stimulated to produce a movement similar to a voluntary
movement, intentional binding is not affected, suggesting
that intentional binding does not depend on the sensory
signals produced during movement, but rather it depends on
the efference copy generated during action planning.
Desantis and colleagues (Desantis, Cedric, & Waszack,
2011) showed that, when participant believes that he/she has
control over the environment, intentional binding is
stronger. In the original study showing intentional binding,
(Haggard, Clark, & Kalogeras, 2002b) the outcome of a
participant generated action was manipulated in terms of
intention (intended or unintended). Results indicate that
intentional binding is stronger for the intended effect
compared to the unintended effect. These and many more
studies indicate a strong link between the implicit measures
of agency and intentional binding, suggesting that
intentional binding can be used as a reliable measure of
implicit sense of agency.
In addition, researchers have investigated the relationship
between intentional binding and explicit sense of agency or
reflective sense of agency (Moore & Obhi, 2012). In one
such study (Ebert & Wegner, 2010), participants were
presented with a picture, which can either move congruent
or incongruent to the direction participant moved the
joystick. The delay between the participant’s movement of
the joystick and the movement of the object on the screen

2790

was manipulated at three levels (100ms, 400ms, and
700ms). At the end of the trial participants were asked to
perform a interval estimation task (to measure intentional
binding) and give rating of authorship (explicit measure of
agency). Authors reported dissociation between the two
measures, with the congruency between action and effect,
having a greater effect on intentional binding compared to
the explicit measure of sense of authorship. The
mechanisms underlying these two different measures and
aspects of SoA are still not fully understood necessitating a
study to understand the mechanisms involved in SoA. The
current study investigates the mechanisms involved in
determining the implicit and explicit measures of sense of
agency and the way in which these two measures might be
related to each other.
We argue that the concept of control exercised by the
participant over perception-action events can provide us a
basic framework to understand both explicit and implicit
sense of agency. Recent studies have shown that control
might play a crucial role in influencing sense of agency
(Desantis, Cedric, & Waszack, 2011; Moore, Lagando,
Deal, & Haggard, 2009; Jordan, 2003; Kumar & Srinivasan,
2012; Kumar & Srinivasan, under review). Studies based on
event-control approach (Jordan, 2003; Kumar & Srinivasan,
2012) suggest that all our interactions with the environment
(which are in form of perceptual-action couplings) are
constrained by multiple hierarchical control loops extending
across organism and his environment (see Jordan, 2003 for
details). Sense of agency, according to this framework is
determined by the highest level of control loop at which
participant is able to exercise control.
We used a modification of the paradigm used by Ebert
and Wegner (Ebert & Wegner, 2010). In the current
experiment, the participant had to aim and shoot at a noisy
target with the help of joystick and the noise in the
environment was manipulated. By changing the amount of
noise, we manipulated the perceptual-motor control that the
participant can exercise. After the first task, the scenario
was made static and a circle flashed at the location where
subject aimed during the first task. The duration interval
between the time when subject presses the trigger and when
the circle is flashed was manipulated. Participant is later
asked to estimate this interval and give a confidence rating
for authorship of action. Estimated interval acted as a
measure of intentional binding and confidence rating
measured participant’s subjective sense of authorship.
According to the event-control approach, sense of self
depends upon the highest level at which control is exercised.
In the current paradigm, control can be exercised at two
levels; firstly, at the perceptual-motor level, that is the
joystick level control and secondly, at the goal level, that is,
whether or not participant is able to correctly aim at the
target. We hypothesized that when participant misses the
target, sense of agency would increase as a function of
perceptual-motor control. When the participant hits the
target, SoA would be independent of perceptual-motor
control.

Method
Participants
Thirteen volunteers from University
participated in the Experiment.

of

Allahabad

Stimuli and Apparatus
Stimuli consisted of eleven natural scenes (resolution
3648x2736) from a custom database. Every scene contained
a target region in the form of three concentric circles, placed
randomly somewhere in the scene. Experiment was
conducted on a 14” monitor at a resolution of 800 x 600,
with input from keyboard and joystick. The experiment was
designed using MATLAB 2010b and psychophysics toolbox
3.

Procedure
Participants were instructed that the experiment consists of
two phases, practice phase and the main experiment. They
were also told that they have to perform time interval
estimation and were instructed about what millisecond
stands for and an approximate idea of the concept (see Ebert
and Wegner, 2010 for more details).
Practice Session
In the practice session, a fixation cross was presented on the
screen. Participants were instructed that they have to press a
trigger to initiate trial and they can press the trigger when
they feel like. After the trigger was pressed, the fixation
cross on the screen turned blue in color indicating that the
trigger has been pressed. After a random interval (out of
0ms, 100ms, 200ms, ..., 900ms), a blue circle was flashed
on screen. Participants were asked to estimate the time
interval between trigger press and the circle flashing on the
screen. Response was made using a ten point scale (0, 100,
200, …, 900). At the end of every trial, participant was
given feedback about his/her estimate. The practice session
served two purposes. Firstly, it helped improve interval
estimation ability and also its assessment. Secondly, it made
participants believe that the interval is manipulated at ten
levels in the main session too. A total number of 200
practice trials were given with 20 trials for each of the ten
intervals. Data from the practice session was used to
perform preliminary analysis.
Main Session
In the main session, for a particular trial, participants were
instructed that they have to aim at a target, by moving the
joystick and press the trigger, within 15 seconds. To
manipulate the amount of control, a random movement was
added to the scene. To decrease the amount of control that
participant can exercise, amount of random movement was
increased. This control varied from trial to trial. We
manipulated control at three levels (low control, medium
control, and full control). At a random interval after the
participant pressed trigger, a blue circle was presented at the

2791

location (always at the centre of the screen) where
participant aimed while pressing the trigger. The SOA
between the trigger press and the presentation of blue circle
was manipulated at three levels (100ms, 400ms, and
700ms).
The circle remained on the screen for 500ms, after which
the participant was asked to report the interval between
trigger press and appearance of circle, on a ten point scale
similar to the practice session. In the main session
participant was not given feedback regarding the interval
estimated. This was followed by a second question, in
which participant had to report the sense of authorship, on a
seven point scale (similar to the questions used by Ebert &
Wegner, 2010). There were a total of 216 trials in the
experiment, with 24 trials in each condition. We recorded
estimated interval, rating of authorship, and whether or not
the participant hit on the target in each trial. In the main
session participants were not given feedback regarding the
estimated interval.

was not significant. When participants were not successful,
there was a main effect of SOA, F(2, 22) = 34.01, p < .01,
with mean rating for 100ms significantly different from
rating for 400ms, t(11) = 7.55, p < .01, and rating for 400ms
significantly less than rating for 700ms, t(11) = 8.6, p < .01.
The main effect of control was significant, F(2, 22) = 6.86,
p < .01. Paired t-tests between different control conditions
suggested a decrease in estimated interval with increase in
control, with close to significance difference between, low
control and medium control, t(11) = 1.619, p = .057, and a
significant difference between medium control condition
and full control condition, t(11) = 3.14, p < .01. The
interaction between SOA and control was not significant (p
= 0.7).

Results
Preliminary Analysis
Data from the practice session suggest that participants in
general are able to correctly estimate the time interval.
Similar to Ebert and Wagner (2011), we calculated the mean
correlation between actual time and estimated time (mean r
= 0.683) that was significantly greater than zero t(12) =
12.3489, p < .01. Data from one participant that was beyond
two standard deviations from the mean (r = 0.2112) was
removed from further analysis. In the main experimental
session, the outcome (target hit/miss) was not controlled or
counterbalanced across SOA (given that this is completely
dependent on the performance of the participant in a given
trial). Hence, to remove bias due to the unbalanced aspect of
target hit/miss, we performed a correlation between target
accuracy and SOA. The correlation between accuracy and
SOA was not significant (mean r = -0.0129) indicating a
lack of relationship between them.
Interval estimation task
Repeated measures ANOVA with SOA and control as
factors on the estimated interval showed an expected
significant main effect of SOA, F (2, 22) = 23.46, p < .01
indicating that participants’ estimates increased as SOA
increased. The effect of control as well the interaction
between control and SOA was not significant. We
categorized data further into two categories: (1) when
participants hit the target and (2) when participants missed
the target. For each category, we performed a two-way
repeated measures ANOVA across three levels of SOA and
three levels of control.
When participants were successful in hitting the target,
there was a main effect of SOA, F(2, 22) = 27.17, p < .001.
Estimated interval for 100 ms, t(11) = 7.76, p <.01 and 400
ms SOA, t(11) = 4.21, p < .05, was significantly different
from that for 700 ms SOA. The main effect for control (p =
0.98) and interaction between control and SOA (p = 0.26)

(a)

(b)
Figure 1: Estimated intervals as a function of control and
SOA (a) when goal was accomplished and (b) when goal
was not accomplished
We used the interval estimation task to assess intentional
binding between self-triggered event (cause) and a second
perceptual event (effect). Results suggest that intentional
binding is greater (estimated interval is less) as the amount
of control increases, that is when higher level goal is not
achieved. When higher level goal is achieved, intentional
binding (interval estimate) is not influenced by the amount
of control.
Self-reported control
When subjects were successful in hitting the target, there
was a main effect of control, F(2, 22) = 35.57, p < .01.
There was an increase in self-reported control as amount of
control was increased, from low to medium, t(11) = 3.91, p
< 0.05 and from medium to full, t(11) = 12.35, p < .05. The

2792

main effect of SOA (p = 0.28) and the interaction effect (p =
0.26) was not significant.
When subjects were not successful, there was a main
effect of control, F(2, 22) = 5.62, p < .05. Post-hoc
comparisons show a significant difference between low
control and medium control conditions, t(11) = 4.5, p < .05
as well as low control and high control conditions, t(11) =
6.3, p < .01. The main effect of SOA (p = 0.88) and the
interaction (p = 0.4) was once again not significant.

(a)

correlation between the two measures is not significant (r
(108) = 0.13, p = .16) indicating differences between the
two measures. Sense of authorship seems to depend on the
amount of control that a participant exercises at the
perceptual-motor level, whereas intentional binding depends
on both lower joystick control level as well as the higher
goal level control.
Control & SOA as Predictors
To further explore how control and SOA can be used to
explain the differences in intentional binding as a function
of goal, we performed two simultaneous multiple linear
regressions for the estimated interval, treating target hit/miss
as a dichotomous variable, with control and SOA as
independent factors and intentional binding as the dependent
measure.
In target miss condition, control (β1 = -92.3, t = -2.5) and
SOA (β2 = 0.48, t = 15.6) were significant (adjusted-R2 =
0.19, F(2, 1035) =124, p < .01). In target hit condition, SOA
(β1 = 0.49, t = 18.65, p < .05) was significant, but the βvalue for Control (β2 = 4.5, t = 0.21, p = 0.82) was not
significant (adjusted-R2 = 0.24, F(2, 1094) = 174, p < .01).
The analysis suggests that estimated interval decreased as
the amount of control increases for the trials in which
participants missed the target but control is not a significant
predictor when the target goal was achieved.

Discussion

(b)
Figure 2: Rating for the sense of Authorship as a function of
control and SOA (a) when target is achieved and (b) when
target is not achieved
Self-reported control was a measure of subjects’ sense of
control and authorship (Ebert & Wegner, 2010). The results
suggest that participant’s sense of authorship depends on the
amount of control and is independent of success or failure in
achieving target.
Relationship between the Two Measures
Results show dissociation between the sense of agency and
sense of authorship with respect to various control levels.
To further analyze how these dependent measures are
related, we performed a correlational analysis between the
measure of intentional binding (interval estimate) and
authorship (self-reported control) for the two levels of
control. When the target goal is not achieved, there was a
significant positive correlation between the two measures (r
(108) = 0.2, p < .05). When target goal is achieved, the

In the current experiment, we investigated the role of
control at multiple hierarchical levels in determining the
sense of agency (both implicit, via measuring intentional
binding and explicit, via rating on sense of authorship).
There are a few important results that can be inferred from
the data. Firstly, the high correlation between estimated and
actual interval supports the idea of using interval estimation
task as a valid measure of intentional binding (Ebert &
Wegner, 2010). Secondly, consistent with the findings from
that study, our findings show dissociation between the two
measures of agency. Thirdly, our study provides support to
the hierarchical event-control framework in understanding
self and sense of agency (Kumar & Srinivasan, under
review; 2012; Jordan, 2003).
Control and Intentional Binding
The results for the measure of intentional binding support
the hypothesis that sense of agency depends hierarchically
on the amount of control at various levels. The results
support to the framework provided by event-control
approach (Jordan, 2003; Kumar & Srinivasan, 2012)
suggesting that control might play a key role in determining
sense of agency. The results of the study are consistent with
findings by Berberian and colleagues (Berberian, Sarrazin,
Blaye & Haggard, 2012), who showed the presence of
intentional binding in a complex task and a decrease in
intentional binding as a function of automaticity in control.
A major difference between our study and that by Berberian
et al. (2012) study was that although both studies

2793

manipulated control at different levels, the manipulation of
control in the two studies is different in nature. In their
study, (Berberian et al., 2012), manipulated control along a
single dimension (i.e. automaticity level). However, in the
current study, control is varied at two different levels (at
goal level, and at perceptual-motor level). A second
difference is that, in their study, the authors report a strong
correlation between the two measures of agency and we find
dissociation between the two measures when subjects are
able to achieve control at the goal level (hit the target). Both
the studies, along with others (Jordan, 2003; Desantis,
Cedric, & Waszack, 2011; Kumar & Srinivasan, under
review) provide evidence that control is correlated to the
amount of intentional binding and plays a key role in
determining sense of agency.
Control and Sense of Authorship
For the sense of authorship, our hypothesis was not
completely supported by the results. Participants did show
an increase in rating with control for the sense of authorship,
when participants missed the target, thus supporting first
part of our hypothesis. But, this increase in sense of
authorship with control was also present when participants
accurately hit the target indicating that the explicit measure
of sense of agency is independent of control when
participants hit the target. In combination, these results
suggest dissociation between the intentional binding and
sense of authorship. This dissociation has also been found in
earlier studies (Ebert & Wegner, 2010), but the underlying
mechanisms are not yet clear (Haggard & Moore, 2010;
(Moore & Obhi, 2012).
Underlying Mechanism
Haggard and Moore (2010), commenting on the Ebert and
Wegner (2010) study raised certain issues that remain
unanswered from the study. Firstly, whether the exact
mechanism of consistency is retrospective or prospective in
nature? In the current study, control is predictive in nature,
the control at perceptual-motor level was based on the prior
expectation of participant when they moved joystick to aim
at the target. At the goal level, participant’s expectation of
the outcome occurred prior to the event (as with congruency
in the case of Ebert and Wegner. But, unlike congruency
(Ebert & Wegner, 2010), the effect at the goal level
occurred immediately before (or at the time) they pressed
the trigger. Hence, goal level control can also be assumed to
be predictive in nature. This suggests that the mechanism
linking control and intentional binding is influenced by
predictive processes.
A second issue was the exact causal nature of the link
between intentional binding and sense of authorship. Our
results suggest that intentional binding is sensitive to the
hierarchical levels of event-control. In comparison, the
sense of authorship seems to be less sensitive to the eventcontrol hierarchy. Hence, we would like to suggest that
intentional binding and sense of authorship are not causally
linked to each other, but are rather mediated by amount of

control at different levels that can be exercised by
participants.
Conclusions
We have shown that the theory of event control provides a
successful framework to understand sense of agency. We
suggest that both implicit and explicit aspects of sense of
agency are mediated by hierarchical levels of control, but
differently. The dissociation between implicit and explicit
aspects of agency can be attributed to a difference in the
way hierarchical nested control at multiple levels mediate
the different aspects of agency. We have also confirmed that
interval estimation task can be used to successfully measure
intentional binding.
If it is actually the case that these nested control loops
mediate agency, what exactly causes these control loops to
mediate various aspects of agency in a different fashion?
Possible answers might lie in the nature of control and the
potential perception-action interactions between the
organism and the environment that are dependent on the
control. The study provides a pathway to understanding
differences in sense of agency and further experiments
would enable to naturalize and understand self.

References
Berberian, B. S., Blaye, P., & Haggard, P. (2012).
Automation technology and sense of control: A window
on human agency. PLoS One, 3, e34075.
Desantis, A., Cedric, R., & Waszack, F. (2011). On the
infuence of causal beliefs on feeling of agency.
Consciousness and Cognition, 20, 1211-1220.
Ebert, J. P., & Wegner, D. M. (2010). Time warp:
Authorship shapes the perceived timing of actions and
events. Consciousness and Cognition, 19, 481-489.
Farrer, C., & Frith, C. (2002). Experiencing oneself vs
another person as being the cause of an action: the neural
correlates of the experience of agency. Neuroimage, 15,
596-603.
Farrer, C., Frank, N., Georgieff, N., Frith, C. D., Decety, J.,
& Jeannerod, M. (2003). Modulating the experience of
agency: a positron emission tomography study.
Neuroimage, 18(2), 324-333.
Haggard, P., & Clark, A. (2003). Intentional action:
Conscious
experience
and
neural
prediction.
Consciousness and Cognition, 12(4), 695-707.
Haggard, P., & Moore, J. (2010). Intentional binding and
higher order agency experience. Consciousness and
Cognition, 19(1), 490-491.
Haggard, P., Clark, S., & Kalogeras, J. (2002b). Voluntary
action and conscious awareness. Nature Neuroscience,
5(4), 382-385.
Humphreys, G., & Buehne, M. (2009). Magnitude
estimation reveals temporal binding. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 35(5), 1542-1549.
Jordan, S. J. (2003). Emergence of self and other in
perception and action: An event-control approach.
Consciousness and Cognition, 4(1), 633-646.

2794

Kumar, D., & Srinivasan, N. (2012). Hierarchical eventcontrol and subjective experience of agency. Frontiers in
Psychology, 3:410.
Kumar, D., & Srinivasan, N. (under review). Naturalizing
self: A hierarchical event-control approach.
Moore, J. W., & Obhi, S. S. (2012). Intentional binding and
sense of agency: A review. Consciousness and Cognition,
21, 1211-1220.
Moore, J. W., Lagando, D., Deal, D. C., & Haggard, P.
(2009). Feeling of control: Contingency determines
experience of self. Cognition, 110, 279-283.
Pacherie, E. (2011). Self-Agency. In S. Gallagher, Oxford
Handbook of the Self (pp. 442-464), Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Synofzik, M., Vosgerau, G., & Newen, A. (2008). Beyond
the comparator model: a multifactorial two-step account
of agency. Consciousness and Cognition, 17(1), 219-239.
Shrager, J., & Langley, P. (Eds.) (1990). Computational
Models of Scientific Discovery and Theory Formation.
San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.

2795

