UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How to Analyze Verbal Protocols

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/56f4r94z

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Author
Tenbrink, Thora

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

How to Analyze Verbal Protocols
Thora Tenbrink (t.tenbrink@bangor.ac.uk)
School of Linguistics and English Language
Room 331, 3rd floor New Arts,
Bangor University, College Road, Bangor, Gwynedd
LL57 2DG, UK
Fon: +44 1248 382263; Fax: +44 1248 383267
Keywords: Think-aloud protocols; verbal data; cognitive
processes; cognitive discourse analysis; linguistic structure;
problem solving; complex cognition.

consciously aware of the network of options (Tenbrink &
Freksa, 2009) that allows for a range of linguistic choices
beside their own, which emerges more clearly by
considering a larger data set collected under controlled
circumstances. According to previous research in cognitive
linguistics and discourse analysis (e.g., van Dijk, 2008),
linguistic features such as the verbal representation of
semantic domains reflected in ideational networks, specific
choices of prepositions, lexical omissions and elaboration,
conceptual
perspectives
revealed
by
language,
presuppositions, hesitation and discourse markers, and many
other linguistic features indicate certain conceptual circumstances; these are related to the current cognitive representations in ways that distinguish them from other options
available in the network. In particular, the chosen linguistic
options reflect what speakers perceive as sufficiently
relevant to be verbalized, as well as the information status
assigned to the diverse parts of the verbalization.
Besides building on established insights about the
significance of particular linguistic choices, validating
evidence for the relationship between patterns of language
use and the associated cognitive processes can be gained by
triangulation, i.e., the combination of linguistic analysis
with other types of evidence such as memory or behavioral
performance data, reaction times, eye movements, decision
outcomes, or any other relevant data that can be collected in
cognitively complex tasks.

Objectives and Scope
Cognitive science researchers are interested in a subject
that is not directly accessible to observation: processes in
the mind and brain, thoughts and thought processes. One
way of addressing higher-level cognitive processes is to
analyze verbal protocols produced along with cognitively
complex tasks (Ericsson & Simon, 1993), such as problem
solving or decision making. Linguistic data of this kind can
be seen as an external representation of some aspects of
what is going on in the mind. In particular, think-aloud
protocols and retrospective reports provide procedural
information that complements other data, such as decision
outcomes and behavioral performance results.
This tutorial explores the scope and limitations of verbal
protocol analysis, and offers practical support for systematic
analysis procedures. Language data can be analyzed with
respect to content as well as structure. Conventionally, the
focus of verbal protocol analysis lies on the content of
verbal data, addressing those aspects (e.g., particular
thought processes or strategies) that the speakers are
themselves aware of (or 'heed', Ericsson & Simon, 1993).
The content-based inspection of verbal reports, particularly
if carried out by experts in the problem domain and set
against a substantial theoretical background (Krippendorff,
2004), often leads to well-founded specific hypotheses
about the cognitive processes involved.
A detailed linguistic analysis can substantially support
such content-based insights, but it can also offer further
insights (e.g., Hölscher et al., 2011; Tenbrink et al., 2011;
Tenbrink & Seifert, 2011; Tenbrink & Wiener, 2009).
Research in cognitive linguistics, psychology, discourse
analysis, and psycholinguistics indicates that patterns in
language are systematically related to patterns of thought
(e.g., Chafe, 1998). Drawing on these insights, one focus of
the tutorial is to identify types of linguistic structure that
point to specific cognitive processes. This is the main idea
in the method of Cognitive Discourse Analysis (CODA)
(Tenbrink, 2008; Tenbrink & Gralla, 2009; Tenbrink, 2010).
Some aspects of language use reflect cognitive aspects
that go beyond conscious reflection by individual speakers,
and that are not necessarily directly observable in linguistic
content. Speakers are typically unaware of the cognitive
structures that are reflected in particular ways of framing a
representation linguistically. Furthermore, they are not

Format and organization
This tutorial is designed to cover a half day (three hours)
and will be highly interactive. The tutorial will take the
participants' current or intended projects as a starting point.
It will be organized so as to cover the complete process of
language data analysis (from initial ideas to evaluation of
analysis results), including short presentations, discussion,
and practical exercises where feasible. In particular, the
following issues will be addressed:
Motivation: How (and to what extent) can language data
serve as empirical resources to address research questions in
cognitive science?
Data collection: What kinds of issues need to be
considered in the light of actual research purposes?
CODA based analysis (main part): Systematic data
annotation and interpretation informed by linguistic
insights.
Triangulation: How can other types of empirical data
complement the insights gained from language?

51

Participants who have already collected natural language
data are encouraged to bring examples as handouts or on
their computers. Furthermore they are encouraged to
contribute a 10-min talk related to one step of this
process, and also to raise questions or issues to discuss for
other steps. It is envisioned to prepare either a collection of
papers or a collective paper, with authors interactively
developing content based on combinations of their talks and
the discussed issues.

Course "Language analysis in cognitive science" at the
Cognitive Science Institute, University of Freiburg
(Germany), summer semester 2009.

References
Chafe, W. (1998). Language and the Flow of Thought. In
M. Tomasello (ed.), The New Psychology of Language.
Cognitive and Functional Approaches to Language
Structure. Mahwah: Lawrence Erlbaum.
van Dijk, T.A. (2008). Discourse and Context. A
Sociocognitive Approach. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Ericsson, K.A., & Simon, H.A. (1993). Protocol analysis:
Verbal reports as data. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hölscher, C., Tenbrink, T., & Wiener, J. (2011). Would you
follow your own route description? Cognition 121, 228247.
Krippendorff, K. (2004). Content Analysis: An Introduction
to its Methodology (2nd ed.). London: Sage.
Tenbrink, T. (2008). The verbalization of cognitive
processes: Thinking-aloud data and retrospective reports.
In W. Ramm & C. Fabricius-Hansen (eds.), Linearisation
and Segmentation in Discourse. Multidisciplinary
Approaches to Discourse (MAD 08), Feb 20-23 2008,
Lysebu, Oslo. Oslo: Dept. of Literature, Area Studies and
Europ. Languages, Univ. of Oslo.
Tenbrink, T. (2010). CODA: Kognitive Diskursanalyse. In:
E. Ruigendijk, T. Stolz, & J. Trabant (Hrsg.), Linguistik
im Nordwesten: Beiträge zum 1. Nordwestdeutschen
Linguistischen Kolloquium. Bochum: Brockmeyer.
Tenbrink, T., Bergmann, E., & Konieczny, L. (2011).
Wayfinding and description strategies in an unfamiliar
complex building. In L. Carlson, C. Hölscher, & T.F.
Shipley (Eds.), Proceedings of the 33rd Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Tenbrink, T., D'Odorico, T., Hertzberg, C., Mazman, G.,
Meneghetti, C., Reshoeft, N., & Yang, J. (2012). Tutorial
report: Understanding spatial thought through language
use. Journal of Spatial Information Science 5:107-114.
http://josis.org/index.php/josis/article/viewFile/124/90
Tenbrink, T., & Freksa, C. (2009). Contrast sets in spatial
and temporal language. Cognitive Processing 10
Supplement 2, S322-S324.
Tenbrink, T., & Gralla, L. (2009). Accessing complex
cognitive processes via linguistic protocol analysis. In U.
Schmid, M. Ragni, M. Knauff (Eds.): Proceedings of the
KI 2009 Workshop Complex Cognition, Paderborn,
Germany, September 15, 2009.
Tenbrink, T., & Seifert, I. (2011). Conceptual Layers and
Strategies in Tour Planning. Cognitive Processing 12:1,
109–125.
Tenbrink, T., & Wiener, J. (2009). The verbalization of
multiple strategies in a variant of the traveling salesperson
problem. Cognitive Processing 10:2, 143-161.

Target audience information
There is no prerequisite for taking this tutorial. It is open for
researchers in cognitive science at any point in their career,
ranging from graduate students to established experts.
Participants interested in a future publication are
encouraged to submit a 300-word abstract to propose a 10minute presentation as part of the tutorial, and / or a critical
issue to discuss.

Tutor Information
Thora Tenbrink is a Lecturer in Cognitive Linguistics at
Bangor University (Wales, UK), and a principal investigator
in two projects in the Collaborative Research Center
SFB/TR 8 Spatial Cognition (Bremen/Freiburg, Germany).
Her main interest concerns complex cognitive processes and
their representation in language. She is the author of "Space,
Time, and the Use of Language" (Mouton de Gruyter,
2007), and co-editor of "Spatial Language and Dialogue"
(Oxford University Press, 2009) and "Representing space in
cognition: Interrelations of behavior, language, and formal
models" (Oxford University Press, in press). Current
research addresses cognitive strategies in various problem
solving tasks, spatial communication in complex built
environments, cognitive transformation processes, and
inferences derived by problem solvers from situational
clues, experience, and verbal and graphical information. See
http://knirb.net for further information.

Previous instantiations
This tutorial has previously been offered in various
versions as listed below (see Tenbrink et al., 2012, for a
report). The current version will focus on complex problem
solving processes across all areas of cognitive science,
tailored to the needs of its participants by establishing email
contact in advance as far as possible.
"Understanding spatial thought through language use".
Half-day tutorial at Spatial Cognition, August 31 September 03, 2012, Abbey Kloster Seeon, Germany.
"Understanding cognitive processes through language
use". Half-day tutorial at ICCM 11th International
Conference on Cognitive Modeling, April 12-15, 2012,
Berlin, Germany.
Workshop "Language analysis in cognitive science".
Cognitive Science Institute, University of Osnabrück
(Germany), May 7-8, 2011.

52

