UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How does emotional content affect lexical processing?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8d3363dm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Vinson, David
Ponari, Marta
Vigliocco, Gabriella

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

How does emotional content affect lexical processing?
David Vinson, Marta Ponari & Gabriella Vigliocco
{d.vinson, m.ponari, g.vigliocco}@ucl.ac.uk
Cognitive, Perceptual and Brain Sciences, University College London
Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT United Kingdom
Abstract
It is now generally accepted that words’ emotional content
plays a role in lexical processing, but the literature offers
incompatible findings concerning what this role may be. Here
we use a large sample of lexical decision data (British
Lexicon Project, Keuleers et al., 2012) and we carry out a
series of analyses differing in the way emotional variables are
treated. A variety of statistical approaches yielded common
conclusions: when confounding variables are taken into
account, emotional words, whether positive or negative, are
processed faster than neutral words. This effect is categorical
rather than graded; is not modulated by emotional arousal;
and is not limited to words explicitly referring to emotions.
We discuss this in terms of internally grounding words’
meanings in emotional experience, akin to the manner in
which concepts may be grounded in perception and action.
Keywords: emotion; valence; lexical decision.

Introduction
In mainstream lexical processing studies, emotional
content has been largely ignored, whether considered
irrelevant to the core meanings of words, or as properties of
narrowly defined sets of words explicitly referring to
emotions (e.g. Altarriba & Bauer, 2004). Recently, however,
a number of studies of lexical processing effectively
demonstrated that emotional content plays a role even in
shallow tasks involving single words such as lexical
decision (e.g. Estes & Adelman 2008a,b; Kousta, Vinson &
Vigliocco, 2009; Kousta, et al., 2011; Larsen, et al., 2008).
As a result, language processing researchers have begun
to acknowledge the interplay between emotion and language
processing systems, discussing emotional effects in
language processing as due to the embodied nature of
linguistic representations (e.g. Kousta et al., 2011; Moseley,
et al., 2012; Vigliocco et al., 2009), just as researchers in
other domains of cognition have posited embodied
emotional effects (e.g. Pistoia et al., 2010). However,
precisely which mechanisms are involved in emotional
processing is unclear at the present. This is because different
studies of lexical processing have found different and
apparently incompatible results even when the same task
(e.g., lexical decision) is used.
It has been shown that previously reported effects of
emotional valence (i.e. numeric ratings indicating the extent
to which a word is positive, neutral or negative) can change
dramatically once confounding variables such as length,
frequency and orthographic neighbourhood size are taken
into account (Larsen, Mercer & Balota, 2006). However,
even after controlling for non-emotional variables, results
are conflicting. Estes & Adelman (2008a,b) and Larsen et al
(2008) reported slower lexical decision reaction times (RTs)

for negative than positive words. This has been interpreted
in terms of attentional vigilance: heightened and/or extended
attention to negative stimuli (e.g. Fox et al., 2001; Pratto &
John, 1991) which would slow any decision (such as lexical
decisions) on other aspects of the stimuli. In contrast,
Kousta et al. (2009) found a processing advantage for both
negative and positive over neutral words, which they
explain in terms of greater motivational relevance of
emotionally loaded stimuli (e.g. Lang, Bradley & Cuthbert,
1997). Kousta et al argued that the discrepancy in findings
was due to the relative lack of neutral words in the data sets
tested previously, but especially due to the lack of control of
potentially confounding variables, such as ratings of
familiarity and age of acquisition (AoA) in previous studies.
In addition, Larsen et al (2008) found that the effect of
valence was modulated by the arousal of words such that a
negative disadvantage was present for medium-low arousing
words, but no effect was observed for highly arousing
negative words, Estes and Adelman (2008b) argued for a far
more constrained role of arousal, and Kousta et al. (2009)
argued that valence effects could not be explained in terms
of arousal (although these authors did not explicitly test for
valence × arousal interactions).
All of these previous studies were conducted using lexical
decision data from a single source: the English Lexicon
Project (ELP, Balota et al., 2007), so in addition to
questions about the different assumptions and approaches
taken by previous authors, one may also wonder about the
extent to which the findings may be related to quirks of that
particular item set. Here we take advantage of an entirely
independently obtained large-scale set of lexical decision
data (British Lexicon Project (BLP): Keuleers, Lacey,
Rastle & Brysbaert, 2012), to try and resolve these
questions. Our analyses compare models based on different
a priori theoretical assumptions concerning the role of
valence in word processing, controlling non-emotional
variables known to affect lexical decision RTs. We begin by
fitting baseline models in which all the non-emotional
predictors mentioned above are taken into account, then add
specific terms embedding different assumptions about the
role of valence. Such an approach is essential in order to test
theoretical accounts of emotion effects in lexical processing.
After assessing how well different measures of valence
perform after taking baseline variables into account, we
move on to evaluating the role of other aspects of emotional
content besides just valence, assessing the extent to which
valence effects may instead be explained or modulated in
terms of arousal. Finally, we test whether the effects of
emotional valence differ for words specifically referring to
emotional experience, vs. words that are only valenced.

1540

negative (e.g. Kousta et al., 2009) we expect a negative
quadratic coefficient while the linear coefficient would offer
no further benefit.

Materials and methods
Data
From the full set of words in the BLP, we selected those
1374 words for which valence ratings were available from
ANEW (Bradley & Lang, 1999), or from the additional
ratings described in Kousta et al., 2009, 2011). Next, we
filtered out those words for which BLP participants were
extremely inaccurate on making lexical decisions: those
with overall accuracy less than 67% in the BLP (n=56, e.g.
larkspur, dryad, godhead). This is an important step not
employed in previous studies, as widely unfamiliar words
are likely to elicit slow RTs, and to receive neutral valence
ratings from participants. Finally, we removed five words
for which concreteness and imageability ratings were not
available, leaving 1313 words for analysis. Of these, 856
were in common with the set from the ELP which Kousta et
al. (2009) analysed.

Measures of emotional valence
We centred the scale of the original valence ratings which
ranged from 1-9, so as to range from -4 (most negative) to
+4 (most positive) with 0 reflecting neutrality. We then
created the following measures that embed different
theoretical assumptions concerning valence. The most
essential distinction concerns the direction of valence effects
as this differentiates between highly distinct accounts of
emotion processing. If the crucial distinction is between
negative words and other words, this would favour
attentional vigilance or other negativity-bias accounts of
emotion processing; but if instead the crucial distinction is
between emotionally valenced and neutral words, it would
favour motivational accounts of emotion processing.
In addition, we compare models in which valence is
considered as a continuous measure, vs. models in which it
is discretized, as a test of previous claims that effects of
emotion should be considered all-or-nothing (e.g. Estes &
Adelman, 2008a,b).
Continuous valence These measures treat valence as a
graded measure varying from most negative (-4) through
neutral (0) to most positive (+4).
Linear measure includes only the linear relationship
between valence and RT. If negative words are slower than
other words (e.g. Estes & Adelman, 2008a,b; Larsen et al.,
2008), we expect to find a negative slope (RTs decrease
with increasing valence).
Polynomial measure includes linear and quadratic
components of valence.1 If valenced words are faster than
neutral words with no difference between positive and
1
Kousta et al (2009) modelled nonlinearity using restricted
cubic splines; here we report a measure including linear and
quadratic terms because they map directly onto the theoretical
alternatives described in previous literature. We also tested models
based on restricted cubic splines; they perform comparably to the
polynomial models described above.

Discrete valence These measures treat valence as
categorical rather than continuous/graded.
Negative/positive measure includes two discrete valence
classes: negative (valence <0) and positive (valence >= 0)
valence levels. If negative words are slower than other
words, these two categories should differ. This model is the
simplest discrete counterpart to the linear measure above,
and was preferred by Estes and Adelman (2008a) as more
complex measures tested did not account for the data better.
Valenced/neutral measure treats positive and negative as a
single class, compared to neutral (emotional: |valence| > 1.5;
neutral: |valence| <= -1.5). If emotional words are faster
than neutral words we expect to find differences between
these two categories (as we would for the quadratic term of
the polynomial measure).

Design and analysis
We fit a variety of linear mixed-effects models described
in more detail below, in each case testing for a partial effect
of valence on lexical decision latencies, using any of the
four proposed valence measures. We conducted our
analyses on log-transformed RT (excluding error trials) then
replicated the same analyses on untransformed RT to be
sure that log-transformation did not produce anomalous
patterns of results. Additionally, we fit models not only to
trial-level data but also to item averages, for both log(RT)
and untransformed RT.2
Analysis of trial level data was carried out using linear
mixed-effects models (packages lme4: Bates & Maechler,
2009; and languageR: Baayen, 2009; cf. Baayen, 2008) in
the R programming environment (R Development Core
Team, 2009). Model fits included random intercepts for
both subjects and items, as well as random slopes by
subjects (for emotional predictors only, which are constant
for each item). Analysis of item averages was carried out
using ordinary least squares regression. Below we focus
upon the results for trial-level analyses of log(RT) but
across the board the findings are comparable for analyses of
untransformed RT and/or item averages.
In all of the analyses we conduct upon valence measures,
we always begin with a baseline model in which we
consider the following non-emotional factors that were
2

Some previous studies of this nature only report analyses on
average response times for single words, averaged across multiple
subjects but treated as point estimates (e.g. Estes & Adelman,
2008a,b; Kousta et al., 2009; Larsen et al., 2008). Such approaches
may overestimate the quality of any predictor as an essential
component of variability has been discarded. In the present study
we conduct analyses of trial-level data (nearly 50,000
observations) as well as item averages, allowing us to test whether
emotional variables still play a role when individual variability is
taken into account.

1541

controlled in all the previous studies we have mentioned:
number of letters; log(HAL frequency), orthographic
neighbourhood size (all from Balota et al, 2007); We also
included additional non-emotional predictors controlled by
Kousta et al. (2009) and which those authors argued to be
essential in order to unambiguously interpret effects as
emotional in nature: mean positional bigram frequency
(Balota et al., 2007); ratings of concreteness, imageability
and familiarity (Coltheart, 1981) and age of acquisition
ratings (Stadthagen-Gonzalez & Davis, 2006). As a result,
our tests of emotional variables provide results that can be
unambiguously attributed to emotion rather than other
characteristics of words with which emotional properties
may be confounded.

To address this issue, we used Wordnet-Affect
(Strapparava & Valitutti, 2004) to identify emotion words.
Wordnet-Affect classifies words according to their
organisation in Wordnet. Any word with an emotional sense
is considered "emotional", thus this is a conservative
classification. We hand-classified a few additional words as
potentially emotional (e.g. courage, craven, stern) with 193
of the 1313 words classified as emotion words. To test
whether emotion words alone are responsible for valence
effects we fit models as above, testing the interaction
between valence and emotion-word classification. If
emotion words drive the effects observed we should see an
interaction such that the valence effects are restricted to
emotion words (or at least differ between emotion and nonemotion words).

The role of arousal
Some previous studies have shown that effects of valence
are modulated by arousal (Estes & Adelman, 2008b; Larsen
et al., 2008, but see Kousta et al. 2009). Using a similar
modelling approach as above, we test the role of arousal in
two ways. First, we treat arousal as a categorical measure
(high arousal words vs. low arousal words), testing valence
× arousal interactions for any of the valence measures
described previously which turn out to be significant
predictors of lexical decision RT. If arousal modulates the
effect of valence we should see such an interaction. Second,
we treat arousal as a control variable, testing in a different
set of models whether unique effects of valence can be
observed after variation related to arousal is taken into
account. This is particularly important for models
distinguishing valenced from neutral words (i.e. quadradic
term of the polynomial measure, and valenced/neutral
measure) as valenced words also exhibit a strong tendency
to be more arousing as well (Bradley & Lang, 2000).

Results
Fitting baseline models
It is no surprise that many of the non-emotional variables
were significant predictors of lexical decision latencies,
consistent with a wealth of previous studies. For the
purposes of the present study we simply note here that
higher-order polynomial transformations offered significant
improvement in performance over linear-alone components
for several of the predictors. Moreover, although some
factors were not significant predictors in the baseline model
(i.e., concreteness, imageability and summed positional
bigram frequency) we retained them as (linear) predictors3
along with the following predictors that were significant in
the (reduced) baseline model: 3-order polynomial
transformations: (log frequency, number of letters, number
of orthographic neighbours, familiarity); linear terms (age of
acquisition) (see Figure 1).

Emotion words vs. emotionally valenced words
One essential factor that has been neglected so far in
large-scale studies of emotion in lexical processing is
whether any valence effect is being driven by a specific,
limited set of words: those referring explicitly to emotion
(e.g. love, shame, joy, hate in contrast to valenced words not
directly referring to emotions, e.g. prison, cake, justice,
cheat). For example, Altarriba and Bauer (2004) argue that
emotion words are sufficiently different to other types of
words that we ought to consider words as falling into three
categories: concrete, abstract and emotion words. Moreover,
it has been argued that emotion words may be embodied not
only internally (via emotional experience, as argued by
Kousta et al., 2011) but also due to body states associated
with emotional experience (such as facial expression,
posture etc., Moseley, et al., 2012). Such words tend to be
prevalent in our vocabulary and even a cursory inspection of
valence norms reveal many such items among the set. If
these words alone are responsible for emotion effects, one
cannot conclude that valence is relevant to lexical
processing in general, as it may play a role only in the
specific, tightly constrained domain of emotion words.

Figure 1: Predictors in the baseline model (logRT; triallevel data). Dashed lines depict 95% highest posterior
density CI (parameter estimates). Similar patterns were
observed for item-level analyses and untransformed RT.

3

Non-significant predictors were kept in the baseline model in
case their absence may have altered the effects of emotional
valence in subsequent models.

1542

Measures of emotional valence
We tested the effects of valence by adding each of the
valence measures described above to the best-fit baseline
model above, thus always allowing us to evaluate the partial
effect of valence only after non-emotional variables were
taken into account. We also added that same valence term in
each model as a random slope by subjects (in analysis of
trial-level data).
Table 1: Partial effects of the different valence measures
(logRT, trial-level), taking non-emotional variables into
account. The same patterns were observed for item-level
analyses and for untransformed RT
Valence measure
Linear
Polynomial4
(linear term)
(quadratic)
Negative/positive
Valenced/neutral

Estimate (Std err.)
.00066 (.00161)

t statistic
0.57

.00052 (.00116)
-.00158 (.00076)
.00166 (.00286)
-0.0067 (.00357)

0.45
-2.07
0.58
-1.87

0.010

neutral words (quadratic term of polynomial continuous
measure, and valenced/neutral measure) were reliable
predictors of lexical decision RT. Instead, the linear
continuous measure did not predict RT once confounding
factors were taken into account, and the same was true for
the negative/positive measure. To assess whether the
continuous (quadratic) measure offers sufficient additional
explanatory power beyond the simplest categorical measure
contrasting valenced to neutral words, we fit one additional
set of models, in which we entered 2-order polynomial
valence along with the categorical measure, and we
compared the models using likelihood ratio tests. There was
no significant improvement gained by adding this additional
term (log likelihood ratio for valenced/neutral model =
7629.1; log likelihood ratio for combined model = 7630.0;
χ2(5) = 1.7972, p = .876 with comparable results for itemlevel analyses and analyses of untransformed RTs.
At this stage the data suggest that the effect of valence is
best described as a simple, categorical contrast between
words with emotional associations and those without. Thus,
when non-emotional variables are taken into account, we
see that a categorical measure of valence, regardless of
polarity, is sufficient to account for emotional effects in
word processing.

The role of arousal

0.006

0.002

-0.002

-0.006

-0.010

-0.014
Linear
(continuous)

Quadratic
(continuous)

PositiveNegative

ValencedNeutral

Figure 2: Graphical depiction of parameter estimates of
the different valence measures reported in Table 1. In all
cases a value of 0 indicates no effect. For continuous
measures, the values plotted reflect the slope (linear
measure) or quadratic coefficient (polynomial measure). For
categorical measures they represent the estimate of the
difference between the two conditions (logRT). Horizontal
line = mean parameter estimate. Box depicts 50%
confidence interval of the parameter estimate; whiskers
depict 95% confidence interval.
Only those measures in which valenced words differ from
4
We also tested 3-order polynomial measure of valence, but the
cubic term was never a significant predictor in any of our analyses.

Here we focus upon those valence measures which were
reliable predictors in the previous section (i.e., 2-order
Polynomial and Valenced/Neutral), assessing whether they
can be accounted for, or modulated, by arousal.
First, we tested the interaction between arousal and each
of the two valence measures (continuous and categorical).
For these analyses we discretized arousal, using a median
split to characterise words as low or high arousal (contrast
coded). For trial-level analyses we included both main
effects and the interaction as random slopes by subjects. We
found that the main effect of valence persisted, with no
effect of arousal category and no interaction between the
two. For log RT and trial level analysis: quadratic
coefficient estimate = -.00338 (SE = .00110), t = -3.067,
arousal main effect and interaction |t| < 1.2; categorical
coefficient estimate = -.0135 (SE = .0050), t = -2.725,
arousal main effect and interaction |t| < 1 (with item level
analyses and analyses of untransformed RTs showing the
same pattern).
Next, we instead considered arousal as a continuous
measure of arousal into the models, testing whether a partial
effect of a valence measure could still be seen after arousal
was taken into account. For trial-level analysis this meant
including random slopes by subject for arousal as well. We
started by adding arousal to the baseline model described
above. When arousal was the only emotional variable
included, its effects were significant (estimate of the slope =
-.0050 (SE = -.0020, t=-2.518): more arousing words
elicited faster responses. We then added a valence measure
to this baseline+arousal model. For both the polynomial and
the categorical valence measure, effects persisted once

1543

arousal was taken into account. For log RT and trial level
analysis: quadratic coefficient estimate = -.00261 (SE =
.00144), t = -2.627; categorical coefficient estimate = -.0112
(SE = .0046), t = -2.410), with the partial effect of arousal
not reaching significance in either case (|t| < 1), a finding
replicated in item-level analyses and analyses of
untransformed RTs. These effects of emotion can thus be
attributed to valence rather than arousal.

Emotion words vs. emotionally valenced words
As in the second set of analyses considering the role of
arousal, we tested whether the effects of valence described
above were different for emotion words and those not
referring to emotional states (using Wordnet-Affect,
Strapparava & Valitutti, 2004), by testing for statistical
interactions.
Just like our analyses involving arousal, the main effect of
valence was unchanged, with no effect of Wordnet-Affect
category and no interaction. For log RT and trial level
analysis: quadratic coefficient estimate = -.00197 (SE =
.00085), t = -2.31, Wordnet-Affect category main effect and
interaction |t| < 1; categorical coefficient estimate = -.00969
(SE = .00419), t = -2.31, Wordnet-Affect category main
effect and interaction |t| < 1.02 (again with item level
analyses and analyses of untransformed RTs showing the
same pattern).

Discussion
Our analyses show a reliable, consistent and rather simple
pattern of emotion effects in lexical processing. Once
potentially confounding variables are taken into account,
lexical decisions to emotionally valenced words are
recognised faster than those to neutral words. This finding
differs from some previous studies (Estes & Adelman,
2008a,b; Larsen et al., 2008): those investigating ELP data,
using a more limited set of words (from ANEW, Bradley &
Lang, 1999) and crucially, for which some important control
variables are unavailable. Those studies also conducted
analysis over item averages only, allowing the possibility
that valence effects observed there may have been
magnified or distorted as a consequence of treating these
values as point estimates rather than varying by subjects.
Our results also differ from those reported by Kousta et al.
(2009) although consistent with their overall conclusions.
There appears to be no benefit in considering valence as a
continuous measure: the 2-order polynomial valence model
is no better than the simplest categorical model (valenced vs
neutral). In fact when we reanalyze their data set, there too
we find that a categorical measure contrasting valenced to
neutral words is comparable to the continuous measure they
favoured.
We also found this categorical effect of valence to be
general in nature: it is not modulated by arousal, and it is
not driven by words specifically referring to emotional
experience. This finding resonates with recent neuroimaging
evidence using a highly controlled set of words, in which
activation in rostral anterior cingulate cortex (an area

associated with emotion processing) is modulated by
valence (regardless of whether it is positive or negative) and
not by arousal (Vigliocco et al., 2013).
Why would emotional content, regardless of polarity,
facilitate lexical processing? Under general motivational
accounts of processing (Lang, Bradley & Cuthbert, 1997)
both negatively and positively valenced items are relevant to
survival and wellbeing albeit for different reasons. Crucial
in this regard is the involvement of emotion processing
systems even for lexical stimuli which do not exhibit
obvious low-level visual characteristics argued to be
evolutionarily linked to positive or negative emotions (vs.
emotional expressions or visual properties of dangerous
entities). In a recent proposal, the involvement of emotional
systems has been argued to provide a means for grounding
abstract concepts in internal experience, just like concrete
concepts are accepted to be grounded in sensory-motor
experience (Kousta, Vigliocco, Vinson, Andrews & Del
Campo, 2011; Vigliocco, Meteyard, Andrews & Kousta,
2009). Under this view, emotional content of words would
facilitate their processing, in a manner akin to the way in
which sensory experience (operationalised as imageability
or concreteness; Kousta et al. 2011) facilitates processing.

Acknowledgments
Supported by UK Economic and Social Research Council
grant RES-062-23-2012 to Gabriella Vigliocco.

References
Altarriba, J., & Bauer, L. M. (2004). The distinctiveness of
emotion concepts: A comparison between emotion,
abstract, and concrete words. American Journal of
Psychology, 117, 389-410.
Baayen, R. H. (2008). Analyzing linguistic data: A practical
introduction to statistics using R. Cambridge University
Press.
Baayen, R.H. (2009). languageR: Datasets and functions
with "Analyzing Linguistic Data: A practical introduction
to statistics". http:/cran.r-project.org/package=languageR .
Baayen, R.H., Davidson, D.J. and Bates, D.M. (2008)
Mixed-effects modeling with crossed random effects for
subjects and items. Journal of Memory and Language, 59,
390-412.
Balota, D.A., Yap, M.J., Cortese, M.J., Hutchison, K.A.,
Kessler, B., Loftis, B., Neely, J.H., Nelson, D.L.,
Simpson, G.B., & Treiman, R. (2007). The English
Lexicon Project. Behavior Research Methods, 39, 445459.
Bates, D. & Maechler, M. (2009). lme4: Linear mixedeffects models using S4 classes. http:/cran.rproject.org/package=lme4 .
Bradley, M.M. & Lang, P.J. (1999). Affective Norms for
English Words (ANEW): Stimuli, instruction manual and
affective ratings (Tech Report C-1). Gainesville:
University of Florida, Center for Research in
Psychophysiology.

1544

Bradley, M. M., & Lang, P. J. (2000). Measuring emotion:
Behavior,
feeling,
and
physiology.
Cognitive
Neuroscience of Emotion, 25, 49-59.
Coltheart, M. (1981). The MRC Psycholinguistic Database,
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 33A, 497505.
Estes, Z., & Adelman, J. S. (2008a). Automatic vigilance for
negative words in lexical decision and naming: Comment
on Larsen, Mercer & Balota (2006). Emotion, 8, 441–444
Estes, Z., & Adelman, J. S. (2008b). Automatic vigilance
for negative words is categorical and general. Emotion, 8,
453–457.
Fox, E., Russo, R., Bowles, R. & Dutton, K., (2001). Do
threatening stimuli draw or hold visual attention in
subclinical anxiety? Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 130, 681-700.
Keuleers, E., Lacey, P. , Rastle, K., & Brysbaert, M. (2012).
The British Lexicon Project: Lexical decision data for
28,730 monosyllabic and disyllabic English words.
Behavior Research Methods, 44, 287-304
Kousta, S.-T., Vigliocco, G., Vinson, D.P., Andrews, M. &
Del Campo, E. (2011). The representation of abstract
words: Why emotion matters. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 140, 14-34.
Kousta, S.-T., Vinson, D. & Vigliocco, G. (2009). Emotion
words, regardless of polarity, have a processing advantage
over neutral words. Cognition, 112, 473-481.
Lang, P.J., Bradley, M.M. & Cuthbert, B.N. (1997).
Motivated attention: Affect, activation and action. In P.J.
Lang, R.F. Simons & M.T. Balaban (Eds.), Attention and
orienting: Sensory and motivational processes. Hillsdale
NJ: Erlbaum.
Larsen, R.J., Mercer, K.A. & Balota, D.A. (2006). Lexical
characteristics of words used in emotional Stroop
experiments. Emotion, 6, 62-72.
Larsen, R.J., Mercer, K.A., Balota, D.A. & Strube, M.J.
(2008). Not all negative words slow down lexical decision
and naming speed: Importance of word arousal. Emotion,
8, 445-452.
Moseley, R., Carota, F., Hauk, O., Mohr, B. &
Pulvermüller, F. (2012). A role for the motor system in
binding abstract emotional meaning. Cerebral Cortex, 22,
1634-1647.
Pistoia, F., Conson, M., Trojano, L., Grossi, D., Ponari, M.,
Colonnese, C., Pistoia, M.L., Carducci, F & Sarà, M.
(2010). Impaired conscious recognition of negative facial
expressions in patients with locked-in syndroms. Journal
of Neuroscience, 30, 7838-7844.
Pratto, F. & John, O.P. (1991). Automatic vigilance: The
attention-grabbing power of negative social information.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 61, 380391.
Stadthagen-Gonzalez, H., & Davis, C.J. (2006). The Bristol
Norms for Age of Acquisition, Imageability and
Familiarity. Behavior Research Methods, 68, 598-605.
Strapparava, C. & Valitutti, A. (2004). WordNet-Affect: An
affective extension of WordNet, Proceedings of the 4th

International Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 2004), 1083-1086.
Vigliocco, G., Meteyard, L., Andrews, M., & Kousta, S.-T.
(2009). Toward a theory of semantic representation.
Language and Cognition, 1, 219-247.
Vigliocco, G. Vinson, D., Della Rosa, P., Kousta, S.T.,
Devlin, J. & Cappa, S.F. (2013) The neural representation
of abstract words: A role of emotion. In press, Cerebral
Cortex.

1545

