UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How intonation contrains pragmatic inference

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4w08j2jn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Tomlinson, Jr., John M.
Bott, Lewis

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

How intonation constrains pragmatic inference
John M. Tomlinson, Jr. (tomlinson@zas.gwz-berlin.de)
Zentrum für allegemeine Sprachwissenschaft (ZAS)
Berlin 10117 Germany
Lewis Bott (BottLA@cardiff.ac.uk)

School of Psychology, Cardiff University, Tower Building
Cardiff CF103AG UK
Abstract
In this paper, we present two experiments that investigate how
intonation can constrain pragmatic inference. While prior
research has shown that intonation can increase the likelihood
of an inference being made, less is known about how it affects
the mechanisms involved in processing of inferences. In the
first experiment, listeners had more direct mouse paths
towards target responses for stronger interpretations after
hearing utterances with referents with pitch accents than
without. In the second experiment, we replicate the finding of
the first study and found more direct mouse paths towards
weaker interpretations after hearing de-accented referents
Our findings suggest that intonation constrains the online
processing of pragmatic inference by increasing the
availability of stronger interpretations.
Keywords: Experimental Pragmatics, Psycholinguistics,
Prosody, Language Comprehension, Mouse-tracking.

Introduction
The rapid nature of human communication requires
speakers and listeners to be as efficient as possible. To help
achieve this, listeners often rely on context to help
disambiguate between different linguistic structures and
meanings. However, often what a speaker intends to say is
not always directly retrievable from a linguistic form; rather
listeners must infer it. One issue concerning pragmatic
inference is whether the processor can keep up with the task
demands of conversation. Some have argued that linguistic
inference must be quick and “cheap” (Levinson, 2000;
Piantidosi, Tily, & Gibson, 2012), however others have
experimentally demonstrated that some linguistic inferences
can be quite costly in terms of processing (Bott & Noveck,
2004; Huang & Snedeker, 2009). In this paper, we discuss
one aspect of the linguistic signal that has the potential to
make certain costly pragmatic inferences quicker and more
efficient: prosody. We report the findings from two
experiments that test different accounts about how prosody
affects the processing of pragmatic inferences.

Pragmatic inferences and language processing
Traditionally, linguists have treated pragmatic inferences
as the interpretative process in which a speaker must
reconcile how speaker’s literal sentence meaning differs
from his or her intended meaning. Grice (1967) initially
distinguished between two types of pragmatic inferences

(particularized implicatures): conventional implicatures and
conversational implicatures. Conventional implicatures
roughly amount to inferences about a speaker’s intended
meaning that can be made without accessing the
conversational context. Conversational implicatures,
however, require that listeners must first consider the literal
sentence meaning, compare it against the context and then
potentially enrich it in order to arrive at a speaker’s intended
meaning. Neo-Griceans have proposed an inference type
that falls somewhere between Grice’s original distinction:
default inferences (Levinson, 2000). Default inferences are
inferences that are computed on every occasion, but can be
cancelled later. Always deriving the inference avoids costly
pragmatic computations that would delay obtaining the
speaker’s intended meaning. According to this process,
inferences are heuristic-based and therefore can become
“cheap” in regards to processing resources.
Researchers in experimental pragmatics have tested
whether certain implicatures classes are indeed understood
as default inferences. One case that has caused some debate
is the case of scalar implicatures. For these inferences,
listeners can choose between either a weak or a strong
interpretation depending on what they think the speaker
intended to communicate. For example, a sentence such as
“I drank some of my friend’s beers last night” could either
be taken to mean that I drank (1) at least one (and possibly
all) of the beers or (2) at least one and not all of the beers.
The difference between interpretations (1) and (2) is that to
interpret “not all” in (2), the listener must infer that had the
speaker meant “all,” they would have said so. In other
words, the listener would need to make a pragmatic
inference to access the stronger interpretation. Several
experimental studies have shown that understanding upper
bound meanings of some, as in (2), takes substantially
longer than the meaning in (1) (Bott & Noveck, 2004;
Huang & Snedeker, 2009). As such, a default implicature
account of scalar implicatures is not borne out by the
majority of these findings because of the processing cost for
(2). However it might be the case that this processing cost
can be diminished in the right context (Grodner, Klein,
Canbary, & Tannenhaus, 2010; Degen & Tannenhaus,
2011), i.e. making (2) more available or active earlier on in
processing. Our studies seek to examine how processing
costs can be diminished and what this means for processing
accounts of pragmatic inferences. Specifically, we examine

3569

how one prominent cue, intonation, affects the availability
and integration of various sources of information during the
processing of conversational implicatures.

Intonation and Pragmatic Inferences
Many studies have shown that intonation interacts with
pragmatic processes in general, specifically those having to
do with the integration of prior context to help disambiguate
anaphoric reference, e.g. reference resolution, via
information structure. For example, Dahan, Chambers, &
Tannenhaus (2002) found that pitch accents (H*) can
rapidly disambiguate referents by integrating prior discourse
mention of a referent. What is less clear is whether
intonation affects pragmatic processes above that of
explicatures, e.g. reference resolution, namely at the level of
implicatures. For example, scalar implicatures are generally
thought to be defeased in the antecedent of a conditional (if
some of the…) and under negation (see e.g., Chierchia,
2004, for a review). Scalar implicatures therefore require the
integration of semantics and pragmatics in a way that other
pragmatic phenomena do not (see Horn, 2006). How and at
what level of interpretation intonational information is
intergrated into the processing of scalar implicatures is
therefore an open question.
From a processing perspective, intonation could affect
implicatures in at least two ways. First, it may alter how
likely people are to derive an implicature. Secondly, it may
also affect the speed with which people derive them. The
difference is important because it allows us to understand in
more detail how intonation interacts with other processing
mechanisms. In particular, intonation might act merely as a
cue to derive the implicature, or it may alter the process
more fundamentally. In the next section we discuss previous
findings related to prosody and pragmatic inferences, before
specifying our hypotheses in more detail.
The one study that has specifically investigated prosody
and scalar implicatures was Chevallier et al. (2008), who
tested the effects of contrastive stress on the disjunction, or.
Disjunctions can be optionally enriched from an inclusive
reading, one or the other and possibly both, to an exclusive
reading, one or the other but not both. Chevallier et al.
tested whether contrastive stress on “or” affected the
enrichment. For example, whether sentences like, “You can
have the meat course or the fish course,” was interpreted
differently to, “You can have the meat course OR the fish
course.” While they found the stress on “or” greatly
increased the proportion of exclusive readings, response
times for the exclusive readings were identical regardless of
whether contrastive stress was used or not. This study then,
found that while intonation altered how the sentence was
understood, it did not alter the time-course for the inference.
While our study is primarily concerned with
conversational implicatures, other studies on intonation and
different sorts of pragmatic inferences are clearly relevant.
These studies have produced mixed results as to the effects
of intonation on the speed of inference derivation, however,
and it is often difficult to see whether intonation is affecting

speed of derivation or probability of derivation. For
example, Dennison (2010) found that contrastive pitch
accents in conjunction with final rises increased the
likelihood that upon hearing “the pencil WAS sharp”,
listeners were more likely to infer that pencil is now not
sharp, i.e. dull. This did not, however, affect the time course
of processing relative to explicit negation: listeners spent as
much time looking at pictures of the affirmative state (a
sharp pencil) before fixating on the intended meaning (a dull
pencil) as with explicit negation. Similarly, Sedivy et al.
(1999) found no difference in looks to a referent
disambiguated by a non-stressed adjective, “Click in the tall
glass,” vs. “Click on the TALL glass”. In contrast, Ito &
Speer (2008) found that contrastive pitch accents (L+H*)
rapidly constrain the reference resolution of an upcoming
noun. When listeners heard a prior mention of a referent
(green ball), listeners were more likely to make anticipatory
eye-movements upon hearing a contrastive pitch accent on
BLUE to an object (ball) that had a contrasting item in the
set (a blue ball vs. a red ball vs. a blue star).
The literature reviewed above suggests that intonation
affects how likely implicatures are to be generated, but it is
unclear whether it speeds up the process of making the
inference. In our experiments we test the former hypothesis,
namely whether a particular intonational pattern, focus
intonation, speeds up the process of making conversational
implicatures. One possibility is that because enrichment is
optional, focus intonation could make it more likely that the
procedures used to derive an implicature would be triggered
(e.g., exhaustivity operator, (van Rooj and Schulz, 2004); or
an only operator, (Chierchia, 2004); or reasoning about
Gricean maxims, (Grice, 1975). If this is the only effect of
the focus however, processing speed will not be altered and
could even be delayed, e.g. more alternatives could be
generated and considered. Focus would be one more cue to
derive the implicature, but would not alter any of the
procedures needed to perform the implicature computations.
This account is consistent with the findings from Chevalier
et al. (2008) and Dennison (2010). The other possibility is
that focus intonation changes how the implicature is
computed, which could happen several ways. For example,
focus intonation might act like an explicit only in the
sentence. This would remove the need to consider whether
the speaker was informed and reliable (Sauerland, 2004).
Removing this stage would speed up processing (Bott et al.,
2012, demonstrate that scalar implicatures are computed
more slowly than similar sentences with an explicit only). A
final possibility is that focus might also encourage people to
start deriving the implicature earlier on in the sentence;
either because the pitch accent strengthens the assertive
content of the proposition, e.g. the speaker is not leaving the
topic open, or because the listener recognizes that a speaker
is in a position to place a pitch accent on the referent.

Overview of experiments
In this paper, we present two experiments investigating
how prosody affects the processing of conversational

3570

implicatures. At issue is whether prosody, in this case
intonation, speeds up the process of making implicatures.
We used a picture-speech matching paradigm.
Participants were presented with a visual display showing
diverse objects. For example, a candle in one part of the
screen and a dog in the other. They then heard a sentence
assigning Mark ownership of one set of objects, and clicked
on the image that best captured the object owned by Mark.
For example, they might hear, “Mark has a candle” and then
had to click on the candle image. In the critical trials,
participants heard a sentence involving one object, “Mark
has a candle (A),” but were presented with one image
containing a candle (A), and one image containing a candle
and a candy (AB). Now, in these trials, both options were
logically permissible – there is a candle in both images; it is
only by generating an implicature that the participant can
chose the candle-only option (“the speaker must mean that
Mark only has a A, and not AB, because otherwise they
would have said so”). Thus, if the participant selected the
candle-only option, they must have derived the implicature.
We refer to the candle-only option(A) as the strong
interpretation because it is informationally stronger than the
candle and candy option (AB) (the weak interpretation).
Most importantly, we manipulated intonational focus on
the referent. Participants heard either “Mark has a candle,”
or “Mark has a CANDLE.” If focus intonation facilitates the
derivation of the inference, the mouse-paths towards the
stronger interpretation targets (CANDLE) should be more
direct for stressed vs. unstressed referents when the twoobject picture is the competitor target.

picture combinations were phonological competitors, e.g.
candle vs. camel and the other half were semantic
competitors, e.g. pencil vs. eraser. This was done to help
disguise the purpose of the experiment. For each item
combination, black and white clip art pictures of each
referent were constructed. Each item had either a picture of
just one of the objects (candle) or both (candle and a camel).
Objects were sized equally so that the picture of the object
was the same size as when the object was in the two-object
picture. This was done to control the salience of a oneobject picture versus a two-object picture. The utterancepicture combinations are also shown in Table 1.
A male speaker of British English with no noticeable
regional variety was used to record the sentences. Sentences
were recorded in a sound attenuated booth using a unidirectional microphone and digitized with USB sound
capture device. All utterances were first recorded in
sentence form and then the individual referents were
recorded in isolation in both stressed and unstressed forms.
A trained phonetician inspected these recordings and made
sure that utterances with focus intonation had H*L-L%
patterns and non-focus intonation utterances had L*L-L%
patterns. Acoustic measurements were conducted so that
this and mean F0 were the only significant different between
the two versions. Next, objects in isolation were spliced into
the sentence frames. In the two referent utterances, the
pause between “and” and the second referent “a camel” was
reduced to 100ms so that listeners could not reliably use the
stress to detect speaker continuation.
Table 1: Utterance-picture combinations Exp. 1
Utterance (Pitch accent)
Picture(s)
Target conditions
(1) Mark has an A (L*)
A vs. AB
(2) Mark has an A (H*)
A vs. AB
(3) Mark has an A (L*)
A vs. B
(4) Mark has an A (H*)
A vs. B

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, the visual display involved two targets,
one on the left and one on the right. Participants heard one
of four types of experimental conditions, as shown in Table
1. Conditions 1 and 2 were the critical conditions described
above, and conditions 3 and 4 were control conditions
designed to eliminate low-level, perceptual explanations of
any effects we might observe. If intonation speeds up the
pragmatic process of deriving the implicature, we would
expect a larger effect of intonation in conditions 1 and 2
than in conditions 3 and 4.

Method
Twenty six undergraduate students in the School of
Psychology at Cardiff University participated in this
experiment for either course credit or a 3 pound Sterling
reimbursement. The experiment took roughly 15 minutes to
complete. All participants were debriefed upon completion.
Stimuli The same auditory stimuli were used for both
experiments (except for the addition of prepositional phrases
in Experiment 2). An utterance had the stem “Mark has a”
and either had one referent (A)or two referents (AB) (see
Table 1). Roughly half of the stimuli (24 items) were
adapted from Dahan, Tannenhaus, & Chambers (2002) and
the other half (26 items) were created in order to increase
the number of items. Of these items, half of the sentence and

Filler conditions
(5)Mark has an A (L*) and a B (L*)
(6)Mark has an A (H*) and a B (H*)
(7) Mark has an A (H*) and a B (L*)
(8) Mark has an A (L*) and a B (H*)

AB vs. A
AB vs. A
C|B vs. A|B
A|C vs. A|B

Design & Procedure In both experiments, participants were
were presented with an audio file and clicked on the picture
that corresponded to the mentioned referent in the sentence.
In the instructions, they were told that they were
overhearing a speaker describing to another person which
objects Mark has. Response boxes were equally sized and
placed at the top left and right and corners of the screen. To
begin each trial, participants clicked on START at the
bottom center of the screen and then saw the response
options for 2000ms before the audio file was played.
Participants could move their mouse and make their
response at the onset of the word “has”.

3571

Participants were exposed to all conditions. Four
experimental lists were generated so that a given participant
had only one of the four target conditions for a given item.
Filler conditions were added that had both related oneobject pictures as well as non-related one-object pictures.
Filler conditions were kept the same across all lists. As
mentioned in the stimuli section, all versions of filler picture
conditions had utterances with both H*L-L% and L*L-L%
accent patterns on initial referents so that listeners would be
as likely to hear focus intonation in both one and tworeferent utterance.
The experiment was run with Runner program in the
Mousetracker suite (Freeman & Ambady, 2010). The
Analyser program exported responses into 101 normalized
time steps. The dependent measure used was the Area under
the Curve (AUC), which amounts to the total geometrical
area for a mouse trajectory relative to a straight line from
the start button to correct target.

Results
The average mouse-paths for the target conditions are
shown in Figure 1. Figure 1 shows the raw x- and ycoordinates for the mouse-paths for the various conditions,
showing that utterances with unstressed referents in the twoobject competitor condition have delayed mouse-paths
towards the response target. Utterances with stressed
referents in the two-object competitor condition do not look
to be substantially delayed relative to the control conditions.
A mixed model with two predictor variables (focus
intonation and competitor type) was used to test the
directness of participants mouse paths (AUCs) towards the
correct response. Intonation (H* vs. L* pitch accents) and
competitor
type
(weaker
interpretation
or
phonological/semantic cohort) were used as fixed effects
(along with an interaction term) and used subjects and items
as random effects. In all conditions, accuracy rates were
over 97%. Participants had more direct mouse paths to
control condition (Conditions 3 & 4) than when the weaker
alternative was used as a competitor (Conditions 1 & 2), t =
3.94, p<.01. Across competitor type, focus intonation
yielded more direct responses toward the correct target, t =
3.31, p<.03. Critically, the interaction between focus and
competitor type was significant, t = 2.91, p<.05, suggesting
that the main effects were driven by the relative difference
of focus intonation between Conditions 1 and 2.

Figure 1: Raw x- on y-coordinates for Experiment 1.

Discussion
In the presence of having a picture of the weaker
interpretation as a competing target, listeners had more
direct responses to the target picture of the stronger
interpretation for utterances with a stressed referent than an
unstressed referent. This suggests that the pitch accent made
the weaker interpretation less accessible. Mouse-paths in
Condition 2 were more direct towards the target and quite
close to the control conditions. This means that focus seems
to have substantially reduced the interference of the weaker
interpretation competitor found in Condition 1 almost to the
extent that is wasn’t present (as in Conditions 3 and 4).
These findings suggest that the implicatures have been
processed more quickly in the focus condition.
An alternative explanation of our findings is that listeners
could be interpreting the focus intonation as a discourse
signal that the speaker has finished speaking. This would
explain why participants mouse movements were more
direct to the signal referent because listeners would be less
likely to expect more upcoming speech from the listener. In
our second experiment, we seek to eliminate this
explanation of our findings.

Experiment 2
Gricean maxims explain not only how speakers imply
meanings beyond literal sentence meaning, but also provide
allow listeners to infer whether a speaker has finished
his/her turn. Moreover, research on intonation has shown
that listeners interpret falling intonation at the end of the
phrase to indicate that a speaker has finished his or her turn
(Deruiter, Mitterer, & Enfeld, 2006). In contrast, phrase
final rising intonation can indicate both speaker continuation
or uncertainty and this along with durational information
can alter listeners’ attention to upcoming speech (Tomlinson
& Fox Tree, 2011). Regarding our items in Experiment 1, it
is possible that the falling intonation on the referent in
phrase final position might have yielded more direct mouse
paths to the correct target because listeners inferred that the
speaker had finished speaking. To control for this
possibility, prepositional phrases were added to each phrase,
e.g. “Mark has a candle on the table”. Because of this, two
more competitor pictures were added to the display,
increasing the possible targets from two to four.
Stimuli The same experimental items from Experiment 1
were used. However, a prepositional phrase was added
(either “on the table” or “on the shelf”) to the existing
auditory files. Because of this, two more picture targets
were added to each trial. In Conditions 1 & 2, participants
were now forced to choose between a picture of a candle
and a camel on the table, a candle on the table, along with
two distractor pictures (a picture of an apple and a pear on
the shelf as well as a picture of an apple on the shelf).
Conditions 3&4 made use of table/shelf distinction by
having participants choose between the single referent on
either the table or the shelf along with the distractor
pictures. Last, a third experimental condition testing the
availability of weaker interpretations in our paradigm. In

3572

this condition, items such as “Mark has a candle on the
shelf” would be heard in the context of a picture of only a
candle on a table and a picture of both a candle and a camel
on a shelf along with the distractor pictures. In this case,
participants would need to click on the picture of the weaker
interpretation, as the prepositional phrase on the single
referent would make the stronger interpretation
incompatible with item.

Results & Discussion
The average mouse-paths for the target in conditions 1-2,
3-4, & 5-6 are shown in Figures 2-4. Conditions 1 & 2 show
the same pattern as in Experiment 1, in that the focus
intonation helped listeners choose the single referent target
in the presence of a two-referent target. However focus did
not have a yield a more direct mouse path to the target in the
control condition.

Figure 2: Mouse paths for Conditions 1 & 2 in Experiment 2.

A mixed-effect model was used to test AUC values with
focus intonation (H* L-L% vs. L* L-L% patterns) and
implicature type (stronger interpretation, control, weaker
interpretation) as fixed effects (along with an interaction
term) and with subjects and items as random effects.
Accuracy rates were over 97% for Conditions 1-4. However
accuracy was only 90% for Conditions 5-6. Overall,
participants’ responses to correct targets for control items
(Conditions 3&4) were more direct than both stronger
interpretations (conditions 1 &2), t = 4.07, p < .03, and
weaker interpretations (conditions 5 & 6), t = 7.44, p <.01.
Across all conditions, focus intonation was not a significant
predictor of AUCs, t = 1.29, = .31. Critically, focus
intonation yielded more direct mouse paths towards the
correct target for stronger interpretations than for control
conditions, t = 2.79, p = 04. The opposite pattern was found
for weaker interpretations: focus intonation yielded less
direct mouse paths to correct targets compared to the control
condition, t = 2.03, p <.05.
In sum, Experiment 2 replicated our findings from
Experiment 1: focus intonation helps listeners exclude
competition from weaker alternatives when selecting strong
interpretations of an utterance. The added prepositional
phrase and visual context suggests that the focus intonation
is integrated incrementally. This also suggests that the
finding from Experiment 1 did not result from listeners
exclusively interpreting the focus intonation as a signal that
the speaker has finished his or her turn. In addition, focus
intonation made it more difficult for participants to choose
weaker interpretations upon hearing an item with a single
referent. This further suggests that the focus intonation is
helping reinforce the “only” operator in such utterances.

Conclusion

Figure 3: Mouse paths for Conditions 3 & 4 in Experiment 2.

Figure 4: Mouse paths for Conditions 5 & 6 in Experiment 2.

In two experiments, we sought to better understand how
prosody, pitch accents, affects the interpretive processes of
pragmatic inference. In our first experiment, focus
intonation reduced the processing cost of understanding a
stronger interpretation (Mark has only a candle) in the
presence of a weak interpretation competitor. The second
experiment replicated the findings from Experiment 1 in
that focus intonation helped listeners exclude weaker
interpretations when clicking on the correct target. Also,
focus intonation introduced more competition for single
referent pictures when choosing weaker interpretations.
We now discuss our findings as they relate to how and
when prosody is integrated incrementally into utterance
meanings. At first glance, our findings might suggest that
focus intonation acted as an explicit only. This effect could
arise by the focus intonation being initially decoded into at a
phonological level and then fed forward into a focus
operator into pragmatics via information theoretic
relationships (Pierrehumbert & Hirschberg, 1990; Büring
2007). Semantic accounts of focus might also explain our
results (Krifka, 1999; van Rooij & Schulz, 2004; Rooth,
1993). Such accounts hold that focus marking is integrated
into utterance interpretations by triggering a search for

3573

lexically available alternatives. As a result of the
information structure, the constituent can take on additional
meanings due to its elevated status relative to alternatives.
However, our findings only partly support this idea of
intonation working at the level of information structure by
ruling out contextually available alternatives. Because both
stronger and weaker alternatives were visually available,
listeners could not use the intonation to create or search out
alternatives based on linguistic information. This suggests
that listeners were integrating non-linguistic information
into these interpretations e.g., visual information and/or
speaker specific information, and that focus intonation sped
up this integration. In other words, a more plausible
explanation might be that focus intonation allowed listeners
to start deriving the inference earlier on in the sentence.
Future work is needed to better tease apart these
possibilities. One way forward would be to dovetail on a
recent investigation by Breheny, Ferguson, & Katsos
(2013), which examined the rapid integration of speakers’
perspectives when processing ad hoc, conversational
implicatures. In their study, listeners’ eye movements were
sensitive to speaker information when generating the
“nothing else” implication, suggesting that information
structure is necessary, but not sufficient for rapidly inferring
“nothing else” implications: initial early biases toward the
“nothing else” interpretation disappeared when listeners
believed that the speaker’s viewpoint of the objects was
obscured. Although their confederate speakers in the look
and listen experiment did not reliably use pitch accents
when communicating the “nothing else” implication, an
open question is whether focus intonation on the referents in
their study would have reduced the delay in the speaker
ignorance condition. We are conducting ongoing research
to test this possibility, which can better adjudicate at what
level intonation affects pragmatic inference.

Acknowledgments
The first author was supported by ESRC grant RES-062-23240 awarded to L. Bott, T. Bailey, and D. Grodner. We
would like to thank Elena Chepucova for helping with the
preparation of the pictures and audio files.

References
Beckman M.E. & Ayers G.M. (1994). Guidlines for ToBI
Labeling.
Bott, L. & Noveck, I. A. (2004). Some utterances are
underinformative: The onset and time course of scalar
inferences. Journal of Memory and Language, 51, 437-57.
Breheny, R., Ferguson, H. J. & Katsos, N. (2006). Taking
the epistemic step: Toward a model of on-line access to
conversational implicatures. Cognition, 126(3), 423-440.
Chevallier, C., Noveck, I. A, Bott, L., Lanzetti, L. Nazir, T.,
Sperber, D. (2008). Making disjunctions exclusive.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 61(11),
1741-1760
Chierchia, G. (2004). Scalar implicatures, polarity
phenomena, and the syntax/pragmatics interface. In A.

Belletti (ed.), Structures and beyond, (pp. 39-103).
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Freeman, J.B. & Ambady, N. (2010). MouseTracker:
Software for studying real-time mental processing using a
computer mouse-tracking method. Behavior Research
Methods, 42, 226-241.
Dahan D., Tannenhaus M.K. & Chambers, C.G. (2002).
Acent and reference resolution in spoken-language
comprehension. Journal of Memory and Language 47:
292-314.
Dennison, H. Y. (2010). Processing implied meaning
through contrastive prosody. PhD dissertation. University
of Hawai‘i at Mānoa, Honolulu: HI.
De Ruiter, J. P., Mitterer, H., & Enfield, N. J. (2006).
Predicting the end of a speaker’s turn; a cognitive
cornerstone of conversation. Language, 82(3), 515-535.
Grodner, D., Klein, N. M., Carbary, K. M., & Tanenhaus,
M. K. (2010). ”Some”, and possibly all, scalar inferences
are not delayed: evidence for immediate pragmatic enrichment. Cognition, 116, 42 - 55.
Grice, P. (1967). Meaning. Philosophical Review 66, 377388.
Horn, Laurence R. (2006). The border wars. In Klaus von
Heusinger and Ken P. Turner, eds., Where Semantics
Meets Pragmatics, (pp. 21–48). Oxford: Elsevier
Huang, Y., & Snedeker, J. (2009). On-line interpretation of
scalar quantifiers: Insight into the semantics-pragmatics
interface. Cognitive Psychology, 58, 376-415
Ito, K. & Speer, S.R. (2008). Anticipatory effects of
intonation: Eye movements during instructed visual
search. Journal of Memory and Language 58: 541-573.
Levinson, S. C. (2000). Presumptive meanings - the theory
of generalized conversational implicature. The MIT Press
Pierrehumbert, J. & Hirschbirg, J. (1990). The Meaning of
Intonational Contours in the Interpretation of Discourse, in
P.R. Cohen, Morgen J. & Pollack M.E. (ed.) Intentions in
Communications: 271-311. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Piantodosi, S.T., Tily, H., & Gibson, E. (2012). The
communicative function of ambiguity in language.
Cognition, 122, 280-291.
Sauerland, U. (2004). Scalar implicatures in complex
sentences. Linguistics and Philosophy, 32, 367-391.
Tomlinson, Jr, J. M. & Fox Tree, J. E. (2012). The
comprehension of uptalk in spontaneous speech.
Cognition, 119, 58-69.
van Rooij, R. & Schulz, K. (2004). Exhaustive interpretation
of complex sentences. Journal of Logic, Language, and
Information, 13, 491-519.

3574

