UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How Healthy Aging and Dementia Impact Memory Search

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3nb727pz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Morais, Ana Sofia
Neth, Hansjorg
Hills, Thomas

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

How Healthy Aging and Dementia Impact Memory Search
Ana Sofia Morais (morais@mpib-berlin.mpg.de) & Hansjörg Neth (neth@mpib-berlin.mpg.de)
Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Lentzeallee 94, 14195 Berlin, Germany

Thomas Hills (T.T.Hills@warwick.ac.uk)
Dept. of Psychology, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK
Abstract
We model the semantic recall sequences of 424 older adults
aged between 69 to 103 years in the animal fluency task. Our
results suggest that, under normal intellectual functioning,
memory search in old age (69–84 years) is consistent with a
dynamic process that switches between retrieval probes. With
dementia and very old age (85–103 years), however, memory
search seems to become more consistent with a static process
that activates items in memory as a function of their
frequency. The weight that probes have in determining the
activation of items in memory seems to be an informative
signature of the impact of healthy aging and dementia on
memory search. Our results show that, with healthy aging and
dementia, the activation of items in memory is increasingly
more determined by the frequency of past experience with
those items.
Keywords: Search; semantic memory; modeling; aging.

Introduction
Ronald Reagan became the oldest president elected in
American history, when he took office at age 69, in 1981.
He was diagnosed with Alzheimer’s in 1993, the most
common form of dementia, four years after he left office.
Yet Reagan’s signs of memory decline while in office – like
forgetting names and being at a loss for words – have led to
much speculation about how early dementia had set in. The
question was whether his memory slips were a sign of
normal aging or rather the early symptoms of dementia.
Studies using the animal fluency task (“name all the
animals you can think of”; Thurstone, 1938) have shown
that healthy older adults recall fewer items relative to
younger adults within a limited time interval (e.g., Hills,
Mata, Wilke, & Samanez-Larkin, 2013; Kozora & Cullum,
1995), in much the same way as older adults with dementia
produce fewer items compared with healthy older adults
(e.g., Beatty, Salmon, Testa, Hanisch, & Troster, 2000;
Epker, Lacritz, & Cullum, 1999). In this paper, we examine
how healthy aging and dementia impact search in semantic
memory beyond the sheer reduction in the number of
recalls. To this end, we formally model the recall sequences
of 424 older adults aged between 69 to 103 years in the
animal fluency task. We then examine individual
differences in model fit and parameter estimates, as a way of
identifying signatures of cognitive decline in memory search
with healthy aging and dementia.

Static and Dynamic Search in Semantic Memory
Memory retrieval can be viewed as the result of probing a
memory representation with one or more probes to activate
a response (e.g., Gronlund & Shiffrin, 1986; Walker &

Kintsch, 1985). We apply two classes of models based on
prior work – static vs. dynamic – that make different
assumptions about how retrieval probes are used to search
memory in the fluency task (Hills et al., 2013). Consider the
following two types of probes. One type of probe, the
frequency probe, activates animal names in memory as a
function of their frequency of past occurrence. A second
type of probe, the similarity probe, activates each item in
relation to its semantic similarity to the previously-recalled
item. In a static model, search is guided by the same probe
arrangement over the entire recall interval (i.e., by either
probe alone or by a combination of the two). A dynamic
model, on the contrary, switches between a frequency probe
and a probe that combines frequency and similarity to
traverse clusters of similar items in memory. When leaving
a cluster, a dynamic model uses frequency alone to find a
new cluster, and goes back to using a combination of
frequency and similarity information as the new cluster is
entered. Past work has found that, from early to late
adulthood, search in memory is overall more consistent with
a dynamic search model than with a static model that uses
the same probe arrangement during the entire recall
sequence (Hills et al., 2013).
In this paper, we examine the relative fit of static and
dynamic models in old and very old age, for healthy
individuals and individuals diagnosed with dementia. In
very old age, do people use memory retrieval probes more
in accordance with a dynamic model than with a static
model as younger cohorts do? Moreover, we test alternative
mechanisms of decline in memory search by investigating
individual differences in the use of retrieval probes. We next
turn to a brief discussion of the alternative mechanisms of
decline in memory search.

Mechanisms of Decline in Memory Search
Existing hypotheses proposed to account for age-related
differences in the number of items produced in fluency tasks
make different assumptions about how memory search
declines with aging. The age invariance hypothesis
proposes that aging is associated with unaffected semantic
processing, and thus predicts no age differences in the use of
retrieval probes (Mayr & Kliegl, 2000). Two alternative
hypotheses argue that the impact of aging affects the ability
to switch between probes. The cluster-switching hypothesis
views memory retrieval as a dynamic process involving a
search for semantic categories like “pets”, and a search for
words within a category (e.g., “dog”) (Troyer, Moscovitch,
& Winocur, 1997; Troyer, 2000). A common finding is that
aging is associated with fewer total switches between
categories, leading to the proposal that aging is associated

3104

with reduced switching between retrieval probes
(categories) (Troyer et al., 1997; Troyer, 2000). On the other
hand, the cue-maintenance hypothesis (Hills et al., 2013)
derives from studies showing that aging is associated with
lower working memory capacity, defined as the ability to
keep focus on one probe while ignoring distracting ones
(e.g., Bopp & Verhaghen, 2007). Age-related decline in
working memory capacity should lead to a loss of probe
focus, and therefore to increased switching between probes
(e.g., Unsworth & Engle, 2007). Existing evidence suggests
that, from early to late adulthood, age is associated with an
increase in switching between probes, per item recalled, in
support of the cue-maintenance hypothesis of decline in
memory search (Hills et al., 2013).
We examine which mechanism of decline best describes
individual differences in switching in old (69–84 years) and
very old age (85–103 years), between healthy individuals
and individuals diagnosed with dementia. These
mechanisms of decline, which have been proposed to
account for age-related differences in fluency performance,
can be used to test additional alternative hypotheses
regarding memory decline in dementia. One hypothesis
holds that memory impairment in dementia results from the
acceleration of the same mechanism that leads to memory
decline in healthy aging (e.g., Brayne & Calloway, 1988;
Huppert, 1994; Huppert & Brayne, 1994). On this view,
age-related differences in switching among individuals
diagnosed with dementia should mirror age-related
differences in healthy individuals. According to an
alternative framework, however, memory decline in healthy
individuals and in individuals with dementia is the product
of distinct processes that target different brain systems (e.g.,
Albert, 1997; Gabrieli, 1996). This framework thus suggests
that age-related differences in switching should arise from
distinct decline mechanisms in healthy aging and dementia.
To summarize, we examine whether semantic search in
healthy old age and dementia is more consistent with a static
or with a dynamic model. Moreover, we test different
mechanisms of decline in memory search by investigating
individual differences in model fit and parameter estimates.

Methods
Participants and Procedure
The present work uses data from the Berlin Aging Study, a
longitudinal study on aging (Baltes & Mayer, 1999).
Specifically, we analyze the animal fluency data that was
collected in the first measurement occasion of the study,
between 1990 and 1993. In the animal fluency task,
participants were asked to respond verbally to the probe
“Name all the animals you can think of” within 90 seconds,
with their responses being tape-recorded. We retrieved
participants’ retrieval sequences from the tapes that were
still functional, having compiled the responses of 424
individuals, with ages ranging from 69 to 103 (mean =
84.77, SD = 8.58). Of these 424 individuals, 91 were
diagnosed with dementia (mean age = 90.31, SD = 6.53)

according to the guidelines of DSM-III-R, and 333
individuals (mean age = 83.25, SD = 8.45) were considered
to have normal intellectual functioning.

The Representation of Semantic Memory
The first step towards formalizing search in semantic
memory is to provide an explicit representation of the space
being searched. We used the semantic representations of
animals computed in prior work (Hills, Jones, & Todd,
2012) using the BEAGLE semantic space model (Jones &
Mewhort, 2007). The BEAGLE model was trained on a
subset of Wikipedia, composed of approximately 400
million word tokens and 3 million word types. Once the
entire corpus has been learned (see Hills et al., 2012, for a
description of the learning process), a word’s memory
representation is a vector pattern reflecting the word’s
history of co-occurrence with other words. Words that
frequently co-occur end up developing similar vector
patterns (e.g., bee-honey), as do words that commonly occur
in similar contexts, even if they never directly co-occur
(e.g., bee-wasp). Based on the representation learned by
BEAGLE, we used the frequency of occurrence of each
animal name in the Wikipedia corpus as well as the pairwise
cosine similarities between animal names for our
comparisons.

Alternative Models of Semantic Search
To describe memory retrieval given this well-defined
memory representation, we used a model framework similar
to the item-level recall probability equation from the Search
of Associative Memory model (SAM; Raaijmakers &
Shiffrin, 1981):
M

∏ S (Q , I ) β
k

P( I i | Q1 , Q2 ,..., QM ) =

k

i

k =1
N M

∑∏ S (Q , I
k

j

) βk

(1)

j =1 k =1

where S(Qk ,Ii ) represents the retrieval strength from probe
Qk to item Ii in memory, and wk represents the saliency or
attention directed at the kth probe. The probability of
retrieving a given item, Ii, is given by the ratio of the
activation strength of that item and the sum of the activation
of all other items in memory given those same probes.
Finally, β is a free parameter that indicates how strongly the
person’s recall was determined by the probe; higher values
of β lead items with higher retrieval strengths for a given
probe, Qk, to gain a larger share of the recall probability,
while lower values of β distribute the probability of recall
more evenly over all items.
We considered the frequency probe and the similarity
probe introduced earlier in the paper. The frequency probe
activates each item in memory as a function of the
frequency of occurrence of each animal name in the
Wikipedia corpus. The similarity probe activates each item
in memory in relation to its semantic similarity to the

3105

previous item recalled. Thus, the most recently recalled item
is the probe used to query memory, and activation is defined
as the pairwise semantic similarities produced by BEAGLE
with all animals yet to be recalled. Given a particular probe
arrangement, we can compute the predicted retrieval
probability for any sequence of animal names by repeatedly
using Equation 1. The β parameters were fit to each
participant’s data to maximize the observed recall
probabilities and produce a maximum likelihood fit.
We tested four models differing in the nature of probe
use. All models share the assumption that the probability
that an item is the first item recalled is a function of its
frequency. From the second recall onwards, the models
differ in whether they use frequency and similarity
information in a static or dynamic way. Static models use
the same probe arrangement over the recall interval. The
static frequency model uses a single probe: frequency. This
assumes that individuals’ recall sequences of animals
reproduce their natural strength of activation in memory as a
consequence of frequency alone. The static similarity model
also uses a single probe: semantic similarity. This assumes
that individuals rely only on the previously recalled item as
a probe for the next recall, producing a chain of pairwise
associated animals. The static combined model represents
the simultaneous combination of frequency and semantic
similarity. This assumes a process based on semantic
similarity to the previous item that is further informed by
the frequency of past experience with those items.
The dynamic model switches between a frequency probe
and a probe that combines frequency and similarity to
traverse clusters of similar items in memory. When leaving
a cluster, a dynamic model uses frequency alone to find a
new cluster, and goes back to using a simultaneous
combination of frequency and similarity information as the
new cluster is entered. Transitions are predicted by the
model only after they occur, meaning that the model tests
where the most plausible locations for transitions are, given
the underlying representation. The model switches between
retrieval probes wherever a sequence of items A, B, C, D
have semantic similarities that follow the pattern S(A,B) >
S(B,C), and S(B,C) < S(C,D). That is, similarity drops
between clusters and then increases again once search
resumes with a new cluster (e.g., the sequence DOG, CAT,
SHARK, WHALE would have two clusters, divided by a
similarity drop between CAT and SHARK).
In our data, healthy aging and dementia are associated
with an increase in the proportion of items repeated. For this
reason, and in contrast to previous studies (Hills et al., 2012,
2013; Hills & Pachur, 2012), we did not exclude repetitions
from participants’ retrieval sequences, nor did we remove
items from the memory representation after they were
recalled. Although the current models do not distinguish
new responses from repeated ones when calculating the
retrieval probabilities, we are currently developing a
generalized version of the models that takes into account
how likely participants are to repeat previous responses.

Results and Discussion
Figure 1 shows the mean number of correct responses
produced in old and very old age, for healthy individuals
and individuals diagnosed with dementia, calculated after
excluding repeated items. Throughout our analyses, the
group “old age” includes participants with ages between 69
and 84 years, and the group “very old age” includes
participants with ages between 85 and 103 years. As
expected, age was associated with recalling fewer items
(t(422) = -11.32, p < .001, r = -.48). The mean number of
correct responses produced decreased with age, both for
healthy individuals and individuals with dementia. In
addition, individuals with dementia produced fewer correct
responses relative to individuals without dementia (t(422) =
-12.03, p < .001, rpb = -.51). These results indicate that both
healthy aging and dementia are associated with a decline in
the number of items retrieved from memory. In what
follows, we present our results for the modeling of semantic
retrieval in old and very old age.

Figure 1: Mean number of correct responses produced in
each group. Error bars represent the standard error of the
mean.

Do people switch between retrieval probes in old
and very old age to navigate their semantic
memory?
Table 1 presents the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC)
of the four models. BIC is a commonly used measure to
compare the fit of different models while penalizing them
for the total number of free parameters that they have, as a
way of reducing overfitting (Lewandowsky & Farrell,
2011). Whereas the static single-probe models have only
one free parameter, the models that use both frequency and
similarity have two free parameters, each indicating how
strongly the person’s recall was determined by each type of
information. Note that smaller values of BIC indicate a
better model fit. Also, due to differences in the number of
items recalled, the BIC values for the different models are
only informative if compared within groups.

3106

Table 1: Median Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC) of
static and dynamic models per group.
Without dementia
With Dementia
Models
Old
Very old
Old
Very old
(69-84) (85-103) (69-84) (85-103)
Static
293.34
223.51
163.27
149.46
(95.48)
(92.39)
(56.7)
(79.75)
321.69
262.5
180.73
182.68
Similarity
(106.49) (101.99) (61.94)
(95.46)
285.72
226.60
164.07
147.49
Combined
(95.83)
(92.30)
(54.19)
(79.62)
278.08
226.60
162.19
146.46
Dynamic
(95.69)
(92.33)
(54.68)
(79.68)
Note. Standard deviations are shown in parentheses.
Frequency

The static, frequency model fit the data of all four groups
better relative to the static, similarity model, suggesting that
the best single predictor of recall was frequency rather than
similarity. The pattern of results is, however, mixed across
groups with respect to the fit of the models that use both
frequency and similarity. The recall sequences of healthy
individuals aged between 69-84 years were better fit by the
static, combined model than by the two static single-probe
models. Moreover, the model that incorporates dynamic
transitions between probe arrangements outperformed the
static combined model, being therefore the best fitting
model for healthy individuals aged between 69-84 years.
This finding is in line with past work showing that younger
cohorts search memory according to a dynamic process that
switches between a frequency probe and a probe that
integrates frequency and similarity (Hills et al., 2013).
For the other groups of participants, however, the results
show smaller differences in BIC between the static model
that relies exclusively on frequency information and more
complex models that use both frequency and similarity in a
static or dynamic fashion. This suggests that the static
frequency model may give a comparatively better account
of memory search in very old age and dementia than for the
healthy younger cohort. Yet the smaller BIC differences
between models indicate that it is difficult to distinguish
between them in very old age and dementia, thus calling for
other methods to address the model selection problem.

is not consistent with the age-related increase in switching
found in previous work for a younger cohort (Hills et al.,
2013), suggesting that different mechanisms of decline may
be at play in adulthood and later in life. Additionally, the
finding that dementia was, as for healthy aging, unrelated
with switching suggests that the decline of memory search
in dementia may result from the acceleration of the same
mechanism that leads to decline in healthy aging.
We believe, however, that there is an alternative, more
sensible interpretation of these findings. As seen above, as
people age, a static model appears to be better supported
relative to a dynamic model. Thus, the number of switches
per item recalled may not be an appropriate signature of the
impact of very old age and dementia on memory search. A
more informative signature of the decline of memory search
in old age may be given by the free parameter, β, which
provides a measure of the deterministic nature of the
activation given a specific retrieval probe. Different cohorts
of healthy older adults and older adults with dementia may
search memory in different ways, and these may influence
the estimates of the β parameter. Higher values of β for the
frequency probe lead very frequent items to have a larger
share of the recall probability. Likewise, higher values of β
for the similarity probe give a larger share of the recall
probability to items that are very similar to the previouslyrecalled item. Lower values of β distribute the recall
probabilities more evenly over all items in memory.
Individual differences in the estimates of the β parameter
may thus suggest alternative mechanisms of decline of
memory search, whereby memory probes are given different
weights in determining the recall probabilities.
Figure 2 plots the mean estimates per group for the β
parameters corresponding to the frequency probe (panel A)
and the similarity probe (panel B) in the static, combined
model. Note that the parameter estimates are not comparable
between probes due to the different scales of the Wikipediadefined frequencies and semantic similarities.

How do healthy aging and dementia impact
memory search?
The number of switches per item was essentially unrelated
to the total number of items recalled (t(422) = -1.21, p = .22,
r = -.06). Additionally, it was also not related with age
(t(422) = -1.05, p = .29, r = -.05), or with the presence of
dementia (t(422) = .87, p = .38, rpb = .04). Contrary to the
cluster-switching and the cue-maintenance hypotheses, both
of which posit specific changes in switching with increased
age, these results seem to suggest that there are no
differences in the nature of probe utilization with increased
age, in support of the age invariance hypothesis. This result

3107

Figure 2: Mean estimates per group for the β parameters
corresponding to the frequency probe (A) and similarity
probe (B) in the combined static model. Error bars represent
the standard error of the mean.

Figure 3: Mean Wikipedia-defined frequencies for new and
repeated items produced as a function of age (A) and
dementia diagnosis (B). Error bars represent the standard
error of the mean.

Figure 2 shows that, for individuals with normal
intellectual functioning, there was an age-related increase in
the estimates for the frequency probe, and a decrease in the
estimates for the similarity probe. This indicates that
memory search is more strongly determined by item
frequency in very old age, but the weight of semantic
similarity seems to decrease. For individuals diagnosed with
dementia, the results demonstrate that there are no age
differences in the estimates for either retrieval probe.
However, the results suggest an association, independent of
age, between dementia and the increasing weight of item
frequency in determining the probability of recall.
This increase in the saliency of the frequency probe may
be related to the observed increase in the proportion of
repeated items with age (t(422) = 6.07, p < .001, r = .28) and
dementia (t(422) = 8.04, p < .001, rpb = .36). Figure 3 shows
the mean of the log-transformed Wikipedia-defined
frequencies for newly occurring items and repeated items
produced as a function of age (panel A) and dementia
diagnosis (panel B).

In both age and dementia groups, repeated items had
overall higher frequencies when compared with items
recalled for the first time. Moreover, both age and dementia
were associated with an increase in the Wikipedia-defined
frequencies of the items repeated and, especially, of newly
occurring items. Further modeling efforts are required to
explore the contribution of repetitions to the higher saliency
of the frequency probe in very old age and dementia.

Conclusion
Our results suggest that, in the absence of dementia,
memory search in early old age is consistent with a dynamic
process that switches between a frequency probe and a
probe that integrates frequency and similarity to traverse
clusters of items grouped in memory by semantic similarity.
This finding is in line with past work showing that younger
cohorts search memory according to a dynamic process
(Hills et al., 2013). However, in very old age and dementia,
memory search processes appear to become more static,
relying more on frequency to probe memory.

3108

Our results further show that the proportion of switches
between probe arrangements is unrelated with age and with
the presence of dementia for older individuals. This result is
in contrast with findings from previous studies showing that
younger cohorts switch more often between probes with
increasing age (Hills et al. 2013), thus suggesting that
different mechanisms of decline may be at play in adulthood
and later in life. Yet the saliency of memory retrieval probes
may be a more informative signature of the impact of very
old age and dementia on memory search. We have shown
that, with healthy aging and dementia, the activation of
items in memory is increasingly determined by the
frequency of past experiences with those items. This result
is consistent with the finding above that, in very old age and
dementia, memory search appears to become more
consistent with a static process that uses frequency to probe
memory. Finally, the increase in the saliency of the
frequency probe seems to be related with the increase in the
number of repetitions. While age is associated with an
increase in the number of repetitions, the items people
repeat have a higher frequency of past occurrence compared
with items recalled for the first time.

References
Albert, M. S. (1997). The ageing brain: normal and
abnormal memory. Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society B, 352, 1703–1709.
Baltes, P., & Mayer, K. (1999). The Berlin Aging Study:
Aging from 70 to 100. New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Beatty, Β. Β., Salmon, D. P., Testa, J. A., Hanisch, C., &
Troster, A. I. (2000). Monitoring the changing status of
semantic memory in Alzheimer’s disease: An evaluation
of several process measures. Neuropsychology, 7, 94–111.
Bopp, K. L., & Verhaeghen, P. (2007). Age-related
differences in executive control processes in verbal and
visuo-spatial working memory: Storage, transformation,
supervision, and coordination. Journals of Gerontology:
Psychological Sciences, 62, 239–246.
Brayne, C., & Calloway, P. (1988). Normal ageing,
impaired cognitive function, senile dementia of the
Alzheimer’s type: a continuum? Lancet, 1, 1265–1267.
Epker, M. O., Lacritz, L. H., & Cullum, C. M. (1999).
Comparative analysis of qualitative verbal fluency
performance in normal elderly and demented populations.
Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology,
21, 425–434.
Gabrieli, J.D.E. (1996). Memory systems analyses of
mnemonic disorders in aging and age-related diseases.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA,
93, 13534–13540.
Gronlund, S. D., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1986). Retrieval
strategies in recall of natural categories and categorized
lists. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 12, 550–561.

Hills, T., Jones, M. & Todd, P. M. (2012). Optimal foraging
in semantic memory. Psychological Review, 119, 431440.
Hills, T., Mata, R., Wilke, A., & Samanez-Larkin, G. R.
(2013). Mechanisms of age-related decline in memory
search across the adult life span. Developmental
Psychology.
Hills, T., & Pachur, T. (2012). Dynamic search and working
memory in social recall.
Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 38, 218228.
Huppert, F. A. (1994). Memory function in dementia and
normal aging—dimension or dichotomy? In F. A.
Huppert, C. Brayne, & D. Β. O’Connor (Eds.), Dementia
and Normal Aging (pp. 291–330). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Huppert, F. A., & Brayne, C. (1994). What is the
relationship between dementia and normal aging? In F. A.
Huppert, C. Brayne, & D. Β. O’Connor (Eds.), Dementia
and Normal Aging (pp. 3–11). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Jones, M. N., & Mewhort, D. J. K. (2007). Representing
word meaning and order information in a composite
holographic lexicon. Psychological Review, 104, 1–37.
Kozora, E., & Cullum, C. M. (1995). Generative naming in
normal aging: Total output and qualitative changes using
phonemic and semantic constraints. The Clinical
Neuropsychologist, 9, 313–325.
Lewandowsky, S., & Farell, S. (2010). Computational
Modeling in Cognition: Principles and Practice. London:
Sage Publications.
Mayr, U., & Kliegl, R. (2000). Complex semantic
processing in old age: does it stay or does it go?
Psychology and Aging, 15, 29–34.
Raaijmakers, J. G. Β., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1981). Search of
associative memory. Psychological Review, 88, 93–134.
Thurstone, L. L., (1938). Primary mental abilities.
University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Troyer, A. (2000). Normative data for clustering and
switching on verbal fluency tasks. Journal of Clinical and
Experimental Neuropsychology, 22, 370-378.
Troyer, A.K., Moscovitch, M., & Winocur, G. (1997).
Clustering and switching as two components of verbal
fluency: Evidence from younger and older healthy adults.
Neuropsychology, 11, 138-146.
Unsworth, N., & Engle, R. Β. (2007). The nature of
individual differences in working memory capacity:
Active maintenance in primary memory and controlled
search from secondary memory. Psychological Review,
114, 104–132.
Walker, Β. H., & Kintsch, Β. (1985). Automatic and
strategic aspects of knowledge retrieval. Cognitive
Science, 9, 261–283.

3109

