UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How do you know that? Sensitivity to statistical dependency in social learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3bk0p693

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Whalen, Andrew
Buchsbaum, Daphna
Griffiths, Thomas

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

How do you know that? Sensitivity to statistical dependency in social learning
Andrew Whalen (awhalen@gmail.com)
Daphna Buchsbaum (daphnab@berkeley.edu)
Thomas L. Griffiths (tom griffiths@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA
Abstract
Social learning has been shown to be an evolutionarily adaptive strategy, but can be implemented via many different cognitive mechanisms. Sensitivity to statistical dependency in the
behavior of other people is a factor that discriminates between
possible mechanisms: simple rule based strategies may be unaffected by dependency, while more sophisticated social learning strategies should take it into account. We use a Bayesian
model to determine how rational agents should incorporate the
effects of statistical dependency when learning from other people, conducting two experiments that examine whether human
learners behave similarly. We find that people are sensitive to
two different patterns of dependency, supporting the use of a
sophisticated strategy for social learning.

Introduction
Social learning is a key factor in the human ability to adapt
to a wide variety of environments and plays an important role
in cultural transmission of information (Boyd & Richerson,
1988, 2005). Formal models have shown that social learning
is an evolutionarily adaptive strategy, able to outcompete individual learning (Laland, 2004). However, there are many
possible mechanisms by which social learning could be implemented, ranging from blind imitation to making sophisticated inferences about the beliefs that underlie that behavior.
While evolutionary models tell us that social learning should
be favored, they don’t tell us which mechanism human learners might be using. This question is particularly important
given results showing that both adults and children sometimes “overimitate”, reproducing another’s unnecessary actions (e.g., Lyons, Young, & Keil, 2007; Nielsen & Tomaselli,
2010; McGuigan, Makinson, & Whiten, 2011).
In this paper, we explore the mechanisms behind human
social learning by examining how sensitive people are to statistical dependency in the behavior of other people. For example, imagine hearing from two friends that they visited
a particular restaurant. Taken at face value, this seems like
strong evidence that the restaurant might be a good place to
eat. But if you discover that one friend went there after finding out that the other had been, the two pieces of information
are no longer statistically independent and the evidence they
provide about the quality of the restaurant is reduced. And if
one friend had taken the other there, it is reduced even further.
Examining whether human social learning is sensitive to
statistical dependency provides an opportunity to discriminate between social learning strategies. Simpler rule-based
approaches such as “imitate the majority” should be insensitive to the subtleties of how other people’s behavior is generated, focusing just on the behavior itself. In contrast, if
social learning is based on rational inferences from the available data, the way in which those data are generated should

matter a great deal (for an example see Buchsbaum, Gopnik,
Griffiths, & Shafto, 2011). Determining the consequences
of dependencies in other’s behavior involves reasoning about
their mental states and the factors that contribute to their decisions, requiring a sophisticated approach to social learning.
To assess whether people are appropriately sensitive to statistical dependency in the behavior of others, we developed a
Bayesian model for a simple social learning task. The model
indicates what inferences a rational agent should draw when
statistical independence is violated in different ways. We ran
two behavioral experiments using this social learning task,
finding that people are sensitive to two forms of dependency.
These results support the idea that human social learning is
based on reasoning about the mental states of other people,
rather than simpler strategies such as imitating the majority.

Learning from others
Before presenting our model and experiments, we will summarize some of the key theoretical and experimental results
on cultural evolution and social learning. These results break
down into three areas of research. At the largest scale, models
of cultural evolution have examined how the learning strategies adopted by individuals impact the spread of different behaviors between generations. Within generations, models of
what are called “information cascades” have been used to analyze the rapid spread of novel innovations among populations. Finally, a number of studies have explored how individual people learn from informant testimony.

Cultural evolution
Theoretical studies of cultural evolution have shown that social learning has adaptive advantages (Boyd & Richerson,
1988, 2005; Laland, 2004). However, many of these studies
analyze systems where individuals are faced with the choice
of either learning from the environment or learning socially
(Rogers, 1988). In reality, learners are likely to combine both
environmental and social information when making a decision. Perreault, Moya, and Boyd (2012) modeled agents who
choose a behavior based on a Bayesian learning algorithm
which integrates social and environmental information. In
this model, agents assumed that the social cues provided by
other agents were independent from one another. This assumption was justified by the fact that all behavioral transmission happened between generations where the probability that
the informants learned from each other was low. However,
many behaviors are transmitted within generations, where informants are likely to share information.

1593

Information cascades
Unlike the cultural evolution literature, the literature on
information cascades, a within-generation model of social
decision-making developed by economists, takes into account
the statistical dependency between agents (Bikhchandani,
Hirshleifer, & Welch, 1992). The basic scenario has a sequence of agents each making a decision by combining the information provided by the decisions made by previous agents
with that provided by a small amount of private data. An
information cascade occurs when agents adopt the majority
belief, regardless of their own private information. The cascade persists as more agents enter the population and adopt
the majority belief. Bikhchandani et al. (1992) analyzed how
rational agents who took into account dependencies in previous responses would act in this situation, and showed that
information cascades are surprisingly common. This result
provides a potential explanation for the adoption and spread
of fads and fashions, as well as boom-bust cycles in the economy. Information cascades have been tested in the laboratory
using a simple scenario that provided the inspiration for the
experiments we present later (Anderson & Holt, 1997), but
this previous work did not examine the consequences of manipulating people’s beliefs about statistical dependency.

Individual decision making
Social learning, and imitation in particular, have been studied extensively by psychologists. This work has generally
demonstrated that adults and even young children are sensitive to many aspects of the knowledge and mental states
of their social informants (for some well known examples
see Meltzoff, 1995; Gergely, Bekkering, & Kiraly, 2002;
Carpenter, Call, & Tomasello, 2005). Related work on how
children learn from testimony has similarly found that children take many factors into account, including the prior accuracy (e.g., Koenig & Harris, 2005; Corriveau, Meints, &
Harris, 2009), expertise (e.g. Jaswal, 2006; Sobel & Corriveau, 2010) and certainty (Jaswal & Malone, 2007; Tenney,
Small, Kondrad, Jaswal, & Spellman, 2011) of informants.
However, other work has found that in some situations, people appear to simply copy the beliefs of others. Adults often
disregard their own judgments when socially pressured (for a
review see Cialdini & Goldstein, 2004), and both adults and
children may sometimes conform to a majority opinion that
conflicts with their own direct perceptions (Asch, 1956; Corriveau & Harris, 2010). Looking at the effect of statistical
dependency can help us determine if this conformity is the
result of a simple rule-based strategy, or a more sophisticated
inference process.

Rational social learning
Many inferences that people make rely upon a combination
of their own experience and the behavior of other people. In
order to determine how a sophisticated agent should combine
these forms of information, we developed a Bayesian model
that can incorporate different patterns of dependency. This

model makes direct predictions that we can test experimentally, having no free parameters.
We assume that agents receive some directly observed data
about the state of the world, d, and testimony from n informants t1 , . . . ,tn . To make a decision, learners evaluate a potential hypothesis, h, using Bayes’ rule,
p(h|d,t1 , . . . ,tn ) ∝ p(t1 , . . . ,tn |d, h)p(d|h)p(h)

(1)

where p(h|d,t1 , . . . ,tn ) is the posterior probability of h, the
degree of belief assigned to h after receiving the data and testimony, and p(h) is the prior probability of h, the degree of
belief assigned to h before receiving any evidence.
In order to estimate the probability of the testimony,
p(t1 , . . . ,tn |d, h), the learner should consider the sources of
information that each informant had access to. If the data
the learner observes, d, is unknown to the informants, then
p(t1 , . . . ,tn |d, h) = p(t1 , . . . ,tn |h). We will assume that this is
the case, since it simplifies calculations and is consistent with
the task we use in our experiments. The form of p(t1 , . . . ,tn |h)
depends on how the informants generate their testimony. We
first consider the case of independent testimony, and then discuss two different patterns of dependency.

Independent testimony
If the informants’ testimonies are independent of one another
given h, then the probability of a series of testimonies is equal
to the product of the probability of the individual testimonies:
n

p(t1 , . . . ,tn |h) = ∏ p(ti |h).

(2)

i=1

If the testimony produced by the informants is based on their
own experiences, this needs to be taken into account in calculating the probability that they would produce their testimony.
More formally, if we assume that informant i received private
data di , we obtain p(ti |h) by marginalizing over di ,
p(ti |h) = ∑ p(di |h)p(ti |di ),

(3)

di

where p(ti |di ) is the probability that the informant produces
testimony ti after observing di . One possibility is that informants deterministically give testimony that supports the hypothesis with the highest posterior probability, with p(ti =
hi |di ) = 1 for hi = arg maxh p(di |h)p(h). This is typically assumed in models of information cascades (e.g., Bikhchandani
et al., 1992). Alternatively, empirical (Vulkan, 2000) and theoretical (Luce, 2005; Shepard, 1958) results in psychology
suggest that in many cases people “probability match”, so
that informants would give testimony in support of a hypothesis proportional to the informant’s posterior probability of the
hypothesis, with p(ti = hi |di ) ∝ p(di |hi )p(hi ). We evaluate
both the maximizing and probability matching models.

Dependent testimony
If multiple informants give testimony based on shared information, then the probability of any single testimony is not

1594

Sequential testimony Much of the theoretical work on information cascades assumes that informants give their testimony sequentially. Each informant uses their own private information, and the testimony of previous informants to make
a decision as to which option to support. Formally, the testimony of informant i is based on the previous testimony of the
previous informants, t1 , . . . ,ti−1 , and their own private data,
di . The probability of t1 , . . . ,tn is then
n

p(t1 , . . . ,tn |h) = p(t1 |h) ∏ p(ti |t1 , . . . ,tn , h).

(4)

i=2

The value p(ti |t1 , . . . ,ti−1 , h) can be found recursively by finding the values for p(t1 |h) up to p(ti−1 |t1 , . . . ,ti−2 , h):
i−1

p(ti |t1 , . . . ,ti−1 , di , h) ∝ ( ∏ p(t j |t1 , . . . ,t j−1 , h))p(di |h)p(h).
j=1

(5)
As in the case of independent informants, we can find
p(ti |t1 , . . . ,ti−1 , h) by marginalizing over the private information, di , and assuming informants apply Bayes’ rule and then
either maximize or probability match.
Shared private data If the informants all provided testimony based on a single piece of data (e.g., they all went to
the restaurant together), then the probability of this testimony
can be found by marginalizing over this shared private data.
Denoting the shared data d 0 , we have
p(t1 , . . . ,tn |h) = ∑ p(d 0 |h) ∏ p(ti |d 0 , h)
d0

1.0

Maximizing Model
(b)

0.9

1.0

Human Performance

Matching Model
(c)

0.9

10

99

0.8

0.8

8

0.7

0.7

7

0.6

0.6

6

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3

3

0.2

0.2

2

0.1

0.1

0.0

0.0

Independent Sequential Shared Private
Testimony
Data

Rating

(a)

Probability of joining the majority

independent from the others. We consider two cases: where
informants give their testimony sequentially, with each informant hearing the preceding testimony, and where informants
base their testimonies on shared private data.

5
4

1

Independent Sequential Shared Private
Testimony
Data

0

Independent Sequential Shared Private
Testimony
Data

Figure 1: Probability of agreeing with the majority opinion in
the simple balls and urns task used in Experiment 1, for both the
Bayesian model and human participants.

which urn was used to fill the bag, based on the testimony of
the informants and the ball seen by the participant.
If all three informants agreed with each other and thought
the bag was filled from the red urn, but the participant got a
blue ball, what should the participant say? We will analyze
three conditions, corresponding to the three cases presented in
the previous section. The predictions for the three conditions
are shown in Figure 1(a) for the maximizing model and in
Figure 1(b) for the probability matching model, using the true
probabilities of red and blue balls for p(d|h) and assuming
both hypotheses are equally likely for p(h).

Independent testimony
Imagine that the three informants are all in separate rooms
and each receive a different ball sampled from the bag, making their testimony completely independent. In this case, the
model predicts that the participant should agree with the social testimony, picking the red urn. The model infers that all
three informants all probably received red balls and three red
balls outweigh the participant’s single blue ball.

Sequential testimony
(6)

i

where the probabilities p(ti |d 0 , h) are calculated by applying
Bayes rule and assuming either maximizing or probability
matching to the posterior, as above.

Reasoning about balls and urns
The consequences of different forms of dependency for rational social learning can be hard to imagine in abstract, so
we will work through a concrete example in detail. One of
the simplest examples that illustrates these consequences is
the “ball and urn” scenario used in the information cascade
experiment conducted by Anderson and Holt (1997). This
scenario is also the basis for our own experiments.
Imagine there are two colored urns. One of the urns is colored red, the other urn is colored blue. An experimenter explains that in the red urn 65 of the balls are red, and the rest of
the balls are blue. In the blue urn the proportions are reversed.
In secret, the experimenter pours one of the urns into a bag.
She then shows a ball to each of three informants, and one
to the participant. The informants say which urn they think
was used to fill the bag, based on the information available
to them. The experimenter then asks the participant to decide

In this case, all three informants might be sitting at the same
table and each receive a different ball, but have the opportunity to hear the answer given by the previous informants
before providing their testimony. This is the situation that
was analyzed in Anderson and Holt’s (1997) experiment. If
the informants give their testimony sequentially, the model
again predicts that the participant should agree with the social testimony. However, the model places less weight on the
hypothesis that the red urn was used to fill the bag. The model
takes into account the fact that the three informants shared information. If the first two people received red balls and the
third person received a blue ball, they may still all agree that
the red urn was used to fill the bag even if the third person
goes against the private evidence she received – a mere blue
ball against two likely red balls – and votes in favor of the
majority. This possibility makes the model less sure of its
decision compared to the independent condition.

Shared private data
Now, consider what happens if all three informants are sitting at the same table and all observe exactly the same ball,
rather than each seeing a separate ball drawn from the bag.
If all three informants saw the same ball, the model is evenly

1595

split between the two urns. On the one hand, the three informants probably received a single red ball, but the participant
received a blue ball. With one red ball and one blue ball on
the table, the balls provide equal evidence for either urn being
used to fill the bag.

their decision, but did not see anyone else’s ball. Each informant agreed with the previous informants’ testimony.
The shared private data condition was the same as the sequential testimony condition, except that a single ball was
shared between the informants, and each informant said that
they saw the same ball as the other informants. The experimenter then showed the participant a single blue ball, contrary
to the three informants’ testimony.
Finally, the experimenter asked participants to rate how
likely it was that the bag was filled each urn. Participants
responded to the survey on an 11-point scale, with 0 corresponding to “definitely the blue urn”, 10 to “definitely the red
urn”, and 5 to “equally likely the blue urn or red urn”.

Summary
Even in a simple scenario with two hypotheses and three informants, a rational social learner should act differently in response to different patterns of statistical dependency. To compare our model with human behavior, we ran an experiment
to see how people incorporate their own understanding of the
information each informant used to give their testimony.

Results and Discussion

Experiment 1: Consistent informants
Experiment 1 used the scenario presented in the previous section, with three informants providing consistent testimony
that went against the private data received by the participant.
There were three conditions corresponding to the independent
testimony, sequential testimony, and shared private data.

Methods
Participants A total of 120 participants were
recruited
through
Amazon
Mechanical
Turk
(http://www.mturk.com).
Participants were compensated $0.25 for their time. They were randomly assigned to
one of three experimental groups: the independent condition
(n = 37) or the shared testimony (n = 41), or shared-data
(n = 45). No participants were dropped from the analysis.
Stimuli The experiment was a web-administered survey involving text and pictures. A cartoon of a brown haired woman
was the experimenter. Three cartoon women were the informants. The informants differed in terms of hair color, hair
style, skin color, and shirt color. Each urn was a picture of a
red or blue opaque urn. The balls were colored red and blue.
Procedure First a woman named Jane (the experimenter)
introduced the urns. She explained that five-sixths of the balls
in the red urn were red, and one-sixth were blue. The opposite
was true for the blue urn. She introduced her three friends (the
informants), and explained that she was going to pour one of
the urns into a bag and give a ball from the bag to each of
her three friends. The friends would then tell the participant
which urn they think the bag was filled from. In all three
conditions the three informants agreed that the bag was filled
from the red urn. The participant then saw a blue ball.1
In the independent testimony condition the participant was
shown three doors, and was told that one informant was waiting in each room. Inside, each informant sat behind a desk.
In the sequential testimony condition the informants sat behind a long table. The informants gave their testimony in order down the table and acknowledged that they had used their
own ball and the testimony of previous informants to make
1 The actual colors were randomized, so half the participants received testimony favoring the blue urn and then saw a red ball.

Ratings were placed on a consistent scale, corresponding to
agreement with the majority, by recoding a rating x to 10−x if
testimony favored the blue urn. The mean rescaled ratings for
all conditions are shown in Figure 1(c). Overall, participants
sided with the informants’ testimony over their own private
information most in the independent condition, second in the
sequential testimony condition, and least in the shared private
data condition. The ordering of the means are consistent with
the model predictions. The matching model provided a good
model fit to the data (Pearson’s r = .90).
We analyzed the effect of condition on participant responses using an ANOVA. The effect of condition was significant (F(2, 99.1) = 7.749, MSE = 49.56, p < 0.001). We
explored the differences between conditions using planned
t-tests. The difference between the independent and shared
private data conditions was significant (two sample t-test,
t(80) = 3.88, p < .001) as well as the difference between
the sequential testimony and shared private data conditions
(two sample t-test, t(84) = 2.66, p < .01). The difference
between the sequential testimony and independent testimony
conditions was not (two sample t-test, t(76) = 0.96,p = .34).
The difference between the shared private data condition
and the independent condition suggests that participants were
able to use their knowledge of what information informants
received to evaluate the informants’ testimony. Because the
three informants received the same ball and gave the same
testimony, participants were able to weigh their judgments
against their own conflicting ball.
However, both the maximizing and the probability matching models predict that in the shared private data condition
the probability of the bag having mostly red balls is approximately 50%: less than the participant’s average value of 60%.
Even though this difference was not significant (one sample
t-test, t(44) = 1.31, p > .05), participants may place more
weight on informant testimony than the model predicts.
At first glance, the null result between the sequential testimony and independent testimony conditions suggests that
people respond similarly in the cases of independent testimony and sequential testimony. However, the magnitude of
the difference between these two conditions predicted by the
model is relatively small. This suggests instead that the sce-

1596

1.0

Maximizing Model
(b)

0.9

1.0
0.9

Human Performance

Matching Model
(c)

10

99

0.8

0.8

8

0.7

0.7

7

0.6

0.6

6

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3

3

0.2

0.2

2

0.1

0.1

0.0

0.0

Independent Sequential Shared Private
Testimony
Data

Rating

Probability of joining the majority

(a)

Stimuli The stimuli were identical to those in Experiment
1, except for the urns shown. Instead of using opaque colored
urns, the urns were replaced with a picture of a clear jar filled
with a mix of red and blue balls. A single diagnostic ball
(either white or black) was placed in each urn. Each urn was
labeled either “Jar A” or “Jar B”.

5
4

1

Independent Sequential Shared Private
Testimony
Data

0

shared testimony (n = 41), or shared private data (n = 42).
No participants were dropped from the analysis.

Independent Sequential Shared Private
Testimony
Data

Figure 2: Probability of agreeing with the majority opinion in the
more complex task used in Experiment 2, for both the Bayesian
model and human participants.

Procedure The procedure was the same as Experiment 1,
except for the following changes. References to the “red urn”
and the “blue urn” were replaced by references to “Jar A” and
“Jar B”. In all three conditions the last informant dissented
from the previous informants, and supported the belief that
the bag was filled from the other urn. In the shared private
data condition, the first two informants received the same ball.
The last informant received a different ball. At the end of the
experiment the participant did not see their own ball and made
their judgments based solely on the informants’ testimonies.
Responses were made on the same 11-point scale as in Experiment 1, changing the names of the urns appropriately.

nario used in previous experiments on information cascades
may not be sufficient to distinguish between how people use
independent testimony over sequential testimony, a limitation
that we address in our second experiment.

Experiment 2: Dissenting informant
The ball-and-urn scenario presented above does not result
in situations where there is a large expected difference between the independent testimony and sequential testimony
conditions. In order to assess whether people are sensitive
to the difference between these two patterns of dependency,
we changed the scenario by having the third informant dissent
from the previous two informants. To give a reason why the
informant would dissent, a single diagnostic ball (either white
or black) was added to each of the two urns. Since each diagnostic ball was present in only one of the two urns, any informant who received the diagnostic ball would know exactly
which urn was used to fill the bag. We also made two other
changes. First, the participant did not receive their own ball,
having to make a judgment based purely on the testimony of
the informants. Second, in the shared private data condition
only the first two informants received the same ball. This was
done so that the dissenter received her own ball, providing an
explanation for why she might dissent.
The model predictions are given in Figure 2(a), for maximizing, and Figure 2(b), for probability matching. The addition of a low-probability diagnostic ball does not substantially
change the model predictions in the independent condition.
However, it makes an important change to the predictions in
the sequential testimony condition, most dramatically in the
maximizing model. The model predicts that the last informant will dissent only if she received a diagnostic ball. Since
she does dissent, she most likely received a diagnostic ball
and so the participant should side with the dissenter over the
majority (a similar but somewhat more subtle effect occurs
for the probability matching model). Finally, in the shared
private data condition, the dissenter probably received a different colored ball than the two informants in the majority.
This provides equal evidence for either urn.

Results and Discussion

Methods
A total of 124 participants were recruited through Amazon
Mechanical Turk. Participants were compensated $0.25 for
their time. They were randomly assigned to one of three experimental groups: the independent condition (n = 41) or the

Ratings were rescaled as in Experiment 1. The mean rescaled
ratings are shown in Figure 2(c). Participants sided with the
majority testimony most in the independent testimony condition, second in the sequential testimony condition, and least
in the shared private data condition. The means and order of
the results are consistent with the probability matching model
predictions, but not the maximizing model predictions. The
probability matching model provides a good fit for the experimental data (Pearson’s r = .94).
We analyzed the effect of condition on participant responses using a one-way ANOVA. The effect of condition
was significant (F(2, 54.3) = 5.561, MSE = 27.13, p <
0.005). We explored the differences between the conditions
using planned t-tests. The difference between the independent testimony and sequential testimony conditions was significant (two sample t-test, t(80) = 3.12, p < .005) as well as
the difference between the independent testimony and shared
private data conditions (two sample t-test, t(81) = 3.16, p <
.001). The difference between the sequential testimony and
shared private data conditions was not significant (two sample
t-test, t(81) = 0.22,p > .82).
The difference between the independent testimony and sequential testimony conditions suggests the learning mechanism that participants use is sensitive to social information
that is shared between informants. The difference between
the shared private data condition and the independent testimony condition supports our conclusion from Experiment 1
that people are sensitive to non-social shared information.
Qualitatively, participants’ performance resembles the
probability matching model more than the maximizing model
used in earlier work on information cascades. However, in
both the sequential testimony and the shared private data con-

1597

ditions participants sided with the majority slightly more than
the probability matching model predicts, suggesting that even
though individuals are able to utilize shared information that
informants use to make their judgments, they may place more
trust in the informants’ testimony. This difference was significant in the Shared Private Data condition (one sample t-test,
t(41) = 2.867, p < .01), but not significant in the sequential
testimony condition (one sample t-test, t(40) = .54, p > .05).

General Discussion
The goal of this research is to determine whether human
social learning is based on a sophisticated strategy that appropriately takes into account dependencies in the behavior
of other people. To answer this question, we developed a
Bayesian model that indicates how patterns of dependency
should affect social learning. The model makes clear predictions about two kinds of dependency – sequential testimony
and shared private data – which we tested through two experiments. Experiment 1 showed that people are sensitive to
shared private data, using a task that has been employed in
previous experiments on information cascades. Experiment 2
showed that people are sensitive to sequential testimony, using a task that is more sensitive to this kind of dependency.
However, in both experiments people’s judgments were influenced by dependency less than they should have been.
Our results have implications for models of cultural evolution and information cascades. For models of cultural evolution, they offer insights into the mechanisms that underlie social learning, and suggest that patterns of dependency
should be taken into account in contexts where agents might
encounter dependent social cues. While models of information cascades typically assume sequential testimony, our results show that people are sufficiently sensitive to patterns
of dependency that information cascades will be even more
probable if it is assumed that informants provide independent
testimony. In addition, the matching model provided a closer
qualitative and quantitative fit to human performance than the
maximizing model. This empirical evidence conflicts with
the assumption that informants maximize their posterior used
in previous work on information cascades (e.g. Bikhchandani
et al., 1992) and helps explain some of the patterns of “errors”
observed in the experiments by Anderson and Holt (1997).
Taken together, our findings suggest that human social
learning mechanisms are fairly sophisticated. People do not
just use simple rule-based imitation strategies. Instead they
are able to integrate their own private information with informants’ testimony, and take into account how each informant decided upon their testimony. This implies that human
cultural evolution is not simply a result of individuals making a trade-off between acquiring their information socially
or through trial-and-error learning, but is instead the result
of complex decisions that draw on beliefs about informants’
sources of information. When learning from testimony, learners are asking themselves the question: “and just how do you
know that?”

Acknowledgments. This work was supported by grant number
IIS-0845410 from the National Science Foundation (NSF), a NSF
Graduate Research Fellowship, and a SURF/Rose Hills Fellowship.

References
Anderson, L., & Holt, C. (1997). Information cascades in the laboratory. The American economic review, 847–862.
Asch, S. E. (1956). Studies of independence and conformity: I.
a minority of one against a unanimous majority1. Psychological
Monographs: General and Applied, 70(9), 1-70.
Bikhchandani, S., Hirshleifer, D., & Welch, I. (1992). A theory of
fads, fashion, custom, and cultural change as informational cascades. Journal of political Economy, 992–1026.
Boyd, R., & Richerson, P. (1988). Culture and the evolutionary
process. University of Chicago Press.
Boyd, R., & Richerson, P. (2005). The origin and evolution of
cultures. Oxford University Press, USA.
Buchsbaum, D., Gopnik, A., Griffiths, T. L., & Shafto, P. (2011).
Children’s imitation of causal action sequences is influenced by
statistical and pedagogical evidence. Cognition, 120(3), 331-340.
Carpenter, M., Call, J., & Tomasello, M. (2005). Twelve- and 18month-olds copy actions in terms of goals. Developmental Science, 8(1), F13-F20.
Cialdini, R., & Goldstein, N. (2004). Social influence: Compliance
and conformity. Annu. Rev. Psychol., 55, 591–621.
Corriveau, K. H., & Harris, P. L. (2010). Preschoolers (sometimes)
defer to the majority in making simple perceptual judgments. Developmental Psychology, 46(2), 437-445.
Corriveau, K. H., Meints, K., & Harris, P. L. (2009). Early tracking
of informant accuracy and inaccuracy. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 27(2), 331–342.
Gergely, G., Bekkering, H., & Kiraly, I. (2002). Rational imitation
in preverbal infants. Nature, 415, 755.
Jaswal, V. K. (2006). Preschoolers favor the creator’s label when
reasoning about an artifact’s function. Cognition, 99, B83-B92.
Jaswal, V. K., & Malone, L. S. (2007). Turning believers into skeptics: 3-year-olds’ sensitivity to cues to speaker credibility. Journal
of Cognition and Development, 8(3), 263-283.
Koenig, M., & Harris, P. (2005). Preschoolers mistrust ignorant and
inaccurate speakers. Child Development, 76(6), 1261–1277.
Laland, K. (2004). Social learning strategies. Learning & behavior,
32(1), 4–14.
Luce, R. (2005). Individual choice behavior: A theoretical analysis.
Dover publications.
Lyons, D., Young, A., & Keil, F. (2007). The hidden structure of
overimitation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
104(50), 19751–19756.
McGuigan, N., Makinson, J., & Whiten, A. (2011). From overimitation to super-copying: Adults imitate causally irrelevant aspects of tool use with higher fidelity than young children. British
Journal of Psychology, 102(1), 1–18.
Meltzoff, A. N. (1995). Understanding the intentions of others:
Re-enactment of intended acts by 18-month-old children. Developmental Psychology, 31, 838-850.
Nielsen, M., & Tomaselli, K. (2010). Overimitation in kalahari
bushman children and the origins of human cultural cognition.
Psychological Science, 21(5), 729–736.
Perreault, C., Moya, C., & Boyd, R. (2012). A bayesian approach to
the evolution of social learning. Evolution and Human Behavior.
Rogers, A. (1988). Does biology constrain culture? American
Anthropologist, 90(4), 819–831.
Shepard, R. (1958). Stimulus and response generalization: Tests of a
model relating generalization to distance in psychological space.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 55(6), 509.
Sobel, D. M., & Corriveau, K. H. (2010). Children monitor individuals’ expertise for word learning. Child Development.
Tenney, E. R., Small, J. E., Kondrad, R. L., Jaswal, V. K., & Spellman, B. A. (2011). Accuracy, confidence, and calibration: How
young children and adults assess credibility. Developmental Psychology, 47(4), 1065-1077.
Vulkan, N. (2000). An economist’s perspective on probability
matching. Journal of Economic Surveys, 14, 101-118.

1598

