UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How Episodic and Working Memory Affect Rule- and Memory-Based Judgments

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2x15t2ch

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Hoffmann, Janina A.
Von Helversen, Bettina
Rieskamp, Jorg

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

How Episodic and Working Memory Affect Rule- and Memory-Based Judgments
Janina A. Hoffmann (janina.hoffmann@unibas.ch)
Bettina von Helversen (bettina.vonhelversen@unibas.ch)
Jörg Rieskamp (joerg.rieskamp@unibas.ch)
Department of Psychology, University of Basel, Missionsstrasse 62a
4055 Basel, Switzerland
Abstract
Making accurate judgments is an essential skill in everyday
life. However, little is known about the basic cognitive skills
required for accurate judgments. Research on judgment and
categorization processes suggests that people rely on various
strategies when making judgments. These strategies differ in
the cognitive abilities they require. Specifically high working
memory capacity may benefit rule-based judgments, whereas
good long-term memory may be crucial for memory-based
judgments. We investigated this hypothesis following an
individual differences approach. 177 participants performed
two judgment tasks that were either best solved by a rulebased or a memory-based strategy. Additionally, we measured
working memory capacity and episodic memory with three
€
tests. Consistent with our hypothesis structural equation
modeling showed that working memory capacity predicted
judgment accuracy in the rule-based task whereas episodic
memory predicted judgment accuracy in the memory-based
task. Apparently, different memory abilities are essential for
successfully adopting different judgment strategies.
Keywords: Judgment and
memory; episodic memory

decision

making;

estimate the price of a shopping basket, for instance, the
shopper may try to estimate the price of each product and
add up all prices. Mathematically, this integration process
can be described with a linear additive model. The criterion
estimate cˆ p of an object p is the weighted sum of the cue
values xpi:
I

cˆ p = k +
€

∑w ⋅ x
i

(1)

pi

i=1

where wi are the cue weights for each cue i and k is a
constant intercept.
In contrast, memory-based strategies assume that people
judge a new object (the probe) by retrieving previously
encountered objects (exemplars) from memory. For
example, when estimating the price of a shopping basket
people may recall how much they spent the last time they
went shopping. The more similar a retrieved exemplar
(previous shopping baskets) is to the probe (current
shopping basket), the more this exemplar influences the
probe’s criterion estimate. If a shopper bought the same
items last time, for instance, he may just recall this price
from memory to estimate the new prize.
This judgment strategy is mathematically described with
an exemplar model (Juslin, Olsson, & Olsson, 2003). To
determine the similarity, first the distance dpj between the
probe p and exemplar j is calculated. This distance is the
summed absolute difference of their cue values xpi and xji on
each cue i, weighted by a sensitivity parameter h.
⎛ I
⎞
d pj = h⎜
x pi − x ji ⎟
(2)
⎜
⎟
⎝ i=1
⎠
These distances are then transformed into similarities
S(p,j) with an exponential decay function (Nosofsky & Zaki,
1998):
−d
(3)
S(p, j) = e pj

working

Long-term memory and working memory are to a varying
degree engaged in many daily activities. On a shopping trip,
for example, people need episodic long-term memory to
remember items on the shopping list. Trying to quickly sum
up the prices of a shopping basket, however, draws upon
working memory. Similarly, everyday judgments, such as
judging the skills of a job candidate or the suitability of an
apartment, may require both working memory and episodic
memory. In this paper, we investigate how memory skills
relate to people’s success in solving judgment tasks.

∑

Multiple Cue Judgments
In multiple-cue judgment tasks, people are asked to
€
repeatedly estimate a continuous criterion such as the price
of a shopping basket based on a number of cues, for
instance the products in the shopping basket. To make such
judgments, recent research suggests that people rely on two
kinds of judgment strategies: rule-based and memory-based
€
strategies (Juslin, Karlsson, & Olsson, 2008; von Helversen
& Rieskamp, 2008).
Rule-based strategies assume that people try to explicitly
abstract the relationship between the cues and the criterion
and integrate this information in a linear additive way. To

To estimate the criterion value cˆ p , the similarities are
weighted with their corresponding criterion values cj and
averaged (Juslin et al., 2003).
J

cˆ p =

J

∑ S(p, j) ⋅ c ∑€S(p, j)
j

j =1

(4)

j =1

Past research suggests that people shift between rulebased and memory-based judgment strategies depending on

€
585

task structure (Juslin et al., 2008; von Helversen &
Rieskamp, 2008). In linear additive judgment tasks, that is
in tasks where the criterion can be approximated by a linear
additive function of the cues, people generally rely on rulebased strategies. In contrast, in multiplicative judgment
tasks, where the criterion can be approximated by a
multiplicative function of the cues, memory-based strategies
are more frequently used (Hoffmann, von Helversen, &
Rieskamp, 2013; Juslin et al., 2008). However, little
attention has been paid to the cognitive abilities these
strategies draw upon and how individual differences in
cognitive abilities influence strategy selection and
performance.

disputed (Knowlton, 1999), leading to a call for more
experimental studies (Ashby & O’Brien, 2005). Taken
together, although some evidence suggests that people
engage in a controlled retrieval process when solving
memory-based judgment tasks, the role of episodic memory
in categorization and even more for judgments is still
unclear.

The Present Study
Our study investigates how episodic and working memory
skills affect judgment performance in rule-based and
memory-based judgments. We test the hypothesis that
judgment accuracy is related to working memory capacity
when people rely on a rule-based judgment strategy.
Likewise judgment accuracy should be related to episodic
memory when people adopt a memory-based judgment
strategy. To test these hypotheses, the participants solved a
linear as well as a multiplicative judgment task. In addition,
we measured participants’ working memory and episodic
memory skills using three different tests.

Memory Processes in Multiple-Cue Judgments
Theories in judgment and categorization propose that rulebased and memory-based judgment strategies build on
different memory abilities. For instance, Ashby and O’Brien
(2005) suggested that executing simple rule-based
categorization strategies requires working memory capacity,
whereas exemplar retrieval involves episodic memory. In a
similar vein, Juslin et al. (2008) argued that cue abstraction
could be conceived as a capacity-constrained sequential
process, whereas memory-based judgment strategies rely on
a controlled retrieval process.
Previous research has often studied how working memory
influences judgment and categorization performance. In line
with a capacity-constrained abstraction process, cognitive
load impairs performance in rule-based categorization tasks
more than performance in implicit information-integration
tasks (Zeithamova & Maddox, 2006). Indeed, cognitive load
may even induce people to shift from a rule-based to a
memory-based strategy suggesting that memory-based
strategies require less cognitive control (Hoffmann et al.,
2013). Yet, some research also suggests that working
memory may play a crucial role in learning in all judgment
tasks. Indeed, performance in a range of judgment tasks can
be predicted by measures of working memory and
intelligence (Weaver & Stewart, 2012). Similarly,
Lewandowsky (2011) found that high working memory
capacity benefitted learning in rule-based as well as
memory-based categorization tasks. Thus, it is unclear
whether high working memory capacity only benefits rule
abstraction processes or whether it benefits performance in
all kinds of judgment tasks.
Research relating episodic memory to judgment
performance is scarce. Exemplar models predict a
relationship between recognition and categorization and,
indeed, have successfully modeled both recognition and
categorization performance (Nosofsky, 1988). Consistent
with a controlled retrieval process, the instruction to learn
all exemplars by heart improves performance in a difficult
memory-based judgment task (Olsson, Enkvist, & Juslin,
2006). Also, memorization of single exemplars enhances
recognition of these exemplars in a later recognition test
(Palmeri & Nosofsky, 1995). The importance of episodic
memory for category learning, however, has been severely

Participants
177 participants (113 female, MAge = 24.1, SDAge = 6.2)
were recruited at the University of Basel. Participants
received a participation fee of 20 CHF per hour (approx. 22
US-$) and an additional bonus in the judgment tasks (M =
10.3, SD = 2.4). One subject was excluded from the analysis
because he guessed in the judgment tasks.

Automated Working Memory Span Tasks
Working memory span tasks were designed to measure both
storage and processing of information in working memory
(Redick et al., 2012). In working memory span tasks,
participants process one set of stimuli while remembering
another set of stimuli. For instance, in each trial of the
operation span task, participants first see a simple equation.
After they have solved the equation and given the answer,
they see the first letter that has to be remembered.
Subsequently, another equation is presented and another
letter has to be remembered, until the set size (the number of
presented letters) is reached. Finally, participants are asked
to recall the letters in the order of their appearance. Trials
with different set sizes are randomly interspersed, with each
set size repeated three times. All span tasks were taken from
Unsworth et al. (2009) and translated to German.
Reading Span In the reading span participants judged the
plausibility of a sentence while remembering letters. Set size
varied from 3 to 7.
Operation Span Participants were asked to solve
mathematical equations while remembering letters. Set size
varied from 3 to 7.
Symmetry Span Participants judged the symmetry of a
chessboard picture while remembering the position of
squares in 4 x 4 matrix. Set size varied from 2 to 5.

586

Verb Recognition We selected 40 verbs with 5 to 7 letters
from the Hager and Hasselhorn database (1994) rated high
on imagery and concreteness. Participants learned half of
the verbs for 3 s each. After a retention interval of 2 minutes
participants indicated whether they recognized the 40 verbs
from the learning phase by classifying them as old or new.€

toxic a bug was on a scale from 0 to 50. The stimuli for the
two cover stories consisted of pictures of either bugs or
comic figures. These bugs and comic figures varied on four
different continuous cues. The bugs varied on the length of
their legs, their antennae, and their wings and the number of
points on their back. The comic figures had different sizes
of their ears and their nose, a different number of hairs and
stripes on their shirt. These visual features were randomly
assigned to the cues.
Both tasks consisted of a training phase and a test phase.
During the training phase, participants learned to estimate
the criterion values for 25 exemplars. In each trial,
participants first saw a picture of a bug or a comic figure
and were asked to estimate its criterion value. Afterwards
they received feedback about the correct value, their own
estimate and the points they earned. The training phase
ended after 10 blocks. In the subsequent test phase,
participants judged 15 new probes four times, but did not
receive any performance feedback.
To motivate participants to reach a high performance,
participants could earn points in every trial. The number of
points they earned was a truncated quadratic function of the
deviation of their judgment j from the criterion y:
Points = 20 − ( j − y) 2 7.625
(7)
At the end of the judgment tasks, the points earned were
converted to a monetary bonus (1500 points = 1 CHF). In
addition, participants earned a bonus of 3 CHF if they
reached 80% of the points in the last training block.

Judgment Tasks

Procedure

Episodic Memory Tasks
We measured episodic memory with three different tasks: a
free recall task with pictures, a cued recall task with
numbers, and a recognition test of verbs.
Picture Free Recall We selected 20 pictures from a picture
database (Rossion & Pourtois, 2004) that had high ratings
on imagery and concreteness. Each picture was presented
for 3 s on the screen and participants were asked to
remember them. After a retention interval of 2 minutes
participants recalled the pictures.
Cued Number Recall We assessed cued number recall with
a computerized version of the Cued Number Recall task
from the BIS 4 (Jäger, Süß, & Beauducel, 1997). 15 pairs of
a two- and a three-digit number were presented for 10 s each
on the screen. After a retention interval of 2 minutes
participants saw the cued number pair as well as four threedigit distractors and had to indicate which three-digit
number was initially presented together with the two-digit
number.

€

Participants solved both a linear and a multiplicative
judgment task. In the linear judgment task, we expected
participants to use a rule-based strategy; that is, their
judgments should be well described by a linear regression
model. In contrast, in the multiplicative judgment task,
participants should rely on a memory-based strategy (Juslin
et al., 2008).
In the linear judgment task, the criterion y was a linear,
additive function of the cues and could thus be perfectly
predicted by a rule-based strategy:
y = 4 c1 + 3 c2 + 2 c3 + c4
(5)
where c1 reflects the most important cue according to its cue
weight. Each cue value varied between 0 and 5.
In the multiplicative judgment task the function
generating the criterion y included a multiplicative
combination of the cues:
y = ( 4 c1 + 3c 2 + 2c 3 +c 4 + 2c1 c 2 c 3 + c 2 c 3 c 4 ) 8.5 (6)
Because of the interacting cues, abstracting linear additive
rules does not help solve the task. Therefore, people should
switch to exemplar-based strategies and store the objects
and the associated criterion values in exemplar memory
(Juslin et al., 2008).
We used two different cover stories for the linear and the
multiplicative multiple-cue judgment task. In the linear
judgment task, participants judged how well a comic figure
performed in a game on a scale from 0 to 50. In the
multiplicative judgment task, participants estimated how

Participants solved all tasks on one day with half an hour
break between the two sessions. The tasks were presented in
the same order to each participant. In the first session,
participants began with the linear judgment task, moved on
to the operation span, solved the verb recognition and the
picture free recall task, and finally completed the symmetry
span. The second session started with the multiplicative
judgment task. Afterwards, participants completed the
reading span and finally the cued number recall task.

Results
Task Performance
We first analyzed participants’ average performance in the
memory and the judgment tasks (see Table 1 for descriptive
statistics). In the working memory tasks, we used the partial
credit score, the sum of items recalled in the correct
position, as the dependent variable (Conway et al., 2005). If
a participant recalled all items correctly, he achieved a score
of 75 in the operation span and the reading span and a score
of 42 in the symmetry span. Overall, participants recalled
more items in the operation and the reading span than in the
symmetry span, replicating normative data (Redick et al.,
2012). In the episodic memory tasks, we used the
percentage of correctly recalled items as the dependent
variable. On average, participants remembered a higher

587

Linear task
7%

Table 1: Descriptive statistics for the memory and the
judgment tasks.
Task
M
SD
Skew
Kurt
Operation Span
57.7 12.3
-1.2
1.7
Reading Span
57.1 12.2
-1.8
2.3
Symmetry Span
29.6
7.4
-0.6
0.1
Recognition (% recalled)
.87
.09
-0.7
0.5
Cued Recall (% recalled)
.42
.19
0.2
-0.2
Free Recall (% recalled)
.46
.17
0.1
-.01
Linear Judgment
Last training block
6.0
2.2
0.9
1.9
Test (Mean)
5.4
1.8
0.7
0.8
Multiplicative Judgment
Last training block
5.2
1.8
0.7
0.6
Test (Mean)
5.0
1.8
1.0
0.8
Note: Skew = Skewness; Kurt = Kurtosis

Multiplicative task
< 1%
16%

77%

33%

66%
Linear Model
Baseline Model
Exemplar Model

Figure 1. Strategy classification of participants in the linear
and the multiplicative judgment task.
modeling approach. Structural equation modeling allows
detecting relationships between latent constructs while
correcting for the distinct variance of the measures (for a
review see Tomarken & Waller, 2005).
We first estimated two separate measurement models for
memory and judgment abilities. These models were later
combined into one structural model. All models were
estimated using a maximum likelihood estimator with
robust standard errors (MLR) because descriptive data
indicated some deviations from multivariate normality. The
reported χ2 difference tests were performed using the
Satorra-Bentler scaled χ2 values (Satorra & Bentler, 2001).

percentage of items correctly in the recognition task than in
the cued recall or the free recall task.
Learning performance in the judgment tasks was
measured with the root mean squared deviation (RMSD)
between participants’ judgments and the correct criterion in
the last training block. The learning performance showed
that on average participants learned the judgment tasks quite
well. However, the multiplicative judgment task was learned
more easily than the linear judgment task. Could
participants generalize this good performance to judgments
for new items in the test phase? We measured judgment
performance in the test phase as the RMSD between the
correct criterion and participants’ mean judgments; that is,
the judgment for each probe averaged over the four
presentations in the test phase. Performance for new items
in the test phase was comparable to performance in the
training phase indicating that participants successfully
generalized their performance to new items.
To determine which judgment strategy described
participants’ judgments best, we fitted a linear regression
model (see equation 1) and an exemplar model (see
equations 2-4) to participants’ judgments in the last three
training blocks and predicted participants’ mean judgments
in the test phase (von Helversen & Rieskamp, 2008). We
compared those models to a baseline model that simply
estimated participants’ mean judgment. Participants were
classified as following the strategy that led to the smallest
RMSD between model predictions and participants’ mean
judgments in the test phase. As shown in Figure 1 the
judgment process of the participants was highly task
sensitive: In the linear judgment task most participants were
best described by a linear model, whereas in the
multiplicative judgment task, most participants were best
described by an exemplar model, χ2(2) = 95.3, p < .001.

Measurement Models for Memory Abilities To measure
memory abilities, we hypothesized that episodic memory
and working memory capacity can be conceived of as two
separate latent constructs that may be correlated (Brewer &
Unsworth, 2012). We first fitted a two-factor latent variable
model to the memory data assuming no correlation between
working memory and episodic memory. All working
memory span tasks loaded on one latent factor, while all
episodic memory tasks loaded on a second latent factor.
Because the residual variance of the manifest variable
recognition was estimated to be negative, we fixed it to 0.
This model fitted reasonably well, χ2(10) = 16.11, p = .10,
CFI = .95, RMSEA = .06, SRMR = .08. Allowing working
memory capacity and episodic memory to correlate did not
significantly improve model fit, χ2(9) = 14.85, p = .10, CFI
= .95, RMSEA = .06, SRMR = .06. Finally, a one-factor
model assuming a correlation of 1 between episodic
memory and working memory capacity fitted worse than the
two-factor model, χ2(10) = 128.2, p < .001, CFI = .01,
RMSEA = .26, SRMR = .16. In sum, memory abilities in
our study were best described by assuming two separate,
uncorrelated latent constructs for working memory and
episodic memory.
Measurement Models for Judgment Abilities To find out
whether performance depends on the judgment task, we
fitted three different measurement models for judgment
abilities to judgment performance in the four test blocks of
the linear and the multiplicative judgment task. We first
estimated a two-factor latent variable model assuming no

Measurement Models
To understand which memory abilities underlie human
judgment processes we followed a structural equation

588

.33

Operation Span

.57

Reading Span

.66
.58

.67

Test Block 1

.41

Test Block 2

.27

Test Block 3

.21

Test Block 4

.27

.74

Test Block 1

.45

.85

Test Block 2

.27

Test Block 3

.31

Test Block 4

.31

.77

.82
Working
Memory

-.23

Linear
Judgment

.86
.89
.85

Symmetry Span
.25

0

Recognition

.97

Cued Recall

1
.18
.24

.94

Episodic
Memory

-.26

Free Recall

Multiplicative
Judgment

.83
.83

Figure 2: Structural equation model relating working memory capacity and episodic memory to judgment
performance in the test phase. All loadings and correlations are standardized.
χ2(77) = 107.48, p = .01, CFI = .97, RMSEA = .05, SRMR
= .10. Indeed, setting the weight from working memory to
linear task performance to 0 decreased model fit, Δχ2(1) =
4.10, p = .04. Likewise, setting the weight from episodic
memory to multiplicative task performance to 0 decreased
model fit, Δχ2(1) = 12.67, p < .001. Thus, while judgment
accuracy in rule-based tasks was predicted by working
memory capacity, judgment accuracy in memory-based
tasks was predicted by episodic memory.

correlation between the factors. One factor predicted
judgment performance in the linear judgment task, the
second factor predicted judgment performance in the
multiplicative judgment task. This model did not describe
the judgment data well, χ2(20) = 38.54, p < .01, CFI = .975,
RMSEA = .07, SRMR = .11. Allowing a correlation
between the judgment factors improved model fit, χ2(19) =
28.24, p = .08, CFI = .99, RMSEA = .05, SRMR = .03.
Finally, we estimated a one-factor model assuming a
correlation of 1 between judgment performance in the linear
and the multiplicative task. This one-factor model could not
account for the judgment data, χ2(20) = 362.14, p < .001,
CFI = .54, RMSEA = .31, SRMR = .22. In sum, a twofactor model with correlated factors captured performance
variations within the judgment tasks best. This suggests that
although performance in rule-based and memory-based
judgment tasks is correlated, distinct processes may account
for performance differences between the tasks.

Discussion
Our study sheds light on which memory abilities people rely
when making judgments, a topic that has received little
attention in the literature. As the first study linking memory
abilities to performance in judgment tasks, we found that
working memory capacity predicted judgment accuracy in a
linear task, whereas episodic memory predicted judgment
accuracy in a multiplicative task. Furthermore, participants
relied on a rule-based strategy in the linear task and a
memory-based strategy in the multiplicative task. In line
with theories of judgment and categorization (Ashby &
O’Brien, 2005; Juslin et al., 2008) this suggests that the two
strategies draw upon different memory abilities.
Our results suggest that working memory capacity only
predicted judgment performance in rule-based judgment
tasks. This result seems to contradict research linking
working memory capacity to performance in rule-based and
memory-based categorization tasks (Lewandowsky, 2011).
One reason for these diverging results may be that our study
focused on the differences between judgment tasks, namely
the covariance that was not explained by a common
judgment factor. Yet, Lewandowsky concentrated on the
similarities among categorization tasks. Another reason for
these diverging results may be that our study focused on the
generalization to new items instead of the learning process.

Linking Memory Skills to Judgment Performance
Next, we investigated the link between memory abilities and
judgment performance. Based on our prediction, we
estimated a structural model (depicted in Figure 2) relating
working memory capacity to judgment performance in the
linear task and episodic memory to judgment performance
in the multiplicative task. This model provided a good fit to
the data, χ2(75) = 89.93, p = .12, CFI = .98, RMSEA = .03,
SRMR = .08. Allowing a correlation between working
memory capacity and judgment performance in
multiplicative tasks and a correlation between episodic
memory and judgment performance in linear tasks did not
significantly improve the fit of the structural model, χ2(73)
= 85.27, p = .15, CFI = .99, RMSEA = .03, SRMR = .06.
Also, a structural model assuming that memory abilities do
not predict judgment abilities could not account for the data,

589

Indeed, in Lewandowsky’s study a learning parameter was
strongly related to working memory capacity. Thus, while
learning to apply a rule-based or a memory-based judgment
strategy may require working memory capacity, only the
correct execution of a rule-based judgment strategy may
draw upon working memory capacity. Executing a memorybased judgment strategy may instead involve episodic
memory skills.
Few studies have examined the link between episodic
memory and judgment abilities. Our study clearly shows
that episodic memory is related to performance in memorybased judgments. This result highlights the importance of
episodic memory for judgments and resonates well with
theories suggesting that exemplars are stored and
deliberatively retrieved from long-term memory (Juslin et
al., 2008). It is also in line with research arguing for
exemplar processes in categorization (Nosofsky & Zaki,
1998). Beyond that, our results highlight that a multitude of
cognitive skills, not only working memory, is involved
when people make judgments. Shifting the focus to longterm memory may open up new research questions and
applications. For instance, memory-based judgment
strategies may be more vulnerable to forgetting and
interference. Knowledge about storage and retrieval
processes in judgment may thus help improving judgments
ranging from simple daily judgments such as estimating the
price of a shopping basket to professional judgments such as
judging the quality of a job candidate.

Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 132, 133–
156.
Knowlton, B. J. (1999). What can neuropsychology tell us
about category learning? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 3,
123–124.
Lewandowsky, S. (2011). Working memory capacity and
categorization: Individual differences and modeling.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 37, 720–738.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1988). Exemplar-based accounts of
relations between classification, recognition, and
typicality. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 14, 700–708.
Nosofsky, R. M., & Zaki, S. R. (1998). Dissociations
between categorization and recognition in amnesic and
normal individuals: An exemplar-based interpretation.
Psychological Science, 9, 247–255.
Olsson, A.-C., Enkvist, T., & Juslin, P. (2006). Go with the
flow: How to master a nonlinear multiple-cue judgment
task. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 32, 1371–84.
Palmeri, T. J., & Nosofsky, R. M. (1995). Recognition
memory for exceptions to the rule. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 21, 548–568.
Redick, T. S., Broadway, J. M., Meier, M. E., Kuriakose, P.
S., Unsworth, N., Kane, M. J., & Engle, R. W. (2012).
Measuring working memory capacity with automated
complex span tasks. European Journal of Psychological
Assessment, 28, 164–171.
Rossion, B., & Pourtois, G. (2004). Revisiting Snodgrass
and Vanderwart's object set: The role of surface detail in
basic-level object recognition. Perception, 33, 217-236.
Satorra, A., & Bentler, P. M. (2001). A scaled difference
Chi-square test statistic for moment structure analysis.
Psychometrika, 66, 507–514.
Tomarken, A. J., & Waller, N. G. (2005). Structural
equation
modeling:
Strengths,
limitations,
and
misconceptions. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 1,
31–65.
Unsworth, N., Redick, T. S., Heitz, R. P., Broadway, J. M.,
& Engle, R. W. (2009). Complex working memory span
tasks and higher-order cognition: A latent-variable
analysis of the relationship between processing and
storage. Memory, 17, 635–654.
von Helversen, B., & Rieskamp, J. (2008). The mapping
model: A cognitive theory of quantitative estimation.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 137, 73–
96.
Weaver, E. A., & Stewart, T. R. (2012). Dimensions of
judgment: Factor analysis of individual differences.
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 25, 402–413.
Zeithamova, D., & Maddox, W. T. (2006). Dual-task
interference in perceptual category learning. Memory &
Cognition, 34, 387–398.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a grant from the Swiss
National Science Foundation (100014_130192/1).

References
Ashby, F. G., & O’Brien, J. B. (2005). Category learning
and multiple memory systems. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 9, 83–89.
Brewer, G. A., & Unsworth, N. (2012). Individual
differences in the effects of retrieval from long-term
memory. Journal of Memory and Language, 66, 407–415.
Conway, A. R. A., Kane, M. J., Bunting, M. F., Hambrick,
D. Z., Wilhelm, O., & Engle, R. W. (2005). Working
memory span tasks: A methodological review and user’s
guide. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 12, 769–786.
Hager, W., & Hasselhorn, M. (Eds.). (1994). Handbuch
deutschsprachiger Wortnormen. Göttingen: Hogrefe.
Hoffmann, J. A., von Helversen, B., & Rieskamp, J. (2013).
Deliberation’s blindsight: How cognitive load can
improve judgments. Psychological Science.
Jäger, A. O., Süß, H.-M., & Beauducel, A. (1997). Berliner
Intelligenzstruktur-Test. Form 4. Göttingen: Hogrefe.
Juslin, P., Karlsson, L., & Olsson, H. (2008). Information
integration in multiple cue judgment: A division of labor
hypothesis. Cognition, 106, 259–298.
Juslin, P., Olsson, H., & Olsson, A.-C. (2003). Exemplar
effects in categorization and multiple-cue judgment.

590

