UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How pitch accents and focus particles affect the recognition of contextual alternatives

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7pg8g2wq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Gotzner, Nicole
Spalek, Katharina
Wartenburger, Isabell

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

How pitch accents and focus particles affect the recognition of contextual
alternatives
Nicole Gotzner (nicole.gotzner@hu-berlin.de)
Katharina Spalek (katharina.spalek@staff.hu-berlin.de)
Department of German Language and Linguistics, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin,
Dorotheenstr. 24, 10117 Berlin, Germany

Isabell Wartenburger (isabell.wartenburger@uni-potsdam.de)
Department of Linguistics, Universität Potsdam
Karl-Liebknecht-Str. 24-25, 14476 Potsdam, Germany

contrast item, suggesting that contrastive pitch accents
enhance memory for the accented element itself as well as
for its alternatives. The rejection of unmentioned items
(lures), however, was not affected by the pitch accent
manipulation.
According to the contrast representation account
advocated by Fraundorf et al. (2010) listeners use
contrastive accents to encode additional information about
items in the contrast set. So, on this account, processing
our example sentence Mary passed the exam with an
L+H* accent would encourage the inference that other
students did not pass the exam.

Abstract
Listeners are sensitive to contrastive alternatives in online
language comprehension (e.g., Braun & Tagliapietra, 2010).
Such alternatives play a crucial a role in the definition of
particles like only which have been found (i) to facilitate recall
of contextual alternatives (Spalek, et al., in revision) and (ii) to
hamper the rejection of unmentioned alternatives (Gotzner et al.,
in preparation). The present study investigated the impact of
combining a contrastive accent with a particle on memory for
contextual alternatives. The results revealed that L+H* accents
(contrastive) facilitate recognition of a contextual alternative to
the accented item compared with H* accents (non-contrastive).
Adding either the particle only or also to the L+H* accent slows
probe recognition relative to a condition with bare L+H* accent.
Hence, while contrastive accenting directly increases the
salience of alternatives in a listener’s mental model, focus
particles lead to an initial processing cost.

Focus Particles
Another means of expressing such a contrast is provided
by certain lexical items. Placing the focus particle only in
front of the utterance (Only) Mary passed the exam results
in a similar effect, since the particle expresses that the
focused element Mary but not the alternatives lead to a
true assertion (cf. König, 1991).
In a previous delayed recall study (Spalek, Gotzner &
Wartenburger, in revision), we explored the impact of
focus particles on memory for contextual alternatives. We
exposed participants to dialogs that introduced a set of
three elements and either contained the particle only, even
or no particle (control condition) in the critical sentences.
The pitch accent type on the element mentioned in the
critical sentences, the focused element, was constant
across conditions (H* on the accented syllable). The
results showed that memory for the alternatives to the
focused element improved in the presence of the particles
only and even relative to the control condition.
In a subsequent study (Gotzner, Spalek & Wartenburger, submitted), we tested the effects of focus particles
on the recognition of contextual alternatives and rejection
of unmentioned alternatives after exposure to an item. We
found that participants were slower in rejecting
unmentioned alternatives to a focused expression in case
the utterances contained the particles only, even or also.
This inhibitory effect was present when we enumerated a
set of alternatives in the context and when the stimuli only
mentioned a semantic category. We concluded that focus
particles encourage richer encoding of the alternative set

Keywords: contrastive alternatives, L+H* pitch accent,
focus particles, recognition memory.

Introduction
Certain pitch accents convey the information that a
statement is contrastive (cf. Pierrehumbert & Hirschberg,
1990). For example, when uttering the sentence Mary
passed the exam with a specific intonation contour on the
noun Mary (L+H* according to the ToBI system), a
speaker expresses that Mary passed the exam in contrast
to other persons in the discourse.
There is evidence that contrastive intonation contours
lead to the activation of alternative expressions to the
contrastively-stressed elements. For example, Braun and
Tagliapietra (2010) found that a sentence produced with
an L+H* accent on the critical word initiated priming of
contrastively-related targets to the critical words in a
lexical decision task (e.g., ANTENNA facilitated satellite).
There is also evidence that prosody influences longterm memory for contextual alternatives. Fraundorf,
Watson and Benjamin (2010) compared contrastive
(L+H*) and non-contrastive (H*) pitch accents in
discourses that contained a contrast set with two elements.
After exposure to all stimuli, participants had to perform a
recognition memory task. The results revealed that the
L+H* accent increased both the number of hits to correct
statements, and the number of correct rejections of the

2434

which leads to better recall of the mentioned alternatives
particle when tested at a longer delay (cf. Spalek et al., in
revision).
Apart from the fact that focus particles and pitch
accents belong to a different formal linguistic level, the
two have a different impact on the status of inferences
about the alternatives, according to linguistic theory (see
for example Krifka, 2007 for an overview). The
exhaustivity inference (that the statement does not hold
for the alternatives) drawn from a contrastive accent is an
implicature which arises through pragmatic reasoning. By
definition, implicatures are cancellable inferences and it
follows that an utterance with an L+H* accent has a
reading that does not exclude the alternatives. On the
contrary, the exclusion of alternatives is part of the
conventional meaning of only, i.e. lexically encoded (cf.
Rooth, 1992). In accordance with these theoretical
distinctions, experimental work has shown that German
participants draw fewer exhaustive inferences from
sentences that bear intonational focus than from sentences
with only (cf. Onea & Beaver, 2011).1
In contrast to exclusive particles, additive particles like
also and even presuppose that a statement holds for at
least one of the alternatives and express that the
proposition holds for the focused element as well (cf.
König, 1991). Yet this linguistic difference did not affect
the retrieval of alternatives in the experiments we carried
out so far. Therefore, we concluded that the observed
effects were driven by the fact that focus particles must
refer to a set of alternatives by their semantic definition.
To sum up, there is evidence that focus particles
facilitate recall of contextual alternatives (Spalek et al., in
revision) and hamper the rejection of unmentioned
alternatives when the focused element carries an
unmarked accent (Gotzner et al., in preparation).
Contrastive pitch accents lead to the activation of
contextual alternatives (cf. Braun & Tagliapietra, 2010)
and have been found to facilitate long-term memory for
focused elements and contextual alternatives, but not for
unmentioned items (cf. Fraundorf et al., 2010).

that by choosing a particular structure, the speaker wishes
to make the alternatives particularly salient for the hearer.
Hence, it might be that highlighting the alternatives from
multiple sources leads to additive effects.
Participants in our experiment were presented with
short discourses that mentioned two referents and one of
them was mentioned again in the second critical sentence,
either pronounced with (a) an unmarked accent (H*) or
(b) a contrastive one (L+H*). In addition to the L+H*
accent, condition (c) contained the exclusive particle only
and (d) the inclusive particle also. After exposure to the
stimuli, participants were asked to recognize the
alternative to the noun mentioned in the critical sentences
(not the mentioned noun itself).
Additionally, we introduced a delay manipulation that
was based on a study by Glenberg, Meyer and Lindem
(1987). In their experiment, they found that manipulating
the associatedness of a referent and an object affected the
mental model listeners constructed from a discourse only
after a delay of one filler sentence but not if no filler
sentence was presented before test. Since we were not
interested in priming effects (cf. Braun & Tagliapietra,
2010), but in the participants’ mental model
representation of the contrast set, we administered a
similar probe recognition task with a delay manipulation
like Glenberg et al. (1987). Accordingly, we hypothesized
that the effects only unfold if probe recognition is tested
at a delay of one filler sentence.
We predicted that the L+H* accent will facilitate
recognition of contextual alternatives compared to the H*
accent. Concerning the comparison between the L+H*
condition and the particle conditions there are three
alternative predictions: If accenting and particles rely on
the same cognitive mechanism, we should obtain the
same magnitude and time-course of the effects. If,
however, contrastive accenting and particles are additive,
we expect that participants are fastest at recognizing the
focus alternative in the two conditions with particles (i.e.,
(c) and (d)) since they contain a particle in addition to the
contrastive accent. Alternatively, it might be that pitch
accents are used immediately to encode information about
the alternatives (see for example Watson et al., 2008)
while such effects take more time to unfold in the case of
focus particles. According to this hypothesis, we expect
the L+H* accent to facilitate the recognition of
alternatives after one intervening filler sentence whereas
the particles should not cause any positive effects at this
point of time.

The Current Experiment
The aim of the current study was to investigate whether
focus particles and contrastive pitch accents rely on the
same cognitive mechanism and whether combining the
two induces additive effects. That is, if the presence of
alternatives is indicated by a contrastive pitch accent in
addition to a focus particle, does the accessibility of
contextual alternatives increase even further?
In non-tonal languages like English and German focus
can be marked prosodically and by specific lexical and
syntactic structures (cf. Krifka, 2008) while the different
types of focus marking are not mutually exclusive.
Following the proposal in Calhoun (2009), we assume

Methods
Participants
A total of 24 native speakers of German (15 female and 9
male, mean age 26.1 years, age range 22-30) were
recruited from a participant pool at the Institute of
Psychology of Humboldt University and were paid 7

1

Note, however, that accent type (contrastive vs. unmarked)
was not manipulated in this study.

2435

a yes response3. A set of 50 filler items was constructed
and 60 items from another experiment were added to
counterbalance yes- and no-responses and to prevent
subjects from concentrating on the nouns in subject
position. Half of the filler items consisted of 2 sentences
and half of them consisted of 3 sentences.

Euros in compensation. None of them reported any vision
or hearing difficulties.

Materials
We created 80 discourses that followed the structure of
the example presented in (1). The first sentence
introduced two referent nouns. The second critical
sentence mentioned one of the referents again and
described an action. As described above, we introduced a
delay variable: On 50 percent of the trials, an additional
filler sentence (in brackets in the example) was presented.
The filler sentence always consisted of five words and
contained a pronoun keeping the referent foregrounded
(cf. Glenberg et al., 1987). Across stimuli, the order of
mention of the two referents was counterbalanced.

Figure 1: Mean pitch contour of the accented syllable
across H* and L+H* conditions.

(1) Der Richter und der Zeuge verfolgten die
Beweisführung. (Nur/Auch) der RICHTER/der
Richter glaubte dem Angeklagten. (Er verkündete
das Urteil.)
Approximate translation:
The judge and the witness followed the argument.
(Only/also2) the JUDGE/the judge believed the
defendant. (He announced the verdict.)
The critical sentences were recorded in four versions in
each of the conditions (H*, L+H*, only and also) by a
female research assistant who was trained on focus
accentuation and had a middle German accent close to the
standard variety of German. After recording, the utterance
with the L+H* accent (b) was cross-spliced into the two
utterances with only (c) and also (d). Thereby, conditions
(b), (c) and (d) all contained the L+H* accent and all
prosodic characteristics of the sentences were held
constant. In total, there were 8 experimental conditions: 4
focus conditions crossed with the delay of either 0 or 1
filler sentence.
Acoustic analyses were performed to compare the
accented syllable of the H* (a) and L+H* (b) conditions.
Figure 1 shows the pitch contour of the accented syllable
averaged over all items. Additionally, acoustic analyses
were performed to compare the duration, maximum pitch,
pitch difference and intensity across accent type
condition. Table 1 summarizes the means, standard
deviations and results of repeated measures ANOVAs
(within item) comparing these acoustic parameters. The
analyses revealed that the syllable with L+H* accent had
a higher pitch excursion, a greater pitch difference,
intensity and duration.
The critical trials always probed recognition of the
alternative to the noun in subject position, hence requiring

Table 1: Summary of acoustic analyses. Table shows
mean values (SE) by accent type and results of F-tests.
Parameter

H

L+H*

F(1,79)

Duration (s)

0.17
(0.01)
195.1
(4.5)
33.6
(4.5)
69.1
(1.9)

0.23
(0.01)
226.9
(6.2)
56.3
(6.2)
73.3
(2.2)

129.1

pvalue
0.001

19.7

0.001

8.5

0.005

208.0

0.001

Maximum Pitch
(Hz)
Pitch difference
(Hz)
Intensity (dB)

Eight experimental lists were created by rotating
through the focus (H*, L+H*, only and also) and delay
conditions (0 vs. 1 filler sentence) according to a Latin
square design. Hence, there were 10 items per condition
within a given list. Each list further contained the 110
filler items resulting in a total of 190 items. The lists were
pseudo-randomized for each participant so that no more
than three filler or test trials were presented in a row and a
given focus condition appeared only twice in a row.

3
In our previous experiments, we tested the alternatives to the
elements in object position. Yet Fraundorf et al. (2010) did not
find any differences in the effects across syntactic position
(subject vs. object).

2

The German translation equivalent of the sentences is
felicitous even though also in the English example cannot
occur in this syntactic position.

2436

Figure 2: Mean RT across conditions (delay 0). Error
bars indicate standard errors.

Procedure
The experiment started with an instruction displayed on
the computer screen. The instructions told the participants
that they will be presented with auditory stimuli and that
their task is to decide whether a subsequently presented
word had appeared in the story or not. They were also
asked to respond as accurately and as quickly as possible
and to listen to the exact wording. After the instructions
were displayed, participants performed four practice trials
and were allowed to adjust the sound volume.
Each trial began with the onset of a central fixation
cross displayed for 700 ms followed by a discourse that
was presented over headphones. Each of the sound files
included 2000 ms of silence after the last sentence. On 50
percent of the trials, the audio files contained an
additional filler sentence. Probes appeared after the entire
audio files, that is, either after the critical sentence (50%,
delay 0) or after the filler sentence (50%, delay 1).
Each probe was administered visually with an offset of
50 ms and the participants indicated whether it had
appeared in the discourse by button press. The probe word
stayed on the screen until a response was made. If
subjects did not respond within a time frame of 4000 ms,
the trial counted as a miss. With an offset of 500 ms the
next trial was initiated. Every 33 trials, subjects had a
short break. In total, there were 6 experimental blocks.
The entire experiment lasted about 50 minutes.

Figure 3 displays the mean RTs broken by focus
condition at delay 1. The final mixed effects model for
this data set contained the same factors and it had a log
likelihood of 206.1 (803 observations, 27 excluded). The
analysis revealed that the alternatives were recognized
slower in the condition with H* accent in comparison
with the L+H* accent (t=2.8, SE=.03, p<.01). Hence, the
L+H* accent facilitated recognition of the alternatives.
Compared to the condition with L+H* accent, the two
particles only and also led to an inhibitory effect (L+H*
vs. only: t=2.0, SE=.03, p<.05; L+H* vs. also: t=2.5,
SE=.03, p<.05). Thus, adding a focus particle to the
contrastive pitch accent led to slower probe recognition
times. Table 3 summarizes estimates, confidence intervals
and p-values extracted by Markov chain Monte Carlo
sampling (10000 runs).

Results
Trials in which subjects responded incorrectly (5.9 %) or
that were more than 2 standard deviations from a
participants’ mean reaction time (4.9 %) were excluded
from the analysis. Accuracy was similar across
conditions. The log-RTs were analyzed with a series of
mixed models following the procedure described in
Baayen (2008). Since we had different predictions for the
two delay conditions, we fit two separate models for the
two data sets.
Figure 2 shows the mean RTs and standard errors
across focus conditions at 0 delay. The final statistical
model contained the log-RTs, focus condition and trial as
fixed factors, subjects, items as random factors and
random slopes for trial. We chose the condition with the
L+H* accent as reference level, since the two conditions
with particles contained an L+H* accent as well and since
we were interested in whether the particles caused effects
in addition to the contrastive accent. The final model had
a log likelihood of 222.6 with 828 observations (27
further observations were excluded based on the
distribution of residuals and fitted values). Regarding the
focus conditions, the model did not reveal any reliable
differences across conditions (p>.2; see Table 2 for model
details). This is in line with Glenberg et al. (1987) who
argued that effects of foregrounding in a mental model
should only be observable after a delay of 1 filler
sentence.

Figure 3: Mean RT across conditions (delay 1). Error bars
indicate standard errors.

2437

Table 2: Summary of the mixed model (at delay 0).
Estimate
Intercept
(L+H*)
H*
only
also
Trial

Upper
bound
6.56

pMCMC

6.47

Lower
bound
6.37

0.04
0.002
0.01
-0.002

-0.02
-0.05
-0.04
-0.003

0.09
0.06
0.07
-0.0015

0.18
0.94
0.72
0.0001

maintained facilitation in the condition with L+H* accent.
Hence, it seems that initially the activation of contrastive
alternatives does not differ across H* and L+H*
conditions. At a delay of one filler sentence in our
experiment, activation of the alternatives decays in the H*
case (as was also argued by Husband & Ferreira, 2012)
and augments in the L+H* case.
This pattern of results confirms the assumption by
Watson et al. (2008) that the interpretational domains of
the two accent types overlap to some extent in that H* are
compatible with contrastive and non-contrastive referents
but that L+H* favor contrastive referents. The data are
hence in line with the claim that H* and L+H* accent do
not necessarily form two discrete categories but that the
latter is the more contrastive variant of the former.
The L+H* pitch accent made the contrastive alternative
more accessible at a delay of one filler sentence. In
contrast, adding either an exclusive or inclusive particle
led to a processing cost. It is conceivable that the
observed pattern is due to a facilitatory effect by the
contrastive accent combined with an inhibitory effect of
the particles since the conditions with particles contained
exactly the same (cross-spliced) recorded utterance.
Such inhibitory effects are consistent with the results of
our probe recognition experiments where we found that
participants were slower in rejecting unmentioned
alternatives to a focused expression in case the utterances
contained the particles only, even or also (vs. no particle).
This inhibitory effect even showed when we explicitly
introduced a set of three elements. Hence, we concluded
that the particles led to the activation of further
unmentioned alternatives in a listener’s mental model
slowing the participant’s ability to indicate that these
elements had not appeared in the story.
Interestingly, Fraundorf et al. (2010) did not find any
effects of contrastive pitch accents on the rejection of
unmentioned items (so-called lures). Despite the
differences between the experiments, it might be that
contrastive accents only affect the representation of items
in the explicit contrast set while focus particles lead to the
retrieval of further alternatives accounting for the
inhibitory effects observed here (as well as in Gotzner et
al., in preparation).
In conclusion, it seems that focus particles lead to an
initial processing cost. The positive effect on the retrieval
of contextual alternatives that we have observed in our
delayed recall experiments (Spalek et al., in revision)
seems to need time to develop. By contrast, pitch accents
are used immediately by a listener to encode information
about the alternatives (see also Watson et al., 2008 for a
similar argument). Yet further research is needed to
establish whether focus particles and contrastive pitch
accents cause additive effects at longer delays or whether
the effects level out. It should also be noted that the
different experimental paradigms, probe recognition and
delayed recall, impose quite different task demands.

0.0001

Table 3: Summary of the mixed model (at delay 1).
Estimate
Intercept
(L+H*)
H*
only
also
Trial

Upper
bound
6.49

pMCMC

6.39

Lower
bound
6.3

0.08
0.06
0.07
-0.01

0.03
-0.002
0.01
-0.004

0.14
0.11
0.13
-0.002

0.006
0.05
0.02
0.0001

0.0001

Discussion
The study reported here extends earlier findings on the
role of pitch accents in the retrieval of contextual
alternatives in two ways. First, it indicates that the L+H*
accent not only induces priming or activation of
contrastive alternatives (cf. Braun & Tagliapietra, 2010)
but it also benefits recognition memory for contextual
alternatives. Second, it shows that such effects already
unfold after one intervening filler sentence (in comparison
with the long delay introduced by Fraundorf et al., 2010).
The task we used required participants to construct a
mental model from the auditory discourses they were
presented with and they had to recognize a referent that
was an alternative to the element mentioned in the critical
sentences. In accordance with Glenberg et al. (1987), the
effects we observed only evolved after the inclusion of
one filler sentence. This finding also provides evidence
that there were no general processing differences across
conditions. For example, it might be argued that the
conditions with particles contained one more word
compared to the other conditions leading to increased
processing times. However, we would expect to see the
same differences across conditions at 0 delay if this were
the right explanation of the effects.
Looking at the recognition times in the H* and L+H*
conditions across delays, it becomes obvious that
recognition performance was equal at 0 delay. By
comparison, the H* slowed and the L+H* facilitated
recognition times at delay 1. This pattern of results is in
line with a recent study by Husband & Ferreira (2012).
They found that contrastively-stressed as well as neutral
prime words primed contrastive targets at an immediate
SOA. At a longer SOA, the contrastive associates only

2438

Structure”. Isabell Wartenburger is supported by the
Stifterverband für deutsche Wissenschaft (ClaussenSimon-Stiftung). We thank Janine Klose and Vinzent
Müller for carrying out the experiments and assistance
with sound recording. We are also grateful to two
anonymous reviewers for helpful comments.

Concerning the theoretical account of the observed
effects, the comparison between the different types of
focus particles leads to an interesting conclusion.
Following the original formulation of the contrast
representation account, we should expect the particle only
to pattern along with contrastive accents but not the
particle also since Fraundorf et al. (2010) speculate that
contrastive accents create a representation of what did not
happen. However, across all our experiments we found
that both exclusive (associated with an exhaustive
meaning) and additive particles affected memory for
information-structural alternatives to a similar extent.
Additive particles like also do not have an exhaustive
meaning but they presuppose that a statement holds for at
least one alternative. Yet what exclusive and additive
particles have in common is that both require a salient set
of alternatives.
In light of the findings, we propose a modification of
the contrast representation account: We assume that
focus-sensitive particles (and contrastive accents) make
reference to an alternative set and highlight its relevance
for interpretation (see also Krifka, 2007 for a recent
definition of focus). This creates a salient representation
of the alternatives and makes them more easily retrievable
on the long run. In immediate recognition (after one
intervening filler sentence), adding a particle to a
contrastive accent hampers the participants’ ability to
match a probe with the alternatives encoded in the mental
model, as observed in the present experiment.
The fact that the facilitatory effects of contrastive
accenting already unfolded after one intervening sentence
whereas the particles led to a processing cost at this point
of time could either indicate that the underlying cognitive
mechanisms are different in the two domains or simply
that prosody is integrated at an earlier point of time.
However, further research is required to determine the
exact cognitive mechanisms that underlie the observed
effects. Taken together with the results of Gotzner et al.
(submitted), the inhibitory effects of the particles might
indicate that listeners activate further unmentioned items
interfering with the recognition of the explicitlyintroduced alternatives. Such effects might be absent in
the case of contrastive accents considering the results of
Fraundorf et al. (2010).

References
Baayen, R. H. (2008) Analyzing Linguistic Data. A
Practical Introduction to Statistics Using R. Cambridge
University Press.
Braun, B., & Tagliapietra, L. (2010). The role of
contrastive intonation contours in the retrieval of
contextual alternatives. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 25, 1024-1043.
Calhoun, S. (2009). What makes a word contrastive?
Prosodic, Semantic and Pragmatic Perspectives. In D.
Barth-Weingarten, N. Dehé and A. Wichmann (eds.)
Where prosody meets pragmatics: Research at the
interface (Studies in Pragmatics 8, 53-78), Bingley.
Fraundorf, S.H., Watson, D.G. & Benjamin, A.S. (2010).
Recognition
Memory
reveals
just
how
CONTRASTIVE contrastive accenting really is.
Journal of Memory and Language, 63, 367-386.
Glenberg, A., Meyer, K. & Lindem, K. (1987). Mental
models contribute to foregrounding in text comprehension. Journal of Memory and Language, 26, 69-83.
Gotzner, N., Spalek, K. & Wartenburger, I. (in
preparation). The impact of focus particles on the
rejection of contrastive alternatives.
Husband, E.M. and Ferreira, F. (2012). Generating
contrastive alternatives: activation and suppression
mechanisms. Talk given at the 25th CUNY Conference
on Human Sentence Processing, New York, NY.
König, E. (1991). The Meaning of Focus Particles: A
Comparative Perspective. London: Routledge.
Krifka, M. (2007). Basic notions of Information Structure.
In Féry, C., Fanselow, G., & Krifka, M. The notions of
information structure. Interdisciplinary Studies on
Information
Structure.
(ISIS),
6.
Potsdam:
Universitätsverlag Potsdam.
Onea, E. & Beaver, D. (2011). Hungarian focus is not
exhausted. In Ed Cormany, Satoshi Ito & David Lutz
(eds.), Proceedings of semantics and linguistic theory
(SALT) 19, 342–359.
Pierrehumbert, J., & Hirschberg, J. (1990). The meaning
of intonational contours in the interpretation of
discourse. In P. Coehn et al. (Eds.), Intentions in
communication. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Rooth, M. (1992). A theory of focus interpretation.
Natural Language Semantics, 1, 75-116.
Spalek, K., Gotzner, N. & Wartenburger, I. (in revision).
Not only the apples: focus particles influence memory
for information-structural alternatives.
Watson, D., Gunlogson, C., & Tanenhaus, M. (2008).
Interpreting pitch accents in on-line comprehension: H*
vs. L+H*. Cognitive Science, 32, 1232-1244.

Conclusion
We showed that contrastive pitch accents enhance the
recognition of contextual alternatives after auditory
exposure to an item. The combination of a contrastive
pitch accent and a focus particle, in turn, led to an
inhibitory effect. We therefore suggest that the facilitatory
effects of focus particles on the retrieval of contextual
alternatives (cf. Spalek et al., 2013) take time to develop.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the DFG as part of the
Collaborative Research Centre SFB 623 “Information

2439

