UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How to improve on Quinian bootstrapping - a response to nativist objections

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9h96q3jp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Author
Jakab, Zoltan

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

How to improve on Quinian bootstrapping – a response to nativist objections
Zoltan Jakab (zoltan.jakab@barczi.elte.hu)
Institute for Psychology of Special Needs, Loránd Eötvös University, Ecseri út 3
1097 Budapest, Hungary

often sound intuitively plausible.2 Hence Fodor’s early view
on concept acquisition, according to which primitive
concepts cannot be learned, and so they must be innate. In
Fodor (1990, 1998) this idea is supplemented by argument
that most of our concepts are primitive, giving rise to radical
concept nativism.
More recently, Fodor (2008) has found this conclusion
much too weak, and formulated a stronger version according
to which the obstacle to concept learning is not that most
concepts are primitive, but rather that compositionality
cannot increase the expressive power of cognitive systems.
Very roughly, expressive power is the range of concepts and
hypotheses (theories, conceptions) that a given
representational system could formulate, or express, given
its primitive symbols (concepts) and rules of combination.
As we currently understand cognition, any case of learning
seems to be underlain by some mental process that exploits
compositionality: forming complex mental representations
out of simpler ones governed by rules, plus adjusting certain
parameters of the primitives.3 If this is how cognition
operates, then all that learning can achieve is the
manifestation of what’s born with us: we actually come to
express what we are innately capable of expressing. In
formal logic, building new complexes out of primitives
(symbols and rules of combination) does not count as
increase in expressive power – only adding certain new
primitives4 does. The same restriction seems to apply in the
realm of mental representation, if indeed compositionality is
the only game in town for cognitive theorizing.
In sum, since no cognitive mechanism that we can
currently think of transcends compositionality, and
compositionality cannot increase expressive power beyond
one’s innate endowment, no cognitive mechanism can
increase the expressive power of mental representational

Abstract
Quinian bootstrapping is Susan Carey's solution to Fodor’s
paradox of concept learning. Carey claims that contrary to
Fodor’s view, not all learning amounts to hypothesis testing,
and that there are ways in which even primitive concepts can
be learned. Recently Georges Rey has argued that Carey’s
attempt to refute radical concept nativism is unsuccessful.
First it cannot explain how the expressive power of mental
representational systems could increase due to learning.
Second, both Fodorian circularity charges and Goodmanian
problems of indeterminacy apply to Carey’s examples of
Quinian bootstrapping. I argue that Carey’s examples of
bootstrapping can be amended to escape Fodorian and
Goodmanian objections. I suggest some ways to improve on
our models of concept learning to this end. I also argue that
skill learning is the way for mental representational systems
to increase their own expressive power, that is, to enrich their
conceptual repertoire beyond what compositionality alone
affords.
Keywords: Quinian bootstrapping;
learning; expressive power

nativism;

concept

Introduction: Fodor’s paradox
Jerry Fodor’s famous argument for concept innateness has
taken different forms. According to its early version (Fodor,
1975, 1981), all learning is hypothesis testing, and to
formulate a hypothesis one needs to possess all the concepts
that the hypothesis involves. Therefore, in the course of
learning one can seek for evidence supporting or
undermining a hypothesis, but formulating hypotheses will
never result in the acquisition of new concepts. In order to
work, this argument needs an immediate qualification. Some
concepts are structured, whereas others are not; they are
primitive. At any rate, this distinction holds on Fodor’s own
representational theory of mind which endorses
compositionality. Complex concepts arise as combinations
of primitives (or simpler complexes). For example, WHITE
RAVEN1 is a complex concept which has two constituents:
WHITE and RAVEN; the two constituents are related by a
conjunction. Now if one wishes to test the hypothesis that
White ravens are quite rare, and it is conceded that forming
WHITE RAVEN out of WHITE and RAVEN counts as
learning a new concept, then evidently hypothesis formation
makes room for concept learning. For more complex cases
the idea that compositionality affords concept learning does

2

For example, learning the idea of MOVING THE KING TWO
SQUARES TOWARDS A ROOK ON THE PLAYER'S FIRST
RANK, FOLLOWED BY MOVING THE ROOK ONTO THE
SQUARE OVER WHICH THE KING CROSSED (i.e.,
CASTLING in chess) may strike one as a case of bona fide
concept learning.
3
Many examples support this generalization from the formation
of perceptual prototypes to the construction of schemas, scripts,
mental models, and propositional representations. As Carey (2009)
says, it is a truism that all learning involves building new
representations from antecedently available ones.
4
I.e., adding new operators, predicates, etc. with content that no
combination of the earlier set of primitives could represent. One
example is adding the modal operators ’possibly’ and ’necessarily’
to classical propositional logic.

1
Concepts here are denoted by the name of their referent typed
in upper case letters.

639

systems. Now if genuine concept learning requires increase
in expressive power, then no cognitive mechanism that we
can currently think of amounts to genuine concept learning
– only triggering of some sort. Thus the challenge is: supply
a theory of cognition which can somehow pass beyond the
limits of ordinary compositional systems, and is a candidate
for expressive power increase. This seems like a challenge
that is next to impossible to meet. This is how I understand
Fodor’s claim (2008) that it is true and a priori that the
whole idea of concept learning is per se confused.
In the rest of this paper I first look at Susan Carey’s
(2009) response to Fodor’s challenge. Then I briefly present
Georges Rey’s (2012) critique of Carey’s views. Finally, I
suggest some ways to address Rey’s and Fodor’s critique
and reinstate concept learning roughly along the lines Carey
proposed.

Nativist objections redrawn
Rey (2012) argues that even though Carey supplies valuable
data on how children in fact acquire concepts, she fails to
meet Fodor’s nativist challenge. This is so because she
conflates certain semantic issues, namely how expressive
power might increase, with epistemological ones, that is,
cognitive accounts of mental representation and its
development. In logic, expressive power increases only if
new primitives (e.g., operators, predicates) are added to a
logical system – primitives which cannot be expressed by
combinations of the antecedently available ones. The
development of mental representation, on the other hand,
includes episodes in which new complexes are formed out
of certain innately available primitives. So how could QBS
increase the expressive power of mental representational
systems?
In addressing this issue, Rey points out an interesting
parallel between Quinian bootstrapping and Ramsey
sentences. Ramsey sentences are logical formulas that serve
to define certain new theoretical terms by specifying their
relations to already given old terms. A Ramsey sentence is a
huge formula that is a conjunction of all the claims made by
some theory. This conjunction involves all the relevant
concepts: old ones, and new ones which are to be
theoretically defined by the entire formula. The Ramsey
sentence contains a unique existential quantification of each
of the new terms. For example, on certain varieties of
functionalism about the mind, types of mental states are
characterized by the relations that they exhibit to other states
(mental states, stimuli, and behaviors). Here the old terms
are those of stimuli and behaviors; the new ones are those of
mental states. For instance, the mental state of hunger is
elicited by certain bodily conditions, it tends to evoke
thoughts about food and food-seeking, and food-seeking
behavior (unless some higher-order motivational states like
the desire to lose weight cancel that behavioral effect out).
Ramsey sentences could also be formed about theories in
other domains of science.
According to Rey, this way of introducing new terms is
reminiscent of Quinian bootstrapping. As we have seen,
QBS consists in introducing some new set of empty
placeholder symbols together with the relations in which
they stand to one another, then gradually filling up the
placeholders with content. The analogy between Ramsey
formalism and QBS may not be perfect, as only the former
assumes that the meaning of the newly introduced
theoretical terms is exhausted by their relations to other
terms. Rey then suggests that even if Ramsey sentences
cannot capture the format of mental representation, they can
at least capture its content. Mental representation probably
does not have the format of Ramsey sentences, but some
Ramsey sentences might have content equivalent to
conceptual representations in the mind.
Ramsey-sentences can even capture the general type of
content-enrichment that arises from locking to new
environmental kinds. Simply adding a rigidifying operator
(Kaplan, 1978) to the logical devices utilized by Ramsey

Quinian bootstrapping
Susan Carey (2009) makes the following claims about
concept acquisition. First, some of our concepts are innate
and modular in origin, whereas the majority of our concepts
are constructed out of the innate resources and originate
from the explicit knowledge systems (roughly, domain
general central systems). Second, the newly constructed
concepts have more expressive power than the innate
system. Third, Carey suggests a mechanism of acquisition
for the second set of concepts that is allegedly more
powerful than ordinary compositionality based on formal
logic. This mechanism is called Quinian bootstrapping
(hereafter QBS), and a number of examples of it are
supplied throughout Carey’s book. The general scheme of
QBS is that in trying to understand some new ideas (e.g.,
fractional numbers, or density as mass per volume), children
first form an ordered set of empty placeholders (”mental
symbols”) which are then gradually filled up with relevant
content as a result of analogical reasoning. Empirical
evidence for transition from an initial to a more powerful set
of concepts involves within-child consistency of
performance over a wide range of relevant tasks, and
observations that the acquisition of the new set of concepts
is difficult. That is, initially children try to assimilate the
new terms to their earlier concepts – for instance, they take
numerals to be quantifiers of some sort.
Carey’s answer to Fodor’s argument in particular is that
QBS constitutes concept learning, because it does not
consist in construction from antecedently available concepts
using the machinery of compositional semantics alone. The
newly bootstrapped concepts are definitional primitives in
Carey’s view, therefore they cannot arise from logical
construction. Carey takes this line of argument to undermine
Fodor’s claims that (i) all learning mechanisms reduce to
hypothesis formation and testing, and that (ii) the relevant
hypotheses must be formed in terms of available concepts
via compositional semantics. In addition to the details she
herself provides, Carey endorses other proposals that
primitive concepts can be learned (Margolis, 1999; Margolis
& Laurence, 2002).

640

occurs in four dimensions’! Analogies may help in causing
the manifestation of a concept, but it’s hard to see how
they’d be sufficient for the bringing out the possession of
one.” Thus it seems that nothing short of innately possessing
concepts can result in their manifestation. We still cannot
see a non-circular account of concept construction that can
also handle the inherent indeterminacy in induction.

sentences would capture the reference-fixing aspect of
cognitive architecture. Kaplan’s dthat operator has the
following interpretation: dthat F := the unique thing that is F
in the actual world, but not in all possible worlds, where F is
some non-rigid role concept. For example, ’watery stuff’
picks out H2O in the actual world (but not in all possible
worlds). ’dthat watery stuff’ designates H2O – the actual
filler of the watery-stuff role – in every possible world. This
is also the semantic function of Fodorian conceptual
primitives like WATER: according to Fodor, the concept
WATER refers to the very natural kind that happens to fill
the watery stuff role on Earth in our world. Therefore these
dthat expressions can be equivalent in content (if not
equivalent in format) to referring conceptual primitives. The
question now is, may dthat expressions as reference fixers
increase the expressive power of a representational system
into which they are introduced? Rey notes that this is a
purely logico-semantic issue which is crucial for resolving
the nativism debate, still empirical evidence concerning
concept acquisition appears irrelevant to it.
Rey still acknowledges that some form of QBS, or the
introduction of new referring primitives, might increase the
host system’s expressive power. However, currently we
cannot see how this could happen, because Carey’s solution
cannot adequately handle Fodorian problems of circularity
and Goodmanian worries of indeterminacy.5 Rey’s
argument for this claim is based on one of Carey’s key
examples, the acquisition of NATURAL NUMBER. On
Carey’s account, the crucial step of induction in this process
is when the child notices that the numerals name successive
sets each of which has one more member than the previous
one (Carey, 2009; Rey, 2012). This noticing, however,
could not happen without tokening the concept ONE MORE
THAN, aka SUCCESSOR, which is the very essence of the
concept NATURAL NUMBER. Without tokening
SUCCESSOR the child could generalize in a number of
other ways when seeing the sets in question, never arriving
at the proper meanings of the numerals. Thus Carey’s bestelaborated example of Quinian bootstrapping is still subject
to both Fodorian and Goodmanian worries.
Rey also supplies some examples to argue that known
cases of analogical reasoning (a crucial process in QBS) are
subject to the same objections. He says in his footnote 13:
“Or consider the bewildering analogy often provided in
introductions to General Relativity, in terms of a rubber
sheet, whose shape is of course ordinarily deformed by
rolling onto it a heavy metal ball. ’The curvature of fourdimensional space-time is just the same,’ we’re told, ’except
that there’s no rubber sheet, no gravity and the deformation

Getting out of the circle
In this section I propose a slightly amended, non-circular
account of bootstrapping SUCCESSOR, trying to save
Carey’s original account. I shall also point out some ways to
handle Goodmanian worries associated with the same
concept. Then I suggest one example of analogical
reasoning in order to provide an existence proof that
analogies play a role in concept learning, and not just
triggering. Following these examples, I shall argue that
some forms of procedural learning, namely the acquisition
of certain skills is necessary for learning new referring
concepts, and this kind of learning is essential for increasing
expressive power in human minds. Finally, I briefly discuss
Fodor’s new nativist argument outlined in the Introduction.

Bootstrapping SUCCESSOR
Step 1. Imagine that a child is playing with toy horses and
riders; she has a bunch of both, and she is trying to mount
exactly one rider on the back of each horse. Two general
outcomes are possible: (i) each horse has a rider, and each
rider is sitting on a horse (ii) there remain horseless riders,
or riderless horses. Suppose that when (i) happens it makes
the child happy giving her a feeling like “it’s all nice and
complete”. So (i) is a Good Case. On the other hand, (ii)
leaves the child with a mild frustration, as the pairing
activity cannot be finished – this is a Bad Case. Thus a
Good Case is one where the pairing activity can be
completed, and there remain no unpaired objects in either
set.
Step 2. Suppose that the child, on carefully observing a
Good Case, notices two possible groupings. One is that all
members in each group (e.g., horses, riders) look alike; the
other is that two different objects (a horse and a rider)
constitute a pair. Looking alike is judged on the basis of
perceptual similarity; but the immediate question is, does
the child need to be born with PAIR, in order to proceed
with the second recognition? The answer is no: let us make
a little detour to see how PAIR might be bootstrapped.
Here we take for granted something like Margolis and
Laurence’s account of primitive concept acquisition
(Margolis, 1999; Laurence & Margolis, 2002). The first step
in bootstrapping PAIR is to take two generic kind-concept
frames, and fill into them the two perceptual prototypes
(horses and riders, in our case). I take it that such generic
concept frames have two placeholders: one for perceptual
information (I call this placeholder the P-slot), the other for
abstract information, represented by other concepts (A-slot).
For any particular concept, these slots may have a varying
amount of information in them, from minimal to very rich.

5

Fodor’s circularity problem has been described above. In
specifying the meaning of some concept via a hypothesis, we must
understand and use the very concept of which we formulate the
hypothesis (Fodor, 1990, 1998). Goodman’s problem of induction
is that given a body of empirical data, there are infinitely many
ways to inductively generalize from it, and learning theories need
to explain how we choose our preferred ones (Goodman &
Putnam, 1983).

641

adults’ constructions do in fact proceed in many different
directions, forming a lot of representational complexes.
There is a lot of search going on in the vast logical space of
compositional representation, but many of the constructs are
soon dropped as useless – either as a result of social
influence, or in an effort to understand what is going on in
the environment. Some constructs, however get promoted.
For an example, imagine that Daddy and little Victor are
playing a board game. At some point, little Victor wants to
know who has more game pieces on the board. As a matter
of fact, Daddy has six blue ones, whereas little Victor has
eight red ones. Little Victor stubbornly thinks that the
proper way to count is 1,2,3,4,2,2,2,2, (repeating 2 ad
infinitum). He notices that Daddy’s set of pieces maps onto
2, and so do his ones, therefore he tentatively concludes that
both of them have the same number of pieces. But he also
has the impression that the blue and red pieces are different
in number. He manages to prove this by pairing them up,
producing a Bad Case. Meanwhile, Daddy is vehemently
arguing that he is doing his counting in the wrong way, and
offers a different system. Now unless little Victor is no
smarter than the present prime minister of Hungary, he will
quickly realize that something has gone wrong with his
system of counting. So he switches to the one proposed by
Daddy, and resolves the inconsistency. Very similar stories
could be told about learning to play chess, and a number of
other cases; note that this solution is quite close to
Goodman’s original one, namely entrenchment (Goodman
& Putnam, 1983).

Suppose that in the horses and riders case, the A-slot of both
concepts initially contains only the core cognition concept
OBJECT. What distinguishes the two concepts is the
perceptual information in their P-slots. In order to represent
a particular pair of objects, the two concepts need to be
linked by means of association. In the present case this is
based on the fact that the two were manipulated together
(one in the child’s left hand, the other in the right, etc.). To
obtain the generic concept PAIR from context-dependent
representations of particular object pairs, we need
abstraction which in our case takes the form of feature
elimination. While forming representations of different pairs
of objects on different occasions, the child notices that there
are varying as well as constant features in these
representations. That there are two concept frames (i.e., two
objects connected in experience) is the constant part; P-slot
contents, and the experiences that set up the associative
connections may vary. Thus PAIR will be the abstract
schema TWO CONNECTED OBJECTS (i.e., two generic
kind concept frames linked by association).
We can now return to SUCCESSOR. In Step 3 the child
notices that the Good Cases consist of pairs only, whereas
the Bad Cases contain leftover single entities for which
pairing cannot be finished. Once again a move of feature
elimination is needed: for being a Good Case, the quantity
of pairs does not matter. Quantity of pairs may be
represented by the analog magnitude system, so there is no
threat of circularity: we do not need NATURAL NUMBER
to account for GOOD CASE, for instance.
Step 4. Suppose that the child does further experiments
with some Good Cases, trying to find out how to turn a
Good Case into a bad one. She discovers that adding
pairless objects of one of the two kinds will do. She then
notes the minimum effort to spoil a Good Case: adding
exactly one object (horse or rider, as in our example). The
concept ONE is available from set-based quantification, so
we have still not closed Fodor’s circle.6 To summarize, the
recipe for obtaining SUCCESSOR is this: take a Good Case,
spoil it with the minimum effort. Disassemble the pairs;
form two groups of the two kinds of objects. Now the kind
group that was added an extra item a moment ago is the
successor of the other (redo the pairing if you forget which
one is which). At the end, MINIMALLY SPOILED GOOD
CASE will serve as SUCCESSOR.
Let us now turn to Goodmanian worries. The question is,
what cognitive factor is shepherding mental construction in
this particular direction, given that there are so many other
possible ways to assemble structures from representational
primitives? Perhaps the directing forces are the innate
concepts PAIR and SUCCESSOR, lurking in the
background? That need not be the case. Children’s and

Analogical reasoning
I declare up front that at present I do not have a
bootstrapping story for CURVATURE OF FOURDIMENSIONAL SPACE. I can only show, using a much
simpler example, that analogical reasoning may indeed be
an important means of actually learning, and not just
triggering, a new concept. Here is my story. The carburetor
was invented by two Hungarians, Donát Bánki, and János
Csonka. According to an anecdote, a key step in the process
happened when Csonka was walking by a florist in a busy
boulevard of Budapest. The lady was using her spray bottle
to water her flowers. Csonka saw the event, and
immediately realized that that was the way to manage fuel
introduction into the cylinders of internal combustion
engines (instead of evaporating gasoline by engine heat, as
was done in some early motors). This is a fairly simple, yet
powerful analogy: the recipe is, replace water by gasoline,
and flowers by steel cylinders, and you pretty much got the
carburetor. So we can meaningfully claim that feeding the
engine with gas is like using a spray bottle – only there is no
spray bottle.
This solution, however, does not generalize to the concept
of four-dimensional space. An important difference between
the carburetor and the 4D-space cases is that all by itself the
image of a steel ball rolling on a rubber sheet may not give a
physics student the crucial insight into the target concept;
this image may simply be an initial intuition pump, or even

6
Note also that actions like coupling, or noticing what takes
minimum effort are pretty close to a sensorimotor vocabulary. I
suggest no return to empiricism, still it is worth noticing that
sensorimotor activity might play some mediating role in
bootstrapping mathematical concepts. To this extent Piaget’s view
of development may be correct.

642

just a funny attention-grabber. I presume that a convincing
account of how to learn FOUR-DIMENSIONAL SPACE
will be much more complex than that of learning
CARBURETOR; still we seem to have an existence proof
that analogies may contribute to genuine learning.
For another example, why suppose that LIGHT BULB
must be innate, given that learners can construct this
concept somewhat similarly to how Edison constructed the
light bulb itself? It is a matter of accumulating experience to
realize that white hot metals may serve as light sources
especially if they don’t melt, don’t burn, and don’t set your
house on fire. Satisfying these constraints was the result of a
long cultural development, and an obvious example of skill
acquisition. The crown was put on by the inventor, but he
was far from being the only one to contribute. And while the
relevant skills are possessed only by some expert workers,
the basic principle can be understood by virtually anyone.

environment. In this sense, there is no increase in their
mind’s expressive power at all.
Here is my response to this argument. Referring is an
ability; it is not a logical construct. If you have the ability to
refer to Fs, then some mental symbol of yours carries
information about Fness. Information carried about Fness is
a semantic issue, whereas the mechanism or ability that
secures the locking and thereby endows the symbol with
content belongs to metasemantics. As such, it is not
captured by logical formalism. The distinction between
skills or procedural knowledge on the one hand, and factual
knowledge on the other, is a familiar idea in philosophy.
Putnam (1981) argued that logical formalism can never
unambiguously determine its own interpretation. However,
the referential grounding of symbols in human minds
reduces interpretational indeterminacy. It has also been
argued that procedural knowledge does not reduce to factual
knowledge captured by logical formalism or statements in
natural language (Carroll, 1895; Winch, 1990; see also
Lewis, 1990).
Keeping semantics and metasemantics separate is quite
important. Metasemantic factors are the sources of mental
(representational) content, thus candidates for a source of
increasing expressive power. Semantics alone cannot
account for the origin of mental content. Metasemantics
does that, and a metasemantic account of how mental
content arises may well involve psychological mechanisms
– for example, skill leaning.
Some examples of perceptuo-motor skills that I have in
mind are the following.
(1) The cultural development of artifacts. The example of
light bulbs above is a case in point: the creation of new
artificial kinds comes with the invention of new conceptual
primitives.
(2) Deference. Learn to communicate with experts, ask
for information. Is this ring made of gold or brass? Is that
animal an insect or a crustacean? By gaining relevant
information, you can ground new concepts.
(3) Actions. Learn or invent new types of action, and call
them dances, martial arts, singing, etc.
(4) Theoretical concepts. This is admittedly the most
difficult case, since on current views in philosophy of
science theoretical concepts are not introduced by skill
learning in the first place. Rather, they are formulated on the
basis of earlier theories, and scientists’ creativity. For
example, scientists first inferred that electrons must exist (an
exercise of already possessed inference skills), then they
developed methods to detect them (detection of electrons
was a newly constructed skill routinely applied later), and
not the other way around. I agree that a lot more needs to be
said about theoretical concepts to make a skill-based
account of concept learning more plausible. One way to
address this problem is to develop further the ideas of
concept construction supplied above, and applying them to
the acquisition of theoretical concepts. The kind of
constructivism that I have proposed so far is Piagetian in

Reference and ramsification
Recall Fodor’s new argument for nativism, according to
which (P1) compositionality cannot increase expressive
power, and (P2) expressive power increase is the hallmark
of concept learning, therefore (C) from the principle of
compositionality no account of concept learning can be
derived. What supports this argument – in particular, what
supports (P1)? Fodor and Rey suggest the following
analogy. Just like in formal logic, where compositionality
cannot increase expressive power, in mental representation
systems (MRS) combination cannot increase expressive
power either. To this analogy the immediate reply is, minds
are not exactly like systems of formal logic – not even on
Fodor’s own view. Next, however, Rey contends that no
matter how the format of MRS differs from formal logic,
contentwise it can be captured by logical formalism. Now
the argument becomes, IF the content of MRS can be
captured by logical formalism, AND compositionality in
logical formalism cannot increase expressive power, THEN
the kind of compositionality that obtains in MRS cannot
increase expressive power either, never mind the differences
in format. This is a giant leap. It needs support, which Rey
provides by (i) reiterating the circularity objection and
Goodmanian worries, trying to show that they undermine
Carey’s examples of QBS, and (ii) arguing that not even
newly acquired primitive concepts can increase the
expressive power of MRS. We have seen that via (i), the
general argument leads us back to particular learning
accounts: if learning theories can take care of circularity and
Goodmanian indeterminacy objections, that will undermine
Fodor’s and Rey’s nativist arguments. In defending (ii), Rey
makes two points. First, conceptual role is essential for
concept possession; a primitive concept that causally
covaries with some environmental kind, but is causally or
inferentially detached from other concepts does not increase
the expressive power of its host MRS. Second, consider
Twin-Earth thought experiments: any denizen of Earth or
Twin Earth has the power to represent either XYZ or H2O,
even before one of these substances appears in their

643

spirit, but a possible way to develop it further is to consider
certain neoconstructivist approaches (e.g., Johnson, 2009).
In his paper, Rey distinguishes between functioning
psychological expressive power, and semantic expressive
power; he argues that learning can increase the former, but
not the latter. Here is how this distinction is to be
understood. Rey thinks that learning and innateness are not
incompatible. Hypothesis testing and experience may select
from innately specified concepts and hypotheses, similarly
Chomsky’s principles and parameters view of the
acquisition of grammar. Experience may tell us which of the
innately available concepts of ours are useful in
understanding our environment at many different levels of
description, ranging from social to microphysical.
I am defending a view stronger than this one: as I have
argued, there exist ways in which even the semantic
expressive power of human minds may increase. I agree
with Carey that many of our concepts arise in ontogenesis as
a result of bootstrapping from experience and a smaller set
of innate concepts. Therefore they are not innate in the sense
Rey thinks they are. New logical constructions out of
antecedently given concepts do not increase expressive
power, but new logical constructions which also contain
new referring primitives inexpressible in antecedent
vocabulary do so, at least according to the standards of
formal logic. Moreover, as I have argued, skill learning
paves the way to learning new referring primitives.
Let me add one more note on the skill-based account
presented here. Fodor would say that even if you learn the
skill to refer to Fs, this does not entail that you learn the
concept F – you may simply trigger an innate concept by
learning a skill.
What motivates this distinction between learning the
relevant skill whereas only triggering the concept? In
Fodor’s view, what keeps this distinction compelling is that
no particular skill is necessary for possessing the concept F.
The criterion of concept possession is locking a mental
symbol to its extension, and locking is multiply realizable
(Fodor, 1998). Here is my reply. The idea that referring is
an ability can easily accommodate multiple realizability:
there are many different skills that can ground a given
concept. My concept ELM is a deferential one at present,
but I could become an expert at recognizing trees in the
future. One needs to learn some of a range of relevant skills
in order to come to possess a particular referring concept.
Finally, note that Fodor’s new, expressive-power-based
argument for nativism is not nearly an a priori one. As we
have seen, this argument takes us straight back to particular
theories of concept learning when we check the support for
its premises. I think the really serious problems of concept
learning remain Fodor’s circularity objection, Goodmanian
indeterminacy, and Fodor’s other question of how concept
learning can be anything other than hypothesis formation.
Solving these problems takes a lot of work: we need to
devise detailed accounts of the acquisition of particular
concepts, or types of concepts. But that is just what Susan
Carey started doing in her book.

Acknowledgments
An earlier version of this paper was presented at the
Budapest Workshop in Philosophy of Mind and Cognitive
Science at Central European University, May 14, 2012, as a
commentary on Georges Rey’s talk. I wish to thank the
organizers Katalin Balog and Barry Loewer for the
invitation, and Georges Rey for critical discussion. I am also
grateful for the valuable commentaries by the four
anonymous reviewers of this submission.

References
Carey, S. (2009). The origin of concepts. New York NY:
Oxford University Press.
Carroll, L. (1895). What the Tortoise Said to Achilles.
Mind, 4, 278–80.
Fodor, J. A. (1975). The Language of Thought. Cambridge
MA: Harvard University Press.
Fodor, J. A. (1981). The present status of the innateness
controversy. In Representations: philosophical essays on
the foundations of cognitive science. Cambridge MA:
MIT Press.
Fodor, J. A. (1990). A theory of content and other essays.
Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Fodor, J. A. (1998). Concepts: Where cognitive science
went wrong. New York NY: Oxford University Press.
Fodor, J. A. (2008). LOT 2: The Language of Thought
Revisited. New York NY: Oxford University Press.
Goodman, N., & Putnam, H. (1983). Fact, fiction, and
forecast. Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.
Johnson, S. P. (2009). Neoconstructivism. New York, NY:
Oxford University Press
Kaplan. D. (1989). Demonstratives. In J. Almog, J. Perry, &
H. Wettstein (Eds.), Themes from Kaplan. New York NY:
Oxford University Press.
Laurence, S., & Margolis, E. (2002). Radical concept
nativism. Cognition, 86, 25-55.
Lewis, D. (1990). What experience teaches. In G. W. Lycan
(Ed.), Mind and Cognition. Hoboken, NJ: WileyBlackwell
Margolis, E. (1999). How to acquire a concept. In E.
Margolis & S. Laurence (Eds.), Concepts: Core readings.
Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Putnam, H. (1981). Reason, truth, and history. Cambridge
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Rey, G. (2012). Learning, expressive power and mad dog
nativism: The poverty of stimuli (and analogies) yet
again. Unpublished manuscript.
Winch, P. (1990). The idea of a social science and its
relation to philosophy. London, UK: Routledge

644

