UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Implications of Polychronous Neuronal Groups for the Nature of Mental Representations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/06w8s4m9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
St. Clair, William Benjamin
Noelle, David C.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Implications of Polychronous Neuronal Groups for the
Nature of Mental Representations
William Benjamin St. Clair (wst.clair@ucmerced.edu)
David C. Noelle (dnoelle@ucmerced.edu)
Cognitive and Information Sciences
University of California, Merced
5200 North Lake Road; Merced, CA 95343 USA
Abstract

eventually making causal contact with the world through sensory and motor processes. When using the vector space approach, these cognitive processes are well described in neurocomputational terms, with nearby points in a vector space
tending to produce similar results when presented to models of downstream neural circuits. While the vector space
approach has been criticized as lacking support for compositional and structured conceptual representations (Fodor &
Pylyshyn, 1988), and there continues to be extensive work
on addressing this critique (Gayler & Levy, 2011), highly
promising approaches to compositionality have been proposed, making use of vector space operations of superposition, convolution, and sparse coding (Smolensky, 1990; Plate,
2003; OReilly, Bhattacharyya, Howard, & Ketz, 2011). In
general, the vector space approach to conceptual representation has been very productive.

How are concepts represented in the human mind? Vector
space representations based on the instantaneous firing rates
of neurons have been used with great success. However, there
is growing evidence, both empirical and computational, that
relevant information is encoded in spatiotemporal patterns of
spikes called polychronous neuronal groups (PNGs). In this
paper, we consider the philosophical implications of PNG representations with regard to their temporal extension, grounding, compositionality, and similarity. We suggest that the temporally extended nature of PNGs implies that conceptual-level
dynamics may only be coherent at coarse time scales. We
introduce the notion of PNG trigger sets as a way to ground
the meaning of PNG representations, and we discuss potential
approachs to compositionality. Finally, we identify the open
problem of how to define an appropriate similarity metric for
PNG-based mental representations.
Keywords: Philosophy of Cognitive Science; Neuroscience;
Representation; Dynamical Systems.

Introduction
How are concepts represented in the human mind? One
highly productive approach to this question has involved
the application of a continuous dynamical systems perspective to the problem (Spivey, 2008). From this perspective,
the currently active concepts of a cognitive system (or subsystem) are jointly encoded as a point in a high dimensional vector space (Churchland, 1989). Nearby points in
this space, according to some distance metric, are seen as
representing similar conceptual states, allowing regions and
manifolds within this space to capture more general concepts or categories (Gärdenfors, 2000). The evolution of
mental states over time becomes a trajectory in this vector
space (Yoshimi, 2012), driven by mechanistic cognitive processes (Churchland, 1996).
This vector space approach to conceptual representation
has many strengths. It supports accounts of the biological basis of cognition by viewing the dimensions of the vector space
as the activity of neural units, such as their firing rates, offering a framework for mapping from the physical state space of
the brain to the conceptual state space of the mind (Spivey,
2008). The approach provides a straightforward way to discuss the cognitive state of a system at any instant in time,
as well as how those states change over time. Issues surrounding the grounding of representations are well addressed
from the perspective of conceptual role semantics (Greenberg
& Harman, 2006), with the “meaning” of a representation
being a function of the inputs that activate it and the other
representations that it produces through causal relationships,

Past challenges to the vector space approach have come
from above: from more abstract and symbolic characterizations of cognitive content and cognitive processing. More
recently, a challenge has arisen from below: from insights into the neural coding of information (Rieke, Warland,
Steveninck, & Bialek, 1999). There is increasing empirical
evidence that, in at least some neural systems, relevant information is encoded in the spatiotemporal pattern of discrete action potentials, or spikes, produced by neurons in a given nucleus (Rolston, Wagenaar, & Potter, 2007; Madhavan, Chao,
& Potter, 2007; Pasquale et al., 2008). While information, in
some cases, may be carried by synchronous or coherent firing
of neurons (Fries et al., 2005), computational considerations
have suggested that content may frequently be encoded in
complex asynchronous patterns of spikes (Izhikevich, 2006).
These complex spike patterns have been called polychronous
neuronal groups (PNGs). The PNG approach to representation differs substantially from the vector space approach.
A PNG is a temporally extended pattern of discrete spiking
events over a collection of neurons, and it is not clear how
such a pattern could be mapped to a point in a continuous
vector space so as to preserve relevant aspects of similarity between representations. In the vector space approach,
temporally extended trajectories capture dynamic changes in
cognitive content, while the PNG account encodes individual conceptual states in such trajectories. A PNG need not
be oscillatory, so it does not make sense to extract features
like frequency or phase to map a PNG into a vector space.
In some important ways, the PNG approach is fundamentally

1372

different than the vector space approach.
It may be tempting to view the vector space account as
supervening on the PNG account, with PNGs implementing
vector space states at some lower level of analysis. In this
brief article, we argue that such a view either is untenable,
with no mapping from the complexities of PNG representations to points in a vector space being possible, or, at least, is
in dire need of an explanation of how such a reduction might
be accomplished. Specifically, we raise four problematic issues that arise when shifting from a vector space approach
to a PNG approach: (1) Temporal Extension — If conceptual
representations involve temporally extended PNGs, to what
degree can a conceptual state be said to be active at a particular instant or actively maintained over an interval? How does
the use of the PNG framework change the characterization of
the evolution of conceptual states over time? (2) Grounding
— If conceptual role semantics is to be used to understand
the “meaning” of a PNG representation, what are the biologically realistic causal mechanisms that link PNGs in an inferential cascade? (3) Compositionality — Does the PNG approach fare better or worse than the vector space approach in
accommodating compositional or structured representations?
(4) Similarity — Is there a distance measure for PNG representations that could be used to capture conceptual similarity
while reflecting the way in which downstream neural circuits
would naturally generalize across disparate PNGs?
Each of these four issues is elaborated in the following sections, and preliminary insights into how these issues could be
addressed are provided. The goal is to highlight how the PNG
approach challenges the prevailing vector space account of
mental representation, while offering some clues concerning
how this challenge might be met.
We begin by offering a review of PNG representations, providing a foundation for exploring each of the four issues that
we find problematic. We then conclude with a brief discussion of open questions in this domain.

timing dependent plasticity (STDP) (Izhikevich, 2006).
To understand the information-bearing properties of PNGs,
it is important to understand how they are generated and propagated. An individual neuron remains at its resting potential
until it receives, or “observes”, a sufficient number of spikes
in a short enough period of time, at which point this coincident input causes the neuron to generate an action potential of
its own. This action potential is then, in turn, observed by the
neurons to which this neuron projects. However, since it takes
time for action potentials to propagate down axonal connections, there is a delay between when a spike is generated and
when it is received. For example, in the cat brain, this delay can be as short as 0.1 ms, or as long as 44 ms (Swadlow,
1992). Since a cortical neuron may project to anywhere between 1,000 and 10,000 other neurons, a single action potential will be received at many different times. Thus, spikes
that are synchronized on generation will not necessarily be
synchronized on their receipt.
Typically, a single input spike is insufficient to drive the receiving neuron to fire an action potential, and the membrane
potential of such a neuron is constantly decaying toward its
resting potential. Within just a few milliseconds after receiving a single spike, the membrane potential of a neuron will
return to its equilibrium state, removing the electrical effects
of the spike (Cessac, Paugam-Moisy, Viéville, et al., 2010).
This highlights the need for synchrony in the arrival of spikes
to initiate firing, but it is important to remember that spikes
that are synchronized at the time of receipt will not necessarily be synchronized at the time of their initiation, due to
variance in conductance delays.

Polychronous Neuronal Groups
Polychronous Neuronal Groups (PNGs) have been proposed as a possible unit of representation in the human
brain (Izhikevich, 2006). A PNG is a reproducible, timelocked, spatiotemporal spike-timing pattern over a collection
of neurons. They are reproducible in the sense that the sequence of spike times tends to replay when the input conditions experienced by the neural network are repeated. They
are time-locked in the sense that, once the PNG begins, the
times between the spikes within the spiking pattern are the
same whenever the PNG is triggered. They are spatiotemporal in the sense that they are defined in terms of a specific set
of neurons that participate in the pattern (spatial) as well as
the specific times at which spikes appear in the pattern (temporal). PNGs spontaneously emerge in spiking neural networks that incorporate variance in the amount of time it takes
for an action potential to reach its receiving neurons (conductance delays), and they are reinforced by mechanisms of spike

Figure 1: A small neural network with time delays.
Consider the network portrayed in Figure 1. If neurons a,
b, and c spike at the same time, Time 0, those spikes will be
received by neuron x at Times 1, 5, and 9, respectively, and
those same spikes will be received by neuron y at Times 8,
5, and 1, respectively. In this case, neither x nor y receive
the coincident spikes needed to fire. The difference in arrival
times are caused by differences in axonal propagation times.
If, instead, neurons a, b, and c spike at Times 8, 4, and 0,
respectively, neuron x will receive all three of these spikes
at Time 9, potentially allowing the cell to fire. In contrast,
neuron y would receive the three spikes at Times 16, 9, and

1373

1, respectively, providing it with no coincident spikes to drive
an action potential. Alternatively, if neurons a, b, and c fire
in the reverse order, neuron y will may spike, while neuron x
will remain silent. Thus, the effects of spikes from neurons a,
b, and c on the firing of neurons x and y is critically dependent
on the timing of the spikes.
In larger, more connected, networks, like those found in
mammalian brains, a particular stimulus will cause a chain
reaction of spikes over time. This group of neurons firing
with precise timing is what forms a corresponding PNG. Importantly, PNG patterns can be strengthened with repetition,
with the strengthening well explained by spike timing dependent plasticity (STDP) (Izhikevich, 2006). Synapses that
exhibit STDP are strengthened whenever the post-synaptic
neuron fires just after it receives evidence of a pre-synaptic
spike. Conversely, whenever the post-synaptic neuron fires
just before it receives evidence of a pre-synaptic spike, then
the synapse is weakened (Dan, Poo, et al., 2004). Thus, as
a PNG unfolds, STDP strengthens the synapses participating
in the PNG’s generation and weakens the synapses that were
active but did not facilitate the firing of neurons participating
in the PNG. Thus, every time a particular PNG unfolds, and
hence becomes strengthened via the mechanism of STDP, it
becomes easier for that PNG to be reproduced.
To restate, a PNG is a reproducible, time-locked, spatiotemporal spike-timing pattern. A PNG is reproducible in
the sense that, when the neurons participating in a PNG are
stimulated in a similar way, the PNG will unfold in a similar way. Furthermore, each reproduction causes a PNG to
become more stable through STDP, making the PNG increasingly robust to timing noise (i.e., some input spikes may be
omitted or added without substantially effecting the generation of the PNG). A PNG is time-locked due to the fact that
the conductance delays between the participating neurons are
fixed by the anatomy of the network. A PNG is spatiotemporal in the sense that it necessarily occurs at many times (polychronous) and involves many neurons. Once stabilized via
STDP, subtle variations in spike timing due to noise do not
lead to unpredictablely different PNGs, but generate a member of a family of related PNGs (Izhikevich, 2006). Also,
it is important to note that many PNGs may be simultaneously active in a common neural network without interacting, due to the low probability that two arbitrary PNGs will
overlap substantially in their precise spike times. In addition
to these properties, PNGs also minimize redundancy through
the weakening of synapses via STDP, and they are more energy efficient than vector space representations that depend
on neural firing rate (Levy & Baxter, 1996). It is also interesting to note that the “small world” connectivity structure of the
mammalian brain gives rise to stable PNGs much more readily than networks of neurons that are connected uniformly at
random (Sporns & Zwi, 2004; Vertes & Duke, 2010).
Since their introduction, PNGs have been utilized extensively in computational neuroscience models of cognitive information processing. The intricate dynamics of PNGs have

been used in combination with models of NMDA receptors and neurotransmitter reuptake to produce a promising
account of working memory function (Szatmáry & Izhikevich, 2011). PNGs have been incorporated into a formal account of the dopamine system in order to produce a candidate
model of neural reinforcement learning that addresses the
problem of temporally distal reward (Izhikevich, 2007). In
addition to their use in computational neuroscience models,
empirical evidence for PNGs has been reported, with reproducible, time-locked, spatiotemporal patterns of spikes being
observed in cortical slices (Rolston et al., 2007). It is clear
that PNGs show great promise as a form of representation in
the brain.
As this review of PNGs shows, the information carried by
a PNG in a neural network is critically dependent on the timing of individual action potentials. This contrasts with vector space accounts of mental representation which map vector
space dimensions onto the instantaneous firing rates of neurons. The PNG approach highlights the way in which individual spike times can carry information, with spiking rates lacking sufficient spatiotemporal detail to discriminate between
different representational states. It is this shift that gives rise
to a number of potential problems with viewing PNGs as the
foundation of mental representation.

Temporally Extended Representations
The Challenge
In vector space representation schemes that make contact
with biology, each dimension corresponds to the instantaneous activity of a neural element, such as the instantaneous
firing rate of a neuron. This provides us with a natural way
to capture the mental state of the agent at any given point in
time. The active maintenance of a conceptual state involves a
relative lack of change in these firing rates, and the evolution
of mental states over time are captured in trajectories through
the vector space.
In contrast, the PNG approach inherently involves temporally extended representations. A PNG is a spatiotemporal
pattern of spikes. If mental representations are to be associated with PNGs, to what degree can any concept be seen as
active at any given instant? Can a representation be actively
maintained over time if the physical substrate of the representation is changing over time? How does the use of the
PNG framework change the characterization of the evolution
of conceptual states over time?

Addressing the Challenge
While some philosophical work may be needed to fully appreciate the nature of temporally extended mental representations, we do not see this challenge as insurmountable.
The activation level of a particular PNG at an arbitrary
point in time, in the midst of a sequence of spikes, does not
have a clear definition. We can identify, however, the degree
to which recently produced spikes match portions of a PNG,
as well as the propensity for the neural network to continue

1374

with the production of further spikes in the PNG. Thus, the
notion of the activation of a concept is only coherent at time
scales that match the time scale of the PNG. For example, if
the PNG π refers to a 30 ms long spike sequence, it may be
asked if, over the last 30 ms, π appeared. For that same π, it
may also be asked at what times over the last 60 ms π was
present. In this way, activation of a mental state represented
by a PNG only makes sense at relatively coarse time scales in
comparison to the time scales used for common vector space
representations. The PNG approach does not admit to a coherent sense of a truly instantaneous mental state.
The mental state encoded by a PNG may be actively maintained for a period of time longer than the duration of the
spike sequence that makes up the PNG. For example, PNG
models of working memory have involved the repeated activation of a PNG, with the spike pattern being sequentially
reinitiated, allowing it to persist for arbitrarily long periods,
as needed (Szatmáry & Izhikevich, 2011). Once again, this
notion of active maintenance is limited to a time scale corresponding to the temporal length of the PNG, but the PNG
approach does not rule out the possibility of persisting in a
mental state for a longer period of time.

The activation of a PNG and the downstream effects of
the initiation of a PNG are mechanistically and computationally quite different than standard neurocomputational mechanisms that can be easily cast as functions between vector
spaces. Given this difference in the causal structure of PNGs,
how can PNG representations be grounded?

Grounding Of Representations

Here, we recognize that a given PNG can have more than one
stimulus trigger. This distinction motivates the definition of a
trigger set.

The Challenge
The symbol grounding problem highlights the need for representational schemes to provide some account of the meaning
of mental representations (Harnad, 1990). Understanding in
an ungrounded representational system is analogous to the
content of a dictionary, defining words in an ultimately circular fashion, in terms of other words. It has been argued that
this problem can be overcome by grounding internal representations in reflections of the world, mediated by iconic representations associated with direct sensations (Harnad, 1990).
Similarly, the meaning of an internal representation can be
seen as arising from the role it plays in a cognitive inferential
process, as described by the theory of conceptual role semantics, with causal and inferential chains eventually connecting
to the world through sensation and action (Greenberg & Harman, 2006).
In the vector space approach, representations may be
grounded in the causal processes in which they participate,
both in terms of inputs that give rise to a representation (eventually leading back to iconic representations) and the effects
of that representation on downstream neural circuits. These
causal relationships can be characterized in terms of functional mappings between vector spaces. For example, if the
transduction of sensory information from the world directly
results in a pattern of neural firing rates, this pattern corresponds to a point in a sensory vector space, and neural circuits
can be seen as mapping this point to corresponding points in
the vector spaces for other neural populations, encoding the
corresponding conceptual content. In this way, the mappings
implemented by neurocomputational mechanisms ground internal representations.

Addressing the Challenge
We assert that the PNG approach to mental representation requires only a slightly different understanding of the nature of
the relevant causal relationships. Rather than being characterized as functional mappings between vector spaces, we posit
that the causal relationships between PNGs are best described
in terms of trigger sets. Let us first consider the definition of
a σ-triggered polychronous neuronal group.
Definition A σ-triggered polychronous group refers to the
set of neurons that can be activated by a chain reaction
whenever trigger neurons Nk (1 ≤ k ≤ σ) fire according to
the timing pattern tk (1 ≤ k ≤ σ), where σ is the size of the
stimulus required to trigger the PNG (Martinez & PaugamMoisy, 2009).

Definition For a given PNG π, its trigger set, τπ , is the set
of spike-time patterns that trigger the existence of π. Each
spike-time pattern in the trigger set of π will give rise to π
when presented in the absence of interfering spikes.
Note that each element of a trigger set may be a PNG or
a portion of a PNG. Thus, the presence of a PNG spike-time
pattern may trigger, or help trigger, other PNGs. The set of
PNGs that have the potential of being triggered by a given
PNG can form the core of a formal characterization of the
causally grounded meaning, µπ , of that PNG.
Definition If a PNG, π0 , is seen as a set of spikes (with each
spike indexed by the identity of the spiking neuron and the
time of the spike), and PI is the set of all possible PNGs in
the neural network, then the meaning of π0 , called µπ0 , is
defined as the set of PNGs whose trigger set, τπ , contains
an element with a nonempty intersection with π0 , or
/
µπ0 = {π : π ∈ PI , ∃πt ∈ τπ , πt ∩ π0 6= 0}.
By this definition, µπ0 includes any PNG for which π0 contributes some spikes that may contribute to the triggering of
the PNG. Thus, µπ0 includes PNGs that may only be triggered
by π0 in the context of other spike-time patterns. In this way,
the meaning of a PNG is context sensitive. While constrained
by the network’s topology, the size of µπ0 may be very large.
These definitions describe the causal relationships between
PNGs, providing the basis for a conceptual role semantics approach to symbol grounding in the PNG framework. PNGs

1375

Similarity Of Representations

triggered by sensory neurons can be considered iconic representations, as can PNGs that trigger motor responses. PNGs
triggered by other neurons in a network form internal representations that are ultimately grounded in these iconic representations through the causal connections of their trigger sets.

The Challenge
Distances in a vector space have been fruitfully used to capture dissimilarity between representations, providing a useful mechanism for generalization. Common distance metrics,
like inner-product distance (related to angular distance), are
tightly related to the kinds of functional mappings between
vector spaces that are are easily implemented by neural circuits. How might similarity between representations be captured in the PNG approach?

Compositionality Of Representations
The Challenge
A representation that exhibits compositionality, simply put, is
one where “the meaning of a compound expression is a function of the meanings of its parts” (Janssen, 1996). In the vector space approach, compositional representations have historically been difficult to capture (Fodor & Pylyshyn, 1988),
but progress has been made (Van Gelder, 1990; Gayler &
Levy, 2011). The most common solutions involve either representational components being maintained in subspaces of
a parent vector space, or components being superimposed
or convolved to form compound representations like tensor
product codes, holographic reduced representations, or sparse
codes (Smolensky, 1990; Plate, 2003; OReilly et al., 2011).
Do PNG representations suffer from the same problems of
compositionality as vector space representations? Are current
approaches to compositionality in the vector space framework
also appropriate for PNG representations? How might compositionality be captured in PNG representations?

Addressing the Challenge

Addressing the Challenge
The PNG approach offers two ways to capture compositional
representations that are impossible, or at least of limited utility, in the vector space approach. These two methods include
sequential concatenation of PNG component representations
and the superposition of PNG components.
A PNG representation might be seen as being composed
of subsequences of spikes, giving rise to representations at
multiple time scales. In essence, a PNG may be seen as containing many smaller PNGs within it, or, inversely, it may be
a part of a sequence of other PNGs. Consider the meaning of
a particular PNG, µπ0 . If a PNG π1 ∈ µπ0 has an element of
its trigger set, τπ1 , contained completely within π0 , then π0
will reliably trigger π1 , in the absense of interfering spikes.
Note that µπ0 6= µπ1 , so these two PNGs do not have the same
meaning. These two PNGs may be combined by simple concatenation, producing a new PNG, π2 = π0 ∪ π1 . Importantly,
the meaning of this compound representation, µπ2 , is a simple
function of the meanings of its parts: µπ2 = µπ0 ∪ µπ1 . (Note
that this is the case even if π0 does not reliably trigger π1 .)
An alternative approach to compositionality involves directly superimposing PNGs over the same time interval.
Since spikes may be sparse over time, the probability of
superposition producing interference between PNGs is relatively small. In this way, the composition of PNG representations may simply involve the simultaneous activation of the
component PNGs.

We see this as an important open question. There are
many existing metrics for evaluating the similarity of spike
trains (Victor & Purpura, 1996; Naud, Gerhard, Mensi, &
Gerstner, 2011). Developing a good similarity metric has
proven difficult, however, as spike sequences are inherently
non-Euclidian (Aronov & Victor, 2004). The metrics that
have been presented focus on comparing spike trains generated by a single neuron, recorded over many trials. Current approaches make the assumption that the significance of
a spike can be treated as independent from other spikes produced in the same neural network. Because of these and other
issues, existing similarity metrics for comparing groups of
spike trains do not predict well whether two PNGs will have
a similar effect on downstream neurons.
It is our suspicion that similarity metrics based on trigger
sets may overcome some of the obstacles described here. Determining a meaningful similarity metric for PNG representations is a focus of our future work.

Conclusions and Future Work
Ongoing work in computational neuroscience is uncovering
the powerful capabilities of polychronous neuronal groups,
and empirical studies are starting to find evidence for this kind
of encoding in biological neural circuits. If PNGs emerge
as a dominant means of representation in the brain, the vector space account of conceptual states will need to be reconsidered. While many of the strengths of the vector space
account appear to transfer, with some modifications, to the
PNG framework, there remain challenges for viewing complex spike patterns as conceptual representations. Perhaps the
most substantial challenge faced by the PNG approach to conceptual representation involves the nature of representational
similarity in this framework. This is the primary focus of our
ongoing research program.
Much philosophical work has been done in order to clarify
how the vector space account of mental representation provides a bridge between brain processes and cognitive processes. If further neuroscientific investigations suggest that
polychronous neuronal groups carry conceptual content in at
least some brain systems, similar work will need to be pursued for this representational framework. By highlighting
several potentially problematic issues with PNG representations, and sketching promising solutions for some of these

1376

issues, we hope to have helped launch this philosophical effort.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Jeff Yoshimi, Michael Spivey, and other
members of the University of California, Merced (UCM)
Cognitive & Information Sciences (CIS) graduate group for
their helpful comments.

References
Aronov, D., & Victor, J. (2004). Non-euclidean properties
of spike train metric spaces. Physical Review E, 69(6),
061905.
Cessac, B., Paugam-Moisy, H., Viéville, T., et al. (2010).
Overview of facts and issues about neural coding by spikes.
Journal of physiology, Paris, 104(1), 5.
Churchland, P. (1989). The neurocomputational perspective: Philosophical essays on the mind, brain, and science.
Cambridge, USA: MIT Press.
Churchland, P. (1996). The engine of reason, the seat of the
soul: A philosophical journey into the brain. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Dan, Y., Poo, M., et al. (2004). Spike timing-dependent plasticity of neural circuits. Neuron, 44(1), 23–30.
Fodor, J., & Pylyshyn, Z. (1988). Connectionism and cognitive architecture: A critical analysis. Cognition, 28(1),
3–71.
Fries, P., et al. (2005). A mechanism for cognitive dynamics: neuronal communication through neuronal coherence.
Trends in cognitive sciences, 9(10), 474–480.
Gärdenfors, P. (2000). Conceptual spaces-the geometry of
thought. Cambridge, MA: Bradford Books, MIT Press.
Gayler, R., & Levy, S. (2011). Compositional connectionism
in cognitive science ii: the localist/distributed dimension.
Connection Science, 23(2), 85–89.
Greenberg, M., & Harman, G. (2006). Conceptual role semantics. In Oxford handbook of philosophy of language.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Harnad, S. (1990). The symbol grounding problem. Physica
D: Nonlinear Phenomena, 42(1), 335–346.
Izhikevich, E. (2006). Polychronization: Computation with
spikes. Neural computation, 18(2), 245–282.
Izhikevich, E. (2007). Solving the distal reward problem
through linkage of stdp and dopamine signaling. Cerebral
Cortex, 17(10), 2443–2452.
Janssen, T. (1996). Compositionality. In Handbook of logic
and linguistics. North Holland, Amsterdam: University of
Amsterdam.
Levy, W., & Baxter, R. (1996). Energy efficient neural codes.
Neural Computation, 8(3), 531–543.
Madhavan, R., Chao, Z., & Potter, S. (2007). Plasticity of
recurring spatiotemporal activity patterns in cortical networks. Physical biology, 4(3), 181.
Martinez, R., & Paugam-Moisy, H. (2009). Algorithms for
structural and dynamical polychronous groups detection.
Artificial Neural Networks–ICANN 2009, 75–84.

Naud, R., Gerhard, F., Mensi, S., & Gerstner, W. (2011).
Improved similarity measures for small sets of spike trains.
Neural computation, 23(12), 3016–3069.
OReilly, R., Bhattacharyya, R., Howard, M., & Ketz, N.
(2011). Complementary learning systems. Cognitive science.
Pasquale, V., Massobrio, P., Bologna, L., Chiappalone, M.,
Martinoia, S., et al. (2008). Self-organization and neuronal avalanches in networks of dissociated cortical neurons. Neuroscience, 153(4), 1354–1369.
Plate, T. (2003). Plate, holographic reduced representation:
Distributed representation for cognitive structures. CSLI
Publications, Stanford, CA.
Rieke, F., Warland, D., Steveninck, R. van, & Bialek, W.
(1999). Spikes: exploring the neural code. Cambridge,
MA: MIT press.
Rolston, J., Wagenaar, D., & Potter, S. (2007). Precisely
timed spatiotemporal patterns of neural activity in dissociated cortical cultures. Neuroscience, 148(1), 294.
Smolensky, P. (1990). Tensor product variable binding and
the representation of symbolic structures in connectionist
systems. Artificial intelligence, 46(1), 159–216.
Spivey, M. (2008). The continuity of mind (Vol. 40). USA:
Oxford University Press.
Sporns, O., & Zwi, J. (2004). The small world of the cerebral
cortex. Neuroinformatics, 2(2), 145–162.
Swadlow, H. (1992). Monitoring the excitability of neocortical efferent neurons to direct activation by extracellular
current pulses. Journal of neurophysiology, 68(2), 605–
619.
Szatmáry, B., & Izhikevich, E. (2011). Spike-timing theory
of working. BMC Neuroscience, 12(Suppl 1), O3.
Van Gelder, T. (1990). Compositionality: A connectionist
variation on a classical theme. Cognitive Science, 14(3),
355–384.
Vertes, P., & Duke, T. (2010). Effect of network topology
on neuronal encoding based on spatiotemporal patterns of
spikes. HFSP journal, 4(3-4), 153–163.
Victor, J., & Purpura, K. (1996). Nature and precision of
temporal coding in visual cortex: a metric-space analysis.
Journal of Neurophysiology, 76(2), 1310–1326.
Yoshimi, J. (2012). Active internalism and open dynamical
systems. Philosophical Psychology, 25(1), 1–24.

1377

