UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Implicit Learning Out of the Lab: Language and Music

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5mm3t554

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Rebuschat, Patrick
Rohrmeier, Martin
Christiansen, Morten
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Implicit Learning Out of the Lab: Language and Music
Patrick Rebuschat (p.rebuschat@lancaster.ac.uk)

Martin Rohrmeier (mr1@mit.edu)

Department of Linguistics and English Language
Lancaster University, Lancaster, United Kingdom

Department of Linguistics and Philosophy, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA

Morten H. Christiansen (christiansen@cornell.edu)

Zoltan Dienes (dienes@sussex.ac.uk)

Department of Psychology, Cornell University
Ithaca, NY, USA

School of Psychology, University of Sussex
Brighton, United Kingdom

Clément François (cfrancois@idibell.cat)
Daniele Schön (daniele.schon@incm.cnrs-mrs.fr)

Xiuyan Guo (xyguo@psy.ecnu.edu.cn)
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Magnetic Resonance and
School of Psychology and Cognitive Science, East China
Normal University, Shanghai, China

INSERM U 1106, Institut de Neuroscience des Systèmes
Aix-Marseille Université, Marseille, France

Shan Jiang (jiangs988@126.com)

Feifei Li (lifeifei1206@163.com)

School of Social Administration, Shanghai University of
Political Science and Law, Shanghai, China

School of Psychology and Cognitive Science, East China
Normal University, Shanghai, China

Jennifer B. Misyak (jennifer.misyak@wbs.ac.uk)

Richard Widdess (rw4@soas.ac.uk)

Behavioural Science Group, Warwick Business School
University of Warwick, Coventry, United Kingdom

Department of Music, School of Oriental and African
Studies, University of London, United Kingdom

Keywords: Implicit learning; statistical learning; explicit
learning; music cognition; language acquisition.

towards the use of more ecologically-valid stimuli. In
addition to introducing novel and exciting subject areas, the
research discussed in this symposium also reflects the strong
tendency, within cognitive science, for methodological
diversification. The talks will discuss data from behavioral
and neurophysiological experiments as well as results of
computational modeling.

Goals and Scope
Implicit learning, essentially the ability to acquire
unconscious (implicit) knowledge, is a fundamental aspect
of human cognition. This symposium focuses on the
acquisition of two cognitive systems that are widely
regarded as prime examples of implicit learning “in the real
world”, namely language and music (see e.g. Rebuschat et
al., 2011; Rohrmeier & Rebuschat, 2012). This symposium
brings together leading researchers from across the
cognitive sciences (psychology, linguistics, cognitive
neuroscience, computer science, and musicology) in order to
discuss current trends in implicit learning research, to
identify the progress made in recent years, and to outline
future directions to take, both in terms of topics and novel
methodologies.
The symposium will consist of five talks, followed by a
brief general discussion. Each talk approaches the
symposium topic from a highly innovative and
interdisciplinary angle. Christiansen and Misyak focus on
individual differences in implicit language learning, while
Rebuschat concentrates on the role of implicit and explicit
learning in second language (L2) acquisition. François and
Schön’s work demonstrates the impressive effect of musical
practice on the implicit learning of linguistic structure, while
the last two talks, by Dienes and colleagues and by
Rohrmeier and Widdess, focus on the implicit learning of
Chinese tonal poetry and of syntactic features of North
Indian music, respectively. These last two studies reflect a
particularly important trend in implicit learning research

Morten H. Christiansen and Jennifer B. Misyak
Individual differences in implicit statistical
learning and language
Over the past decade, implicit learning under the guise of
statistical learning has emerged as an important
experimental paradigm with which to study mechanisms
involved in language acquisition. Although few empirical
studies have directly linked variation across statistical
learning and language, it is generally assumed that greater
sensitivity to statistical structure leads to better language
performance. Here, we report the results of studies
investigating the relationship of individual differences in
statistical learning of adjacent and nonadjacent
dependencies to variations in the processing of local and
nonlocal dependencies in natural language. Together, the
results indicate that individual differences in statistical
learning are positively related to variations in language
processing. However, the complexity of the pattern of
interrelations suggests that future developmental and adult
work on implicit statistical learning must incorporate careful
attention to a diversity of natural dependency-structures to
establish the proper relationship between adjacent and
nonadjacent manifestations of statistical learning and the

103

extent to which they map onto similar structures in
language.

language and music require learners to engage several
cognitive functions and notably the ability to sequence
sound patterns. There is increasing evidence showing that
the statistical regularities found in the input can play a
important role in the implicit acquisition of several
linguistic and musical structures. We previously showed
that combining music and language into song can facilitate
speech segmentation in implicit learning paradigms (Schön
et al., 2008). Moreover, we recently conducted a set of
experiments with adults and children showing that musical
practice directly affects sensitivity to statistical regularities
in speech both at the neural and behavioral levels (François
& Schön, 2011; François et al., 2012). Interestingly, our
results seem to show that musical training and expertise
have effects on brain plasticity that may go beyond primary
auditory regions. These results also confirm that
neurophysiological measures are more robust and sensitive
than behavior to study implicit statistical learning processes.

Patrick Rebuschat
Implicit and explicit learning of L2 syntax
First language acquisition is generally characterized as a
process where most learning proceeds implicitly, i.e.
incidentally and in absence of awareness of what was
learned. At the same time, however, there is considerable
debate as to whether implicit learning plays a similarly
important role in the case of adult second language (L2)
acquisition. In this talk, I will review a series of experiments
that investigated the implicit and explicit learning of L2
syntax by means of an artificial language paradigm. This
research addressed questions such as the following: Is there
implicit learning in the case of L2 acquisition? If so, how is
implicit knowledge of language represented in the mind
(rules, patterns, chunks...)? How do task instructions affect
the acquisition of implicit and explicit knowledge? Is there
an implicit-explicit interface? And what is the role of
individual differences (e.g. working memory capacity), in
the implicit and explicit learning of languages?

Martin Rohrmeier and Richard Widdess
Implicit learning of musical grammar:
The acquisition of North Indian music
Recent years have witnessed an increasing interest in the
implicit and statistical learning of music (see Rohrmeier &
Rebuschat, 2012, for a review). Despite this interest, only
few studies employed stimuli that resemble actual musical
systems more closely, and only little research has been
carried out on the acquisition of non-Western music. In this
paper, we present the findings of a study that addressed this
gap. The study focused on the implicit learning of modal
melodic features in traditional North Indian music by
Western learners who were unfamiliar with this musical
system. Participants were trained on the ālāp (introduction)
section of either the rāga Toṛī and Multānī and tested on
novel excerpts from (later) joṛ sections of both rāgas
featuring five distinct melodic features. Three of the five
features were melodically distinctive of either rāga, whereas
two were only distinctive based on other than mere pitch
sequence features (for instance, emphasis). Findings
indicated that Western participants unfamilar with Indian
music learned to distinguish features of either rāga without
intending to and after a very short exposure period. These
results confirm that implicit learning constitutes a powerful
mechanism that plays a fundamental role in the acquisition
of highly complex, ecologically-valid musical stimuli.

Zoltan Dienes, Xiuyan Guo, Shan Jiang,
and Feifei Li
Implicit learning of symmetries in tonal
language
Implicit learning research has identified a number of
structures that people can unconsciously learn, including
chunks and fixed patterns of repetition. Language and
music appear to involve structures more complex, indeed
higher than finite state, for example symmetry structures
that are simply generated by recursive rules (e.g. centre
embedded, cross-serial dependency structures). The implicit
learning of such structures presents an interesting challenge
to existing models of implicit learning, such as the Simple
Recurrent Network (SRN). We build on our earlier work in
music and movement, by looking at symmetries in the tonal
structure of Chinese poetry. We show that people can
acquire unconscious knowledge of both cross-serial
dependencies and centre embeddings in tonal poetry, with
the former being easier than the latter. We also show that
people can generalise their unconscious knowledge from
being trained on strings of a certain length to test strings of a
different length, indicating apparent learning of the
symmetry itself rather than chunks or fixed length
associations. We also show the SRN can model many of the
details of this learning, exploring whether the SRN is more
than a graded finite state machine.

Moderators:
Patrick Rebuschat and Martin Rohrmeier
References
Rebuschat, P., Rohrmeier, M., Hawkins, J. H., & Cross, I.
(2011). Language and music as cognitive systems.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Rohrmeier, M. & Rebuschat, P. (2012). Implicit learning
and acquisition of music. Topics in Cognitive Science
(TopiCS), 4(4), 525–553.

Clément François and Daniele Schön
Implicit learning of linguistic structures and
the effect of musical practice
Both speech and music involve sequences of sounds ordered
in time according to complex rules. The acquisition of both

104

