UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Individual and Strategy Differences in an Allocentric-Heading Recall Task

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4t92c5wh

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Burte, Heather
Hegarty, Mary

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Individual and Strategy Differences in an Allocentric-Heading Recall Task
Heather Burte (burte@psych.ucsb.edu)
Department of Psychological & Brain Sciences, UCSB
Santa Barbara, CA 93106 USA

Mary Hegarty (hegarty@psych.ucsb.edu)
Department of Psychological & Brain Sciences, UCSB
Santa Barbara, CA 93106 USA

Abstract
Participants estimated allocentric headings using pictures of
familiar buildings around a college campus, in an allocentricheading recall task. A weak relationship between sense-ofdirection and accuracy, an alignment effect, and a novel
relationship between strategy and accuracy were found. These
results demonstrate that sense-of-direction and strategy use
differentially affect accuracy across heading disparities. Our
findings suggest that individual differences and strategy
differences need to be incorporated into current hypotheses
regarding allocentric-heading – specifically, into the animalmodel hypothesis.
Keywords: allocentric heading; sense of direction; headingrecall; strategy; egocentric and allocentric reference frames.

Introduction
People characterize their ability to move effectively through
environmental-scale spaces, such as neighborhoods or cities,
by referring to their ‘sense-of-direction’. Kozlowski and
Bryant (1977) found that people’s ratings of their sense-ofdirection (or SOD) correlated with accuracy in distance,
direction, and time estimation tasks. Since then, research has
either focused on how to assess SOD or how SOD correlates
with performance in environmental-scale spatial tasks (e.g.,
Hegarty et al., 2002). However, the field is lacking insights
into the underlying causes of the vast individual differences
found in environmental-scale spatial cognition.
Research on SOD has typically focused on strategy
differences in navigation or on individual differences in
learning novel environments. In terms of strategy
differences, individuals with a poor SOD tend to prefer
route strategies and those with a good SOD tend to prefer
survey strategies (Prestopnik & Roskos-Ewoldsen, 2000). In
terms of individual differences, there are large individual
differences in the rates and accuracy with which individuals
can learn novel environments and these differences are
related to self-reported SOD (Ishikawa & Montello, 2006).
To date, little research has focused on strategy and
individual differences in manipulating one’s knowledge of
familiar environments; however, manipulating one’s spatial
knowledge is essential for wayfinding and route planning.
Research that has used familiar environments tends to focus
on two tasks: egocentric pointing (pointing from one’s
current location towards a landmark) and judgments of
relative direction (pointing from an imagined location and
orientation towards another landmark) (e.g. Kozlowski &

Bryant, 1977; Hegarty et al., 2002). These studies found
significant correlations between SOD and task performance,
but have not investigated strategy differences.
The strategies identified during navigation, namely route
and survey strategies, are not necessarily relevant in all
spatial knowledge manipulation tasks (such as egocentric
pointing and judgments of relative direction tasks).
Therefore, research is needed to uncover the strategies used
in spatial knowledge manipulation tasks – specifically, in
environmental-scale spaces. In contrast, research on strategy
differences has tended to utilize small-scale tasks.
Kozhevnikov and Hegarty (2001) found that when people
complete judgments of relative direction tasks, while
viewing a map, they use either perspective-taking or mental
rotation strategies. They found individual differences in
performance, which were related to SOD, and they
identified two strategies, which were separable abilities.
The goal of this paper is to investigate the individual and
strategy differences that exist within manipulating one’s
environmental-scale spatial knowledge. To do so, we will
focus on one task, the allocentric-heading recall task (Sholl,
Kenny, & DellaPorta, 2006), which requires participants to
manipulate their spatial knowledge of a familiar place.
Sholl et al. (2006) developed the allocentric-heading
recall task to reveal the architecture of a proposed human
head-direction system. They argued that SOD is a singlefaceted construct related to the performance of a headdirection system in humans, and they assumed that this
system operated similarly to the head-direction system
found in rats (Ranck, 1984). In rats, each head-direction cell
fires maximally to one angle of difference between the rat’s
facing direction and a reference direction grounded in the
environment. In other words, head-direction cells respond to
allocentric headings and not directions based on the axis of
the body (or egocentric headings). Sholl et al. proposed that
the human head-direction system operates similarly to that
of rats and that the human head-direction system is the
neural mechanism underlying self-reported SOD. We will
refer to this the animal-model hypothesis.
In the allocentric-heading recall task, participants view
photographs of a familiar environment, identify the
direction from which the photographs were taken, and then
rotate in their chair to reproduce the direction. Initial studies
(Sholl et al., 2006) revealed an alignment effect.
Specifically, when a participant is facing the same direction
as that from which the photograph was taken, participants

1958

were more accurate (a facilitation effect). However, when
participants were 180º misaligned from the direction of the
photograph (for example, they faced north but the
photograph was taken from a south-facing direction),
participants were the least accurate (a detrimental effect).
The alignment effect was explained as interference between
one’s current head-direction signals and the retrieval of the
head-direction signals, which were activated when the
individual viewed the photograph location in the real world.
Strong correlations (.7 or higher) between performance on
the allocentric-heading task and self-assessed ratings of
SOD supported Sholl et al.’s proposal that SOD solely
reflects the operation of the human head-direction system.
The allocentric-heading recall task assesses people’s
ability to manipulate their spatial knowledge of
environmental-scale spaces. According to Sholl et al., when
viewing a building, the allocentric-heading of that view is
stored in memory and is linked to signals of body-direction.
Upon seeing a picture of that building, a person recognizes
the building, and then recalls the allocentric-heading from
spatial memory. Therefore, Sholl et al. proposed that only
one strategy exists, and individual differences reflect
differences in the fidelity of head-direction signals, and
consequently, the ability to carry out this strategy.
In contrast to this view, Burte and Hegarty (2012) found
preliminary evidence for possible strategy differences.
During informal debriefing interviews, participants reported
a range of strategies, including imaging a walk to the
photograph location, and relating the photograph heading to
the direction of a local mountain range. However, strategy
differences have yet to be systematically investigated in this
task.
There is also a possibility that familiarity with the tested
environment drives individual differences in performance.
Sholl et al. did not investigate familiarity differences, as pretesting had revealed that all their pictures were highly
familiar to participants. However, Burte and Hegarty (2012)
found significant correlations between familiarity and SOD,
as well as between familiarity and accuracy, despite pretesting photos for high familiarity. This suggests that
individual differences in this task might be partially due to
differences in familiarity with the environment.
The main purpose of this study is to investigate individual
and strategy differences within the allocentric-heading recall
task. First we will describe the allocentric-heading task in
more detail and then consider strategy differences found
within a similar task.

Allocentric-Heading Recall Task
The allocentric-heading recall task is a four-alternative,
forced-choice task, using campus pictures as stimuli.
Pictures were taken from magnetic north, east, south or west
(to match the intrinsic structure of the environment).
However, while cardinal directions will be used for
simplicity in writing this article, it should be noted that
cardinal directions were never used in written or verbal
instructions, as they are not required to complete the task.

First, we will define key terminology used: picture
heading is the photographer’s orientation when taking the
picture; default heading is the orientation of participant
before each trial; response heading is the orientation the
participant responded with; and heading disparity is the
angular disparity between default heading and picture
heading. The animal-model hypothesis makes predictions
about the relationship between heading disparities and
performance – specifically, about the alignment effect;
therefore, heading disparity is the main independent
measure of interest.
Turning in one’s chair (to replicate the picture heading)
was used as the response mode in previous studies. Sholl et
al. (2006) argued that turning to represent an angle was a
natural response for this task, because turning allows for
one’s current head-direction cells to find a match to the
memory of one’s head-direction cell firing. A secondary
goal of this study was to investigate whether participants
could perform this task without rotating in a chair, but only
by using a button-press as the response mode. Therefore, we
attempted to replicate Sholl et al.’s results with an
alternative, less body-based response mode.

Strategy Differences
In studies using a judgments of relative direction task
(JRDs), a dissociation has been made between two
strategies: (1) a perspective-taking strategy whereby
participants imagined moving themselves to assume a new
orientation, or used directions related to their bodies to
assume a new orientation; and (2) a mental rotation strategy
whereby participants imagined moving the entire scene
around themselves, or imagined rotating angles between
locations (Kozhevnikov & Hegarty, 2001). This suggests
that participants can think in terms of a body-based
reference frame (egocentric), or a reference frame grounded
in the environment (allocentric) while completing the task.
Kozhevnikov, Motes, Rasch, and Blajenkova (2006)
found that the perspective-taking strategy resulted in
decreased accuracy with increasing heading disparities, a
similar pattern to that found by Sholl et al. (2006).
However, use of a mental rotation strategy resulted in a
significantly weaker alignment effect. Therefore, another
goal of this study is to investigate if these strategy
differences exist within the allocentric-heading recall task.
In sum, our goals are (1) to investigate if the predictions
of the animal-model hypothesis are robust to a new context
and to a button-press response mode; (2) to investigate our
prediction that individual differences in familiarity are
related to task performance; (3) to determine if egocentric
and allocentric strategy use exist within this task; (4) to
investigate if individual differences in SOD and strategy are
related to task performance; and (5) to investigate whether
strategy differences are related to SOD.

Method
Participants Seventy-four students (39 males and 35
females) participated as part of a research requirement. Two

1959

participants, both males, were excluded from analysis
because their mean familiarity with the picture stimuli was 2
SDs below that of all participants. Participants had spent at
least two quarters on campus before participating.
Design The methodology of the study was both
experimental and correlational. The experimental factors
were picture heading (within subjects) and default heading
(between subjects). The correlational factors are familiarity,
SOD, and strategy use. Participants were randomly assigned
to one of the four default headings (19 participants faced
north, 18 east, 17 south, and 18 west) and completed fortyfive trials, one for each picture.
Materials The experiment took place in a room that was
aligned with the main axes of the campus (and the cardinal
directions). The experimental room had one east-facing
window that was open during the experiment. The view
directly out that window was of a major pathway and a large
(eight storey) building. However, if one stood next to the
window, one could see the mountains and ocean (major
orientation markers for the campus), and a few major
buildings. Therefore, the window afforded excellent views
for initial orientation to the campus (when standing near the
window), but only basic information while participants
completed the experiment.
Experimenters arranged a chair and laptop facing the
assigned default heading before each participant arrived.
The large table at which participants were seated (but in
different orientations) was aligned with the room, the room
was aligned with campus, and campus is aligned with the
cardinal directions. Therefore, the space was aligned with
respect to the default headings and response headings. This
alignment was never mentioned to participants.
The photographic stimuli were sourced from the 36 most
familiar photographs from a previous experiment (Burte &
Hegarty, 2012), and nine new photographs (two north and
seven east), for a total of 45 pictures. A global positioning
device (GPS) was used to ensure that photographs were
taken facing the cardinal directions. Photographs were taken
of highly recognizable building facades and were cropped to
exclude surrounding buildings or large-scale landmarks.
A typical trial started with viewing a photograph of
campus on a computer, and participants responded by using
a keypad with four arrows (front, right, back, and left). The
participant determined the direction (with respect to the
campus environment) in which the photographer stood to
take the photograph (i.e., picture heading) and pressed a
button to reproduce that direction. For example, if the
photograph was taken facing south, and the participant was
facing north, then the participant should press the downward
arrow to indicate the direction behind him/her.
Procedure Participants were briefly introduced to the
experiment, completed a demographics questionnaire, and
then completed the Santa Barbara Sense of Direction (or
SBSOD) scale (Hegarty et al., 2002). Next, participants

were asked to orient to the layout of campus while looking
out the window. The experimenter asked the participant to
point towards six major campus landmarks, to ensure that
s/he was oriented to the global layout of the campus. The
experimenter provided feedback, if needed, but most
participants oriented and pointed correctly.
Participants were then introduced to the allocentricheading recall task and presented with 12 practice trials in a
fixed order. Participants were given feedback by being
presented with the correct answer after each practice trial,
and then completed 45 experimental trials without feedback.
After the allocentric-heading recall task, participants rated
their familiarity with each photograph location on a 7-point
Likert scale, with 1 being “Very familiar” and 7 being “Not
at all familiar”. As an objective measure of familiarity,
participants were required to place an arrow on an
unlabelled map of campus, to indicate the location and
direction from which each photograph was taken. This map
task and the familiarity task were used to ensure high
familiarity with each photograph.
Finally, participants completed a strategy questionnaire
that consisted of a free-response question, in which they
entered the strategies they used, and then selected the
strategies they used from a list of potential strategies. The
list was created based on pre-testing and consisted of
strategies such as “Using cardinal directions”, “Using largescale landmarks to determine orientation (mountains, ocean,
Isla Vista, etc.)”, and “Imagining travelling to the location”.

Results
Photograph Familiarity To ensure that participants were
sufficiently familiar with the pictures, pictures needed to
pass three criteria to be included in the analysis: (1) mean
familiarity for each picture could not be 2SDs lower than
grand mean familiarity, (2) less than 25% of participants
needed to rate their familiarity as “6” or “7 – Not at all
familiar” for each picture; and, (3) at least 25% of
participants needed to correctly identify the orientation and
location of the picture, on the map task. Given these criteria,
seven photographs were dropped from analysis, resulting in
9 north-facing, 9 east-facing, 10 south-facing, and 10 westfacing pictures. The familiarity grand mean for the 38
photographs was 2.2. Familiarity ranged from 1.0 to 3.7
across participants and from 1.2 to 3.9 across pictures.
Accuracy Heading disparity (angular difference between
default and picture heading) served as the main independent
measure. For example, if the picture heading was aligned
with the default heading for a particular participant and trial,
then this trial would be labeled as having a 0º heading
disparity. A 4 (Heading disparity: 0º, 90º, 180º, 270º) by 2
(Gender) ANOVA comparing mean accuracy indicated a
main effect of heading disparity, F(3, 216) = 6.79, MSE =
.13, p < .001. The mean accuracy by heading disparity is
shown in Figure 1. Post hoc tests revealed that the 180º
condition was less accurate (M = 54%) than all other
conditions, which had similar accuracies (0º M = 61%; 90º

1960

M = 64%; 270º M = 63%). This can be interpreted as a
detrimental effect on performance when one’s body is
positioned 180º away from the memory trace from one’s
head-direction cells when the location was last viewed. This
detrimental effect is predicted by the animal-model
hypothesis; however, we failed to replicate the predicted
facilitation effect.
The main effect of gender was also significant, F(1, 70) =
6.58, MSE = 1.32, p < .05, with males being more accurate
(M = 67%) than females (M = 54%). The interaction of
heading disparity and gender was not significant, F(3, 210)
= 1.07, MSE = .02, p = .36.

participants (M = 49%), F(1, 35) = 7.82, MSE = 1.78, p <
.01, and there was a significant interaction of SOD with
heading disparity, F(3, 105) = 2.60, MSE = .05, p < .05.
Importantly, the simple effect of heading disparity for
GSOD participants was not significant, F(3, 33) = 1.13, p =
.35, indicating that GSOD participants were equally
accurate across all heading disparities. This is a novel
finding and has not been found in previous studies (Sholl et
al., 2006; Burte & Hegarty, 2012).
In contrast, the simple effect for PSOD participants
indicated a significant difference across heading disparities,
F(3, 33) = 4.11, p < .05. Not only are PSOD individuals less
accurate on this task than GSOD participants, but they are
significantly less accurate with 180º heading disparities
compared to other disparities. This indicates that the
detrimental effect of having one’s body 180º misaligned
with the picture, primarily affects PSOD individuals.

Figure 1: Mean accuracy rate as a function of heading
disparity. Error bars are the standard errors of the mean.
Self-Reported Sense-of-Direction The correlation between
SBSOD scores and overall accuracy was statistically
significant, r(70) = .31, p < .01, indicating that people who
rated themselves as having a good SOD were more accurate
on the task. This correlation is similar to that found by Burte
and Hegarty (2012); but substantially lower than those
reported by Sholl et al. (2006). In addition, we failed to find
a significant correlation between familiarity and SBSOD
scores, r(70) = .03, p = .81, indicating that good SOD
participants were not more accurate simply due to being
more familiar with the photographs.
To further investigate individual differences in task
performance, we compared the performance of good SOD
(or GSOD) participants from the top 25% of the SBSOD
distribution (N = 18), and poor SOD (or PSOD) from the
bottom 25% (N = 19). A 2 (GSOD, PSOD) X 4 (Heading
disparity: 0º, 90º, 180º, 270º) ANOVA comparing mean
accuracy indicated significant main effects and a significant
interaction. There was a main effect of heading disparity,
F(3, 105) = 3.60, MSE = .08, p < .05, such that a heading
disparity of 180º resulted in lower accuracy (M = 54%)
compared to 90º (M = 63%) and 270º (M = 64%). The
heading disparity of 0º (M = 60%) was not significantly
different from other headings.
As shown in Figure 2, GSOD participants were
significantly more accurate (M = 71%) than PSOD

Figure 2: Mean accuracy rate as a function of heading
disparity and SOD. Error bars are the standard errors of the
mean.
Strategy Use To examine reported strategy differences,
items in the strategy questionnaire were classified as
egocentric or allocentric strategies (cf. Kozhevnikov &
Hegarty, 2001). Example items from the egocentric strategy
were “imagining myself standing at the photograph
location”, “imagining traveling to the photograph location
using campus walkways”, “comparing my current facing
direction to the photographer’s facing direction at the
photograph location”, etc. These strategies were labeled as
‘egocentric’ due to their reliance on thinking about
directions in relationship to the participant’s body.
Strategies that focused on thinking about directions in
relationship to external frames of reference were labeled as
‘allocentric’. Examples of these items are “using a mental
map or imaging a campus map”, “using cardinal directions”,
“using large-scale landmarks”, etc.
Participants were classified into strategy groups by
calculating z-scores to reflect each participant’s tendency to
use each strategy compared to that of the entire group. For
each participant, the egocentric and allocentric z-scores

1961

were compared and if the two scores differed by more than
.75 SDs, the participant was deemed to have used one
strategy more than the other. If the z-scores did not differ by
.75 SDs, the participant was classified as using a mixed
strategy. This resulted in 33 participants who used a mixed
strategy, 15 who used an egocentric strategy, and 24 who
used an allocentric strategy.

was not statistically significant. The finding that strategy
use impacts the accuracy with which participants respond to
the allocentric-heading task is a novel finding and is not
predicted by the animal-model hypothesis.

Strategy Use and Sense-of-Direction To test the
relationship between SOD and strategy, we compared the
SBSOD scores of those classified as using egocentric and
allocentric strategies. Egocentric strategy use corresponded
with lower (or poorer) SBSOD scores (M = 3.7, SEM = .2)
and allocentric strategy use corresponded with higher (or
better) SBSOD scores (M = 4.5, SEM = .2), and this
difference was statistically significant, t(37) = -2.24, p < .05.
Looking at strategy use across PSOD and GSOD
individuals, we see that PSOD individuals used egocentric
(N = 8), allocentric (N = 6), and mixed strategies (N = 5).
However, GSOD individuals only reported using allocentric
strategies (N = 8) and mixed strategies (N = 10). A chisquared test revealed a significant relationship between
SOD and strategy, X2(2, N = 37) = 9.93, p < .01. GSOD
individuals were less likely to use egocentric strategies than
predicted by chance.

Figure 3: Mean accuracy rate as a function of heading
disparity and strategy. Error bars are the standard errors of
the mean.
Strategy Use and Accuracy A 2 (Strategy: egocentric or
allocentric) X 4 (Heading disparity: 0º, 90º, 180º, 270º)
ANOVA indicated a significant main effect of heading
disparity, F(3, 111) = 6.07, MSE = .12, p < .001, a
significant main effect of strategy, F(1, 37) = 9.50, MSE =
1.72, p < .01, and a non-significant interaction, F(3, 111) =
1.27, MSE = .03, p = .29. Figure 3 shows the mean accuracy
by heading disparity. Participants who tended to use
allocentric strategies were significantly more accurate (M =
72%) than those who tended to use egocentric strategies (M
= 50%). While Figure 3 shows a trend for allocentric
strategy users to show a weaker alignment effect, this trend

Photograph Familiarity and Accuracy Correlations
between participants’ mean familiarity rating (averaged over
the 38 pictures) and their mean accuracy on the headingrecall task were not significant, r(70) = .03, p = .81. This
indicates that participants, who rated their familiarity as
high, were not more accurate than participants with lower
familiarity. One interpretation is that all participants had a
level of familiarity high enough, as to not hinder their task
performance. However, correlating mean familiarity per
picture (averaged over individuals) with mean accuracy per
picture resulted in a significant correlation, r(36) = -.49, p <
.01. This suggests that despite pretesting for familiarity,
some familiarity differences remained between the pictures.
Importantly, as default heading is manipulated between
participants, differences in picture familiarity cannot
account for the effects of heading disparity on performance.

Discussion
We replicated findings that individuals can recall
allocentric-directional information from pictures, and that
individual performance in the allocentric-heading recall task
is related to SOD (Sholl et al., 2006; Burte & Hegarty,
2012). We also showed that these results replicate with a
button-press response rather than the more body-based
response of turning in one’s chair. Importantly, we provided
evidence for the use two strategies in this task, and showed
that strategy use was related to self-reported SOD. GSOD
participants reported using allocentric or mixed strategies,
compared to PSOD participants were equally divided across
strategy groups. Furthermore these groups had very
different patterns of performance; PSOD individuals
showed an alignment effect while GSOD did not. This
pattern suggests that allocentric strategy use resulted in
better performance, in general, and the alignment effect
primarily affects PSOD individuals.
Changing the response mode, from turning in a chair to
pressing a button, led to a weakened relationship between
heading disparity and accuracy relative to previous studies.
Specifically, the facilitation effect at 0º was not found.
Another weakened relationship was the correlation of SOD
with accuracy. Our correlations were noticeably lower than
those found by Sholl et al (2006); therefore, this experiment
adds doubt to the conclusion that that SOD solely reflects
the operation of the human head-direction system. Instead,
self-reported SOD might also relate to strategy differences.
Egocentric strategy use resulted in decreased accuracy in
general and decreased accuracy for larger heading
disparities (an alignment effect). Allocentric strategy use
resulted in somewhat more equivalent accuracy across
heading disparities. Although the interaction of strategy and
heading disparity was not significant in the present study,
the trends are notable in that they are similar to trends found

1962

by Kozhevnikov et al. (2006) using JRD tasks.
Although we found both strategy differences and
performance differences between those with good and poor
sense-of-direction, the relationship between SOD, strategy,
and performance remains ambiguous. Participants who used
the egocentric strategy were more likely to have a lower (or
poor) SOD, and those who used the allocentric strategy
were more likely to have a higher (or good) SOD. Good
SOD participants were also less likely to use egocentric
strategies, than would be predicted by chance. But the
causal relationships between strategy differences, individual
differences and performance are currently unclear, as having
a good SOD could cause people to use the allocentric
strategy or repeated use of the allocentric strategy could
contribute to having a good SOD. We are investigating the
causal relationship between strategy use, SOD, and
performance in a current study.
The newly discovered strategy differences between good
SOD participants and poor SOD participants might have
been due to the replacement of the body-based response
with the button-press response. It is possible that the
response of turning in one’s chair in previous studies forced
participants to use an egocentric strategy, which resulted in
the alignment effect for participants of all ability levels.
Perhaps, pressing a button did not force participants into
using an egocentric strategy, so good SOD participants were
freed from this restriction to think in terms of their body.
This allowed good SOD participants to demonstrate similar
performance across differing default headings. While our
findings cannot provide support for these ideas, our findings
do suggest that individual and strategy differences need to
be incorporated into accounts of the performance within the
allocentric-heading task. Research is also needed to
determine if the response mode change was responsible for
the identification of strategy differences.
We found a more nuanced relationship between
familiarity and performance than in our earlier study (Burte
& Hegarty, 2012). Specifically, familiarity was correlated
with performance, but only when compared across pictures,
and overall familiarity with the pictures was unrelated to
SOD. It seems that our goal to use only familiar
photographs was achieved, as accuracy was not correlated
with mean familiarity for all pictures; however, the
familiarity rating of individual photographs still impacted
accuracy. Since recognition of a location is likely the first
step in completing the allocentric-heading task, it follows
that familiarity on a picture-by-picture basis would affect
accuracy.
Another novel finding of this study is that we found
gender differences in task performance. It is possible that
females are more tied to their bodies than males, which
leads to a greater gender difference with a button-press
response than a more body-based response (i.e., turning).
Future experiments should continue to monitor gender
differences in this task.
In conclusion, we found novel evidence for strategy
differences in the allocentric-heading recall task and these

differences are related to level of performance and selfreported sense-of-direction. Given similar findings in
navigational tasks, we propose that choice of strategy is a
critical element to the understanding of individual
differences within spatial tasks. Specifically, this study
demonstrates that individual and strategy differences can be
found within tasks that are often conceptualized as universal
or invariant cognitive processes. Neuroscientific research
using animals has provided the foundation for
understanding the functional architecture of human spatial
abilities. Now, there is a need to incorporate the unique
aspects of human cognition – like strategy and individual
differences – into the functional architecture.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported
Collaborative Biotechnologies.

by the

Institute

for

References
Burte, H., & Hegarty, M. (2012). Revisiting the
Relationship between Allocentric-Heading Recall and
Self-Reported Sense of Direction. In N. Miyake, D.
Peebles, & R. P. Cooper (Eds.), Proceedings of the 34th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
162-167). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Hegarty, M., Richardson, A. E., Montello, D. R., Lovelace,
K., & Subbiah, I. (2002). Development of a self-report
measure of environmental spatial ability. Intelligence, 30,
425-447.
Ishikawa, T., & Montello, D. R. (2006). Spatial knowledge
acquisition from direct experience in the environment:
Individual differences in the development of metric
knowledge and the integration of separately learned
places. Cognitive psychology, 52(2), 93-129.
Kozhevnikov, M., & Hegarty, M. (2001). A dissociation
between object manipulation spatial ability and spatial
orientation ability. Memory & Cognition, 29(5), 745-756.
Kozhevnikov, M., Motes, M. A., Rasch, B., & Blajenkova,
O. (2006). Perspective-taking vs. mental rotation
transformations and how they predict spatial navigation
performance. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 20(3), 397417.
Kozlowski, L. T., & Bryant, K. J. (1977). Sense of
direction, spatial orientation, and cognitive maps. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 3, 590-598.
Prestopnik, J. L., & Roskos–Ewoldsen, B. (2000). The
relations among wayfinding strategy use, sense of
direction, sex, familiarity, and wayfinding ability. Journal
of Environmental Psychology, 20(2), 177-191.
Ranck, J. B., Jr. (1984). Head-direction cells in the deep cell
layers of dorsal presubiculum in freely moving rats.
Society of Neuroscience Abstracts, 10, 599.
Sholl, M. J., Kenny, R. J., & DellaPorta, K. A. (2006).
Allocentric-heading recall and its relation to self-reported
sense-of-direction. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 32(3), 516-533.

1963

