UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Infants’ Early Understanding of Coincidences

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6399q853

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Sim, Zi
Xu, Fei

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Infants’ Early Understanding of Coincidences
Zi L. Sim (zi@berkeley.edu)
Fei Xu (fei_xu@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720 USA

Abstract
Coincidences are surprising events that can provide learners
with the opportunity to revise their theories about how the
world works. In the current research, we investigate whether
infants are truly sensitive to coincidences, detecting these
events even when they cannot be predicted mere probabilities.
In addition, we explore whether this sensitivity is translated
into action, encouraging infants to engage in activities that
enable them to revise their theories. Results from 2
experiments demonstrate that infants display a sensitivity to
coincidence similar to adult intuitions, and they selectively
explore objects that produce anomalous data that better
supports an alternative theory than their prior theory.
Keywords: coincidence; probabilistic reasoning; theory
revision.

Introduction
As scientists, we are sometimes met with surprising results
in our research. At this point, it can be a struggle trying to
reconcile the evidence with our theories – do we chalk these
results up as experimenter error, or do we discard our
theories in favor of an alternative one? Sometimes, such
results were a mere coincidence; they go away upon a
review of our procedures or an increase in sample size.
Other times, however, unexpected results have led to
important scientific discoveries. For example, the discovery
that cholera was caused by infected water, rather than the
prevailing notion that the disease was transmitted by bad air,
was due to a suspicious coincidence observed by John
Snow, a physician, in 1854. After a particularly violent
outbreak of cholera in the city of London, Snow noticed that
the location of the victims were all tightly clustered around
a water pump on Broad Street (Snow, 1855). Using this
suspicious finding, Snow convinced the local council to
remove the handle of the water pump, and this action has
since been commonly credited with stopping the further
spread of cholera. Such discoveries abound in the history of
science, emphasizing the detection of suspicious
coincidences as key to causal discovery (Owens, 1992;
Nickerson, 2004) and rational inference (Horwich, 1982).
This detection of coincidences is not limited to scientific
research, as adults use it to make inferences in daily life as
well. They also act on these observations appropriately,
taking the nature of these coincidences into consideration.
Imagine a situation in which one leaves our apartment in a
hurry on the way to work. While waiting for the elevator,
we meet three of our neighbors, and each one of them is
carrying an umbrella. Do we dismiss this observation as a

mere coincidence? Probably not – we are likely to discard
our belief that today is just like any fair weather day in
California, rushing back to grab an umbrella too.
According to Griffiths & Tenenbaum (2007), our reaction
at the elevator can be properly understood through a
Bayesian framework, in which coincidences are formally
defined as events that provide better support for an
alternative theory, as compared to a currently favored causal
theory. Whether a surprising observation should be taken as
compelling evidence or dismissed as a mere coincidence is
thus dependent on two factors: the prior probability of the
alternative theory, and the strength of coincidence as given
by the likelihood ratio. The likelihood ratio quantifies the
support that the evidence provides for the alternative theory
over the original theory. Griffiths & Tenenbaum (2007) also
show empirically that adults evaluate coincidences in ways
that are consistent with this framework – they take into
account prior probabilities and likelihood ratios when
thinking about unexpected evidence. For example, adults
judged the results of a test of psychokinesis (low prior
probability) as mere coincidence and that of a test of genetic
engineering (high prior probability) as evidence, even when
the data provided the same support for the two alternative
theories. However, when the strength of the coincidence is
manipulated to be sufficiently high in the case of
psychokinesis, adults find it increasingly hard to dismiss the
observations as just chance results. Therefore, adults act in
ways consistent with an ideal Bayesian learner, evaluating
and acting on observed coincidences in rational ways.
Our reaction in the elevator situation can thus be easily
understood through the Bayesian lens. Given that there are
many more fair weather days than rainy days in California,
we should favor the null hypothesis due to its higher prior
probability: today is a fair weather day, just like most days.
However, the surprising observation that our neighbors are
all carrying their umbrellas gives a high likelihood ratio,
strongly suggesting an unexpected causal structure: today is
a rainy day. We have thus detected a coincidence: the
observed event provides better support for an alternative
theory of rainy weather, as compared to our prior theory of
fair weather. In this example, the alternative theory also has
a sufficiently high prior probability, pushing us to discard
our original theory, and to intervene by retrieving an
umbrella from our apartment.
Detecting such coincidences is important for learners, as
these events are often great opportunities for us to revise our
current theory of how the world works. This opportunity is
especially essential for children, whose accounts of the inner

3402

workings of the world are under major construction and
revision (Carey, 1985, 2009; Gopnik & Meltzoff, 1997).
Given that many causal relationships in the world are
probably novel to young children, coincidences are rich
sources of information for how their theories should be
revised, and thus one should predict that children should pay
great attention to coincidences (Griffiths & Tenenbaum,
2007). In this paper, we investigate this prediction by asking
whether young infants are sensitive to such coincidences,
and whether this sensitivity translates into action that can
help them update their theories about how the world works.
Recent research exploring the development of
probabilistic reasoning has provided ample evidence that 6to 12-month-old infants are sensitive to differences in
probabilities (Denison, Reed & Xu, 2012; Teglas, Girotto,
Gonzalez & Bonatti, 2007; Xu & Garcia, 2008). For
example, Teglas et al. (2007) showed that in a lottery
machine-like setup that consisted of 1 yellow and 3 blue
objects bouncing around, 12-month-old infants were more
“surprised” to see a yellow object (low probability) exiting
the machine, than when a blue object (high probability) did.
However, detecting coincidences is not quite the same as
assessing the relative probabilities of different events. In
some cases, events can have equal probabilities, but we do
not consider them equally surprising. Take the instance of
five rolls of a 6-sided dice. The probability of seeing the
sequence “2, 1, 4, 3, 1” is
= 0.00013. Although low in
probability, this event is unsurprising to most adults. In
contrast, the probability of seeing the sequence “1, 1, 1, 1,
1” is again
= 0.00013, but this time we are astonished,
becoming suspicious of the dice and the roller of the dice.
These intuitions cannot be simply explained by the proposal
that learners are actually evaluating and comparing the
probabilities of “kinds” of events (e.g. the probability that
the sequence consists of different numbers vs. the
probability that the sequence consists of the same number),
instead of single events (e.g. the probability that the specific
sequence is “2, 1, 4, 3, 1”). This proposal is problematic as
it is unclear what exactly counts as a “kind” of event, and
what a learner should do when there are many possible
“kinds” to consider (e.g. running sequences such as “1, 2, 3,
4, 5” or alternating sequences such as “1, 2, 1, 2, 1” are
suspicious too, but do not fit into the two earlier-mentioned
“kinds”; see Griffiths & Tenenbaum, 2007 for a more
comprehensive review). Instead, we consider the sequence
“1, 1, 1, 1, 1” to be a suspicious coincidence because it
provides better support for the alternative theory that the
dice is weighted towards “1,” rather than our original theory
that the dice is fair.
As such, there exists a gap in our knowledge of whether
infants are truly sensitive to coincidences – we know that
they are surprised by the occurrence of low-probability
events, but do they detect coincidences even when the mere
probabilities of different events are exactly equal? To
investigate this question, we designed an experiment
analogous to the dice roll example detailed earlier. 8-month-

old infants were familiarized to a box containing 6 different
colored balls. An experimenter then tossed out a ball from
the box, seemingly with no control over the outcome of the
event. The ball was then returned to the box, and this event
was repeated 3 more times. Using a violation-of-expectation
paradigm, we measured the amount of time infants looked at
a trial where the same colored ball fell out each time (e.g.
yellow, yellow, yellow, yellow), as well as a trial where a
different colored ball fell out each time (e.g. blue, green,
red, yellow). Note that each specific sequence shown had
the same exact event probabilities:
.
We also designed a second experiment with an
exploration measure, examining whether this sensitivity to
coincidences translates to action, such that the detection of a
suspicious coincidence could potentially have consequences
on children’s learning. In this experiment, we showed 13month-old infants two different boxes each containing 6
different colored balls. One of the boxes always generated
the same sample each time, and the other always generated a
different sample each time. The two boxes were then
offered to the infants to play with freely, and we measured
the amount of time they played with each box.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, we investigated whether infants were
sensitive to coincidences that cannot be predicted by the
computation of the mere probabilities of events. If infants
shared adult intuitions, they should look longer at the event
in which the same colored ball fell out of the box each time
under random sampling, than when a different colored ball
fell out each time. We also included a Baseline condition to
assess infants’ intrinsic preferences for these two events.

Method
Participants Forty infants (21 males and 19 females, M = 8;
6 [months; days], R = 7; 3 to 9; 1) were tested. All were
recruited from Berkeley, California, and its surrounding
communities. An additional 7 infants were tested but
excluded due to fussiness (N = 5) or experimenter error (N
= 2). Infants who participated in the experiment were
required to be exposed to English a minimum of 50% of the
time. Infants received a small gift for their participation.
Materials A total of 36 colored balls (7 cm in diameter)
were used. The balls came in 6 colors: red, purple, blue,
green, yellow and orange.
A small white box (28 cm x 10 cm x 7.5 cm) constructed
from foam core was used in the Free Play phase of the
experiment (see Procedure). The box contained 3 different
colored balls.
A small, transparent Plexiglas container with an open top
(16.5 cm x 7.5 cm x 9 cm) was used to display the sampled
ball during the test trials.
A large box (30 cm x 26 cm x 21 cm) was used to display
the population of 6 different colored balls during the
familiarization and test phase. The box was rectangular,

3403

with a Plexiglas window to show the population of balls,
and two hidden back compartments. One compartment was
used to hold the 4 sample balls to be tossed out later during
the test trials, while the other compartment was to contain
the balls that were being returned to the box after each toss.
From the infants’ perspectives, the box appeared as one
single unit, filled only with 6 different colored balls. The
Plexiglas display window was covered with a fabric curtain
to ensure that the population would be hidden from sight
while each sampled ball was being tossed out.
Apparatus The testing room was divided in half by curtains
spanning its width and height. The curtains had a cut-out
above a puppet stage that measured 94 cm x 55 cm (width x
height). The experimenter sat behind the stage with her
upper body and head visible to the infant. There was a black
back curtain attached to the stage, such that the
experimenter is hidden from view when it is dropped. An
observer, present to code the infant’s looking times, sat in a
corner of the room and was not visible to the infant. She
watched the infant on a TV monitor and coded the infant’s
looking behavior online using JHAB (R. Casstevens, 2007).
The observer was blind to the order of the test trials.
Infants sat in a high chair about 70 cm from the center of
the stage. Each parent sat next to their infant facing the
opposite direction, and was instructed to avoid looking at
the stage. Two video cameras were used to record each
experimental session, one to record the infant’s looking
behavior, and another to record the experimenter’s
presentation of the trials.
Design and Procedure Each infant was randomly assigned
to a Sampling condition or a Baseline condition. Both
conditions consisted of a Calibration phase, a Free Play
phase, a Familiarization phase and a Test phase.
Sampling Condition To calibrate each infant’s looking
window, a squeaky toy and/or keys were used in the
Calibration phase to direct the infant’s attention to the
outside parameters of the stage.
In the Free Play phase, the infant was shown a white box
containing three different colored balls. She was encouraged
to play with the balls for approximately 30 seconds, and the
experimenter ensured that the infant touched every ball.
This phase was to allow the infants to become familiar with
the balls used in the experiment.
The Familiarization phase that followed consisted of two
trials. To begin each trial, the experimenter placed the large
box on the stage with its front curtain down. Then, she lifted
the curtain to reveal a population of 6 different colored
balls, saying “See this?” She proceeded to shake the box
side to side 4 times, and then set the box back to the center
of the stage. While the infant was looking at the stage, the
experimenter said “Look, [baby’s name], look!” and
dropped the back curtain, hiding herself from view of the
infant. The observer began timing upon hearing the second

“look”. Trials ended when the infant looked away for 2
consecutive seconds.
The large box was removed from the stage between each
familiarization trial, and the back curtain was lowered to
conceal the experimenter. These trials were included to
familiarize the infants to the population of balls in the large
box, as well as to the general procedure of the experiment.
The familiarizations lasted about 2 minutes for each trial.
The Test phase consisted of two test trials, a Uniform trial
and a Variable trial. On each test trial, the experimenter
placed the large box and the small Plexiglas container on the
left and right side of the stage (infant’s view) respectively.
The two objects were placed 8 cm apart. The experimenter
then lifted the front curtain of the large box, saying “What’s
this?” She lowered her head and directed her eye gaze at the
box for 1 second, in order to remind the infants of the
population of balls in the large box. She then picked up the
box and shook it 4 times. After the box was set back down,
the experimenter lowered the front curtain to conceal the
box’s display window. Then, the box was lifted and tilted to
its side, allowing one ball to fall out into the small Plexiglas
container. Although it appeared that the ball had fallen out
from the population of balls at random, the ball actually fell
out of the back compartment of the box, which contained
balls that had initially been set up by the experimenter. The
experimenter then directed her gaze towards the “sampled”
ball in Plexiglas container, saying “Look at that!” After 1
second, the ball was returned into the box. This process of
revealing the population, shaking the box and tossing a ball
out was repeated 3 more times, to make a total of 4
“sampled” balls. When the 4th ball was tossed out, the
experimenter said “Look, [baby’s name], look!” and
dropped the back curtain of the stage. The observer began
timing upon hearing the second “look,” and ended the trial
after the infant looked away for 2 consecutive seconds.
Between trials, the stage was cleared and the back curtain
was lowered as well. Each test trial lasted for approximately
2 minutes.

Figure 1: Schematic representation of the two trials.
Each infant participated in a Uniform trial and a Variable
trial (See Figure 1). In the Uniform trial, the 4 “sampled”
balls were all of the same color (e.g. 4 yellow balls), while

3404

in the Variable trial, the 4 “sampled” balls were all of a
different color (e.g. 1 red ball, 1 green ball, 1 blue ball, and
1 yellow ball). The last ball that was tossed out in the
Variable trial was always identical in color to the balls used
in the Uniform trial, to ensure that any difference in looking
time was not due to a preference for balls of a certain color.
Trial order and the colors of the sampled balls were
appropriately counterbalanced across infants.

this condition looked longer in the Uniform trial, Wilcoxon
signed-ranked test: z = 1.93, p = .05. In contrast, infants in
the Baseline condition looked significantly longer in the
Variable trial (M = 15.96s, SD = 9.02) than the Uniform trial
(M = 10.14s, SD = 6.01), t(19) = 2.48, p = .02, d = .76.
Fifteen out of 20 infants in this condition looked longer in
the Variable trial, Wilcoxon signed-ranked test: z = 2.35, p
= .02.

Baseline Condition The procedure in the Baseline
condition was identical to the Sampling condition, except
that instead of having the 4 balls being tossed out from the
large box, the balls were individually taken out from and
returned to the experimenter’s pocket. The Baseline
condition provided a measure of the infants’ pattern of
looking times for 4 balls of the same color vs. 4 balls of
different colors.

Discussion

Results
Preliminary analyses found no effects of gender, median
age-split (whether the infants were younger or older than the
median age of the group), or test trial order (Uniform trial
first vs. Variable trial first) on looking times. Subsequent
analyses were collapsed over these variables.

In the Sampling condition, infants looked reliably longer
when 4 balls that were tossed out at random were all of the
same color, than when 4 balls were all of different colors,
even though the sequences had equal event probabilities.
Hence, infants found it surprising when samples that were
being generated from a uniform distribution over the long
run were identical, i.e. when 4 randomly generated balls
(with replacement) all shared the same color, even though
they came from a population of 6 different colored balls.
This pattern of looking time was reversed in the Baseline
condition, where infants looked longer when 4 balls of
different colors were produced from the experimenter’s
pocket instead. Thus, our findings cannot be attributed to a
preference for sequences of identical events. These results
support the claim that infants are sensitive to coincidences,
even when such suspicious coincidences cannot be predicted
by evaluating the mere probabilities of particular events.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2, we used an exploration measure to
examine whether the infants’ sensitivity to coincidences
translates into action with consequences on their learning.
We predicted that infants should play longer with the box
that generated the same colored ball each time under
random sampling as compared to a box that generated a
different colored ball each time.

Method
Figure 2: Mean looking times in the Sampling condition and
the Baseline condition. Error bars represent SE.
Looking times for the test trials were analyzed using a 2 x
2 repeated-measures ANOVA with Condition (Sampling vs.
Baseline) as the between-subjects factor and Trial Type
(Uniform vs. Variable) as the within-subjects factor. There
was a significant interaction between Condition and Trial
Type, F(1, 38) = 11.58, p = .002, 2 = .23. There were no
main effects found.
To break down the interaction, we conducted follow-up ttests exploring the effect of Trial Type (Uniform vs.
Variable) for each Condition separately (See Figure 2 for
mean looking times). In the Sampling condition, infants
looked significantly longer in the Uniform trial (M = 13.68s,
SD = 9.87) than the Variable trial (M = 10.22s, SD = 6.35),
t(19) = 2.49, p = .02, d = .42. Thirteen out of 20 infants in

Participants Fifteen infants (10 males and 5 females, M =
13; 3 [months; days], R = 12; 18 to 13; 29) were tested. All
were recruited from Berkeley, California, and its
surrounding communities. An additional 3 infants were
tested but excluded for not playing with any of the boxes
during the test trial. Infants who participated in the
experiment were required to be exposed to English a
minimum of 50% of the time. Infants received a small gift
for their participation.
Materials The materials used in Experiment 2 were
identical to those used in Experiment 1, except that the large
box containing the population of balls was replaced with
two new boxes. Similar to the large box, these two boxes
(29 cm x 23 cm x 22 cm) each had a Plexiglas window to
display a population of 6 different colored balls, as well as
two hidden back compartments. One of the boxes had its
surface painted white, with a black fabric curtain covering
the display window, while the other box had its surface

3405

painted black, with a white fabric curtain covering its
window. This design was to enhance infant’s discrimination
of the two boxes, without biasing the infant towards any of
the boxes.

Results
All of the infants’ behaviors were coded offline. Preliminary
analyses found no effects of gender or demonstration order
(Uniform box first vs. Variable box first) on infants’
exploration of the boxes. Subsequent analyses were
collapsed over these variables.
Preliminary results show that infants played significantly
longer with the Uniform box (M = 25.02s, SD = 26.06) than
the Variable box (M = 7.02s, SD = 11.78), t(14) = 2.08, p =
.05, d = 0.95.

Design and Procedure Infants were tested individually in a
forced-choice paradigm. Each infant sat on her parent’s lap
on the floor approximately 1.2 meters from a puppet stage.
Parents were instructed to hold on to their infant, and to
avoid influencing their child in any way. They were also
told that they would be asked to set their infant on the floor
directly in front of their lap when the experimenter gives the
instruction, “Do you want to come and play?” towards the
end of the experiment. Each experimental session consisted
of a Free Play phase, a Demonstration phase, and a Test
phase. Two video cameras recorded the infants’ and
experimenter’s behavior during the session.

Discussion
As predicted, infants played reliably longer with the
Uniform box than the Variable box. These results replicate
the findings in Experiment 1, demonstrating the infants are
sensitive to coincidences that cannot be predicted by mere
probabilities. In addition, our preliminary results indicate
that infants do translate this sensitivity into action,
selectively exploring the box that generated data which was
indicative of a suspicious coincidence.

Free Play Phase This phase was identical to that of
Experiment 1.
Demonstration Phase To begin the Demonstration phase,
the experimenter placed the two large boxes on the stage
about 20 cm apart, with their front curtains down. One of
the boxes was a Uniform box, containing 4 balls of the same
color hidden in its back compartment. The other box was a
Variable box, containing 4 hidden balls of different colors
instead. The experimenter also placed a transparent
container in the space in front of the center of the two boxes.
She then drew the infant’s attention to the box on the left,
saying “What’s in this box?” The front curtain of this box
was subsequently lifted, revealing a population of 6
different colored balls. The procedure that followed was
identical to an individual test trial in Experiment 1, in which
the experimenter seemingly tosses out 4 colored balls from
the box at random, one after another with replacement. The
only exception was that the 4th ball was returned to the box
after 1 second, as looking behaviors were not of interest in
Experiment 2. After this 4th ball was returned to the box, the
experimenter said “All done!” She then pointed to the box
on the right, and said “Let’s see what’s in this box!” The
experimenter then repeated the steps performed on the
previous box. This phase lasted approximately 3 minutes.
The boxes that were assigned as the Uniform or Variable
box, as well as the colors of the sampled balls, were
appropriately counterbalanced across infants.
Test Phase Each infant completed one test trial. The
experimenter brought the two large boxes forward and set
them down on the ground about 1 m from the infant, saying
“Do you want to come and play?” Parents were instructed to
let go of their infant if they had not done so at this point.
When the infant touched one of the boxes, the experimenter
started a timer and the test trial ended after 60 seconds.
Coding Infants were coded for the amount of time in which
they were in contact with each of the boxes.

General Discussion
We provide some suggestive evidence that infants are
sensitive to coincidences, detecting these anomalous events
even when they cannot be predicted by their mere event
probabilities. In Experiment 1, infants were presented with a
box that ostensibly generated balls under random sampling,
creating an expectation that a sequence of tosses should
result in a sampling distribution that is even across the 6
colors present in the box. Infants were surprised when the
box consistently produced samples that were identical
instead. This finding is impressive, considering that the two
different sequences that infants saw in Experiment 1 had
equal probabilities of occurring. Experiment 2 replicated
this novel finding with an older age group through an action
measure, and extended the finding by demonstrating that the
sensitivity that infants show for coincidences translates into
action, as infants preferentially explored a box that produced
a sequence of four of the same colored balls, as compared to
a box that produced a sequence of four different colored
balls.
We speculate that the obtained differences in looking
exploration times arise because infants are evaluating the
data that they receive according to how well it supports
different underlying causal models. For example, a sequence
of four yellow balls is surprising because the event provides
better support for the alternative theory that the box is
rigged, rather than the original theory of random sampling.
However, another interpretation of our results is possible,
namely that infants (and adults) may consider the uniform
sequence “yellow, yellow, yellow, yellow” to be lower in
probability than the variable sequence “blue, green, red,
yellow.” Therefore, the results obtained may be due to a
misunderstanding of event probabilities, rather than a
consideration of alternative theories. More empirical work is
thus necessary to parse these interpretations apart. That

3406

being said, our results continue to provide evidence that
young infants are sensitive to anomalous data, and will
selectively explore the source of these anomalies.
One might also raise the representativeness heuristic as an
alternative account of these results (Kahneman & Tversky,
1972). By this account, infants preferred the box that
generated the same sample each time because the samples
(e.g. 4 yellow balls) were very dissimilar to the population
from which they were drawn (i.e. 6 different colored balls).
However, recent research examining infants’ probabilistic
reasoning has rendered this interpretation unlikely, as
looking patterns were predicted by probabilistic reasoning
and not by the representativeness heuristic when these two
interpretations were pitted against each other (Denison &
Xu, 2010).
Besides understanding how infants’ representation of the
presented events led to differences in their looking and
exploration times, of interest in these studies is also why
such differences arose. We believe that the ideas advanced
by Griffiths & Tenenabaum (2007) may shed light on this
issue: infants pay attention to the coincidences that they
encounter in the world, as these surprising events are likely
to be rich sources of information for theory revision. By
selectively investigating these events, children provide
themselves with an opportunity to make a discovery that can
enable them to revise their theories.
The present results thus provide tentative support for a
growing set of findings demonstrating that infants and
young children attend to the generative process of the data
they observe and effectively consider between different
models for the inputs that they receive (e.g. Gerken, 2010).
Our results also bring additional insight to recent research
demonstrating a Goldilocks effect in infant’s allocation of
attention, which found preferential attention to visual
sequences that are neither too simple, nor too complex
(Kidd, Piantadosi & Aslin, 2012). In this research,
experimenters found that 7-month-old infants are likely to
look away earlier for events that are highly predictable.
However, predictability is probably not the only determinant
of how infants allocate their attention – although a sequence
of 4 yellow balls in our experiments was highly predictable,
infants paid greater attention to this event because it was
inconsistent with their prior expectations about random
sampling. Thus, we suggest that infants’ consideration of
the generative process for the observed data may also play
an important role in their allocation of visual attention.
In summary, our experiments provide some suggestive
evidence that infants may be sensitive to coincidences.
Furthermore, this sensitivity translates into action, as infants
preferentially explored the source of such anomalous data.
However, many open questions remain: How did infants
represent the events presented in our experiments? Why did
infants show the obtained differences in looking and
exploration time? What is the relationship between infants’
looking times and their exploration? Future research
examining these questions will provide us with a better
grasp of infants’ understanding of coincidence, and how

children eventually come to have an accurate idea of how
the world works by adulthood.

Acknowledgments
We thank Anjelica Benitez and the Berkeley Early Learning
Lab (BELL) for their help in recruitment and stimuli
building, and the parents and infants for their participation.
We also thank Tom Griffiths and Noah Goodman for
insightful discussions.

References
Carey, S. (1985). Conceptual change in childhood.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Carey, S. (2009). The origin of concepts. Oxford University
Press, USA.
Denison, S., Reed, C. & Xu, F. (2012) The emergence of
probabilistic reasoning in very young infants: evidence
from 4.5- and 6-month-old infants. Developmental
Psychology.
Denison, S., & Xu, F. (2010). Integrating Physical
Constraints in Statistical Inference by 11‐Month‐Old
Infants. Cognitive Science, 34(5), 885-908.
Gopnik, A., & Meltzoff, A. N. (1997). Words, thoughts, and
theories. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Griffiths, T. L., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2007). From mere
coincidences to meaningful discoveries. Cognition,
103(2), 180-226.
Gerken, L. (2010). Infants use rational decision criteria for
choosing among models of their input. Cognition, 115(2),
362-366.
Horwich, P. (1982). Probability and evidence. Cambridge
University Press.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1972). Subjective
probability: A judgment of representativeness. Cognitive
psychology, 3, 430–454.
Kidd, C., Piantadosi, S. T., & Aslin, R. N. (2012). The
Goldilocks effect: Human infants allocate attention to
visual sequences that are neither too simple nor too
complex. PloS one, 7(5), e36399.
Nickerson, R. S. (2004). Cognition and chance: The
psychology of probabilistic reasoning. Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Owens, D. (1992). Causes and coincidences. Cambridge
University Press.
Snow, J. (1855). On the mode of communication of cholera.
John Churchill.
Teglas, E., Girotto, V., Gonzalez, M., Bonatti, L.L. (2007).
Intuitions of probabilities shape expectations about the
future at 12 months and beyond. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, 104, 19156-19159.
Xu, F. & Garcia, V. (2008). Intuitive statistics by 8-monthold infants. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, 105, 5012-5015.

3407

