UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Infant contributions to joint attention predict vocabulary development

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5nt6s5cq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Scott, Katherine
Sakkalou, Elena
Ellis-Davies, Kate
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Infant contributions to joint attention predict vocabulary development
Katherine Scott (scottks@cf.ac.uk)
Elena Sakkalou
Kate Ellis-Davies
Elma Hilbrink
School of Psychology, Cardiff University
Park Place, Cardiff, CF10 3AT, UK

Ulrike Hahn (u.hahn@bbk.ac.uk)
Department of Psychological Sciences, Birkbeck
Malet Street, London, WC1E 7HX, UK

Merideth Gattis (gattism@cf.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, Cardiff University
Park Place, Cardiff, CF10 3AT, UK

Abstract

Meltzoff, 2008; Crain-Thorenson & Dale, 1992). Other
influences on language ability are local and specific, and
as a result allow causal hypotheses about specific
processes through which words are learned, such as joint
attention (eg; Carpenter, Nagell & Tomasello, 1998;).
Joint attention refers to a situation in which two people
share a common point of reference, such as when a
mother and child both look at a toy and periodically look
to one another as well, while at the same time the mother
describes the toy (Mundy & Newell, 2007). In such
situations, joint attention is thought to help children
identify relations between words and their referents, and
in so doing, increase word learning (Baldwin, 1991;
1993; Brooks & Meltzoff, 2008). Joint attention thus
depends on adult and infant behaviours, and the
conjunction of the two supports word learning (Smith, Yu
& Pereira, 2011).
Several studies of naturalistic parent-infant interactions
have demonstrated that parents differ in how they interact
with infants, and these differences influence word
learning. These differences include the frequency of
utterances, use of prescriptives, and choice of object
reference whilst interacting with their infants (Akhtar,
Dunham & Dunham, 1991; Masur, Flynn & Eichorst,
2005; Tomasello & Farrar, 1986). Perhaps most
importantly, the results of a number of longitudinal
studies indicate that caregivers’ sensitivity and
responsiveness to their infants’ focus of attention during
parent-infant interactions predicts the timing of early
linguistic milestones and vocabulary growth rate (e.g.,
Carpenter et al., 1998; Tamis-LeMonda, Bornstein &
Baumwell, 2001). This evidence suggests that caregivers
are responsible for joint attention episodes: when
caregivers notice their infants’ focus of attention and join
in, joint attention is established, and as a result, word
learning is supported.

Joint attention has long been accepted as constituting a
privileged circumstance in which word learning prospers.
Consequently research has investigated the role that
maternal responsiveness to infant attention plays in
predicting language outcomes. However there has been a
recent expansion in research implicating similar predictive
effects from individual differences in infant behaviours.
Emerging from the foundations of such work comes an
interesting question: do the relative contributions of the
mother and infant to joint attention episodes impact upon
language learning? In an attempt to address this, two joint
attention behaviours were assessed as predictors of
vocabulary attainment (as measured by OCDI Production
Scores). These predictors were: mothers encouraging
attention to an object given their infant was already
attending to an object (maternal follow-in); and infants
looking to an object given their mothers encouragement of
attention to an object (infant follow-in). In a sample of 14month old children (N=36) we compared the predictive
power of these maternal and infant follow-in variables on
concurrent and later language performance. Results using
Growth Curve Analysis provided evidence that while both
maternal follow-in and infant follow-in variables
contributed to production scores, infant follow-in was a
stronger predictor. Consequently it does appear to matter
whose final contribution establishes joint attention
episodes. Infants who more often follow-in into their
mothers’ encouragement of attention have larger, and faster
growing vocabularies between 14 and 18-months of age.
Keywords: vocabulary, maternal responsiveness, joint
attention, growth curve modelling

Introduction
An extensive body of research has identified several
fundamental influences on word learning during infancy
and early childhood. Some influences are broad predictors
of language ability, such as maternal education and
frequency of story reading in the home (Brooks &

3384

Other studies have identified robust infant
characteristics that influence word learning, such as infant
attentional abilities or attention style. For example,
Tamis-LeMonda and Bornstein (1989) reported that 5month-olds who habituated to a visual stimulus more
quickly also had larger receptive vocabularies at 13
months. Dixon and Smith replicated this finding and
demonstrated that infant temperament moderates the
relation between attention and vocabulary size (Dixon &
Smith, 2008). The influence of infant attention on
vocabulary size is presumed to function via joint
attention, and indeed, individual differences between
infants on experimental measures of gaze following
predict later language (Brooks & Meltzoff, 2005; 2008).
Until recently, however, the hypothesised relation
between infant joint attention and word learning was
presumed through global longitudinal relations rather than
observations of local, specific relations. Recent work
using microanalytic techniques for investigating joint
attention and word learning has given insight into both
infant and maternal contributions. Infants holding an
object named by the adult, the size of the object in the
infant’s view, and the stability of head movements during
naming are predictive of word learning (Yu, Xu & Zhu,
2011). Additionally parents’ holding the object being
named is only predictive of word learning when in doing
so they attract their infants’ attention (Yu et al., 2011). In
similar micro-analytic studies of children’s eye
movements during word learning, systematic, selective
and sustained attentional shifts have been labelled the
“critical factor” (Smith & Yu, in press; Yu & Smith,
2012).
Our aim was to build on the studies of Yu et al., and Yu
& Smith by examining both maternal and infant
contributions to joint attention, and to examine the
significance of those contributions for word learning at a
global, rather than local level. A lot is known about infant
and maternal behaviours during constrained learning tasks
but much less about their micro-level behaviours in real
time such as during free play (Yu et al., 2011). On a
general environmental level maternal reponsiveness has
been shown to predict language outcomes (TamisLeMonda et al., 2001). Infant joint attention behaviours
measured experimentally have also been shown to predict
language outcomes (Brooks & Meltzoff, 2005, 2008). We
wished to assess complementary joint attention
behaviours of infants and their mothers in a single
situation. Our aim was to assess both infants and their
mothers in a genuine and sustained learning environment.
To do so we implemented a methodology to assess both
maternal and infant contributions in the same naturalistic
interaction concurrently by using a single micro-level
behavioural coding system. Mothers and their 14-monthold infants participated in 10-minute free play interactions
in a university laboratory. We coded mother and infant
attention independently, using a fine-grained coding
system that has been used in a number of studies of

maternal responsiveness and infant attention (Bornstein,
Suwalsky, Ludemann, Painter & Schulthess (1991). We
then combined those codes to compute the likelihood that
a mother encouraged attention to an object, given that her
infant was already attending to it (maternal follow-in) and
the likelihood that an infant attended to an object given
that the mother encouraged attention to it (infant followin). Both likelihood measures were odds ratios. Maternal
follow-in identified situations in which the mother
followed an infant’s attentional state and as a result, joint
attention was established. Infant follow-in identified
situations in which the infant followed the mother’s
attentional state, and as a result, joint attention was
established. We then examined the predictive power of
each variable (maternal follow-in and infant follow-in) for
language development at 14, 16, 17 and 18 months
(measured as productive vocabulary size).
In this study three hypotheses were examined. First, in
keeping with previous work, we hypothesized that
maternal follow-in at 14 months would predict language
development from 14 to 18 months. Second, we
hypothesized that infant follow-in at 14 months would
predict language development from 14 to 18 months.
Finally we considered infant follow-in to be an important
indicator of the infant’s active contribution to establishing
joint attention, and therefore hypothesized that infant
follow-in would be a better predictor of language
development than maternal follow-in.

Method
Participants
Mothers were recruited in their third trimester of
pregnancy to take part in First Steps, a longitudinal study
of development from birth to 18-months, which has since
been extended to four-years, (see Ellis-Davies, Sakkalou,
Fowler, Hilbrink & Gattis, 2012). This recruitment took
place in community groups. Of the 39 mother/infant
dyads initially recruited, 36 infants (19 boys, 17 girls)
were included in the analyses reported here. Exclusion
criteria were failure to complete the interaction (P36 &
P38), and any referral for developmental delays (P18).
Infants came from a range of socioeconomic and maternal
education backgrounds. Although all infants’ data was
included in the analysis 4 infants missed vocabulary
testing at one of the four time points. The majority
(N=29) were first language English speakers. A further 7
infants were bi-lingual or second language speakers.
Monthly testing sessions took place either on campus at
Cardiff University or in a local community facility.
Parents were given £25 in shopping vouchers at each of
their monthly visits and a final £250 upon completion of
the study. For more information on the sample and study
see Ellis-Davies, Sakkalou, Fowler, Hilbrink & Gattis,
(2012).

3385

scores for the infants were the outcome variables of
interest for the current study.

Procedure
Infant Vocabulary Growth Measure. Vocabulary
acquisition scores were obtained using the Oxford
University Babylab U.K adaptation of the MacArthurBates Communicative Development Inventory (OCDI:
Hamilton, Plunkett & Schafer, 2000). Parents completed
all sections of the OCDI when their children reached 14,
16, 17 and 18-months of age. Vocabulary production

Interaction Coding. During the monthly testing session
at 14-months mothers and their infants were left alone
with a standard set of age appropriate toys. These “free
play” interactions were filmed and the first 10-mins of
uninterrupted interaction were used for coding the
variables of interest.

FIGURE 1. Scatterplots and regression lines of vocabulary production and age for all infants who met inclusion criteria.
Interactions were coded using mutually exclusive and
exhaustive coding scheme as described in Bornstein,
Suwalsky, Ludemann, Painter & Schulthess (1991). Using
Mangold® (2010) INTERACT software infant attention
and maternal encouragement of attention behaviours were
coded if they met or exceeded one second in duration.
Infant codes were limited to: look to object; look to
caregiver; or none/not visible. Maternal codes were
limited to: physical or verbal encouragement of attention
to object; encouragement of attention to caregiver; or
none of the above. Interrater reliability was based on 10%
of interactions. Cohen’s Kappa was .64 for infant
attention and.8 for maternal encouragement. This study

was particularly interested in the didactic behaviours of
both parties. Once interactions were coded using the two
modes a sequential analysis was carried out following the
procedures of Bakeman and Quera (1995) and Bakeman
and Gnisci (2005). This computed odds ratios, descriptive
measures of effect size, for our variables. Odds ratios
were computed using episodes where the target follow-in
behavior commenced within 3-secs of the preceding
behavior beginning. If target behaviours were more likely
to be initiated during points when the corresponding
behaviour was ongoing (as opposed to any other times)
these odds ratios were greater than 1. The Generalized
Sequential Querier program (GSEQ version 4.1.2;

3386

Bakeman & Quera, 1995) was used to compute these
values. Infant follow-in was classified as: the infant looks
to object given maternal encouragement of attention to
object. Maternal follow-in then was classified as:
maternal encouragement of attention to object given
infant attending to object.

Models of productive vocabulary growth
GCMs provide a powerful tool for investigating the
impact of predictor variables on both the overall
performance and accelerated growth of productive
vocabulary (Mirman, Dixon & Magnuson, 2008). We
perfomed a median split on our predictor variables (see
Figure. 2a & 2b), and using the R (version 2.15.2 [201210-26]) package lme4 (Bates, Maechler & Dai, 2012)
both random and fixed effects were input into the model
and their predictive strength assessed. The best fitting
model was a mixed effects model including random
effects of participant on the intercept of a linear growth
curve, coupled fixed effects of infant follow-in (median
split high-low) on the intercept and on the slope; and
fixed effects of other individual differences on the slope.
With such models Akaike’s Information Criterion (AIC),
Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC), and Chi^2 are the
most commonly used indices of goodness of fit. For our
best fitting model these were: AIC=1311.6, BIC=1335
Chi^2=104.89, p<.001) (See Table.1 Model I1). Whereas
the addition of maternal follow-in provided a significant
improvement in fit over the baseline model of random
effects of participant on productive vocabulary growth
(see Model M1, Table.1), the addition of maternal followin provided no improvement over and above the inclusion
of infant follow in. Infant follow-in is thus a better
predictor of both absolute vocabulary values and rate of
growth, where maternal follow-in only effects rate of
growth and to a lesser extent.

Results
Productive vocabulary scores
As reported in previous work (eg., Brooks & Meltzoff,
2008), productive growth increased rapidly across these
age ranges in our sample (Figure.1). As expected mean
productive vocabulary scores across children at each age
correlated strongly and positively. The mean at each data
collection point was significantly different from the others
with the only exception being between 16-month
(M=27.58, SD=31.07), and 17-month (M=46.63,
SD=55.75), values.
Interaction coding results
The sequential analysis odds ratios (N=36), were
generated giving a probability of the examined sequence
over others. Infant follow-in (M=1.15, SD=.33), and
maternal follow-in (M=1.22, SD=.52), correlated
positively (r=.38, p=.02). There was no significant
difference between these values t(35)=-.78, p=.44).
Individual correlations between infant follow-in and
vocabulary production at each time step were between
r=.34 and r=.42, and were all significant, p<.05. Maternal
follow-in correlations were non-signifcant, ranging
between r=.07 and r=.23. In order to consider the data
from all measurement points together in a single overall
analysis, we turned to growth curve models (GCMs).

Follow-up analysis
In order to eliminate the possibility that our infant followin variable was simply a function of how often an infant
looked to objects or how long they looked to objects in
total or the average duration of looks to object, a simple
independent samples t-test was carried out to ensure these
characteristics of the low and high groups were not
significantly different. No differences between high and
low groups were found for: number of looks to an object,
t=-.54, p=.59; total duration of looking at an object, t=.7,
p=.67; and average duration of looking at an object, t=.48,
p=.64.

General Discussion
In this paper joint attention episodes between mothers
and infants were evaluated, in order to examine maternal
and infant contributions to joint attention and their
relations to language outcomes. The duration of joint
attention episodes has previously been correlated with
language development (Markus, Mundy, Morales,
Delgado & Yale 2001). It is thought to do so by helping
children identify relations between objects and words
(Baldwin, 1991; 1993). In this study we sought to
elucidate a more specific picture of the components
involved. Previous work has demonstrated maternal
contributions to joint attention influence vocabulary
development (Carpenter et al., 1998; Tamis-LeMonda et

Figures.2a & 2.b. Line-graphs showing production scores
(mean number of words) over time in months based on
median split values of subjects on infant follow-in (2a)
and maternal follow-in (2b) variables.

3387

al., 2001). We used naturalistic interactions to evaluate
infant and maternal contributions to joint attention in
comparable ways. Results from our Growth Curve
Analysis models showed that both infant and maternal
follow-in behaviours contributed to rate of language
growth. Furthermore infant follow-in made the most
sizeable contribution to the model: infants’ tendency to
look at objects after being encouraged to so do was
strongly related to productive vocabulary size and growth
over the next 4 months. It is not simply infants who look
more frequently to objects, or show sustained visual
attention whose productive vocabularies are higher. The
follow-in variable rests upon the infant’s visual attention
being temporally contingent on the encouragement of
their parent. The current paper provides support for a
model in which it is infant and not only maternal offerings
to early word learning situations that are substantial
(Smith & Yu, 2010; Yu & Smith, 2012). For productive
vocabulary at 14 months-old it is important that infants
respond appropriately to mothers’ encouragement of
attention by attending to objects, thereby establishing
joint attention.

attention, as opposed to outside them, has been previously
documented (Tomasello & Farrar, 1986). Once infants
establish a period of joint attention by orienting to a point
of shared reference with their parent, given meaningful
encouragement to do so, the subsequent information
relayed can aid forming new associations (Waxman &
Gelman, 2009).
These findings then add to evidence that global
attributes of joint engagement and specific individual
differences in the protagonists contributing to it are
crucial in guiding language outcome. Our results confirm
and extend prior reports that individual differences in
infants’ abilities to respond to joint attention attempts
between 6 and 18-months relate positively to vocabulary
development (Morales, Mundy, Delgado, Yale,
Messinger, Neal & Schwartz, 2000). Future studies
should investigate this relation further by comparing the
contributions of maternal initiation and infant follow-in to
joint attention.
By assessing maternal and infant contributions to joint
attention in comparable ways within a single naturalistic
interaction we have been able to advance beyond previous
studies. Such temporally precise micro-analytic analysis
of attention has been previously encouraged as a means to
elucidate the processes of word learning (eg., Yu &
Smith; 2010, Yu et al., 2011). We aimed to bridge a gap
between the micro-analytic measurement-techniques used
previously in experimental word learning settings, and a
significantly more naturalistic situation. Previous
experiments judged word-learning performance on those
novel items included in the experimental task. We have
moved beyond this to show that global productive
vocabulary (as measured by the OCDI) benefits
significantly from infants being able to detect and respond
successfully to attempts at joint engagement during
periods of unconstrained play. Infant follow-in, over and
above maternal follow-in, is a novel and valuable
predictor of vocabulary development. Future research
should address what quality of the episode underlies this
result.

Table 1: Table of growth curve model estimated fixed
effects and model fits.
Fixed Effects

Baseline

Age
Age*Infant
Follow-in
Age*Maternal
Follow-in
Age*Maternal
followin*Infant
follow-in
Model Fit
AIC
BIC

12.05

Chi^2

Model
I1
M1
.34
.05
7.7

IM1
19.84
-11.02

8.21

-11.85
11.21

1435
1446

1312
1335

1329
1352

1317
1352

Conclusions
As early as 14 months the selective visual attention of
infants in response to maternal encouragement is
predictive of both concurrent and future linguistic
success. In this study we demonstrated, as reported
previously, responsive caregivers impact infant
vocabulary size positively. Moreover, for the first time in
this study, the infant’s response to joint attention was
shown to account for a higher proportion of vocabulary
growth.

104.89** 19.35** 2.36*

Pr(>Chi^2) = p<.05*, p<.001**
Such results suggest that those infants who can
effectively respond to and engage in shared experience
are then able to efficiently attend to the subsequent
maternal contributions held within it. That is during play
between mother and infant, when a mother is encouraging
their infants’ attention to an object the infant then
responds to this encouragement by sharing their mothers’
attentional focus. In such situations, joint attention is
achieved by the infant following into their mother’s focus
of attention. The positive predictive nature of maternal
contributions within already established periods of joint

Acknowledgments
The First Steps longitudinal study was funded by the
Leverhulme Trust, with further funding through PhD
studentships from the Economic and Social Research

3388

Council and the School Of Psychology, Cardiff
University.

Markus, J. A., Mundy, P., Morales, M., Delgado, C. E. F.,
& Yale, M. (2000). Individual differences in infant
skills as predictors of child-caregiver joint attention and
language. Social Development, 9 (3), 302-315.
Masur, E.F., Flynn, V., & Eichorst, D.L. (2005). Maternal
responsiveness and directive behaviors and utterances
as predictors of children’s lexical development. Journal
of Child Language, 32(1), 63-91.
Mirman, D., Dixon, J.A., & Magnuson, J.S. (2008).
Statistical and computational models of the visual
world paradigm: Growth curves and individual
differences. Journal of Memory and Language, 59(4),
475-494.
Morales, M., Mundy, P., Delgado, C. E. F., Yale, M.,
Messinger, D., Neal, R., & Schwartz, H. (2000).
Responding to joint attention across the 6- to 24-month
age period and early language acquisition. Journal of
Applied Developmental Psychology, 21, 283-298.
Mundy, P., & Newell, L., (2007). Attention, joint
attention and social cognition. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 16(5), 269-274.
Smith, L.B. & Yu, C. (in press). Visual Attention is not
enough: Individual differences in Statistical WordReferent Learning in Infants. Language Learning and
Development.
Smith, L.B., Yu, C., & Pereira, A. F. (2010). Not your
mother’s view: the dynamics of toddler visual
experience. Developmental Science, 1-9.
Tamis-LeMonda, C. S., Bornstein, M. H., (1989).
Habituation and maternal encouragement of attention in
infancy as predictors of toddle language, play and
representational competence, Child Development, 60,
738-751.
Tamis-LeMonda, C. S., Bornstein, M. H., & Baumwell,
L. (2001). Maternal Responsiveness and Children’s
Achievement of Language Milestones. Child
Development, 72 (3), 748-767.
Tomasello, M., & Farrar, MJ. (1986). Joint attention and
early language. Child Development, 57(6), 1454-1463.
Waxman, S.R., & Gelman, S.A. (2009). Early wordlearning entails reference, not merely associations.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences. 13(6), 258-263.
Yu, C., & Smith, L. (2010). What you learn is what you
see: using eye movements to understand infant crosssituational statistical learning Developmental Science,
1-16.
Yu, C., & Smith, L. (2012). Hypothesis testing versus
associative learning in cross-situational word-referent
learning: Prior questions. Psychological Review, 119,
21-39.
Yu, C., Xu, J-M., & Zhu, X. (2011). Word learning
through sensorimotor child-parent interaction: A feature
selection approach. In L. Carlson, C. Holscher, & T.
Shipley (Eds.), Proceedings of the 33rd Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Society. Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.

References
Akhtar, N., Dunham, F., & Dunham, P.J. (1991).
Directive
interactions
and
early
vocabulary
development: The role of joint attentional focus.
Journal of Child Language, 18, 41-49.
Bakeman, R., & Quera, V. (2011). Sequential Analysis
and Observational Methods for the Behavioral
Sciences. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.
Baldwin, D. A. (1991). Infants’ contribution to the
achievement of joint reference. Child Development, 62,
875-890.
Baldwin, D. A. (1993). Infants’ ability to consult the
speaker for clues to word reference. Journal of Child
Language, 20, 395-418.
Bates, D. M., Maechler, M., & Dai, B. (2012). lme4:
Linear Mixed-Effect Models Using
S4 Classes,
R Package Version 0.999375-42. Vienna: R Foundation
for Statistical Computing.
Bornstein, M. H., Suwalsky, J. T. D., Ludemann, P.,
Painter, K. M., & Schulthess, K. (1991). Manual for
observation and analysis of infant development and
mother-infant interaction in the first four years of life.
Bethesda, MD: National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development, Child and Family Research.
Brooks, R. & Meltzoff, A. N. (2005). The development of
gaze following and its relation to language.
Developmental Science, 8, 535–43.
Brooks, R. & Meltzoff, A. N. (2008). Infant gaze
following and pointing predict accelerated vocabulary
growth through two years of age: a longitudinal, growth
curve modeling study. Journal of Child Language, 35,
207-220.
Carpenter, M., Nagell, K., & Tomasello, M. (1998).
Social cognition, joint attention, and communicative
competence from 9 to 15 months of age. Monographs
of the Society for Research in Child Development,
63(4), (Serial No. 255).
Crain-Thoreson, C., & Dale, P. S. (1992). Do early talkers
become early readers? Linguistic precocity, preschool
language, and emergent literacy. Developmental
Psychology, 28, 421-429.
Dixon, W. E., & Hull Smith, P. (2008) Attentional focus
moderates habituation-language relationships: Slow
habituation may be a good thing. Infant and child
development, 17, 95-108.
Ellis-Davies, K., Sakkalou, E., Fowler, N. C., Hilbrink, E.
E., & Gattis, M. (2012). CUE: The continuous unified
electronic diary method. Behavior Research Methods,
44, 1063-1078.
Hamilton, A., Plunkett, K. & Schaffer, G. (2000). Infant
vocabulary development assessed with a British
Communicative Development Inventory: Lower scores
in the UK than the USA. Journal of Child Language,
27, 689-705.

3389

