UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Inferring Sensory Experiences

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3698s5dj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Author
Reuter, KEvin

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Inferring Sensory Experiences
Kevin Reuter
kevin.reuter@rub.de
Department of Philosophy, Ruhr University Bochum

Abstract
Several scholars, e.g. Sellars (1956), Meltzoff &
Gopnik (1993), have construed the attribution of
experiences as being governed by a folkpsychological theory in which experiences function
as theoretical entities. However, so far this claim
has not been convincingly supported by an account
of how people infer the existence of experiences. In
this paper I argue that the mechanisms that lead to
the stipulation of experiences are fundamentally
inferential and are applied in both self-attribution
and third-person attribution of experiences. The two
most common sources for going through such
inferential processes are (i) disagreements between
two people in how the world is presented to them,
(ii) being aware of or suspecting differences
between how the world is presented to a person and
extraneous information the person has about the
world. From situations like these, I show that
‘experience’ is a theoretically-acquired concept
which refers to entities that play an explanatory role
in virtue of fulfilling two conditions: a person
entertains the concept experience if that person
makes an appearance-reality distinction (C1) and
considers the appearance to be subjective (C2).
Keywords: experiences, self-ascription, selfattribution, introspection, appearances, appearancereality distintion, theory-theory, Austin

1. The Appearance-Reality
Distinction
It is widely held that self-ascribing experiences
requires a person to conceive of the way things
appear and not how they really are. Tye claims that
“if you are attending to how things look to you, as
opposed to how they are independently of how they
look, you are bringing to bear your faculty of
introspection” (2000, p. 46), and Dretske argues that
when we self-ascribe experiences “we are
conceiving of how things seem” (1994, p.266-7).
What it means to conceive of how things seem,
however,
remains
mostly
unclear.
More

specifically, it is hardly ever discussed, which
appearance-statements count as attribution of
experiences and which do not. This is especially
curious as noone believes that every appearancestatement involves the attribution of an experience,
e.g. “she looks chic” is an appearance-statement
from which we cannot infer the attribution of an
experience.
We often make appearance-statements when we
know or suspect that we are in a situation in which
it would be wrong to take what we seem to perceive
at face value. E.g. we state that ‘the Müller-Lyer
lines only appear to be of different length’
(illusion), ‘my phone only appears to be ringing‘
(hallucination), ‘the wall looks green to me but it is
white’ (unusual lighting conditions), ‘the sponge
looks like a rock’ (different surface conditions) - see
figure 1 below.

Figure 1: The Müller-Lyer illusion (left) and a
sponge looking like a rock (right) are grasped by
making an appearance-reality distinction.
It would be wrong, however, to infer without
argument that in all of these cases attribution of
experiences takes place. Austin makes an
observation that deserves our attention. He states:
"It is perhaps even clearer that the way things look
is, in general, just as much a fact about the world,
just as open to public confirmation and challenge, as
the way things are. I am not disclosing a fact about
myself, but about petrol, when I say that petrol
looks like water." (1962, p.43, my italics)
The case of a white wall looking green because it is
illuminated by green light, and the example of a

1217

sponge looking like a rock because it has a surface
that has a rock-like structure, seem to support
Austin’s claim, that the way things look is as much
a fact about the world, just as open to public
confirmation and challenge, as the way things are.
When it comes to visual examples, the photo test
seems to be a possible means to track whether the
way an object appears is largely a fact about the
world: The illuminated wall will yield a greenish
tone on the photo picture, and the sponge is
indistinguishable from a rock on the photograph. In
contrast, the way the Müller-Lyer lines look to a
person does not seem to be subject to public
confirmation and challenge. Making a photograph
of the lines will not yield lines of differing length on
the photograph (assuming of course a head-on
photo). Hallucinations, dreams and afterimages are
also not subject to public confirmation.
What is important for our discussion, is that Austin
seems to have established a feature of appearancestatements which does not hold for all cases, and
that this criterion supports our intuition that we selfascribe experiences just in cases in which the
appearance is not open to public confirmation.
However, it is of course possible for a person to
ascribe a sensory state despite the reason for why
something appears to be different from the way it
really is, is dependent on external conditions of
perception; and surely, people can self-ascribe their
sensory states even though there is no reason to
doubt the veridicality of their experiences. Hence, a
simple classification of appearance-statements that
are made because the senses are deceived as selfascriptive, and appearance-statements that are made
because the conditions of perception are unusual as
objective, seems false. What really seem to matter,
so I will now argue, are the inferences people make
when thinking about appearances. To illustrate this
point, let us look at two examples: mirages and the
moon illusion.

2. Inferring the Existence of
Experiences
People are often aware or at least suspect that the
world appears different from the way it really is.
However, they also often lack an understanding of
the reasons for why they make an appearancereality distinction. Mirages are most commonly
associated with a thirsty and exhausted person
traveling through the desert, suddenly seeming to
see an oasis. People offer two distinct explanations

to account for this appearance: illusion and optical
phenomenon. Whereas it could of course be the case
that a traveler starts to hallucinate an oasis, mirages
are properly explained (and most frequently
happen) by the bending of light rays from distant
objects and can be captured on camera - thus they
are optical phenomena. The moon illusion, on the
other hand, is a phenomenon that often occurs when
people look at the moon which is just above the
horizon. The moon appears to be larger on the
horizon than it is high up in the sky (see figure 2
below). It was originally thought that due to light
refraction in the atmosphere, the moon on the
horizon occupies more space in the visual field than
it would normally do. However, the moon illusion is
not an optical phenomenon but is explained by the
workings of our perceptual apparatus and is related
to the Ponzo illusion, and cannot be captured on a
photograph.

Figure 2: Example of the Moon illusion.
We can see from these two examples that people
can be justifiably uncertain about whether the
appearance of an object is different from its reality
due to external physical conditions or internal
psychological conditions. Sometimes it is simply
very difficult to ascertain the reasons for a
difference in appearance and reality. Misattributions
of this difference go both ways: mirages are often
misattributed to deranged sensory perception, the
moon illusion is often misattributed to the physical
properties of the atmosphere. But this also has the
consequence that the meaning of an appearancestatement depends on which state - physical or
psychological - is blamed for the conceived
difference between appearance and reality.
Although it is correct to say that the appearancestatement ‘the moon appears larger on the horizon’
cannot be subject to public confirmation or
challenge, a person can say the same words but
express a different appearance-statement, one that
he thinks expresses openness to public

1218

confirmation. Similarly, although the appearancestatement ‘there seems to be an oasis’ is usually
taken to be subject to public confirmation, a person
can utter the same sentence, but uses the sentence in
a different sense which precludes public
confirmation.
If people consider the appearance-statement to be
open to public confirmation, they do not focus on
their mental states as representing the world in a
certain way, but rather talk about how the world is
independent of their experiences. In contrast, they
might use an appearance-statement to talk about
their experiences themselves - statement which then
of course should be classified as self-attributive. We
are now in a position to formulate the two necessary
and jointly sufficient conditions for self-attributing
an experience.
Self-attribution of experiences: a subject S selfattributes an experience iff,
(C1)
(C2)

S distinguishes the appearance from the
reality of what S experiences,
S considers the appearance to be
subjective.

Similarly, we can easily specify the conditions for
attributing an experience to another person:
Attribution of experiences to others: a subject S
attributes an experience to agent O iff,
(O1)
(O2)

S distinguishes the appearance from the
reality of what O experiences,
S considers the appearance to be
subjective.

Being aware of or suspecting differences between
the way the world presents itself and other beliefs
we have about the world, is one of the two main
sources for why people attribute experiences. We
often suspect that the way the world presents itself
is not how it really is with our less dominant senses,
e.g. it may seem to us as if there is faint smell of
burned toast in the air, but it might as well be just
our imagination or a different scent that we
misinterpret accordingly. In these and similar cases,
suspicion often arises as to whether we experience
the world differently from how it really is.
Disagreements between people about the way the
world is perceived to be, are the second main source
for attribution of experiences. Suppose you are at a
ball, talking to a woman, and comment on how the

red-coloured dress suits her style. She responds by
politely pointing out that the dress is of an orangecoloured shade. The disagreement about the colour
might persist, and you cannot get yourself to see the
orange colour. Once again, there seem to be two
options: you can either blame the lighting
conditions or some other external condition, or you
can blame your way of perceiving the world for the
disagreement, and thus attribute to yourself an
experience.
Both the first-person and the third-person cases are
very similar. People attribute experiences to other
people for the same reasons that they self-attribute
experiences: there is a difference between what
seems to be the case for oneself and what seems to
be the case for another person. This situation needs
an explanation, and thus people postulate the
existence of experiences.
We can generalise this case by following inferential
theory-theoretic rule (TT):
(TT-A) If the perceptual statements of two honest
people differ, and if these people
have sufficient knowledge and are in a
position to make correct statements
about the world, it is reasonable to draw a
distinction between how the world
appears and how the world really is.
(TT-B) If there is no obvious worldly cause for why
people disagree with each other, it
makes sense to consider the possibility that
the way the world appears is
dependent
on the sensory system.
(TT-C) In ‘blaming’ the sensory system for the way
the ‘world’ appears, attribution of
experiences takes place.

3. The Explanatory Power of this
Theory-Theory
This theory of self-ascription of experiences not
only specifies two necessary and jointly sufficient
conditions for the self-attribution of experiences,
but also (a) analyses the concept of experience, and
(b) captures the cognitive requirements that we need
to be in possession of in order to be capable of
metacognition.
(ad a) There is a need to specify the minimal but
also sufficient conditions for the possession of the
concept experience. (C1) and (C2) state that a

1219

person entertains the concept of experience, if that
person makes an appearance-reality distinction (C1)
and considers the appearance to be subjective (C2).
These two conditions have the advantage of
specifying the conditions for entertaining the
concept of experience in a non-circular way, i.e. we
do not need to mention experiences in the
description of the two conditions.
(ad b) Empirical results from the psychological
literature on the appearance-reality task have a
direct bearing on this discussion. According to this
theory, children need to make two important
advancements in their understanding of the nature
of the world in order to have the ability to ascribe
experiences. First, children need to understand that
things can appear to be different from the way they
are (C1). Second, they need to understand that the
reason for why things can appear different is not
always found in the environment itself (C2). In one
of the well-known appearance-reality tasks, a
sponge that looks like a rock, is presented to
children. Several psychologists and philosophers
argue that once children pass the appearance-reality
task, they have gained the cognitive ability to selfascribe experiences (Taylor & Flavell (1984),
Nichols & Stich (2003)). But this conclusion is not
warranted. It is possible, and indeed highly
plausible, to presume that children do not consider
the reason for the appearance-reality distinction to
be a matter of perceiving the sponge, but rather to
blame the deceptive appearance on a visible
property of the sponge. Thus, a child might pass the
appearance-reality task because he associates the
appearance of the sponge as a rock with the form of
the sponge, e.g. the surface, shape, and size of the
sponge is rock-like. The child does not need to think
that the appearance of rock-like properties is
explained by the way the sponge is perceived.
It is of course possible to self-ascribe a veridical
experience without having any doubts whatsoever
regarding the veridical nature of the experience. A
person might entertain the concept of experience for
other reasons (e.g. she just read about the brain-ina-vat thought experiment) or for no obvious reason
at all (e.g. sometimes thoughts enter our mind
without us knowing where they ‘came from’). The
main conclusion of this paper is that self-awareness
of experiences is often arrived at by an inferential
process that is governed by a folk-psychological
theory that we learn as children. The concept of
experience is therefore a theoretically-acquired
concept which refers to entities that play an
explanatory role in that theory.

The theory I have presented belongs in certain
respects to the group of theories which are
commonly labelled ‘theory-theories of selfawareness’ (TTSA) and which originate in the
theories of Ryle (1949) and Sellars (1956).
Proponents of TTSA hold a theory according to
which a person who self-attributes an experience,
uses a theory to do so - hence the name ‘theorytheory of self-awareness’. In a sense, I also claim
that a person often uses a theory to self-ascribe her
experiential states, but it must be clearly
differentiated from other theory-theories that have
been advocated in the literature. It is often argued
that theory-theory accounts of self-awareness state
that self-ascriptions of mental states are based on
the same or similar processes as ascriptions of
mental states to others (Kind (2005), Schwitzgebel
(2010)). This claim is ambiguous: it can either mean
that we determine the content of other people’s
mental states by the same or similar mechanisms
that we use when determining the content of our
own mental states; or it can mean that the
mechanisms that lead from thoughts about the world
to the attribution of experiences to others are the
same or similar to the mechanisms when selfattributing mental states. Whereas I reject the
former claim, I endorse a restricted form of the
latter thesis. We do not infer what we experience
but rather that we experience. What we experience,
we know by perceptual attention and recognition.
That we experience, we know by theorising about
the circumstances we often find ourselves in

4. Objections
In this section I evaluate two rather specific
objections against construing the self-attribution of
experiences in the way I have suggested above.
First, Carruthers argues that the theory that children
apply when they attribute experiences, is a nativistic
theory. I show that Carruthers’s claim is not
warranted and that instead the inferential
mechanisms that we apply when attributing
experiences, are learned by children. Second,
Papineau argues that experiences cannot be entities
embedded in a folk-psychological theory because
we can conceive of experiences as epiphenomenal
states. I agree that Papineau’s argument is valid, but
he presupposes a conception of experiences as
theoretical entities that my theory is not committed
to.

1220

Are self-attributive
learned?

inferences

nativistic

or

Carruthers claims:
“I favour such a nativistic theory-theory because if,
firstly, young children are pictured as little
scientists, constructing a mentalistic theory as the
best explanation of the data, then it beggars belief
that they should all hit upon the same theory, and at
the same tender age too (at about the age of four, in
fact). But if, secondly, the theory is supposed to be
learned by the child from adult practitioners, then it
is puzzling how this can take place without any
explicit teaching or training;” (1996, p.23)
I agree with Carruthers that if we do conceive of
young children as little scientists who need to
construct their mentalistic theory all by themselves,
then we should expect diverging theories to emerge
from different children at different ages. But what is
Carruthers’s evidence that adult practitioners do not
teach young people their theory of experiences? He
gives none. So let me present what I consider to be
a plausible story about how adults teach young
children to self-attribute their experiences.
I have argued that the capability to make a
distinction between appearance and reality is one of
two necessary conditions required to grasp the
concept experience. Adults not only provide
children with the linguistic tools to make this
distinction, they also actively educate children in
making this distinction in appropriate circumstances
and explain why appearance and reality can come
apart. If a child asks what a rainbow is, the parent
might tell the child that rainbows are not what they
appear to be, but are only optical phenomena; or
when the lights are switched off, then things do not
become black, but only appear to be black. By then,
children have also learned that bodily states like
pains and itches are only felt by themselves, simply
because they are the only ones who are ‘connected’
with their body. The distinction between public and
private objects is, moreover, manifested in everyday
conversations with adults. Adults ask children
whether they are hungry, and ask them where the
pain is located, but they tell them to watch out
where they are going, tell them to eat food, and tell
them to listen to what they say. Thus, children learn
that (a) objects often do not change but rather their
perceptual properties do, and that (b) they can draw
a distinction between private objects and public
objects of discourse. However, if it was not for
situations in which children are required to combine

both ideas, the stipulation of experiences would
seem unnecessary - at least from a folkpsychological standpoint. These situations exist
though, and provide Kuhnian puzzles for children.
Although illusions and hallucinations are the prime
examples of non-veridical experiences in the
philosophical literature, the most common and
persistent non-veridical experiences are dream
experiences. Children are not only regularly
confronted with dreams they also want support from
their parents especially after having had nightmares.
But now the following curious situation occurs:
parents tell their children that they need not worry
because what they dreamed was not real. However,
they also ask their children about what happened in
their dreams. Thus, children are told that they had
appearances that are private to them. They now
only need to combine these two ideas, and thereby
understand the concept of experience. I therefore
reject Carruthers’s claim that the concept of
experience is nativistic.
Do experiences necessarily have effects?
Papineau considers the possibility that selfattribution like ‘this auditory experience’, utilises a
concept of experience, that is “some kind of
theoretical concept, constituted by its role in some
theory of experiences” (2007, p.121). He rejects this
solution because he argues that if we really derive
the concept of experience from some folkpsychological theory then we conceive of
experiences as states with causes and effects. These
causes and effects do not need to be specified by
folk-psychology but they would be nonetheless an
analytic part of our conception of experience.
However, Papineau states, we can without
contradiction
think
of
experiences
as
epiphenomenal states without any subsequent
effects like behaviour.
Papineau’s argument is sound but only under a
more specific reading of what a theoretical concept
involves, which we do not need to accept. I argue
that when children learn how to distinguish
appearance from reality, they theorise that
experiences have causes but not necessarily any
effects. Possessing the concept of experience
enables a person to conceptually distinguish
veridical from illusory or hallucinatory experiences,
and if there is a difference between appearance and
reality, the person understands that the experience
was not merely caused by worldly objects and
events. However, I do not see any reason why we

1221

should believe that this concept of experience is
committed to the fact that experiences have
cognitive or behavioural effects. Applying the
appearance-reality distinction only implies that
appearances are caused by the world, but not that
appearances themselves have any effects. Thus,
epiphenomenalism is consistent with phenomenal
concepts being constituted by a theoreticallyacquired concept of experience.

5. Conclusion
In this paper I have argued that we understand
experiences to be (a) appearances that are (b)
subjective. In most circumstances in which a person
attributes an experience, there are very good reasons
for doing this. These reasons follow the twofold
structure of the concept of experience. I have argued
that there are two main ‘sources’ of experience
attribution. First, a person might become aware of
or suspect differences between how the world
appears and how it really is. Second, disagreements
between two people about how the world ‘presents
itself’, can make people aware of such differences.
The inferential nature of attribution of experiences
was defended against two objections.

Phenomenal
Concepts
and
Phenomenal
Knowledge, NY: Oxford University Press.
8. Ryle, G. (1949). The concept of mind. Chicago:
Chicago University Press.
9. Schwitzgebel, E. (2010). Introspection. The
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, E. Zalta
(ed.),
URL
=
http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/introspection/
10. Sellars, W. (1956/1997). Empiricism and the
philosophy of mind. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
11. Taylor, M., Flavell, J. (1984). Seeing and
believing: children’s understanding of the
distinction between appearance and reality. Child
Development, 55, 1710-20.
12. Tye, M. (2000). Consciousness, Color and
Content . Cambridge: MIT Press.

References
1. Austin, J.L. (1962). Sense and sensibilia.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
2. Carruthers, P. (1996). Autism as mind-blindness:
an elaboration and partial defence. in P.
Carruthers, P. Smith (eds.) Theories of Theories
of Mind, Cambridge University Press.
3. Dretske, F. (1994). Introspection. Proceedings of
the Aristotelian Society. 94, 263-78.
4. Kind, A. (2012). Introspection. in The Internet
Encyclopedia of Philosophy, ISSN 2161-0002,
http://www.iep.utm.edu/introspe/.
5. Meltzoff, A., Gopnik, A. (1993). The role of
imitation in understanding persons and
developing theories of mind. in Baron-Cohen
Understanding other minds: Perspectives from
autism, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
6. Nichols, S, Stich, S. (2003). How to read your
own mind: a cognitive theory of selfconsciousness. in Q. Smith and A. Jokic (eds.)
Consciousness: New Philosophical Perspectives,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
7. Papineau, D. (2007). Phenomenal and perceptual
concepts. in T. Alter and S. Walter (eds.)

1222

