UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Influences Beyond Language: Comparing Spatial Referencing in Native French Speakers
from Four Countries

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/124507sf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Huther, Lisa
Bentz, Anne
Spada, Hans
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Influences Beyond Language? A Comparison of Spatial Referencing
in Native French Speakers from Four Countries
Lisa Hüther (lisa.huether@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
University of Freiburg, Department of Psychology, Engelbergerstrasse 41
79085 Freiburg, Germany

Anne Bentz (anne.bentz@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
University of Freiburg, Department of Psychology, Engelbergerstrasse 41
79085 Freiburg, Germany

Hans Spada (spada@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
University of Freiburg, Department of Psychology, Engelbergerstrasse 41
79085 Freiburg, Germany

Andrea Bender (bender@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
University of Freiburg, Department of Psychology, Engelbergerstrasse 41
79085 Freiburg, Germany

Sieghard Beller (sieghard.beller@uni-paderborn.de)
University of Paderborn, Department of Human Sciences, Warburger Straße 100
33098 Paderborn, Germany

Abstract
Research has shown that spatial referencing differs across
cultures. Whether “Western” samples, specifically ones
speaking the same native language, show the same
referencing patterns has not been investigated thus far.
Examining spatial referencing behavior across different tasks,
we compared samples from four different countries speaking
the same language with respect to their application of the
intrinsic frame of reference (FoR) and the three variants of the
relative FoR. Our findings indicate influences of factors
beyond language: While the four French-speaking samples
showed an overall preference for the reflection variant of the
relative FoR, they differed significantly regarding the extent
to which reflection and the intrinsic FoR were applied.
Moreover, in all samples, characteristics of the referenced
objects, namely whether they were animate or inanimate,
influenced FoR use. The order of tasks also had an impact on
referencing behavior.
Keywords: space; spatial cognition; frames of reference
(FoRs); linguistic relativity; object characteristics; animacy;
French.

The Question of Language’s Influence on
Cognition
In the past decades, the debate about linguistic relativity
(known as the Sapir-Whorf-Hypothesis, e.g. Sapir, 1949;
Whorf, 1956), that is, whether language determines
cognition, has been revived (e.g. Gumperz & Levinson,
1996). An influential research area spurring this revival
concerns frames of reference in the domain of space.
Languages differ regarding spatial referencing, that is,
how they preferentially describe the position of objects in

relation to one another (e.g. Majid, Bowerman, Kita, Haun,
& Levinson, 2004; Mishra, Singh, & Dasen, 2009).
Moreover, it has been shown that across different languages,
frames of reference (FoRs) covary in language and
cognition (e.g. Danziger, 2011; Haun, Rapold, Janzen, &
Levinson, 2011; Levinson, 2003). However, there is still
much debate on how this covariation comes about,
specifically whether language determines cognition or vice
versa or whether environmental factors influence both
language and cognition (see e.g. the debate between
Levinson, Kita, Haun, & Rasch, 2002, and Li & Gleitman,
2002; and see Haun et al., 2011; Li, Abarbanell, Gleitman,
& Papafragou, 2011).
In their overview of cross-cultural findings, Majid and
colleagues (2004) investigated environment (urban vs.
rural), habitual action (subsistence patterns) and cognitive
styles (individualism vs. collectivism) as possible mediators
between FoRs in language and cognition. They found that
none of these factors beyond language systematically
accounted for differences in non-linguistic FoR use between
speakers of different languages.
Commonly, in spatial referencing research, language and
culture are treated as one entangled factor (e.g. Burenhult &
Levinson, 2008). As they are closely intertwined (e.g.
Kodish, 2003), differential effects of language and culture
are arguably difficult to investigate. However, feasible
approaches would be to investigate individuals living in the
same country but speaking different languages or the other
way around: individuals speaking the same language but
living in different countries.

2602

Research in this vein indicates that both language and
extra-linguistic factors play a role for referencing strategies.
Eggleston (2012) compared three samples, namely Spanish
speakers from Barcelona and from Nicaragua and a
Nicaraguan sample speaking Sumu-Mayangna. While the
former two spoke the same language, the latter two lived in
the same country. She found that the samples differed with
respect to referencing preferences. Shared language was a
stronger predictor of spatial referencing behavior than
shared environment. Eggleston concludes that the two
factors interact. Similarly, indicating influences beyond
language, Troadec (2003) found differences in FoRpreferences between two different French speaking samples
in Polynesia, in that the absolute FoR was preferred on an
island while the relative FoR was preferred in a city. Taken
together, these findings indicate that while language and
spatial cognition covary, speaking the same language alone
does not necessitate identical FoR-preference. Instead, there
seem to be differing conventions between communities, at
least when the language allows for application of all FoRs.

Frames of Reference
In times of ever-increasing international cooperation it is
important to know possible sources of miscommunication.
Implications of research on spatial referencing thus go far
beyond research offices, as illustrated by the following
example: Task forces from different countries have to come
up with strategies of how to enter a building in which
terrorists are keeping hostages. If the order “we enter the
building from the back left, you guys go in from the front
right entrance” are interpreted in different manners, this may
have devastating consequences. Knowledge on differences
regarding how we describe where things are is one
important step in the direction of successful international
cooperation.
In order to describe the location of objects in relation to
one another, frames of reference (FoRs) are used. They
comprise several constituents (cf. Levinson, 2003): a
coordinate system (e.g. front, back, left and right), a figure
object whose location is to be described and a ground object
in relation to which the location of the figure is described
(Talmy, 1983).
Three main FoRs have been identified in the literature
(Levinson, 2003): absolute, intrinsic and relative FoR. The
relative FoR is subdivided into three variants: translation,
reflection and rotation. The absolute FoR uses fixed
bearings, such as the cardinal directions for the coordinate
system. Applying this FoR, a figure object might then be
described to be “northeast” of the ground object.
Applying the intrinsic FoR, the coordinate system is
centred in the ground object, the figure object’s position is
thus described from the perspective of the ground object.
Hence, this FoR can only be applied when the ground object
has intrinsic front, back, left and right sides.
Using a relative FoR, the position of the figure object in
relation to the ground object is described from an observer’s
perspective; the primary coordinate system originates in the

observer’s front, back, left and right sides. This primary
coordinate system is then projected onto the ground object
and transformed into a secondary coordinate system in one
of three possible ways: Applying translation, the secondary
coordinate system results from a mere shift of the primary
system into the ground object. Here, left and right remain
oriented as in the observer’s primary coordinate system. A
figure between the observer and the ground is described to
be “behind” the ground object. In the case of reflection, the
primary coordinate system is reflected off the ground object.
A figure between the observer and the ground is hence
described to be “in front of” the ground object, left and right
again remain oriented as in the primary coordinate system.
In the third variant, rotation, the secondary coordinate
system results from rotating the primary system and
centring it in the ground as if another observer was facing
the observer of the scene. Here, similar to the reflection
variant, a figure between the observer and the ground is
described to be “in front of” the ground object, however, left
and right are also switched. Thus, between the intrinsic and
the three relative FoRs, the order “we enter the building
from the back left, you go in from the front right entrance”
can be interpreted in at least four different ways. However,
individuals are mostly unaware of ambiguities in their
spatial descriptions (cf. Grabowski & Miller, 2000).

The “Western” Bias
Research investigating the link of language and cognition by
means of spatial referencing has almost exclusively focused
on comparing “Western” (North-American and European)
with “Non-Western” (Indigenous) samples. It has been
shown that while “Westerners” preferentially use egocentric
(relative) referencing strategies, many “Non-Western”
cultures use allocentric (absolute) referencing, some even
exclusively (e.g. Levinson, 2003). While there is a prevalent
implicit assumption that “Westerners” are all the same (e.g.
Pederson, 1993), empirical findings comparing referencing
behavior within and between Western cultures are scarce.
Those studies attempting to do so (e.g. Grabowski & Miller,
2000; Flaherty & Richardson, 1996) found that there are
differences regarding the application of at least two
distinctive FoRs commonly used by speakers of European
languages: The intrinsic and the relative FoR. Importantly,
the variants of the latter have received very little attention in
past research efforts on spatial referencing. In research, the
reflection variant is commonly treated to be “the” relative
FoR and the only one investigated. However, use of the
other two variants has also been reported (e.g. translation in
Tongan and Hausa: Bennardo, 2000; Hill, 1982; translation
and rotation to some extent in Chinese, Tongan and Farsi
speaking samples: Beller, Hüther, Singmann, & Bender,
subm.; Beller, Singmann, Esfandiari, & Bender, subm.;
Bender, Rothe-Wulf, Hüther, & Beller, 2012). Accounting
for the different ways individuals can reference from their
own perspective, we found that FoR-preferences of two
“Western” populations speaking different languages,
namely US-Americans and Germans, differ regarding the

2603

extent to which variants of the relative FoR are applied
(Beller et al., subm. [a]; Bender et al., 2012; Hüther, 2010).
In the current study, we examined if referencing differences
would also occur between Western cultures speaking the
same language, namely French.

Determining the Role of Situational Aspects
The French language allows for the application of all
described FoRs. While a preference for the relative FoR is
assumed in native speakers of French (e.g. Mishra et al.,
2009; Pederson, 1993), there are no empirical investigations
of speakers of French regarding the variants of the relative
FoR and the intrinsic FoR.
To shed light on the issue of language versus other factors
influencing referencing preferences in Western populations,
we compared four samples speaking the same language but
living in different countries: Belgians, French, Québécois
and Swiss. Thus, we kept native language constant while the
environment (country) varied between samples. If language
alone were the main determinant of referencing preferences,
the different groups of French native speakers should not
significantly differ in their use of FoRs, irrespective of
where they live. However, if FoR-use is a matter of
conventions within communities, samples from different
countries may differ despite their speaking the same
language. Moreover, testing for possible situational factors
influencing FoR-use (as suggested by Li & Gleitman, 2002),
we varied whether the referenced objects were animate or
inanimate. We assumed a stronger preference for the
intrinsic FoR with animate objects. The intrinsic orientation
of living beings may be more salient than that of inanimate
objects thus making the application of the intrinsic FoR
easier. Also, one may be more likely to take, say, a bird’s
perspective than that of a pencil. We thus assumed
influences of the given spatial task at hand, in that intrinsic
referencing would occur more often with animate than with
inanimate objects.
Considering the three variants of the relative FoR as well
as the intrinsic FoR, we set out to answer the following
questions: Which referencing preferences can be observed
in native speakers of French from France, Switzerland,
Belgium, and Canada? Are there inter-individual differences
within the countries, indicating variations in FoR-use within
communities? Do the samples differ with regard to their
preferred FoR, indicating that language is not the only
determinant of referencing preferences? And finally, are
individuals’
referencing
choices
intra-individually
consistent across different situations or do situational
influences such as differences in animacy of the to be
referenced objects correspond to different FoR-use?

Participants A total of 186 students (131 female) of the
social sciences completed the questionnaire. The Belgian
sample consisted of 55 students (46 female; mean age 21.8
years, SD = 4.82) from the University of Liège. The French
sample consisted of 46 students (34 female; mean age 22.5
years, SD = 4.51) attending different universities. The
Canadian sample consisted of 57 students (29 female; mean
age 25.5 years, SD = 6.07) from the University of Montreal.
The Swiss sample consisted of 28 students (22 female; mean
age 24.3 years, SD = 4.27) from the University of Geneva.
All participants indicated that French was their native
language. Participation was voluntary and was not
compensated.
Materials and Procedure All materials were presented in
French. After being informed about the procedure and
indicating their consent, each participant filled out a
questionnaire comprising 40 tasks. Each task contained one
of the following eight descriptions:
‐ The candle [the starfish] is located behind and to the right
of the pencil [the bird].
‐ The candle [the starfish] is located in front and to the left
of the pencil [the bird].
‐ The candle [the starfish] is located behind and to the left
of the pencil [the bird].
‐ The candle [the starfish] is located in front and to the right
of the pencil [the bird].
Each of the eight descriptions was presented five times,
every time with different pictures as answer options. Out of
eight photographs displaying different configurations of
animate (starfish and bird) or inanimate (candle and pencil)
objects, participants were asked to choose the one that best
fitted the description. The photographs differed regarding
the direction into which the ground object (bird or pencil)
was facing and regarding the position of the figure (starfish
or candle). In each task, four of the depicted object
configurations corresponded to a distinct FoR (the three
relative FoR variants or the intrinsic FoR); choosing one of
the other four pictures did not indicate application of one of
the FoRs. Animate and inanimate object configurations
were presented as two blocks. An example item is shown in
Figure 1. Here, choosing b) corresponds to the reflection
variant of the relative FoR, c) to the rotation variant, h)
corresponds to the translation variant, and selecting d)
indicates application of the intrinsic FoR.

Method
FoR-use of the four French speaking samples was assessed
using an online questionnaire in French. We developed the
questionnaire using the Questback software. Within each
sample, two versions of the questionnaire were administered
in order to control for sequence effects.

Figure 1: Example of an item with configurations of animate
objects. The task was to select the photograph corresponding to the description “The starfish is located in front and to
the left of the bird.”

2604

Table 1: Percentages of FoR choices in the four samples considering object animacy and order of tasks.
order
items with inanimate objects
items with animate objects
Country
ref.
rot.
trans.
int.
n.c.p.
ref.
rot.
trans.
int.
Belgian (N=30)
A
1.3
5.7
7.5
2.3
1.8
4.7
19.3
83.2
71.3
(N=25)
B
1.8
6.4
43.6
2.0
42.2
2.6
4.8
46.2
44.2
(N=55) Total 64.7
1.6
6.1
25.6
2.2
56.8
2.2
4.8
31.8
French

Canadian

Swiss

n.c.p.
2.8
6.2
4.5

(N=21)
(N=25)
(N=46)

A
B
Total

65.5
38.4
52.0

5.0
2.2
3.6

3.6
3.8
3.7

21.7
49.2
35.5

4.3
6.4
5.4

54.1
38.2
46.2

4.1
6.2
5.2

4.1
3.8
4.0

30.5
44.0
37.3

7.4
7.8
7.6

(N=25)
(N=57)

A
B
Total

80.0
60.4
70.2

0.8
3.0
1.9

7.8
5.8
6.8

7.7
29.0
18.4

3.8
1.8
2.8

56.7
41.6
49.2

1.6
5.0
3.3

5.6
7.2
6.4

30.5
41.8
36.2

5.6
4.4
5.0

(N=14)
(N=14)
(N=28)

A
B
Total

84.6
79.6
82.1

8.6
1.8
5.2

0.7
1.4
1.1

2.1
13.2
7.7

3.9
3.9
3.9

69.6
65.4
67.5

8.9
4.6
6.8

1.8
2.1
2.0

15.4
24.6
20.0

4.3
3.2
3.8

Note: Percentages are aggregated across participants and 20 items per block (animate and inanimate); order A: inanimate-animate, order
B: animate-inanimate; ref. indicates application of the reflection variant of the relative FoR, rot.=rotation, trans.=translation, int.=intrinsic
FoR and the n.c.p. (no clear preference) column denotes the percentages of answers that did not correspond to one of the investigated FoRs
(i.e. choices of one of the other four answer options).

Participants were randomly assigned to one of two
questionnaire sequences: Approximately half of each
sample answered the 20 tasks with inanimate objects first
(A), the others started with the 20 animate items (B). After
completion of all 40 tasks, demographics were requested
and participants were thanked and debriefed.

Data Analysis and Results
To answer our research questions, we combined descriptive
and inferential statistics in analyzing FoR-use in the four
samples. As evident in Table 1, albeit to differing extents, in
all four investigated French speaking countries the reflection
variant of the relative FoR was predominantly used,
followed by the intrinsic FoR.
In order to be able to test for significant differences in the
samples’ FoR-use, we first identified for every participant
how often they applied the different FoRs in the two blocks
(the possible maximum being 20 per block, indicating
application of the same FoR on every item). We then
conducted a repeated measures ANOVA with FoR
(reflection, rotation, translation, intrinsic, and no clear
preference) and block (animate vs. inanimate) as withinsubjects-factors and nationality (Belgian, French, Canadian
or Swiss) and block order (animate or inanimate items first)
as between-subjects-factors. Aside from the expected main

effect of FoRs (F (1.360, 242.041) = 159.4, p < .001, ŋp² =
.472), it revealed a significant interaction of FoRs x
nationality (F (4.079, 242.041) = 2.7, p = .029, ŋp² = .044).
For all analyses, Greenhouse-Geisser corrected values are
reported. As apparent in Table 1, the main differences
between the samples from the different countries concerned
the extent to which the intrinsic FoR and the reflection
variant of the relative FoR were applied. Aggregating the
data over all items and participants, we found that in the
French sample, while the reflection variant of the relative
FoR was applied the most (48.1%), the intrinsic FoR was
applied in over a third of the items (37.3%). In the other
three countries, the reflection variant dominated much more
clearly over the other referencing options: in the Canadian
sample, 60.8% of the aggregated answers corresponded to
the reflection variant (26.2% intrinsic), in Belgium 62.2%
(27.3% intrinsic) and the Swiss sample showed the clearest
preference with 74.8% of the answers corresponding to the
reflection variant (only 13.8% intrinsic).
The repeated measures ANOVA also showed a significant
interaction of FoR and animacy (F (1.411, 242.041) = 16.7,
p < .001, ŋp² = .086). As evident from Table 1, this effect
was mainly due to overall increased application of the
intrinsic FoR with animate objects as opposed to inanimate
objects. There was also a significant interaction between

Table 2: Consistent referencing preferences in % by nationality and object animacy.
items with inanimate objects
items with animate objects
Country
ref.
rot.
trans.
int.
n.c.p.
ref.
rot.
trans.
intr.
Belgium (N=55) 67.3
0
3.6
23.6
5.5
0
1.8
30.9
54.6
France
(N=46) 50.0
2.2
0
36.9
10.9
0
0
34.8
41.3
Canada
(N=57) 71.9
0
5.3
17.5
5.3
0
1.7
28.1
45.6
Switzerland (N=28) 85.7
3.6
0
7.1
3.6
3.6
0
14.3
60.7

n.c.p.
12.7
23.9
24.6
21.4

Note: Table displays averaged percentages of number of individuals whose FoR-choice was consistent across at least 15 of 20 items per
block. N.c.p. (no clear preference) subsumes participants who were not intra-individually consistent.

2605

FoR and order (F (1.360, 242.041) = 11.9, p < .001, ŋp² =
.063): Participants who worked on the animate items first
showed a stronger overall preference for the intrinsic FoR
(intrinsic: 38.3%; reflection: 48.9%) than those who worked
on the inanimate items first (intrinsic: 17.3%; reflection:
70.5 %).
Taking a closer look at the variance in FoR-choices
within the countries, we established for all participants
whether they were intra-individually consistent in their FoRuse across tasks. We considered an individual to be
consistent, when he/she chose the same FoR in at least 15 of
20 items (75%). Interestingly, intra-individual consistency
was also affected by animacy of the items (cf. Table 2). For
inanimate items, the majority of participants behaved intraindividually consistent in terms of their FoR choice (France
was the exception with 10.9% of participants that were not
intra-individually consistent). For animate items, FoRchoice across items was less intra-individually consistent
(cf. Table 2). There were also inter-individual differences
within the countries: In the Belgian, French and Canadian
samples a considerable number of participants (consistently)
applied either reflection or the intrinsic FoR, whereas the
Swiss sample applied reflection very consistently both intraindividually (cf. Table 2), and inter-individually. All
samples preferred the reflection variant over the other two
variants of the relative FoR.

Discussion
Considering the three variants of the relative FoR as well as
the intrinsic FoR, we found significant differences in
referencing behavior between four samples speaking the
same native language but living in different countries.
French allows for choosing freely between the different
FoRs, thus misunderstandings occurring due to this
variation in descriptions/interpretations of the same spatial
array are possible. While all samples generally preferred
reflection over the other variants of the relative FoR, the
French used the intrinsic FoR more than the Canadian,
Belgian and Swiss samples, the latter almost exclusively
applied reflection. Unlike the other investigated countries,
France is not officially bilingual. Since second language
proficiency influences spatial referencing (cf. Flaherty &
Richardson, 1996), this may account for the French sample
differing from the others. The observed general preference
for reflection corresponds to our previous findings in
German samples. However, indicating situational influences
on referencing behavior and thus supporting our hypothesis,
the intrinsic FoR was used more frequently with animate
than with inanimate items. In previous studies (e.g., Beller
et al., subm. [a]) we had found no significant differences
with respect to object’s animacy. The current study may
have facilitated detection of such differences by using
photographs, thus making the referencing tasks more lifelike. Another possible explanation inherent in the depicted
objects is that the animate objects were bigger and the
intrinsic front of the bird may thus have been more salient
than that of the pencil. However, this possible effect of the

material would have affected all samples in a similar fashion
and hence cannot account for the observed differences
between our samples. Presenting the animate and inanimate
tasks in blocks may also have had an influence (see Surtees,
Apperly, & Noordzij, 2011). Specifically, task order
influenced FoR choice: when animate items came first, the
intrinsic FoR was applied more on the following inanimate
items as well, and the same effect appeared for the reflection
variant of the relative FoR when the order was reversed.
This might be explained by some sort of priming effect
and/or a tendency to reference consistently (set effects).
Regarding consistency, we found that differences within
countries were due to inter-individual differences rather than
intra-individual differences in referencing. This suggests
that while miscommunication regarding the position of
objects occurs between people in a given country,
individuals tend to keep to their preferred referencing
strategy. Note, however, that intra-individual consistency
was lower with animate than with inanimate items. Overall,
our findings empirically support the generally expected
preference for a relative FoR in Western cultures, more
specifically, for the reflection variant. However, our data
show that the intrinsic FoR is also applied to considerable
extents in all investigated populations. Moreover, we found
that the extent to which this FoR is applied by French
speakers differs both between and within countries. One
cannot help but wonder why these possible sources of
misunderstandings are not gradually adapted or at least
made explicit within language communities, so that the
same sentence will not be interpreted in different ways.
How does this fit in with Sapir’s (1949) famous claim that
“We see and hear and otherwise experience very largely as
we do because the language habits of our community
predispose certain choices of interpretation”? Our findings
regarding interindividual differences and differences
between countries indicate that interpretation choices may
not so strongly be predisposed by the language habits of our
community, whether the community is defined by speaking
the same language or by living in the same country. We are
required to talk about things in space everyday, yet FoRs
seem to still be somewhat variably applied, possibly
hindering successful communication.
With respect to limitations of the current study, it must be
said that our rather homogenous samples of university
students majoring in the social sciences do not necessarily
warrant generalizability of our findings to the entire
population of the investigated countries. On the upside,
however, the observed differences cannot be attributed to
differences between the samples concerning factors like age
or level of education. Moreover, assessing referencing
preferences by means of a questionnaire may not adequately
represent strategies applied in everyday settings. However,
our questionnaire allowed for assessment of the different
samples in their usual surroundings with the exact same
measure, thus avoiding possible experimenter effects
induced by specific dialects for instance. Regarding this
train of thought, one might argue that different variants of

2606

French are spoken in the investigated samples, and that
differences in referencing behavior may be due to the
differences in the linguistic habits of these groups.
However, we used the same descriptions across all groups,
and, more importantly, our tasks did not require speech
production but rather interpretation of a given sentence by
choosing one of eight possible depictions. This procedure
diminishes possible influences of different dialects on
referencing strategies as linguistic input was both minimal
and held constant across groups.
In summary, our findings suggest that with respect to the
FoRs commonly applied by Westerners, there are
differences even between speakers of the same language
that seem to be influenced, at least in part, by their living in
different countries. In addition, we also found that aspects of
the referenced objects had an impact on FoR-preferences.
How these differences between speakers of the same
language, yet living in different places, come about remains
a question for further research.

References
Bender, A., Rothe-Wulf, A., Hüther, L., & Beller, S. (2012).
Moving forward in space and time: How strong is the
conceptual link between spatial and temporal frames of
reference? Frontiers in Psychology: Cultural Psychology,
3:486, 1-11.
Beller, S., Hüther, L., Singmann, H., & Bender, A. (subm.
[a]). How relative is the relative frame of reference?
Spatial reference in frontal and dorsal arrays across four
languages.
Beller, S., Singmann, H., Esfandiari, A., & Bender, A.
(subm. [b]). Frontal and dorsal spatial references in Farsi:
Insights from an MPT-analysis.
Bennardo, G. (2000). Language and space in Tonga: The
front of the house is where the chief sits! Anthropological
Linguistics, 42, 499-544.
Burenhult, N., & Levinson, S. C. (2008). Language and
landscape: A cross-linguistic perspective. Language
Sciences, 30, 135-150.
Danzinger, E. (2011). Distinguishing three-dimensional
forms from their mirror-images: Whorfian results from
users of intrinsic frames of linguistic reference. Language
Science, 33(6), 853-867.
Eggleston, A. G. (2012). Spatial reference in SumuMayangna, Nicaraguan Spanish, and Barcelona Spanish.
Doctoral dissertation, West Lafayette, Indiana: Purdue
University.
Flaherty, M., & Richardson, W. (1996). Cognition,
perception and deixis: the expression of spatial
relationships in Spanish and English. Proceedings of the
Second International Colloquium on Deixis, Time, Space
and Identity. Nancy, France: Centre de Recherche en
Informatique.
Grabowski, J., & Miller, G. A. (2000). Factors affecting the
use of dimensional prepositions in German and American
English: Object orientation, social context, and

prepositional pattern. Journal of Psycholinguistic
Research, 29, 517-553.
Gumperz, J. J., & Levinson, S. C. (1996). Rethinking
Linguistic Relativity. Cambridge University Press.
Haun, D. B. M., Rapold, C. J., Janzen, G., & Levinson, S. C.
(2011). Plasticity of human spatial cognition: Spatial
language and cognition covary across cultures. Cognition,
119, 70-80.
Hill, C. A. (1982). Up/down, front/back, left/right. A
contrastive study of Hausa and English. In J. Weissenborn
& W. Klein (Eds.), Here and there: Cross-linguistic
studies on deixis and demonstration. Amsterdam:
Benjamins.
Hüther, L. (2010). Spatial Referencing in The United States
of America and Germany: A Cross-Cultural Empirical
Study. Diploma Thesis, Albert-Ludwigs-University,
Freiburg, Germany.
Kodish, B. I. (2003). What we do with language-What it
does with us. ETC: A Review of General Semantics, 60,
383-395.
Levinson, S. C. (2003). Space in Language and Cognition.
Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Levinson, S. C., Kita, S., Haun, D. B. M., & Rasch, B. H.
(2002). Returning the tables: Language affects spatial
reasoning. Cognition, 84, 155-188.
Li, P., & Gleitman, L. (2002). Turning the tables: Language
and spatial reasoning. Cognition 83, 265–294.
Li, P., Abarbanell, L., Gleitman, L., & Papafragou, A.
(2011).
Spatial
reasoning
in
Tenejapan
Mayans. Cognition, 120, 33-53.
Majid, A., Bowerman, M., Kita, S., Haun, D. B. M. &
Levinson, S. C. (2004). Can Language restructure
cognition? The case for space. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 8, 108-114.
Mishra, R. C., Singh, S., & Dasen, P.R. (2009). Geocentric
dead reckoning in Sanskrit – and Hindi – medium school
children. Culture & Psychology, 15, 386-408.
Pederson, E. (1993). Geographic and manipulable space in
two Tamil linguistic systems. In A. Frank & I. Campari
(Eds.), Space information theory. Berlin: Springer.
Sapir, E. (1949). Selected writings. In D. Mandelbaum
(Ed.), Culture, language and personality. Berkeley, CA:
University of California.
Press.Surtees, A. D. R., Apperly, I. A. & Noordzij, M.
(2011). Sometimes losing your self in space: Children's
and adult's spontaneous use of multiple spatial reference
frames. Developmental Psychology, 48(1), 185-191.
Talmy, L. (1983): How language structures space. In: H. L.
Pick, Jr. & L. P. Acredolo (eds.): Spatial orientation:
Theory, research and application. NY: Plenum.
Troadec, B. (2003). Le développement de la représentation
de l'espace à Tahiti: variabilité du côté mer et du côté
montagne. Jrnl de la Société des Océanistes, 116, 25-37.
Whorf, B. L. (1956). Language, mind, and reality. In J.B.
Carroll (Ed.), Language, thought and reality. Selected
writings of Benjamin Lee Whorf. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.

2607

