UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Informavores: Active information foraging and human cognition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9n7750vs

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Markant, Doug
Gureckis, Todd
Meder, Bjorn
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Informavores: Active information foraging and human cognition
Doug Markant (Moderator) and Todd Gureckis
Dept. of Psychology, New York University
Björn Meder and Jonathan D. Nelson
Center for Adaptive Behavior and Cognition, Max Planck Institute for Human Development
Peter Pirolli
Palo Alto Research Center
Chen Yu
Dept. of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University
in humans. The symposium should appeal to a broad set of
attendees including educators, developmental psychologists,
cognitive modelers, and computer scientists.
The influence of priors on sequential search decisions -

Keywords: active learning, self-directed learning, information
search, sensemaking

Just as the body survives by ingesting negative entropy,
so the mind survives by ingesting information. In a very
general sense, all higher organisms are informavores. Miller (1983)

Doug Markant and Todd Gureckis

Normative models of information acquisition predict that
people’s search decisions should be strongly influenced by
their prior beliefs, which capture the set of alternative hypotheses they are considering. In the present experiments we
tested whether people adjusted their information search behavior in response to sequential changes in the prior. Participants played a search game in which they had to identify
the shape and location of multiple hidden targets in a display
(similar to the board game Battleship). During the task they
were told that the set of possible shapes had changed, and the
key question was whether they would adjust their search decisions according to the predictions of a normative model. Manipulations of the prior included changes in the frequency of
certain classes of targets as well as the introduction of higherorder constraints (e.g., that all targets would have the same
shape). The results showed that an individual’s prior could
be recovered from their sequences of search decisions, but
that there were notable differences in their ability to adjust to
certain changes in the hypothesis space, an effect that is not
predicted by the normative model. We discuss the implications of these findings for how people generate and represent
hypotheses during the course of information foraging.
Is people’s information search behavior sensitive to different reward structures? - Björn Meder and Jonathan Nelson
In situations where humans actively acquire information
for classification, information search preferentially maximizes accuracy (Nelson et al., 2010). However, the goal of
obtaining information to improve classification accuracy can
strongly conflict with the goal of obtaining information for
improving utility when there are asymmetries in costs and
benefits for classification decisions (e.g., in many medical
diagnosis situations). Is people’s information search behavior sensitive to such asymmetries? We addressed this experimentally via multiple-cue probabilistic category-learning
and information-search experiments, where the payoffs corresponded either to accuracy, with equal rewards associated with the two categories, or to an asymmetric payoff
function with different rewards associated with each cate-

Unlike a passive sponge floating in a sea of information,
humans are active information foragers – informavores – who
gather and consume new knowledge. From controlling the
movement of our eyes to determining which sources of news
to consult, judging the quality of alternative sources of information is a critical part of our behavior. The goal of this
symposium is to bring together researchers who are working
to understand the cognitive processes underlying active information foraging and how they interact with more general
aspects of cognition.
The study of active information search is in the midst of a
renaissance. Psychological research from diverse areas ranging from developmental psychology (Schulz & Bonawitz,
2007), to higher level cognition (Nelson, 2005) to visual perception (Najemnik & Geisler, 2005) have begun to understand information gathering strategies in terms of a common
set of computational principles. Simultaneous developments
in machine learning on “active vision” and “active learning” (Settles, 2009) have resulted in new algorithms that optimize their own learning by focusing on useful training data.
Similarly, models from optimal foraging theory from biology
are being brought to bear on cognitive search processes both
within and outside the mind (Pirolli, 2007; Todd, Hills, &
Robbins, 2012).
This symposium aims to bring together leading experts in
this area to discuss how active information foraging can be
understood from a diverse set of perspectives within cognitive
science. Key themes include how prior knowledge influences
search (Markant & Gureckis), how information and reward
interact to determine choice (Meder & Nelson), developmental patterns in information seeking behavior (Nelson et al.),
information foraging in complex sensemaking tasks (Pirolli),
and the allocation of attention during statistical word learning (Yu). While each represents a distinct area of research, all
discussants in the symposium share a core approach of applying computational models to understand information search

93

gory. We found that people have difficulties identifying the
reward-maximizing (rather than accuracy-maximizing) feature in search, following a neutral category learning task.
Conversely, when trained to classify under asymmetric payoffs, they had difficulties conducting accuracy-maximizing
queries when searching under symmetric rewards, where the
accuracy-maximizing feature maximizes reward.
Finally, if words and numbers are used to convey environmental probabilities, neither reward nor accuracy consistently
predicts search. These findings emphasize the necessity of
taking into account peoples goals and search-and-decision
processes during learning, thereby challenging current models of information search.
Sequential information search: Theoretical, developmental and psychological issues - Jonathan Nelson, Björn Meder,

tion, and using that information to revise probability estimates about which insurgent groups might commit a future
bombing attack. The model exhibits information-seeking patterns that are comparable to humans studied on this task and
both model and people deviate from a rational model based
on greedy maximization of expected information gain. The
model also exhibits observed human biases in seeking and
using information.
Active learning and selective attention in statistical word
learning - Chen Yu
There are various kinds of statistical regularities in a realworld learning environment. Therefore, statistical learners
have to be selective and actively gather just-in-time information required by internal learning processes and then update
their internal learning states which will consequently influence their attention and selection in the next learning moment. The present study provides evidence for the operation
of selective attention in the course of cross-situational learning with two main goals. The first was to show that selective
attention is critical for the underlying mechanisms that support successful statistical learning. The second one was to test
whether an associative mechanism with selective attention is
sufficient to explain momentary gaze data in human learning.
Toward these goals, we collected eye movement data from
participants engaged in a cross-situational statistical wordlearning task. Various gaze patterns were extracted, analyzed
and compared between strong learners who acquired more
word-referent pairs through training, and average and weak
learners who learned fewer pairs. Fine-grained behavioural
patterns from gaze data reveal how learners actively control
their attention to gather statistical information after hearing
a word, how they attend to individual objects which compete for attention within a learning trial, and how statistical
evidence is selected and accumulated moment by moment,
and integrated across words, across objects, and across wordobject mappings. Taken together, these findings provide new
evidence on the real-time active learning mechanisms operating in the human cognitive system.

Bojana Divjak, Gudny Gudmundsdottir, Matt Jones, and Laura
Martignon

We theoretically and empirically examine sequential
search games in which the task is to identify an unknown
target object by asking yes-no questions about its features.
Globally optimal decision trees were identified using exhaustive search, in two task environments. This provided a benchmark for evaluating the efficiency of heuristic and stepwise
optimal experimental design (OED) approaches for selecting
questions. Some, but not all, OED approaches are useful for
selecting queries. A heuristic strategy, the split-half heuristic,
is mathematically equivalent to information gain, a stepwiseoptimal OED method. We investigated 4th-grade childrens
search strategies on this task. Results show that children have
good intuitions regarding questions’ usefulness and search
adaptively, relative to the statistical structure of the task environment. Search was especially efficient in a task environment that was representative of real-world experiences. This
suggests that children can use their knowledge of real-world
environmental statistics to guide their search behavior.
One issue for future work is to characterize the circumstances under which people identify efficient search strategies, especially in environments in which no stepwise strategy is optimal. A related issue is whether directed play can
foment generalizable insights or intuitions.
Some models of human information foraging and sensemaking - Peter Pirolli
Information Foraging Theory aims to explain and predict
how people shape their information seeking behaviors to their
information environments (e.g., the Web, Twitter, social tagging systems, etc.). Typically, the key steps in developing a
model of information foraging involve: (a) a rational analysis of the task and information environment (often drawing
on optimal foraging theory from biology) and (b) an ACTR computational cognitive model. I will present work on
individual information seeking (e.g., on the Web), and then
discuss how this work has been expanded to an ACT-R simulation of a complex sensemaking task involving geospatial
intelligence analysis. This map-based task requires seeking
(choosing) various types of available intelligence informa-

References
Miller, G. (1983). Informavores. In F. Machlup & U. Mansfield
(Eds.), The study of information: Interdisciplinary messages
(p. 111-113). Wiley-Interscience.
Najemnik, J., & Geisler, W. (2005). Optimal eye movement strategies in visual search. Nature, 434(7031), 387–391.
Nelson, J. (2005). Finding useful questions: On Bayesian diagnosticity, probability, impact, and information gain. Psychological Review, 114(3), 677.
Nelson, J., McKenzie, C., Cottrell, G., & Sejnowski, T. (2010).
Experience Matters: Information acquisition optimizes probability gain. Psychological Science, 21(7), 960.
Pirolli, P. (2007). Information Foraging Theory: Adaptive Interaction with Information.
Schulz, L., & Bonawitz, E. (2007). Serious fun: Preschoolers engage in more exploratory play when evidence is confounded.
Developmental psychology, 43(4), 1045.
Settles, B. (2009). Active Learning Literature Survey (Tech. Rep.
No. 1648). University of Wisconsin-Madison.
Todd, P., Hills, T., & Robbins, T. (2012). Cognitive search: Evolution, algorithms, and the brain (Vol. 9). Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.

94

