UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Interactive Panel Discussion: Professional advancement through real and virtual
international collaboration

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2zc4g8rp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Feldman, Laurie Beth
Van Hell, Janet
Kroll, Judith
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Interactive Panel Discussion: Professional advancement through real and virtual
international collaboration
Laurie Beth Feldman* (lfeldman@albany.edu)
Department of Psychology; SS 369
The University at Albany, SUNY
Albany, NY 12222, USA

Janet van Hell (jgv3@psu.edu)
Moore Building
Department of Psychology
The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16802 USA

Judith Kroll (jfk7@psu.edu)
Moore Building
Department of Psychology
The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16802 USA

Suparna Rajaram (srajaram@notes.cc.sunysb.edu)
Department of Psychology
Stony Brook University
Stony Brook, NY 11794-2500 USA

Natasha Tokowicz (Tokowicz@pitt.edu)
LRDC Room 634
3939 O'Hara St.
University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA 15260-5169 USA

Keywords: cross cultural diversity; networking; participation;
professional development; research collaboration.

The central theme will be how to develop new research
collaborations outside of one's primary institution, including
international collaborations and why this is important to
one's career development. All acknowledge that this is not a
simple process and often evolves slowly, out of more social
networking connections. While such solutions generally
occur on an ad hoc basis and vary tremendously across
individuals and settings, the aim of the WICS workshop is
to enable discussion of this and related activities that
enhance productivity and thus visibility. Discussion will
include the role of virtual collaborations and virtual research
networks in enhancing professional enhancement, even for
women with less opportunity/money/time to travel.
At the time of publication, R. Harald Baayen (Eberhard
Karls University, Tübingen), Melody Dye (Indiana
University, Bloomington), Laurie Feldman (SUNY, Albany
& Haskins Labs), Lael Schooler (Max Planck Institute for
Human Development, Berlin), and Anne Warlaumont,
(University, of California, Merced) have been invited to
describe and contrast varied formats and goals of their
international collaborations. These people represent
American and European junior and senior researchers, some
who have held positions as university administrators and
department heads and chairs. Each will share his/her
perspective.
The theme of virtual as well as real collaboration will be
of relevant not only to those who have funds to attend the
meeting in Berlin but to those with more limited travel
budgets. Materials from the speakers will be posted on the
Women in Cognitive Science website. Because the
networking function of our workshop differs from the goal

Women in Cognitive Science (WICS) has a history of
conducting panels at yearly meetings of several professional
societies. Their goal is to increase attention to the situation
of women cognitive scientists, to better understand the
reasons for existing problems of under representation in key
positions, and to provide a forum for professional
development that encourages both junior and senior
scientists to consider the ways in which they might work
with their own home institutions to effect change. Specific
topics have addressed networking and collaboration, best
practices for institutional transformation, and issues of
family and academic careers. Speakers and panelists have
included both women and men who represented senior and
junior scientists and topics have focused on the experience
of both faculty and administration in negotiating these
issues and in developing policies that are likely to support
women’s success. Its history demonstrates that WICS is in a
unique position to address the concerns of junior as well as
senior scientists as they pursue their professional careers in
the sciences.
The Interactive Panel Discussion: Professional
advancement through international collaborations seeks
to bring together American and European researchers in
Cognitive Science at the 2013 meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society in Berlin, Germany. Speakers will discuss
national and international collaborations as a tool
towards professional advancement and visibility.

26

of most other workshops, it has been scheduled in a special
time slot that conflicts only minimally with other
workshops.
* Contact person

Acknowledgments
Women in Cognitive Science (WICS) was founded in
2001 by Judith Kroll (Penn State), Randi Martin (Rice
University), and Suparna Rajaram (Stony Brook) with NSF
ADVANCE Funds. From 2007 onwards, Laurie Feldman
(Albany) and Janet van Hell (Penn State) have assumed a
leadership role within the group. In 2012, Natasha Tokowitz
joined the group.
Partial funding for this event comes from NSF Award
BCS-1049764.

27

