UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Intentionality and choice

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6nb924q6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Ndubuisi, Benignus
Byrne, Ruth

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Intentionality and Choice
Benignus N. Ndubuisi (ndubuibn@tcd.ie)
and

Ruth M.J. Byrne (rmbyrne@tcd.ie)
School of Psychology & Institute of Neuroscience,
Trinity College Dublin, University of Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland
Abstract
People judge that harmful side effects are intentional, e.g., a
CEO who introduces a new program to increase profits that
results in harm to the environment is judged to have
intentionally harmed the environment. They judge helpful
side effects are unintentional, e.g., a CEO who introduces a
new program to increase profits that results in helping the
environment is not judged to have intentionally helped the
environment. We report two experiments that suggest the
effect arises because people believe individuals can make
alternative choices in bad situations and not in good ones.
Keywords: Intentions, choices, side-effects, inactions.

Intentionality
“Nothing hinders one act from having two effects, only one
of which is intended, while the other is beside the intention.
Now moral acts take their species according to what is
intended, and not according to what is beside the intention,
since this is accidental.” Aquinas (1265–1274)

Intentionality is a core category of mental life, along
with space, time and cause (Miller & Johnson-Laird 1976).
Philosophers, psychologists and legal scholars have
identified that the accurate assessment of other people’s
intentions is vital to moral and legal judgment, and to how
we understand and explain other people’s behavior (e.g.,
Knobe 2010). Logicians and artificial intelligence
researchers have modeled intentions using dynamic
doxastic logic and related systems as an important aspect
of simulating revisions to beliefs (e.g., Gardenfors 1988).
Neuroscientists and psychiatrists have established that the
loss of the ability to reason about intentions is catastrophic
after prefrontal cortex damage (e.g., Young, Bechara,
Tranel, Damasio, Hauser, & Damasio 2010) and in
disorders such as schizophrenia (e.g., Roese, Park,
Smallman & Gibson 2008), just as it is essential to
children’s proper development of a theory of mind (e,g.,
Leslie, Knobe & Cohen 2006). Not surprisingly then, it is
of concern that recent evidence indicates that people may
make systematic errors in their assessments of other
people’s intentions, at least in relation to the intentionality
of side effects (e.g., Knobe 2010). Consider the following
story:
The vice-president of a company went to the chairman
of the board and said, ‘We are thinking of starting a
new program. It will help us increase profits, but it
will also harm the environment.’ The chairman of the

board answered, ‘I don’t care at all about harming the
environment. I just want to make as much profit as I
can. Let’s start the new program.’ They started the
new program. Sure enough, the environment was
harmed.
Participants judged that the chairman intentionally harmed
the environment (Knobe, 2003a). The judgment is
puzzling because intentionality implies that the protagonist
desires the outcome, has the belief or knowledge that the
action will bring it about, and intends to carry it out, as
well as that the protagonist is aware of carrying it out and
has the skill to do so (Malle & Knobe, 1997).
The puzzle deepens when participants are told that the
program will help rather than harm the environment:
The vice-president of a company went to the chairman
of the board and said, ‘We are thinking of starting a
new program. It will help us increase profits, and it
will also help the environment.’ The chairman of the
board answered, ‘I don’t care at all about helping the
environment. I just want to make as much profit as I
can. Let’s start the new program.’ They started the
new program. Sure enough, the environment was
helped.
Participants judged the chairman did not intentionally help
the environment (Knobe 2003a).
The asymmetry between harmful and helpful side-effects
occurs in many different sorts of situations. It occurs for
different contents, ranging from serious violations such as
when an army commander’s decision to capture a region
in battle has the side effect of affecting the numbers of
soldiers killed (Knobe 2003a), to more trivial ones such as
when a protagonist’s decision to mow the lawn early in the
morning affects their neighbor’s sleep (Sverdlik 2004). It
is observed in languages other than English such as Hindi
(Knobe & Burra 2006) and for an array of linguistic
expressions such as ‘advocated’ and ‘decided’ (McCann
2005; Pettit & Knobe 2009). It emerges early in young
children (Leslie, et al 2006) and occurs even in people
with deficits such as Asperger’s (Zalla & Leboyer 2011).
Why do people judge that others bring about harmful
side-effects intentionally but helpful side-effects
unintentionally? The issue is hotly debated and several
alternative explanations have been proposed to account for
it.

1970

Intentionality and morality
One influential explanation for the asymmetry in
judgments of the intentionality of harmful and helpful
side-effects is that people first assess the morality of the
side-effect. Their judgment of the side effect as morally
good or morally bad infuses their judgment of its
intentionality (e.g., Knobe 2006). Against this proposal
however, it has been observed that people judge that a
protagonist brought about a harmful side-effect
intentionally even for non-moral side-effects. For example,
when the CEO of a movie company decides to introduce a
new program that will increase profits and have the side
effect of making movies worse from an artistic standpoint,
participants judged that he intentionally brought about the
side-effect of harming movies from an artistic standpoint
(Knobe 2004). When the story substituted ‘help’ for
‘harm’, they judged that he didn’t intentionally bring about
the side effect of helping movies from an artistic
standpoint. Likewise, the effect occurs for non-moral
norms, e.g., it occurs for a decision to change a
manufacturing process that will have the side effect of
creating a product that deviates from an industry standard
of ‘darker than blue’ (Uttich & Lombrozo 2010).
Most tellingly, badness and intentionality can be ‘doubly
dissociated’. On the one hand, some harmful side effects
are judged intentional even when they are not judged to be
bad e.g., a chairman who decides to increase profits in one
branch of the company with the side effect of decreasing
profits in another branch, is judged to have intentionally
harmed the other branch’s profits even though harming the
other branch’s profits is not judged to be bad (e.g., Knobe
2006; Knobe & Mendlow 2007). On the other hand, some
side effects are judged unintentional even though they are
judged bad, e.g., a town-planner who introduces a program
to clean toxic waste with the side effect of increasing
joblessness is judged to have affected joblessness
unintentionally even though joblessness is judged to be
bad (e.g., Phelan & Sarkissian 2008; Sverdlik 2004).
A related explanation is that people judge individuals to
be blameworthy when their decisions lead to harm. The
motivation to express blame leads participants to conclude
that the harmful side effect is intentional (e.g., Adams &
Steadman 2004; Alicke 2008; Mele 2003; Nadelhoffer
2004). Against this proposal however, it has been observed
that a harmful side-effect is judged intentional even when
participants have the opportunity to blame the protagonist,
or otherwise to assign responsibility to the protagonist
separately (e.g., Knobe 2003b; Pellizzoni, Girotto &
Surian 2010). Again, most tellingly, blame and
intentionality can be ‘doubly dissociated’. On the one
hand, some harmful side-effects are judged unintentional
even when the protagonist is blamed, e.g., a driver who
goes out of control while drunk and injures a family is
judged to be blameworthy, but not to have harmed the
family intentionally (Knobe 2003b). On the other hand,
some harmful side-effects are judged intentional even
when the protagonist is not blamed, e.g., a dentist who

carries out necessary dental surgery and inflicts pain on
the patient is judged to have inflicted the pain intentionally
but is not blamed for doing so (Sverdlik 2004).
Hence, moral assessments of goodness and badness, or
judgments of blameworthiness, do not appear to be the
reason why people tend to judge harmful side-effects to be
intentional and helpful side-effects to be unintentional.
However, one further possibility from this perspective is
that the difference in intentionality judgments for harmful
and helpful side-effects arises because of the moral
disparity between the primary goal (increasing profits) and
the side-effect (affecting the environment): the primary
goal itself may be perceived to be morally bad in the
context of the side effect. The first experiment tests this
moral disparity explanation.

Experiment 1
We gave participants an ‘Aid’ story in which the primary
goal was elevated to be of equivalent moral status to the
side-effect of affecting the environment:
The vice-president of an international aid charity went
to the chairman of the board and said, ‘We are
thinking of starting a new program. It will help us save
more people from starvation in Africa, but it will also
harm the environment.’ The chairman of the board
answered, ‘I don’t care at all about harming the
environment. I just want to save as many people as I
can. Let’s start the new program.’ They started the
new program. Sure enough, the environment was
harmed.
If moral assessments are central to intentionality
judgments, then harming the environment should be
judged unintentional because its immorality is ameliorated
by the morality of saving starving people. We also gave
participants a ‘Rival’ story in which the side-effect was
diminished to be of equivalent moral status to the primary
goal of increasing profits:
The vice-president of a company went to the chairman
of the board and said, ‘We are thinking of starting a
new program. It will help us increase profits, but it
will also harm our rival’s profits.’ The chairman of the
board answered, ‘I don’t care at all about harming our
rival’s profits. I just want to make as much profit as I
can.’ Let’s start the new program.’ They started the
new program. Sure enough, the rival’s profits were
harmed.

Method
The participants were 60 students from Trinity College
Dublin who took part voluntarily. They were 17 men and
43 women, aged 16 to 58 years, with an average age of 24
years.
Participants were assigned to the Aid or Rival groups
(n = 30 in each). They were each given a harm and help

1971

version of the story. Half received the harm version first
and half the help version first (and no effects of order were
observed). They completed several tasks, such as a praiseblame assignment task, as well as the key side-effect
intentionality judgment task, in response to the question,
‘Do you think the chairman intentionally affected the
<side-effect>?’. They circled their answer on a 7 point
likert-type scale with 6 anchored as ‘intentional’ and 0 as
‘unintentional’ and the mid-point anchored as ‘neither’.
They were instructed that they would be given two short
stories and they were asked to read them carefully, to
answer the questions in the order they were given, not to
change any of their answers, and to complete all of the
questions on one story before moving on to the next.

Results and Discussion
Participants judged that the protagonist intentionally
affected the side-effect more for the harmful side-effect
than the helpful one in the Aid condition, Wilcoxon’s z =
-2.828, p = .005, r = .365 as Figure 1 shows. (For clarity,
responses were graphed using scores translated from 0 to 6
to -3 to +3).	   The result shows that even when the
protagonist’s primary goal was elevated to be morally
compelling (saving people from starving) participants
tended to judge that he brought about the harmful side
effect (harming the environment) more intentionally than
the helpful side effect (helping the environment).
Harm

Intentional

2

Help

1.5
1
0.5
0

Unintentional

-0.5
-1
-1.5
-2

Aid

Rival

Figure 1: Judgments of intentionality for harmful and helpful
side-effects in the Aid and Rival conditions. Error bars are
standard error of the mean.

Participants also judged that the protagonist intentionally
affected the side-effect more for the harmful outcome than
the helpful one in the Rival condition, Wilcoxon’s z =
2.481, p = .013, r = .3203, as Figure 1 also shows. Even
when the side-effect (affecting a rival’s profits) was
diminished to be as morally unenlightening as the primary

goal (increasing one’s own profits), participants judged
that the protagonist brought about the harmful side effect
(harming the rival’s profits) more intentionally than the
helpful side effect (helping the rival’s profits).
The results suggest that the moral disparity between the
primary goal, of increasing profits, and the side-effect, of
harming or helping the environment, does not underlie the
asymmetry in judgments of intentionality. An alternative
explanation is based on the availability of choice.

Intentionality and choice
A new explanation for why people judge harmful side
effects to be intentional and helpful side effects to be
unintentional is that the protagonist is perceived to have a
choice when faced with the harmful dilemma but not when
faced with the helpful one. We propose that a harmful
side-effect poses a genuine dilemma: the goal is positive
whereas the side-effect is negative, and in a dilemma a
protagonist makes choices between priorities.
This availability of choice explanation proposes that
people think about whether the protagonist has other
options. They can think about an alternative to the harmful
side-effect: the protagonist could have decided not to
introduce the program to increase profits, and so not
harmed the environment. Because they can think of
alternatives, they perceive that the protagonist had a choice
and they judge the side-effect to be intentional. In
contrast, a helpful side-effect poses no dilemma: the goal
and side-effect are positive and the protagonist need not
make choices between them: his action will increase
profits and help the environment. Participants do not tend
to think of an alternative to the helpful side-effect and so
they perceive that the protagonist had little choice and they
judge the side-effect to be unintentional. This suggestion is
consistent with earlier acknowledgments that choice has a
potential role in intentionality judgments (e.g., Alicke
2008; Cushman & Young 2011; Machery 2008; Malle &
Knobe 1997; Phillips & Knobe 2009; Royzman & Baron
2002). For example, when the protagonist does not have
sufficient knowledge of the outcome, the effect is
eliminated (e.g., Nichols & Ulatowski 2007; Pellizzoni et
al 2010).
At the heart of the availability of choice explanation is
the idea that thinking about choices requires people to
imagine alternatives: they think about the protagonist’s
choice of pursuing the goal and its harmful side-effect, and
they imagine a counterfactual alternative of not pursuing
the goal and no harmful side-effect. Evidence to support
this suggestion comes from the observation that when
participants are required to create ‘if only’ counterfactual
thoughts about how things could have turned out
differently prior to making their judgments of
intentionality, the side-effect asymmetry is amplified
(Byrne 2012). They judged the harmful side effect to have
been brought about intentionally more often when they
were required to create counterfactuals compared to when
they were not, presumably because they could think of

1972

alternative choices the protagonist could have made; they
judged the helpful side effect to have been brought about
unintentionally more often when they were required to
create counterfactuals compared to when they were not,
presumably because they could not think of alternative
choices the protagonist could have made. The suggestion
is consistent with the idea that intentionality judgments
may potentially be affected by counterfactual generation
(e.g., Adams & Steadman 2004; Knobe, 2010; McCloy &
Byrne 2000; Pellizzoni et al 2010; Young & Phillips
2011). Our second experiment tests the availability of
choice proposal, by examining intentionality judgments
for side-effects that are brought about by actions or
inactions.

Experiment 2
Outcomes that result from a protagonist’s actions may
appear to be the result of deliberate choices, more so than
outcomes that result from a protagonist’s inactions. If so,
the asymmetry in judging harmful side-effects to be
intentional and helpful side-effects to be unintentional may
be diminished when the side-effects result from the
protagonist’s inaction, rather than from the protagonist’s
action.
People tend to regret bad outcomes that arise from their
actions more than bad outcomes that arise from their
inactions. Consider the following scenario:
Mr. Paul owns shares in company A. During the past
year he considered switching to stock in company B,
but he decided against it. He now finds out that he
would have been better off by $1,200 if he had
switched to the stock of company B. Mr. George
owned shares in company B. During the past year he
switched to stock in company A. He now finds out that
he would have been better off by $1,200 if he had kept
his stock in company B. Who feels greater regret?
Most people judge that the actor, Mr. George, will regret
his action more than the individual who did not act, Mr.
Paul (Kahneman & Tversky 1982). Even when their task
is to judge the regret that a person experienced without
making a comparison to the regret experienced by another
person, their estimates of regret for an actor are higher
than their estimates of regret for a non-actor (Feeney &
Handley 2006; N’gbala & Branscombe, 1997). They also
judge that actors will feel better about good outcomes that
arise from their actions compared to individuals whose
inaction leads to a good outcome (Landman, 1987). This
‘omission bias’ may arise because actions appear to
change the status quo more than inactions (Byrne &
McEleney 2000; Ritov & Baron 1999). Of course, when
there are compelling reasons to act, inactions can be seem
inexcusable (Gilovich & Medvec 1995; Zeelenberg, Van
den Bos, Van Dijk, & Pieters 2002).

We gave participants a version of the company scenario
which emphasized the protagonist action in switching to a
new program:
The vice-president of a company UMT Ltd went to the
chairman of the board, Mr. Smith, and said ‘We are
thinking of switching to a new program, instead of
staying with our old one. If we switch to the new
program it will help us increase profits, but it will also
harm the environment’. The chairman of the board,
Mr. Smith answered, ‘I have no desire to affect the
environment. I just want to make as much profit as I
can’. Mr. Smith considered staying with their old
program but in the end he said ‘Let’s switch to the
new program.’ They switched to the new program and
sure enough, the environment was harmed.
We compared this ‘Action’ version to an ‘Inaction’
version which indicated instead that the protagonist had
not acted:
The vice-president of another company in a different
region, OZF Inc went to the chairman of the board,
Mr. Jones, and said ‘We are thinking of staying with
our old program, instead of switching to a new one. If
we stay with the old program it will help us increase
profits, but it will also harm the environment’. The
chairman of the board, Mr. Jones, answered, ‘I have
no desire to affect the environment. I just want to
make as much profit as I can’. Mr. Jones considered
switching to the new program but in the end he said
‘Let’s stay with the old program.’ They stayed with
the old program and sure enough, the environment
was harmed.
We used the phrase ‘I have no desire to affect the
environment’ rather than ‘I don’t care at all about harming
the environment’ to obviate any inference that the
protagonist was maliciously negligent (Cushman & Mele
2008; Guglielmo & Malle 2010).

Method
The participants were 40 students from Trinity College
Dublin who participated voluntarily. They were 7 men and
33 women, aged 18 to 43 years, with an average age of 25
years.
Participants were assigned to the harm or help groups (n
= 20 in each). They each received an action and an
inaction version of the story (in that order, see Feeney &
Handley 2006). They received the action and inaction
versions for two vignettes, the company scenario and also
a parenting scenario in which a county council
chairwoman pursued a primary goal of funding basic
community services such as maintenance of roads and
parks, with the side-effect of harming (or helping) funding
for a ‘better parenting’ program designed to provide skills
to vulnerable adults in at-risk families.

1973

Half the participants received the company scenario first
and half the parenting one, and order had an effect
(participants tended to give different responses to the
company scenario when it appeared first rather than
second). Hence we report the results for participants’
responses to the first scenario they received only. There
were no differences in responses to the two contents,
company versus parenting when they were received first.
Participants completed several tasks, such as a praiseblame assignment task, as well as the key side-effect
intentionality judgment task. We eliminated four
participants because their response to a final question on
‘protected values’ (absolute values that people protect
from trade-offs) indicated they did not value the
environment or parenting programs highly (Ritov &
Baron, 1999; Tanner & Medin 2004). The procedure was
similar to the previous experiment.

Results and Discussion
Participants in the Action condition judged that the actor
brought about the side-effect intentionally for the harmful
side-effect more than the helpful one, Mann Whitney U, z
= -2.111, p = .035, r = .3518. The difference was
eliminated in the Inaction condition, z = -1.203, p = .229,
as Figure 2 shows. The result is consistent with the
suggestion that the asymmetry in judgments of
intentionality for harmful and helpful side-effects arises
from the perceived differential availability of choice for
harmful and helpful side-effects that result from actions.
Side-effects that result from a protagonist’s inaction may
appear not to be the result of deliberate choice as much as
those that result from a protagonist’s actions.
Harm
Help

Intentional

2

Wilcoxon’s z = -.680, p = .479; in contrast, they judged
the protagonist had brought about a helpful side effect
marginally more unintentionally for an action than for an
inaction, z = -1.792, p = .073, r = .299. The result indicates
that people judge the unintentionality of side-effects
differently when they arise from inaction rather than
action.

Conclusions
Participants tend to judge that an individual brought about
a harmful side-effect intentionally, but a helpful side-effect
unintentionally (Knobe 2003a). We suggest the
phenomenon arises because a harmful side-effect poses a
genuine dilemma in which the actor must make choices,
whereas a helpful side-effect poses no dilemma and the
actor does not need to make choices. People imagine a
counterfactual alternative in which the actor made a
different choice for a harmful side-effect and the readily
available imagined alternatives for a harmful side-effect
lead them to infer it was intentional.
The tendency to judge that an individual brought about a
harmful side-effect intentionally but a helpful side-effect
unintentionally persists even when the goal is of equal
moral worth to the side effect, such as saving people from
starvation, as the first experiment showed, ruling out an
explanation based on moral disparity. The effect is
eliminated when the side effects arise from inactions rather
than actions, as the second experiment showed, consistent
with an explanation based on the availability of choice.
The availability of choice explanation is consistent with
the view that common mechanisms underlie reasoning
about intentionality in moral and non-moral domains (e.g.,
Byrne 2005; Rai & Holyoak 2010; Royzman & Baron
2002; Shenhav & Greene 2010; Uttich & Lombrezo 2011).

Acknowledgments

1.5

Some of the research was funded by the TCD Arts and
Social Sciences Benefactions Fund. Thanks to Shane
Doherty and Kathryn Lambe for help collecting the data.

1
0.5

References

Unintentional

0
-0.5
-1
-1.5
-2

Action

Inaction

Figure 2: Judgments of intentionality for harmful and helpful
side-effects in the Action and Inaction conditions. Error bars are
standard error of the mean.

However, it is important to note that participants judged
the protagonist had brought about a harmful side effect
intentionally as often for an inaction as for an action,

Adams, F., and Steadman, A. (2004). Intentional action in
ordinary language. Analysis, 64, 173-181.
Alicke, M.D. (2008). Blaming badly. Journal of Cognition
and Culture 8, 179–186.
Byrne, R.M.J. (2012). Reasoining about intentions. Talk at
the International Conference on Thinking, London, UK.
Byrne, R.M.J. (2005). The Rational Imagination: How
People Create Alternatives to Reality. Cambridge: MIT.
Byrne, R.M.J. & McEleney, A. (2000) Counterfactual
thinking about actions and failures to act. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 26, 1318-1331
Cushman, F., & Mele, A. (2008). Intentional action: Twoand-a-half folk concepts? In J. Knobe & S. Nichols
(Eds.), Experimental Philosophy. Oxford: OUP.

1974

Cushman, F., & Young, L. (2011). Patterns of moral
judgment derive from nonmoral psychological
representations. Cognitive Science, 1-24.
Feeney, A., & Handley, S. J. (2006). Comparisons, mental
models, and the action effect in judgements of regret.
Memory & Cognition, 34(7), 1422-1430.
Guglielmo, S. & Malle, B. F. (2010). Can unintended side
effects be intentional? Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 36, 12, 1635 –1647
Gärdenfors, P. (1988). Knowledge in Flux. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Gilovich, T. & Medvec, V.H. (1995). The experience of
regret: what, when, and why. Psychological Review,
102, 379–395.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1982). The psychology of
preferences. Scientific American. 246, 1, 160-173.
Knobe, J. (2003a). Intentional action and side-effects in
ordinary language. Analysis, 63, 190- 193.
Knobe, J. (2003b). Intentional action in folk psychology.
Philosophical Psychology, 16, 309-323.
Knobe, J. (2004). Folk psychology and folk morality.
Journal of Theoretical and Philosophical Psychology,
24, 270-279.
Knobe, J. (2006). The concept of intentional action.
Philosophical Studies, 130, 203-231.
Knobe, J. (2010). Person as scientist, person as moralist.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences. 33, 353-365.
Knobe, J., & Burra, A. (2006). The folk concept of
intention and intentional action. Journal of Culture and
Cognition, 6, 113-132.
Knobe, J., & Mendlow, G. (2004). The good, the bad, and
the blameworthy. Journal of Theoretical and
Philosophical Psychology, 24, 252-258.
Landman, J. (1987). Regret and elation following action
and inaction. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 13, 524–536.
Leslie, A., Knobe, J., & Cohen, A. (2006). Acting
intentionally and the side-effect effect. Psychological
Science, 17, 421-427.
Machery, E. (2008). The folk concept of intentional action.
Mind and Language, 23, 2, 165-189.
Malle, B.F. & Knobe, J. (1997). The folk concept of
intentionality. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 33, 101–121.
McCann, H. (2005). Intentional action and intending.
Philosophical Psychology, 18, 6, 737/748.
McCloy, R. & Byrne, R.M.J. (2000) Counterfactual
thinking about controllable actions. Memory &
Cognition, 28, 1071-1078.
Miller, G. & Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1976). Language and
perception. Harvard: Harvard University Press.
Mele, A. (2003). Intentional action. Philosophical
Psychology, 16, 325-340.
Nadelhoffer, T. (2004). On praise, side effects, and folk
ascriptions of intentional action. Journal of Theoretical
and Philosophical Psychology, 24, 196-213.

N'gbala, A., & Branscombe, N. R. (1997). When does
action elicit more regret than inaction and is
counterfactual mutation the mediator of this effect?
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 33, 324343.
Nichols, S., & Ulatowski, J. (2007). Intuitions and
individual differences. Mind & Language, 22, 346-365.
Pellizzoni, S., Girotto, V., & Surian, L. (2010). Beliefs
and moral valence affect intentionality attributions.
Review of Philosophy and Psychology, 1, 2, 201-209
Pettit, D. and Knobe J. (2009). The pervasive impact of
moral judgment. Mind & Language 24, 5, 586-604.
Phelan, M., and Sarkissian, H. (2008). The folk strike
back. Philosophical Studies, 138, 291–298
Phillips J., & Knobe, J. (2009). Moral judgments and
intuitions about freedom. Psychological Inquiry, 20, 1,
30-36.
Rai, T.S. & Holyoak, K.J. (2010). Moral Principles or
Consumer Preferences? Cognitive Science 34, 311–321
Roese, N. J., Park, S., Smallman, R., & Gibson, C. (2008).
Schizophrenia involves impairment in the activation of
intentions by counterfactual thinking. Schizophrenia
Research, 103, 343-344.
Rozyman, E.B. & Baron, J. (2002). The preference for
indirect harm. Social Justice Research, 15, 2, 165-184.
Ritov, I., & Baron, J. (1999). Protected values and
omission bias. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 79, 2, 79-94.
Shenhav, A. & Greene, J.D. (2010). Moral judgments
recruit domain-general valuation mechanisms to
integrate representations of probability and magnitude.
Neuron. 67, 667–677
Sverdlik, S. (2004). Intentionality and moral judgments in
commonsense thought about action. Journal of
Theoretical and Philosophical Psychology, 34, 224-236.
Tanner, C., & Medin, D. L. (2004). Protected values: No
omission bias and no framing effects. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 11, 1, 185-191.
Uttich, K., & Lombrozo T. (2010). Norms inform mental
state ascriptions: A rational explanation for the sideeffect effect. Cognition 116, 1, 87-100.
Young, L., Bechara, A., Tranel, D., Damasio, H., Hauser,
M., & Damasio, A. (2010). Damage to ventromedial
prefrontal cortex impairs judgment of harmful intent.
Neuron, 65, 6, 845-851.
Young, L., & Phillips, J. (2011). The paradox of moral
focus. Cognition, 119, 166-178.
Zalla, T. & Leboyer, M. (2011). Judgment of intentionality
and moral evaluation in individuals with high
functioning autism. Review of Philosophy and
Psychology, 2, 681–698
Zeelenberg, M., Van den Bos, K., Van Dijk, E., & Pieters,
R. (2002). The inaction effect in the psychology of
regret. Journal of personality and Social Psychology,
82, 3, 314-327

1975

