UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Intentionality, Evaluative Judgments, and Causal Structure

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4m697071

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Shepard, Jason
Wolff, Phillip

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Intentionality, Evaluative Judgments, and Causal Structure
Jason Shepard (jason.s.shepard@emory.edu)
Phillip Wolff (pwolff@emory.edu)
Department of Psychology, 36 Eagle Row
Atlanta, GA 30322 USA

Abstract
The results from a number of recent studies suggest that
ascriptions of intentionality are based on evaluative considerations:
specifically, that the likelihood of viewing a person’s actions as
intentional is greater when the outcome is bad than good (see Knobe,
2006, 2010). In this research we provide an alternative explanation
for these findings, one based on the idea that ascriptions of
intentionality depend on causal structure. As predicted by the causal
structure view, we observed that actions leading to bad outcomes are
associated with negative social pressures (Experiment 1), that these
negative pressures give rise to a specific kind of causal structure
(Experiment 2), and that when these causal structures are pitted
against the badness of the outcome, intentionality judgments track
with causal structure and not badness (Experiment 3). While the
badness of an outcome may have an indirect effect on judgments of
intentionality, our results suggest that the factors that affect
judgments of intentionality most directly are non-evaluative and
objective.

directly explained in terms of causal structure than badness
of the outcome.

The Side-Effect Effect (or Knobe effect)
A connection between intentionality and badness has been
demonstrated in research examining the so-called side-effect
effect, or Knobe effect. Experiments investigating this effect
have typically included two main conditions. In the harm
condition, participants read scenarios like the following:
The vice-president of a company went to the
chairman of the board and said, ‘We are thinking
of starting a new program. It will help us increase
profits, but it will also harm the environment.’
The chairman of the board answered, ‘I don’t
care at all about harming the environment. I just
want to make as much profit as I can. Let’s start
the new program.
They started the new program. Sure enough, the
environment was harmed.

Keywords: Social cognition, Folk psychology, Theory of
mind, Intentional action, Intentionality, Causal structure,
Morality, Norms, Side-effect effect, Knobe effect.

Introduction
Ascriptions of intentionality play a fundamental role in our
explanations of behaviors (Malle, Moses, & Baldwin,
2001). They influence our judgments of character
(Rotenberg, 1980), deservedness of blame or praise
(Lagando & Channon, 2008), the impermissibility of actions
(Cushman 2008), and the severity of deserved punishment
(Horan & Kaplan, 1983). Standard accounts of intentionality
ascription hold that judgments of intentionality are based on
objective or descriptive properties of the actors and the
situation, such as foreseeability, desire, and belief
(Guglielmo, Monroe, & Malle, 2009; Knobe & Malle, 1997;
Mele & Sverdlik, 1996; Sripada, 2010). Recent empirical
work by Knobe (2003a) and others (Nadelhoffer, 2006;
Wright & Bengson, 2009; Cova & Naar, 2012) raises an
alternative view, that ascriptions of intentionality may be
based on evaluative properties of a situation. Specifically,
Knobe (2006, 2010) has argued that the likelihood of
viewing a person’s actions as intentional is greater when the
outcome is bad than when it is good. In this paper, we offer a
critical test of this proposal. We also put forward and test
another possibility, that judgments of intentionality are most
directly based on the causal structure of a situation, which
can be influenced at times by evaluative considerations. In a
series of three experiments, we show that the phenomenon
originally observed in Knobe (2003a) and others is more

After reading the scenario, participants are asked “Did the
chairman intentionally harm the environment?” For this
scenario, Knobe (2003a) found that 82% of the participants
responded that the chairman intentionally harmed the
environment. In help conditions, everything is kept the same
except the side-effect is described as good. In the chairman
scenario, for example, participants were told that the
business plan would not only make a profit but also help the
environment. Interestingly, in this alternative condition,
only 23% of the participants felt that the chairman
intentionally helped the environment (Knobe, 2003a). This
basic finding has been replicated with other scenarios
(Knobe, 2003b; Knobe, 2007; Knobe & Mendlow, 2004;
Mallon, 2008; Nadelhoffer, 2004; Nadelhoffer, 2006; Uttich
& Lombrozo, 2010; Wright & Bengson, 2009) and in a
diverse array of populations, including Hindi speakers when
the scenarios are translated into Hindi (Knobe & Burra,
2006), with four-year old children (Leslie, Knobe, & Cohen,
2006), with participants who suffer from deficits in
emotional processing due to lesions in the ventromedial
prefrontal cortex (Young, Cushman, Adolphs, & Hauser,
2006), and with adults with high functioning autism or
Asperger’s (Zalla & Leboyer, 2011). The wide range of
situations and populations supports the conclusion that the
basic pattern of findings is both reliable and conceptually
significant, but do these findings really demonstrate that

3390

intentionality is directly dependent on the badness of the
outcome?

Responses to the Evaluative Accounts
Though many take the side-effect effect as evidence that
ascriptions of intentionality are affected by evaluative
considerations (Nadelhoffer, 2004; Nado, 2008; Wright &
Bengson, 2009) such as badness, others have attempted to
provide accounts of the side-effect effect that are consistent
with standard, descriptive models of intentionality. For
example, Adams and Steadman (2004) has argued that the
side-effect effect is a result of pragmatic implicature: People
assent to the statement that the chairman intentionally
harmed the environment not because they genuinely
attribute intentionality to the chairman but because they do
not want to imply that the chairman is not responsible for
harming the environment. Machery (2008) has argued that
the effect is the result of calculation of trade-offs, arguing
that people are more likely to attribute intentionality
whenever there is a trade off and that the higher rates of
attributions for outcomes that involve a trade-off occur
regardless of the evaluative status of the trade-off. Sripada
(2010; 2012; Sripada & Konrath, 2011) has argued that the
side-effect effect can be explained in terms of concordance
with deeply held attitudes and values attributed to the actor.
For example, in the chairman case, since the chairman states
that he doesn’t care about the environmental outcome in
both the harm and the help case, people take this as
evidence that the chairman harbors anti-environmental
attitudes. However, only in the harm case does the outcome
concord with anti-environmental attitudes. It’s this
concordance that explains the side-effect effect, not the
evaluative status of the outcome (see Hughes & Trafimow,
2012, for a similar account). However, all these accounts
have met explanatory or experimental challenges (e.g., Cova
& Naar, 2012; Knobe, 2003b, Knobe, 2004; Mallon, 2008;
Phelan & Sarkissian, 2009; see Nadelhoffer, 2011 for a
review).
Uttich and Lombrozo (2010) have argued that the sideeffect effect results from the fact that behavior that
conforms to a norm is less informative about the underlying
mental states than is behavior that violates a norm.
According to their account it is the fact that a norm was
violated, not any particular evaluative judgment, that leads
to higher rates of attribution of intentional action.
Furthermore, they argued that the higher rates of attribution
for norm violations is not specific to violations of
evaluatively-laden moral norms but that the phenomenon is
a feature of norm violations more generally, including
statistical and prudential norms. However, their account
does not provide a mechanism that allows us to differentiate
why some norm violations (e.g., harming versus helping the
environment) lead to larger asymmetries in intentional
action attributions than other norm violation (e.g., violating
an industry standard versus conforming to an industry
standard (see Uttich & Lombrozo, 2010, Experiment 1)) or
why some norm violation do not lead to an asymmetry at all

(e.g., a supervillain who violates supervillain social norms
(see Uttich & Lombrozo, 2010, Experiment 2)). In a slogan,
their account can be viewed to being committed to the
claim: “A norm is a norm is a norm.” But the fact of the
matter is when it comes to the side-effect effect, not all
norms are equal. Some norm violations are more
informative than others. What explains this fact?
Furthermore, their evidence is still compatible with the
claim that badness (or some other evaluative judgment) best
explains the pattern of asymmetries observed in various
side-effect effect cases.

Causal Structure Account
Though the demonstrations of the side-effect effect suggest
that evaluations of the badness of the outcome may enter
into our reasoning about intentionality, another possibility is
that in Knobe’s experiments, more may have been varied
than the valence of the outcome. In particular, in varying the
badness of the outcome, Knobe may have also varied the
causal structure of the scenarios, and it may have been the
causal structure, and not the valence of the outcomes per se,
that affected people’s ascriptions of intentionality.
According to this alternative view, the extra something that
determines whether actions are judged as being intentional,
is whether, in fact, the agent causes himself to produce the
action.
The claim here begins with the idea that, in situations
such as the harm version of the chairman case, there is
normative force that acts on the chairman, and this
normative force puts a pressure on the chairman not to
pursue behavior that would knowingly violate the norm. In
other words, the presence of the norm puts a preventive
pressure on the chairman not to harm the environment. This
establishes a preventive causal relationship: namely, Norm
PREVENTS chairman from harming the environment.
However, in spite of the presence of this PREVENT
relationship, the chairman overcomes that pressure and
engages in behavior that will knowingly harm the
environment. In overcoming the normative pressure, an
additional PREVENT relation is formed: The chairman
PREVENTS the norm. This string of PREVENT relations
establishes what is known as a double prevention (Collins,
2000; Dowe, 2001; Hall, 2004; Schaffer, 2000). In this case,
the chairman PREVENTS the norm from PREVENTING
him from harming the environment. Prior research has
shown that double preventions are interpreted as
instantiating CAUSE or ALLOW relationships (McGrath,
2005; Wolff, Barbey, & Hausknecht, 2010). In this case, the
pattern would result in the CAUSE relationship: The
chairman causes himself to harm the environment.
Interestingly, this “causing of one’s self” instantiates a
situation in which an actor acts on himself, making it
reflexive. This self-causation is particular important for
intentionality. To intentionally do something is, if nothing
else, to cause oneself to do that something. Importantly, the
double prevention, and thus the reflexive relationship, will
arise in the harm scenario but not in the help scenario

3391

because there is no preventive pressure against helping the
environment, only against harming the environment.
Three experiments were conducted to test this causal
structure account against the badness account.

***
***

Experiment 1
In this experiment we investigated whether the causal
structure view could provide an alternative explanation for
the results found in previous studies. Just as in previous
studies, participants read scenarios in which an actor
brought about a good or bad side-effect and then they rated
the intentionality of the actor. The scenarios included six
scenarios that have been used in other studies in the
literature, as well as 10 new scenarios created specifically
for this experiment. We were interested in whether we could
replicate the intentionality effect observed in other studies.
The current experiment also tested one of the main
predictions of the causal structure account, that people
would infer more preventive pressure in harm scenarios
than help scenarios.

Methods
Participants Forty-eight Emory University undergraduates
participated for course credit.
Materials The materials were 16 scenarios modeled after
the chairman scenario described above. For each scenario,
there was a HARM version in which the side effect violated
a norm and a HELP version in which the side effect did not
violate a norm.
Procedure Participants read eight of the 16 scenarios. Each
participant received only one version of each scenario they
read, either the HARM or HELP version of each scenario.
In response to each scenario, participants provided an
intentionality rating by indicating their agreement or
disagreement with statements of the form “The [primary
actor] intentionally [side effect]”. Participants also provided
preventive pressure ratings by indicating their agreement or
disagreement with statements of the form “Knowing that
[going forward with the proposed plan of action] would
[side effect] put pressure on [primary actor] to not [go
forward with the plan]. The two types of ratings were
presented in random order. All ratings were made on a scale
that ranged from -4 complete disagreement to +4 complete
agreement.

Results and Discussion
As shown in Figure 1, participants were more willing to say
that an actor intentionally brought about the side effect in
the HARM condition (M = 1.01, SD = 1.97) than in the
HELP condition (M = –1.71, SD = 1.80), t(47) = 7.91, p <
.001, thus replicating, with a much wider range of materials,
the phenomenon originally reported in Knobe (2003a). Of
central importance to the causal structure hypothesis,
participants rated the preventative pressure on the actor not
to act as greater in the HARM condition (M = 1.56, SD =
1.85) than in the HELP condition (M = –2.28, SD = 1.49),
t(47) = 9.38, p < .001.

Figure 1: Mean ratings of intentionality and pressure by
scenario (HARM vs. HELP) in Experiment 1. *** p<.001

Experiment 2
Experiment 1 established that people infer a greater pressure
against bringing about the side effect in HARM than HELP
scenarios. With the first link of the double present
established, this entails that a double prevention would be
established in any case where the first PREVENT relation is
overcame. Thus, Experiment 1 establishes that when people
knowingly bring about a bad side effect, they infer a
sequence of PREVENT relations, or otherwise, a double
prevention. Double preventions typically lead to CAUSE or
ALLOW relationships (McGrath, 2005). In the context of
the scenarios, this implies that people should be more
willing to say that the actor either caused or allowed the side
effect in the HARM condition than in the HELP condition.
In Experiment 2, we tested the prediction that people will be
more likely to say that the actor caused the side effect in the
HARM scenarios than in the HELP scenarios.

Methods
Participants Fifty-two Emory University undergraduates
participated for course credit.
Materials and Procedure The materials were the same as
in Experiment 1. As in Experiment 1, participants provide
ratings of intentionality. Unique to the present experiment,
participants also provided ratings of causation by indicating
their agreement or disagreement with statements of the form
“The [primary actor] caused [side effect].”

Results and Discussion
As shown in Figure 2, participants were more likely to say
that the actor caused the side effect in the HARM condition
(M = 1.42, SD = 1.97) than in the HELP condition (M = –
.06, SD = 1.96), t(51) = 5.94, p < .001. The basic asymmetry
in intentional action attributions was replicated in this
experiment with participants more likely to attribute
intentional action in the HARM condition (M = .40, SD =
2.22) than in the HELP condition (M = –1.98, SD = 1.84),
t(51) = 6.35, p < .001.

3392

perform in the concert. I am going to invite the
Smiths to perform.”
The deacon invited the Smiths to perform.
***
***

Figure 2: Mean ratings for cause and intentionality
judgments by scenario type (HARM vs. HELP) for
Experiment 2. *** p < .001

Experiment 3
The results from Experiments 1 and 2 support the causal
structure account but are not conclusive because they
remain compatible with the badness account. In order to test
between badness and causal structure, the typical alignment
between badness and causal structure needs to be reversed.
Such a re-alignment was achieved in the current experiment
by using scenarios in which an actor either violated or
conformed to an unjust rule or law. Such scenarios
instantiate situations in which there is a preventive pressure
against doing a good thing, and little or no pressure against
doing a bad thing.
Take for example the following VIOLATE scenario used
in Experiment 3 (brackets indicate changes in wording for
the CONFORM condition):
In Midwestern America, there was a church that
had explicit rules against interracial couples
participating in any church-sponsored activity.
One day a church deacon was considering which
of his friends to invite to perform in a concert
celebration being sponsored by the church. He
decided to invite the Smiths, a husband and wife
duet.
Upon hearing the news a fellow church member
went to the deacon and said, “By inviting the
Smiths, you will be violating [conforming to] the
church’s rules against interracial couples
participating in any church-sponsored activity.”
The deacon answered, “Look, I know I will be
violating [conforming to] the church’s rules against
interracial couples participating in any churchsponsored event, but I don’t care one bit about that.
I just want to invite the most talented people to

In cases like this, it appears the right thing to do would be
to violate the rule. Thus, when the deacon violates the rule it
is likely that people will judge the violation as good.
However, since the rule is in force, it is likely that people
will judge that the deacon is under pressure not to violate
the rule. In contrast, when the deacon conforms to the rule,
it is likely that people will judge the conforming to the rule
as being bad, yet it is likely that people will not judge that
the deacon is under pressure not to conform. If this is right,
then the badness account and the causal structure account
make opposite predictions for intentionality judgments in
cases like the church case. The badness account predicts that
intentionality judgments should be higher for the conform
cases than for the violate cases because it is bad to conform
but good to violate. The causal structure account predicts
that intentionality judgments should be higher for the violate
cases than for the conform cases because the actor is under
pressure not to violate but is not under pressure not to
conform. Additionally, because overcoming a preventive
pressure instantiates a double prevention, and since the
pattern of double preventions observed in these cases should
lead to the inference of a reflexive causal relationship, the
causal account also predicts that people will be more likely
to say that the actor causes himself to violate the law or rule
than to say that the actor causes himself to conform to the
law or rule.

Methods
Participants Thirty-two Emory University undergraduates
participated for course credit.
Materials The materials were 8 scenarios modeled after the
church scenario. For each scenario, there was a
VIOLATION version in which the decision would violate
an unjust rule or law, and a CONFORM version in which
the decision would conform to an unjust rule or law.
Procedure Participants were assigned to read one version of
each scenario. For each scenario, participants were asked to
rate their level of agreement with statements about whether
the primary actor acted intentionally and whether the
primary actor experienced preventive pressure, as in
Experiments 1 and 2. Unique to the current experiment,
participants rated their level of agreement with statements
that the primary actor caused himself to bring about an
effect by responding to statements of the form “The
[primary actor] caused himself to [side effect].” As a
manipulation check, participants also rated whether the
outcome was good or bad, by responding to statements of
the form, “How good or bad is [the occurrence of the side
effect],” on a scale from -4 very good to 4 very bad.

3393

Results and Discussion

General Discussion

As is shown in Figure 3, Participants were more likely to
say that an actor was under pressure not to violate an unjust
rule or law (M = 1.11, SD = 1.89) than to conform to an
unjust rule or law (M = –1.31, SD = 1.91), t(31) = 5.24, p <
.001. Participants were also more likely to say that the
outcome was bad when the unjust rule was conformed to (M
= .70, SD = 1.70) than when the unjust rule was violated (M
= –1.56, SD = 1.31), t(31) = –5.49, p < .001. These results
lead the badness account and the causal structure account to
make opposite predictions for intentionality judgments in
these cases. The causal structure account predicts that
intentionality judgments will be higher in the violate cases,
while the badness account predicts that intentionality
judgments will be higher in the conform cases. As predicted
by the causal structure account, participants were more
likely to say that the actor intentionally violated the rule or
law (M = 1.67, SD = 2.35) than conformed to the rule or law
(M = –.62, SD = 2.01), t(31) = 5.94, p < .001. Additionally,
as predicted by the causal structure account, participants
were more likely to judge that the actor caused himself to
violate the rule or law (M = 1.98, SD = 1.74) than
conformed to the rule or law (M = .34, SD = 1.82), t(31) =
4.91, p < .001.

***

***

***

***

The results from Experiments 1 – 3 support the conclusion
that ascriptions of intentionality are driven by the causal
structure rather than badness of the outcome. When
assessing causal structure, it appears that people may look
for reflexive causal relationships, that is, causal relations in
which a person causes herself to do something.
Differences in causal structure are descriptive differences,
not evaluative differences. Thus, our findings are
compatible with the standard, descriptive views concerning
the way we reason about mental states. However, it may be
objected that the causal structure account is not fully
compatible with the standard, descriptive views because,
according to our account, causal structure is sensitive to
norms. While we acknowledge that prohibitory norms are
typically viewed as providing a force against behavior, it is
not really any particular evaluative judgment that is
providing this force (above and beyond the non-evaluative
recognition that a norm is in effect). In Experiment 3, we
demonstrated that force against behavior is perceived even
in cases in which it is thought to be good to violate the
norm. Additionally, even though our experiments focused
on norm violations of different kinds, we don’t think the
effect is particular to norm violations. We would expect
there would be higher rates of intentionality attribution for
any situation involving a preventive, whether this force is
due to norms or physical resistance.
Though we have shown that ascriptions of intentionality
depend on causal structure, our results point to the
possibility that the concept of intentionality itself may be
little more than a kind of causal structure. Such a result
might help explicate the curious role that intentionality
seems to play in our understanding of causal relationships in
general.

Acknowledgments
We thank Tyler Brown, Ted Guio, and Lee Kugelmann for
their assistance with stimulus preparation and data
collection. This research was supported by a graduate
fellowship from the Neuroethics Scholar Program.

Figure 3: Mean ratings for pressure, badness, intentionality,
and reflexive cause judgments by scenario type (HARM vs.
HELP) for Experiment 3. ***p < .001.

References

To provide converging statistical evidence that causal
structure and not badness of outcome was leading to the
asymmetrical judgments of intentional action, a regression
analysis was conducted with intentionality judgments
regressed on pressure judgments, reflexive-causation
judgments and badness judgments. After controlling for the
other variables in the model, pressure judgments and selfcausation judgments significantly predicted intentionality
judgments, β’s ≥ .349, p’s < .005. However, intentionality
judgments and badness judgments were unrelated, β = –
.095, p = .406.

Adams, F. & Steadman, A. (2004). Intentional action in
ordinary language: Core concept or pragmatic
understanding? Analysis, 64, 173-181.
Collins, J. (2000). Preemptive prevention. The Journal of
Philosophy, 97, 223–234.
Cova, F. & Naar, H. (2012a). Side-effect effect without side
effects: The pervasive impact of moral considerations on
judgments of intentionality, Philosophical Psychology,
25, 837-854.
Cova, F. & Naar, H. (2012b). Testing Sripada’s deep self
model. Philosophical Psychology, 25, 647-659.

3394

Cushman, F. (2008). Crime and Punishment: Distinguishing
the roles of causal and intentional analyses in moral
judgment. Cognition, 108, 353-380.
Dowe, P. (2001). A counterfactual theory of prevention and
“causation” by omission. Australasian Journal of
Philosophy, 79, 216–226.
Guglielmo, S., Monroe, A., and Malle, B. F. (2009). At the
heart of morality lies folk psychology. Inquiry, 52, 449466.
Hall, N. (2004). Two concepts of causation. In J. Collins, N.
Hall, & L. Paul (Eds.), Causation and counterfactuals
(pp. 225–276). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Horan, H. D., & Kaplan, M. F. (1983). Criminal intent and
consequence severity: Effects of moral reasoning on
punishment. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
9, 638–645.
Hughes, J. & Trafimow, D. (2012). Inferences about
character and motive influence intentionality attributions
about side effects. British Journal of Social Psychology,
51, 661-673
Knobe, J. (2003a). Intentional action and side effects in
ordinary language. Analysis, 63, 190–193.
Knobe, J. (2003b). Intentional action in folk psychology: An
experimental investigation. Philosophical Psychology, 16,
309-323.
Knobe, J. (2004). Intention, intentional action and moral
considerations. Analysis, 64, 181-87.
Knobe, J. (2006). The concept of intentional action: A case
study in the uses of folk psychology. Philosophical
Studies, 130, 203-231.
Knobe, J. (2007). Reason explanation in folk psychology.
Midwest Studies in Philosophy, 31, 90-106
Knobe, J. (2010). Person as scientist, person as moralist.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 33, 315–365.
Knobe, J. & Burra, A. (2006). The folk concepts of
intention and intentional action: A cross-cultural study.
Journal of Cognition and Culture, 6, 113-132.
Knobe, J. & Mendlow, G (2004). The good, the bad, and the
blameworthy: Understanding the role of evaluative
reasoning in folk psychology. Journal of Theoretical and
Philosophical Psychology, 24, 252-258.
Lagnado, D. A. and Channon, S. (2008). Judgments of
cause and blame: The effects of intentionality and
foreseeability. Cognition, 108, 754-770.
Leslie, A., Knobe, J., & Cohen, A. (2006). Acting
intentionally and the side-effect effect: Theory of mind
and moral judgment. Psychological Science, 17, 421-427.
Machery, E. (2008). The folk concept of intentional action:
Philosophical and experimental issues. Mind & Language,
23, 165-189.
Malle, B. F. & Knobe, J. (1997). The folk concept of
intentionality.
Journal
of
Experimental
Social
Psychology, 33, 101-121.
Malle, B. F., Moses, L., and Baldwin, D. (2001). The
significance of intentionality. In B. Malle, L. Moses, and
D. Baldwin (Eds.), Intentions and Intentionality:

Foundations of Social Cognition. Cambridge,MA: MIT
Press.
Mallon, R. (2008). Knobe vs. Machery: Testing the tradeoff hypothesis. Mind and Language, 23, 247-255
McGrath, S. (2005). Causation by omission: A dilemma.
Philosophical Studies, 123, 125–148.
Mele, A. & Sverdlik, S. (1996). Intention, intentional action,
and moral responsibility. Philosophical Studies, 82, 265287.
Nadelhoffer, T. (2004). On praise, side effects, and folk
ascriptions of intentionality. Journal of Theoretical and
Philosophical Psychology, 24, 196-213.
Nadelhoffer, T. (2006a). Desire, foresight, intentions, and
intentional actions: Probing folk intuitions. Journal of
Cognition and Culture, 6, 133-157.
Nadelhoffer, T. (2011). Experimental philosophy of action.
In J. Aguilar, A. Buckareff, & K Frankish (Eds.), New
Waves in the Philosophy of Action. New York: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Nado, J. (2008) Effects of moral cognition on judgments of
intentionality. British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science, 59, 709, 731.
Rotenberg, K. (1980). Children’s use of intentionality in
judgments of character and disposition. Child
Development, 51, 282-284.
Schaffer, J. (2000). Causation by disconnection. Philosophy
of Science, 67, 285–300.
Sripada, C. (2010). The deep self model and asymmetries in
folk judgments about intentional action. Philosophical
Studies, 151, 159-176.
Sripada, C. & Konrath, S. (2011). Telling more than we can
know about intentional action. Mind & Language, 26,
353-380.
Sripada, C. (2012). Mental state attributions and the sideeffect effect. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
48, 232-238.
Utich, K. and Lombrozo, T. (2010). Norms inform mental
state ascriptions: A rational explanation for the side-effect
effect. Cognition, 116, 87-100.
Wolff, P., Barbey, A. K., & Hausknecht, M. (2010). For
want of a nail: How absences cause events. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 139, 191-221.
Wright, J. & Bengson, J. (2009) Asymmetries in judgments
of responsibility and intentional action. Mind and
Language, 24, 24-50.
Young, L., Cushman, F., Adolphs, R., Daniel, T., Hauser,
M. (2006). Does emotion mediate the relationship
between ac action’s moral status and its intentional
status?Neuropsychological
evidence.
Journal
of
Cognition and Culture, 6, 291-304.
Zalla, T. & Leboyer, M. (2011). Judgment of intentionality
and moral evaluation in individuals with high functioning
autism. Review of Philosophical Psychology, 4, 681-698.

3395

