UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Intrusions and the Decision to Terminate Memory Search

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8jv3j178

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Harbison, J. Isaiah
Davelaar, Eddy
Yu, Erica
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Intrusions and the Decision to Terminate Memory Search
J. Isaiah Harbison (isaiah.harbison@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, University of Maryland at College Park
College Park, MD 20742

Eddy J. Davelaar (eddy.davelaar@gmail.com)
Departiment of Psychological Sciences, Birkbeck University of London
Malet Street, WC13 7HX, London, UK

Erica C. Yu (erica.c.yu@gmail.com)
Erika K. Hussey (erikahussey@gmail.com)
Michael R. Dougherty (mdougher@umd.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Maryland at College Park
College Park, MD 20742
Abstract

termination (exit latency or EL ; Dougherty & Harbison,
2007). These variables allow for the testing of different
memory search stopping rules previously proposed in the
literature, with much of the available data uniquely supporting the cumulative-failures stopping rule (Harbison,
Dougherty, Davelaar, & Fayyad, 2009) proposed within
the search of associative memory model (SAM; Raaijmakers & Shiffrin, 1981). According to this rule, every
retrieval attempt that does not produce a new retrieval
is counted as a retrieval failure and search is terminated
when the number of these failures reaches a threshold.
Recent research, however, has suggests that search termination might also be influenced by the presence of
memory intrusions (Miller, Weidmann, & Kahana, 2012;
Unsworth, Brewer, & Spiller, 2011). Miller et al. (2012)
showed that memory search was more likely to be terminated after an intrusion from a previous list (prior
list intrusion or PLI), an extra list intrusion (ELI), or
after outputting a list word that had previously been retrieved (repetition). They suggested that the increase in
the probability of stopping may be due to the effect such
retrieval errors have on subsequent recall. Each retrieved
word is thought to influence subsequent retrievals either
by the use of the retrieved word as a cue for subsequent
retrieval attempts (Kimball, Smith, & Kahana, 2007;
Sirotin, Kimball, & Kahana, 2005) or by the retrieved
item shifting the contextual retrieval cues closer to the
retrieved items own context (Howard & Kahana, 2002).
Intrusions and repetitions then would decrease the probability of retrieving a new target list word. A PLI would
increase the relative probability of another word from
the prior list being retrieved; an ELI would increase the
probability of sampling related extra-list words, and repetitions would increase the probability of retrieving other
words that have already been retrieved.
One potential problem with the Miller et al. analysis is that they had to infer when participants terminated search since the experiments they used in their
analysis used a closed-interval design. To determine

Little is known about the how the decision is made to
terminate memory search, though there have been several recent attempts to uncover this process. In one
recent study, Miller et al. (2012), re-analyzed data from
a large number of free-recall experiments and identified
intrusions as a factor that influenced search termination
decisions. One potential problem with this re-analysis is
that all the data were drawn from experiments in which
it was impossible to determine if or when search was terminated. Using data from experiments in which search
termination decisions were directly measured, we confirmed Miller at al.’s (2012) original findings but also
demonstrated that intrusions influence the time taken
to generate the final retrieval and the time between
the final retrieval and search termination. The pattern of data is consistent with a simple, sample-withreplacement model in which intrusions are less active
than items from the target list.
Keywords: recall; memory search termination; stopping rules

Every search of memory is eventually terminated. When
an individual decides to terminate their own memory
search (e.g., when they are not interrupted or given a
fixed time limit for search), what factors influence this
decision? The long history of memory research is relatively silent regarding this question as most memory
recall experiments give participants a pre-determined
amount of time to search memory (a closed-interval) and
have no method of determining when or, even if, participants terminate their search before the retrieval interval expires. When participants are allowed to terminate
their own search, as is the case in the open-interval design discussed below, a number of dependent variables
emerge that allow the measurement of memory search
termination decisions. These variables include the total
time spent in search (total time or TT ), which is controlled by the participant in this design. The total time
can be divided into the time from the beginning of search
to the time of the final retrieval (time-to-last retrieval or
TL ) and the time between the final retrieval and search

549

when participants might have terminated search, they
used data from an open-interval experiment (Dougherty
& Harbison, 2007) to set an inter-retrieval time longer
than participants were found to search memory before
terminating search. However, the factors they identified as increasing the probability of search termination
would also slow down retrieval. That is, if intrusions increase the probability of sampling non-target words, this
decreases the probability of sampling target list words.
When the probability of sampling a word decreases, the
expected time to sample that word increases. Therefore, it might be that intrusions did not increase the
probability of search termination but simply slowed retrieval sufficiently for no additional words to be output in
the retrieval interval. Participants might have continued
searching but to no avail.
In the present study, we used data from experiments
that used an open-interval paradigm to examine whether
intrusions increase the probability of search termination
when participants were required to indicate when they
terminated search. Second, we tested the hypothesis
that the retrieval of an intrusion changes the probability of subsequent retrieval types. Third, we tested if
terminating search after an intrusion changes the temporal variables of search termination (TT , TL , and EL ).
Fourth, we evaluated whether the results could be modeled using a cumulative-failures stopping rule, and if so
what assumptions were needed.

Figure 1: Comparison of A) Closed-Interval and B)
Open-Interval Experimental Designs.
more quickly if an intrusion is the final outputted word
relative to when a word from the target list is the final
retrieval.
We re-analyzed data from two previous experiments
using the open-interval design to test for these results.
Importantly, the data from these two experiments utilized what we call a multi-target cued recall paradigm.
Within this paradigm, participants studied multiple separate lists of words successively, with all words from each
list paired with a single cue word. After studying all the
lists, participants were presented with a cue and asked
to recall as many words as possible that had appeared
with the cue. This aspect of the experiments is particularly useful for examining the role of intrusions on search
termination because it should increase the probability
of PLIs. The multi-target cue task can be contrasted
with the standard procedure for list recall experiments,
which is to have participants study a single list at a time
and then, possibly after a filler task to clear short-term
memory (e.g., solving simple math problems), prompt
participants to retrieve words from the studied list.

Open- vs Closed-Interval Retrieval
The difference between the standard free recall
paradigm, or the closed-interval design, and the openinterval design is depicted in Figure 1. In the closedinterval design participants are given a predetermined
length of time for retrieval (e.g., 60 seconds). In this design, the decision to terminate search is obscured. During the retrieval interval participants might continue to
search memory throughout the entire interval, terminate search immediately after the final retrieval, or even
retrieve items after terminating search (e.g., a participant might terminate search then stumble upon another
list word while letting their mind wander). In contrast,
the open-interval design allows participants to continue
search until they decide to terminate their own search
(depicted in Figure 1 with an “X”). As mentioned above,
three temporal variables emerge as measures of memory
search termination and it has been found that the TT
and TL increases while the EL decreases with the number
of items retrieved (Dougherty & Harbison, 2007; Harbison et al., 2009; Unsworth, Brewer, & Spillers, 2011).
The open-interval design is therefore particularly useful for examining search termination decisions and provides not only a method of replicating the Miller et al.
results, but also a method of extending them. Using this
design it is possible to determine if search is terminated

Analysis of Previous Experiments
As mentioned above, both experiments used a multitarget cued recall paradigm. For the first experiment
(Dougherty & Harbison, 2007), three lists were shown
in each block for four total blocks of lists providing
data from twelve lists per participant. For the second
(Experiment 1, Harbison et al., 2009), four lists were
shown in each of the four blocks providing sixteen lists
per participant. The two experiments also differed in
list length. There were ten words per list in the first
experiment and eight words per list in the second.
Both experiments used lists of high (KF ¿ 50) and
low (KF ¡ 10) frequency words drawn from the MRC
Psycholinguistic Database (Wilson, 1988; available from
http://www.psy.uwa.edu.au/mrcdatabase.uwa mrc.htm).
For the second experiment, in addition to high and low

550

frequency lists, two of the lists per block were a mix
of high and low frequency words (four of each). One
mixed-frequency list had a high frequency cue word per
block and one had a low frequency cue word. In both
experiments, word frequency did not have a significant
effect on the memory search termination variables.
Therefore, the analyses collapsed across lists of high
and low frequency words.
Table 1: Mean Number Retrieved
Source
Dougherty & Harbison, 2007
Exp 1. Harbison et al., 2009
New Experiment

List
3.40
2.12
1.84

PLI
.25
.53
.32

ELI
.18
.42
.06

Table 1 shows the mean number of list words, PLIs,
and ELIs per participant per list. Note that the number
of PLIs though still small made up 6% and 17% of the
total number of items retrieved, respectively. Following
the procedure of Miller et al. (2012), we examined the
probability of terminating search as a function of both
the previous retrieval type (list word, PLI, ELI) and output position. Note that for all results reported in this
study statistical significance was determined by biasedcorrected and accelerated (BCa) bootstrap estimates of
the 95% confidence intervals. Here, we test the differences between list words and the two types of intrusions.
The results from both previous experiments were consistent with the PLIs and ELIs increasing the probability
of search termination, as shown in Figure 2A, but none
of these differences were significant for the Dougherty
and Harbison (2007) experiment. For the Harbison et
al. (2009) experiment, shown in Figure 2B, output positions two and three were significant for both ELIs and
PLIs, also ELIs were significant for the first position.
Therefore, these results replicated those of Miller et al.
(2012).
The hypothesis for why intrusions increase the probability of search termination was also tested. As mentioned above, the explanation is that intrusions increase
the probability of non-list items being sampled after an
initial intrusion. These intrusions could be words from
a previous list, as should be the case for PLIs, or words
from outside the experiment, as should be the case for
ELIs. Figure 3A and B shows the probability of list
words, PLIs, ELIs, and search termination immediately
after each type of retrieval. For both experiments, after
a PLI participants were more likely to terminate search,
less likely to output a list word, and, importantly, more
likely to output another PLI relative to after they had
generated a list word. In contrast, after ELIs there were
only significant differences in the probability of generating list words and terminating search and this was only
found to be significant in the Harbison et al. Experiment

Figure 2: Probability of terminating search as a function of the previous retrieval and output position for A)
Dougherty & Harbison, 2007; B) Harbison et al., 2009,
Exp 1; and C) the new experiment.

1 data.
These results are consistent with the explanation proposed by Miller et al.(2012). Not only are PLIs associated with an increase in the probability of termination,
but they are also associated with an increase in the probability of generating other words from previous lists. The
support for ELIs is mixed, but still consistent with this
explanation.
Overall the pattern of results using the open-interval
design were consistent with those reported using the
closed-interval design. Search termination was more
likely after an intrusion, especially a PLI. Furthermore,
the retrieval of a PLI does appear to be correlated with
an increase in the probability of retrieving words from
previous lists and a decrease in the probability of retrieving subsequent list words. However, the replication
of difference in the probability of terminating search by
type and output position was only significant for one
of the two re-analyzed experiments. Therefore, to further test Miller et al.’s results a new experiment using
the open-interval and multi-target cued recall was conducted.

551

Procedure
The same open-interval, multi-target cued recall procedure was used as in the previous experiments. During
learning, participants were presented with the cue word
and each list word from the first, second, third, and
fourth list. The learning phase was then repeated. Thus,
participants saw each list word with that list’s cue word
twice. Participants were then asked to retrieve the words
from the first, second, third, and fourth lists, in that order. There were a total of four blocks of lists. As before,
participants were provided an open-interval for retrieval.
They indicated when they were finished retrieving from
each list by saying ‘Stop” and pressing the space bar.

Results and Discussion
The exit latency and total time results replicated
the findings from previous open-interval experiments
(Dougherty & Harbison, 2007; Harbison et al., 2009;
Unsworth et al., 2012). EL s were negatively correlated
with number retrieved and TL and TT were positively
correlated with number retrieved. The mean within participant gammas of -0.293, 0.224, and 0.472, respectively,
were each significant.
Intrusions and Search Termination As shown in
Figure 2C, the results were again consistent with Miller
et al. (2012). PLIs and ELIs were consistently more
likely to be the final word retrieved before termination across output positions relative to target list words.
However, only the output positions with the most participants contributing to them, the first three positions,
were significantly different between the intrusion types
(both PLI and ELI) and list words.
The shift in the probability of retrieving subsequent
list items and intrusions after retrieving an intrusion was
found in the present experiment, matching the results
of the re-analyzed experiments. Participants were more
likely to have a PLI after a PLI and more likely to terminate search while also being less likely to retrieve a
target item. Likewise, after an ELI, participants were
more likely to terminate and less likely to generate a
target word. One difference from the results reported
above is that participants were also more likely to generate an ELI after an ELI in the present experiment. This
pattern is shown in Figure 3C.

Figure 3: Probability of retrieval type or termination as
a function of the previous retrieval type.

Experiment
103 Participants were randomly assigned to one of two
conditions. Participants in one condition were given two
blocks of four high frequency word lists followed by two
blocks of low frequency word lists while participants in
the other condition were given four blocks of low frequency word lists. This manipulation was designed to
test a hypothesis about the role of individual differences
in motivation on the influence of previous retrieval experience on stopping decisions (Dougherty & Harbison,
2007) which is outside of the scope of the present study.
As was found in the previous experiments, word frequency did not influence stopping decisions outside of
the impact on number of words retrieved. Therefore,
consistent with the previous experiments, all lists were
combined for the purpose of examining stopping decisions.

Intrusions and the Time Course of Termination
The open-interval design also allows for the testing of
temporal effects of intrusions. Specifically, does the generation of an intrusion have a different profile in terms
of exit latency (EL ), time-to-last (TL ), and total time
(TT )? To test this, we compared temporal variables
when search was terminated after both types of intrusions with instances where retrieval was terminated after
a target list word was generated. Note that rate transformations were used for the purposes of the analyses and

Stimuli
Both high and low frequency words were drawn from
MRC linguistics database (Wilson, 1988), the same
source for lists in the previous experiments, and the same
criteria for high and low frequency words were used.
Lists of eight to be recalled words and one cue word
were random generated for each participant.

552

that we again used BCa to estimate the 95% confidence
intervals.

ticularly for PLIs), and that the time between the final
retrieval and termination is shorter after an intrusion
(particularly for PLIs). This pattern of data provides a
new challenge for models of recall and particularly stopping rules to account for. The next section examines how
well as simple sample-with-replacement model is able to
account for these results.

Stopping Rules and Intrusions
For the present simulation, we tested the explanation
that intrusions have lower activations relative to list
words. Like intrusions, items with lower activation are
retrieved later in recall. Here we tested if items with
lower activation shared the additional characteristic of
intrusions. The present focus is on the sampling process
itself. Therefore, for the sake of simplicity, we assumed
a set of activations instead of modeling encoding and
the activation process (Harbison, Hussey, Dougherty, &
Davelaar, 2012; Rohrer, 1996).
A sample-with-replacement model equipped with the
cumulative failures stopping rule was used to predict
search. The pattern of activations used to test the model
was (.5, .5, .5, .5, 1, 1, 1.5, 1.5, 2, 2). We ran the
sample-with-replacement procedure where the probability of sampling item i was determined by the acti divided
by the sum over all item activations. A retrieval attempt
was successful if the sampled item had not previously
been retrieved and if the activation of the sampled item
was greater than the recovery threshold of 0.5. Four
unrecoverable items were included in the activation pattern. The total number of retrieval failures was tracked
and once this number exceeded the stopping threshold of
30 search retrieval was terminated as prescribed by the
cumulative failure stopping rule (Harbison et al., 2009).
The stopping threshold was within the range tested in
previous applications of the model (Harbison et al., 2012)
and the activation pattern used, specifically the inclusion
of four items that were not recoverable, was chosen to
increase the variability in the number of items retrieved.
Also to this end, for each simulation run a subset of six
items was chosen at random (and with equal probability) from the complete pattern of activations. Without
this, the number of items retrieved was too consistent to
be at all comparable to participant data.
The results from 10,000 independent runs of list recall
are presented in Figure 5. Items that were relatively less
active show the same profile as intrusions. The probability of terminating search after an item with less activation was greater than for an item of greater activation,
as shown in Figure 5A. Also, if items with lower activation were the final retrieved, it took longer to generate
them (TL is greater) and search was terminated more
quickly after the final retrieval (EL is smaller), as shown
in Figure 5B. Therefore, the present results relating intrusions to search termination can be accounted for by

Figure 4: A) Exit Latency, B) Time to Last, and C)
Total Time as a function of final retrieval type and total
number retrieved.
We combined the data from the present experiment
and the experiments included in the above reanalysis.
The combined EL , TL , and TT results are shown in
Figure 4 as a function of final retrieval type and total
number retrieved. The EL after a PLI was significantly
shorter than when the final word was from the target
list for four of the five cases. Furthermore, the TL was
longer after a final PLI for all five total number retrieved.
The pattern of results was less clear for the differences
between target list words and ELIs. The EL was shorter
for three of the five cases and the TL was longer for two
of them. The results were even less consistent for TT .
The difference between list words and PLIs were significant for two output positions and the difference between
list words and ELIs was only significant for one of the
positions.
The temporal data add another portion of the picture
of the role of intrusions in search termination. Combined, the present results suggest that participants are
more likely to terminate search following an intrusion,
more likely to generate a subsequent intrusion of the
same type (particularly for PLIs), that the time to generate the final item is longer if it is an intrusion (par-

553

of intrusions in search termination is an indirect one. Intrusions could lead to a greater probability of retrieval
failures, with the total number of retrieval failures still
being the direct cause of search termination.

Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge NSF (grant BCS-1030831) for
support of this research.

References
Dougherty, M. R., & Harbison, J. I. (2007). Motivatied
to retrieve: How often are you willing to fo back to the
well when the well is dry? Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 33 ,
1108–1117.
Harbison, J. I., Dougherty, M. R., Davelaar, E. J., &
Fayyad, B. (2009). On the lawfulness of the decision to
terminate memory search. Cognition, 111 , 416–421.
Harbison, J. I., Hussey, E. K., Dougherty, M. R., & Davelaar, E. J. (2012). Self-terminated vs. experimenterterminated memory search. In N. Miyake, D. Peebles,
& R. P. Cooper (Eds.), Proceedings of the 34th annual
conference of the cognitive science society (pp. 426–
431). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Howard, M. W., & Kahana, M. J. (2002). A distributed
representation of temporal context. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 46 , 269–299.
Kimball, D. R., Smith, T. A., & Kahana, M. J. (2007).
The fSAM model of false recall. Psychological Review ,
114 , 954–993.
Miller, J. F., Weidemann, C. T., & Kahana, M. J. (2012).
Recall termination in free recall. Memory & Cognition,
40 , 540–550.
Raaijmakers, J. G., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1981). Search
of associative memory. Psychological Review , 88 , 93–
134.
Rohrer, D. (1996). On the relative and absolute strength
of a memory trace. Memory & Cognition, 24 , 188–
201.
Sirotin, Y. B., Kimball, D. R., & Kahana, M. J. (2005).
Going beyond a single list: Modeling the effects of
prior experience on episodic free recall. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review , 12 , 787–805.
Unsworth, N., Brewer, G. A., & Spillers, G. J. (2011).
Factors that influence search termination decisions in
free recall: An examination of response type and confidence. Acta Psychologica, 138 , 19–29.
Wilson, M. D. (1988). The MRC psycholinguistic
database: Machine readable dictionary, version 2. Behavioral Research Methods, Instruments and Computers, 20 , 6–11.

Figure 5: A) Probability of search termination and B)
EL , TT , and TL by item activation.
a simple sample-with-replacement model equipped with
the cumulative failures stopping rule as long as it can be
assumed that intrusions are relatively less active than
words from the target list. This seems a reasonable assumption as models taking into account multiple sources
of association (context, experimental word associations,
and semantic word associations) often a assume a multiplicative use of search cues (Sirotin, Kimball, & Kahana,
2005; Kimball, Smith, & Kahana, 2007) and intrusions
should at least have a lower association strength to the
target context than list words.
In contrast, the model does not account for the observed impact of intrusions on subsequent retrieval.
That is, it cannot account for the greater probability of
retrieving a PLI when the immediately preceding item
is a PLI. Therefore, it might be necessary to assume
that the retrieval of an intrusion changes the contextual
landscape which determined the probability of retrieving subsequent PLIs and target list items. Provided this
extra assumption, the cumulative failure stopping rule
should have no trouble accounted for the present results.

Conclusion
The results from three experiments using the openinterval design replicate the results from a large-scale
re-analysis of closed-interval experiments (Miller et al.,
2012) that participants are more likely to terminate
search after an intrusion (either from previous list or
from outside the experiment) than after a correct recall.
Furthermore, search was terminated more quickly after
an intrusion (smaller exit latency) and the time taken
to generate an intrusion as the final output was greater
(greater time-to-last retrieval). These results were found
to be consistent with the predictions of a sample-withreplacement model equipped with a cumulative failure
stopping rule. As such, the results suggest that the role

554

