UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Investigating the Other-Race Effect of Germans towards Turks and Arabs using Multinomial
Processing Tree Models

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3nr6504j

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Singmann, Henrik
Kellen, David
Klauer, Karl Christoph

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Investigating the Other-Race Effect of Germans towards Turks and Arabs using
Multinomial Processing Tree Models
Henrik Singmann (henrik.singmann@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
David Kellen (david.kellen@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
Karl Christoph Klauer (christoph.klauer@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
Institut für Psychologie, Sozialpsychologie und Methodenlehre, Engelbergerstr. 41
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg, 79085 Freiburg, Germany
Abstract
The other-race effect (ORE) refers to the phenomenon that
recognition memory for other-race faces is worse than for ownrace faces. We investigated whether White Germans exhibited
an ORE towards Turkish or Arabic faces using a multinomial
processing tree model (MPT), the two-high threshold model of
recognition memory with three response categories (old, skip,
and new). Using an MPT enabled us to adequately disentangle
memory and response processes using the Fisher information
approximation, a minimum description length based measure
of model complexity. Results showed that participants exhibited an ORE on the memory parameters but not on the parameters representing response processes.
Keywords: Recognition Memory; Other-Race Effect; Multinomial Processing Tree Model; Face Recognition; Minimum
Description Length

The Other-Race Effect
The other-race effect (ORE, also known as own-race effect, own-race bias, or cross-race effect; e.g., Meissner &
Brigham, 2001; Hugenberg et al., 2010) describes the phenomenon that people tend to have a recognition memory advantage for own-race faces compared to other-race faces. A
typical experiment consists of two phases, the study phase
and the test phase. In the study phase, participants are asked
to memorize a list of faces of at least two different races (e.g.,
white and arabic faces). In the subsequent test phase, participants are presented with old (i.e., presented during the study
phase) and new (i.e., not presented during the study phase)
faces of the two races and have to decide for each face separately if it was presented during the study phase by responding either “old” or “new”.
The typical data pattern observed in such an experiment
is a mirror effect, namely that participants produce more hits
for own-race faces than for other-race faces (i.e., P(“old”|old)
is higher for own-race faces) and simultaneously more falsealarms for other-race faces (i.e., P(“old”|new) is higher for
other-race faces). A meta-analysis by Meissner and Brigham
(2001) of 39 studies with almost 5,000 participants showed
P(hit) was 1.4 times higher for own-race faces than for otherrace faces and P(false alarm) was 1.56 times higher for otherrace faces than for own-race faces, indicating a substantial
ORE.
Recent findings have qualified this overall effect. For example, in a study by Gross (2009) Asian, Black, Hispanic,
and White participants performed a recognition memory experiment with Asian, Black, Hispanic, and White faces. Furthermore note that the study was performed in Southern California (USA) where the majority of the population is Hispanic

(42% versus 38% Whites). For all participants the best performance (at least descriptively) was found for faces of the
participants’ own race. When analyzing participants based
on their race, an interesting pattern emerged. White participants had the best performance for white faces followed by
Hispanic faces followed by Asian and Black faces. Hispanic
participants had the best performance for Hispanic and White
faces (so no significant advantage for own-race faces) followed by Asian faces followed by Black faces. These results
indicate that the ORE does not generalize to all “other-races”,
but its magnitude depends on which other-race is the target.
Sporer and Horry (2011) have conducted a study with
a similar design that is of special importance for the current paper. Their participants were White and Turkish participants living in Germany which were tested on faces of
African Americans, Turks, White Americans and White Germans. White German participants exhibited an ORE only for
African-American faces, there was no reliable difference in
the memory for the other three target races. Turkish participants had a comparable performance for Turkish and White
German faces, which was better than the performance for
White- and African-American faces.
Taken together, these results indicate that people do not
display an ORE towards all other-races, rather it is an empirical question which seems to be depend on factors such
as facial features of the target race (e.g., White participants
in Germany did not show and ORE towards non-German
White faces whereas Turks in Germany did) and also on
social-cognitive factors such as the majority/minority or ingroup/outgroup status of the target race (as e.g. shown by the
study of Gross, 2009). The answer to the question whether an
ORE is displayed towards a specific other-race may also have
severe practical implications, for example in the domain of
eyewitness identification, as and ORE can lead to the wrongful accusation or conviction of innocent individuals or to an
acquittal of guilty individuals.

The Present Experiment
In this experiment we investigate whether White Germans exhibit an ORE towards people of Middle Eastern descent such
as Turks and Arabs. We selected Turks and Arabs as “otherrace” as (a) the only published study we know of investigating this (Sporer & Horry, 2011) surprisingly did not find an
ORE, (b) Turks are the biggest ethnic minority in Germany
(around 3 million of a 82 million population, Statistisches

1330

Do
Old Items

"Old"
g1

1 - Do
1 – g1

"Old"
g2

"New"

1 – g2

"Skip"

Dn
New Items

"New"
g1

1 - Dn
1 – g1

"Old"
g2

"New"

1 – g2

"Skip"

Figure 1: The 2HTM for recognition memory. On the left side
are the two different item types, old and new items, respectively, each represented by one tree. On the right side are the
observed responses “Old”, “Skip”, and “New”. In between
are the assumed latent states with the probabilities leading to
these states. Do = Detect an old item as old, Dn = detect a
new item as new, gi = guessing state.
Bundesamt, 2011), and (c) increasing prejudices towards people with Middle Eastern descent have been observed in the
aftermath of the terrorist attacks on 9-11 (e.g., Morgan, Wisneski, & Skitka, 2011).
Furthermore, our experiment employed a novel methodology that enabled us to disentangle two types of cognitive processes that contribute to performance in recognition memory,
memory and response processes. According to the current
state of knowledge (Meissner & Brigham, 2001), the ORE is
an effect that affects both memory and response processes.
However, in the next part of this manuscript we will argue
that the usual employed methodology of disentangling memory and response processes is flawed and offer an alternative.

Measuring Recognition Memory Performance
It is generally agreed upon that there are at least two different
kinds of cognitive processes that contribute to an observed
pair of P(hit) and P(false alarm) in a recognition memory
experiment (Snodgrass & Corwin, 1988): memory processes
(e.g., how good the memory for the studied items is) and response processes (e.g., the tendency to respond with “old”
instead of “new”). For example, better memory for the studied items should increase P(hit) but decrease P(false alarm),
whereas differences in the response tendencies should affect
P(hit) and P(false alarm) in the same direction.
So far, the study of the ORE has relied on simple performance indices such as d 0 or A0 (see Macmillan & Creelman,
2005) to measure the aforementioned processes. Based on
these indices Meissner and Brigham (2001) concluded that
the ORE is mainly a memory effect and that there are also

differences in response bias (i.e., participants are more inclined to respond with “old” for other race faces) which are
considerably smaller than the effect for memory processes.
However, the ability of these measures to accurately characterize an individual’s performance is known to be quite
limited, as they make simplifying assumptions (e.g., homoscedasticity of the evidence distributions) which, if violated, seriously compromise any conclusions drawn from the
analysis (see Verde, Macmillan, & Rotello, 2006). In particular, differences in memory and response tendencies tend to be
grossly confounded. Unfortunately the data usually gathered
does not allow to test these assumptions, encouraging the use
of measurement models which are based on richer data sets.
A model that has been extensively used in the literature is
the Two-High-Threshold Model (2HTM; Snodgrass & Corwin, 1988). The 2HTM assumes that studied and non-studied
items at test can be in either a detection or uncertainty state:
When an item is detected its true status (studied or nonstudied) is known, and a correct response is invariably given.
On the contrary, when an item is not detected, it is in an uncertainty state where no information regarding its true status
is available, leading to a response based on guessing. The
2HTM can be represented as a multinomial processing tree
(MPT; Riefer & Batchelder, 1988), as depicted in Figure 1.
Figure 1 describes the 2HTM for a recognition-memory
task, which we have enriched by introducing a third response
option “skip” in addition to “old” and “new”. The studied
items can be detected with probability Do , which is assumed
to invariably lead to response “old”. In the absence of detection (which occurs with probability 1 - Do ), the individual merely guesses, responding “old”, “skip”, or “new” with
probabilities g1 , (1 − g1 )(1 − g2 ), and (1 − g1 )g2 respectively.
Non-studied items can be detected with probability Dn , invariably leading to response “new” and in the absence of detection (which occurs with probability 1 - Dn ) the individual guesses using the above-stated probabilities. Parameters
Do and Dn attempt to capture memory retrieval processes as
well as memory-based metacognitive judgments (e.g., Strack
& Bless, 1994), while g1 and g2 capture response tendencies.
The advantages of using this model are threefold: First, the
2HTM is a simple yet validated model (e.g., Bröder, Kellen,
Schütz, & Rohrmeier, in press; Snodgrass & Corwin, 1988)
that is used as a building block in more complex measurement models (e.g., Klauer & Kellen, 2010). Second, the
use of 2HTM allows for different independent parameter estimates for German and Turkish face-stimuli, while other popular measurement models based on Signal Detection Theory (Macmillan & Creelman, 2005) suffer from identifiability issues that compromise their use (see Wickens & Hirshman, 2000). Third, the 2HTM is a member of the MPT
model class, a class for which model selection under the
Minimum Description Length principle is well documented
and available (Singmann & Kellen, in press; Wu, Myung, &
Batchelder, 2010). The latter point is discussed in greater detail below.

1331

Model Selection in the MPT Model Class: A
Minimum Description Length Approach
One of the advantages when employing an analysis based on
cognitive models is that model parameters capture entities of
primary interest such as the probability with which a certain
cognitive state is reached (e.g., the probability of remembering a face). A direct consequence of this is that psychological
hypothesis directly correspond to relationships among model
parameters. For example, the absence of an ORE corresponds
to the identity of parameters for German and Arabic faces.
Hence, in our analysis different versions of the MPT model
described above are used corresponding to different hypothesis (e.g., no ORE, an ORE only based on memory processes,
etc.). To establish which hypothesis is the most plausible
given the experimental result therefore entails an assessment
of the performance of the different models, a process known
as model selection.
Model selection requires a weighting between the ability of
the model to account for the observed data (via goodness-offit statistics) and the ability of the model to account for data
in general (model complexity or flexibility), as more flexible
models provide a better fit to data a priori (Roberts & Pashler,
2000). The established goal is to find the model with the best
trade-off between fit and flexibility, with different methods
and approaches being proposed in the literature (e.g., Vanderkerckhove, Matzke, & Wagenmakers, submitted).
One prominent approach in model selection is based on the
Minimum Description Length principle (MDL; Grünwald,
2007). According to the MDL approach, both models and
data are understood as codes that can be compressed. The
goal of MDL is to assess models in terms of their ability to
compress data. The greater the compression, the better the
account of the underlying regularities that are present in the
data. One of the indices emerging from the MDL principle
is the Fisher Information Approximation (FIA), which combines a model’s goodness of fit with model-flexibility penalties. Specifically, FIA takes the number of parameters and the
sample size into account, but additionally contains a term that
accounts for the flexibility of the model due to its functional
form by integrating over the determinant of the Fisher information matrix of the model for a sample of size 1 (see Wu et
al., 2010). An algorithm that computes FIA for members of
the MPT model class was developed by Wu et al. (2010), and
made available in an open-source package by Singmann and
Kellen (in press).
While common model-selection indices such as AIC and
BIC (Burnham & Anderson, 2002) use the number of free
parameters as a proxy for the relative flexibility of a model,
FIA is able to capture the model’s ability to account for data
in general. Because of this MDL indices such as FIA usually
outperform AIC and BIC (and null-hypothesis testing) when
attempting to identify the most suitable model (e.g., Klauer
& Kellen, 2011).
One further advantage of FIA is the ability to incorporate order restrictions being imposed on the parameters (e.g.,

Do ≥ Dn ), allowing for the testing of informative hypotheses
(Kellen, Klauer, & Bröder, in press). This means that one can
restrict the flexibility of the models to patterns that are theoretically plausible, and directly test whether this flexibility is
sufficient to account for the observed data.

Methods
Participants
A total of 42 White German psychology students (mean age
= 21.4 years, SD = 2.7) participated in the experiment for
partial fulfillment of course credits.

Materials
The pictures were taken from publicly accessible websites of
sports team of lower leagues (mostly soccer teams) from Central European countries (e.g., Germany, Belgium), Turkey,
and Middle Eastern countries. In total we gathered 123 White
and 125 Turkish/Arabic pictures (henceforth we will refer to
these as Arabic pictures). We digitally removed the background and eye-catching features and colorized the shirts uniformly black. The pictures were then pretested in an online
study on four 7-point scales: two ethnicity dimensions (German/Central European and Turkish/Arabic), distinctiveness
(“How easy it is to spot the face in a crowd?”, Valentine &
Bruce, 1986), and valence (positive to negative). We obtained
a mean of 20.6 ratings per picture. The ethnicity dimensions
were subtracted from each other to form a racial extremity
score (i.e., German minus Turkish rating for White pictures
and vice versa for Arabic pictures).
Based on the pretest data we selected 100 pictures from
each category (avoiding extreme ratings on any dimension)
that were comparable (albeit significantly different) in their
ratings. On the racial extremity dimension the Arabic pictures were somewhat less extreme than the White pictures,
3.7 versus 4.6. On the distinctiveness and valence dimension ratings were comparable, 3.5 versus 3.0 and 4.3 versus 4.6, respectively. Additionally, we randomly selected another 10 pictures from the remaining pictures to serve as primacy and recency items in the study phase. More details on
the pretest can be found here: http://www.psychologie.unifreiburg.de/Members/singmann/pubs/cogsci13supp

Procedure
Participants were tested individually. They were informed
that they were to take part in a memory experiment consisting of two study phases in which they had to memorize a
set of faces and a subsequent test phase. No reference was
made to race or related concepts. In the first study phase,
50 White and 50 Arabic faces (randomly selected) were presented in random order (plus 5 primacy faces at the beginning and 5 recency faces at the end) each for 2 seconds with
a 0.5 seconds inter-trial interval (ITI). To increase memory
for the pictures, the study phase was repeated with the same
items (plus primacy and recency items) presented in a new
random order. Directly after the second study phase, participants were introduced to the test phase in which they had to

1332

Table 2: Mean parameter values (SD) of model without parameter restrictions

judge for each of 200 faces (50 White old, 50 White new,
50 Arabic old, and 50 Arabic new) whether or not it was
presented during the study phase by selecting one of three
options: “old” [“altes Gesicht”], “skip” [“überspringen”], or
“new” [“neues Gesicht”]. We implemented a 0.5 seconds ITI
in the test phase.

parameter
Do
Dn
g1
g2

Results
Response Proportions

MPT Analysis
All analyses were performed using MPTinR (Singmann &
Kellen, in press).
The Unrestricted Model. We fitted the unrestricted 2HTM
model to each individual dataset separately using the maximum likelihood method. The model seemed to provide a
good fit to the data (as the unrestricted model was saturated
we couldn’t formally test this). Of the 42 participants only 6
participants had a G2 > 1, of those only two participants had
a G2 > 2 (3.70 and 4.95). The summed G2 was 19.19.
The mean parameter estimates and the underlying distributions plus additional information are depicted in Figure 2. As
can be seen, there were no big differences for parameters Do ,
g1 , and g2 . Only Dn showed a difference in the expected direction, Dn was smaller for Arabic than for White faces. This
results was also supported by significance testing (Table 2),
only for Dn did the parameters for White and Arabic faces differ. Somewhat unexpectedly, Do tended to be slightly higher
for Arabic faces than for White faces, although this result did
not reach significance.

P(hit)
P(skipold )
P(miss)
P(fa)
P(skipnew )
P(cr)

.67 (.16)
.07 (.08)
.26 (.16)
.16 (.11)
.09 (.12)
.75 (.16)

.71 (.14)
.07 (.09)
.21 (.12)
.27 (.17)
.13 (.13)
.60 (.19)

.06
.66
.03
<.001
.01
<.001

Note. Column p contains p-values from paired t tests comparing response proportions for White and Arabic faces.
P(fa) = P(false alarm); P(cr) = P(correct rejection).

.45 (.23)
.53 (.28)
.39 (.22)
.78 (.24)

.50 (.23)
.24 (.23)
.38 (.22)
.74 (.25)

.10
<.001
.79
.09

Table 3: Model selection results for models with different
parameter restrictions across face races

Table 1: Mean Response Proportions (SD)
p

p

restrictions and furthermore calculated the FIA for each of
those models using 200,000 Monte Carlo samples (see Table
3 for the results). The different models correspond to the different hypothesis regarding the nature of the ORE we could
capture with the 2HTM. The first model is the model without any parameter restrictions reflecting the possibility that
an ORE is driven by both differences in memory processes
and differences in response tendencies. In models two to four,
only memory parameters (i.e., Do and Dn ) were restricted to
be equal across the races, but response tendencies were allowed to vary. Model five only assumes differences in the
memory parameters but no differences in the guessing parameters. Models six to eight implement different versions of a
memory ORE with the guessing parameters restricted. Note
that for all but the first model we implemented an inequality
restriction on the memory parameters so that Do and Dn for
White faces were equal or larger than those for Arabic faces
(unless they were restricted to be equal).
The model with the best performance was model 6 (Ta-

Model Selection. To test for the existence of an ORE we
fitted eight models implementing different sets of parameter

Arabic faces

Arabic

Note. Column p contains p-values of paired permutation tests
comparing parameters across races using 100.000 bootstrap
samples (Hothorn et al., 2006). p-values of paired t tests are
identical up to the second decimal (up to the fourth decimal for
p < .001).

Table 1 presents the response proportions obtained for White
and Arabic faces and p-values of t tests comparing those
(without controlling for multiple testing). As can be seen, we
did not find a mirror effect. Rather, we found slightly higher
proportions of hits and higher proportions of false alarms for
the Arabic faces. Additionally, we found differences in the
use of the “skip” option in that participants used “skip” more
often for Arabic than for White new faces.

White faces

White

#

restricted

df

G2

p

FIA

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

none
Do
Dn
Do , Dn
g
Do , g
Dn , g
Do , Dn , g

0
42
42
84
84
126
126
168

19.19
48.29
71.07
96.91
182.71
210.97
356.87
385.13

.23
.003
.16
<.001
<.001
<.001
<.001

516.41
486.55
497.69
503.66
477.10
454.46
527.66
504.25

best
0
3
2
3
1
16
3
14

Note. The results are summed across participants. The lowest FIA value is printed in bold. Column ”best” contains the
number of times each model provided the best performance
(using FIA as the criterion). If not restricted, Do and Dn are
inequality restricted to be equal or larger for German faces
than for Arabic faces (except for the ”none” model in which
all parameters are free).

1333

1.0

Do

g1

Dn

g2

●

0.8

●
●
●

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

●

White

Arabic

White

Arabic

White

Arabic

White

Arabic

Figure 2: Violin plots (Hintze & Nelson, 1998) of the parameter estimates for the unrestricted 2HTM. The outer area depicts
the density of each variable. The boxplot depicts the first, the second (i.e., the median), and the third quartile and the area 1.5
times the interquartile range outside those values. The mean is depicted as a ×.
revealed that the majority of the participants were less able to
detect the correct status of new items for Turkish and Arabic
faces (i.e., lower Dn ) than for White faces, hence our ORE
was a pure memory effect. There were no reliable differences
on the other memory parameter (i.e., Do ) nor on the response
bias parameters (i.e., g). Additionally, our analysis revealed
that not all participants exhibit an ORE. In fact, although most
of the participants did show this effect, 14 of 42 participants
did not show any ORE. This latter finding may in part be responsible for the failure of Sporer and Horry to find an ORE
towards Turks as their analysis strategy might have not have
been as powerful as ours, as it may have suffered from problems of the employed performance index A0 (see also below).
When looking at the response proportions only, we did not
find the expected mirror effect (higher hit rate for own-race
faces and higher false alarm rate for other-race faces; MeissDiscussion
ner & Brigham, 2001) which is the usual data pattern in the
ORE. One possible explanation for this is that our decision
The goal of this experiment was to investigate whether White
to enrich the data base by introducing a “skip” option may
Germans exhibit an ORE towards people of Middle Easthave hidden the mirror effect. Alternatively, the mirror efern descent such as Turks or Arabs. In contrast to the only
fect, which is usually found in studies when the other-race
other published study we know of investigating this (Sporer
is Black, could be absent for Arabic faces. Future research
& Horry, 2011), we indeed found evidence for an ORE of our
should try to disentangle these two explanations. The absence
participants. More specifically, the analysis using the 2HTM
of the mirror effects also indicates that, although we did find
an ORE, our finding regarding the underlying processes may
Table 4: Mean parameter values (SD) of best performing model
not simply generalize to different own- or other-races.
with parameters Do and g restricted
Enriching the data base by introducing the “skip” option
and thereby allowing to employ a fully identified two-high
parameter
White
Arabic
p
threshold multinomial processing tree model, has proven to
Do
.50 (.23)
be a useful tool in investigating the ORE. It not only overDn
.52 (.24)
.23 (.24)
<.001
comes limitations of the often-used performance indices such
g1
.35 (.18)
as d 0 or A0 (Verde et al., 2006), it is also able to overcome
g2
.76 (.23)
identifiability issues when using two different stimuli classes
Note. See Table 2.
(i.e., White and Arabic faces) in a signal-detection framework

ble 4) with Do and the g parameters restricted across races
and the only differences being DnW hite ≥ DnArabic (this model
also had the lowest FIA value in an analysis without the inequality restrictions on the memory parameters), indicating
that we found a memory based ORE. This model did not only
have the lowest FIA value, but also provided the best FIA
performance for the largest number of participants (16 of 42
participants).
Inspecting the best performing models per individual
datasets revealed a surprising spread. Each model (with the
exception of the unrestricted model) provided the best performance for at least one dataset. Furthermore, the model
assuming no ORE (model 8) provided the best fit for 14 participants, indicating that quite a substantial subgroup did not
show an ORE.

1334

(Wickens & Hirshman, 2000). We hope that this new tool
may help in answering some of the open questions regarding
the ORE (see Hugenberg et al., 2010).
The adopted model selection strategy was also successful in uncovering interesting individual differences. Theories of ORE have highlighted that differences in ORE can be
explained by social-cognitive variables such as attitudes towards other-races (Hugenberg et a., 2010). Combining our
methodology with relevant individual differences measures
within the MPT framework, such as the new MPT model for
the implicit association test (IAT; F. Meissner and Rothermund, in press), could therefore be fruitful.

Acknowledgments
We thank Alina Arnhold, Felicitas Flade, and Hannah
Kammüller for their help in collecting the data and Jasmyn
Touchstone and Johannes Falck for preparing the stimuli.

References
Broder, A., Kellen, D., Schutz, J., & Rohrmeier, C. (in press).
Validating a two-high-threshold measurement model for
confidence rating data in recognition. Memory.
Burnham, K. P., & Anderson, D. R. (2002). Model selection and multi-model inference: A practical informationtheoretic approach. Springer.
Gross, T. F. (2009). Own-ethnicity bias in the recognition
of black, east asian, hispanic, and white faces. Basic and
Applied Social Psychology, 31(2), 128–135.
Grunwald, P. D. (2007). The minimum description length
principle. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Hintze, J. L., & Nelson, R. D. (1998). Violin plots: A box
plot-density trace synergism. The American Statistician,
52(2), 181–184.
Hothorn, T., Hornik, K., Wiel, M. A. van de, & Zeileis, A.
(2006). A lego system for conditional inference. The American Statistician, 60(3), 257–263.
Hugenberg, K., Young, S. G., Bernstein, M. J., & Sacco, D. F.
(2010). The categorization-individuation model: An integrative account of the other-race recognition deficit. Psychological Review, 117, 1168–1187.
Kellen, D., Klauer, K. C., & Bröder, A. (in press). Recognition memory models and binary-response ROCs: a comparison by minimum description length. Psychonomic Bulletin
& Review, 1–27.
Klauer, K. C., & Kellen, D. (2010). Toward a complete decision model of item and source recognition: A discrete-state
approach. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 17, 465–478.
Klauer, K. C., & Kellen, D. (2011). The flexibility of models of recognition memory: An analysis by the minimumdescription length principle. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 55(6), 430–450.
Macmillan, N. A., & Creelman, C. D. (2005). Detection
theory : a user’s guide. New York: Lawrence Erlbaum
associates.
Meissner, C. A., & Brigham, J. C. (2001). Thirty years of investigating the own-race bias in memory for faces: A meta-

analytic review. Psychology, Public Policy, and Law, 7(1),
3–35.
Meissner, F., & Rothermund, K. (in press). Estimating the
contributions of associations and recoding in the implicit
association test: The ReAL model for the IAT. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology.
Morgan, G. S., Wisneski, D. C., & Skitka, L. J. (2011). The
expulsion from disneyland: The social psychological impact of 9/11. American Psychologist, 66(6), 447–454.
Riefer, D. M., & Batchelder, W. H. (1988). Multinomial modeling and the measurement of cognitive processes.
Psychological Review, 95(3), 318–339.
Roberts, S., & Pashler, H. (2000). How persuasive is a good
fit? a comment on theory testing. Psychological Review,
107(2), 358–367.
Singmann, H., & Kellen, D. (in press). MPTinR: analysis
of multinomial processing tree models in r. Behavior Research Methods, 1–16.
Snodgrass, J. G., & Corwin, J. (1988). Pragmatics of measuring recognition memory: Applications to dementia and
amnesia. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
117(1), 34–50.
Sporer, S. L., & Horry, R. (2011). Recognizing faces from
ethnic in-groups and out-groups: Importance of outer face
features and effects of retention interval. Applied Cognitive
Psychology, 25(3), 424–431.
Statistisches Bundesamt (Ed.). (2012). Bevölkerung mit
migrationshintergrund: Ergebnisse des mikrozensus 2011;
[population with migration background: results of the microcensus 2011] (Vol. Reihe 2.2) (No. 1). Wiesbaden:
Statistisches Bundesamt.
Strack, F., & Bless, H. (1994). Memory for nonoccurrences:
Metacognitive and presuppositional strategies. Journal of
Memory and Language, 33(2), 203–217.
Valentine, T., & Bruce, V. (1986). The effects of distinctiveness in recognising and classifying faces. Perception,
15(5), 525-535.
Vandekerckhove, J., Matzke, D., & Wagenmakers, E.-J. (submitted). Model comparison and the principle of parsimony.
In J. R. Busemeyer, Z. Townsend, J. Wang, & A. Eidels
(Eds.), Oxford handbook of computational and mathematical psychology. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Verde, M. F., Macmillan, N. A., & Rotello, C. M. (2006).
Measures of sensitivity based on a single hit rate and false
alarm rate: The accuracy, precision, and robustness of,A z,
andA. Perception & Psychophysics, 68(4), 643–654.
Wickens, T. D., & Hirshman, E. (2000). False memories and
statistical design theory: Comment on miller and wolford
(1999) and roediger and McDermott (1999). Psychological
Review, 107(2), 377–383.
Wu, H., Myung, J. I., & Batchelder, W. H. (2010). On
the minimum description length complexity of multinomial
processing tree models. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 54(3), 291–303.

1335

