UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Investing Amid Uncertainty: A Test of the Domain Specific Anchoring Hypothesis

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2rv3h405

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Chai, Hui Yih
Newell, Ben

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Investing Amid Uncertainty: A Test of the Domain Specific Anchoring Hypothesis
Hui Yih Chai (hui.chai@psy.unsw.edu.au)
and
Ben R. Newell (ben.newell@unsw.edu.au)
School of Psychology, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia

Abstract

Reactions to Range Forecasts

The current study examined reactions to the precision of
earnings’ forecasts in hypothetical investment decisions. In a
forced choice task, participants were found to be indifferent
between point (e.g., $2) or range (e.g., $1.70-$2.30) forecast
formats when both outcomes were favorable (i.e., above
market expectation). When the outcomes were unfavorable
(below expectation), participants’ preferences were
significantly biased towards range estimates. When faced
with options which mixed forecast formats and favorability,
participants almost always opted for forecasts with a
favorable outlook regardless of format. These results are
inconsistent with domain specific ambiguity reactions found
previously (Du, 2009) and also offer no support for the
domain specific anchoring hypothesis (e.g. Du, 2009; Du &
Budescu, 2005). These findings raise some doubts about the
generality of domain specific reactions to uncertainty and
suggest that such effects might be dependent, in part, on the
(financial) sophistication of participants.
Keywords: Point; Range; Uncertainty; Ambiguity;
Communication; Precision format; Domain specific

Investors often rely on management earnings forecasts
when making their investment decisions. However, these
forecasts are rarely precise. For example, there is
uncertainty surrounding the reliability and credibility of the
forecasts, the forecasters might be unsure about the current
economic outlook, the market might be too volatile for an
accurate forecast to be made and so on. This growing
uncertainty that the investors, inevitably, have to face has
generated a heated discussion on how best to communicate
uncertainty to financial decision makers (Christensen,
Glover, Omer, & Shelley, 2012).
Extant literature has found that managers often
communicate uncertainty by incorporating imprecision into
their management earnings forecasts (Christensen et al.,
2012; Du, 2009; Du & Budescu, 2005; Du, Budescu,
Shelley, & Omer, 2011). Instead of providing a precise
point forecast (e.g. $1.00), managers issue earnings
forecasts in the form of a range estimate (e.g. $0.60-$1.40).
These findings are further evidenced in the National
Investor Relations Institute survey results (NIRI, 2003).
They found that the majority (78%) of corporate members
provided earnings forecasts information regularly and
among them, 75% use range estimates, whereas only 11%
choose the precise point formats. In addition, the authors
found that, by the end of 2001, 55% of the firms reported
their earnings in a range format while only 23% issued the
earnings forecasts in the form of point estimate (Cotter,
Tuna, & Wysocki, 2006).

Despite the fact that range forecasts are widely used in
earnings forecasts, investors’ reactions to this format are
rather mixed. On one hand, some literature has found that
being open about uncertainty by choosing a range disclosure
format could not only increase perceived credibility,
trustworthiness (Hirst, Koonce, & Venkataraman, 2008),
and investors’ confidence in the company (Habicht, 1992)
but also reduce the company’s legal liability (Hirst et al.,
2008).
On the other hand, evidence of range formats not being
well-received has also been obtained. Prior research has
shown that using the range format has led to reduced
investors’ confidence (Hirst, Koonce, & Miller, 1999),
heightened risk perception (Han et al., 2009; Kuhn &
Budescu, 1996), negative affective reactions such as worry
or distress related to choice outcomes and avoidance of
decision making in choice situations (Camerer & Weber,
1992; Han, Moser, & Klein, 2006).
Mixed reactions towards range forecasts were also
highlighted in participants’ comments that, although they
felt that range forecasts were more trustworthy and
informative than precise point format, the range format has
led them to question the company’s competence and ability
in estimating the uncertainty and risk involved (Dieckmann,
Mauro, & Slovic, 2010; Johnson & Slovic, 1995).
In terms of people’s understanding of the information
conveyed in the range format, past studies reported that
participants felt that range forecasts were more complicated
and harder to understand (Han et al., 2009; Johnson &
Slovic, 1995), even for highly educated and professional
participants (Sheridan & Pignone, 2002).

Domain Specific Ambiguity Reactions
Driven by the mixed findings between the reactions to
point and range earnings forecasts, Du (2009) conducted a
study to clarify how investors react to forecasts in different
presentation formats and with different outcome
favorability. In Du’s study, MBA students were asked to
evaluate four different investment options based on the brief
company background information provided and also their
respective CEO’s forecasts of next year’s earnings presented
either in a point or a range form. Specifically, the
participants were given prediction of the Earnings Per Share
(EPS) for next year.
Furthermore, participants received information about the
performance of the company relative to a benchmark.

1994

Participants were told whether the forecasts were higher
(indicating positive/favorable performance) or lower
(negative/unfavorable
performance)
than
market
expectation. Having read the descriptions and forecasts
information, the participants made a series of judgments,
including earnings prediction, confidence, investment, risk
and likelihood of investment decisions.
Drawing evidence from the literature on decision making
under ambiguity (e.g. Camerer & Weber, 1992; Du &
Budescu, 2005; Ellsberg, 1961), Du predicted that investors
would display ambiguity attitudes which were domain
specific. In other words, in the domain of favorable
outcomes, participants would seek ambiguity and react
positively to range forecasts whereas in the domain of
unfavorable outcomes, participants would avoid ambiguity
and react negatively to range forecasts.
Du (2009) found that precision format had no effect on
investors’ earnings predictions, confidence and risk
judgments. However, partial support for the domain specific
hypothesis was found in that when the outcomes were
favorable (i.e. the forecasts were higher than market
expectation), participants preferred ambiguity and invested
more when the forecasts were presented in a range rather
than in a point format. However, no such finding was found
when the outcomes presented were unfavorable (investment
was equally low in both range and point formats).
Du’s (2009) findings are consistent with Viscusi and
Chesson’s (1999) findings that participants’ reactions to
ambiguity was driven by the “hope and fear” effects.
Viscusi and Chesson found that when the situation generates
a ‘fear’ effect (or a small possibility of loss), people are
more averse to ambiguity whereas when the situation
generates a ‘hope’ effect, people are more inclined to seek
ambiguity. Du’s favorable forecasts could have generated a
‘hope’ effect, and hence, driven participants to seek
ambiguity and invest more in companies with range
forecasts.

Domain Specific Anchoring Hypothesis
Du (2009) suggested that her findings are consistent with
the argument that participants selectively draw information
from different focal end points of range estimates when the
decision context changes (Du & Budescu, 2005). In
particular, the domain specific argument posits that
participants are more likely to focus on the upper bound of
the range and seek ambiguity (or imprecision) when there is
a potential for gains, but they are more likely to focus on the
lower bound of the range and avoid ambiguity when there is
a potential for losses (hereafter referred to as the domain
specific anchoring hypothesis). Du’s finding that people
invested more in companies with range forecasts when the
outcomes were favorable could be the result of a preference
for the higher earnings values when participants compared
the upper end of the range forecasts with the point forecasts.
Furthermore, this domain specific anchoring hypothesis
has been linked to goal framing theory. Budescu, Kuhn and
colleagues (2002) argue that investors are motivated by the

goals to maximize gains and to minimize losses in the
financial market, and thus, anchor their judgments on
different focal end points in different contexts. In the
domain of gains, participants anchor their judgment on the
upper end of the range estimates so as to maximize the
potential gains and vice versa in the domain of losses in
order to minimize their potential losses.

Aim and Hypotheses
Whilst evidence shows that the domain specific argument
is well-established, thus far, no research has tested this
hypothesis directly in the context of investor decisions.
Therefore, the current study examined the prevalence of
domain specific ambiguity reactions and tested the extent to
which these findings could be explained by the domain
specific anchoring hypothesis. The current study adapted a
method used by Du et al. (2011) and presented participants
with eight forced choice options differing in the forecast
format, predicted outcome favorability and forecasts values.
After they read the brief descriptions of the two forecasts,
participants evaluated the informativeness, accuracy and
credibility of each form of presentation.
Prior to indicating their preference of investment in the
two options, they were required to predict where the actual
earnings would fall. That is, for the point forecasts (e.g.,
$2.00), they estimated the probability of the actual earnings
being lower than, exactly at, and higher than the point
estimate. For the range forecasts (e.g., $1.70-$2.30),
participants indicated the probability of the actual earnings
to be lower than the lower end, exactly at the lower end,
between the range, exactly at the higher end, and higher
than the higher end of the range forecasts (hereafter referred
to as the anchoring task). Their responses served as an
indication of where they anchored their judgments when
making the investment decision under different domains.
In accordance with Du (2009), it was predicted that
participants would show domain specific ambiguity
reactions, that is, participants would show ambiguityseeking behavior when the forecasts were favorable (i.e.,
prefer range over point estimates) and ambiguity-averse
behavior when the forecasts were unfavorable (i.e., prefer
point over range).
Furthermore, it was expected that these patterns of
responses could be explained by the domain specific
anchoring hypothesis. We predicted that the participants’
estimates of the actual earnings to be more likely to occur at
the higher end of the range estimates when forecasts were
favorable and given that this upper end estimate was higher
as compared to the point estimate, they would be more
inclined to choose range forecasts when they saw favorable
outcomes. In a similar vein, we predicted participants would
anchor more on the lower end of the range estimates when
the forecasts were unfavorable and since this lower bound
estimate was lower than the comparative point estimate,
participants would prefer point estimates more when the
outcomes were unfavorable.

1995

In terms of informativeness, accuracy and credibility, it
was predicted that point estimates would be rated as more
accurate than range ones (Du, 2009), and that as the
imprecision increased, the perceived informativeness (Kim
& Verrecchia, 1991) as well as its credibility (Longman,
Turner, King, & McCaffery, 2012) would decrease.

Method
Participants
Thirty Psychology undergraduate students from the
University of New South Wales participated (70% male,
Mage = 19.5 year-old, SDage = 2.2) in return for course credit.

Experimental Design and Measures
This study employed a 2 (forecasts format: point vs.
range) X 2 (forecasts favorability: favorable vs.
unfavorable) X 2 (forecasts values: high vs. low) withinsubject design. Participants were asked to assume the role of
an investor and to assess a number of investment options
that varied in three dimensions: (1) earnings forecasts
format, (2) forecasts favorability, and (3) forecasts values.
Forecasts Format The earnings forecasts (i.e. EPS) were
presented either in a point (e.g. $2.00) or a range (e.g.
$1.70-$2.30) format. These two formats were considered to
be informationally equivalent because the midpoint of the
range estimate always matched the point estimate. The
width of the range estimates was fixed at $0.60.
Forecasts Favorability Similar to Du (2009), benchmark
information for each forecast was provided to indicate the
overall performance of the company. Participants were
asked to assume that an earnings forecast that was higher
than market expectation indicated good performance
whereas one that was lower than market expectation
indicated poor performance.
Forecasts values Prior research has shown that investors’
decisions were affected by the expected earnings values (Du
& Budescu, 2005). Thus, the absolute values of the current
earnings forecasts were also manipulated. Half of the
estimates were high in values (with a midpoint of $5.00 or
$6.00) while the remaining half was low in their absolute
amount (with a midpoint of $1.00 or $2.00).

Procedures
Subsequent to providing informed consent, participants
were given earnings forecasts of two companies and asked
to indicate which company they would invest in. They could
also express indifference between the two options.
However, prior to making their investment decision, they
were required to evaluate the informativeness, accuracy and
credibility of each of the formats on a 6-point scale (1: Not
at all, 6: Very). Then, they were instructed to complete the
anchoring task for each form of presentation. After

completing the rating and anchoring judgments, the
respondents made their investment decision.
The two forecasts formats and two favorability outcomes
yielded four possible combinations of the two dimensions:
1. Range favorable vs. Point favorable
2. Range unfavorable vs. Point unfavorable
3. Point favorable vs. Range unfavorable
4. Point unfavorable vs. Range favorable
For example, participants comparing statements in the
first combination would evaluate “Company PA with a
predicted EPS of $2.00, which is higher than market
expectation” (point favorable statement) and “Company QC
with a predicted EPS in the range of “$1.70- $2.30, which is
higher than market expectation (range favorable statement).
Altogether, participants completed eight forced choice
options, two versions (a high and a low absolute value
version) for each combination.

Results
Table 1 displays the distribution of investor’s preferences
of forecasts format and outcome favorability across high
and low earnings values. Contrary to prediction, the pattern
of responses did not show that participants favored range
(point) forecasts when the outcomes were favorable
(unfavorable). Instead, Table 1 shows that when the
outcomes were favorable (comparison 1), participants were
about equally likely to choose the company with point or
range forecasts. When the forecasts were unfavorable
(comparison 2), participants were biased towards choosing
range estimates. However, in situations where there was a
mix between forecast format and outcome favorability
(comparisons 3 and 4), participants almost always opted for
the ones with favorable outlook, regardless of format.
A statistical analysis was conducted to examine if these
differences were statistically significant. Participants’
choices were coded into an index of preference for
precision. As in Du et al. (2011), a preference for point
forecast was given a value of 0 whereas a preference for
range forecast was given a value of 1. Indifferent (or
“Either”) option was assigned a value of 0.5 1. A mean
preference score was calculated with a mean of less than 0.5
indicating a preference for point estimates and a mean score
of more than 0.5 indicating a preference for range forecasts.
A one-sample t-test, with a test-value of 0.5, was conducted
and support for the patterns of responses aforementioned
was found (see Table 2).
In short, no evidence of domain specific ambiguity
reactions was found. As can be seen in Table 2, participants
seemed to prefer range estimates more especially when the
forecasts were unfavorable, and when they were faced with
a choice with mixed forecast format and outcome
favorability, their decisions were almost always swayed by
the favorability of the outcomes.

1

A further analysis showed that excluded indifferent responses did
not alter the statistical pattern of effects.

1996

Domain Specific Anchoring Hypothesis
The distributions of participants’ predictions about the
range and point forecasts are summarized in Figure 1.
Figure 1 shows, overall, participants estimated that the
actual earnings were more likely to be in between the range
estimates and exactly at the point estimate. The participants
also appeared to believe that the actual earnings were
roughly equally likely to occur at the different focal end
points, regardless of decision context.
Recall that the domain specific anchoring hypothesis
predicted that participants’ allocation of the probability
judgments at the different end points would differ as a
function of favorability of the outcomes. Specifically, the
hypothesis predicts that participants will anchor their
judgments at the lower end of the range forecasts when the
outcomes were unfavorable, but at the upper end when the
outcomes were favorable. The data plotted in Figure 1a
seem to show no support for this anchoring hypothesis.
In order to test this prediction statistically, an average of
participants’ responses at the lower ends (i.e. both ‘exactly
at lower bound’ and ‘lower than lower bound’) and the
upper ends (i.e. both ‘exactly at upper bound’ and ‘higher
than upper bound’) of the range estimates were calculated.
T-tests were then carried out to examine if participants’
prediction of the occurrence of the actual earnings at the
lower and upper ends would differ as a function of outcome
favorability. No significant differences were found. The
results indicated that participants believed that the actual
earnings were equally likely to occur at the lower and upper
ends regardless of outcome favorability, t(29)lower = -.408,
plower = .686 and t(29)higher = 1.378, phigher = .179 respectively.
Similar analyses were also conducted on point forecasts.
In accordance with the domain specific anchoring
hypothesis, it was predicted that participants would be more
optimistic and believe that the actual earnings were more
likely to be higher than the forecast when the forecast was
favorable, but they would be more pessimistic and consider
the actual earnings to be lower than the estimate when the
forecast was unfavorable. T-tests revealed that none of the
effects were significant, both ps > .05.
Collectively, findings from both the point and range
analyses showed no support for the domain specific
anchoring hypothesis. Participants did not focus on the
different end points when the favorability of the outcomes
differed.

Informativeness, Accuracy and Credibility Ratings
A 2 X 2 X 2 repeated measure ANOVA was carried out
on participants’ informativeness, accuracy and credibility
ratings. Consistent with prior research (Du, 2009), point
estimates (M = 4.07, SD = 1.18) were rated as more accurate
than the range forecasts (M = 3.32, SD = 0.87), F(1,29) =

11.242, p = .002. In terms of credibility ratings, favorable
forecasts (or forecasts that were higher than market
expectation; M =3.26, SD = 1.14) were rated as slightly less
credible than unfavorable ones (or those that were lower
than market expectation; M = 3.46, SD = 1.13), F(1,29) =
6.849, p = .014. No other significant effects of forecast
formats and favorability on how participants rated
informativeness, accuracy and credibility judgments were
found.
Table 1. Distribution of preferences of forecast format and
outcome favorability across different earnings conditions.
Low High Average
EPS EPS
1. Point Fav vs. Point Fav
11
9
10
Range Fav
15
18
16.5
Range Fav
Either
4
3
3.5
2. Point Unfav vs. Point Unfav
5
8
6.5
Range Unfav Range Unfav
17
14
15.5
Either
8
8
8
3. Point Fav vs. Point Fav
17
22
19.5
Range Unfav Range Unfav
8
6
7
Either
5
2
3.5
4. Point Unfav vs. Point Unfav
6
3
4.5
Range Fav
21
23
22
Range Fav
3
4
3.5
Either
Note: DM = Decision Makers; EPS = Earnings per share;
Low EPS = EPS with low values (with a midpoint of $1.00 or
$2.00); High EPS = EPS with high values (with a midpoint of
$5.00 or $6.00); Fav = Favorable; Unfav = unfavorable,
Either = indifferent between the two options.
DMs prefer

Table 2. Comparison of point and range forecasts differing
in favorability.
Mean
Preference

t(29)

Sig. (2tailed)

1. Point Fav vs.
0.61
1.383
0.177
Range Fav
2. Point Unfav vs.
0.65
2.473
.019*
Range Unfav
3. Point Fav vs.
0.29
-3.117
.004**
Range Unfav
4. Point Unfav vs.
0.79
4.592
.000**
Range Fav
Note: Ms > 0.5 indicates a preference for range forecasts;
Ms < 0.5 indicates a preference for point forecasts
*indicates significance at the .05 level
** indicates significance at the .01 level

1997

Figure 1. Distribution of probabilities of occurrence of actual earnings at different focal points for (a) range and (b) point
estimates.

Discussion
The current study aimed to test the domain specific
anchoring hypothesis directly in the context of financial
decision making. An examination of investors’ preferences
for point or range presentation format in favorable and
unfavorable contexts revealed no evidence for domain
specific ambiguity reactions. Participants did not show
ambiguity seeking or avoidance behavior when the
favorability of the outcomes changed.
A further
investigation of participants’ anchoring judgments on where
the actual earnings would fall also failed to support the
domain specific anchoring hypothesis. Somewhat
surprisingly, we found that even though participants
believed that point forecasts were more accurate than range
forecasts, they still seemed to prefer forecasts in range
format more than those in point format, particularly when
the forecasts were unfavorable. This finding was not
affected by the perceived informativeness and credibility
judgments on the presentation format.
Interestingly, favorable forecasts were rated as less
credible than unfavorable estimates. Given the growing
uncertainty in the current economy, participants may be
more cautious and skeptical about the forecasts provided.
They may feel that favorable forecasts have not sufficiently
incorporated the uncertainty in the current economic
conditions, and hence, rated them as less credible than
unfavorable ones.
Another interesting finding of the present study is that
financial decisions are largely dominated by the favorability
of the outcomes. In the third and fourth comparisons where
forecast format and outcome favorability were mixed,
participants almost always selected the ones with favorable
outcomes. Given that participants were told to regard
‘higher (lower) than market expectation’ as an indication of
good (poor) performance, it is perhaps unsurprising that the
effects of favorability may overshadow the concern for

forecast format when both dimensions are mixed. It would
be interesting in follow up work to see if participants’
preferences’ differ when favorability of the outcomes is
manipulated between subjects.
One possibility for why we did not find domain specific
ambiguity reactions could be that the current participant
pool was psychology undergraduates rather than the MBA
students used in Du (2009). Moreover, we did not take into
account participants’ prior investment experience or
knowledge about the stock market. Limited exposure to the
financial settings may have affected participants’
understanding of the earnings prediction presented to them
making them less susceptible to the influence of the
different forecast formats. Future work could examine this
role of ‘expertise’ in reactions to imprecision.
Another difference between the current research and Du’s
(2009) is that Du employed range forecasts with variable
width whereas we used range forecasts with fixed width.
The largest range width used in Du’s study (i.e. $1.80) was
three times the value of the current width (i.e. $0.60). It
could be that the domain differences in ambiguity reactions
are only found in forecasts with larger range width.
This assertion is further supported by examination of the
range width used in Du and Budescu’s (2005) study which
also found support for domain specific ambiguity reactions.
The size of the range width chosen by the authors ranged
from $2.00 to $32.00. Although participants in the current
study rated range forecasts as different (in terms of
accuracy) from point forecasts, the $0.60 range width may
still be too narrow, and hence, too subtle to influence their
preferences between the two formats.
On the other hand, previous evidence of domain specific
ambiguity reactions (e.g. Du & Budescu, 2005) is not as
direct as Du’s (2009). For example, Du and Budescu (2005)
found that domain specific ambiguity reactions was task
specific. They only found the reversal of ambiguity attitudes
in a certainty equivalent task but not in a pairwise

1998

comparison task. Thus it seems that reactions to ambiguity
might be dependent on the particular task used to elicit
preferences.
Furthermore, in their study, the authors manipulated the
sources of uncertainty – whether it is uncertainty in the
estimates or in the outcomes (Du & Budescu, 2005). It
could be that the effect of domain specific ambiguity
reactions would be stronger when another source of
uncertainty is included. Future research specifically
focusing on these issues will help to clarify the exact nature
of domain specific ambiguity reactions.
In conclusion, we found no evidence for domain specific
ambiguity reactions or for the anchoring hypothesis in the
context of investment decisions. However, our results
revealed that favorability of the outcomes dominates
judgments and its effect may have masked the concern for
presentation format when both dimensions were mixed.
Future research, controlling for the issues discussed, is
required to unpack the domain specific observations more
thoroughly.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by an Australian Postgraduate
Award Scholarship awarded to the first author, and an
Australian Research Council Linkage Project Grant and a
Future Fellowship awarded to the second author. The
support of the ARC Centre of Excellence in Climate
Systems Science is also gratefully acknowledged.

References
Budescu, D. V., Kuhn, K. M., Kramer, K. M., & Johnson,
T. R. (2002). Modeling certainty equivalents for
imprecise gambles. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes, 88(2), 748-768.
Camerer, C., & Weber, M. (1992). Recent developments in
modeling preferences: Uncertainty and ambiguity.
Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 5(4), 325-370.
Christensen, B., Glover, S., Omer, T., & Shelley, M. (2012).
Does Estimation Uncertainty Affect Investors' Preference
for the Form of Financial Statement Presentation?
Available at SSRN: Abstract 2163878.
Cotter, J., Tuna, A. I., & Wysocki, P. D. (2006).
Expectations management and beatable targets: How do
analysts react to explicit earnings guidance?
Contemporary Accounting Research, 23(3).
Dieckmann, N. F., Mauro, R., & Slovic, P. (2010). The
Effects of Presenting Imprecise Probabilities in
Intelligence Forecasts. Risk Analysis, 30(6), 987-1001.
Du, N. (2009). Do Investors React Differently to Range and
Point Management Earnings Forecasts? Journal of
Behavioral Finance, 10(4), 195-203.
Du, N., & Budescu, D. V. (2005). The Effects of Imprecise
Probabilities and Outcomes in Evaluating Investment
Options. Management Science, 51(12), 1791-1803.
Du, N., Budescu, D. V., Shelley, M. K., & Omer, T. C.
(2011). The appeal of vague financial forecasts.

Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes,
114(2), 179-189.
Ellsberg, D. (1961). Risk, Ambiguity, and the Savage
Axioms. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 75(4), 643669.
Habicht, F. H. (1992). Guidance on risk characterization for
risk managers and risk assessors. Retrieved from United
States Environmental Protection Agency website:
http://www.epa.gov/oswer/riskassessment/habicht.htm
Han, P. K., Klein, W. M. P., Lehman, T. C., Massett, H.,
Lee, S. C., & Freedman, A. N. (2009). Laypersons'
Responses to the Communication of Uncertainty
Regarding Cancer Risk Estimates. Medical Decision
Making, 29(3), 391-403.
Han, P. K., Moser, R. P., & Klein, W. M. (2006). Perceived
ambiguity about cancer prevention recommendations:
relationship to perceptions of cancer preventability, risk,
and worry. J Health Commun, 1, 51-69.
Hirst, D. E., Koonce, L., & Miller, J. (1999). The Joint
Effect of Management's Prior Forecast Accuracy and the
Form of Its Financial Forecasts on Investor Judgment.
Journal of Accounting Research, 37, 101-124.
Hirst, D. E., Koonce, L., & Venkataraman, S. (2008).
Management Earnings Forecasts: A Review and
Framework. Accounting Horizons, 22(3), 315-338.
Johnson, B. B., & Slovic, P. (1995). Presenting Uncertainty
in Health Risk Assessment: Initial Studies of Its Effects
on Risk Perception and Trust. Risk Analysis, 15(4), 485494.
Kim, O., & Verrecchia, R. E. (1991). Trading volume and
price reactions to public announcements. Journal of
Accounting Research, 29(2), 302-321.
Kuhn, K. M., & Budescu, D. V. (1996). The Relative
Importance of Probabilities, Outcomes, and Vagueness in
Hazard Risk Decisions. Organizational Behavior and
Human Decision Processes, 68(3), 301-317.
Longman, T., Turner, R. M., King, M., & McCaffery, K. J.
(2012). The effects of communicating uncertainty in
quantitative health risk estimates. Patient Educ Couns,
89(2), 252-259.
NIRI. (2003). NIRI survey results on earnings guidance
practices: The executive alert: The National Investors'
Relations Institute.
Sheridan, S. L., & Pignone, M. (2002). Numeracy and the
medical student's ability to interpret data. Eff Clin Pract,
5(1), 35-40.
Viscusi, W. K., & Chesson, H. (1999). Hopes and Fears: the
Conflicting Effects of Risk Ambiguity. Theory and
Decision, 47(2), 157-184. doi: 10.1023/a:1005173013606

1999

