UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Is perception cognitively penetrable? A philosophically satisfying and empirically testable
reframing

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1d69g49p

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Lupyan, Gary
Stokes, Dustin
Macpherson, Fiona
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Is perception cognitively penetrable?
A philosophically satisfying and empirically testable reframing
Gary Lupyan (lupyan@wisc.edu)
Department of Psychology
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Madison, WI 53706

Dustin Stokes
(dustin.stokes@utah.edu)

Rasha Adbel Rahman
(rasha.abdel.rahman@hu-berlin.de)

Department of Philosophy
University of Utah
Salt Lake City, UT 84112

Department of Psychology
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin
Berlin, Germany

Fiona Macpherson
(fiona.macpherson@glasgow.ac.uk)

Robert Goldstone
(rgoldsto@indiana.edu)

Department of Philosophy
University of Glasgow
Glasgow, G12 8QQ

Department of Psychology
Indiana University
Bloomington, IN 47405

Keywords: perception; top-down effects; perceptual learning;
philosophy of cognitive science

ed as follows: define the phenomenon and then, definition in
hand, interpret various psychological data. However, different theorists offer different and apparently inconsistent definitions. And so in addition to the usual problems (e.g., definitions being challenged by counterexample), an important
result is that different theorists apply their definitions and
accordingly get conflicting answers to the question ―Is this a
genuine case of cognitive penetration?‖ This hurdle to philosophical and scientific progress can be remedied, I argue,
by returning attention to the alleged consequences of the
possible phenomenon. There are three: theory-ladenness of
perception in contexts of scientific theory choice, a threat to
the general epistemic role of perception, and implications
for mental architecture. Any attempt to characterize or define, and then empirically test for, cognitive penetration
should be constrained by these consequences. This is a
method for interpreting and acquiring experimental data in a
way that is agreeable to both sides of the cognitive penetration debate. Put crudely, the question shifts to ―Is this a
cognitive-perceptual relation that results in (or constitutes)
one or more of the relevant consequences?‖ In answering
this question it may turn out that there is no single unified
phenomenon of cognitive penetration. But this should not
matter, since it is the consequences that are of central importance to philosophers and cognitive scientists alike.

Introduction
The question of whether perception can be penetrated by
cognition is in the limelight again. The reason this question
keeps coming up is that there is so much at stake: Is it possible to have theory-neutral observation? Is it possible to
study perception without recourse to expectations, context,
and beliefs? What are the boundaries between perception,
memory, and inference (and do they even exist)? Are findings from neuroscience that paint a picture of perception as
an inherently bidirectional and interactive process relevant
for understanding the relationship between cognition and
perception?
We have assembled a group of philosophers and psychologists who have been considering the thesis of cognitive
(im)penetrability in light of these questions (Abdel Rahman
& Sommer, 2008; Goldstone, Landy, & Brunel, 2011; Lupyan, Thompson-Schill, & Swingley, 2010; Macpherson,
2012; Stokes, 2011). Rather than rehashing previous arguments which appear, in retrospect, to have been somewhat
ill-posed (Pylyshyn, 1999), this symposium will present a
thesis of cognitive (im)penetrability that is at once philosophically satisfying, empirically testable, and relevant to
the questions that cognitive scientists find most interesting.

Fiona Macpherson
Dustin Stokes

Adjudicating between cognitive penetration and perceptual learning
Do we have good evidence that cognitive penetration occurs? There is a history of disagreement between those who
think that perceptual experiences can be cognitively penetrated and those who think that they cannot. The argument
has often proceeded on a case-by-case basis. Those who
think that experiences can be penetrated present alleged examples. Most of these examples are cases in which it is

Towards a consequentialist understanding of cognitive
penetration
Philosophers of mind and cognitive scientists have recently taken renewed interest in in the cognitive penetration of
perceptual experience. The question is whether cognitive
states like belief influence perceptual experience in some
important way. Since the possible phenomenon is an empirical one, the strategy for analysis has, predictably, proceed-

91

claimed that there are two different experiences, and that the
best explanation for this difference is that one of the experiences was penetrated and the other was not or that the two
experiences were penetrated by different cognitive states.
Those who think that cognitive penetration does not occur
try to offer alternative explanations. One kind of alternative
explanation is that the experiences differ due to a non-cognitive difference—such as a difference in perceptual attention or in eye movement. In this paper, I discuss one variant
of this strategy that tries to explain away a case of different
colour experiences by claiming that the difference is due to
perceptual learning, untainted by cognition. I discuss what
evidence we would need to have to show that this case was
one of penetration, rather than perceptual learning. I claim
that we have actual evidence which is tantalizingly close to
being the sort of evidence we require to show cognitive
penetration, rather than perceptual learning, is occurring,
and that a modicum of further easy-to-gather evidence
would probably settle this case in favour of the existence of
cognitive penetration.

Robert Goldstone
Hacking Our Own Perceptual Systems so that Cognition
Improves
Training allows our perceptual processes to deliver outputs that would have otherwise required abstract or formal
reasoning. Even without people having any privileged access to the internal operations of perceptual modules, these
modules can be reliably altered over time so as to better
subserve our high-level cognition needs. Strategic changes
need not be implicated when perceptual systems adapt.
However, there is also a continuum of intentional specificity, and with varying degrees of precision we are also able to
intentionally alter our perceptual systems for our own purposes. We ―hack‖ our perceptual systems by A) physically
changing our perceptual equipment, B) strategically employing our existing perceptual equipment in new ways, C)
making explicit efforts to accelerate our own perceptual
adaptation process, D) creating new perceptual objects to
emphasize task-relevant properties, and E) creating new
physical tools to help us perceive better. Certainly not all of
these adaptations should count as cases of cognitive penetration on perception, but there are striking parallels between
these five classes. Strategic mechanisms of adaptation demonstrably present in some of the classes can be inferred to
be at work in other classes. The semi-strategic nature of
perceptual adaptation is well illustrated by the hybrid process of educating experts. The training of experts in medicine, sports, engineering, design, and food science has converged on a combination of frequent perceptual exposure to
cases, explanation of causal mechanisms, and verbal descriptions that lead to selective attention to previously extracted features as well as organization into new perceptual
features.

Rasha Abdel Rahman
The influence of semantic knowledge on visual perception
The perception of complex visual stimuli such as objects
and faces is determined not only by physical properties but
may be affected by various sources of top-down influences
such stored verbal categories or attention. I will present a
series of experiments examining the influence of different
types of semantic knowledge on perception, using the finegrained temporal resolution of event-related brain potentials
(ERPs) to localize semantic effects on high and low-level
components of visual analysis. The different types of
knowledge include functional information that directly relates to the visual appearance of objects and their specific
properties, thus explaining object shapes and features. Alternatively, the information may be unrelated to visual properties. This typically holds for biographical information
about persons that can neither be derived from vision nor
account for the visual appearance of a person’s face. Likewise, affective biographical knowledge cannot directly be
related to features or emotional expressions of faces. Furthermore, semantic information is also a major determinant
of the meaningfulness of verbal categories, and semantic
contents or the depth of information associated with verbal
labels may play a critical role in explaining categorical perception. The results show that different types of semantic
information that may or may not be directly related to visual
stimulus properties shape the perception of objects and faces, including emotional facial expressions. These effects
suggest an influence of semantic knowledge on sensory processing in the visual cortex that may be mediated by
knowledge-induced attentional modulations and may reflect
embodied cognition or reentrant activation form higherlevel semantic to sensory cortical areas.

Discussant: Gary Lupyan
Toward a cognitive penetrability that we all care about:
a consequentialist and empirically-testable one.
Abdel Rahman, R., & Sommer, W. (2008). Seeing what we know
and understand: How knowledge shapes perception. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 15(6), 1055–1063.
Goldstone, R. L., Landy, D., & Brunel, L. C. (2011). Improving
Perception to Make Distant Connections Closer. Frontiers in Psychology, 2.
Lupyan, G., Thompson-Schill, S. L., & Swingley, D. (2010). Conceptual penetration of visual processing. Psychological
Science, 21(5), 682–691.
Macpherson, F. (2012). Cognitive Penetration of Colour Experience: Rethinking the Issue in Light of an Indirect Mechanism. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research,
84(1), 24–62.
Pylyshyn, Z. (1999). Is vision continuous with cognition? The case
for cognitive impenetrability of visual perception. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22(3), 341–365.
Stokes, D. (2011). Perceiving and desiring: a new look at the cognitive penetrability of experience. Philosophical Studies,
1–16.

92

