UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Joint Action Coordination through Strategic Reduction of Variability

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0979524h

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Vesper, Cordula
Schmitz, Laura
Sebanz, Natalie
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Joint Action Coordination through Strategic Reduction of Variability
Cordula Vesper (vesperc@ceu.hu)
Department of Cognitive Science, Central European University
Frankel Leó út 30-34, Budapest 1023, Hungary
Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen
P.O. Box 9104, 6500 HE Nijmegen, The Netherlands

Laura Schmitz (laschmit@uos.de)
Department of Cognitive Science, University of Osnabrück
Albrechtstraße 28, 49076 Osnabrück, Germany

Natalie Sebanz (sebanzn@ceu.hu)
Günther Knoblich (knoblichg@ceu.hu)
Department of Cognitive Science, Central European University
Frankel Leó út 30-34, Budapest 1023, Hungary
Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen
P.O. Box 9104, 6500 HE Nijmegen, The Netherlands

Abstract
How do people coordinate actions with others? We tested the
hypothesis that pairs of participants strategically reduce the
variability of their action performance to achieve synchronicity in the absence of visual feedback about each other’s
actions. Consistent with this prediction, participants moved
faster and less variably in a condition where they could not
see their task partner’s movements compared to a condition in
which visual information was available. The accuracy of the
resulting coordination was the same in both conditions. These
findings are interpreted as evidence for general strategic
adaptation in the service of real-time action coordination
when only minimal perceptual information is available.
Keywords: Joint action; coordination strategy; cooperation;
social cognition.

Introduction
Whenever people coordinate their actions with other people,
they are engaged in a ‘joint action’ (Clark, 1996; Marsh et
al., 2009; Sebanz, Bekkering, & Knoblich, 2006). Depending on the specific task and the presence or absence of
an explicit joint action goal, different mechanisms and processes will make coordination of multiple people’s actions
possible. For instance, a couple might discuss through
verbal or non-verbal communication who is responsible for
preparing dinner and who will set the table (Clark &
Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986). Or a group of friends might help
push-start a car by using perceptual cues and haptic
information to predict when everyone else will push (van
der Wel, Knoblich, & Sebanz, 2011; Wilson & Knoblich,
2005). In yet other cases, coordination might arise without
prior planning as when two strangers unintentionally walk
in synchrony (van Ulzen et al., 2008).
While people in these and many other everyday examples
make use of visual, auditory or haptic information to guide
their joint efforts, this is not always possible. Sometimes
coordination is required in contexts where only little or even

nothing is known about the coordination partner and how or
when the partner will perform a particular action. In these
cases, all that might be represented is one’s own action part
(‘ME’), the fact that someone will take care of another
action part (‘X’) required to achieve the joint goal and the
joint action goal (‘ME+X’) achieved by combining the
individual action parts (Vesper et al., 2010). Thus, a precise
representation about the partner’s task might not be available. We claim that in these cases, coordination is supported
by very general mechanisms and processes that are not
required to the same extent if more information about a task
partner is available. The present study addressed the
mechanisms and processes allowing people to achieve
coordination in this kind of minimal joint action situation.
More specifically, we investigated whether people who
intend to coordinate their actions under real-time constraints
and with no access to visual information about a task
partner’s actions adapt their own actions in a way that will
make interpersonal coordination most likely. Such a coordination strategy (Vesper et al., 2010) reliably simplifies
coordination in a general way, i.e. it is a modulation of
one’s own behavior that does not directly depend on how a
task partner’s particular action will unfold.
One example of strategic adaptation is to behave in a way
that will make one’s own actions predictable. When timing
is not critical, this could involve relying on shared or
conventional knowledge (Clark, 1996). For example,
someone might decide to wait at the Brandenburg Gate to
meet a friend in Berlin when they forgot to agree on a
precise meeting point in advance (Schelling, 1960).
Similarly, if each member of a group has to guess a number
such that the sum of all numbers matches a randomly
selected target number, providing consistent and therefore
predictable guesses can be beneficial to achieve the desired
group outcome (Roberts & Goldstone, 2011).
In situations in which actions need to be coordinated in
real-time, making actions predictable can involve mini-

1522

mizing the variability of one’s own performance. Recent
empirical evidence for this claim is provided by a study in
which pairs of participants performed a simple two
alternative forced choice (2-AFC) reaction time task next to
each other with the goal of synchronizing the timing of their
response button presses (Vesper et al., 2011). An analysis of
mean reaction times and the trial-by-trial variability of
reaction times indicated that participants responded faster
and with less variability in joint action compared to individual baseline performance. This in turn positively
affected coordination such that pairs whose members
responded fast and with little variability were on average
better synchronized.
Critically, the study showed that it was the reduction in
variability that predicted how successful coordination was,
as demonstrated by a correlation of variability and asynchrony that persisted when controlling for the potential
effects of mean reaction time. Thus, the more predictable
actions were, the more successful interpersonal coordination
was. Given that performing tasks at higher speed tends to
reduce temporal variability (Wagenmakers & Brown, 2007),
participants most likely used speeding as a means to reduce
their action variability. A second experiment demonstrated
that speeding and predictability were only correlated with
asynchrony when task partners intended to synchronize their
button presses, but not in an experimental condition where
the two people merely performed the task next to each other
without a coordination goal. This suggests that the
coordination strategy of making oneself predictable is used
specifically to achieve intentional joint action coordination.
The aim of the present study was to extend these earlier
findings (Vesper et al., 2011) by addressing three predictions following from the concept of a coordination strategy
(Vesper et al., 2010) – generalizability, specificity, and
independence. The first prediction was that the link between
response speed, response variability, and asynchrony of task
partners’ actions would also be useful for coordination of
more complex, temporally extended joint actions. Therefore, we instructed pairs of participants to each use a
computer mouse to move a cursor on a screen from a start
location towards a target with the joint goal of reaching the
target at the same time (Figure 1). Thus, the task required
two people to synchronize the endpoints of two-dimensional
aiming movements. When they reached the target auditory
feedback informed participants about their coordination
accuracy.
The second prediction was that a coordination strategy
will predominantly be used in situations in which no or only
little information about a task partner’s actions is available.
In this ‘minimal’ case, all someone can do is to adapt his or
her own actions in a general way to make coordination most
likely. In contrast, when task or perceptual information is
available, other mechanisms and processes will support
coordination. For instance, co-actors can monitor (Malfait et
al., 2009; Schuch & Tipper, 2007) or predict (Graf et al.,
2007; Knoblich & Jordan, 2003) when and how another
person will perform a particular action. Consequently, in

many situations, perceptual information is beneficial for
joint action coordination. As an example, when two people
build a toy model together such that one person (the
director) verbally instructs another person (the builder)
which parts to assemble, coordination is more successful if
the director can see what the builder is doing (KrychAppelbaum et al., 2007). Similarly, two people who jointly
search a shared workspace for a target object are more
efficient in their search if they receive information about
where each of them is currently looking at (Brennan et al.,
2008). To test the specificity of coordination strategies, we
compared an experimental condition in which co-actors did
not receive visual information about each other (Other
Hidden) with one in which they could see each other and
each other’s ongoing action performance (Other Visible).
We hypothesized that a speeding and predictability strategy
would predominantly be employed in the Other Hidden
condition, whereas for Other Visible, we expected that the
additional perceptual information would allow co-actors to
use a different mechanism for coordination. This could
involve monitoring and anticipating the partner’s computer
mouse movements. Therefore, we expected reaction times
and movement variability to be smaller in Other Hidden
compared to Other Visible. Given that perceptual information often positively influences coordination, we also
hypothesized that asynchronies between co-actors’ actions
in Other Visible would be smaller, indicating better
coordination accuracy when more information is available.
The third prediction was that a coordination strategy is
used in a general way, independently of how the task partner
actually performs an action. This means that the partner’s
particular action performance is not directly relevant for
one’s own strategic adaptation. In contrast, when other
mechanisms such as monitoring and prediction are used,
one’s own action performance should be directly related to
the task partner’s action performance. One way to address
this prediction is to compare the actually measured asynchronies between task partners’ actions with asynchronies
that are calculated after co-actors’ reaction times have been
shuffled and randomly matched. This method effectively
treats the data as if each person’s actions were not targeted
towards a corresponding action of the co-actor because their
actions now come from different trials. We hypothesized
that this procedure would affect coordination in Other
Hidden to a lesser extent than in Other Visible, indicating
that co-actors in the former case adapt in a general way that
is independent of the task partner’s particular action
performance, whereas in the latter case, co-actors make use
of the given perceptual information and take into account
how the partner’s action unfolds on a trial-by-trial basis.

Method
Participants
Twenty-four students (14 women) participated in pairs.
They were between 19 and 25 years old (mean 21.1 years)

1523

and right-handed. They gave prior informed consent and
received monetary compensation for their participation.

Material and Apparatus
A “space mission” scene was created on two computer
screens placed next to each other (Figure 1). The scene
contained three elements presented on a dark blue background. First, close to the outer margin of each screen, a
yellow “spaceship” was drawn (ca. 2.5 cm x 1.9 cm;
position centrally on the vertical axis), indicating the
starting position for each trial. Second, on the inner margin
of each screen, a blue half circle was drawn on one of three
possible locations, indicating a “planet” as the target (radius
ca. 2.0 cm or 3.8 cm; position at 20 %, 50 % or 80 % from
the upper screen margin). When both screens were visible
(Other Visible), the two half circles together formed a
complete “planet”. Finally, centrally between “spaceship”
and “planet”, on one of five possible locations, an array of
small differently-sized white dots was drawn to represent an
“asteroid belt” (ca.1.9 cm x 9.3 cm; position at 20 %, 35 %,
50 %, 65 % or 80 % from upper screen margin). It served as
a potential obstacle between start and target locations.

Figure 1: The “space mission” scene (example layouts). A)
In Other Hidden, each participant only saw one half of the
scene due to an occluder placed between the participants. B)
In Other Visible, both participants saw the complete scene.
The stimuli were presented on two 17”-screens (resolution 1280 x 1024 pixel, refresh rate 60 Hz). In individual
baselines and in Other Hidden, a black card board (70 x 100
cm) was set up between the two participants and between
the two screens. The experiment was run on two Dell
OptiPlex computers that were connected through a nullmodem cable to allow online data exchange. For data

collection, two special gaming computer mice (Logitech
G500) were used that were sampled at 100 Hz and that had
automatic acceleration turned off. Matlab version 2012a was
used for controlling the experiment and for data analysis.

Procedure
There were four experimental parts: the Other Hidden
condition (Figure 1A), the Other Visible condition (Figure
1B) and two individual baselines. Each participant first
performed four practice trials and then the first individual
baseline, while the task partner waited in another room.
After both participants had finished their first individual
parts, they performed the two joint conditions together. The
order of Other Hidden and Other Visible was counterbalanced. Finally, each participant separately performed
another individual baseline. Each of the four parts consisted
of six experimental blocks à 16 trials with short breaks in
between. The overall duration of the experiment was about
1.5 hours.
At the beginning of a trial, the start location (“spaceship”)
was presented for 600 ms. Next, the target (“planet”) and
obstacle (“asteroid belt”) appeared at a location that was
randomly chosen from the possible locations. The frequency
of target and obstacle locations and the target size were
counterbalanced within each block. The relation of target
and obstacle locations determined whether the direct path
between start and target location was blocked by the
obstacle or not. At the same time when target and obstacle
appeared, the spaceship briefly flashed for 200 ms by
showing flames at the rear engine. The purpose was to
redirect participants’ attention to the start location where a
mouse cursor (a yellow circle) was now visible.
Participants were instructed to move the mouse cursor to
the target without moving over the obstacle. A short
feedback tone (100 ms) was played as soon as they moved
into the target area, i.e. no button press was required. The
feedback tones for the left-seated and the right-seated
participants differed in frequency so that they could be
distinguished (1100 Hz, 1320 Hz). Additionally, visual
feedback about the accuracy of the trial was given: The
planet turned red indicating negative task performance 1) if
participants’ movements were too slow (movement onset >
600 ms or reaction time > 1600 ms), 2) if they moved over
the obstacle area, 3) if the task partner had made any of
these mistakes or 4) if co-actors did not reach the target
synchronously (absolute asynchrony > 400 ms)1. In all other
cases, trials were successful and the planet turned into a
bright green. Participants then returned to the start position
and the next trial started.
Participants were told to think of the task as a space
contest that requires securing planets from an alien nation
by landing on a planet before them. According to this
background story, in some areas of the universe (individual
baselines), this could be achieved alone, whereas in other
1
During individual baselines, only the first two criteria generated negative feedback.

1524

areas of the universe (Other Hidden, Other Visible), they
would have to arrive at the planet at the same time as the
task partner in order to win. Thus, task instructions
explicitly mentioned that participants should be as fast and
as accurate as possible, while strongly focusing on arriving
at the same time. Co-actors were not allowed to talk.

Results
For the purpose of the present paper, we only report
analyses of mean reaction times (RT; measured as the time
from the start signal until the target was reached), standard
deviation of reaction times (STD) and absolute asynchrony
between participants’ reaction times (ASYNC) 2. These
dependent variables were acquired by averaging over all
trial types within a condition, i.e. we did not differentiate
between different target and obstacle locations or target
sizes. All trials in which participants’ own RT was slower
than 1600 ms or in which they moved over the obstacle area
were excluded from further analyses (1.1 % in Other
Hidden, 0.7 % in Other Visible).

For Other Hidden, these analyses indicated that both RT and
STD significantly influenced ASYNC such that shorter and
less variable RTs led to better coordination between coactors (for exact results, see Figure 3A). Crucially, however,
when controlling for RT in a partial correlation, STD still
predicted ASYNC, whereas when controlling for STD, the
relation between RT and ASYNC did not persist. Thus, as
predicted, participants’ response variability was critical in
determining how well coordinated co-actors were when no
online perceptual information about the task partner’s
actions was available. In contrast, in Other Visible, RT and
STD did not predict ASYNC, although RT and STD were
correlated (for exact results, see Figure 3B).

Figure 3: Zero-order and partial (in parentheses) correlations
for A) Other Hidden and B) Other Visible. The thick arrow
in A indicates that the relation between STD and ASYNC
still holds when controlling for the influence of RT with a
partial correlation. * p < .05, ** p < .01, *** p < .001.

Figure 2: Results. A) Mean RT. B) Mean trial-by-trial
variability measured as STD. The dotted lines show
individual baseline performance before (upper line) and
after joint action (lower line). Error bars display withinsubject confidence intervals (Loftus & Masson, 1994).
We first tested whether participants made use of a
coordination strategy predominantly in the case where they
did not receive visual information about the task partner’s
action. Confirming this hypothesis, RTs in Other Hidden
were significantly faster, F(1,23) = 14.01, p < .01 (Figure
2A) and less variable, F(1,23) = 5.36, p < .05 (Figure 2B)
than in Other Visible. Moreover, as described in more detail
below, coordination between co-actors was equally good in
the two conditions.
To investigate the hypothesized relation of RT, STD and
ASYNC, we performed zero-order and partial correlations.
2
For every pair and condition, half the trials were used to calculate ASYNC for one person and the remaining trials for calculating
ASYNC for the other person (randomly distributed). This allowed
us to perform all analyses with the full degrees of freedom.

Finally, we tested the hypothesis that the speeding and
predictability strategy in Other Hidden is general in the
sense that it depends only to a certain extent on how the task
partner actually performed his or her actions. In contrast, coactors in Other Visible should take the other person’s actual
movements into account by monitoring and predicting the
other’s action. Based on this reasoning, we hypothesized
that the coordination outcome from a general strategy
should depend less on a trial-by-trial match of task partners’
actions, whereas when using perceptual information this
should be relevant. To test this prediction, we compared the
originally measured asynchronies with asynchronies in
which the specific trial-by-trial relation between co-actors’
actions was destroyed by randomly shuffling the order of
trials from one member in each pair (separately for the
different trial types) and re-calculating the asynchrony
between the two persons’ response times.
In line with our hypothesis, a comparison of original and
shuffled asynchronies in the two conditions indicated an
unequal effect of the shuffling: Although asynchronies
increased in both conditions, shuffling co-actors’ trial order
had a significantly stronger effect for Other Visible than for
Other Hidden. This was demonstrated statistically by an
interaction of the factors Condition (Other Hidden, Other

1525

Visible) and Trial Order (original, shuffled), F(1,23) =
10.59, p < .01 (Figure 4). There was also a main effect of
Trial Order, F(1,23) = 16.88, p < .001, but no significant
effect of Condition, F(1,23) = .01, p > .9. Thus, co-actors
reached the same level of coordination performance in the
two conditions.

Figure 4: Asynchrony measured (original) and re-calculated
after randomly matching different trials from the members
within a pair (shuffled). Error bars display within-subject
confidence intervals (Loftus & Masson, 1994).

Discussion
The aim of the present study was to systematically test
predictions following from the hypothesis that people
strategically increase the speed and predictability of their
actions to achieve real-time coordination with another
person given only minimal perceptual information (Vesper
et al., 2010, 2011). Pairs of participants performed mouse
movements towards a target displayed on a computer
screen. The joint goal was to reach the target at the same
time as the task partner. Short feedback tones when arriving
at the target informed participants about the accuracy of
their joint coordination.
The present results confirm our hypothesis that co-actors
strategically reduced the variability of their movements
through speeding (Wagenmakers & Brown, 2007) whereby
action variability contributed directly to the coordination
outcome. In particular, when controlling for the impact of
reaction times, response variability still predicted asynchrony, whereas when controlling for the impact of response
variability, there was no longer a correlation between
reaction time and asynchrony. This not only replicates
earlier findings (Vesper et al., 2011) but also demonstrates
that this coordination strategy can support coordination in
complex, temporally extended actions.
Furthermore, the present study shows that the predictability strategy is predominantly used in situations in
which little or no information about the task partner is
available. To test this hypothesis, we compared an
experimental condition in which co-actors could not see
each other (Other Hidden) with one in which visual

information was available (Other Visible). Consistent with
our predictions, participants’ movements were significantly
faster and less variable without visual information and the
relation between reaction time, variability, and coordination
accuracy was present only in the Other Hidden condition.
This confirms that coordination strategies are specific such
that they are predominantly employed when other mechanisms like monitoring and predicting another’s actions
cannot be used.
A third hypothesis was that the employment of strategic
behavior modulations would not depend on how the task
partner actually performs his or her actions. Therefore, we
compared two types of asynchronies: One that we had
actually measured (original) and one that we calculated after
shuffling the order of task partners’ reaction times and
randomly matching them again (shuffled). This resulted in a
measure of how much each person’s action was related to
the task partner’s actual action performance. Confirming our
hypothesis, shuffling the trial order affected coordination
significantly less in Other Hidden compared to Other
Visible. Thus, when making oneself predictable one’s own
actions do not or only to a small extent depend on how
exactly the task partner performs his or her action.
A possibly surprising result of the current study is that coactors were on average equally well-coordinated in the two
joint conditions. Although perceptual information is often
beneficial for joint action (e.g. Brennan et al., 2008;
Knoblich & Jordan, 2003; Krych-Appelbaum et al., 2007),
this suggests that using a coordination strategy can compensate for a lack of perceptual information. Moreover,
given that participants’ actions were overall faster and less
variable when no perceptual information was available, one
might even argue that action performance was better
without visual feedback. This is consistent with other
evidence that having ‘redundant’ information potentially
impairs joint action coordination. Specifically, when two
people who jointly search a workspace not only receive
visual information about each other’s looking behavior, but
can also talk to each other about the task, their search is
considerably less efficient than when verbal communication
is restricted (Brennan et al., 2008). As an alternative, the
present findings might indicate that taking away perceptual
information requires co-actors to put in extra effort in order
to achieve the same degree of coordination.
How then did co-actors approach the task in the Other
Visible condition? Although investigating this in detail is
beyond the scope of the present paper, participants most
likely used the available visual information to guide their
actions either reactively (monitoring the task partner’s
action, then acting oneself) or predictively (anticipating
when the task partner will reach the target and acting in
accordance with this prediction). Further experiments could
distinguish these two cases, e.g., by measuring participants’
eye movements to determine at what time during the interaction they track their task partner’s movements.
The present study has implications beyond human joint
action. For instance, an important research topic in the

1526

cognitive sciences is how to implement real-time interaction
of a robot and a human user. To that end, mechanisms
observed in human social interaction are currently being
transferred to robot platforms, including natural-language
discourse (Salem et al., 2010), action prediction (Bicho et
al., 2011; Dindo, Zambuto, & Pezzulo, 2011) and
continuous movement synchronization (Mörtl et al., 2012).
Considering also general strategic behavioral adaptions for
human-robot interaction can be beneficial for this endeavor.
First, human users might employ a strategy such as making
oneself predictable also when interacting with a robot so
that coordination would improve if the robot used the same
strategy. Second, human users might expect the robot to
adapt its movements strategically so that robots that do so
would appear more ‘human-like’ and thereby are more
easily accepted as an interaction partner.
Taken together, this study provides evidence that general
strategic adaptations of one’s own actions can effectively
support coordination with other people in situations in
which precise representations about the partner’s task might
not be available. The concept of a coordination strategy
therefore complements other approaches towards joint
action like those focusing on communication (Clark, 1996),
action prediction (Wilson & Knoblich, 2005) or dynamic
perception-action coupling (Marsh et al., 2009).

Acknowledgments
The research reported in this manuscript was supported by
the ESF program EuroUnderstanding. We thank Veronika
Herendy for her help in collecting the data.

References
Bicho, E., Erlhagen, W., Louro, L., & Costa e Silva, E. C.
(2011). Neuro-cognitive mechanisms of decision making
in joint action: A human–robot interaction study. Human
Movement Science, 30, 846-868.
Brennan, S. E., Chen, X., Dickinson, C. A., Neider, M. B.,
& Zelinsky, G. J. (2008). Coordinating cognition: the
costs and benefits of shared gaze during collaborative
search. Cognition, 106, 1465–1477.
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using language. Cambridge, England:
Cambridge University Press.
Clark, H. H., & Wilkes-Gibbs, D. (1986). Referring as a
collaborative process. Cognition, 22, 1–39.
Dindo, H., Zambuto, D., & Pezzulo, G. (2011). Motor
simulation via coupled internal models using sequential
Monte Carlo. Proceedings of the International Joint
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2113-2119.
Graf, M., Reitzner, B., Corves, C., Casile, A., Giese, M., &
Prinz, W. (2007). Predicting point-light actions in realtime. NeuroImage, 36, T22–T32.
Knoblich, G. & Jordan, J. S. (2003). Action coordination in
groups and individuals: learning anticipatory control.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 29(5), 1006–1016.
Krych-Appelbaum, M., Law, J. B., Jones, D., Barnacz, A.,
Johnson, A., & Keenan, J. P. (2007). “I think I know what

you mean” - The role of theory of mind in collaborative
communication. Interaction Studies, 8(2), 267–280.
Loftus, G. & Masson, M. E. J. (1994). Using confidence
intervals in within-subject designs. Psychonomic Bulletin
and Review, 1, 476–490.
Malfait, N., Valyear, K. F., Culham, J. C., Anton, J.-L.,
Brown, L. E., & Gribble, P. L. (2009). FMRI activation
during observation of others’ reach errors. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 22(7), 1493–1503.
Marsh, K. L., Johnston, L., Richardson, M. J., & Schmidt,
R. C. (2009). Toward a radically embodied, embedded
social psychology. European Journal of Social
Psychology, 39, 1217–1225.
Mörtl, A., Lorenz, T., Vlaskamp, B., Gusrialdi, A., Schubö,
A., & Hirche, S. (2012). Modeling inter-human
movement coordination: synchronization governs joint
task dynamics. Biological Cybernetics, 106, 241-259.
Roberts, M. E. & Goldstone, R. L. (2011). Adaptive group
coordination and role differentiation. PLoS ONE 6(7),
e22377.
Salem, M., Kopp, S., Wachsmuth, I., & Joublin, F. (2010).
Towards an integrated model of speech and gesture
production for multi-modal robot behavior. Proceedings
of the IEEE International Symposium on Robot and
Human Interactive Communication, 649-654.
Schelling, T. C. (1960). The strategy of conflict. Harvard
University Press, Cambridge.
Schuch, S., & Tipper, S. P. (2007). On observing another
person’s actions: influences of observed inhibition and
errors. Perception and Psychophysics, 69(5), 828–837.
Sebanz, N., Bekkering, H., & Knoblich, G. (2006). Joint
action: Bodies and minds moving together. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 10, 71–76.
van der Wel, R., Knoblich, G., & Sebanz, N. (2011). Let the
force be with us: Dyads exploit haptic coupling for
coordination. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 37, 1420–1431.
van Ulzen, N. R., Lamoth, C. J. C., Daffertshofer, A.,
Semin, G. R., Beek, P. J. (2008). Characteristics of
instructed and uninstructed interpersonal coordination
while walking side-by-side. Neuroscience Letters, 432,
88–93.
Vesper, C., Butterfill, S., Knoblich, G. & Sebanz, N. (2010).
A minimal architecture for joint action. Neural Networks,
23, 998-1003.
Vesper, C., van der Wel, R., Knoblich, G., & Sebanz, N.
(2011). Making oneself predictable: Reduced temporal
variability facilitates joint action coordination.
Experimental Brain Research, 211(3-4), 517-530.
Wagenmakers, E. J. & Brown, S. (2007). On the linear
relation between the mean and the standard deviation of a
response time distribution. Psychological Review, 114,
830–841.
Wilson, M., & Knoblich, G. (2005). The case for motor
involvement in perceiving conspecifics. Psychological
Bulletin, 131(3), 460–473.

1527

