UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Language as a Window into the Brain and its Pathologies

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1dv1n3wj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Garrard, Peter
Graben, Peter Beim
Elvevag, Brita
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Language as a Window into the Brain and its Pathologies
Peter Garrard (pgarrard@sgul.ac.uk)

Brita Elvevåg (brita@elvevaag.net)

St George’s, University of London & St George’s Stroke and
Dementia Research Centre, UK.

Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Tromsø, &
University Hospital of North Norway Tromsø, Norway.

Peter beim Graben (peter.beim.graben@hu-berlin.de)

Eduardo Mizraji (mizraj@fcien.edu.uy)

Institut für deutsche Sprache und Linguistik, HumboldtUniversität zu Berlin, Germany.

Sección Biofísica, Facultad de Ciencias
Universidad de la República, Uruguay.

Juan C. Valle Lisboa (juancvl@fcien.edu.uy)
Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de la República, Uruguay.
Keywords: Language; Psychiatry; Schizophrenia; Model;
Neural Networks

notoriously affect the way lexical items are selected and
used by a writer, even before the symptoms of the disease
are apparent. Several measures of language comprehension
and production have been used to assess the presence and
course of schizophrenia and mania. Classically, for patient
state evaluation, there is a variety of ﬁne-grained rating
scales of the coherence of speech and communication, such
as the Scale for the Assessment of Thought, Language and
Communication (Andreasen & Grove, 1986). The use of
these scales requires extensive training and the results
remain open to variance across raters. Several recent
approaches attempt to devise automatic or semiautomatic
methods aimed at diagnosis or with the purpose of
understanding
the
cognitive
deficits
involved
(Cabana,Valle-Lisboa, Elvevåg, & Mizraji, 2011). The
description of the underlying causes of these alterations is
specially relevant when these methods are combined with
imaging and modeling data. We turn next to models.

Introduction
Traditionally, psycholinguistics and neuropsychology
have been informed by conspicuous pathologies such as
aphasia, which revealed the localization of some of the
processes involved in language comprehension and
production, in particular of those related to lexical access
and morphological and syntactic processing. One of the
main objectives of this symposium is to explore whether
psychiatric pathologies are informative of the processes
involved in meaning construction and comprehension, in the
same way that aphasia research has contributed to our
knowledge of the neurobiology of other aspects of language
(Elvevåg, Helsen, De Hert, Sweers, & Storms, 2011).
The kind and type of language disturbances displayed by
patients can shed some light on the underlying pathologies,
hopefully suggesting tractable lines for further research.
Conversely, an improved understanding of the mechanism
of psychiatric diseases can promote the understanding of
some intricate aspects of non-pathological language
production. In this Symposium we bring together different
perspectives to the study of language in pathology and as a
manifestation of the underlying neural networks' workings.
The symposium is thus centered around language, both from
an empirical perspective and a modeler's point of view. We
describe this two aspects in the following sections.

From data to models
The complex patterns of linguistic productions, with the
associated generation of measurable neurobiological
responses, can only be interpreted in light of models and
theories. The other aspect of the symposium is the use of
neural models and theories in order to interpret the data, to
propose new experiments and to suggest new therapeutic
avenues for research. The models of choice are based on
connectionist approaches. There is an increasing tendency to
develop connectionist models of psychiatric pathologies
(e.g. Hoffman, Grasemann, Gueorguieva, Quinlan, Lane, &
Miikkulainen, R., 2011). At the symposium two types of
models will be discussed. One type is that of coarse-grained
models that when deteriorated can lead to alterations of
language processing and production that mimic some of the
properties displayed by language produced by patients
(Valle-Lisboa, Pomi, Cabana, Elvevåg & Mizraji, 2013 ).
This type of model is aimed at the level of brain networks as

Language analysis in pathology
The last decades have seen a tremendous increase in the
development of techniques to study the physiological and
pathological processes in the brain. Among them, the study
of language production and comprehension has been
recognized as a central research topic. The disturbances in
language vary between different brain pathologies. For
instance Garrard and coworkers (Garrard, Maloney, Hodges
& Patterson, 2005) have shown that Alzheimer's disease can

109

derived from fMRI. The other type of model is concerned
with the syntactic level of description and its expression
through brain potentials as measured through EEG (beim
Graben & Potthast, 2012). Interestingly, both type of
models can be related through their basic assumptions (i. e.
multiplicative synaptic interactions).
The symposium will consist of a 10 minute introduction
by the chairman followed by 20 minute talks by each
speaker and followed by a round of discussion.

of Biophysics in the School of Sciences, Universidad de la
República, Uruguay.

Chairman and Organizer
Dr. Juan Valle Lisboa (juancvl@fcien.edu.uy)
Dr Valle Lisboa is a Biophysicist and Neurobiologist
interested in theoretical neuroscience and the neural basis of
high level cognition. His latest works include the
development of language production models and their
deterioration in pathologies as well as neural models of
lexical representation. Dr Valle Lisboa is at the School of
Sciences and the School of Psychology at the Universidad de
la República, Uruguay.

Speakers
Dr. Peter Garrard (pgarrard@sgul.ac.uk)
Dr Garrard is a Neurologist with vast experience in the
study of semantic dementia and Alzheimer's disease, in
particular the linguistic manifestations of those pathologies.
He has developed several diagnostic procedures and is
currently exploring the symptoms and neuroimaging
manifestations of patients suffering atypical dementias. He
is Reader in Neurology at St George’s, University of
London and Honorary Consultant Neurologist, St George’s
Stroke and Dementia Research Centre, UK.

Acknowledgments
JCVL and EM are supported by PEDECIBA and CSIC
(UDELAR).

References
Andreasen NC and Grove WM. (1986) Thought, language
and communication in schizophrenia: diagnosis and
prognosis. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 12:348–359.

Dr. Peter beim Graben (peter.beim.graben@hu-berlin.de).
Dr beim Braben is a Physicist who works in Cognitive
Neurodynamics, Computational Psycholinguistics and
Computational Neuroscience. His recent work is related
both to the processing of sentences by neural networks and
the electrical potential measurements of neural activity. He
is DFG Heisenberg Fellow for Cognitive Neurodynamics, at
the Institut für deutsche Sprache und Linguistik, HumboldtUniversität zu Berlin, Germany.

beim Graben, P. & Potthast, R. (2012). A dynamic field
account to language-related brain potentials. In Rabinovich,
Friston, & Varona (Eds.) Principles of Brain Dynamics:
Global State Interactions, MIT Press: Cambridge (MA).
Cabana Á, Valle-Lisboa JC, Elvevåg B, and Mizraji E.
(2011) Detecting order–disorder transitions in discourse:
Implications for schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Research,
131:157-164.
Elvevåg, B., Helsen, K., De Hert, M., Sweers, K. & Storms,
G. (2011). Metaphor interpretation and use: a window into
semantics in schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Research, 133,
205-211.

Dr. Brita Elvevåg (brita@elvevaag.net).
Dr Elvevåg is a research psychologist interested in
cognitive neuropsychiatry, cognitive neuroscience, and the
cognitive, neural and genetic basis of language in healthy
individuals and those with clinical conditions that affect the
brain, especially psychosis and dementia. She is Professor
of Psychiatry in the Department of Clinical Medicine at the
University of Tromsø, and also at the Norwegian Centre for
Integrated Care and Telemedicine at the University Hospital
of North Norway Tromsø, Norway.

Garrard P, Maloney L, Hodges J, Patterson K. (2005) The
effects of very early Alzheimer's disease on the
characteristics of writing by a renowned author. Brain 128:
250-260.
Hoffman, R, Grasemann, U., Gueorguieva, R., Quinlan,
D., Lane, D., and Miikkulainen, R. (2011) Using
Computational Patients to Evaluate Illness Mechanisms in
Schizophrenia. Biological Psychiatry 69:997–1005.
Valle-Lisboa, J.C. , Pomi, A., Cabana, A, Elvevåg, B and
Mizraji, E. (2013) A modular approach to language
production: Models and facts. Cortex (in press).

Dr. Eduardo Mizraji (mizraj@fcien.edu.uy)
Dr. Mizraji is a Biophysicist who studies neural network
theory and the implementation of high level cognitive
activities through the use of neural models. The part of his
recent works more related to the symposium are concerned
with discourse generating neural models, and the emergence
of symbolic activities in a neural network. He is Professor

110

