UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Language and Gesture Evolution
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8128w991
Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)
Authors
Call, Joesph
Goldin-Meadow, Susan
Hobaiter, Cat
et al.
Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed
 eScholarship.org                                 Powered by the California Digital Library
                                                                    University of California

                                          Language and Gesture Evolution
                                                   Josep Call (call@eva.mpg.de)
                                   Department of Developmental and Comparative Psychology,
                              Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Deutscher Platz 6,
                                                       04103 Leipzig, Germany
                                           Susan Goldin-Meadow (sgm@uchicago.edu)
                            The University of Chicago, 5848 South University Avenue, Rm Green 510
                                                       Chicago, IL 60637, USA
                                             Cat Hobaiter (clh42@st-andrews.ac.uk)
                      School of Psychology and Neuroscience, University of St. Andrews, Westburn Lane
                                                  St Andrews, Fife, KY16 9JP, UK
                                             Katja Liebal (katja.liebal@fu-berlin.de)
                                Freie Universität Berlin, Department of Education and Psychology,
                      Evolutionary Psychology, Cluster Languages of Emotion, Habelschwerdter Allee 45
                                                        14195 Berlin, Germany
                                                             Discussant
                                           Michael Tomasello (tomasello@eva.mpg.de)
                                   Department of Developmental and Comparative Psychology,
                              Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Deutscher Platz 6,
                                                       04103 Leipzig, Germany
Keywords: gesture, language evolution, children, nonhuman            first systematic study of gesture in a wild ape. In this
primates, homesigner, sign language                                  presentation I will describe the gesturing of free-ranging
	                                                                   chimpanzees in the Budongo forest, Uganda. Here we find
                         Introduction                                that chimpanzee gestures are used in intentional commu-
In humans, gestural communication is closely intertwined             nication by individuals of all ages, across a wide range of
with language: adults perform a variety of manual gestures,          contexts, including evolutionarily urgent ones. I will discuss
head movements and body postures while they are talking,             possible explanations for the combination of gestures into
children use gestures before they start to speak, and highly         sequences, including: a) persistence following failed
conventionalized sign systems can even replace spoken                communications, and b) the idea that young chimpanzees
language. Because of this role of gestures for human com-            may employ sequences as a fail-safe strategy to explore and
munication, theories of language evolution often propose a           fine-tune a very large repertoire of available forms, down to
gestural origin of language. In searching for the evolutionary       a more specific repertoire in regular use. I will examine
roots of language, a comparative approach is often used to
                                                                     flexibility in gestural communication, considering: a)
investigate whether any precursors to human language are
                                                                     whether or not gestures have specific meaning, b) if this is
also present in our closest relatives, the great apes, because of
                                                                     consistent across signalers, and c) whether or not the extent
our shared phylogenetic history. Therefore, the aim of this
symposium is to present recent progress in the field of              of flexibility in gestural repertoire varies with factors such
language evolution from both a developmental and compa-              as social context.
rative perspective and to discuss the question if and to what
extent a comparison with nonhuman primates is suitable to                What Can Gestures of Nonhuman Primates Tell
shed light on possible scenarios of language evolution.                        us About Language Evolution? (Katja Liebal)1
	  
                                                                     Theories of language evolution usually argue for a uni-
  Gestural Communication in Wild Chimpanzees                         modal origin of language, either gestural or vocal. Many of
                      (Cat Hobaiter)                                 them draw on comparative evidence of the communicative
The gestural communication of great apes has provoked                	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
considerable interest by demonstrating striking evidence for         1
                                                                            	   This work has greatly benefited from discussions with Katie
the flexible and intentional use of a large communicative            Slocombe, University of York, and Bridget Waller, University of
repertoire, key aspects of human language. We have                   Portsmouth. See also Slocombe, K.E., Waller, B.M., & Liebal, K.
recently expanded the extensive work in captivity, with the          (2011). The language void: The need for multimodality in primate
                                                                     communication research. Animal Behaviour, 81(5), 919-924.
     	  
                                                                  57

abilities of our closest relatives, the nonhuman primates. In
this presentation, we will summarize the results of a
systematic review of the literature on gestural communi-
cation in nonhuman primates covering the past 40 years and
compare it with the main findings of studies on facial and
vocal communication. We demonstrate that research into
vocal, gestural and facial behaviors has very different
theoretical and methodological approaches and as a result,
comparisons of communicative patterns across modalities
are problematic. We suggest that a multimodal approach to
primate communication is essential to understand the
complexity of nonhuman primates’ communicative systems
and to identify phylogenetic precursors to human language
as part of a multi-modal system.
     From Homesign to Sign Language: Creating
      Language in the Manual Modality (Susan
                     Goldin-Meadow)
Imagine a child who has never seen or heard any language at
all. Would such a child be able to invent a language on her
own? Despite what one might guess, the answer to this
question is "yes". I describe congenitally deaf children who
cannot learn the spoken language that surrounds them, and
have not yet been exposed to sign language, either by their
hearing parents or their oral schools. Nevertheless the
children use their hands to communicate––they gesture––and
those gestures, called homesigns, take on many of the forms
and functions of language. I first describe the properties of
language that we find in homesign. I next consider properties
of language that homesigners can and cannot develop by
comparing their linguistic systems to those developed by deaf
individuals in Nicaragua. Thirty years ago large numbers of
homesigners were brought together for the first time and
Nicaraguan Sign Language (NSL) was born; NSL continues
to develop as new waves of children enter the community and
learn to sign from older peers. I end by taking an
experimental approach to when gesture does and does not
take on linguistic properties. I examine hearing individuals
asked not to speak and instead communicate using only their
hands. Although these silent gesturers can create some
properties of language on the spot, they do not create all of
the properties that homesigners develop over time.
	                                                            58

