UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Language dominance modulates cross-language lexical interaction in late immersed
learners

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/76g5w505

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Malt, Barabara
Li, Ping
Ameel, Eef
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Language Dominance Modulates Cross-language Lexical Interaction
in Late Immersed Bilinguals
Barbara C. Malt (barbara.malt@lehigh.edu)
Department of Psychology, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA 18015, USA

Ping Li (pul8@psu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Penn State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA

Eef Ameel (eef.ameel@psy.kuleuven.be)
Department of Psychology, University of Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium

Aneta Pavlenko (apavlenk@temple.edu)
Department of Teaching and Learning, Temple University, Philadelphia, PA, 19122, USA

Huichun Zhu (huichun.zhu@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA 18015, USA

Abstract
Languages differ in the way they package elements of the
world into words, which poses a challenge for bilinguals. We
examined word use patterns for common household objects
for late-immersed Chinese-English bilinguals to investigate
how the bilingual lexical network develops when the first
language is fully mature at the time of second-language
immersion. We found changes to both first- and secondlanguage word use with increased English dominance,
indicating continued plasticity and mutual influence.
Keywords: bilingualism; word learning; word use; lexicon;
categorization.

Introduction
Second-language learning research traditionally examined
transfer from the first language (L1) to the second (L2)
assuming a stable L1. Separately, language attrition research
examined changes to L1 in the face of L2 dominance. Only
recently has it been appreciated that L1 and L2 may exert
mutual influences, and that performance in each may best be
understood by studying their interplay across conditions of
learning and use (Schmid & Köpke, 2007).
Most inquiry from this new perspective has focused on
phonology and morpho-syntax. These domains are
considered to engage procedural memory and potentially be
affected by phenomena such as critical periods for learning.
In contrast, the lexicon is considered to be stored in
declarative memory, with performance subject to standard
memory parameters such as frequency of retrieval (e.g.,
Ullman, 2004). But appropriate use of words depends on
much more than retrieval of word forms. Languages differ
in the way they package elements of the world into words.
For instance, in English, upholstered seats for one person
receive the same name as hard wooden seats for one person
(chair), whereas in Mandarin they receive the same name as
upholstered seats for several (safa). Even cognates show

differing patterns. In Spanish, a Coke bottle is botella but a
baby bottle is mamadera, and a tennis ball is not a bola but
a pelota.
These subtle differences can be thought of in terms of a
lexical network in which the conceptual level of
representation includes features, instances, and associations
rather than unitary concept nodes. Associated word forms of
the two languages can have different patterns of connection
to elements of the conceptual layer (Ameel, Storms, Malt, &
Sloman, 2005; Pavlenko, 2009; Van Hell & de Groot,
1998). Given this model, influences of one language on the
other can be conceived as changes to the weights on
connections between word forms and elements of the
conceptual layer. When a new L2 word form is taught as, or
implicitly assumed to be, a translation equivalent of an L1
word, the network will set initial weights to match those of
the L1 word. With experience, the connection weights might
be adjusted to more closely match those of native L2
speakers. However, cross-connections between words might
cause adjustments to the L1 connection weights as well,
shifting them away from those of native L1 speakers.
The theoretical issues raised about bi-directional influence
in phonology and morpho-syntax (e.g., Schmid, 2011;
Köpke, Schmid, Keijzer, & Dostert, 2007) are closely
echoed for lexical knowledge when framed in these terms.
A potential key variable on the degree of mutual influence is
age of acquisition. The network’s weight configurations
may stabilize after mastery of L1 and become resistant to
change. If L2 is introduced after the network has stabilized,
and if the L2 connection patterns initially reflect those of
L1, two consequences may result. First is difficulty
adjusting the L2 weights toward the L1 standard. Second is
that the L1 will be protected from an influence of L2 -because weights for the L1 words are resistant to change,
and also because the L2 weights will diverge little from L1
weights and so have little potential to influence L1 weights.
This situation resembles a critical period effect with regard

2961

to acquisition of the L2. Because it also entails protection
of the L1 from change, though, it may better be framed in
terms of entrenchment of the network. The effects of L1
lexical entrenchment have begun to been tested in
connectionist models. Zhao and Li (2010) simulated early
versus late bilingual learners and found significant
differences between them with regard to the organization of
word classes.
A different possibility is that the network may not exhibit
stabilization that is resistant to change after the initial L1
learning. In that case, with sufficient input at any time of
exposure, the L2 connection weights may be gradually
shaped to a close approximation of those of native speakers.
This requires that the network be never fully committed to
the weight configurations even later in learning. The degree
to which a network should be flexible versus committed
poses a classic ‘stability-plasticity’ dilemma in
computational modeling (see Li, Farkas, & MacWhinney,
2004). Under this scenario, because of cross-connections
between the L1 and L2 lexicons, the more the L2 weights
diverge from initial L1 settings, the greater the impact on L1
usage may be. Conversely, predominant use of the L1 may
leave L1 patterns largely intact. This possibility is
compatible with suggestions that continued use of L1
protects it against attrition. However, because the more one
language is used, the less the other must be, it also implies
the trade-off that greater preservation of the L1 patterns will
entail lesser progression in the L2.
Yet a third possibility is that if the acquired L1 pattern
does not resist change, the network will, under the influence
of L2 input, arrive at a configuration for both languages that
is a compromise between L1 and L2 patterns. In this case,
patterns of usage may not fully match those of monolingual
speakers of either language. Ameel et al. (2005) found a
convergence of this sort for Belgian early bilinguals who
grew up with both French and Dutch. It may be less likely
to be found for late bilinguals, having one well-established
language before substantial exposure to the second.
Conversely, the patterns of the two languages may be
functionally separable for late bilinguals, allowing mastery
of native -like patterns for both given sufficient exposure to
each. This outcome may be most likely under conditions
where the languages are dissimilar overall and/or in terms of
naming patterns within a domain, yielding weaker crossconnections as L2 learning takes place.
We focus here on late L2 learners to examine plasticity of
the network after L1 is well-established. In related work,
Malt & Sloman (2003) found that, for immersed L2 users of
English, elements of non-native usage patterns for concrete
nouns in the L2 persisted for many years despite evolution
toward more native-like usage. On the other hand, Pavlenko
and Malt (2011) found evidence for some L2 impact on L1
word use in Russian immigrants to the U.S. who continued
to speak Russian at home. These bilinguals treated several
L1 Russian terms for drinking vessels as if they were more
equivalent to English terms than did largely monolingual
speakers in Russia. The L2 influence on L1 was greatest for

those who came to the U.S. in early childhood, but some
influence was seen even for those who arrived after age 18.
These results point toward limited but continued plasticity
of the network. Malt and Sloman’s study did not isolate late
learners, however, and neither study looked at performance
in L1 and L2 in relation to each other, or at outcomes as a
function of language dominance or attainment. Malt and
Sloman’s participants came from many L1 backgrounds,
creating variable L1-L2 similarity, whereas Pavlenko and
Malt’s Russian-English language pairing can be considered
to involve languages of intermediate similarity.
The current study investigated naming patterns for
common household objects by native speakers of Chinese
attending school in the U.S. They named the objects in both
English and Chinese, in separate sessions. Participants had
arrived no earlier than age 15, thus having a mature L1 at
the time of immersion. They varied in the extent to which
they had become more English-dominant. Their two
languages are dissimilar on many dimensions from syntax to
writing systems, and the naming patterns in this domain are
dissimilar. We asked three questions that will shed light on
fundamental aspects of how bilingual patterns of word use
develop for dissimilar languages under conditions of late L2
immersion. These are:
(1) What constrains learning of subtle aspects of L2 word
use patterns given mature L1 knowledge at time of
immersion? Can L2 usage evolve toward native-like
patterns as a function of experience, even in light of a
mature L1, or will entrenched L1 knowledge defeat reshaping of L2 word usage patterns?
(2) How stable are L1 usage patterns when L2 immersion
occurs after L1 is mature? In particular, are highly
entrenched L1 patterns immune to an L2 influence, or does
the impact vary depending on L2 experience?
(3) If progress in L2 mastery is observed and linked to the
extent of L2 dominance, does it have a negative relation to
the preservation of the native L1 patterns, or do they vary
independently?

Method
Sixty-two Lehigh University students, native speakers of
Mandarin, participated. All used English on a daily basis.
Average age of immersion in English was 21, with a
minimum of 15. Mean self-rated proficiency for English
was 4.94 on a 7-point scale; for Chinese, 6.92. Twenty-five
largely monolingual speakers of Mandarin resident in China
and 28 largely monolingual speakers of English resident in
the U.S. served as comparison groups.
Stimuli for assessing naming patterns consisted of 67
pictures of objects for preparing and serving foods and 73
pictures of objects for holding and dispensing products such
as health and beauty aids, cleaners, and foods (see Ameel et
al., 2005). For brevity we call the first the dishes set and the
second the bottles set, but each contained many objects with
other names, as reported below.

2962

Figure 1. Sample pictures from the dishes set.

Results

Figure 2. Sample pictures from the bottles set.

Each set of pictures was presented on a web page.
Instructions indicated (in English or Mandarin, depending
on test session) that for each picture, they should give
whatever name seemed best or most natural, and that their
response could be one word or more than one. The photos
followed, with each accompanied by a response box into
which participants typed their choice of name.
Monolingual speakers of English and of Mandarin each
participated in only one experimental session in which they
viewed the web pages (with order balanced across
participants) and typed in their responses to the pictures.
Bilinguals participated in three sessions. In the first,
conducted in English, they filled out an extensive language
history questionnaire (in English) that asked for information
such as age of exposure to English, years of formal
instruction, age of immersion, years of immersion, and other
aspects of language experience and usage. They then
completed an English word/non-word discrimination task as
one measure of English proficiency. The second session
was also conducted in English, always by a native speaker,
and participants’ responses were in English. Participants
first completed the naming task for the two stimulus sets
(with order balanced across participants). Additional
measures of proficiency and current language accessibility
were then taken including a speeded picture-naming task
and a verbal fluency task in which they were asked to list all
the exemplars they could to each of three prompts
(Clothing, Transportation, and Food) in 60 seconds each.
Last, they told the story depicted in a wordless picture book
to the experimenter. The final session was conducted in
Mandarin by a native speaker of Mandarin and took place at
least one week after the second. The same tasks were
completed in the same order, with responses in Mandarin.

Monolingual naming patterns. We first tabulated the
names produced by monolingual speakers of each language
to determine the most common (“dominant”) name for each
picture. Those names, along with how many objects of the
set had each listed name as dominant, are presented in
Tables 1 and 2. The tables show that the lexical categories
of the two languages do not have a simple relation for either
stimulus set. For both, each language has one broad term
that covers 1/3 or more of the objects, but these terms do not
correspond closely to one another: Objects labeled by a
single term in one language are distributed across several in
the other. This is also true for most of the other terms that
cover multiple objects of the set. These complex relations
pose a challenge for the L2 learner. The neatest mapping
across languages is the close correspondence of Mandarin
bei to the combined English cup, mug, and glass. However,
in this case, an L1 speaker of Mandarin must still learn to
segment a broader category into several narrower ones.
For the dishes stimulus set, the number of terms that are
dominant for at least one object is similar between the two
languages, with 9 for English and 8 for Mandarin. For the
bottles set, however, English has 13 compared to
Mandarin’s 5. The greater number of discriminations, along
with absence of a clean mapping between any major terms,
may make acquiring English naming patterns for the bottles
set more challenging for Mandarin-English bilinguals. At
the same time, if dissimilarity decreases cross-connections
to the L1, it may exert less influence on the L1.
Table 1a: Distribution of names across the 67 pictures of the
dishes set, grouped by English.
English
27 bowl
12 mug
9 cup
8 dish
6 plate
2 glass
1 pot
1 jar
1 tray

Mandarin
19 wan, 3 pen, 1 pan, 1 die, 1 bei, 1 yao, 1
yan hui gang
12 bei
9 bei
3 pan, 3 yan hui gang, 2 pen
4 pan, 2 die
2 bei
1 guo
1 wan
1 pan

Table 1b: Distribution of names across the 67 pictures of the
dishes set, grouped by Mandarin

2963

Mandarin
24 bei
20 wan
9 pan
5 pen
4 yan hui gang
3 die
1 guo
1 yao

English
12 mug, 9 cup, 2 glass, 1 bowl
19 bowl, 1 jar
4 plate, 3 dish, 1 tray, 1 bowl
3 bowl, 2 dish
3 dish, 1 bowl
2 plate, 1 bowl
1 pot
1 bowl

To evaluate whether language experience – in particular,
the dominance of one language over the other in current
usage – influences match to the monolingual pattern,
bilinguals were divided into two groups according to the
extent to which English had become dominant for them. To
do so, all the individual language performance measures
other than naming responses were correlated with one
another and with responses to the various language history
questions. The relative number of items produced to the
category prompt Clothing in English vs. Mandarin
correlated significantly with more other measures (20 out of
36) than any other performance measure and was selected as
the basis for grouping. To the extent that the bilinguals can
retrieve more English than Mandarin words for items of
clothing in 60 seconds, their English can be assumed to be
more highly activated than their Mandarin.
The distribution of number of English minus Mandarin
clothing items produced by each participant was examined
for a break point. Participants assigned to the Higher
English Dominance group (n = 27) had a mean value of 0.15
(s.d. 3.22), indicating that on average they produced about
equal numbers in Chinese and English. Those assigned to
the Lower English Dominance group (n = 35) had a mean
value of -9.0 (s.d. 3.26), indicating that on average they
produced 9 more in Chinese than English. Correspondingly,
mean self-rated English proficiency for the Higher English
Dominance group was 5.14 and for the Lower, 4.76. For
Chinese self-ratings, it was 6.87 and 6.95 respectively.
Table 3 presents the mean individual agreement scores of
each speaker group to the monolingual English group for
each stimulus set.

Table 2a: Distribution of names across the 73 pictures of the
bottles set, grouped by English.
English
37 bottle
7 can
6 container
5 box
4 jar
4 tube
3 stick
2 case
1 basket
1 canister
1 carton
1 grinder
1 shaker

Mandarin
33 ping, 3 tong, 1 he
3 ping, 2 tong, 1 guan, 1 he
3 he, 2 ping, 1 tong
5 he
2 ping, 1 guan, 1 he
4 guan
2 ping, 1 guan
2 he
1 he
1 he
1 he
1 ping
1 ping

Table 2b: Distribution of names across the 73 pictures of the
bottles set, grouped by Mandarin.
Mandarin
44 ping
16 he
7 guan1
6 tong

English
33 bottle, 3 can, 2 stick, 2 jar, 2
container, 1 grinder, 1 shaker
5 box, 3 container, 2 case, 1 bottle,
1 carton, 1 jar, 1 basket, 1 can, 1
canister
4 tube, 1 jar, 1 stick
3 bottle, 2 can, 1 container

What constrains L2 learning given mature L1
knowledge at time of immersion? Can L2 usage evolve
toward native-like patterns as a function of L2 language
experience, or will entrenched L1 knowledge defeat reshaping of word usage patterns? Naming performance of
each participant for each stimulus set was assessed using a
measure of individual agreement with monolingual name
choice across all pictures of the set. For each object, the
bilingual was credited for the name produced for it
proportional to the number of monolingual English speakers
who produced that name. For instance, if a given object
was called bottle by 80% of monolingual speakers, jar by
10%, container by 5%, and jug by 5%, then a bilingual who
called it bottle received a score of .8, one who called it jar
received a score of .1 and so on. A 0 was assigned for
responses not produced by any monolingual speaker. An
individual’s scores for the 67 dish pictures and 73 bottles
pictures were each averaged to produce a summary value for
each person for each set. As a baseline for comparison, we
also calculated the mean level of agreement for individual
monolingual speakers of English with their own
monolingual group for each stimulus set.
1

Because responses were typed in pinyin, we cannot distinguish
guan with tone 3 from guan with tone 4, but for our stimuli, most
or all are likely to be guan4.

Table 3: Mean agreement scores of monolinguals and
bilinguals to the monolingual English group.

Monolingual
English
Dishes
Bottles

.58 (.04)
.45 (.09)

Higher
English
Dom.
Bilinguals
.50 (.04)
.37 (.06)

Lower
English
Dom.
Bilinguals
.44 (.07)
.38 (.08)

An ANOVA with speaker group as a between-subjects
factor showed a significant main effect of speaker group for
both stimulus sets: F (2,87) = 46.16, p < .0001 for dishes;
F(2, 86) = 8.14, p < .001 for bottles. Post hoc comparisons
(LSD) showed that bilinguals differed significantly from
monolinguals for both stimulus sets (p < .001). The effect of
extent of English dominance differed by stimulus set,
though. For dishes, the bilingual groups differed from each
other (p < .001), but for bottles, they did not. Thus, the
ability to progress toward an L2 native-like naming pattern
differs by semantic domain.
For dishes, both bilingual groups differed from the
monolinguals by greatly over-using cup and plate and
under-using mug and dish. Higher English dominance
bilinguals added to the dominant term list one word

2964

dominant in monolingual usage for only one object (pot)
and one dominant for two (glass), as well as a more
important term, mug, dominant for 12 objects for the
monolinguals. However, the bulk of their progress does not
appear to be due to addition of these vocabulary words.
Removing from the data the three stimuli that had
monolingual dominant names of pot or glass leaves the
scores virtually unchanged (.50 vs. .45). Furthermore, about
40% of lower English dominant bilinguals did produce mug,
even though it was not dominant for any object for them.
Looking only at the scores of those who did produce mug in
each group, the mean score for lower English dominance
was .47 and for higher English dominance was .52,
maintaining the difference between groups. It appears that
progress in matching monolingual patterns is largely due to
more appropriate use of terms known to both groups.
For bottles, both bilingual groups differed from the
monolinguals by greatly over-using bottle and, to a lesser
extent, box, and by under-using container, jar, and several
minor terms (dominant for monolinguals for only one to
three objects of the set). As already noted, though, there was
no sign of greater shaping of the word-object connections
toward native-like with higher English dominance.
In short, these late bilinguals speaking two dissimilar
languages do show movement toward overcoming
entrenched L1 patterns as a function of language experience.
However, they do so only for one of the domains, a point to
which we will return.
How stable are L1 usage patterns when L2 immersion
occurs after L1 is mature? In particular, are highly
entrenched L1 patterns immune to an L2 influence, or
does the impact vary depending on L2 experience?
Performance on Mandarin naming was scored in the same
way as for English naming. Table 4 presents the mean
individual agreement scores of each speaker group to the
monolingual Mandarin group for each stimulus set.

Dishes
Bottles

.85 (.07)
.86 (.06)

Higher
English
Dom.
Bilinguals
.69 (.03)
.63 (.09)

If progress in L2 mastery is observed and linked to the
extent of L2 dominance, does it have a negative relation
to the preservation of the native L1 patterns, or do they
vary independently? The data already presented suggest
that they must vary independently, since bilinguals showed
differential progress toward the L2 standard only for dishes
and differential movement away from the L1 standard only
for bottles. To further address this question, we correlated
individual bilinguals’ mean scores for English and
Mandarin performance. For dishes, there was no relation
between the two (r = .10, n.s.). For bottles, there was a
small and marginally significant positive relation rather than
a negative one (r = .21, p = .06). Overall, then, it appears
that progress in one language does not mandate a declining
performance in the other across the board with respect to
naming patterns.

Discussion

Table 4. Mean agreement scores of monolinguals and
bilinguals to the monolingual Mandarin group.

Monolingual
Mandarin

due to over-extension of ping and guan and under-extension
of he and tong. The latter two may have particularly unclear
relations to any English words (see Tables 2a and b).The
effect of extent of English dominance again differed by
stimulus set, though. For bottles, the bilingual groups
differed from each other (p < .01); those with higher English
dominance were further from the monolingual standard. For
dishes, the groups did not differ. Whereas progression
toward the L2 standard with greater English dominance was
shown for dishes, greater loss of agreement with the L1
standard appears here for bottles.

Lower
English
Dom.
Bilinguals
.68 (.04)
.68 (.06)

An ANOVA with speaker group as a between-subjects
factor showed a significant main effect of speaker group for
both stimulus sets: F (2,84) = 100.94, p < .0001 for dishes;
F(2, 82) = 73.44, p < .001 for bottles. Post hoc comparisons
(LSD) showed that bilinguals differed significantly from
monolinguals for both stimulus sets (ps < .0001). This
indicates that entrenched L1 patterns are not immune from
an L2 influence, even under late immersion for bilinguals
speaking dissimilar languages. Changes appear to be largely

We initially outlined several possibilities for how the
bilingual lexical network might develop under conditions of
late L2 learning. The data argue against the idea that the
network stabilizes at an L1 configuration that both protects
it against L1 change and prevents progress in L2
acquisition. The data also argue against a reciprocal relation
where shifts toward the naming pattern of one language
inevitably result in shifts away from the other. At the same
time, there was no evidence for the full separation of the
two language learning experiences (whereby there could be
preservation of the L1 while also progressing toward L2).
The current data are most compatible with the situation
found in Ameel et al. (2005)’s data for simultaneous
French-Dutch bilinguals in Belgium: The network adjusts
weights for both languages such that convergence results,
and the word usage patterns for each language are more
similar for bilinguals than they are for two monolinguals of
the corresponding languages.
This outcome is more surprising in the current context,
given that the two languages were acquired asynchronously
and are dissimilar on many dimensions, as well as having
divergent naming patterns with no cognates that might
promote
incorrect
assumptions
of
word-to-word
equivalences. In light of the naming strategies adopted by
the bilinguals in each language, though, it may be less
surprising. For both L1 and L2, the trend was to over-extend
the words that are prominent in the domain (covering a large

2965

numbers of objects for monolinguals) and under-extend
words used for smaller subsets of objects. We cannot ensure
that our stimulus sets exactly match the distribution of
objects in the real world, but we sampled widely and it is
likely that, if anything, we somewhat over-represented less
common object types. It is probably inevitable that
bilinguals receive less of the input needed to maintain (for
L1) or establish (for L2) appropriate connection weights to
object types for the infrequent words, and will use these
less. Some mutual influence may then be exerted across the
word-object inputs more commonly encountered, such that
the major categories come to resemble each other more.
The remaining critical question is why the two domains
showed different outcomes for the effect of increased
English dominance. The observed outcomes most likely do
derive from the different L1-L2 relations in the two
domains, as alluded to earlier. The agreement scores of the
monolinguals show that Mandarin speakers use their
dominant terms for both domains with a high degree of
consistency. English speakers used theirs with much lower
consistency, and the full sets of response shows many more
uncommon terms (e.g., cylinder, dispenser, vial, tub, tin;
platter, saucer, trough, Tupperware) used sporadically. The
lower English consistency is especially pronounced for the
bottles set. In addition, as noted earlier, this set lacks any
terms having a neat mapping to the Chinese terms, whereas
the dishes set at least has a fairly clean correspondence of
cup, mug, and glass jointly to Chinese bei. For dishes,
bilinguals may be able to make progress in the distinctions
among cup, mug, and glass without reshaping their use of
bei. For bottles, bilinguals are more likely to struggle to
acquire the native-like distinctions without success because
the input is so highly variable. Nevertheless, the more they
tilt toward becoming English dominant, the less they are
reinforcing their Chinese usage patterns, and those weaker
word-object connection weights may further diminish.
The current discussion has been framed in terms
compatible with connectionist modeling. The network
perspective provides a framing that links theoretical issues
for the lexicon with those for phonology and morpho-syntax
and highlights questions about bi-directional influence on
patterns of word usage. Implementation is an important next
step toward understanding the dynamics of lexical crosslanguage influence. Modeling stands to yield significant
insights into the competition and representation of multiple
languages in the bilingual mind (see Li, 2013 for a recent
discussion). In naturalistic or experimental settings it is
often difficult to bring learning variables under tight control,
but these variables can be parametrically manipulated in a
computational model. For instance, characteristics of the
naming patterns, amounts of input in each language,
proficiency or dominance in L1 or L2, and temporal
characteristics of the input (blocked by language, as in a
complete switch to L2, or intermixed as for immersed
bilinguals who maintain contact with an L1 community) can
be manipulated to make further predictions about what
effects might emerge under what circumstances.

Conversely, the behavioral data as reported here help inform
the nature of the models to be developed.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a grant from the National
Science Foundation (#BCS-1057855) to Barbara Malt and
Ping Li.
Eef Ameel is supported on a postdoctoral
fellowship from the Fund for Scientific Research-Flanders.
We thank Shijing Jiang, Zinan Jiang, Rachel Jobe,
Gwendolyn Johnson, Lauren O’Brien, Nikolas Rivera,
Aislinn Rowan, Shenchi Tian, and Rachel Williams for
assistance with data collection and analysis, and Ben
Zinszer for helpful discussion.

References
Ameel, E., Storms, G., Malt, B.C., and Sloman, S. A.
(2005). How bilinguals solve the naming problem.
Journal of Memory and Language, 53, 60-80.
Schmid, M. S. & Köpke, B. (2007). Bilingualism and
attrition. In B. Köpke, M. S. Schmid, M. Keijzer, & S.
Dostert (Eds.).
Language attrition: Theoretical
perspectives. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Köpke, B., Schmid, M.S., Keijzer, M., & Dostert, S. (Eds.).
Language attrition: Theoretical perspectives. Amsterdam:
John Benjamins.
Li, P. (2013). Computational modeling of bilingualism:
How can models tell us more about the bilingual mind?
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 16, 1-6.
Li, P., Farkas, I., & MacWhinney (2004). Early lexical
acquisition in a self-organizing neural network. Neural
Networks, 17, 1345-1362.
Malt, B. C. and Sloman, S. A. (2003). Linguistic diversity
and object naming by non-native speakers of English.
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 6, 47-67.
Pavlenko, A. (2009) Conceptual representation in the
bilingual lexicon and second language vocabulary
learning. In Pavlenko, A. (Ed.) The bilingual mental
lexicon: Interdisciplinary approaches. Clevedon, UK:
Multilingual Matters.
Pavlenko, A. & Malt, B.C. (2011). Kitchen Russian: Crosslinguistic differences and first-language object naming by
Russian-English bilinguals. Bilingualism: Language and
Cognition, 14, 19-45.
Schmid, M. (2011). Language attrition. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Ullman, M. T. (2004). Contributions of neural memory
circuits to language: The declarative/procedural model.
Cognition, 92, 231-270.
Van Hell, J. G., & De Groot, A. M. B. (1998). Conceptual
representation in bilingual memory: Effects of
concreteness and cognate status in word association.
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 1, 193–211.
Zhao, X., & Li, P. (2010). Bilingual lexical interactions in
an unsupervised neural network model. International
Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, 13,
505–524.

2966

