UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Lay biology in health: How adults conceptualize the benefits of exercise

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/53b1n9ds

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Gripshover, Sarah
Markman, Ellen

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Lay biology in health: How adults conceptualize the benefits of exercise
Sarah Gripshover

Ellen M. Markman

sarahjg@stanford.edu
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

markman@stanford.edu
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

Abstract
We present an approach to health interventions based on the insight that throughout life, individuals construct intuitive theories to predict, explain, and determine how to act on the world.
We propose that an intuitive theory-based approach may be
useful for teaching adults about the body’s biochemical response to exercise. The first step in using this approach is to
document the theories that a target population brings to bear on
a health domain. We therefore present what is to our knowledge the first investigation of adults’ reasoning about exercise.
Specifically, we explore how adults explain why exercise confers various benefits, how plausible adults find the physical,
emotional, and cognitive benefits of exercise, and how contingent on weight loss adults believe such benefits to be. These
findings lay the groundwork for constructing an intervention to
motivate adults to exercise more.
Keywords: health, intuitive theories, folkbiology

Introduction
Throughout life, individuals construct and use coherent belief
systems, or intuitive theories, to predict, explain, and determine how to act upon the world (Carey, 1987, 2009; Murphy
& Medin, 1985; Gopnik & Wellman, 1994; Au, Romo, & DeWitt, 1999; R. Gelman, Brenneman, Macdonald, & Roman,
2009; S. Gelman, 2003). This insight has so far remained
largely untapped, however, as a resource for health interventions.
We present an approach to health interventions that leverages participants’ intuitive theories, builds on them when appropriate, and corrects misconceptions that would interfere
with understanding the health message when necessary. This
approach goes beyond most knowledge-based interventions
that provide facts, “do’s and don’ts’,’ and admonitions without a coherent explanatory framework (see Au, Romo, & DeWitt, 1999). The intuitive theory based approach takes stock
of participants’ existing theories in the relevant domain, considers the specific nature of the health message, and determines what conceptual prerequisites need to be in place for
participants to understand the message thoroughly, apply it
flexibly, and believe it with conviction. The present work
takes stock of participants’ existing theories regarding exercise.
Gripshover and Markman (in press) used this intuitive theory based approach to teach young children that foods have
different nutritional profiles—no one food provides all the
nutrients the body needs—and therefore we need a variety
of healthy foods. This explanation relies on several concepts,
some readily understandable and others opaque. Preschoolers
may find invisible, discrete, heterogeneous nutrients inside
homogeneous-looking food puzzling because they expect

substances to be continuous (Au, 1994). Because preschoolers understand solutions (Au, Sidle, & Rollins, 1993; Rosen
& Rozin, 1993), nutrients were explained by analogy to sugar
dissolving in water. Nutrient extraction during digestion was
explained in mechanical (not biochemical) terms: food enters the body, the stomach breaks it into smaller pieces, extracts the nutrients, and blood carries them throughout the
body. This built on children’s emerging mechanical understanding of digestion in which food enters and eventually exits the body, but little is known about the intermediate processes of digestion (Teixeira, 2000; Rowlands, 2004). Labels were used to unite perceptually distinct foods into foodgroup categories and convince children that they share important internal properties (S. Gelman & Markman, 1986).
Finally, while children believe that food enables biological
processes (Inagaki & Hatano, 1996), it was additionally explained that different processes require different nutrients.
Children learned and generalized this new theory: over half
described the role of blood in transporting food when answering open-ended questions about digestion, almost all claimed
there were invisible nutrients inside of food, and nearly half
justified their hypothetical snack choices in terms of nutrients
or variety. Moreover, children even increased their vegetable
consumption during snack time even though eating more vegetables was not explicitly mentioned in the intervention.
In the present research, we lay the groundwork for using
such an intuitive theory based approach for motivating adults
to exercise by taking stock of adults’ theories regarding exercise. New findings in exercise research show profound and
broad-ranging benefits of exercise, from increasing insulin
sensitivity (Borghouts & Keizer, 2000), to regulating the immune system and reducing inflammation (Woods, Vieira, &
Keylock, 2009), to warding off depression (Dunn, Trivedi,
Kampert, Clark, & Chambliss, 2005; Salmon, 2001) and even
decreasing the risk for dementia among the elderly (Kramer,
Erickson, & Colcombe, 2006; Hillman, Weiss, Hagberg, &
Hatfield, 2002; K. Erickson & Kramer, 2008). Though research is just beginning to delineate the specific mechanisms
behind these benefits, the general explanation seems to be
that the body sets in motion a cascade of biochemical processes that are specially adapted to sustain and repair body
and brain cells and prepare them for the next physical challenge. This repair process explains why exercise improves
such a wide range of health indicators, and even causes the
creation of new brain cells. Exercise is more than just physical movement: it is in many ways like taking medicine.
We begin by asking what theories adults draw upon to reason about exercise. Very little research exists to guide us

2446

in characterizing these theories. However, we expect nonexpert adults to explain the benefits of exercise by appealing
to causal mechanisms that are more or less mechanical in nature; e.g., the heart works harder and thus propels more blood
throughout the body; muscles physically grow larger as they
become stronger; calories are used up and thus the amount
of fat on the body is reduced. Under this view, health benefits would appear to result from biomechanical factors such as
weight loss and increased strength of the muscles and heart.
If adults indeed do hold a predominantly biomechanical
theory of exercise, we suspect that this theory will be inadequate to explain many of these recently-discovered benefits
of exercise satisfactorily. Mental benefits, such as the reduced risk for dementia and improvements in cognitive ability should be especially problematic, because they cross a
well-worn ontological boundary between the biological and
psychological domains (see, e.g., Carey, 1987; Wellman &
Gelman, 1992, 1998; Inagaki & Hatano, 1993; Erickson,
Keil, & Lockhart, 2010; Lynch & Medin, 2006). For example, a normal-weight, or even thin, elderly person who is
concerned about memory loss might be more likely to seek
out crossword puzzles than physical exercise. An overweight
person who embarks on an exercise program and fails to lose
a significant amount of weight despite hard work may despair
of receiving any health benefits. The present research seeks
to document the theories that adults bring to bear on explaining the benefits of exercise as a first step towards creating an
intuitive theory based intervention designed to communicate
the newfound benefits of exercise to adults.

effects (reduced depression risk, improved mood), and 2
cognitive effects (reduced risk for memory loss, improved
problem-solving ability). Finally, half of the effects were
framed as short-term (immediately after exercise, people experience increased heart rate, improved mood, and improved
problem-solving ability) and half as longer-term (regular exercise helps improve blood pressure, reduce depression risk,
and reduce risk for memory decline).
Explanation of benefits Participants were shown claims
about the benefits of exercise and asked questions framed as,
“Research shows that getting regular physical exercise can
[claim about benefit]. If you had to guess, why would you
say getting plenty of exercise [claim about benefit]?” Participants were asked to assume the claims were true and provide
the best explanations they could. Items included 2 physical
(reduced blood pressure / blood sugar), 2 emotional (reduced
depression risk, reduced stress), and 3 cognitive benefits (improved memory, improved problem-solving ability, and reduced risk for dementia).
Importance of weight loss Seven questions asked whether
participants saw value in exercise apart from weight loss. Participants rated how much they agree or disagree with 7 statements such as, “If someone exercises regularly for a long time
and never loses any weight, they are probably wasting their
time” on a scale of 1-100 using a sliding scale.

Results and Discussion
Results did not differ by age and gender, so results are collapsed across these categories.

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 explores 3 questions: (1) To what extent do
adults evoke biomechanical, biochemical, and other causal
mechanisms to explain the effects of exercise on the body?
(2) How plausible do adults find physical and mental effects
of exercise? (3) Do adults view physical benefits of exercise
as contingent on weight loss?

Methods
Participants Participants were 50 adults (27 women) from
the United States recruited through Amazon’s Mechanical
Turk (AMT). Ages ranged from 18-25 years (N = 9) to 6069 years (N = 2).
Survey A survey was designed using Qualtrics. Question
blocks were presented in a fixed order (i.e., plausibility ratings, explanation of benefits, importance of weight loss, and
explanation of benefits without weight loss), but items were
always randomized within blocks.
Plausibility Ratings Participants were given a list of claims
about the effects of exercise and asked to rate their agreement on a scale of 0 - 100 with their mouse using a slider.
The endpoints of the scale were labeled “totally disagree”
and “totally agree,” and the midpoint was labeled “neither
agree nor disagree.” Items included 2 physical effects (improved blood pressure, increased heart rate), 2 emotional

Plausibility Ratings Figure 1 presents mean agreement ratings for each effect of exercise. All ratings were significantly
greater than the “neither agree nor disagree” midpoint (all
t’s > 3.2), demonstrating that all effects were more plausible than not. Ratings were arcsine transformed to ensure homogeneity of variance and compared to one another using
a repeated-measures ANOVA with within-subjects factors of
item type (physical, emotional, and cognitive) and time scale
(long vs. short-term). Results revealed a main effect of item
type (F[2, 48] = 50.53, p < .0001 and a significant item type
by time scale interaction (F[2, 48] = 11.28, p < .0001). Posthoc paired t-tests showed that emotional effects were less
plausible than physical effects (physical M = 90.8% agreement rating, emotional M = 80.9% agreement rating, t(49) =
6.09, p < .0001), and cognitive effects (M = 66.5% agreement rating) were less plausible than emotional (t[49] = 6.14,
p < .0001) and physical (t(49) = 9.75, p < .0001) effects.
No differences were observed between long - and short-term
items within physical and emotional effects (t’s < 1.8), but
improving immediate problem-solving ability (M = 60.1%
agreement rating) was less plausible than reducing risk for
dementia (M = 72.8% agreement rating).
Explanations of benefits Tables 1-3 present summaries
of participants’ open-ended explanations. Responses were

2447

100

M = 89%

M = 82%

physical
emotional
cognitive

M = 80%

80

M = 73%

20

40

60

M = 60%

0

Mean agreement rating

Items (2)
non-biological
biochemical all
release
relax tire out
circulation
other
dk

M = 92%

blood
pressure

heartbeat

depression

happier

memory
decline

problem
solving

depression
0.52
0.50
0.00
0.00
0.04
0.12
0.00

stress
0.32
0.30
0.38
0.12
0.02
0.12
0.00

Table 2: Proportion of participants appealing to each explanation type for 2 emotional benefits of exercise: preventing
depression and reducing stress

Item

Figure 1: Mean plausibility ratings by items. Error bars represent standard error of the mean.
coded into one or more categories.

Cognitive benefits Table 3 presents a summary of explanations for cognitive benefits of exercise. As with physical benefits, participants appealed predominantly to to biomechanical mechanisms such as circulation (improved blood or oxygen flow to brain and other tissues) and the brain itself getting a “workout” during physical exercise. Participants also
claimed that exercise increases feelings of awakeness and improves overall health, and also offered non-biological explanations (e.g., exercise increases social activity, mental discipline, willpower, etc.), and a few biochemical explanations.

Physical benefits Explanations for physical benefits included biomechanical mechanisms such as circulation (improved/increased blood flow), “burning off” sugar/calories,
clearing debris from blood vessels, strengthening the heart
and/or blood vessels, and reducing weight; non-biological
explanations (e.g., exercising helps people develop better
health-related habits, self-discipline, confidence, etc.); biochemical explanations; and ambiguous biological explanations such as increasing metabolic rate. Table 1 presents the
proportion of participants whose explanations featured each
category. Biomechanical explanations were by far the most
common.
Items (2)
burns sugar / calories
weight
circulation
stronger heart
clears blood vessels
biochemical
metabolism
non-biological
other
dk

blood
pressure
0.00
0.24
0.36
0.34
0.12
0.00
0.00
0.02
0.34
0.00

Items (3)
circulation
nonbio
alert clear head
physical health
exercises brain
other
biochemical
dk

blood
sugar
0.52
0.26
0.08
0.00
0.00
0.12
0.12
0.08
0.30
0.02

dementia
0.52
0.18
0.00
0.18
0.14
0.10
0.10
0.06

memory
0.62
0.16
0.14
0.10
0.12
0.10
0.10
0.00

problem solving
0.40
0.20
0.22
0.08
0.06
0.08
0.04
0.02

Table 3: Proportion of participants appealing to each explanation type for 3 cognitive benefits of exercise: preventing dementia, improving memory, and improving problem-solving
ability

Table 1: Proportion of participants appealing to each explanation type for 2 physical benefits of exercise: reducing blood
pressure and blood sugar

Biochemical explanations Table 4 presents a summary
of biochemical explanations across items. While participants mentioned a wide variety of biochemicals, the most
commonly-mentioned was endorphins.

Emotional benefits Table 2 presents a summary of explanations for the effect of exercise on stress and depression. A handful of biomechanical explanations were observed, such as improved circulation (4% and 2% for depression and stress) and the release of stress, tension, or negative energy (38% for stress only). However, explanations for
stress and depression most commonly appealed to biochemical explanations (52% and 30% for depression and stress)
and non-biological explanations (52% and 30% for depression and stress).

Summary of explanations of benefits Participants evoked
primarily biomechanical explanations for physical and cognitive benefits of exercise, and primarily biochemical and nonbiological explanations for emotional benefits. This suggests
that although many participants are aware of some biochemical processes related to exercise, they do not view the physical, cognitive, and emotional benefits of exercise as consequences of a single cascade of adaptive biochemical responses. Interestingly, biochemical explanations were overwhelmingly offered for emotional benefits, rather than phys-

2448

Benefit
type
physical
emotional

Explanation
type
insulin
endorphins
general
chemicals
hormones
seratonin

cognitive

cortisol
endorphins
general
chemicals

hormones
neurotransmitters
build new
brain cells
endorphins

Item
blood sugar
depression
stress
depression
stress
depression
stress
depression
stress
stress
problemsolving
dementia
memory
problemsolving
dementia
memory
dementia

conditional
% of participants
1.00 (6 of 6
0.54 (14 of 26)
0.67 (10 of 15)
0.31 (8 of 36)
0.13 (2 of 15)
0.08 (2 of 26)
0.13 (2 of 15)
0.19 (5 of 26)
0.07 (1 of 15)
0.13 (2 of 15)
0.50 (1 of 2)
0.40 (2 of 5)
0.40 (2 of 5)
0.50 (1 of 2)
0.40 (2 of 5)
0.20 (1 of 5)
0.20 (1 of 5)

memory

0.20 (1 of 5)

memory

0.20 (1 of 5)

Table 4: Breakdown of biochemical explanations by benefit
type (cognitive, emotional, and physical) and item (preventing depression, reducing stress, etc.). Presented as a conditional proportion of total biochemical explanations given for
each item.

of exercise as more plausible than participants who offered
none, and found that they did not, t’s < 1.3.

Discussion
Experiment 1 provided preliminary evidence that adults find
the cognitive effects of exercise are less plausible than emotional effects, and emotional effects less plausible than physical effects. Furthermore, we provided preliminary evidence
that adults appeal predominantly to biomechanical explanations for explaining the physical and cognitive benefits of exercise, but not the emotional benefits. Instead, adults frequently gave biochemical and non-biological, rather than
biomechanical, explanations for the emotional benefits of
exercise. However, we suspect these biochemical explanations represent isolated facts, rather than a coherent biochemical theory of the body’s response to exercise. Nevertheless,
awareness of at least some biochemical effects of exercise in
the could be used as leverage for teaching a more coherent
biochemical theory.
Finally, although participants were reluctant to endorse
statements that blatantly identify weight loss as the primary
source of exercise-related health benefits, participants who
gave at least one biochemical explanation viewed weight loss
as less of a critical factor than participants who identified
none. However, it is possible that although adults concede
that exercise can offer benefits aside from weight loss, they
may still view achieving a healthy weight as important gauge
of success if given more subtle questions. Experiment 2 tests
this possibility.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 explores more closely the importance adults
place on maintaining a healthy weight when gauging
exercise-related health benefits.

ical or cognitive ones, and the vast majority cited endorphins
as the causal mechanism. We therefore suspect many of these
biochemical explanations may reflect awareness of the wellpublicized “runners’ high.”

Methods

Importance of weight loss Reliability among the 7 questions about the importance of weight loss was high (Cronbach’s alpha = .93) and so a composite importance-of-weight
score was created, M = 23.2 out of 100, sd = 14.2. This score
was significantly lower than the “neither agree nor disagree”
midpoint of the scale, t(49) = 13.34, p < .0001, indicating
that participants do not view exercise as beneficial solely in
the presence of weight loss.
Biochemical explanations in relation to other measures
To see whether participants who appealed to biochemical
causal mechanisms viewed weight loss as less important, we
divided participants into two groups: one who never offered
biochemical explanations (N = 18), and one who did (N =
30). Participants who offered a biochemical explanation had
lower importance-of-weight scores (M = 19.1) than participants who did not (M = 29.5, t[46] = 2.56, p = .02). We
also asked whether participants who offered at least one biochemical explanation rated cognitive and emotional benefits

Participants Participants were 47 adults (23 women) from
the United States recruited via AMT. Ages ranged from 18-29
(N = 23) to 50-59 (N = 4).
Survey A survey was designed using Qualtrics. Blocks
were presented in a fixed order (i.e., open-ended health behaviors, thinness vs. fitness, weight loss vs. no weight loss),
but items within blocks were randomized.
Open-ended health behaviors Participants were asked to
list what they believe are the best ways to stay healthy. We
were interested in whether participants would be more likely
to list maintaining a healthy weight than exercise on its own.
Thinness vs. fitness Participants indicated which of two
hypothetical people would be healthier: someone with a
healthy weight who rarely exercises and has low physical
fitness, or someone who is overweight, exercises frequently,
and has high physical fitness.

2449

100

mean percent likelihood ratings for each item
using participants' FIRST vignette only

Exercise vignettes: weight loss vs. no weight loss Participants viewed two vignettes about characters who are overweight and begin fitness programs. Both work out 4-5 times
per week for 30-40 minutes each time for a year. However, one character achieves a weight near the healthy range,
and the other character only loses a few pounds and remains
overweight. Participants estimated the percent likelihood that
each character received a set of physical, cognitive, and emotional benefits. Order was randomized across participants.

88%
84%

81%

80%

yes_weight_loss
no_weight_loss

75%
80

74%

64%

65%

65%

68%

67%

65%

53%

0

20

40

60

56%

blood
pressure

diabetes
risk

stress
reduction

mood
improvement

avoid
memory loss

circulation

osteoperosis

Results and Discussion
Figure 2: Ratings of percent likelihood that the character
in each vignette experienced each benefit. Considering only
each participant’s first vignette

Results did not differ by age and gender, so results are collapsed across these categories.
Open-ended health behaviors Table 4 presents behaviors
participants identified as important for health. Nearly all participants identified exercise and diet. No participants identified maintaining a healthy weight.

healthy diet
exercise
weight loss

% of participants
1.00
0.96
0.00

Thinness vs. fitness 15% of participants said that a person
who is lean and not physically fit is healthier than someone
who is fit and overweight. 23% of participants said both are
equally healthy, and 61% said that an overweight, fit person
is healthier, χ2 (2) = 16.2, p = .0003.
Exercise vignettes: weight loss vs. no weight loss Reliability across likelihood ratings for physical, cognitive, and
emotional benefits was high (alpha = .93 for no-weight-loss
vignettes and .92 for weight-loss vignettes) mean composite score for each vignette was computed for each participant
across items. Participants rated benefits as significantly more
likely in the presence of weight loss (no-weight-loss vignettes
M = 56% likely, weight-loss vignettes M = 72% likely, t[46]
= 6.8, p < .0001).
Because the vignettes were identical except for weight loss,
it was possible that participants used weight explicitly to differentiate their ratings. We therefore performed a betweensubjects comparison using only each participant’s first vignette. Figure 2 presents these ratings. Again, participants
rated benefits as more likely when they occurred in the presence of weight loss (M = 76% likely) than in the absence of
weight loss (M = 65% likely), t(45) = 2.4, p = .02.
This suggests that adults do at least to some extent view
weight loss as an indication of progress in an exercise program. This was true for nearly every benefit we presented,
including physical and emotional benefits.

Discussion
Participants identified diet and exercise as the best ways to
improve health nearly 100% of the time, and they recognized

that a fit, overweight person is likely to be healthier than a
normal-weight, unfit person. On the other hand, participants
rated nearly all of the benefits of exercise that we presented
as less likely to occur for a character who loses very little
weight. It is possible that participants found it implausible
that a character could truly comply with an exercise program
for a year and not lose weight. Exercise physiology research
has shown, however, that some individuals do comply rigorously with an exercise program but lose very little weight,
and yet still reap health benefits similar to those who lose
more weight (King, Hopkins, Caudwell, Stubbs, & Blundell,
2009). The vignettes furthermore gave identical descriptions
of both exercise regimens. Participants still may have assumed the non-weight-loss character was not working out as
intensely, however. Further research is needed to determine
whether adults view weight loss as a mechanism behind certain health benefits, or as diagnostic of adequate effort.

General Discussion
These studies to our knowledge provide the first systematic
exploration of how adults bring their biological theories to
bear on the topic of exercise. Although many participants
were aware of some biochemical effects of exercise, we did
not find evidence of participants holding coherent theory of
exercise triggering a cascade of beneficial chemical responses
in the body.
Although adults do not view weight loss as more important
than exercise, we found that they do view many benefits as
less likely to occur without weight loss. A biochemical theory
of exercise may therefore be useful to de-emphasize weight
loss as a gauge or mechanism for health benefits.
We also identified one area in which biochemical effects
of exercise are already well-known: the emotional benefits of
exercise. Widespread knowledge of the “runner’s high” can
therefore be leveraged to teach a more general biochemical
theory of exercise.
Finally, we identified one way in which a biochemical theory of exercise may fail to support a coherent understanding
of the wide-ranging benefits of exercise. Adults view cog-

2450

nitive benefits of exercise as less plausible than physical and
even emotional benefits. They also explain cognitive benefits primarily by appeal to biomechanical explanations–few
participants offered biochemical accounts. This raises the interesting possibility that a lay biochemical theory of exercise
does not support a coherent, compelling explanation for the
cognitive benefits of physical exercise. This may have implications for motivating older adults to exercise. Maintaining cognitive acuity may be much more important to older
adults than more well-known aims of exercise such as building strength and improving physical appearance. At the same
time, these cognitive benefits may be the most difficult to understand in light of adults’ lay theories. An intervention that
explains the cognitive benefits of exercise may therefore be
especially useful if targeted towards older adults.
Future research will test whether teaching adults a biochemical theory of exercise increases their conviction about
the cognitive benefits of exercise, diminishes focus on weight
as an indicator of success, and actually motivate adults to
exercise more. The present research documents adults’ lay
theories of exercise and establishes the potential utility of an
intuitive theory based approach to motivating adults to exercise.

References
Au, T. K. (1994). Developing an Intuitive Understanding of
Substance Kinds. Cognitive Psychology, 27(1), 71–111.
Au, T. K., Romo, L. F., & DeWitt, J. E. (1999). Considering
Children’s Folkbiology in Health Education. In M. Siegal
& C. C. Peterson (Eds.), Children’s understanding of biology and health (pp. 209–234). New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press.
Au, T. K., Sidle, A. L., & Rollins, K. B. (1993). Developing
an intuitive understanding of conservation and contamination: Invisible particles as a plausible mechanism. Developmental Psychology, 29(2), 286–299.
Borghouts, L. B., & Keizer, H. a. (2000). Exercise and insulin sensitivity: a review. International journal of sports
medicine, 21(1), 1–12.
Carey, S. (1987). Conceptual Change in Childhood (MIT
Press ed.). Cambridge, MA.
Carey, S. (2009). The Origin of Concepts. New York, NY:
Oxford University Press.
Dunn, A. L., Trivedi, M. H., Kampert, J. B., Clark, C. G.,
& Chambliss, H. O. (2005). Exercise treatment for depression: efficacy and dose response. American journal of
preventive medicine, 28(1), 1–8.
Erickson, J., Keil, F. C., & Lockhart, K. L. (2010). Sensing
the coherence of biology in contrast to psychology: young
children’s use of causal relations to distinguish two foundational domains. Child development, 81(1), 390–409.
Erickson, K., & Kramer, A. F. (2008). Aerobic Exercise
Effects on Cognitive and Neural Plasticity in Older Adults.
British journal of sports medicine, 43(1), 22–4.
Gelman, R., Brenneman, K., Macdonald, G., & Roman, M.

(2009). Preschool Pathways to Science: Facilitating Scientific Ways of Thinking, Talking, Doing, and Understanding.
Baltimore, MD: Brookes Publishing Company.
Gelman, S. (2003). The Essential Child: Origins of Essentialism in Everyday Thought. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Gelman, S., & Markman, E. M. (1986). Categories and induction in young children. Cognition, 23(3), 183–209.
Gopnik, A., & Wellman, H. M. (1994). The Theory Theory.
In S. Gelman & L. A. Hirschfeld (Eds.), Mapping the mind
(pp. 257–293). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gripshover, S., & Markman, E. M. (in press). Teaching
Young Children a Theory of Nutrition: Conceptual Change
and Potential for Increased Vegetable Consumption. Psychological Science.
Hillman, C. H., Weiss, E. P., Hagberg, J. M., & Hatfield, B. D.
(2002). The relationship of Age and Cardiovascular Fitness to Cognitive and Motor Processes. Psychophysiology,
39(3), 303–12.
Inagaki, K., & Hatano, G. (1993). Young Children’s Understanding of the Mind-Body Distinction. Child Development, 64(5), 1534.
Inagaki, K., & Hatano, G. (1996). Young Children’s Recognition of Commonalities between Animals and Plants. Child
Development, 67(6), 2823–40.
King, N. A., Hopkins, M., Caudwell, P., Stubbs, R. J., &
Blundell, J. E. (2009). Beneficial effects of exercise: shifting the focus from body weight to other markers of health.
British Journal of Sports Medicine, 43(12), 924–7.
Kramer, A. F., Erickson, K., & Colcombe, S. J. (2006). Exercise, Cognition, and the Aging Brain. Journal of Applied
Physiology, 101(4), 1237–42.
Lynch, E., & Medin, D. (2006). Explanatory models of illness: a study of within-culture variation. Cognitive psychology, 53(4), 285–309.
Murphy, G. L., & Medin, D. L. (1985). The Role of Theories
in Conceptual Coherence. Psychological Review, 92(3),
289–316.
Rosen, A. B., & Rozin, P. (1993). Now you see it, now you
don’t: The preschool child’s conception of invisible particles in the context of dissolving. Developmental Psychology, 29(2), 300–311.
Rowlands, M. (2004). What do children think happens to
the food they eat ? Journal of Biological Education, 38(4),
167–172.
Salmon, P. (2001). Effects of physical exercise on anxiety, depression, and sensitivity to stress: a unifying theory. Clinical psychology review, 21(1), 33–61.
Teixeira, F. M. (2000). What happens to the food we eat?
Children’s conceptions of the structure and function of the
digestive system. International Journal of Science Education, 22(5), 507–520.
Woods, J. a., Vieira, V. J., & Keylock, K. T. (2009). Exercise, inflammation, and innate immunity. Immunology and
allergy clinics of North America, 29(2), 381–93.

2451

