UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Linguistic cued attention in children: Words organize attention to shape in a visual search
task

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/72h4z73k

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Vales, Catarina
Smith, Linda

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Linguistic cued attention in children:
Words organize attention to shape in a visual search task
Catarina Vales (cvales@indiana.edu)

Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, 1101 E 10th St
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA

Linda B. Smith (smith4@indiana.edu)

Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, 1101 E 10th St
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA
Abstract
By one account of early word learning, children become
proficient word learners as a result of environmental
regularities: Learning words tunes the child to the regularities
offered by the language being learned, orienting attention to
those regularities. We test one core claim of this account, that
count nouns should cue attention to the shape of the objects.
Using a visual search task we present evidence that hearing
the name of the object narrows children’s attention to the
objects in the array that have the same shape. Future steps
and the implications of these results are discussed.
Keywords: attention; language and cognition; visual search;
word learning.

Introduction
Using past experience to select what to attend to is a
powerful feature of human cognition. If exposed to
environmental regularities, infants (Kirkham, Slemmer and
Johnson, 2002; Saffran, Aslin & Newport, 1996) and adults
(Chun & Jiang, 1998; Zhao, Ngo, McKendrick, & TurkBrowne, 2011) readily attend to the current events that
better match the underlying structure of their previous
experience.
This ability to selectively attend to the most reliable
sources of information as a result of past experience has
been proposed as a mechanism underlying early word
learning. Not only do children learn a large amount of
words in the first years of life, but they also seem to do so in
very smart ways. For example, by 2.5 years children use
shape to generalize new noun categories – if given a novel
named object, children will selectively attend to shape over
color or texture when extending the novel name to new
exemplars (the shape bias; Booth & Waxman, 2002; Jones
& Smith, 2002).
Because in English many count nouns map to object
categories well organized by within-category shape
similarity, learning individual word-object mappings could
create a top-down process that would organize future
learning. According to the attentional learning account of
the shape bias, it is the co-occurrence of nouns and shapes
that creates an attentional bias to shape over other features
when generalizing a new object category. Although there is
evidence supporting the attentional account (GershkoffStowe & Smith, 2004; Jones, 2003; Smith, Jones, Landau,
Gershkoff-Stowe, & Samuelson, 2002), the specific

mechanisms through which nouns cue object shape have not
been directly tested. In the traditional shape bias task,
children are asked to generalize a new object category in an
untimed forced-choice procedure. The fact that children
tend to select the shape match could be do to attentional
processes or to much later decision processes. Indeed,
competing theories of the attentional learning account have
suggested that the shape bias reflects more conceptual
theories about how words refer to objects (Waxman &
Gelman, 2009).
The purpose of this paper is to empirically test a core
claim of the selective attention account: That words cue
children’s attention to the shape of the objects. To this end,
we use a visual search task – a well-documented attentional
task in which participants are asked to find a particular
object (the target) amidst distractor objects. In the visual
search literature with adults (Treisman & Gelade, 1980) and
children (Gerhardstein & Rovee-Collier, 2002), when the
target and the distractors differ by just one feature, search is
almost effortless and does not depend on the number of
distractors. When the target and the distractors have
overlapping features, finding the target becomes a serial
search – and response times depend on the number of
distractors. The intercept and the slope of the search
function are also indicators of the attentional processes
involved. While the slope reflects the per item search time
(i.e. how long it takes per item to decide if it is the target),
the intercept is thought to reflect pre-search processes,
including the representation of the search target in working
memory (Vickery, King & Jiang, 2005; Woodman, Vogel
and & Luck, 2001).
To investigate the role of labels in visual attention we use
a visual search task to compare children’s performance
when they were cued with both the spoken name and a
picture of the target versus then they were cued with just a
picture of the target.

Experiment 1: Do labels cue attention to
shape?
Finding a target requires keeping a representation of the
target in working memory. Research with adults has
suggested that more robust working memory representations
of the target result in overall decrease in search times (i.e.
intercept changes). Because visual attention is biased

3610

towards elements in the array that match the contents of
working memory, stronger working memory representations
would effectively suppress attention to nonmatching
elements in the search array (Kristjansson, Wang &
Nakayama, 2002; Soto & Humphreys, 2007; Vickery, King
& Jiang, 2005), therefore modulating pre-search attentional
processes.
Does hearing the name of the target prior to search
influence its representation in working memory, and thus
search? If hearing the object name results in the enhanced
representation of object shape relative to other properties,
then the explicit naming of the search target on each trial
should effectively narrow search to items in the array with
the same shape. This is the hypothesis tested in Experiment
1.
In a conjunctive search task, children were asked to search
for a particular colored object (e.g., red bed) in a field of
same shape (e.g., green bed) and same color (e.g., red
couch) distractors. In the Label condition, children heard
the displayed object (but not its color) named (e.g., “bed”)
prior to each search trial; in the Silent condition, they just
saw the displayed target. If storing the name along with the
target object in working memory supports processes that
automatically direct attention to same shaped items in the
array, then overall search time should decrease in the Label
condition as participants would preferentially examine the
shape matching objects to find the conjunctive match. That
is, by hypothesis, in the Label condition children’s attention
might be automatically attracted to the shape matching
items, with attention to the non-shape matching items being
dampened. If so, this would effectively reduce the search
set and should lead to faster overall search times in the
Label than in the Silent condition.

Methods
Participants. Thirty-two children (M=37 months, range:
31-43 months) were assigned to either the Silent or the
Label condition. Ten additional children were recruited but
not included in the final sample due to refusal to participate
in the study (N=3), not finishing the familiarization phase
(N=1), or selecting a non-target object on most test trials
(N=6). Children were reported to have no developmental
disorders, normal (or corrected to normal) visual acuity and
color vision. English was the main language spoken by all
families. Parental consent was obtained for all participants
in compliance with the IRB of Indiana University.
Stimuli and procedure. Figure 1 shows the experimental
set up and the temporal order of events on each trial. The
child was seated approximately 35cm from a 17’ monitor
equipped with a touchscreen (MagicTouch, Keytec,
Garland, TX). E-Prime software (PST, Pittsburg, PA) was
used to control stimulus presentation and record the latency
and the location of each response during the test phase. On
each test trial, a “fixation” slide encouraged the child to rest
their hands on the table (Figure 1a) before the target object
was displayed on the center screen for 1sec (Figure 1b).

The search array (with the target object amid distractor
objects) was then displayed and the child asked to find the
target picture as fast as possible (Figure 1c). Prior to the test
phase, children were familiarized with the search procedure,
with holding their hands on the table during fixation, and
touching the target.

(a)

1000 ms
[auditory cue]
(b)
(c)

Figure 1: Structure of a trial (left) and child performing
the task (right).
Each child was assigned one search target and searched
for the same object throughout 32 test trials. Four different
objects served between subjects as targets: a red bed, a red
couch, a green bed, and a green couch. For each target, the
distractors were selected so that half had the same shape and
half had the same color as the target (that is, when the target
was a red bed, half the distractors were red couches and half
were green beds). Each test stimulus was rendered in a 180
x 140 pixel area on a white background. Across trials, the
number of distractor objects was manipulated: on each trial,
the target object was placed amidst 2, 4, 8 or 12 distractors;
eight occurrences of each distractor set size was presented in
an order randomly determined for each subject. Sixteen
possible locations were used to place the target and the
distractors. Across test trials, the target appeared equally
often on the left and right side of the screen.
The experimenter started each trial ensuring that the child
was looking at the screen; no time limit was set for finding
the target. No feedback was given during test phase. In the
Label condition, a sound file containing the name of the
target object (e.g. “bed”) played at the onset of the target
(Figure 1b). The audio files were recorded using an
artificial speech creator at a sample rate of 16KHz. No
sound file was played in the Silent condition.

Results and Discussion
Mean reaction times (RT) per distractor level were
calculated for each child. Only correct responses (i.e. when
the target object was selected) were included. Although
some participants did not complete all test trials, no
differences were found between conditions in the total
number of trials completed, t (30) = -0.37, n.s., nor in
accuracy, t (30) = 0.14, n.s. (see Table 1). Figure 2 depicts
mean RT for the Silent and the Label conditions as a
function of number of distractors. A mixed 2 x 4 analysis of
variance with condition as the between-subjects factor and
number of distractors as the within-subjects factor yielded a
main effect of distractor number [F (3,90) = 27.30, p <
0.001], reflecting the fact that RT increased as the number

3611

of distractors increased. A main effect of condition was also
found [F (1,30) = 4.48, p < 0.05], reflecting a significant
decrease in overall RT for the Label condition. Number of
distractors and condition did not interact [F (3,90) = 0.21,
n.s.]. The slopes and intercepts of the linear best-fit lines
were also calculated for each child. Independent samples ttests showed that while the slopes of the two conditions
were not different [t (30) = 0.39, n.s.], there was a
significant reduction in the intercept of the Label condition
when compared to the Silent condition [t (30) = - 2.40, p <
0.05].

1 but replaced the target name on each trial with the word
“Go.”

Methods
Participants. Sixteen children between 32 and 42 months
of age (M = 37 months) participated; none of these children
had participated in Experiment 1.
Eleven additional
children were recruited but not included in the final sample
due to selecting a non-target object on most test trials.
Recruitment and informed consent procedures were the
same as in Experiment 1.
Stimuli and procedure. All aspects were the same as in
the Label condition of Experiment 1, except that the sound
file presented at the onset of the target played the word
“Go.”

Results and Discussion

3000

4000

5000

6000

silent
label

2000

Mean Reaction Time (ms)

7000

Mean Reaction Time for Correct Responses

2

4

8

12

Number of Distractors

Figure 2: Mean RT (ms) per number of distractors for the
Silent and the Label conditions in Experiment 1. Error bars
represent standard errors.
These results are consistent with the hypothesis that
hearing the name increases attention to shape matching
items and/or decreases attention to non-shape matching
distractors – thus decreasing overall search time. The
results provide direct evidence for a role of object names in
guiding children’s attention to object shape.
However,
presenting the target label did not affect the slope of the
search function, which may indicate that the label does not
affect the time it takes to make a decision per each attended
item. This point will be addressed in the General Discussion
section.
Experiment 2 examines an alternative account for the
present findings; that it was not the object name per se
which enhanced overall search time, but the presence of an
auditory signal at the start of each trial.

Mean RT per number of distractors for correct responses
was calculated for each child. Children completed 30 trials
(SD = 2.98) on average, and mean accuracy was 83% (see
Table 1). Figure 3 presents RT for correct responses per
distractor level for the Go condition. For comparison
purposes, results from the Silent condition from Experiment
1 are also shown. A mixed 2 x 4 analysis of variance with
number of distractors as within-subjects factor and
condition as the between-subjects factor yielded no reliable
differences in RT between the Go condition of Experiment
2 and the Silent condition of Experiment 1 [F (1, 30) = 0.06,
p = 0.82]. A main effect of distractors number was found [F
(3, 90) = 23.82, p < 0.001], reflecting the increase in RT as a
result of increasing the number of distractors. These two
factors did not interact [F (3, 90) = 0.41, p = 0.75]. The
analyses of the individual slopes and the intercepts
confirmed the trends found for RT: No differences were
found between the Go condition of Experiment 2 and the
Silent condition of Experiment 1 in the slope [t (30) = 0.25,
p = 0.80] or the intercept [t (30) = -0.38, p = 0.71].
In brief, an auditory word that is not the name of the
target does not result in more rapid search than the
presentation of no sound at all, a result that suggests the
observed effects in Experiment 1 were not due to an
auditory cuing effect but instead reflected the presentation
of the object name.
Table 1: Experiments 1 and 2 – Slopes and Intercepts of
the search functions, Mean accuracy and Mean number of
trials completed.

Experiment 2: Does any word cue attention?

A growing literature shows multimodal influences on visual
attention and search such that auditory cues may lead to
more rapid search (Iordanescu, Grabowecky, & Suzuki,
2011; Van der Burg, Olivers, Bronkhorst, & Theeuwes
Condition
2008). Thus it is possible that the effects observed in
Experiment 1 were due to the addition of a spoken word – Exp.1-Silent
potentially any word – and not to the target’s name nor Exp.1-Label
increased attention to object shape.
Accordingly, Exp.2-Go
Experiment 2 replicated the Label condition of Experiment

3612

Slope
(SE)

Intercept
(SE)

212 (28)
233 (5)
223 (15)

3264 (212)
2284 (37)
3085 (113)

Trials
Accuracy
completed
(SE)
(SD)
85 (3)
31 (1.55)
86 (4)
31 (3.75)
83 (3)
30 (2.98)

7000

Mean Reaction Time for Correct Responses

5000
4000
2000

3000

Mean Reaction Time (ms)

6000

go
silent

2

4

8

12

Number of Distractors

Figure 3: Mean RT (ms) per number of distractors for the
Go condition of Experiment 2 and the Label condition in
Experiment 1. Error bars represent standard errors.

General Discussion
Word learning requires selective attention to the right
properties – shape is likely to be the right feature if
generalizing countable objects, while texture might be a
better alternative if generalizing food terms. What processes
support the development of these attentional biases? This
question is the source of a major dispute in the literature,
with some arguing for the role of attended regularities in
setting up such attentional biases (Smith, Jones, Yoshida,
Colunga, 2003) and others arguing that word learning
entails more conceptual and deliberative processes about
how categories are formed (Waxman & Gelman, 2009).
The current results offer support to the first alternative.
By showing that words direct attention to the shape of
known objects, we offer for the first time direct evidence for
a core claim of the attentional learning account. After
enough instances of attention being directed to the shape of
known objects in the presence of their names, a generalized
attentional bias might emerge – any noun, even a novel one,
could now cue attention to shape. This is potentially a very
powerful learning mechanism, one that enables children to
quickly generalize new categories in the presence of new
words.
The current results also suggest that the attentional effects
of words may be located at the level of working memory –
hearing an object’s name strengthens the shape
representation of that object. The finding that hearing the
target name on a visual search task influences the intercept
of the search function, without changes in the slope, also
suggests that the effects of words do not influence the
efficiency of search (i.e. how long it took to identify or
dismiss each item as the target). However, the present
version of the task may not be optimal to test for a potential
role of labels in the efficiency of search (as measured by the
slope of the search function). In adults, the slope – or per
item search time – is affected by the familiarity of the target
and distractors (Mruczek & Sheinberg, 2005; Wang,

Cavanagh & Green, 1994), by the need or ease of binding
the features of individual items in the array into their
individual units (Treisman & Gelade, 1980), and by the
discriminability of the target from the distractors (Duncan &
Humphreys, 1989). For young children, providing the
basic-level name of the target could, in principle, influence
any of these processes – and in so doing increase the role of
shape in search in ways that expedite the identification of
the target. By this hypothesis, given sufficiently difficult
shape discriminations, hearing the object name prior to
search might be expected to yield a decreased slope in the
search function as well as a decrease in overall search time.
This is a critical issue for future research.
What are the implications of the current results?
Although more research is needed to further understand the
mechanisms involved in the attentional effects of labels in
word learning, the evidence presented here suggests that
hearing a name activates a representation of certain features
of the object – in the case of count nouns, object shape. It
follows that hearing an object name will cue attention to that
object’s shape, and over time this has the potential to not
only become a more automatic process, but also to change
the nature of the representation (possibly from specific
individual features to more abstract shape representations).
Moreover, by extension from accounts of these processes in
the adult literature (Dahan & Tanenhaus, 2005; Huettig &
Altmann, 2007; Lupyan & Spivey, 2010) these labeling
effects appear to be rapid and automatic, that is, not under
deliberative or conceptual control. Thus, the current results
provide a stepping-stone to a mechanistic account of how
words organize attention in children – and in so doing, may
organize early word learning and the on-line comprehension
of words in context.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a grant from the National
Institute of Child Health and Development (HD28675) to
LBS and a Graduate Fellowship from the Portuguese
Foundation for Science and Technology awarded to CV
(SFRH/BD/68553/2010). The authors would like to thank
the members of the Cognitive Development Lab at IU for
useful discussions, Anna MacKinnon, Blakely Meyer and
Tracy Kelsey for their help with recruitment and data
collection, and the parents and children who participated in
these studies.

References
Booth, A. E., & Waxman, S. R. (2002). Word learning is
‘smart’: evidence that conceptual information affects
preschoolers’ extension of novel words. Cognition, 84(1),
B11–B22.
Chun, M. M., & Jiang, Y. (1998). Contextual cueing:
Implicit learning and memory of visual context guides
spatial attention. Cognitive Psychology, 36, 28–71.
Dahan, D., & Tanenhaus, M. K. (2005). Looking at the rope
when looking for the snake: Conceptually mediated eye

3613

movements
during
spoken-word
recognition.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 12(3), 453–459.
Duncan, J., & Humphreys, G. W. (1989). Visual search and
stimulus similarity. Psychological Review, 96(3), 433.
Gerhardstein, P., & Rovee-Collier, C. (2002). The
development of visual search in infants and very young
children. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 81:
194–215.
Gershkoff-Stowe, L., & Smith, L. B. (2004). Shape and the
first hundred nouns. Child Development, 75(4), 10981114.
Huettig, F., & Altmann, G. T. M. (2007). Visual-shape
competition during language-mediated attention is based
on lexical input and not modulated by contextual
appropriateness. Visual Cognition, 15(8), 985–1018.
Iordanescu, L., Grabowecky, M., & Suzuki, S. (2011).
Object-based auditory facilitation of visual search for
pictures and words with frequent and rare targets. Acta
Psychologica, 137(2), 252–259.
Jones, S. S. (2003). Late talkers show no shape bias in a
novel name extension task. Developmental Science, 6(5),
477-483.
Jones, S. S., & Smith, L. B. (2002). How children know the
relevant properties for generalizing object names.
Developmental Science, 5(2), 219–232.
Kirkham, N. Z., Slemmer, J. A., & Johnson, S. P. (2002).
Visual statistical learning in infancy: evidence for a
domain general learning mechanism. Cognition, 83(2),
B35–B42.
Kristjansson, A., Wang, D. & Nakayama, K. (2002). The
role of priming in conjunctive visual search. Cognition,
85, 37-52.
Lupyan, G., & Spivey, M. J. (2010). Redundant spoken
labels facilitate perception of multiple items. Attention,
Perception & Psychophysics, 72(8), 2236–2253.
Mruczek, R. E. B. & Sheinberg, D.L. (2005). Distractor
familiarity leads to more efficient visual search for
complex stimuli. Perception and Psychophysics, 67(6),
1016-1031.
Saffran, J. R., Aslin, R. N., & Newport, E. L. (1996).
Statistical learning by 8-month-old infants. Science,
274(5294), 1926–1928.
Smith, L. B., Jones, S. S., Landau, B., Gershkoff-Stowe, L.,
& Samuelson, L. (2002). Object name Learning Provides
On-the-Job Training for Attention. Psychological Science,
13(1), 13–19.
Smith, L.B., Jones, S.S., Yoshida, H., Colunga, E (2003).
Whose DAM account? Attentional learning explains
Booth and Waxman. Cognition, 3, 209-13.
Soto, D. & Humphreys, G. W. (2007). Automatic guidance
of visual attention from verbal working memory. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 33(3), 730-753
Treisman, A.M., & Gelade, G. (1980). A feature-integration
theory of attention. Cognitive Psychology, 12: 97-136.
Van der Burg, E., Olivers, C. N. L., Bronkhorst, A. W., &
Theeuwes, J. (2008). Pip and pop: Nonspatial auditory

signals improve spatial visual search. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 34(5), 1053–1065.
Vickery, T. J.; King, L.; Jiang, Y. (2005). Setting up the
target in visual search. Journal of Vision, 5, 81-92.
Wang, Q., Cavanagh, P., Green, M. (1994). Familiarity and
pop-out in visual search. Perception and Psychophysics,
56(5), 495-500.
Waxman, S. R., & Gelman, S. A. (2009). Early wordlearning entails reference, not merely associations. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 13(6), 258–263
Woodman, G.F.; Vogel, E.K.; Luck, S.J. (2001). Visual
Search Remains Efficient When Visual Working Memory
Is Full. Psychological Science, 12(3), 219-224.
Zhao, J., Ngo, N., McKendrick, R., & Turk-Browne, N. B.
(2011). Mutual interference between statistical summary
perception and statistical learning. Psychological Science,
22, 1212-1219.

3614

