UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Making Robust Classification Decisions: Constructing and Evaluating Fast and Frugal Trees
(FFTs)

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/31z882gm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Neth, Hansjorg
Czienskowski, Uwe
Schooler, Lael
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Making Robust Classification Decisions:
Constructing and Evaluating Fast and Frugal Trees (FFTs)
Hansjörg Neth, Uwe Czienskowski, Lael J. Schooler
{neth, sciencec, schooler}@mpib-berlin.mpg.de
Center for Adaptive Behavior and Cognition
Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Berlin, Germany

Kevin Gluck
kevin.gluck@us.af.mil
Air Force Research Laboratory
Wright-Patterson AFB, OH, USA
Abstract
Fever for more
than 2 days?

Fast and Frugal Trees (FFTs) are a quintessential family of
simple heuristics that allow effective and efficient binary classification decisions and often perform remarkably well when
compared to more complex methods. This half-day tutorial
will familiarize participants with examples of FFTs and elucidate the theoretical link between FFTs and signal detection
theory (SDT). A range of presentations, practical exercises and
interactive tools will enable participants to construct and evaluate FFTs for different data sets.

No

Yes

No macrolides

Child older
than 3 years?
Yes

Keywords: Fast and frugal trees; binary classifications; simple
heuristics; signal detection theory; validity; robustness

Prescribe
macrolides

Motivation
Many real-world problems call for binary classification decisions. We may want to predict whether a partnership is
promising, whether an investment is profitable, or whether
a patient is in peril. Such classifications have important consequences, yet are typically made under time-pressure and
uncertainty. Predictions of experts and laypeople in the real
world require robust decision strategies that work swiftly and
reliably on the basis of limited information.
Fast and Frugal Trees (FFTs) allow efficient and effective
binary classification decisions by sequentially attending to
a list of diagnostic cues (Martignon, Vitouch, Takezawa, &
Forster, 2003; Martignon, Katsikopoulos, & Woike, 2008).
FFTs are a special case of simple heuristics — simple decision processes that often perform remarkably well in comparison to more complex methods (Gigerenzer, Todd, & the
ABC research group, 1999; Gigerenzer, Hertwig, & Pachur,
2011) — and have been linked with the theoretical framework
for diagnostic classification decisions provided by signal detection theory (SDT, Luan, Schooler, & Gigerenzer, 2011).
Figure 1 illustrates an example of a FFT that predicts
whether an antibiotic prescription is indicated for some patients, particularly children. By checking only one or two
cues physicians can identify patients at risk of being infected
with a specific type of bacteria and prescribe an appropriate antibiotic treatment (Fischer et al., 2002). Beyond being
both effective and efficient FFTs are useful by virtue of being robust (by being insensitive to perturbations due to noisy
data and by providing reliable out-of-sample predictions) and
communicable (e.g., they can easily be understood, learned

No

No macrolides

Figure 1: Example of a FFT that allows clinicians to prescribe
treatment with macrolides (see Fischer et al., 2002).
and taught). FFTs have successfully been developed in a variety of applied domains, including medical, legal, and financial decision making (see Luan et al., 2011, for examples).

Content, Structure, and Activities
This half-day tutorial builds upon the lectures and materials
used in previous tutorials (e.g., at the International Conference on Cognitive Modeling, ICCM 2012) and workshops
(e.g., at the Max Planck Research School on Adapting Behavior in a Fundamentally Uncertain World, 2012, and the ABC
Summer Institute on Bounded Rationality, 2013). Through a
combination of presentations and practical exercises participants will become familiar with the theoretical framework
behind FFTs, contrast them with alternative classification algorithms, and learn to construct and evaluate FFTs for realworld data sets.
The half-day tutorial interleaves lecture-style presentations
with practical exercises and will be structured as follows:
Theoretical background [45 min]: We briefly introduce
the basic ideas behind the simple heuristics framework to explain when and why biased minds can make successful inferences. This illustrates how strategies with limited information search can yield robust classification decisions relative
to computationally more complex models (Katsikopoulos,

43

Schooler, & Hertwig, 2010). Theoretical notions reviewed
in this part include the predictive validity of cues, speedaccuracy tradeoffs, the bias-variance dilemma, assessing classification outcomes via contingency tables (hits and correct
rejections vs. false alarms and misses), as well as fundamental concepts of SDT (e.g., criterion shifts, bias c, the sensitivity index d 0 , and the interpretation of ROC curves, Luan et
al., 2011). The question How can we make effective and efficient classification decisions on the basis of limited and noisy
data? will set the stage for the practical exercises.
Hands-on sessions [2 × 45 min]: Two practical parts
will explore the consequences of specific cue and criterion
choices. By using interactive software tools participants will
acquire hands-on experience in constructing FFTs.
1. Spreadsheet-based FFTs: In a first practical part, participants will be guided through a series of exercises using
a pre-designed MS ExcelTM sheet. To facilitate the transfer from theoretical notions to applicable expertise we will
examine the consequences of different cue choices, bias values, and criterion shifts on various measures of classification
performance. After assessing a selection of minimal FFTs
(with only one predictive cue) participants will re-construct a
FFT that has been designed to help emergency-room doctors
to rapidly decide whether to send a patient with severe chest
pain to the coronary care unit (Green & Mehr, 1997). Finally,
particpants will explore alternative multi-cue FFTs and evaluate their performance on a variety of outcome measures.
2. Interactive software tool (FFT-builder): A second practical session will introduce a new version of FFT-builder —
an interactive software tool that allows rapid-prototyping, explorative learning and the visual inspection of outcome measures in the context of FFTs (see Figure 2). FFT-builder provides a range of features to create and manage environments,
data sets, and corresponding FFTs. Numeric and visual analysis tools allow to quantify and compare the performance of
different solutions to the same data or explore and inspect the
consequences of applying FFTs to different data sets.

Figure 2: Screenshot of the FFT-builder software tool.
teractive fashion, participants will be enabled and encouraged
to apply FFTs to data sets in their own domain of expertise.

References
Fischer, J., Steiner, F., Zucol, F., Berger, C., Martignon, L.,
Bossart, W., Altwegg, M., & Nadal, D. (2002). Use of
simple heuristics to target macrolide prescription in children with community-acquired pneumonia. Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine, 156(10), 1005–1008.
Gigerenzer, G., Hertwig, R., & Pachur, T. (Eds.). (2011).
Heuristics: The foundations of adaptive behavior. New
York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Gigerenzer, G., Todd, P. M., & the ABC research group.
(1999). Simple heuristics that make us smart. New York,
NY: Oxford University Press.
Green, L., & Mehr, D. R. (1997). What alters physicians’
decisions to admit to the coronary care unit? Journal of
Family Practice, 45(3), 219–226.
Katsikopoulos, K., Schooler, L. J., & Hertwig, R. (2010).
The robust beauty of ordinary information. Psychological
Review, 117(4), 1259–1266.
Luan, S., Schooler, L. J., & Gigerenzer, G. (2011). A signaldetection analysis of fast-and-frugal trees. Psychological
Review, 118(2), 316–338.
Martignon, L., Katsikopoulos, K. V., & Woike, J. K. (2008).
Categorization with limited resources: A family of simple heuristics. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 52(6),
352–361.
Martignon, L., Vitouch, O., Takezawa, M., & Forster, M. R.
(2003). Naïve and yet enlightened: From natural frequencies to fast and frugal decision trees. In D. Hardman &
L. Macchi (Eds.), Thinking: Psychological perspectives on
reasoning, judgment and decision making (pp. 189–211).
Chichester, England: Wiley.

Validity and robustness [45 min]: In a final session we
will cover two topics central to the theory and practical application of FFTs: their validity and their robustness. The
point here is not to merely declare FFTs to be valid and robust, but rather to examine the evidence base and methodological options for addressing these important concerns. Results from cross-validation analyses and a formal quantification and methodological operationalization of robustness will
supplement the conceptual discussion.

Objectives
The goal of this tutorial is to provide participants with intellectual and software tools to tackle real-world classification
problems. Upon completing the tutorial, participants will
be familiar with theoretical criteria and practical skills for
designing efficient, effective, and robust classification algorithms. By building and evaluating a variety of FFTs in an in-

44

