UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Mechanistic Developmental Process: Rumelhart Prize Symposium in Honor of Linda Smith

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/79q777b0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Samuelson, Larissa K.
Morse, Anthony
Yu, CHen
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Mechanistic Developmental Process:
Rumelhart Prize Symposium in Honor of Linda Smith
Participants
Larissa K. Samuelson (larissa-samuelson@uiowa.edu)

Anthony Morse (anthony.morse@plymouth.ac.uk)

Chen Yu (chenyu@indiana.edu)

Eliana Colunga (colunga@psych.colorado.edu)

Department of Psychology and DeLTA Center
University of Iowa
Iowa City, IA, 52242

Centre for Robotics and Neural Systems,
Plymouth University
Plymouth, Devon, PL4 8AA, UK

Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences
Indiana University
Bloomington, IN, 47405

Department of Psychology and Neuroscience,
University of Colorado Boulder
Boulder, CO, 80309

Thomas Hills (T.T.Hills@warwick.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology
University of Warwick
Coventry CV4 &AL UK

Organizer
Larissa K. Samuelson (larissa-samuelson@uiowa.edu)
Department of Psychology and DeLTA Center
University of Iowa
Iowa City, IA, 52242

learners” as they seem to know the whole category to which
a new word applies after hearing one exemplar named one
time. This perspective leads to theories of development
couched in terms of innate knowledge structures and
complex hypothesis testing. In contrast, this paper will
present a view of development as the accumulation of small
moments of knowing based on the specifics of the here-andnow that accumulate over longer timescales via simple
associative processes. Data will illustrate how children use
multiple sources of information such as the statistics of their
vocabulary, associations in language structure, consistent
space, and the relative novelty or familiarity of stimuli to
solve language problems in a moment. Dynamic Neural
Field and Hebbian Recurrent Network models will then be
used to show that although children’s behaviors look
amazing, the processes that underlie them are not.

Keywords: cognitive development; word learning;
computational models; robotics; dynamic systems.

Motivation
Traditional views of cognition, cognitive development,
and word learning have viewed knowledge as divorced
from processes of perceiving and acting. Linda Smith
has championed a dynamic, mechanistic, and processoriented view of cognition and focused on questions of
development. She has shown how knowledge is
embedded in, distributed across, and inseparable from
the processes of perceiving and acting in the world. In
so doing, she has enabled a new understanding of the
nature of cognition and of how new ways of thinking
come to be. This Rumelhart symposium in her honor
illustrates how this focus on developmental process
changes the questions asked and our resulting
understanding of cognition. The five speakers will
examine the developmental process of word learning
from different vantage points ranging from perceptual
to social to cognitive, and spanning multiple periods
from the first words to rapid vocabulary growth to the
building of semantic networks.

A Unified View of Early Word Learning:
Linking social interaction to sensory-motor
Dynamics in Child-Parent Interaction
Author: Chen Yu with Daniel Yurovsky
Abstract: Many theories of early word learning begin with
the uncertainty inherent to learning a word from its cooccurrence with a visual scene. However, the relevant visual
scene for infant word learning is neither from the adult
theorist’s view nor the mature partner’s view, but is rather
from the learner’s personal view. To understand the
mechanistic nature of early word learning, this talk focuses
on micro-level behaviors as they unfold in real time in the
dynamically complex interactions of child-parent
interactions. We found that when infants interacted with

Smart Behaviors from Simple Processes
Author: Larissa Samuelson
Abstract: The period between16-months and 3-years of age
is one of rapid vocabulary growth and diversification.
Children this age are often referred to as “amazing word

61

objects in play with their parents, they created moments in
which a single object was visually dominant. If parents
named the object during these moments of bottom-up
selectivity, later forced-choice tests showed that infants
learned the name. The sensory-motor behaviors of infants
and parents were analyzed to determine how their actions on
the objects may have created these optimal visual moments
for learning. By studying the quality of parent-child social
interactions at the sensory-motor level, the research
provides a mechanistic understanding of the developmental
dependencies between sensory-motor processes, social
behavior, and language learning.

emergence of a shape bias for solids is related to a shift in
rate of learning for different kinds of words – shape-based
or material-based – in networks and toddlers. Third, we look
at how these interactions follow different developmental
patterns in typically developing children at risk for language
disorders, so-called “late talkers”. Finally, we discuss the
implications of this approach in increasing our
understanding of language disorders, as well as our ability
to improve early diagnosis and the design of individualized
intervention plans.

Growing Semantic Networks in a Sea of Words
Authors: Thomas Hills with Nicole Beckage
Abstract: Children learn language from exposure to a sea
of words. The structure of this sea can be quantified using
semantic space models applied to corpora of child-directed
speech, which identify potentially meaningful statistical
signatures from the company that words keep—including
contextual diversity and associative structure (à la
Saussure). At the same time, the words children learn can
be characterized using computational models of growing
networks of semantic information, with the edges between
words based on semantic information embedded in the
corpora. Our research has aimed at developing a
quantitative theoretical account of early word learning based
on the structure of the learning environment and the words
children know—which we call the associative structure of
child-directed language—and using this to predict the
structure and growth of children’s semantic networks over
time. We have used this approach to predict the order of
early word learning, to detect differences in typical and late
talkers, and to predict differences in child versus adultdirected speech.

Body Posture and Constraints on Word
Learning in Robots and Children
Author: Anthony Morse with Viridiana Benitez
Abstract: The starting point for many theories of word
learning is the co-occurrence of the visual object being
attended, and the spoken word, but in reality such crosssituational learning has many problems and is unreliable in
ways that simply don't match the human data. For example,
in a series of recent experiments Smith, Samuelson &
colleagues demonstrate that children around 2 years old can
learn object names in their absence so long as they are
typically observed in consistent locations. We hypothesize
that body posture is orchestrating this learning. In ongoing
work with Linda Smith, we took this hypothesis literally
placing the body centrally and binding ongoing multimodal
experience via the body posture as a way to control the
humanoid robot iCub, not only to replicate this data but to
further generate predictions subsequently confirmed in
further child experiments. With iCub we go beyond isolated
cognitive modeling, embodying our system in real sensory
and motor data, in a real interaction mirroring closely the
setup of the psychology experiments. Based in spreading
activation and self-organization our model tests and
explores the role that the body plays in embodied cognition
leading to a wider set of experiments in language learning.
Finally we explore the role of competing systems (body and
language), and simple learned skills in producing an
explosion of word learning in an artificial robot.

Time Considered as a Helix of Precious Words:
Modeling the Emergence and Interactions of
Word Learning Biases
Author: Eliana Colunga
Abstract: Early word learning may be supported by a
developmental feedback loop: the kind of words a child
learns early on support the generalization of attentional
biases, which in turn guides subsequent word learning. In a
series of neural network simulations and a longitudinal
behavioral study with toddlers in the lab, we explore the
interactions between words learned and word learning
biases, and argue that it is this interaction that builds the
individual developmental trajectories children follow. First,
we look at the development of the shape bias for solids and
how its emergence is accompanied by an attentional shift in
novel noun generalizations for other solidities, in both
networks and toddlers. Second, we look at how the

62

