UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Mental Model Ascription by Language-Enabled Intelligent Agents

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/12x2r91d

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Author
McShane, Marjorie

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Mental Model Ascription by Language-Enabled Intelligent Agents
Marjorie McShane (marge@umbc.edu)
Department of Computer Science and Electrical Engineering
University of Maryland Baltimore County
Baltimore, MD, 21250, USA
The main goal of the workshop is to foster mutual learning,
discussion and future collaboration among researchers
pursuing agent-oriented mental model ascription in
integrative cognitive architectures.

Topic and Goal
Mental model ascription can be defined as inferring features
of another human or artificial agent that cannot be directly
observed, such as that agent’s beliefs, plans, goals,
intentions, personality traits, mental and emotional states,
and knowledge about the world. This capability is an
essential functionality of intelligent agents if they are to
engage in sophisticated collaborations with people. The
computational modeling of mental model ascription offers
an excellent opportunity to explore the interaction of
traditionally separate modules of cognitive architectures,
such as language understanding, plan- and goal-oriented
reasoning, and memory management.
The study of mental model ascription can benefit from
advances in fields as disparate as machine reasoning, social
interaction, developmental psychology, robotics, emotion,
philosophy and computational linguistics, to name just a
few.1 The common thread of this workshop will be the
computational modeling of unobservable features by
intelligent agents using language input as at least one of
their modes of perception. Topics of interest include but are
not limited to:
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

Program Committee (confirmed)
Ron Artstein (USC)
Jerry Ball (Air Force Research Laboratory)
Paul Bello (Office of Naval Research)
Graeme Hirst (University of Toronto)
Eva Hudlicka (Psychometrix Associates, Inc.)
Pat Langley (University of Auckland, NZ and CMU)
Marjorie McShane, Chair (UMBC)
Sergei Nirenburg (UMBC)
Massimo Poesio (University of Essex)
Chris Potts (Stanford University)
Yorick Wilks (IHMC).

Organizational
This will be a full day workshop that will include invited
talks, talks selected by abstract submission, a round table
discussion, and, optionally, a poster session. Talks will be
grouped by similarity of theme and approach, and the
schedule will allow for extended discussion of each group
of presentations, best exploiting the workshop genre.
We expect 30-40 participants that include students and
researchers with broad interests in the computational
modeling of cognition and/or psychologically-inspired
natural language processing.
The final session of the day will be devoted to planning a
special journal issue (for Advances in Cognitive Systems) of
papers inspired by the workshop. There are no special
requirements for participants in the workshop.
The
workshop
website
is
http://ilit.umbc.edu/Workshop/MentalModelCogSci2013.html.
The contact email is mentalmodel2013@gmail.com.
The workshop organizer, Marjorie McShane, has been
working in the field of AI-NLP for the past fifteen years,
with recent work focusing on the development of cognitive
simulations of virtual patients to support clinician training.
For a brief CV and list of publications, see
http://ilit.umbc.edu/PubMcShane.htm.

Developing computational treatments of language
phenomena (e.g., indirect speech acts, irony,
paraphrase, humor, coercion) that require or give rise
to mental model ascription.
Applying computational models of other cognitive
capabilities
(dialog,
emotion,
agent
collaboration/competition and plan- and goaloriented reasoning) to mental model ascription.
Modeling agent decisions about what to learn about
other agents’ unobservable features, considering that
attempting to learn everything in every context would
incur a heavy cognitive load.
Modeling how agents measure their confidence in the
results of mental model ascription, which will be
affected by their confidence in their understanding of
contributing linguistic (or other) percepts as well as
their ability to make valid inferences.
Modeling dynamic belief modification, including
overriding a previous belief and managing memories
with respect to modified beliefs.

1

As a comparison, CogSci 2012 featured a workshop, "Modeling
the Perception of Intention" that treated intention recognition with
an emphasis on visual perception.

34

