UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Minimal Nativism: How does cognitive development get off the ground?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8nz010qc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Ullman, Tomer
Tenenbaum, Josh
Goodman, Noah
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Minimal Nativism: How does cognitive development get off the ground?
Tomer D. Ullman and Joshua B. Tenenbaum
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT
Cambridge, MA USA 02139

Noah D. Goodman
Department of Psychology, Stanford University
Stanford, CA USA 94350

Shimon Ullman
Department of Computer Science and Applied Mathematics, Weizmann Institute of Science
Rehovot 76100 Israel

Elizabeth Spelke
Department of Psychology, Harvard University
Cambridge, MA USA 02138
Keywords: Cognitive development;
Learning; Computational modeling

Core

knowledge;

nurture” debates. At the same time, recent empirical work
with young children offers striking new data that both
motivates and challenges these computational accounts. Our
symposium brings together some of the researchers who
have contributed to these developments from both
computational and empirical perspectives (Goodman,
Ullman, & Tenenbaum, 2011; Spelke & Kinzler, 2006;
Tenenbaum, Kemp, Griffiths, & Goodman, 2011; Ullman,
Harari, & Dorfman, 2012; Ullman, Goodman &
Tenenbaum, 2010; Xu & Kushnir, 2012). Our goals are to
survey the landscape of developmental possibilities across
multiple domains of physics, psychology, number,
geometry, and language; to bring recent models and
empirical work into closer contact; and to confront, honestly
and clearly, the deep challenges that remain unaddressed.

When constructing a mind, what are the basic materials,
structures and blueprints a young child has to work with?
Are most of the structures already in place, with children
merely working to embellish them? Do children begin with
several buildings already in place (the Physics Building, the
Social Building, the Number building, etc.), and only
decorate a bit as they get older, perhaps building bridges
between them using language? Such a view might describe a
strong innate core hypothesis (Spelke et al., 1994). Or does
the child begin with more of an empty plain, and an ability
to construct whatever is necessary out of whatever materials
are at hand at the time? Such a view might be more along
the lines of classic empiricism (Quine, 1964).

Our plan is to have four 15-minute talks, followed by a
30-40 minute discussion. T. Ullman will speak first,
sketching out the space of potential approaches to a
“minimal scaffolding” for cognitive development, and
touching briefly on his own work modeling the development
of intuitive physics, intuitive psychology, and the interface
between these domains. N. Goodman will then present the
“probabilistic language of thought” view – that an innate,
abstract, domain-general, language-like ability for
composing and manipulating conceptual representations is
the minimal structure necessary for learning, potentially
supplemented with specific 'named-functions' or inputanalyzers for certain domains. S. Ullman will then expand
on the notion of innate perceptual input analyzers,
illustrating with a case study drawn from his recent work on
computer vision systems that learn to identify and reason
about agents and actions in real-world video. E. Spelke will
approach these issues from the standpoint of her recent work
on the development of space, number and other
mathematical concepts. She will also provide a more
general critical perspective on the various computational
perspectives presented earlier. This will set the stage for our

Many other views are possible, lying somewhere between
the extremes of positing that the child starts with everything,
and positing that the child starts with nothing. For example,
perhaps the child begins with a powerful general-purpose
learning mechanism and a general blueprint for how to
organize the world’s entities into core domains, but no
detailed, specific understanding of how these domains
operate. Or perhaps the child begins with a powerful
learning mechanism and a general blueprint for cognitive
architecture, but no abstract concepts – only raw sensory
experience. Yet if her sensory experience can be structured
by a few crucial ‘proto-concepts’ - low-level input analyzers
that tug her learning apparatus in certain appropriate
directions – that minimal scaffolding could be sufficient.
Of course metaphors for cognitive development will only
take us so far. In the last few years, a number of stimulating
proposals for how cognitive development might get off the
ground have been framed by computational modeling
researchers, and these models offer to bring greater
precision, clarity and subtlety to classic “nature versus

107

discussion, to be facilitated by Tenenbaum and Spelke,
with the active involvement of audience participants as well
as all our speakers.

beyond the specific tasks, by showing how domain-specific
‘proto concepts’ can guide the system to acquire meaningful
concepts, which are significant to the observer, but
statistically inconspicuous in the sensory input.
Such proto-concepts may exist in other domains, forming
a bridge between the notion of innate conceptual knowledge
and that of learning mostly from sensory experience.

Tomer Ullman: The theoretical landscape, and
a case study in the origins of physical and
psychological knowledge
Cognition can be viewed as a program, albeit an
incredibly complex one. Cognitive development then is the
process by which the mind moves from one program to
another. I will introduce a range of approaches to modeling
cognitive development as different takes on the problem of
“program induction” or “program synthesis”. I will argue
for the value of beginning with abstract templates that can
capture deep patterns common to the explanatory structure
of theories in many domains. I will show how this approach
provides insight into the development of children’s first
physical and psychological concepts, such as force and
utility, as well as the interface between these domains. I
will briefly speculate on how these templates might arise or
grow over the course of development or evolution.

Elizabeth Spelke: The origins of spatial and
numerical thinking
When children begin to learn arithmetic, measurement,
and geometric symbols such as maps, what cognitive
systems support this learning process? I propose that this
process is supported by four domain-specific cognitive
systems: two core systems of number and two core systems
of geometry. These systems are present and functional at
the time that a child or animal first encounters the entities on
which they operate: in this strong sense, they are innate.
The systems also remain functional throughout life and
support mathematical reasoning in adults as well as
children: in this sense, they are foundations of mature
mathematical reasoning. But the systems are far less
general or powerful than the formal mathematical systems
that children come to acquire, including the systems of
natural number and Euclidean geometry. Powerful, domaingeneral systems for representing the information delivered
by core systems, and for forming new concepts from this
information, therefore constitute a fifth foundation for
mathematics.
This may be the general scheme for much of later
conceptual knowledge: combining core domains that have
isolated innate concepts using later maturing domaingeneral systems.

Noah Goodman: Minimal nativism and the
language of thought
How much must be built into the language of thought?
Universal formal languages can be built with a very small
number of primitive operations, yet adult humans have a
large number of conceptual operations ready-to-go for new
situations. Indeed, developmental psychologists have argued
that a significant and rich subset of these are innate
primitives. I will argue that a universal language of thought
together with a powerful learning mechanism is able to
construct many of the needed concepts very quickly.
However, I will find that some basic concepts can be
learned more easily when supported by low-level modules
that transform the perceptual input -- input analyzers. This
combination cuts a middle road between strongly nativist
and strongly empiricist view -- a minimal nativism.

Shimon Ullman: Bootstrapping from domainspecific ‘proto-concepts’
Already in their first months of life, infants rapidly learn
to recognize complex objects and events in their visual
input. Two striking examples are the detection of agents'
hands and their direction of gaze, properties which play an
important part in understanding actions and goals
(Woodward 1998, Flom et al. 2007). In computational
schemes, these problems are notoriously difficult. In
contrast, detecting hands and gaze direction, and using them
to make inferences and predictions, are natural for humans,
and appear early in development. I will briefly describe how
these problems can be solved using a learning scheme
guided by an empirically motivated innate mechanism – the
detection of ‘mover’ events in dynamic images, which are
the events of a moving image region causing a stationary
region to move or change after contact. The implications go

References
Flom R, Lee K, Muir D (2007) Gaze-Following: Its Development
and Significance (Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Mahwah, NJ).
Goodman, N. D., Ullman, T. D., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2011).
Learning a theory of causality. Psychological review, 118(1),
110.
Quine, W. V. O. (1964). Word and Object. MIT Press.
Spelke, E.S., Breinlinger, K., Macomber, J., and Jacobson, K.
(1992). Origins of knowledge. Psychological Review 99(4), 605.
Spelke, E. S., & Kinzler, K. D. (2006). Core
knowledge. Developmental science, 10(1), 89-96.
Tenenbaum, J. B., Kemp, C., Griffiths, T. L., & Goodman, N. D.
(2011). How to grow a mind: Statistics, structure, and
abstraction. Science 331(6022), 1279-1285.
Ullman, S., Harari, D., & Dorfman, N. (2012). From simple innate
biases to complex visual concepts. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences.
Ullman, T. D., Goodman, N. D., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2012).
Theory Acquisition as Stochastic Search in the Language of
Thought. Cognitive Development 27(4), 455-480.
Woodward, A. L. (1998) Infants selectively encode the goal object
of an actor’s reach. Cognition 69:1–34.
Xu, F., & Kushnir, T. (Eds.). (2012). Rational Constructivism in
Cognitive Development (Vol. 43). Academic Press.

108

