UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Mnemonic Diffusion: An Agent-Based Modeling Investigation of Collective Memory

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2v41f1j3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Luhmann, Christian
Rajaram, Suparna

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Mnemonic Diffusion: An Agent-Based Modeling Investigation of Collective Memory
Christian C. Luhmann (christian.luhmann@stonybrook.edu)
Department of Psychology, Stony Brook University
Stony Brook, NY 11790 USA

Suparna Rajaram (suparna.rajaram@stonybrook.edu)
Department of Psychology, Stony Brook University
Stony Brook, NY 11790 USA

behavior as a function of group size. In this study, groups of
between one and 15 confederates stood on a New York
street corner looking upward at a window overhead. Passing
pedestrians were likely to mimic some aspect of the
observed behavior (e.g., looking up) and this tendency
increased with group size. The classic studies of Asch (e.g.,
Asch, 1951) demonstrate the power of social influence even
more starkly because his participants were asked about
matters of objective fact (e.g., the length of lines). Despite
being accurate when making judgments individually,
participants placed with confederates tended to conform,
producing substantial errors.
Though past work has revealed the presence of social
influences on a variety of behaviors, we know little about
the mechanisms that underlie these influences. For example,
it has been suggested that, “Social networks function…by
giving us access to what flows within them” (Christakis &
Fowler, 2009, p. 91). But what does flow within our social
networks that allows for these powerful influences on our
behavior?

Abstract
Past research has uncovered evidence of social influences on
a wide variety of behaviors. Everything from our choice of
clothing to smoking appears to be shaped by the people we
know. However, little is known about the mechanisms that
underlie these influences. Here, we report a series of agentbased simulations demonstrating that information diffuses
across social networks in much the same way that behavior
diffuses. These findings lead us to conclude that many
previously observed social influences on behavior likely rely
on a substrate of information transmission and representation.
Keywords: learning, memory, collaboration, social network,
agent-based modeling

Diffusion of Behavior
The idea of social influence has long been a topic of
fascination for both scientists and the general public
(Bartlett, 1932; Cialdini, 2001; Gladwell, 2000; Schelling,
2006). The general concept of social influence is an intuitive
one. For instance, peer pressure is a factor in adolescents’
tendency to drink, smoke, and engage in sexual behavior
and some individuals slavishly follow the latest fashion
trends, mimicking the styles seen on the runway or worn by
celebrities. However, the intuition about social influence is
far too narrow. The examples cited above are seen as
exceptions; perhaps the susceptibility is restricted to a
particularly impressionable population (e.g. adolescents) or
perhaps influence is seen for relatively trivial behaviors
(e.g., the clothes you wear). Such mindless imitation would
not be seen, intuition suggests, concerning behaviors that
are both deeply personal and of great consequence (e.g.,
suicide, how many children to have). Surprisingly, research
has challenged this intuition, finding that social ties strongly
influence a wide range of behaviors, including
transformative life decisions (Christakis & Fowler, 2009;
Watts, 2003). For example, a program of research by
Christakis and Fowler (2007) has revealed the surprising
“contagion” of health-related attributes such as obesity and
smoking.
In psychology, there is a long history of work exploring
the influence of social context on behavior. Early work
focused on the potentially deleterious behavioral effects of
social influence. For example, Milgram (Milgram, Bickman,
& Berkowitz, 1969) examined social influences on arbitrary

Existing Models of Social Influence
Several mathematical models of social influence have
been proposed (Easley & Kleinberg, 2010; Jackson, 2008;
Lopez-Pintado & Watts, 2008). Among the most influential
are linear threshold models (Granovetter, 1978). Such
models assume that each individual has two mutually
exclusive and exhaustive behavioral options available. For
example, in Granovetter’s classic example, each individual
chooses whether or not to join a riot. In addition, each
individual is assumed to observe the behavior of all other
individuals. The decision of the individual is then a function
of their own idiosyncratic threshold and the behavior
observed in the group. If the number of other people
observed to be rioting does not exceed the individual’s
threshold, she remains a bystander. If this number exceeds
the individual’s threshold, she begins to riot.
Several key details of the current crop of mathematical
models should be noted. First, this work typically assumes
“zero-intelligence agents” (Gode & Sunder, 1993) that can
do nothing but copy the behavior of their neighbors with
some probability (e.g., Granovetter, 1978). This is
undoubtedly convenient, but represents a substantial
simplification, at least when attempting to model human
behavior. Though some behaviors may be the result of

936

innate imitative mechanisms, many more behaviors are
deliberative, relying on individuals’ beliefs, goals, and
desires. Second, many of the computational models of
behavioral diffusion assume that individuals can occupy one
of a small number of behavioral “states”. For example, in
the rioting example discussed above, individuals are
assumed to either be rioting or not rioting, another vast
over-simplification.
Finally,
because
of
these
simplifications, previous models have largely avoided
questions about the mechanisms by which behaviors are
transferred between individuals. Indeed, these models
expressly omit such mechanisms by assuming that mimicry
is the critical basis of diffusion. To address the mechanisms
themselves, the current study takes an agent-based modeling
(ABM) approach (Smith & Conrey, 2007; Stasser, 1988;
Carley, Martin, & Hirshman, 2009; Parunak, Belding,
Hilscher, & Brueckner, 2009; Coman, Kolling, Lewis, &
Hirst, 2012) in which agents are information processing
units capable of representing information and learning.
The current study investigates the representation and
transmission of information within social networks as
fundamental mechanisms underlying these potent influences
on our behavior. Specifically, we investigate how
information is represented by individuals within a larger
network and how the nature of social interactions shape the
information as it flows through the network.

Mechanisms Involved During Collaboration
The suboptimal performance of collaborative groups has
been attributed to the retrieval disruption process where the
output of one participant’s recall disrupts other participants’
attempts at recall, and as a result lowers the latter
participants’ output (B.H. Basden, Basden, Bryner, &
Thomas, 1997). Because each individual recalls less than
her potential during collaboration, researchers have asked
whether their post-collaborative representations would
continue to exhibit this deficit. Though some forgetting does
occur (Cuc, Koppel, & Hirst, 2007) two mechanisms
usually enhance the quantity and accuracy of postcollaborative representations; one, items not recalled during
collaboration bounce back post-collaboratively (rebound)
and, two, collaboration acts to expose each participant to
items she might not have remembered otherwise (reexposure, Blumen & Rajaram, 2008, 2009; Congleton &
Rajaram, 2011).
Several individual- and interaction-based properties
influence these collaborative effects. One such change of
note relates to increase in memory errors. As one example,
social contagion errors arise when the stimuli activate
plausible items for recall that were never presented (B.H.
Basden et al., 2002; French, Gary,&Mori, 2008; Reysen,
2007; Roediger, Meade, & Bergman, 2001). Such contagion
has been demonstrated in collaborative studies (B.H. Basden
et al., 2002) using DRM stimuli (Roediger & McDermott,
1995) in which a list of associatively-related words such as
bed, rest, awake, tired, dream, wake, snooze, blanket, etc.
leads participants to recall the never-presented lure (sleep)
with great confidence. Propagation of memory errors in the
real-world has been an enduring concern of cognitive
scientists (e.g., Bartlett, 1932) but empirical investigations
have remained elusive due to feasibility.
Memory representations in small groups are also
characterized by the frequency with which information is
processed before and during collaboration. For instance, the
individual who dominates the collaborative discussion
benefits most from rehearsal (Rajaram & Pereira-Pasarin,
2010) and has the largest influence on the post-collaborative
representations of other group members (Cuc, Ozuru,
Manier, & Hirst, 2006). Conversely, post-collaborative
memory deficits occur for information not discussed during
collaboration, either through omission (Cuc et al., 2007),
rejection of correct responses (Merckelbach, van Roermund,
& Candel, 2007), or group conformity to incorrect responses
(Reysen, 2005). We have further shown that frequency of
discussion prior to or during collaboration changes both
collaborative group recall and post-collaborative memory;
when information is repeatedly processed prior to
collaboration, it can reduce or even eliminate collaborative
inhibition in group recall (Congleton & Rajaram, 2011;
Pereira-Pasarin & Rajaram, 2011), and improve postcollaborative memory (Congleton & Rajaram, 2011). Just as
interestingly, when groups are given the opportunity to
discuss more frequently this too reduces collaborative
inhibition in group recall (B.H. Basden et al., 2000; Blumen

Collaborative Memory in Small Groups
Recent behavioral work on the social transmission of
memory in small groups has identified several key
mechanisms that facilitate or inhibit information
transmission in small groups, and how the interaction
among these mechanisms shapes convergence amongst
group members (what is referred to as collective memory).
The collaborative memory paradigm provides a robust
method for measuring the transmission of information in
small groups of two or three participants (Rajaram, 2011).
In this paradigm, each participant is first exposed to
experimenter-provided stimuli (words, pictures, narratives).
Participants then form groups and recall items
collaboratively.
Finally, participants recall items
individually to assess the post-collaborative representations
retained by each participant.
The consequence of collaboration on group memory is
counterintuitive. Though a collaborating group recalls more
than a given individual, the group recalls significantly less
than its potential, a phenomenon called collaborative
inhibition (Weldon & Bellinger, 1997). To estimate the
group’s potential, performance is compared to that of a
nominal group: the total, nonredundant recall of an equal
number of participants who recalled individually (Blumen &
Rajaram, 2008; Weldon & Bellinger, 1997). Although it
seems reasonable to assume participants perform
suboptimally because they feel less accountable while
working in groups (social loafing; Latane, Williams, &
Harkins, 1979), experimental findings shows this is not the
case (Weldon, Blair, & Huebsch, 2000).

937

is above the agent’s recall threshold ( ) and has not yet been
generated by the group, then this item is successfully
retrieved and generated (e.g., spoken out loud). Finally,
associates of the retrieved item (from S) have their
activations decreased (i.e.,
where
is the
retrieved item,
is the strength of the association between
items i and j, and is a forgetting rate).

& Rajaram, 2008). These behavioral outcomes raise
intriguing questions about how frequency of discussion
influences group-level representations in large social
networks.
Yet another intriguing finding concerns the effects of
group size. Even within small groups, research shows that
as group size increases (from 2 to 3 or 4 members)
collaborative inhibition increases with group size (B.H.
Basden et al., 2000; Thorley & Dewhurst, 2007). This raises
the question about whether larger social networks would
display an exaggerated version of this decline or whether the
complex interplay of mechanisms would completely change
how the group-level representation evolves.

Current Approach
In the current study we investigate the processes that shape
the transmission of information during both the
collaborative remembering in the laboratory paradigm and
more realistic social contexts. We take an agent-based
modeling approach in which individuals are represented by
computational agents and allowed to interact much as
human subjects interact in the collaborative memory
paradigm. The agents are endowed with simplified memory
models capable of storing a set of N items (e.g., words). The
memory model consists of two separate representations.
First, agents represent a set of inter-item associations that
exist prior to any social interaction (a matrix denoted S).
These associations represent pre-experimental knowledge
such as the semantic associations between words. For the
sake of simplicity, these inter-item associations were
assigned random values (within the range [0,1]) in the
current simulations. More systematic prior knowledge
could obviously be constructed, particularly if such factors
were important for specific research questions. For example,
lists of categorized words can be simulated by constructing
high within-category associations and low between-category
associations, a strategy we have successfully used in recent
modeling (Luhmann, Congleton, Zhou, & Rajaram, 2013).
The second representation is a set of N activations (a vector
denoted A, with elements bound to the range [0, 1]), which
allow for learning to occur during the experimental
experience itself. For example, these activations capture
recent experience studying experimenter-provided stimuli
(e.g., word lists), items generated by collaborative partners,
and even items generated by the agent itself.
Agents have two behaviors. First, they may encode a
presented item by increasing the activation associated with
the presented item (i.e.,
, where
is the
activation of the item and
is a learning rate). This
encoding occurs when items are presented by the
experimenter (i.e., during the collaborative memory
paradigm’s initial study phase) and when agents are exposed
to the items retrieved by other agents (e.g., during
collaborative recall). Second, agents can retrieve an item.
This is done by randomly selecting an item in proportion to
the activation levels in A (i.e., more active items are more
likely to be generated). If the activity of the candidate item

Figure 1 – Simulations replicate the
collaborative inhibition effect

Simulation 1: Collaborative Inhibition
Our first investigation is of the most surprising finding to
come out of the collaborative memory paradigm:
collaborative inhibition. This was done for two reasons.
First, the finding is elicited from a fairly simple
experimental paradigm making these initial simulations
relatively straightforward to construct. Second, to the
degree we are capable of successfully replicating the least
intuitive aspect of the empirical data, we can proceed with
somewhat more confidence that our formalism has not
overly simplified the cognitive processes involved.
To simulate the collaborative memory paradigm, we first
presented the entire list of N items to each agent in a random
order. Three agents were then allowed to interact with one
another. The interaction was structured such that each agent
was given an opportunity to retrieve an item on each round.
If an agent successfully retrieved an item, the retrieved item
was encoded by the other two agents. Figure 1 illustrates the
results of 1000 simulations of a collaborative condition and
1000 simulations of a nominal condition (i.e., total,
nonredundant recall of three agents recalling individually)
evaluated exactly as in the behavioral studies described
above. As can be seen, the simulation results reproduce the
collaborative inhibition findings describe above. This result
is likely due to the fact that each agent is endowed with an
idiosyncratic set of activations during the initial, individual
study phase but then learns the contents of their peer’s
activations during the collaborative phase. Thus, the
interaction between agents tends to increase the similarity of
the agents’ representations and minimize the idiosyncrasies
that make the nominal groups more successful in generating
greater quantity. Furthermore, exploratory simulations
suggest that having individual agents repeatedly engage in
isolated retrieval does not diminish the performance of the
nominal group, suggesting that the collaborative inhibition
is due to the social interaction (e.g., retrieval disruption,
B.H. Basden et al., 1997) rather than repeated retrieval.

938

Simulation 3: Diffusion of Collective Memory
The collaborative memory paradigms represent a realistic,
real-world social network that is amenable to experimental
study. However, the size of groups involved in this
paradigm places obvious restrictions on the research
questions that may be asked. The current simulation seeks to
achieve substantially greater realism than the more
traditional laboratory paradigms allow. Specifically, we
wish to explore how the information represented by and
shared between individuals makes its way through larger
social networks.
To explore true social networks, we employed a larger
population (60 computational agents of the kind described
above), each of which was placed into a larger network
structure. Though there are many potentially interesting
network structures, we are most interested in those related to
real world social networks. For this reason, the current
simulation employs a so-called small world network (Watts
& Strogatz, 1998). Within such a network, the shortest
distance between two nodes is short on average despite the
network itself being relatively sparse (most nodes are not
neighbors). These features give rise to the well-known “six
degrees of separation” phenomenon. We further chose to
set the average degree to 2 (meaning that agents were, on
average, connected to 2 other agents).
As in the simulations reported above, each simulation
began by presenting the entire list of 40 items to each agent
individually. All subsequent interaction between agents
occurred over this network. On each epoch of the
simulation, a random agent was selected along with one of
that agent’s randomly selected neighbors. This pair was
then allowed to interact just as the collaborative groups
simulated above (each taking a turn to retrieve, etc.). To
assess the diffusion of information across the network, we
computed the similarities between pairs of agents’
representations (i.e., the correlation between activation
vectors, A) after the simulations were completed. This
measure of similarity goes up with the overlap (both in what
they represent strongly and what they have forgotten, i.e.,
collective memory) and goes down when one agent has
forgotten an item that the other agent still remembers (i.e., is
strongly active in A). We computed the similarity between
all pairs of agents (i.e., both neighboring pairs and nonneighboring pairs) sorting these similarities on the basis of
how close the two agents in each pair were to each other
within the network (i.e., minimum distance). Neighboring
agents would have a distance of 1. Two non-neighboring
agents that shared a common neighbor would have a
distance of 2 and so on.
Figure 3 illustrates the results of a 60-node small world
network that was allowed to run for 1000 epochs. As can be
seen, neighboring agents acquired very similar
representations. This is not particularly surprising since
neighboring agents will have interacted with each other and
learned the contents of their neighbors’ representations.
What is surprising is that agents at a distance of two are
highly similar as well. These agents never interacted with

Figure 2 – Influence of group size
on collaborative inhibition

Simulation 2: Group Size
As mentioned above, prior work with the collaborative
memory paradigm has manipulated a variety of different
factors. One factor that has received surprisingly little
attention is the size of the collaborating group despite its
obvious real-world relevance. Only two studies have
manipulated group size (B.H. Basden, Basden, and Henry,
2000; Thorley and Dewhurst, 2007), and both concluded
that increasing group sizes produce more detrimental
collaborative effects.
Details of these studies limit
interpretation, however. For example, Basden et al. (2000)
tested 1-, 2-, and 4-person groups. Though the 1-person
groups recalled more than the 4-person groups, the 2-person
groups were different from neither. Thorley and Dewhurst
(2007) used DRM stimuli and were specifically interested in
groups’ tendency to falsely recall the lure items (rather than
recall per se). Further, the group size tested was small in
these studies (2-4 person groups) again limiting
interpretation.
Here, we systematically manipulate group size and
investigate the influence of this factor on collaborative
inhibition. We simulated collaborative groups ranging in
size from two to seven as well as nominal groups consisting
of agents retrieving in isolation. As before, the entire list of
N items was first presented to each agent. The agents within
a group were then allowed to interact with one another with
the interaction structured as described above.
Figure 2 illustrates the results of 1000 simulations for
each group size. The standard collaborative inhibition effect
(measured here as Nominal - Collaborative) was found for
all group sizes. However, the relationship between group
size and collaborative inhibition was not entirely
straightforward.
As groups grew from two to four,
collaborative inhibition increased (replicating Basden et al.,
2000). However, as group size increased further,
collaborative inhibition decreased. This non-monotonic
relationship appears to be driven by the relative balance
between the facilitative effects offered by collaboration (i.e.,
more agents increase the probability that the group will
retrieve a given item) and the detrimental effects of retrieval
disruption (i.e., more collaborators means more
opportunities to be disrupted).

939

one another, so direct communication cannot explain this
similarity. Instead, the two agents’ common neighbor
presumably acted as a conduit through which information
diffused, indirectly connecting the non-neighbors. Even
more surprising then, is the fact that agents at distance three,
separated by two intermediate agents, are also somewhat
similar. After this point, the similarity between agents
levels off, reflecting the boundaries of collective memory in
large networks.
This similarity between non-neighboring agents is a
phenomenon that has been observed in a variety of realworld social networks and is known as hyperdyadic spread
(Christakis & Fowler, 2009). For example, previous work
has shown that people are 57% more likely to become obese
if a peer (e.g., friend) becomes obese and 20% more likely
to become obese if a peer of a peer (e.g., a friend of a friend)
becomes obese. Furthermore, in many of the behaviors
studied within social networks, hyperdyadic spread from a
given node in the social network has been found to extend to
three “hops” from that node (e.g., to the friend of a friend of
a friend) but not beyond – what Christakis and Fowler
(2009) have termed the three degrees of influence rule. The
fact that our simulations comply with this rule is interesting
because the standard finding of hyperdyadic spread
concerns the spread of behavior whereas the current results
reflect the spread of information. Exploratory simulations
employing other network structures (e.g., chains, trees) have
either failed to uncover strong hyperdyadic spreading or
failed to conform to the three degrees of influence rule.
This suggests that this class of phenomena may be jointly
driven by both the details of the social networks in which
we live (e.g., small-world networks) and the constraints of
human learning and memory.

memory are likely candidates for such mechanisms as they
are in prime position to influence the representations
individuals hold and transmission of information between f
Past work using the collaborative memory paradigm has
provided useful empirical data with which we can begin to
explore our proposal.
In this paradigm, groups of
individuals first study items in isolation before collaborating
in groups to recall these same items. Despite the practical
limitations posed by this paradigm (e.g., small group sizes),
the literature has provided a wealth of insights into the
social influences on learning and memory. These insights
include the role of retrieval disruption, re-exposure, and
error correction, the influence of group size, and phenomena
such as collaborative inhibition and error propagation.
In the current study, we have taken an agent-based
modeling approach, simulating individuals as relatively
simple information processing units capable of representing
information, learning from experience, and interacting with
other agents. In order to evaluate our proposal, we selected
three different phenomena to explore. We first investigated
the robust collaborative inhibition effect. Our simulations
replicate the standard pattern of results, with collaborative
groups under-performing relative their controls. We next
simulated the somewhat less thoroughly studied role of
group size on the collaborative inhibition effect. Here, we
found that our simulations were capable of replicating the
effects observed in the literature (increasing collaborative
inhibition with increasing group size) but also made
predictions about the boundary conditions of these effects.
Finally, we extended our findings beyond the collaborative
memory paradigm to investigate agents in a larger social
network. Here, we found that our simulations exhibited
hyperdyadic spread, a standard empirical finding in the
diffusion of behavior across social networks.
We take the success of the current simulations as
evidence in favor of our proposal. Our simulations
demonstrate that the spread of information across
connections in a social network mirrors the way in which
behavior spreads across those same connections. Thus, it
seems likely that social influence, and particularly the
diffusion of behavior, relies on a substrate of information
transmission and representation.

Figure 3 – Hyperdyadic spread of collective
memory in our simulation results

Asch, S. E. (1951). Effects of group pressure upon the
modification and distortion of judgments. In H. Guetzkow
(Ed.), Groups, Leadership, and Men (pp. 177-190).
Pittsburgh: Carnegie Press.
Bartlett, Sir F. C. (1932). Remembering: A Study in
Experimental and Social Psychology. London: Cambridge
University Press.
Basden, B. H., Basden, D. R., & Henry, S. (2000). Costs
and benefits of collaborative remembering. Applied
Cognitive Psychology, 14(6), 497-507.
Basden, B. H., Reysen, M. B., & Basden, D. R. (2002).
Transmitting false memories in social groups. American
Journal of Psychology, 115, 211-231.

References

Discussion
Broadly speaking, the goal of the current study has been to
investigate social influence in real world social networks.
Prior research has developed formal models to capture how
behaviors diffuse amongst large groups, but these
formalisms have been relatively agnostic about the
underlying psychological mechanisms, instead modeling
such behaviors as being literally contagious. Here, we have
argued that the cognitive processes governing learning and

940

Basden, B. H., Basden, D. R., Bryner, S., & Thomas, R. L.,
III (1997). A comparison of group and individual
remembering: Does collaboration disrupt retrieval
strategies? Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 23, 1176-1189.
Blumen, H. M., & Rajaram, S. (2008). Influence of reexposure and retrieval disruption during group
collaboration on later individual recall. Memory, 16, 231244.
Blumen, H. M., & Rajaram, S. (2009). Effects of repeated
collaborative retrieval on individual memory vary as a
function of recall versus recognition tasks. Memory, 17,
840-846.
Carley, K. M., Martin, M. K., & Hirshman, B. R. (2009).
The etiology of social change. Topics in Cognitive
Science, 1(4), 621-650.
Christakis, N. A., & Fowler, J. H. (2007). The spread of
obesity in a large social network over 32 years. New
England Journal of Medicine, 357, 370-379.
Christakis, N. A., & Fowler, J. H. (2009). Connected: The
Surprising Power of our Social Networks and How they
Shape our Lives. New York: Little, Brown and Company.
Congleton, A. R. & Rajaram, S. (2011). The influence of
learning methods on collaboration: Prior repeated
retrieval enhances retrieval organization, abolishes
collaborative inhibition, and promotes post-collaborative
memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
140, 535-551.
Coman, A., Kolling, A., Lewis, A., & Hirst, W. (2012).
Mnemonic convergence: From empirical data to largescale Dynamics, Social Computing, Behavioral-Cultural
Modeling and Prediction, 256-265.
Cuc, A., Koppel, J., & Hirst, W. (2007). Silence is not
golden: A case for socially shared retrieval-induced
forgetting. Psychological Science, 18, 727-733.
Easley, D., & Kleinberg, J. (2010). Networks, Crowds, and
Markets: Reasoning About a Highly Connected World.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
French, L., Gary, M., & Mori, K. (2008). You say tomato?
Collaborative remembering leads to more false memories
for intimate couples than for strangers. Memory, 16, 262–
273.
Gladwell, M. (2000). The Tipping Point: How Little Things
Can Make a Big Difference. New York: Little, Brown &
Company.
Granovetter, M. (1978). Threshold models of collective
behavior. American Journal of Sociology, 83, 1420-1443.
Gode, D. K., & Sunder, S. (1993). Allocative efficiency of
markets with zero-intelligence traders: Market as a partial
substitute for individual rationality. Journal of Political
Economy, 101, 119-137.
Jackson, M. O. (2008). Social and Economic Networks.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Latane, B., Williams, K., & Harkins, S. (1979). Many hands
make light the work: The causes and consequences of
social loafing.
Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 37, 822-832.

Luhmann, C.C., Congleton, A.C., Zhou, X., & Rajaram, S.
(2013). When less is more: Retrieval-refined
representations produce the testing effect. Manuscript
submitted for publication.
Merckelbach, H., van Roermund, H., & Candel, I. (2007).
Effects of collaborative recall: Denying true information
is as powerful as suggesting misinformation. Psychology,
Crime, & Law, 13, 573–581.
Milgram, S., Bickman, L., & Berkowitz, L. (1969). Note on
the drawing power of crowds of different size. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 13, 79-82.
Parunak, H. V., Belding, T. C., Hilscher, R., & Brueckner,
S.
(2009).
Understanding
collective
cognitive
convergence Multi-Agent-Based Simulation IX (pp. 4659): Springer.
Pereira-Pasarin, L., & Rajaram, S. (2011). Study repetition
and divided attention: Effects of encoding manipulations
on collaborative inhibition in group recall. Memory &
Cognition, 39, 968-976.
Rajaram, S. (2011). Collaboration both hurts and helps
memory: A cognitive perspective. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 20, 76-81.
Rajaram, S., & Pereira-Pasarin, L. (2010). Collaborative
memory: Cognitive research and theory. Perspectives on
Psychological Science, 5, 649-663.
Reysen, M. B. (2005). The effects of social pressure on false
memories. Dissertation Abstracts International: Section
B: The Sciences and Engineering, 65, 6066.
Roediger, H. L., & McDermott, K. B. (1995). Creating false
memories: Remembering words not presented in lists.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 21, 803-814.
Roediger, H.L., III, Meade, M.L., & Bergman, E.T. (2001).
Social contagion of memory. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 8, 365–371.
Smith, E. R., & Conrey, F. R. (2007). Agent-based
modeling: A new approach for theory building in social
psychology. Personality and Social Psychology Review,
11, 87-104.
Stasser, G. (1988). Computer simulation as a research tool:
The DISCUSS model of group decision making. Journal
of Experimental Social Psychology, 24, 393-422.
Thorley, C. & Dewhurst, S. A. (2007). Collaborative false
recall in the DRM procedure: Effects of group size and
group pressure. European Journal of Cognitive
Psychology, 19, 867-881.
Watts, D. J., & Strogatz, S. H. (1998). Collective dynamics
of “small-world” networks. Nature, 393, 440-442.
Weldon, M. S., & Bellinger, K. D. (1997). Collective
memory: Collaborative and individual processes in
remembering. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 23, 1160-1175.
Weldon, M. S., Blair, C., & Huebsch, D. (2000). Group
remembering: Does social loafing underlie collaborative
inhibition? Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 26, 1568-1577.

941

