UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Modeling Spatial Ability in Mental Rotation and Paper-Folding

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4jc23853

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Lovett, Andrew
Forbus, Kenneth

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Modeling Spatial Ability in Mental Rotation and Paper-Folding
Andrew Lovett (Andrew@cs.northwestern.edu)
Kenneth Forbus (Forbus@northwestern.edu)
Qualitative Reasoning Group, Northwestern University, 2133 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208 USA

perform each task consistently. This analysis allows us to
address a longstanding debate about the effects of shape
complexity on mental rotation. It also provides hypotheses
about the skills supporting fast, efficient mental rotation,
and thus the skills underlying spatial ability.
We begin with background on mental rotation and the
question of shape complexity. We show how paper-folding
appears to violate many researchers’ conclusions, as it
involves simple shapes but requires great deliberation and
effort. We next present our computational model, which
builds on previous cognitive models of perception,
comparison, and visual problem-solving (Falkenhainer,
Forbus, & Gentner, 1989; Lovett & Forbus, 2011). We
apply the model to the two tasks, determining the amount of
information that must be carried through the
transformations, and showing why paper-folding is a more
difficult task. Finally, we discuss the results and consider
the ramifications for spatial ability in general.

Abstract
Spatial ability tests like mental rotation and paper-folding
provide strong predictions of an individual’s achievement in
science and engineering. What cognitive skills are involved in
them? We use a computational model to analyze these tasks,
asking how much information must be processed to perform
them. The models demonstrate that in some cases stimuli can
be vastly simplified, resulting in consistent performance
regardless of stimulus complexity. The ability to produce a
scaled-down representation of a complex stimulus may be a
key skill underlying high spatial ability.
Keywords: spatial ability; mental rotation; paper-folding;
cognitive modeling.

Introduction
There is strong evidence linking spatial ability to academic
achievement. Children who perform well on spatial ability
tests are more likely to study STEM disciplines (Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics) and to go into
a STEM profession (Shea, Lubinski, & Benbow, 2001; Wai,
Lubinski, & Benbow, 2009). This effect holds even when
controlling for verbal and mathematical ability, suggesting
that spatial ability is an independent component of
intelligence. If we are to improve STEM achievement, it is
critical that we better understand the skills that compose
spatial ability and how they can be taught.
Traditionally, spatial ability has been evaluated using
tasks such as mental rotation and paper-folding. In mental
rotation (Figure 1A, 1B), individuals are shown two shapes
and asked whether a rotation of one shape could produce the
other. In paper-folding, they are shown a line-drawing of
paper and asked to imagine the results of unfolding (Figure
1C) or folding up (Figure 1D) the paper. Both tasks appear
to measure spatial visualization, the ability to manipulate
mental representations of images (McGee, 1979). There is
evidence that the tasks are linked, with training on one
improving performance on the other (Wright et al., 2008).
However, many questions remain about what skills enable
people to perform them quickly and accurately.
Here, we study the mental rotation and paper-folding
tasks using a computational model. The model operates
directly on 2D line drawings (sketches), automatically
generating representations, transforming them, and
evaluating the results of the transformation. We use the
model to analyze the tasks, asking how much information
must be encoded and carried through the transformations to

Background
Mental Rotation
Mental rotation is frequently used to evaluate spatial ability
(Vandenberg & Kuse, 1978). Typically the distractors—the
shapes that aren’t a valid rotation—are mirror reflections.
When they are presented sequentially, there is often a cue
indicating what the orientation of the second shape will be
(e.g., Cooper & Podogny, 1976; Figure 1B). A common
finding across task variations is that the response time is
proportional to the angle of rotation between the shapes.
That is, response times increase linearly with angular
distance. This finding has led to the claim that people use a
mental space, analogous to the physical space, and that they
rotate their representation through this space just as an
object might rotate physically (Shepard & Cooper, 1982).
One common question concerns how shapes are rotated
through mental space. Are they rotated piecemeal, with one
part rotated at a time, or are they rotated holistically, with
every part rotated together (Bethell-Fox & Shepard, 1988)?
These two possibilities produce different predictions about
how shape complexity interacts with rotation speed. If
shapes are rotated piecemeal, then people should rotate
complex shapes more slowly, because there are more parts
to rotate. If shapes are rotated holistically, then shape
complexity may not affect rotation speed.

930

A)

B)

C)

D)

Figure 1. Mental rotation (A, B) and paper-folding (C, D) tasks (A: Shepard & Metzler, 1971; B: Cooper & Podogny, 1976;
C: Ekstrom et al., 1976; D: Shepard & Feng, 1972).
The results on shape complexity provide evidence for
both piecemeal and holistic rotation. Overall, it appears that
rotation speed depends more on other factors, such as the
familiarity of the objects (Bethell-Fox & Shepard, 1985;
Yuille & Steiger, 1982), the similarity of the distractors
(Folk & Luce, 1987), and the strategy and overall ability of
the participant (Yuille & Steiger, 1982; Heil & JansenOsmann, 2008). These findings suggest that dealing with
shape complexity may itself be a spatial skill. Skilled
participants may apply heuristics to simplify shapes for
rapid rotation. However, when these heuristics fail, they are
reduced to rotating one piece at a time, which is slower.
One straightforward heuristic for simplifying a shape is to
ignore parts of it. When Yuille and Steiger (1982) told
participants they could complete a mental rotation task
using only the top halves of the shapes, participants rotated
the shapes more quickly. Alternatively, participants might
utilize scalable representations (Schultheis & Barkowsky,
2011) that support dynamic variation of detail based on task
demands. Both the degree and the type of detail may vary.
For example, while we can imagine both the locations and
orientations of objects in space, a task might require
considering only one of these. In this paper, we use the term
spatial smoothing for any process that removes spatial
detail, producing a simpler representation.
Participants may smooth out the details in complex
shapes, producing representations with equal complexity to
those of simpler shapes. However, when the distractors are
particularly similar to the base shapes, participants may
require additional detail, and so they may use more complex
representations that are more difficult to rotate.
This hypothesis leads immediately to two predictions: 1)
When similarity of distractors is kept constant and relatively
low, people should rotate shapes at the same rate regardless
of shape complexity. 2) As distractors become more similar,

A)

people should rotate shapes more slowly, particularly when
the shapes are complex. There is evidence supporting both
predictions (1: Cooper & Podgorny, 1976; 2: Folk & Luce,
1987).

Paper-Folding
In contrast with mental rotation, paper-folding has seen
relatively little study. This is surprising, given that it is also
often used to evaluate spatial ability (Ekstrom et al., 1976).
Here, we focus on a version of paper-folding that emerged
at about the same time as mental rotation (Shepard & Feng,
1972). While this version is used less frequently in spatial
ability evaluations, there is direct evidence linking it to
mental rotation (Wright et al., 2008).
Figure 1D shows an example. The letters have been added
for illustrative purposes and are not part of the stimulus. In
this task, participants are shown six connected squares,
representing the surfaces of a cube that has been unfolded.
Two edges are highlighted by arrows, and one square is
grayed out, indicating it is the base of the cube. Participants
are asked whether the highlighted edges would align if the
squares were folded back into a cube.
Unlike mental rotation, this task requires a sequence of
rotations. For example, Figure 1D requires three rotations.
One solution (Figure 2) would be: 1) Rotate squares A, B,
and C up, so that they stick out from the plane. 2) Rotate
squares B and C down to make the top surface of the cube.
3) Rotate square C farther down, making the front surface of
the cube. At this point, the two arrows align perfectly.
Surprisingly, even though each of these three rotations
seems simple, they appear to be piecemeal rotations.
Participants’ response times are not a function of the
number of rotations performed, but of the number of times
every square is rotated. In this case, three squares are rotated
(Figure 2B), then two squares (2C), then one square (2D),

B)

C)

Figure 2. Possible solution for Figure 1D.

931

D)

so the overall number of squares rotated is 3 + 2 + 1 = 6.
The response times reflect the six rotations, suggesting
participants rotate a single square at a time.
Why should participants require piecemeal rotation for
such apparently simple shapes? We propose that, unlike
many mental rotation tasks, little spatial smoothing can be
performed. The precise location and orientation of every
surface rotated is critical to performance. In Figure 2A, the
location and orientation of square A determines where the
second rotation occurs, and the location and orientation of
square B determines where the third rotation occurs.
If this proposal is true, it may shed light on how and when
spatial smoothing can be applied, and what happens when it
cannot be used. Understanding this requires determining
how much spatial information must be rotated in each task.
To better answer this question, we developed a
computational model of the tasks.

computed, it generates qualitative spatial relations between
the edges, e.g., indicating that two edges are parallel or that
a corner between edges is convex.
CogSketch models visual comparison using the StructureMapping Engine (SME) (Falkenhainer et al 1989), a
domain-general cognitive model based on Gentner’s (1983)
structure-mapping theory. SME compares two qualitative
representations by aligning their common relational
structure, highlighting commonalities and differences. For
example, suppose SME is comparing two shapes like the
one in Figure 3A. Each representation will contain entities
(symbols representing each edge), attributes (features of the
edges, such as straight vs. curved), first-order relations
between edges (e.g., indicating that a corner between edges
is convex), and higher-order relations between other
relations (e.g., indicating that two corners are adjacent along
the shape). By aligning the common relations, SME can
determine the corresponding edges in the two shapes.

Model

Modeling in CogSketch CogSketch possesses two key
features that support modeling psychological experiments.
First, in addition to sketching by hand, users can import
shapes from another program such as PowerPoint. Perfectly
straight line drawings from an experiment can be replicated
in PowerPoint and imported into CogSketch, providing it
with the same stimuli as those shown to human participants.
Second, CogSketch includes a Spatial Routines language
for writing cognitive models. Spatial Routines, which builds
on Ullman’s (1984) concept of visual routines, provides
modelers with a set of cognitive operations. These include
visual perception, visual comparison, and spatial
transformation operations. Modelers can parameterize these
operations and combine them in different ways to produce a
spatial routine. Each routine is both a theoretical model of
how people perform a task and a fully automated
computational model. The computational model can be run
on visual stimuli, and its performance can be compared to
human responses to evaluate the theoretical model.
We have previously modeled visual problem-solving
tasks such as geometric analogy (Lovett & Forbus, 2012),
Raven’s Progressive Matrices (Lovett, Forbus, & Usher,
2010), and an oddity task (Lovett & Forbus, 2011).

The spatial ability model is built within CogSketch, a sketch
understanding system. Below, we present CogSketch and its
framework for cognitive modeling. We then describe how
the model performs mental rotation and paper-folding.

CogSketch
CogSketch is an open-domain sketch understanding system
(Forbus et al., 2011). Users sketch a scene by drawing one
or more objects. It is the user’s responsibility to manually
segment a sketch into objects, indicating when they have
finished drawing one object and begun on the next.
Given a set of objects, CogSketch automatically generates
a representation of the scene. While CogSketch does not
model the process of visual perception, its representations
are a model of those produced by human perception. The
representations are based on two psychological claims: 1)
Spatial representations include a qualitative or categorical
component and a quantitative or metric component
(Kosslyn et al., 1989; Forbus, et al 1991). When possible,
people use the qualitative component during reasoning.
CogSketch computes qualitative spatial relations between
objects, e.g., indicating that one object is right of another or
that two objects intersect. 2) Spatial representations are
hierarchical, meaning they can represent a scene at different
levels of abstraction (Palmer, 1977; Marr & Nishihara,
1978). CogSketch can represent objects and the relations
between them, or it can represent the edges of an individual
object and the relations between those edges. To produce an
edge-level representation, CogSketch segments an object’s
contour into edges at points of maximum curvature (e.g.,
Figure 3A; Lovett et al., 2012). Once edges have been

A)

B)

Mental Rotation
We modeled a classic sequential mental rotation task
because it presents the clearest evidence for efficient,
holistic rotation. In this task (Figure 1B; Cooper &
Podogny, 1976), participants are presented with three
stimuli in sequence: 1) They see the base shape. 2) They see
an arrow indicating what the target shape’s orientation will
be. They are encouraged to mentally rotate the base shape to
that orientation and press a button when they are done. 3)
They see the target shape, and they indicate whether it is the
same as the rotated base shape. The amount of time
participants spend on step 2) indicates the rotation time. The
key finding of the experiment was that rotation time did not
increase as the shape complexity increased from a 6-sided

C)

Figure 3. A: Shape segmented into edges. B: Result of
Gaussian smoothing. C: Result of selecting 4 longest edges.

932

polygon to a 24-sided polygon. Our model is designed to
evaluate whether spatial smoothing can explain this finding.

was given a solid gray fill (CogSketch can recognize
elements by their color). CogSketch was given three
objects: the unfolded cube and the two arrows pointing to
the critical edges.

Input In CogSketch, sequences of images can be input
using a sketch lattice, a grid which divides the sketch space.
For this model, we used a three-cell lattice to represent the
three phases of each experimental trial. Stimuli were
reproduced in PowerPoint. The experimenters traced over
images of the original stimuli, ensuring that the number of
sides in the new polygons was the same as in the original.

Representations This model required the development of a
new representational level: surfaces. Surfaces are closed
shapes making up the sides of three-dimensional objects.
Each square of the unfolded cube is a separate surface.
Surfaces can be computed easily using CogSketch’s existing
ability to find closed cycles of edges.
This model does not need to find corresponding elements,
so it requires only quantitative representations. Each surface
is represented with: 1) The location of its center. Locations
are now in three-dimensional space, unlike with the
previous model. 2) Its orientation, i.e., the orientation of a
vector orthogonal to the surface. Three-dimensional
orientations are unit vectors containing (x, y, z)
components, unlike the single value required for two
dimensions. 3) A list of edges going around the surface.
Each edge has its own individual location and orientation.
Three-dimensional rotations are performed about an axis
in three-dimensional space. For example, in Figure 2B,
surfaces A, B, and C are rotated about the edge connecting
surface A to the base of the cube.

Representations CogSketch uses edge-level representations
to perform two-dimensional shape transformations and
comparisons. The qualitative edge-level representations
describe spatial relations between edges, as summarized
above. The quantitative representation includes for each
edge: 1) The location of its center. 2) Its two-dimensional
orientation. 3) Its length. 4) Its curvature.
When a shape is scaled, rotated, or reflected, each
individual edge is transformed. This has little effect on the
qualitative representation, but it can change each of the four
features in the quantitative representation.
Shapes are compared in a two-step process. 1) Qualitative
representations are compared using the Structure-Mapping
Engine. This identifies the corresponding edges in the two
shapes. 2) Each corresponding edge pair’s four quantitative
values are compared. If every pair is quantitatively the
same, the shapes are identical.

Strategy Given a stimulus, the model segments the object
into edges and surfaces. Using the arrows, it identifies the
two critical edges and their associated surfaces. In Figure
1D, the critical surfaces are the base of the cube and surface
C. It folds each critical surface back into the cube shape via
two spatial operations: 1) Trace along adjacent surfaces
from the critical surface to the base surface. For surface C,
this would produce the following trace: C->B->A->base. 2)
Rotate 90° about the edge between surfaces in the reverse
trace order. First rotate surface A about the edge between
the base and surface A. Because surfaces B and C are
connected to A, they will also be rotated (Figure 2B). Next,
rotate surface B about the edge between surfaces A and B.
Because C is connected, it will also be rotated. And so on.
The model performs these two operations on each critical
surface. In Figure 1D, the second critical surface is not
rotated because it is already the base. The model takes the
resulting shape and evaluates whether the two critical edges
are aligned, i.e., have the same location and orientation.

Strategy Given a stimulus such as Figure 1B, the model
automatically constructs an edge-level representation of
each shape. It detects the orientation of the arrow and rotates
the base (leftmost) shape accordingly. It then compares the
rotated base shape to the target shape to determine whether
they are identical.
Spatial Smoothing Recall that scalable representations
allow two forms of spatial smoothing: spatial detail may be
smoothed out, or certain types of spatial information may be
removed entirely. There are many possible ways to smooth
data, e.g. apply a Gaussian filter to the entire shape (Figure
3B). Such an approach would lose critical information about
the nature of the edges making up the object. Here, we use
a simple sampling strategy: we remove all but the four
longest edges (Figure 3C). This operation produces
representations of equal size for all shapes, regardless of
their initial complexity, which is what we desire.
The quantitative representations contain four types of
spatial information. We propose that spatial smoothing
might remove three, leaving only a single type. In our
evaluation, we test whether the task can be performed using
only edge locations or using only edge orientations.

Spatial Smoothing In this task, the location and orientation
of most edges is irrelevant to the task; only the two critical
edges matter. If an edge lies along only one surface, it can
be ignored. If an edge lies between two surfaces (e.g., the
edge between surfaces A and B), it is important for
determining the axis of rotation. However, because this task
involves perfectly regular square shapes, a heuristic can be
used: when rotating between two surfaces, place the axis of
rotation halfway between the surfaces’ centers, and orient it
within the plane of those surfaces, perpendicular to the line
connecting their centers. Due to this heuristic, all edges can
be ignored except the two critical edges.

Paper Folding
We modeled the paper-folding task shown in Figure 1D.
Input Each paper-folding stimulus was recreated in
PowerPoint. The square representing the base of the cube

933

This means the following is being considered: the location
and orientation of each rotated surface (and of the base), and
the location and orientation of each critical edge. It may be
possible, again, to consider only the location or orientation
of the critical edges. However, both a surface’s location and
its orientation must be used in computing axes of rotation.

all other edges were ignored. This proved sufficient for
solving all problems—the model correctly distinguished
between matches and nonmatches. Furthermore, when only
edge orientations or only edge locations were used to
compare the critical edges, either was sufficient.

Discussion

Simulation

Having successfully modeled both tasks, we can now
consider how much data must be transformed to perform
mental rotation and paper-folding. The mental rotation
model required only four values: the orientations or
locations of the four longest edges.
Now, suppose the model were rotating two surfaces
during paper-folding. This would require five values: the
location and orientation of the two surfaces, and the location
or orientation of the critical edge. Furthermore, these values
are three-dimensional, whereas the mental rotation values
were two-dimensional. In the computational model, threedimensional values are far more complex—for example, an
orientation is a vector with (x, y, z) components. Spatial
data is likely implemented differently in the brain, but there
still may be increased processing demands for three
dimensions (see Jolicoeur et al., 1985 for a discussion; but
see Shepard & Metzler, 1988).
These results support our initial hypothesis. Rotation rate
appears to depend less on shape complexity than on the
degree and type of detail required by the task. Paper-folding
requires that more information be transformed, even when
only two surfaces are being rotated and the surfaces are
perfect squares. We propose that paper-folding overwhelms
people’s spatial working memory, forcing them to rotate
one surface at a time in a piecemeal fashion.

Mental Rotation
The original experiment (Cooper & Podogny, 1976) used
five base shapes which varied in complexity from a 6-sided
figure to a 24-sided figure. On each trial, participants were
cued to rotate shapes some multiple of 60° using the rotated
arrow. They were then presented with a target shape at the
new orientation. This could be: a) the same shape; b) a
mirror-reflected shape; or c) a shape with some of the points
permuted from the base shape. While distractors of type b)
are commonly used, the distractors of type c) were added to
test how carefully participants were rotating the shapes.
In this simulation, we ran the model on all six base
shapes. However, we used only a single rotation value (60°),
and only the mirror-reflected distractors. The single rotation
was used because other rotations are mathematically
equivalent and should not place additional demands on the
model. The mirror-reflected distractors were used because
they are the most common distractors found across different
mental rotation tasks. In Future Work, we consider the
challenge of recognizing permuted distractors.
Results Recall that the model spatially smoothed each
shape, removing all but the four longest edges. This proved
sufficient for recognizing that same shapes were the same
and mirror-reflected shapes were different. Furthermore,
when only edge orientations or only edge locations were
used, either was sufficient for performing the task. We can
conclude that when the distractors are sufficiently different,
very little information must be rotated to perform mental
rotation, and the complexity of the shapes is irrelevant.

Conclusions and Future Work
This paper demonstrates how visual stimuli can be encoded,
transformed, and compared. The computational model
builds on existing cognitive models of visual representation
and comparison. While we wish to avoid strong conclusions
about how spatial information is represented and
transformed in the brain, the model provides valuable
information on the constraints of the modeled tasks.
In particular, the model suggests much of the spatial detail
in a shape can be ignored during transformation. The detail
needed depends on the task. In a task like mental rotation,
where a single transformation is applied to all edges, very
little detail is required. In a task like paper-folding, where
the results of one rotation determine the axis for the next
rotation, more detail must be carried through each
transformation. Of course, even in mental rotation more
detail will be required as the distractors become more
similar to the shapes being rotated (Folk & Luce, 1987;
Yuille & Steiger, 1982).
These findings are important for understanding spatial
ability. Fast, holistic spatial transformations require spatial
smoothing. Thus, a key component of spatial ability must be
spatial abstraction: the ability to identify and encode critical
spatial details while ignoring irrelevant features.

Paper-Folding
Shepard and Feng (1972) identify ten different classes of
paper-folding problems, based on the number of folds and
the number of squares per fold. For example, Figure 1D is a
class I problem, in which 3 + 2 +1 squares must be rotated
for one critical edge and no squares must be rotated for the
other. Their paper provides one example of each class.
In this simulation, we ran the model on the single
example of each class. Other instances of a class are
mathematically equivalent. As in the original study, there
was one nonmatch problem (where folding did not cause the
critical edges to align) for each match problem. Nonmatch
problems were created by randomly rotating an arrow so
that it pointed to an adjacent edge in the same square.
Results Recall that the model rotated each surface’s center
and orientation. The two critical edges were rotated also, but

934

Questions remain about how skilled rotators perform
spatial abstraction. The present approach of selecting the
four longest edges, while effective, is only one heuristic.
Others might include studying the distractors to determine
which parts of a shape are most diagnostic (Yuille &
Steiger, 1982) and segmenting shapes into larger-scale parts
(Hoffman & Richards, 1984). In the future, we would like to
study a larger stimulus set with distractors that vary in their
similarity to the base shapes (Cooper & Podogny, 1976;
Folk & Luce, 1987). By evaluating different spatial
smoothing heuristics in the model, we can better understand
the skills supporting spatial abstraction and spatial ability.

spatial representations: Hemispheric specialization for
categorical and coordinate relations. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: H P & P, 15, 723-735.
Lovett, A., & Forbus, K. (2012). Modeling multiple
strategies
for
solving
geometric
analogy
problems. Proceedings of CogSci ’12.
Lovett, A., & Forbus, K. (2011). Cultural commonalities
and differences in spatial problem-solving: A
computational analysis. Cognition, 121(2), 281-287.
Lovett, A., Forbus, K., & Usher, J. (2010). A structuremapping
model
of
Raven's
Progressive
Matrices. Proceedings of CogSci ’10.
Lovett, A., Kandaswamy, S., McLure, M., & Forbus, K.
(2012). Evaluating qualitative models of shape
representation. Proceedings of QR’12.
Marr, D., & Nishihara, H. K. (1978). Representation and
recognition of the spatial organization of threedimensional shapes. Philosophical Transactions of the
Royal Society of London, Series B, Biological Science,
200(1140), 269-294.
McGee, M. G. (1979). Human spatial abilities:
Psychometric studies and environmental, genetic,
hormonal, and neurological influences. Psychological
Bulletin, 86(5), 889-918.
Palmer, S. E. (1977). Hierarchical structure in perceptual
representation. Cognitive Psychology, 9, 441-474.
Schultheis, H., & Barkowsky, T. (2011). Casimir: An
architecture for mental spatial knowledge processing.
Topics in Cognitive Science, 3(4), 778-795.
Shea, D.L., Lubinski, D., & Benbow, C.P. (2001).
Importance of assessing spatial ability in intellectually
talented young adolescents: A 20-year longitudinal study.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 93, 604–614.
Shepard, R. S., & Cooper, L. A. (1982). Mental Images and
their Transformations. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Shepard, R. N., & Feng, C. (1972). A chronometric study of
mental paper folding. Cognitive Psychology, 3, 228-243.
Shepard, S., & Metzler, J. (1988). Mental rotation: Effects
of dimensionality of objects and type of task. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception &
Performance, 14(1): 3-11.
Shepard, R. N., & Metzler, J. (1971). Mental rotation of
three-dimensional objects. Science, 171(3972), 701-703.
Ullman, S. (1984). Visual routines. Cognition, 18, 97-159.
Vandenberg, S. G., & Kuse, A. R. (1978). Mental rotations:
A group test of three-dimensional spatial visualization.
Perceptual and Motor Skills, 47, 599-601.
Wai, J., Lubinski, D., & Benbow, C. (2009). Spatial ability
for STEM domains: Aligning over 50 years of cumulative
psychological knowledge solidifies its importance.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 101(4), 817-835.
Wright, R., Thompson, W. L., Ganis, G., Newcombe, N. S.,
& Kosslyn, S. M. (2008). Training generalized spatial
skills. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 15(4), 763-771.
Yuille, J. C., & Steiger, J. H. (1982). Nonholistic processing
in mental rotation: Some suggestive evidence. Perception
& Psychophysics, 31(3), 201-209.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NSF SLC Grant SBE-0541957,
the Spatial Intelligence and Learning Center (SILC).

References
Bethell-Fox, C. E., & Shepard, R. N. (1988). Mental
rotation: Effects of stimulus complexity and familiarity.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
& Performance, 14(1), 12-23.
Cooper, L., & Podgorny, P. (1976). Mental transformations
and visual comparison processes: Effects of complexity
and similarity. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception & Performance, 2(4), 503-514.
Ekstrom, R. B., French, J. W., Harman, H. H., & Derman,
D. (1976). Manual for Kit of Factor-Referenced Cognitive
Tests. Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Services.
Falkenhainer, B., Forbus, K., & Gentner, D. (1989). The
structure
mapping
engine:
Algorithm
and
examples. Artificial Intelligence, 41, 1-63.
Folk, M. D., & Luce, R. D. (1987). Effects of stimulus
complexity on mental rotation rate of polygons. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception &
Performance, 13(3), 395-404.
Forbus, K., Nielsen, P., & Faltings, B. (1991). Qualitative
spatial reasoning: The CLOCK project. Artificial
Intelligence, 51(1-3), 417-471.
Forbus, K., Usher, J., Lovett, A., Lockwood, K., & Wetzel,
J. (2011). CogSketch: Sketch understanding for cognitive
science research and for education. TopiCS, 3(4), 648-666.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Heil, M., & Jansen-Osmann, P. (2008). Sex differences in
mental rotation with polygons of different complexity: Do
men utilize holistic processes whereas women prefer
piecemeal ones? The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 61(5), 683-689.
Hoffman, D. D., & Richards, W. A. (1984). Parts of
recognition. Cognition, 8(1–3), 65–96.
Jolicoeur, P., Regehr, S., Smith, L., & Smith G. N. (1985).
Mental rotation of representations of two-dimensional and
three-dimensional objects. Canadian Journal of
Psychology, 39(1), 100-129.
Kosslyn, S. M., Koenig, O., Barrett, A., Cave, C. B., Tang,
J., & Gabrieli, J. D. E. (1989). Evidence for two types of

935

