UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Modeling the Development of Determiner Productivity in Children's Early Speech

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2ds4h2zz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Meylan, Stephan
Frank, Michael
Levy, Roger

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Modeling the Development of Determiner Productivity in Children’s Early Speech
Stephan Meylan

Michael C. Frank

Roger Levy

smeylan@berkeley.edu
Department of Psychology
University of California, Berkeley

mcfrank@stanford.edu
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

rlevy@ucsd.edu
Department of Linguistics
University of California, San Diego
Noun Phrase

Abstract
The English definite and indefinite articles (also known as determiners) are a useful index of early morphosyntactic productivity in children’s speech, and give evidence about children’s representation of syntactic abstractions. Previous work
(i.e. Pine & Lieven, 1997) used a measure of productivity that
shows a strong sensitivity to sample size and does not account
for the relationship between adult input and children’s learning. In this paper, we develop a more robust metric by employing a hierarchical Bayesian model to characterize the degree of generalization implicit in observed determiner usage.
By inferring parameters for a generative model over longitudinal corpora, we measure the trajectory of grammatical category
abstraction. Our results are consistent with the hypothesis that
child learners exhibit adult-like patterns of generalization quite
early in the acquisition of determiners.
Keywords: grammatical productivity; development; syntax;
morphosyntax; modeling

Introduction
How do children begin to use the rich combinatorial structure of language to express novel thoughts? Nativist accounts
propose an innate specification of syntactic categories that allow the child learner to exploit regularities in language structure from birth (Valian, 1986). Constructivist theories, on
the other hand, contend that abstract categorical knowledge
is built up over time as the child learner generalizes from specific usages to form broader combinatorial rules (Tomasello,
2003). The indefinite determiner “a” and the definite determiner “the”—the shortest and most frequent words in the English language—are a locus of interest for both theoretical
viewpoints. Because they are both frequent and obligatory,
determiners are an early index of morphosyntactic1 productivity that can be observed cross-linguistically.
A context-free grammar production rule (Figure 1) captures the intuition that a noun phrase can be created by choosing a determiner from the abstract DET category and a noun
from the abstract N category. This noun phrase in turn combines with other phrase structures, like a verb phrase or preposition, to form higher-order structures. For most singular
nouns, a grammatical NP can be formed using either determiner. Furthermore, hearing a novel word with one determiner suggests that use with the the other is also likely grammatical. Hearing someone introduce “a blickmoo” for the
first time, you would not hesitate to request “the blickmoo”
even if you had never heard that sequence of words before.
1 In English, determiners and nouns are separate words by linguistic criteria (e.g. an adjective may come between a determiner
and a noun). Many other languages use determiners that are morphologically integrated with the noun (see Kramsky, 1972 for an
overview).

Determiner
{a, the}

Noun

{cat, dog, baby,
ground, dialectic,
tuxedo, [. . .] }

Figure 1: Many noun phrases can be created by combining a word from the abstract categories determiner and noun
(NP→DET+N). It is an open question whether children’s
early representations are organized around these abstractions.

When do children share that same judgment? Valian
(1986) showed that children between 2;0 and 2;6 demonstrate
a variety of productive syntactic categories, including determiners. Using a distributional analysis of children’s speech,
she found that determiners were used in a fashion consistent
with an adult-like grammar. Determiners were never used as
the sole content of an utterance, never appeared in a sentencefinal position, and were always sequenced correctly with respect to adjectives and nouns in noun phrases.
Pine & Lieven (1997) challenged Valian’s assertion of
adult-like grammatical productivity in children’s speech by
citing an apparent limit to productivity in determiner use. As
a quantitative metric, Pine and Lieven presented the overlap measure for determiners: the number of nouns used with
both determiners (in some sample), divided by the number
of nouns used with either (in the same sample). For 11 children from 1;0 to 3;0 this proportion ranged from 0 to .23,
which Pine and Lieven interpreted as being extremely low
for a speaker with productive determiner syntax. Rather than
making full use of the combinatorial productivity of nouns
and determiners, on this metric children thus seemed to be
very conservative in their productions and to show a strong
tendency to use nouns with only a single determiner. Pine
and Lieven interpreted this finding as supporting item-based
theories of learning in which there is only gradual generalization from individual instances to abstractions like DET.
Valian et al. (2009) objected that Pine & Lieven (1997)
failed to take noun frequency into account in considering determiner use. Because the overlap measure is necessarily 0
for all nouns that appear only once, Valian and colleagues
argued that the overlap measure, especially when calculated
over small datasets, under-represents productivity. Highly
frequent nouns were much more likely to be used with both
determiners: more than 80% of nouns used at least 6 times
were used with both “a” and “the.” Our own analyses of the
Providence corpus (Demuth & McCullough, 2009) confirm

3032

ν

0.20

Island
Learner

1

0

3

2

Complete
Overgeneralization

∞

5

4

200

500 1000

100

200

500 1000

20

50

100

200

500 1000

Word Tokens in the Sample

Figure 2: Determiner overlap (proportion of nouns used with
both “a” and “the”) increases as a function of the number of
tokens in a speech sample, as seen from CHILDES files for 4
children from the Providence corpus. Dashed and solid lines
show loess smoothers for the child and parent respectively.

3.0

2.0

2.0
0.0

0.10
50

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Proportion The

0.00

0.00

0.10

0.0

20

1.0

100

1.0

=4
μ =.5

0.0

50

1.0

20

0.0

500 1000

= 2.5
μ =.5

2.0

3.0

200

= .2
μ = .5

1.0

Relative Density

0.00
100

0.20

50

3.0

0.10

0.10
0.00
20

0.20

Overlap Measure

0.20

child
parent

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Proportion The

1.0

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Proportion The

Figure 3: Interpretation of the ν parameter, a concise metric of grammatical productivity. At low values of ν, little or
no information is shared between nouns. At higher ν values,
nouns exhibit more consistent usage as a class, indicating the
existence of a productive DET+N rule.

Metric Model

this issue: overlap is deeply confounded with sample size.
Sample size is the best predictor of both child and parent overlap, regardless of age (Figure 2).
Yang (2010) supplemented this argument by showing
that—regardless of sample size—the overlap measure is necessarily low because of the Zipfian distribution of noun frequencies. The Zipfian frequency distribution of nouns results
in a long tail of words seen only once, so if overlap is calculated as the proportion of nouns seen with both determiners,
it will necessarily be low. Yang additionally observed that
nouns vary in their determiner preference (e.g., “the bathroom” is more frequent than “a bathroom”, but “a bath” is
more frequent than “the bath”), unlike the simplest probabilistic instantiation of a productive context-free rule scheme
as in Figure 1, where the probabilities of Determiner→”the”
and Determiner→”a” would be independent of the noun’s
identity (Booth, 1969).
But while the overlap statistic is flawed, there is currently
no replacement that directly measures the productivity of
children’s determiner use. Hence, in the current study, we develop a novel method for quantifying determiner productivity.
We use a hierarchical Bayesian model to estimate adults’ and
children’s determiner productivity (metric model) and then
develop a variant that estimates the linkage between adult input and child generalization (linking model). In each model,
one key parameter can be interpreted as a graded metric of
productivity robust to variation in sample size and noun frequency distribution. Bayesian inference gives us the posterior
distribution of this parameter given child and adult caregiver
production data, allowing us to quantify determiner productivity and examine its developmental timecourse.

We model the use of each determiner with a noun as a draw
from a binomial distribution (a single weighted coin flip).
The use of “the” is heads, and the use of “a,” tails. The idiosyncratic determiner preference for each noun can thus be
thought of as a coin’s weighting, ranging from zero (a noun
used only with “a”) to one (a noun used only with “the”).
We model variability in noun-specific determiner preferences
by assuming some distribution underlying these preferences;
specifically, we assume that each noun’s preference is drawn
from a beta distribution with mean µ0 (the underlying “average” preference across all nouns) and scale ν, giving us a
hierarchical beta-binomial model (Gelman et al., 2004).2
The scale parameter ν in our model plays a central role in
quantifying cross-noun variability and thus gives us a continuous space in which to quantify learner productivity (Figure 3). At one end of the range, when ν = 0, we have an
extreme “island” learner for whom every noun is produced
with only one determiner or the other. At the other end of
the spectrum, as ν approaches infinity, we have an extreme
over-generalizer who has identical determiner preference for
all nouns. The ν parameter thus establishes a continuum on
which we can place constructivist and nativist hypotheses.
By estimating values of µ and ν for individual children
over the course of their development, we can examine how
these parameters change, potentially reflecting developmental changes in productivity. Here we use the metric model to
compare mother and child productivity for the six children in
the Providence corpus (Demuth & McCullough, 2009).

Model Details
A full graphical model representation of the linking model is
shown on the left side of Figure 4. We assume that data d
2 Many readers may be more familiar with the more common parameterization of the beta distribution in terms of shape parameters
α = µν and β = (1 − µ)ν.

3033

1.0

Metric Model
α

αη

α

µ0

ν : Degree of dispersion in determiner preference
α: Uninformative priors over ν and µ 0
η : Noise parameter downweighting observed data
α η : Uniformative prior over η

Linking Model

ν

µ0

ν

µ

µ i : Idiosyncratic determiner preferences for each of M noun types
di : Observed determiner-noun pairs (N pairs)

η

Metric Model
µ i ~ Beta( µ 0 ν , (1 − µ 0 )ν )
di ~ Bern( µ i )

µ

d

dC

dA
NA

N

M

Linking Model
µ i ~ Beta( µ 0 ν + ηr iA , (1 − µ 0 )ν + η(N iA − r iA ))
N iA : total number of instances of the ith noun with “a” or “the”
r iA : no. of successes (observances of the) for the ith noun
dCi ~ Bern( µ Ci )
dAi ~ Bern( µ Ai )

NC

M

Figure 4: Graphical representations of the metric and linking model. Shaded nodes indicate observed data (determiner-noun
productions) or uninformative priors set by the researcher.
(individual determiner observations) are generated as draws
from a binomial with parameter µi for each of M noun types.
These parameters are in turn drawn from a beta distribution
with parameters µ0 and ν. The µ0 parameter describes the
overall mean determiner preference, and the ν parameter—
the central target of inference—describes the degree to which
individual noun preferences vary around the overall average
µ0 . We complete the model via an uninformative prior distribution over µ0 and ν.
Given a sample of determiner-noun pairings, we can use
Bayesian inference to produce full posteriors over µ and ν.
In practice, we perform inference using Gibbs sampling via
the JAGS package (Plummer, 2003); grid-sampling of posterior distributions and trace plots confirmed good convergence
properties (see also the Appendix).

Corpus Selection and Extraction
The Providence corpus (Demuth et al., 2006) consists of longitudinal in-home recordings from six children from New
England and contains a relatively high density sample from
the onset of single words at about 1;3 to 3;0. Utterances from
each child and their mother were extracted from CHILDESformatted transcripts (MacWhinney, 2000) and augmented
with a machine-generated syntax tier in CLAN (Sagae et
al., 2010). Using these syntactic trees, we automatically extracted modifiers associated with each noun, as well as their
part of speech. For the model input, noun uses were subset to those with a definite or indefinite determiner, yielding
5 − 15 × 103 age-referenced DET+N tokens for the mothers
and 1.5 − 5 × 103 for the children.
For each mother and child, we performed a sliding-window
analysis, examining successively older subsections of the corpus. On the basis of artificial corpus simulations (see Appendix), a window size of 1024 tokens was selected. On a
linear sequence of tokens, each new window contained 10
new tokens from the full dataset and omitted the earliest 10.

This method yielded on average 150 measures of determiner
productivity for each speaker. Additionally, an overlap measure was calculated for each 1024 token window according to
the procedure described in Pine & Lieven (1997).

Results and Discussion
An item-based learning theory predicts a developmental increase in children’s generalization across nouns (as measured
by ν) as individual item-based constructions give way to a
general production rule. In contrast, a theory positing full
morphosyntactic productivity predicts no major difference in
generalization over development; instead, children and parents will show the same level of productivity from early on.
Our sliding window analysis reveals no clear developmental trend in children’s productivity (Figure 5), consistent with
the early productivity account. For both the adult and the
child, individual conversational bouts show high variance, but
ν values for the children are as higher or higher than those
in the speech of their mothers, and children exhibit adult-like
peaks of noun groupedness from the beginning of production.
Nevertheless, for several of the children (e.g. William, Ethan,
Violet), it is clear that the amount of data is not sufficient to
allow the temporal granularity for a strong test.
Although it gives similar results to the overlap statistic, the
ν parameter in our model is preferable. While the overlap
measure is confounded by sample size (see above), additional
data only improves our estimate of ν. Posterior inference
gives an explicit representation of the model’s uncertainty in
a data set, making it readily apparent when the sample size is
too small to estimate model parameters.
This property of the model allows us to note that the variability in the estimates of productivity for adults and children
seem to be quite reliable. In both cases, there is substantial
variability that is not explained by the child’s age. We hypothesize that this variability is due to the changing conversational and discourse dynamics between recordings in the

3034

Figure 5: Sliding window analysis results. The metric model shows no clear developmental trend in children’s productivity, nor
a major difference in productivity between children and their mothers. On the left, black points and vertical gray bars represent
the mean of the posterior and the 95% highest posterior density interval on ν; horizontal gray bars show the temporal extent of
the window used in the model at each point.
corpus, leading to the introduction by chance of many nouns
with similar or dissimilar determiner preferences in context.
Denser data will be needed, however, to test this hypothesis
more fully.

Linking Model
Although the metric model’s results are suggestive of productivity from the earliest ages of children’s determiner production, several aspects of the metric model limit the strength
of the conclusions we can draw from it. First, the model
fails to control for differences in the distribution of nouns for
which determiners are produced by the speaker. For example, if children’s determiner-noun productions disproportionately involve high-frequency nouns compared with adult productions, and if higher-frequency nouns tend to have more
balanced determiner preference, it would inflate the metric
model’s estimate of children’s productivity.
Additionally, an advocate of the island-learner position
could justly point out that a child might produce relatively
equal numbers of both determiners for a given noun Y—
which disfavors low values of ν—not due to generalization
but because the child has learned both “a Y” and “the Y”
as islands from the input. Our linking model remedies these
shortcomings by explicitly linking the determiner preference
for child productions of a given noun to the experience the
child has had with that noun in input from the caregiver. In
the linking model, ν more directly represents the strength of
a child’s generalization across nouns: as ν approaches zero,
we have a true island learner whose productions for a given
noun reflect only experience with that noun from adult input;

as ν approaches infinity, we have a true overgeneralizer for
whom noun-specific variabilty in determiner frequencies in
input are completely ignored. While it allows for a more nuanced picture of the relationship between a child’s input and
his or her productions, the linking model does not allow us to
compare measures of adult and child productivity directly; in
this sense it is complementary to the metric model.

Model Details
The generative structure for the linking model is given on the
right side of Figure 4. As before, we assume a hierarchical beta-binomial model linking different noun-specific determiner preferences together into a general determiner preference with mean µ0 and scale ν. Here, however, adult determiner productions d A for a given noun in the child’s input
contribute explicitly to the child’s determiner preference µ for
that noun. We formalize the effect of the input on the child’s
determiner preference by assuming that the child acts as an
ideal observer. Adult input for a given noun serves as binomial count observations, which the child combines with its
beta-prior pseudocounts to yield Bayesian inference on the
posterior distribution over the determiner preference for that
noun.3 We allow adult input to be downweighted by a “for3 Note, however, that while the linking model contains an idealobserver component, it is not an ideal-observer model in its totality.
Most critically, µ0 and ν are not learned by the child from adult data,
but rather reflect the relationship between adult input and the child’s
productions. In principle, the child’s productions can even be highly
discrepant from the adult input, if ν is large and µ0 does not match
the overall distribution of adult determiner use. Conversely, if the
posterior on µ0 is a close match to adult determiner use, it suggests

3035

Figure 6: Linking model results for inference on ν (left) and simulated vs. empirical overlap measure (right). Black points
and vertical gray bars represent the mean of the posterior and the 95% highest posterior density interval on ν, respectively.
Horizontal gray bars express the temporal extent of the window used to fit the model at each point.
getting” or “noise” parameter η, motivated not only theoretically from the consideration that a child is unlikely to be able
to store and learn with perfect fidelity from every determinernoun production in its input, but also empirically: without it,
it is hard for even an extreme island learner version of our
model to reproduce a pattern sometimes seen in our dataset,
where the determiner distribution for a given noun will be relatively balanced for the adult but highly skewed for the child.

simulated determiner productions for the specific noun distribution in that window, and comparing the overlap measure
for the simulated data with the empirical overlap measure in
that window. For nearly all windows of all children, empirical
overlap falls within the range of simulated overlaps, validating the model’s overall fit to the data (Figure 6, right).

Dataset, Results and Discussion

We constructed two models to quantify the productivity in
children’s early determiner usage and to compare this to that
of their mothers. These models instantiated a statistical tradeoff between memorization of the observed data (“island learning”) and extreme generalization. Results from both models
suggested that the children in our sample were neither extreme generalizers nor extreme island learners. Contra the
constructivist hypothesis, neither model provided clear evidence for developmental change in children’s generalization
behavior over time, and by the summary measure of productivity furnished by the metric model their speech was not
quantitatively distinguished from that of their parents. Yet
contra the full-productivity nativist hypothesis, there is clear
evidence for item-specific combinatorial preferences between
determiners and nouns (ν values are relatively low in the metric model; compare Figures 3 and 5) and that children are at
least somewhat sensitive to the specifics of adult input (ν values are low in the linking model).
Nevertheless, while the current results are consistent with
early productivity, our modeling work leaves unaddressed a
number of issues that both preclude a conclusive judgment
in this debate thus far and also point the way towards future
work. As we alluded to when introducing the linking model,
it is difficult to rule out the possibility that apparently “productive” determiner behavior for a given noun may reflect the
child’s having learned both determiners with that noun as is-

We used the same window size (1024 tokens) as for the metric
model for a sliding window analysis using the linking model,
but used all parent data up to and including the period of child
usages for each window. Results of the linking model indicate that children generalize beyond the input that they receive (Figure 6, left), though there is some evidence of variation across children in generalization strength: the weakest
generalizer, Alex, shows a ν around 0.6, and the strongest
generalizer, William at the latest stage in our dataset, shows a
ν around 2.3 Posterior means for η varied between 0.071 and
0.599, with substantial variation between children; posterior
means for µ0 varied between 0.145 and 0.717. As with the
metric model, we observed no evidence for a developmental
trend from lesser to greater generalization: while some children (Ethan, Violet, William) seem to show a trend toward
increasing ν over time, other children (Naima, Alex) show no
directional trend, and one child (Lily) has a decreasing trend.
Finally, although we have argued that the overlap measure
is not useful for quantifying productivity across sample sizes,
we can use it as a goodness-of-fit metric for our model within
a sample. We do this by using the adult data and the joint
posterior of the fitted model for each window to generated
that the child is indeed generalizing from adult productions across
nouns in his or her production behavior.

General Discussion

3036

lands. This difficulty is compounded by the fact that though
the Providence corpus is extensive, it still records only a small
fraction of the total adult input each child in the corpus has
received. In the future this difficulty may be addressed by
more complete datasets; additionally, our model could be
extended by allowing imputation of unrecorded adult data,
which would allow our uncertainty regarding the content of
this input to be incorporated into inferences about productivity in child behavior.
A second challenge is that an advocate of the fullgeneralization position could reasonably object that nounspecific determiner preferences in child productions that mirror adult input may be driven by other factors to which both
adults and children are sensitive in determiner production,
such as referential context (e.g., Maratsos, 1979; KarmiloffSmith, 1981). Our model could be extended to account
for these effects by conditioning determiner probabilities not
only on noun identity but also on other contextual factors recoverable from corpus data; this move might allow a richer
investigation of the developmental trajectory of how these aspects of the knowledge underlying fully proficient determiner
deteminer use are learned and used in naturalistic production.
The gold standard for demonstrating the existence of productive knowledge of determiner syntax would, of course, be
the combination of a novel noun with determiners that the
child has not yet heard used with that noun. Regardless of
the outcome of such a study, however, we believe that our
probabilistic, data-driven approach would retain potential to
advance our understanding of how linguistic knowledge develops. The modeling framework presented here provides an
alternative to the extreme positions of all memorization or all
generalization embodied by constructivist and nativist viewpoints. Although our model contained many simplifying assumptions, including not only those mentioned above but also
the restriction to two determiners, it has given initial traction
in measuring how experience from local episodes may lead
to global generalizations. For the problem of determiner productivity, the simplifying assumptions can be relaxed one by
one; and the general architecture can be applied to study a
broad range of phenomena beyond the development of determiners, such as the emergence of plural markings and other
morphological generalizations. We hope that exploring the
space of models that combine the best features of both islandand generalizing-learner accounts may lead to new insights
into the emergence of productive language.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to the members of the Language and Cognition Lab at
Stanford and the Concepts and Cognition Lab at UC Berkeley for valuable discussion. This material is based upon work
supported by the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship under Grant No. DGE-1106400.

References
Booth, T. L. (1969). Probabilistic representation of formal languages. In IEEE conference record of the 1969 tenth annual sym-

posium on switching and automata theory (pp. 74–81).
Demuth, K., Culbertson, J., & Alter, J. (2006). Word-minimality,
epenthesis, and coda licensing in the acquisition of english
(Vol. 49).
Demuth, K., & McCullough, E.
(2009).
The prosodic
(re)organization of children’s early english articles. J. of Child
Language, 36, 173–200.
Frank, M. C., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Gibson, E. (2013). Learning
and long-term retention of large-scale artificial languages. PLoS
ONE, 8, e52500.
Gelman, A., Carlin, J., Stern, H., & Rubin, D. (2004). Bayesian
data analysis. Chapman & Hall/CRC.
Karmiloff-Smith, A. (1981). A functional approach to child language: A study of determiners and reference (Vol. 24). Cambridge University Press.
Kramsky, J. (1972). The article and the concept of definiteness in
language. Paris: Mouton.
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The childes project: Tools for analyzing
talk. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Maratsos, M. (1979). Learning how and when to use pronouns and
determiners. Language acquisition. Cambridge, 225–240.
Pine, J. M., & Lieven, E. (1997). Slot and frame patterns and the development of the determiner category. Applied Psycholinguistics,
18, 123–138.
Plummer, M. (2003). JAGS: A program for analysis of Bayesian
graphical models using Gibbs sampling.
Sagae, K., Davis, E., Lavie, A., Macwhinney, B., & Wintner, S.
(2010). Morphosyntactic annotation of childes transcripts. J. of
Child Language, 37, 705–729.
Tomasello, M. (2003). Constructing a language: A usage-based
theory of language acquisition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Valian, V. (1986). Syntactic categories in the speech of young children. Developmental Psychology, 2, 562–579.
Valian, V., Solt, S., & Stewart, J. (2009). Abstract categories or
limited-scope formulae? the case of children’s determiners. J. of
Child Language, 36, 743–778.
Yang, C. (2010). Who’s afraid of George Kingsley Zipf? (Unpublished manuscript)

Appendix: Model Validation with Artificial Corpora
To test the validity of our Gibbs sampling procedure procedure and establish the minimum number of DET+N samples
necessary to parameterize the model, we tested the metric
model on artificial noun and determiner counts generated according to known statistical properties. We varied µ was from
.1 to .9 in increments of .1, and ν at .05, .1, .5, 1, 5, 10, and
50. We additionally varied the number of tokens from 20 (1)
to 224 (1.6x107 ) (the upper limit corresponding to the order of
magnitude of tokens heard by a child; Frank et al., 2013), with
token distributions generated from both uniform and Zipfian
word frequency distributions.
As in the main simulations, we estimated posteriors for the
parameters µ and ν and compared with the known µ and ν
used to generate the input data. MCMC chains here and in the
main simulations consisted of 1000 samples after a burn-in of
1000 adaptive samples and 1000 updates, with no thinning.
We employed Gelman diagnostics as well as manual inspection of traces to check for sufficient burn-in time and mixing.
Grid sampling confirmed that likelihoods were sufficiently
peaked to constrain parameter estimates and were consistent
with posteriors produced inferred with MCMC. Measures of
the reliability of inference (mean and standard deviation in
the difference from the true value) helped establish a minimum window size for sliding window analyses to correspond
with error less than some fixed value ε.

3037

