UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Modeling Gain-Loss Asymmetries in Risky Choice: The Critical Role of Probability
Weighting

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/27n5s4wn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Pachur, Thorsten
Kellen, David

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Modeling Gain-Loss Asymmetries in Risky Choice:
The Critical Role of Probability Weighting
Thorsten Pachur (pachur@mpib-berlin.mpg.de)
Center for Adaptive Rationality, Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Lentzeallee 94
14195 Berlin, Germany

David Kellen (david.kellen@psychologie.uni-freiburg.de)
Department of Psychology, Albert Ludwig University Freiburg, Engelbergerstr. 41
79085 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany

Abstract
A robust empirical regularity in decision making is that the
negative consequences of an option (i.e., losses) often have a
stronger impact on people’s behavior than the positive
consequences (i.e., gains). One common explanation for such a
gain-loss asymmetry is loss aversion. To model loss aversion in
risky decisions, prospect theory (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979)
assumes a kinked value function (which translates objective
consequences into subjective utilities), with a steeper curvature
for losses than for gains. We highlight, however, that the
prospect theory framework offers many alternative ways to
model gain-loss asymmetries (e.g., via the weighting function,
which translates objective probabilities into subjective decision
weights; or via the choice rule). Our goal is to systematically
test these alternative models against each other. In a reanalysis
of data by Glöckner and Pachur (2012), we show that people’s
risky decisions are best accounted for by a version of prospect
theory that has a more elevated weighting function for losses
than for gains but the same value function for both domains.
These results contradict the common assumption that a kinked
value function is necessary to model risky choices and point to
the neglected role of people’s differential probability weighting
in the gain and loss domains.
Keywords: cognitive modeling; loss aversion; risky choice;
prospect theory; probability weighting

Introduction
For many of our decisions we are unable to tell with
certainty what consequence the decision will have—for
instance, when deciding between different medications that
potentially lead to some side effects. Ideally, we have
knowledge of the nature of the possible consequences as
well as some inkling of the chances that the consequences
will occur, but our decisions must necessarily remain in the
“twilight of probability” (Locke, 1690/2004). Elaborating
how such risky decisions are made (and how they should be
made) has engaged decision scientists at least since
Bernoulli’s (1738/1954) seminal work on subjective utility.
One of the most influential and successful modeling
frameworks of risky decision making is prospect theory
(Kahneman & Tversky, 1979; Tversky & Kahneman, 1992).
A prominent feature of prospect theory is the assumption
that the subjective disutility of a negative outcome is higher
than the subjective utility of a positive outcome of the same
size. In other words, prospect theory assumes an asymmetry
between gains and losses in its value function, which

translates objective outcomes into subjective magnitudes.
This assumption of loss aversion can explain, for instance,
that people dislike gambles in which one has a 50% chance
to win a particular amount of money and a 50% can to lose
the same amount. Similarly, loss aversion is invoked to
account for the endowment effect—the phenomenon that
people evaluate an object higher in a buyer perspective than
in a seller perspective (e.g., Pachur & Scheibehenne, 2012;
for a general overview of gain-loss asymmetries, see Peeters
& Czapinski, 1990).
However, the way prospect theory—more specifically, its
mathematical formulation in cumulative prospect theory
(CPT; Tversky & Kahneman, 1992)—is usually
implemented allows for asymmetries in the evaluation of
positive and negative prospects to be represented also in
other ways than via the value function. For instance, the
parameters of CPT’s weighting function, which translates
objective probabilities into subjective decision weights, are
typically estimated separately for the gain and the loss
domain (e.g., Gonzalez & Wu, 1999). Furthermore, it has
been argued that choice sensitivity (i.e., how accurately
choices between two alternatives reflect their subjective
valuations) differs between options involving losses and
those involving gains only (Yechiam & Hochman, 2013a).
Crucially, these possible representations of gain-loss
asymmetries within CPT have never been directly pitted
against each other in a model-comparison analysis (Linhart
& Zucchini, 1986), where the descriptive power of a model
is evaluated in light of its complexity (but see Harless &
Camerer, 1994; Stott, 2006). Conducting such a model
comparison is our goal in this paper. To that end, we use
CPT to model data collected by Glöckner and Pachur
(2012), where 64 participants were asked to make choices
between 138 two-outcome monetary gamble problems.1
Fitting different implementations of CPT to this data also
allows us to test specific predictions of how a gain-loss
asymmetry should be reflected in specific parameter
patterns, such as choice sensitivity (Yechiam & Hochman,
2013a) or probability sensitivity (Wu & Markle, 2008). Next
we provide a detailed description of CPT’s parameter

1

In Glöckner and Pachur (2012) each participant made choices
between 138 gamble problems at two separate sessions (separated
by one week). Here we analyze the data from the first session.

3205

framework, which we then use to formalize different ways
to represent gain-loss asymmetries in risky decision making.

Cumulative Prospect Theory
According to CPT, the possible consequences of a risky
option are perceived as gains or losses relative to a reference
point. The overall subjective value V of an option with
outcomes xm > … ≥ x1 > 0 > y1 > … > yn and corresponding
probabilities pm ... p1 and q1 ... qn is given by:
m

n

i =1

j =1

V ( A) = ∑ v( xi )π i+ + ∑ v( y j )π −j ,

(1)

where v is a value function satisfying v(0) = 0; π+ and π– are
decision weights for gains and losses, respectively, which
result from a rank-dependent transformation of the
outcomes’ probabilities. The decision weights are defined
as:
π m+ = w+ ( pm )
π n− = w− (qn )

π i+ = w+ ( pi + ... + pm ) − w− ( pi +1 + ... + pm ) for 1 ≤ i < m
π −j = w− (q j + ... + qn ) − w+ ( q j +1 + ... + qn ) for 1 ≤ j < n

, (2)
with w and w being the probability weighting function for
gains and losses, respectively (see below). The weight for
each positive outcome represents the marginal contribution
of the outcome’s probability to the total probability of
obtaining a better outcome; the weight for each negative
outcome represents the marginal contribution of the
outcome’s probability of obtaining a worse outcome.
Several functional forms of the value and weighting
functions have been proposed (see Stott, 2006, for an
overview). In our analyses, we use the power value function
suggested by Tversky and Kahneman (1992), which is
defined as
v( x) = xα
.
(3)
v ( y ) = −λ ( − y ) β
+

-

For α and β usually values smaller than 1 are found,
yielding a concave value function for gains and a convex
value function for losses. The parameter λ reflects the
relative sensitivity to losses versus gains and is often found
to be larger than 1, indicating loss aversion.
The weighting function has an inverse S-shaped
curvature, indicating overweighting of unlikely events (i.e.,
those with a small probability) and underweighting of likely
events (i.e., those with a moderate to high probability). Here
we use a two-parameter weighting function originally
proposed by Goldstein and Einhorn (1987), which separates
the curvature of the function from its elevation (cf.
Gonzalez & Wu, 1999):
δ + pγ
+
w ( p) = + γ
for x
.
(4)
δ p + (1 − p) γ
− γ
δ q
−
w (q) = − γ −
for y
δ q + (1 − q) γ
γ+ and γ- (both < 1) govern the curvature of the weighting
function in the gain and loss domains, respectively, and
+

+

+

−

−

indicate the sensitivity to probabilities. The parameters δ+
and δ- (both > 0) govern the elevation of the weighting
function for gains and losses, respectively, and can be
interpreted as the attractiveness of gambling. In other words,
δ+ and δ- also indicate a person’s risk attitude, with higher
(lower) values on δ+ (δ-) for higher risk aversion in gains
(losses).
In addition to these core components of CPT, a choice
rule is required when applying CPT to model binary choice.
To derive the predicted probability of CPT that a gamble A
is preferred over a gamble B we used an exponential version
of Luce’s choice rule:

p( A, B) =

eφ⋅V ( A)
,
eφ⋅V ( A) + eφ⋅V ( B )

(5)

where ϕ is a choice sensitivity parameter, indicating how
sensitively the predicted choice probability reacts to
differences in the valuation of gambles A and B. A higher ϕ
indicates more deterministic behavior; with ϕ = 0, choices
are random.

Modeling Gain-Loss Asymmetries
As described in the previous section, the common approach
to accommodate an asymmetric evaluation of positive and
negative prospects is to assume a kinked utility function, for
instance produced by λ > 1 (see also Usher & McClelland,
2004; Ahn, Busemeyer, Wagenmakers, & Stout, 2008).
Note, however, that observed choices are modeled based on
three intertwined components, a value function, a weighting
function, and a choice rule, all of which could, in principle,
represent an asymmetry between gains and losses. In the
following, we describe how gain-loss asymmetries could be
modeled within each these components.

Utility Accounts
The formalization of CPT’s value function allows for two
ways to represent a gain-loss asymmetry.
Differential weighting of losses and gains Tversky and
Kahneman’s (1992) original version of CPT accommodates
a gain-loss asymmetry using the loss aversion parameter λ,
with λ > 1 leading to a stronger impact of losses (relative to
gains). As can be seen from Equation 3, the effect of λ is to
multiplicatively magnify the utility of losses relative to the
utility of gains, implying greater sensitivity to losses.
Differences in outcome sensitivity In many applications of
CPT the exponent of the value function is estimated
separately for gains and losses (cf. Fox & Poldrack, 2008).
If the latter (i.e., β in Equation 3) is higher than the former
(i.e., α in Equation 3), this could also lead to a kinked utility
function, and thus a gain-loss asymmetry. Note that this
pattern has been observed in studies that included pure gain
and pure loss gambles (e.g., Abdellaoui, Vossmann, &
Weber, 2005).

Probability Weighting Accounts
Equation 1 shows that according to CPT—as in other
models in the expectation tradition—the evaluation of an

3206

α
α
α

β
α
α
α
α
α
α
α

γ
γ
γ
γ+ γγ
γ
γ+ γγ+ γγ
γ+˅- γ±

δ
δ
δ
δ+
δ+
δ+

δδδδ
δ
δ
δ

λ=1
λ
λ=1
λ
λ
λ=1
λ
λ=1
λ=1
λ

ϕ
ϕ
ϕ
ϕ
ϕ
ϕ
ϕ
ϕ

Free
parameters

Choice
sensitivity

CPTnola
CPTl
CPTab
CPTgd
CPTd
CPTdfixl
CPTg
CPTgfixl
CPTphila
CPTgsm

Loss
aversion

Which Model Provides The Best Account?
Several investigations have challenged the utility account of
gain-loss asymmetries (e.g., Schmidt & Traub, 2002;
Yechiam & Hochman, 2013a). However, one problem of
these studies is that they focused on specific items and are
thus silent with regard to the importance of the elements of

Table 1: Versions of CPT tested.
Elevation

A radically different explanation for an asymmetry between
the gain and the loss domain was proposed by Yechiam and
Hochman (2013a). They argued that the somewhat
inconsistent manifestation of loss aversion in risky choice
studies might be due to the fact that processing information
about potential losses increases the amount of attention
allocated to the task at hand. According to Yechiam and
Hochman, this should be reflected in a higher choicesensitivity parameter in problems involving losses (i.e.,
pure-loss gambles and mixed gambles) as compared to
problems involving gains only. In a task in which
participants responded to sequentially learned risks and
using a reinforcement model, Yechiam and Hochman
(2013b) found support for this hypothesis; to our
knowledge, it has not been tested in the context of
description-based tasks and using CPT as modeling
framework.

Modeling Approach
To evaluate the different accounts of gain-loss asymmetries
described above, we tested a total of 10 different
implementations of CPT in their ability to describe people’s
risky choices. The implementations, which are summarized
in Table 1, differ in terms of whether a gain-loss asymmetry
is represented in the value function, the weighting function,
or the choice rule.

Probability
sensitivity

Choice Sensitivity Account

utility accounts (e.g., the loss aversion parameter) for CPT’s
ability to describe risky choices more generally.
For a more general test, one needs to compare different
CPT implementations (representing alternative accounts of
gain-loss asymmetries) and to determine which fares best in
trading off model fit and model complexity (Myung, 2000).
Such a modeling analysis also allows us to test
hypotheses concerning specific parameter patterns predicted
by some of these accounts. For instance, according to the
choice-sensitivity account by Yechiam and Hochman
(2013a) choice sensitivity should be higher in tasks
involving losses than in tasks involving gains only. This
hypothesis has not been tested directly in the context of
description-based tasks.
A second hypothesized parameter pattern follows from
the probability weighting account proposed by Wu and
Markle (2008), according to which the probability
sensitivity (i.e. the curvature of the weighting function) is
lower for mixed gambles than for single-domain gambles.
Wu and Markle found support for this pattern using Tversky
and Kahneman’s (1992) one-parameter weighting function;
one limitation of this function is, however, that curvature
and elevation are confounded. Whether the hypothesized
parameter pattern also emerges when using a function that
allows to disentangle curvature and elevation (e.g., using the
two-parameter weighting function described in Equation 4)
has not yet been tested.

Outcome
sensitivity

option closely ties the outcomes to their probabilities, as
both are combined multiplicatively. Therefore, an apparent
gain-loss asymmetry in the choices might also be
represented by assuming differences between gains and
losses in probability weighting (Zank, 2010; see also
Birnbaum, 2008). Existing studies that have estimated the
weighting function separately for gains and losses show that
doing so indeed partly absorbs a gain-loss asymmetry (and
might decrease the estimated value of λ). In particular, the
elevation is commonly found to be higher for losses than for
gains (for an overview, see Fox & Poldrack, 2008).
Nevertheless, it is currently unclear to what extent
estimating different weighting functions for losses and gains
interacts with the estimation of the λ parameter and whether
the increased model flexibility gained by adding more
parameters actually leads to better predictive performance.
Differences in probability sensitivity Wu and Markle
(2008) highlighted that an asymmetry might not necessarily
exist between gains and losses, but between problems with
mixed gambles and problems with single-domain gambles
(i.e., those that offer either only gains or only losses). They
found support for a version of CPT that allows probability
sensitivity to differ between mixed and single-domain
problems, with a lower probability sensitivity for mixed
gambles than for single-domain problems. Moreover, Wu
and Markle showed that this version of CPT can account for
violations of gain-loss separability (that the evaluation of
outcomes and their respective probabilities is done
separately for the gain and the loss domains, as shown in
Equation 1), which is a fundamental assumption in Tversky
and Kahneman’s (1992) original description of CPT.

ϕ+ ϕ±/ϕ

CPTl can be considered as the standard implementation of
CPT. It assumes the same exponent in the value function

3207

4
5
5
7
6
5
6
5
5
5

(Equation 3) for gains and losses (i.e., α = β), but allows for
a gain-loss asymmetry by having λ as a free parameter. CPTl
uses one common set of curvature (γ) and (δ) elevation
parameters across the gain and loss domains. In a restricted
version of CPTl, CPTnola, λ is set to 1 and thus assumes no
gain-loss asymmetry. CPTnola will serve as a benchmark
model. CPTab also sets λ to 1 but allows the exponents of the
value function to differ between gains (α) and losses (β).
CPTgd is the model with the largest number of free
parameters: it allows for differences between gains and
losses both in curvature (γ+ and γ-) and elevation (δ+ and δ-)
of the weighting function. The restricted versions CPTd and
CPTdfixl allow a gain-loss asymmetry in the elevation only,
thus assuming a single curvature parameter for gains and
losses (γ+ = γ-); in CPTdfixl λ is set to 1. CPTg and CPTgfixl
allow a gain-loss asymmetry in the curvature of the
weighting function only, thus assuming a single elevation
parameter (δ+ = δ-); for CPTgfixl λ is set to 1.
The two remaining models, CPTphila and CPTgsm
implement the proposals by Yechiam and Hochman (2013a)
and Wu and Markle (2008), respectively. CPTphila assumes a
gain-loss asymmetry neither in the value function (i.e., λ =
1) nor in the weighting function (γ+ = γ- and δ+ = δ-);
instead, it allows for separate choice sensitivity parameters
in gambles involving losses (ϕ±/-) and gambles involving
gains only (ϕ+). CPTgsm assumes no gain-loss asymmetry in
the value function, but allows for different curvatures of the
weighting function for single-domain gambles (γ+˅-) than for
mixed gambles (γ±).
The models were fitted to individual participants using
the maximum-likelihood method. In order to avoid local
minima, the optimization algorithm was supplemented with
an initial grid search (considering up to 80,000 value
combinations of the entire parameter space, with all
parameters partitioned similarly).
To evaluate the models, we relied on the Bayesian
Information Criterion (BIC), which penalizes a model as a
function of its number of free parameters (Schwarz, 1978).
The BIC of a given model is given by:

= −2 log( ( | )) + log( ) ,

(6)

with d denoting the data, N the number of data points (i.e.,
the number of gamble problems), and k the number of free
parameters in the model. BIC is an approximation of the
Bayes Factor (Kass & Raftery, 1995), providing a
theoretically-principled framework for model comparison
that takes into account goodness of fit as well as model
complexity (e.g., Myung, 2000). A lower BIC indicates a
better model fit.
Data We applied the different CPT implementations to
model individual data in Glöckner and Pachur (2012).2 In
2

Note that while Glöckner and Pachur also compared some
implementations of CPT, they neither tested Wu and Markle’s
(2008) sensitivity account, nor Yechiam and Hochman’s (2013a)
choice sensitivity account. More importantly, they also neither
considered implementations of CPT in which only some of the

this study, 63 participants (25 male, mean age 24.7 years)
indicated their preferences between 138 two-outcome
monetary gamble problems that contained 70 pure gain, 30
pure loss, and 38 mixed gambles, all drawn from sets of
gamble problems used in previously published studies (see
Glöckner & Pachur for details). The outcomes of the
gambles ranged from -1000 € to 1200 €. At the completion
of each session, one of the chosen gambles was picked
randomly, played out and the participant received an
additional payment proportional to the resulting outcome.

Results
Is there a Gain-Loss Asymmetry in the Value
Function?
For the standard version of CPT, CPTl, which allows for a
gain-loss asymmetry only through the loss aversion
parameter, the median (across participants) best-fitting value
of the λ parameter was substantially larger than 1, λ = 1.40.
71.9% of the participants had a λ larger than 1. Moreover,
CPTl showed a considerably better fit than CPTnola, which
does not allow for an asymmetry between gains and losses
(median BIC: 158.34 vs. 160.23). These results thus provide
evidence for a gain-loss asymmetry in the data.
Is choice sensitivity higher in gambles involving losses?
As previously stated, Yechiam and Hochman (2013a) argue
that due to differences in attention, choice sensitivity should
be higher when the gambles include a potential loss. We
tested this prediction by modeling the data with CPTphila,
which allows for a gain-loss asymmetry in choice sensitivity
only. As it turned out, there was no evidence for Yechiam
and Hochman’s hypothesis; in fact, we find the opposite
pattern, with a higher choice-sensitivity parameter for gains
than for losses, median values ϕ+ = 0.18 and ϕ±/- = 0.09,
Wilcoxon test: W = 2,609, p = .0008 (two-tailed). This
pattern of results was found for 58 of the 64 participants
(91%).
Is probability sensitivity lower in mixed gambles?
Consistent with Wu and Markle’s (2008) hypothesis, the
estimates for γ obtained with CPTgsm indicated a lower
probability sensitivity for mixed gambles than for singledomain gambles, median values γ+˅- = 0.58 and γ± = 0.86,
Wilcoxon test: W = 2,928, p = .0001 (two-tailed). Fortyeight out of 64 participants (75%) showed this pattern.
To summarize, these analyses indicate that people’s
choices reflect an asymmetry between gains and losses. Of
two proposals concerning the specific nature of such
asymmetries, we found support for only one, namely Wu
and Markle’s (2008) hypothesis that probability sensitivity
is reduced in mixed as compared to single-domain gamble
problems. Yechiam and Hochman’s (2013a) proposal of a
higher choice sensitivity for gambles involving losses was
not supported (in fact, we found the opposite pattern). Next,
we turn to the question of how well the different
parameters of the weighting function were estimated separately for
gains and losses, nor implementations with a fixed λ parameter.

3208

implementations of CPT summarized in Table 1 can account
for people’s choices. For instance, even if there is support
for Wu and Markle’s (2008) hypothesis of a lower
probability sensitivity in mixed (as compared to singledomain) gambles, does an implementation of CPT allowing
for this pattern (i.e., CPTgsm) also perform well in terms of
BIC?

Model Comparison
Figure 1 shows the median (across participants) BICs for
each of the CPT implementations. As can be seen, the bestperforming model is CPTdfixl, which allows for gain-loss
asymmetries in the elevation of the probability weighting
function but sets λ = 1. Figure 2 shows the probability
weighting function of CPTdfixl, based on the median bestfitting parameter values. The figure shows that this model
represents a gain-loss asymmetry by having a more elevated
weighting function for losses than for gains, δ- = 1.69, δ+ =
0.63. Like models implementing the utility account, CPTdfixl
gives more weight to losses than to gains, but does this via
the decision weights resulting from the weighting function
rather than via the value function. CPTdfixl not only achieved
the best performance in terms of the median BIC, but also
the overwhelming majority of individual participants
(54.7%) were best accounted for by this model.3

finding evidence for a gain-loss asymmetry. However, we
pointed out that the parametric menagerie of CPT can, in
principle, represent gain-loss asymmetries in many different
ways, such as via outcome sensitivity, probability
sensitivity, the elevation of the weighting function, and
choice sensitivity. Crucially, our analyses showed that a
model that assumes a gain-loss difference in the elevation of
the weighting function and a symmetric value function
provided the best account of people’s choices. The common
assumption of a kinked utility function thus does not seem
to be necessary. Other proposed implementations of CPT,
such as one that attributes gain-loss asymmetries to
differences in the choice rule (Yechiam & Hochman, 2013a)
or one that replaces the assumption of strict gain-loss
separability by allowing for differences in probability
sensitivity between single-domain and mixed gambles (Wu
& Markle, 2008), were also clearly outperformed.

165

160

BIC

155

150

145

cpt_GEphila
CPTphila

gsm

cpt_GEgsm
CPT

cpt_GEgfixl
CPTgfixl

CPT
cpt_GEg
g

cpt_GEdfixl
CPTdfixl

cpt_GEd
CPT
d

cpt_GEgd
CPTgd

cpt_GEab
CPTab

cpt_GE
CPT
l

CPTnola
cpt_GEnola

140

Figure 1: Performance of the different versions of CPT, as
indicated by the median BIC (across participants)

Discussion
One of the fundamental assumptions in prospect theory is
that negative prospects receive more weight in people’s
evaluations of risky alternatives than positive prospects. In
general, our analyses provide support for this assumption by
3
The second-best model in terms of selection frequency was
CPTnola, which best accounted for 17.2% of the individual
participants. Interestingly, the second-best performing model in
terms of the median BIC, CPTd, best accounted for only 4.7% of
the participants.

Figure 2: Shapes of the separate probability weighting
functions for gains and losses of CPTdfixl, the best
performing model, when using the median best-fitting
parameter estimates. The weighting functions differ only in
terms of their elevation, which is higher for losses than for
gains.
Our results seem to challenge the approach taken in
previous tests of prospect theory that have focused on
specific and individual gamble problems. For instance,
using problems specifically designed to test gain-loss
separability, Wu and Markle (2008) found evidence for a
superiority of a version of CPT that allowed for different
probability sensitivity in single-domain than in mixed
gamble problems. By contrast, in the data set used here,
where the gamble problems were not constructed to test
specific assumptions of CPT (instead many of the gambles
had been randomly generated; see Glöckner & Pachur,
2012, for details), Wu and Markle’s modified version of
CPT performed rather poorly (Figure 1). The results of our
model comparison thus suggest that model developments
based on focused tests may sometimes sacrifice a model’s

3209

ability to account for choices more generally for its ability
to account for idiosyncratic cases.
What does the superiority of the version of CPT with a
more elevated probability weighting for losses than for
gains (Figure 2) mean psychologically? The cognitive
underpinnings of probability weighting are still rather little
understood. This has led some researchers (e.g., Brooks &
Zank, 2005; Zank, 2010) to focus more on what can be
called “behavioral gain-loss asymmetries”, that is, specific
choice patterns that follow from gain-loss asymmetries on
the value and/or probability weighting functions.
These open questions notwithstanding, our results suggest
that if one’s goal is to predict how people will decide
between risky alternatives, modeling gain-loss asymmetries
in terms of differences in probability weighting rather than
utility weighting promises to be a more successful approach.
Our conclusions thus resonate well with Prelec’s (2000)
assessment that “probability nonlinearity will eventually be
recognized as a more important determinant of risk attitudes
than money nonlinearity.” (p. 89)

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a grant of the German
Research Foundation as part of the priority program “New
Frameworks of Rationality” (SPP 1516) to Thorsten Pachur
(HE 2768/7-1).

References
Abdellaoui, M., Vossmann, F., & Weber, M. (2005).
Choice-based elicitation and decomposition of decision
weights for gains and losses under uncertainty.
Management Science, 51, 1384–1399.
Ahn, W.-Y., Busemeyer, J. R., Wagenmakers, E.-J., &
Stout, J. C. (2008). Comparison of decision learning
models using the generalization criterion method.
Cognitive Science, 32, 1376-1402.
Bernoulli, D. (1738/1954). Exposition of a new theory on
the measurement of risk. Econometrica, 22, 23–36.
Birnbaum, M. H. (2008). New paradoxes of risky decision
making. Psychological Review, 115, 463-501.
Brooks, P., & Zank, H. (2005). Loss averse behavior.
Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 31, 301-325.
Fox, C. R., & Poldrack, R. A. (2008). Prospect theory and
the brain. In Glimcher, P., Camerer, C., Fehr, E. &
Poldrack, R. (Eds), Handbook of neuroeconomics. New
York: Elsevier.
Glöckner, A., & Pachur, T. (2012). Cognitive models of
risky choice: Parameter stability and predictive accuracy
of prospect theory. Cognition, 123, 21-32.
Goldstein, W. M., & Einhorn, H. J. (1987). Expression
theory and the preference reversal phenomenon.
Psychological Review, 94, 236-254.
Gonzalez, R., & Wu, G. (1999). On the shape of the
probability weighting function. Cognitive Psychology, 38,
129–166.

Harless, D. W., & Camerer, C. F. (1994). The predictive
utility of generalized expected utility theories.
Econometrica, 62, 1251–1289.
Kass, R., & Rafterty, A. (1995). Bayes factors. Journal of
the American Statistical Association, 90, 773-795.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An
analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica, 47, 263–
292.
Linhart, H., & Zucchini, W. (1986). Model selection.
Oxford, England: John Wiley & Sons.
Locke, J. (1690/2004). An essay concerning human
understanding. London: Penguin.
Luce, R. D. (1959). Individual choice behavior: A
theoretical analysis. New York: Wiley.
Myung, I. J. (2000). The importance of complexity in model
selection. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 44, 190204.
Pachur, T., & Scheibehenne, B. (2012). Constructing
preference from experience: The endowment effect
reflected in external information search. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 38, 1108-1116.
Peeters, G., & Czapinski, J. (1990). Positive-negative
asymmetry in evaluations: The distinction between
affective and informational negativity effects. In W.
Stroebe, & M. Hewstone (Eds.), European review of
social psychology (Vol. 1, pp. 33-60). Chichester, UK:
Wiley.
Prelec, D. (2000). Compound invariant weighting functions
in prospect theory. In D. Kahneman, & Tversky, A. (Eds.)
Choices, values, and frames (pp. 67–92). Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Schmidt, U., S. Traub. 2002. An experimental test of loss
aversion. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 25, 233-249.
Schwarz, G. (1978). Estimating the dimension of a model.
The Annals of Statistics, 6, 461-464.
Stott, H. P. (2006). Cumulative prospect theory’s functional
menagerie. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 32, 101–130.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1992). Advances in prospect
theory: Cumulative representation of uncertainty. Journal
of Risk and Uncertainty, 5, 297–323.
Usher, M., & McClelland, J. L. (2004). Loss aversion and
inhibition in dynamical models of multialternative choice.
Psychological Review, 111, 759–769.
Wu, G., & Markle, A. (2008). An empirical test of gain-loss
separability in prospect theory. Management Science, 54,
1322–1335.
Yechiam, E., & Hochman, G. (2013a). Losses as modulators
of attention: Review and analysis of the unique effects of
losses over gains. Psychological Bulletin. 139, 497-518.
Yechiam, E., & Hochman, G. (2013b). Loss-aversion or
loss-attention: The impact of losses on cognitive
performance. Cognitive Psychology, 66, 212-231.
Zank, H. (2010). On probabilities and loss aversion. Theory
and Decision, 68, 243-261.

3210

