UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Modeling the Emergence of an Exemplar Verb in Construction Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0sh360fb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Barak, Libby
Fazly, Afsaneh
Stevenson, Suzanne

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Modeling the Emergence of an Exemplar Verb in Construction Learning
Libby Barak, Afsaneh Fazly, and Suzanne Stevenson
Department of Computer Science
University of Toronto
{libbyb,afsaneh,suzanne}@cs.toronto.edu
Abstract
Using a computational model of verb argument structure learning, we study a key assumption of the usage-based theory: that
the acquisition of a construction relies heavily on the existence
of a high-frequency exemplar verb that accounts for a large
proportion of usages of that construction in the input. Importantly, unlike the psycholinguistic experiments that focus
on the learning of an artificial novel construction using novel
verbs, here we examine the acquisition of the English sentential complement construction from naturalistic input. Our
results provide new insights into exemplar-based learning in
the context of naturalistic input with multiple semantic classes,
and a diverse set of constructions for the verbs.

Introduction
Verb argument structure acquisition is a challenging task that
children face early in their life. In order to correctly use a
verb, children must learn the syntactic structures that the verb
appears in, as well as the semantic relations among the arguments of the verb. Nonetheless, children learn the correct
usages of many verbs at a young age. Usage-based theories
of language acquisition suggest that children learn the argument structure regularities mainly from the input they receive.
These theories are supported by observing that children initially learn verb argument structures on an item-by-item basis, and only later generalize their verb-specific knowledge
into abstract constructions that map a particular syntactic
form to certain semantic properties (Tomasello, 2000).
The distributional properties of verb usages in childdirected input highly affect the developmental path of the acquisition of argument structure constructions. For example,
several studies have shown that children tend to learn highfrequency verbs earlier (Naigles & Hoff-Ginsberg, 1998;
Matthews, Lieven, Theakston, & Tomasello, 2005), and that
they are more likely to detect grammatical anomalies in sentences containing such verbs (Theakston, 2004; Ambridge et
al., 2008). Moreover, the relative frequency of a verb with
a particular syntactic construction has been shown to positively correlate with the ability of young children to recall
sentences containing that verb (Kidd, Lieven, & Tomasello,
2006, 2010). Most importantly, there is evidence that the acquisition of a construction is connected to a high-frequency
exemplar verb; e.g., give is the exemplar for the ditransitive
construction (Goldberg, 1999; Kidd et al., 2006, 2010). In
fact, several studies have shown that it is not just the amount
of overall exposure to a construction that affects its acquisition, but instead learning seems to be facilitated by a high
number of usages of a particular exemplar verb (Casenhiser
& Goldberg, 2005; Wonnacott et al., 2008).
The above psycholinguistic studies perform experiments
on children, and hence are often limited in the number of

items they can investigate, and in how much they can tease
apart the various interacting factors that might play a role on
the results. For example, the sentence recall tasks performed
by Kidd et al. (2010) examine only eight complement-taking
verbs (CTVs). Moreover, due to their choice of verbs, they
cannot separate the effects of overall frequency and relative
construction frequency on their results. Using a computational model of argument structure learning, we extend these
investigations into a larger set of CTVs, and also manipulate input in such a way that we can tease apart the effects
of the various frequency factors. Our results are consistent
with the findings of Kidd et al. (2006, 2010), that the relative frequency of a verb with a sentential complement is positively correlated with the ability of young children to recall
sentences containing the verb in that construction. However,
through computational modeling, we are further able to provide evidence on the interaction of verb frequency and relative construction frequency in accounting for their findings.
Studies examining the effect of a high-frequency exemplar
verb in the acquisition of novel constructions often do so in
the context of an artificial language learning task, where children are introduced to a novel verb mapped to a novel (or familiar) event semantics (Casenhiser & Goldberg, 2005; Wonnacott et al., 2008). We use our computational model to investigate the existence and role of an exemplar verb in the
acquisition of the English finite sentential complement (SC)
syntax — a complex structure that has received less attention in the experimental studies (though see Kidd et al., 2006,
2010). Importantly, the use of a model enables us to vary distributional properties of the input in a way not easily achieved
in a human experimental setting. Inspired by the work of
Casenhiser and Goldberg (2005), we study the role of a highfrequency exemplar verb (think) for the acquisition of SC,
but we do so in the context of a diverse set of verbs and constructions, as is the case in the naturalistic input that children
receive. Our results suggest that the acquisition of a construction is facilitated by the relative frequency with which a class
of semantically-related verbs appear with the syntactic form
associated with the construction.

The Computational Model
We use an extended version of the verb argument structure acquisition model of Alishahi and Stevenson (2008), which we
have used in studying the acquisition of mental state verbs
(Barak, Fazly, & Stevenson, 2012). This model has appropriate characteristics for our study: (i) it focuses on argument
structure learning, and the interplay between syntax and semantics; (ii) it is probabilistic and hence can naturally reflect

1815

Input Utterance: He thinks Mom made pancakes.

Semantic
class
Belief

Extracted Frame:
main predicate
other predicate
event primitives
event participants
syntactic pattern
argument count
complement type

think
make
{ state, consider, cogitate, action }
{ experiencer, perceiver, considerer}
{ agent, animate}
{ theme, changed}
arg1 verb arg2 verb arg3
3
finite

Desire
Communication
Perception

Table 1: An example of an input frame based on the utterance
He thinks Mom made pancakes, and the semantic information
assumed to be available from the scene (not shown).
the role of the statistical properties of the input in the formation of constructions; and (iii) it is incremental, which allows
us to investigate changes in behaviour over time.
The input to our model is a sequence of frames, where
each frame is a collection of features that resemble what children can extract from the utterances they hear and the typical learning scenes they preceive from their environments.
We use features that include both semantic properties (i.e.,
event primitives and event participants), and syntactic properties (i.e., syntactic pattern, argument count, and complement
type). Table 1 presents an example of an input frame given a
child-directed utterance in a typical learning scene.
The model incrementally clusters the input frames into
constructions that reflect probabilistic associations of semantic and syntactic features across similar verb usages. Note
that a cluster is not simply a set of similar frames, but instead
an abstraction over these frames represented as probability
distributions over the possible values of each feature.

Algorithm for Learning Constructions
The model clusters input frames into constructions on the basis of their overall similarity in the values of their features.
Importantly, the model learns these constructions incrementally, considering the creation of a new construction for a
given frame if the frame is not sufficiently similar to any of
the existing constructions. Formally, the model finds the best
construction (including a new one) for a given frame F as in:
BestConstruction(F) =

argmax

P(k|F)

(1)

k∈Constructions

where k ranges over all existing constructions and a new one.
Using Bayes rule:
P(k|F) =

P(k)P(F|k)
∝ P(k)P(F|k)
P(F)

(2)

The prior probability of a construction P(k) is estimated as
the proportion of observed frames in k, assigning a higher
prior to constructions that are more entrenched (i.e., observed
more frequently). The likelihood P(F|k) is estimated based
on the values of features in F and the frames in k:
P(F|k) =

∏

i∈ f rameFeatures

Pi ( j|k)

(3)

Verb
think
bet
guess
know
believe
wish
hope
tell
say
ask
hear
see
look

Overall
frequency
13829
391
278
7189
78
132
290
2953
8622
818
1370
9717
5856

Frequency
with finite-SC
100%
100%
76%
61%
21%
94%
86%
64%
60%
29%
21%
14%
9%

Table 2: The Overall frequency of the 13 CTVs in our data,
along with their relative frequency with finite-SC. Verbs are
grouped by semantic class, and only the 13 verbs that appear
with this construction are listed.
where i refers to the ith feature of F and j refers to its value.
The conditional probability of a feature to have value j in
construction k, is calculated using a smoothed version of:
Pi ( j|k) =

counti ( j, k)
nk

(4)

where counti ( j, k) is the number of times feature i has the
value j in construction k, and nk is the number of frames in k.

Generation of the Input Corpora
We generate artificial corpora for our simulations, since we do
not have access to sufficient data of actual utterances paired
with scene representations. To create naturalistic data that
resembles what children are exposed to, we build an inputgeneration lexicon that is based on the distributional properties of actual child-directed speech (CDS). We extracted our
verbs and their distributional properties from the CDS to 8
children from CHILDES (MacWhinney, 2000).1 We selected
31 verbs from different semantic classes and different frequency ranges, including 11 Physical Action (come, go, fall,
eat, play, get, give, take, make, put, sit), 5 Perception (hear,
listen, look, see, watch), 5 Communication (ask, say, speak,
talk, tell), 5 Belief (think, know, guess, bet, believe), and 5
Desire (want, wish, like, mind, need). For each verb, we manually analyzed a random sample of 100 CDS usages (or all
usages if fewer than 100) to extract distributional information
about argument structures. Many of these verbs can take a (finite or infinitival) SC. Our focus in this work is on the finiteSC construction, and so we use the term Complement-Taking
Verb (CTV) to refer to verbs that appear with the finite SC,
following Kidd et al., 2010. Table 2 lists the 13 CTVs in our
data, along with their semantic class, their overall frequency,
and their relative frequency with the finite SC).
1 Corpora of (Brown, 1973; Suppes, 1974; Kuczaj, 1977; Bloom,
Hood, & Lightbowny, 1974; Sachs, 1983; Lieven, Salomo, &
Tomasello, 2009).

1816

We construct the input-generation lexicon by listing each
of the 31 verbs (i.e. the main predicate), along with its overall frequency, as well as the frequency with which it appears
with each argument structure. Each entry contains values for
the syntactic and semantic features (see Table 1 for examples). By including these features, we assume that a learner
is capable of (i) understanding basic syntactic properties of an
utterance, such as syntactic categories (e.g., noun and verb)
and word order, and (ii) perceiving and conceptualizing the
general semantic properties of events — including mental,
perceptual, communicative, and physical actions — as well
as those of the event participants. Values for the semantic features (the event primitives and event participants) are
taken from several resources, including Alishahi and Stevenson (2008), VerbNet (Kipper et al., 2008), and Dowty (1991).
For each simulation in our experiments (explained below), we
use the input-generation lexicon to automatically generate an
input corpus of frames that reflects the observed frequency
distribution in CDS. We perform 100 simulations, each on
20, 000 frames, and examine the behaviour of our model over
the course of learning.

Experiment 1: The Imitation Task
Our goal here is to examine the role of verbs’ overall frequency and their frequency with finite-SC, and the interaction
of these frequencies, in the acquisition of argument structure
constructions. Our simulations are inspired by the imitation
task in which participants are asked to repeat a recently-heard
utterance. Kidd et al. (2006, 2010) use this approach to examine the effect of verb frequency with finite-SC on how well
children repeat utterances, in particular focusing on the relation between frequency of a verb with finite-SC and its likelihood of being correctly repeated, or substituted by another
verb.

Experimental Setup
Following Kidd et al. (2006, 2010), we focus on whether our
model correctly repeats the verb of a sentence in an imitation task involving CTVs with sentential complements. We
present the model with a full frame representing a complete
utterance plus its corresponding scene, analogous to the presentation of a sentence with an accompanying picture, as in
the psycholinguistic experiments. We then ask the model to
predict the best verb in response to that frame, essentially asking it to repeat the just-presented verb.
To consider the responses of the model over a developmental trajectory, we train it on the full corpus, and at periodic fixed points during training, we present it with a test
frame for each of the 13 CTVs in our lexicon, to see how it
responds to each CTV. All the test frames have the same syntactic features (i.e., syntactic pattern, argument count, and
complement type) corresponding to a finite SC that contains
a transitive action verb, paired with the appropriate semantic
features for the given CTV (see Table 1). For consistency,
we use the same physical action verb for the embedded verb

(other predicate) in all 13 test frames, but randomly vary this
verb across each of 100 simulations.
As in Kidd et al. (2006, 2010), we focus on the patterns of
verb repetition and verb substitution among the model’s responses. We record for each of the 13 test frames (at each
point of testing) which verb the model predicts as its best response to that frame. To do this, we calculate the likelihood
of each of our 31 verbs v given a test frame Ftest , as in:
P(v|Ftest ) =

∑

Pmain (v|k)P(k|Ftest )

(5)

k∈Clusters

where Pmain (v|k) is the probability of the main predicate feature having the value v in cluster k, calculated as in Eqn. (4),
and P(k|Ftest ) is calculated as in Eqn. (2) (see Section for details). The model’s response is taken to be the verb with the
highest likelihood; this resembles the single choice of a verb
made by the participants in the psycholinguistic experiments.

Results: Verb Repetition
Kidd et al. (2006, 2010) observe a positive correlation between the frequency of a verb with finite-SC and the proportion of its correct repetitions. We focus on how frequency
with finite-SC impacts our model’s correct repetition of a
verb. Figure 1 presents the proportion of times that each of
the 13 CTVs are correctly repeated, which we refer to as the
repetition accuracy. According to these results, a high frequency with finite-SC is neither a necessary nor a sufficient
condition for a verb to be correctly repeated by our model.
For example, although the two verbs with the highest repetition accuracy (i.e., think and say) have high frequencies
with finite-SC, other verbs with high frequency with finiteSC (i.e., bet, guess, know, wish, and hope) are not easy for
our model to repeat. In addition, see is among the top four
verbs to be correctly repeated, although it has relatively low
frequency with finite-SC (see Table 2). These results suggest
that other factors beyond the frequency with finite-SC examined by Kidd et al. (2006, 2010) may play a role here.
Our model enables us to explore some of the possible factors, and to make predictions that could be verified through
experiments with children. For example, the overall frequency of the verb affects the model’s responses: Out of the
four highest-frequency verbs (think, see, say, know), three
also have a higher repetition accuracy compared with the
other CTVs. However, like frequency with finite-SC, overall
frequency alone does not predict the responses: The repetition rate is not in frequency order, and know is high frequency
but has a low repetition rate. In fact, we note that, except
for the verb think, the model rarely repeats Belief verbs correctly, regardless of their frequencies. These results point to
another factor that might affect the performance of our model
in repeating a verb: the frequency with which semanticallyrelated verbs appear with the same syntactic pattern as the
verb to be repeated. To illustrate, when given a test frame
that represents the semantic properties of a Belief verb with
SC syntax, the model predicts the Belief verb with the highest
frequency since it will have more occurrences in the clusters

1817

Figure 1: Verb repetition accuracy for each of the 13 CTVs.

Figure 2: Verb substitution rate for each of the 13 CTVs.

that the model bases its predictions on (see Eqn. 5). E.g., the
verb know will have usages in clusters with many more occurrences of think, and hence the model will mainly produce
think in response to test frames containing the semantics of
know with the SC syntax. To further understand the interaction of overall frequency and frequency with finite-SC, and
distribution over semantic classes, we next look at the patterns of verb substitution by our model.

the input such that we can examine the effects on the substitution patterns in our model of: overall frequency, frequency
with finite-SC, as well as the frequency with finite-SC of a
verb class as a whole. We perform three new experiments, in
each of which we switch the overall frequency of think with
one of the following three verbs: guess, believe, and tell. The
goal is to change the input such that it is not the case that
the verb with the highest overall frequency is also the verb
with a frequency of 100% with finite-SC (as is the case with
think)—that is, we want to tease apart the effect of these two
frequencies.
The first interesting finding is comparing the results of
making guess vs. believe (other Belief verbs) the highestfrequency verb (in place of think). This explores the impact
of a relatively high (but not 100%) frequency with finite-SC
(for guess, of 76%) and a low frequency with finite-SC (for
believe, of 21%), in the context of a very high overall frequency. We find that, as in the original results with think,
guess is substituted for other verbs a very high proportion of
the time (75%). However this does not hold for believe; when
it is the highest-frequency verb, the Belief verb with next
highest overall frequency and relatively high frequency with
finite-SC (know) becomes the verb most often substituted for
others, with a substitution rate of 43%. This behaviour predicts that both a high overall frequency and a relatively high
frequency with finite-SC are required for a verb to be treated
as an ‘exemplar’ of the finite-SC construction.
We also examined the result of making tell, which is not a
Belief verb, the highest frequency verb with fintie-SC (again,
in place of think). Interestingly, although tell is a verb with
a relatively high frequency with finite-SC (like guess above),
tell does not become the verb the model most frequently substitutes for other verbs (in contrast to guess). In this case,
know — a Belief verb — is the verb most frequently substituted for others. This suggests that the semantics of the verb
also plays an important role in determining the substitution
behaviour. The strong association of particular (Belief-verb)
semantics with the finite-SC syntactic pattern are necessary
to the verb substitution behaviour.
In summary, our findings suggest a somewhat different
view from that of Kidd et al. (2010), who suggested that think

Results: Verb Substitution
Interestingly, Kidd et al. (2006, 2010) found that in a large
number of cases, children specifically substituted the verb
think in place of the verb they heard. They thus suggest that
think is an ‘exemplar’ for the finite-SC construction. Figure 2
presents the proportion of times each of the 13 CTVs is produced by our model in place of the other 12 verbs, which
we refer to as the substitution rate. That is, for each verb v,
its substitution rate reflects the proportion of times that our
model incorrectly produces v in response to the test frames
for the other 12 CTVs (out of 100 simulations). In line with
the findings of Kidd et al. (2006, 2010), the model substitutes
the verb think for the other verbs with a very high likelihood
from an early stage (See Figure 2)
Kidd et al. (2006, 2010) attribute their finding to the high
frequency of the verb think with finite-SC. However, we have
observed that think also has the highest overall frequency
among the 13 CTVs (see Table 2). In addition, think is a
Belief verb, and it is known that people form a strong association between Belief verbs and the finite-SC syntax (Gleitman
et al., 2005). It is thus not clear whether the status of think
as an exemplar for the finite-SC construction is solely due to
its high frequency with finite-SC, or if it is also affected by
these other factors: (a) the high overall frequency of think,
and/or (b) the overall strong connection of Belief verbs to the
construction. We explore these factors in the next set of experiments.

Interaction of the Different Frequency
One of the advantages of using a computational model is that
we can manipulate the input to study the effects and interactions of the different frequency factors. Here, we manipulate

1818

was an exemplar verb in their experiments mainly because of
its 100% frequency with finite-SC. The results of the input
manipulation with guess and believe predict that for a verb to
be the exemplar for a construction (here the finite-SC), it has
to have a sufficiently high overall frequency and also appear
with the construction with a relatively high frequency. In addition, although a semantically diverse group of verbs appears
with finite-SC, the input manipulation involving tell suggests
that the exemplar verb will come from the Belief class, since
Belief verbs as a whole have an overall high frequency of appearance with the SC syntax.

(a)

Experiment 2: Generalization
Experiment 2 further examines the role of verb, construction, and semantic verb class frequencies in the acquisition
of the finite SC. Given the noted strong association between
the finite-SC syntax and Belief semantics, we focus here on
the emergence of a ‘Belief–SC’ construction.

Experimental Setup
Following Casenhiser and Goldberg (2005), we focus here
on the effect of the distributional pattern of verb usages with a
particular construction on the acquisition of that construction.
Casenhiser and Goldberg (2005) introduce five novel verbs
appearing in a novel construction (a novel syntactic pattern
paired with a novel meaning), to 5-to 7-year-old children in
two input conditions: The skewed condition where one verb
accounts for half of the occurrences of the construction, and
the balanced condition with roughly equal number of usages
of each verb. The study used a preferential-looking paradigm
to show that participants in the skewed condition were significantly better at generalizing the newly-learned construction
to a new novel verb (by looking at the scene with the appropriate semantics), compared to the balanced condition.
Our results in Experiment 1 imply that, in addition to the
frequency with finite-SC of the individual verbs, their semantic class also influences the learning and use of verbs in a
construction. This interaction of semantic classes is not addressed by the artificial language experiment of Casenhiser
and Goldberg (2005), since it includes only a single class.
Using a computational model enables us to explore the impact of a skewed vs. balanced distribution in a naturalistic
setting, in which verbs from different semantic classes occur
in the same syntactic frame under investigation (here, the finite SC), and verbs occur with multiple constructions (not just
the one under investigation). Specifically, we examine how
strongly our model learns the Belief–SC construction given
the skewed input of our CDS-based data, compared to a balanced input, both with the same total exposure to CTVs. We
form the balanced input by re-distributing the overall number of occurrences of CTVs so that each CTV would have
an equal number of occurrences with finite-SC. Note that, all
CTVs have an equal number of occurrences with finite-SC
in the balanced input. However, because there is a different
number of CTVs in each semantic class, the total number of
finite-SC usages still slightly differs across classes.

(b)

Figure 3: The 3 highest likelihood values of semantic properties of the event (a) given the CDS-based distribution, (b)
given artificially balanced frequencies with finite-SC.

We need to evaluate the ability of the model to generalize its knowledge of the Belief–SC construction in response
to a novel verb when training on these two types of input.
However, the model is incapable of engaging in preferential
looking, as in Casenhiser and Goldberg (2005). Instead, we
simulate preferential looking in our model as a choice between possible sets of event primitives, given a test frame.
Following the psycholinguistic settings, we construct the test
frame with a novel verb in place of the main predicate, where
event participants are associated with a belief event, but the
semantics of the predicate is missing. In other words, the
test frame represents the belief construction used to test the
children, and each set of event primitives represents one of
the test scenes in a preferential looking task. At each point of
testing, over 100 simulations, we record the set of event primitives that the model predicts as its best response to the partial
test frame. This prediction corresponds to the selection of the
scene with the appropriate action, given the arguments and
syntax of the construction (as in Casenhiser and Goldberg).

Results
Figure 3(a) and (b) report the proportion of times each of
the three most likely sets of event primitives is chosen by
our model as the most appropriate one, which we refer to as
the event prediction rate.2 Figure 3(a) shows that the semantics of Belief events is highly associated with the arguments
and syntax of novel Belief verbs from an early stage, given
2 Other sets of event primitives have lower likelihoods than the
likelihoods presented here.

1819

the skewed condition. That is, the Belief–SC construction is
strongly entrenched given the naturalistically-skewed input.
However, in the balanced condition, as shown in Figure 3(b), only much later in training is the Belief event semantics predicted with the highest rate for the test frames.
As in the results of Experiment 1, there is an effect of overall frequency in addition to frequency with finite-SC, of both
verbs and classes. In the balanced input, each CTV has the
same number of occurrences with finite-SC; hence there is
only a small difference in the total number of occurrences of
the different classes with this pattern. Recall that, to balance
the input in terms of the CTV usages, we had to change the
overall frequencies of the verbs and classes. In particular, we
note that the overall frequency of the Belief class in the balanced input is much lower than that of the Perception class.
The model is thus exposed to many more usages of Perception verbs with the finite-SC compared to the usages of Belief
verbs with the same syntax, causing the observed delay in the
formation of a strong Belief–SC construction.

Summary
We have used a computational model to examine the effect
of various distributional properties of the input on the acquisition of argument structure constructions. Specifically, we
have examined the interaction of several factors in the emergence of an exemplar verb for the finite SC construction. Our
results suggest that exemplar-based learning of a construction (such as the finite SC) is sensitive to several properties
of the input, including overall verb frequency, frequency of
each verb with the construction, and the frequency of each semantic verb class with the construction. These results are in
line with the psycholinguistic findings (e.g., Naigles & HoffGinsberg, 1998; Casenhiser & Goldberg, 2005; Wonnacott et
al., 2008; Kidd et al., 2006, 2010). Moreover, they further our
understanding of the exemplar-based learning mechanism by
providing a broader investigation of the role of each of the
above factors in the context of naturalistic input that contains
multiple classes of verbs each appearing with multiple constructions. Our findings signify the importance of considering the interaction of the various distributional factors in the
design of psycholinguistic experiments.

References
Alishahi, A., & Stevenson, S. (2008). A computational model
of early argument structure acquisition. Cognitive Science,
32(5), 789–834.
Ambridge, B., Pine, J., Rowland, C., & Young, C. (2008).
The effect of verb semantic class and verb frequency (entrenchment) on children’s and adults’ graded judgements
of argument-structure overgeneralization errors. Cognition,
106(1), 87–129.
Barak, L., Fazly, A., & Stevenson, S. (2012). Modeling the
acquisition of mental state verbs. In Proc. of the 3rd Wkshp.
on Cognitive Modeling and Computational Linguistics.
Bloom, L., Hood, L., & Lightbowny, P. (1974). Imitation

in language development: If, when, and why. Cognitive
Psychology, 6(3), 380–420.
Brown, R. (1973). A first language: The early stages. Harvard U. Press.
Casenhiser, D., & Goldberg, A. (2005). Fast mapping between a phrasal form and meaning. Developmental Science, 8(6), 500–508.
Dowty, D. (1991). Thematic Proto-Roles and Argument Selection. Language, 67(3), 547–619.
Gleitman, L., Cassidy, K., Nappa, R., Papafragou, A., &
Trueswell, J. (2005). Hard words. Language Learning
and Development, 1(1), 23–64.
Goldberg, A. (1999). The emergence of the semantics of
argument structure constructions. The emergence of language, 197–212.
Kidd, E., Lieven, E., & Tomasello, M. (2006). Examining the
role of lexical frequency in the acquisition and processing
of sentential complements. Cognitive Development, 21(2),
93–107.
Kidd, E., Lieven, E. V., & Tomasello, M. (2010). Lexical
frequency and exemplar-based learning effects in language
acquisition: Evidence from sentential complements. Language Sciences, 32(1), 132–142.
Kipper, K., Korhonen, A., Ryant, N., & Palmer, M. (2008).
A large-scale classification of English verbs. Language Resources and Evaluation, 42(1), 21–40.
Kuczaj, S. (1977). The acquisition of regular and irregular
past tense forms. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 16(5), 589–600.
Lieven, E., Salomo, D., & Tomasello, M. (2009). Twoyear-old children’s production of multiword utterances: A
usage-based analysis. Cognitive Linguistics, 20(3).
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES project: Tools for
analyzing talk (Vol. 2). Psychology Press.
Matthews, D., Lieven, E., Theakston, A., & Tomasello, M.
(2005). The role of frequency in the acquisition of English
word order. Cognitive Development, 20(1), 121–136.
Naigles, L., & Hoff-Ginsberg, E. (1998). Why are some verbs
learned before other verbs? Effects of input frequency and
structure on children’s early verb use. Journal of Child
Language, 25(1), 95–120.
Sachs, J. (1983). Talking about the there and then: The
emergence of displaced reference in parent-child discourse.
Children’s language, 4.
Suppes, P. (1974). The semantics of children’s language.
American psychologist, 29(2), 103.
Theakston, A. (2004). The role of entrenchment in children’s
and adults’ performance on grammaticality judgment tasks.
Cognitive Development, 19(1), 15–34.
Tomasello, M. (2000). Do young children have adult syntactic competence? Cognition, 74(3), 209–253.
Wonnacott, E., Newport, E., & Tanenhaus, M. (2008). Acquiring and processing verb argument structure: Distributional learning in a miniature language. Cognitive Psychology, 56(3), 165–209.

1820

