UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Modelling the Supervisory System and Frontal Dysfunction: An Architecturally Grounded
Model of the Wisconsin Card Sorting Task

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0cp8m3rp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Sood, Mariam
Cooper, Richard

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Modelling the Supervisory System and Frontal Dysfunction:
An Architecturally Grounded Model of the Wisconsin Card Sorting Task
Mariam R. Sood
(msood01@mail.bbk.ac.uk)

Richard P. Cooper
(R.Cooper@bbk.ac.uk)

Department of Psychological Sciences, Birkbeck, University of London
Malet Street, London WC1E 7HX, UK
Abstract
We present a model of the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test, a
classical neuropsychological test frequently used to assess
deficits in executive functioning. The model is grounded in a
cognitive architecture based on the Supervisory System
theory of Norman and Shallice (1986) and evaluated against
data from control subjects and several groups of neurological
patients as reported by Stuss et al. (2000). The model is able
to account for control performance across a range of
dependent measures. When damaged in theoretically
motivated ways it is also able to capture the behaviour of the
different patient groups. Specifically, the model supports the
association by Shallice et al. (2008) of the function of tasksetting to left lateral prefrontal cortex, of the function of
attentiveness to inferior medial prefrontal cortex, and of the
function of monitoring to right lateral prefrontal cortex. The
implication of these results for the supervisory system
architecture and the localisation of function within prefrontal
cortex are discussed.
Keywords: Cognitive architecture; Supervisory system;
Wisconsin card sorting task; Frontal dysfunction.

Introduction
Several theories of the organisation of cognitive processes
have been proposed over the last 25 years. These cognitive
architectures generally comprise complex production
systems, and normally have their roots in behaviours in
specific cognitive domains (e.g., problem solving, as in,
Soar: Newell, 1990; associative memory, as in ACT-R:
Anderson, 2007; or immediate response tasks as in EPIC:
Meyer & Kieras, 1997). While such architectures have been
highly successful at accounting for a range of behavioural
effects, they are not well suited to modelling the behaviour
of neurological patients with focal brain damage. This is
largely because it is unclear how the functional components
of such architectures might be impaired without causing
complete breakdown of the system. The cognitive
architecture sketched by Norman and Shallice (1986) and
elaborated by Shallice et al. (2008), in contrast, provides a
modular view of cognition in which functional components
may operate more or less efficiently, and hence neurological
deficits might be more directly accounted for.
The Norman/Shallice theory draws a primary distinction
between routine behaviour, which is generated by a lower
level scheduling system – Contention Scheduling – and nonroutine behaviour, which is effected by a higher level
system – Supervisory System. This higher level system
operates indirectly on behaviour by modulating the
functioning of Contention Scheduling. When initially

described (Norman & Shallice, 1986), the situations
requiring Supervisory System input were clearly
enumerated but the subsystem’s functioning was specified
only in abstract terms. Those functions include what have
since come to be known as executive functions such as tasksetting, monitoring and working memory maintenance.
In a somewhat separate line of work, Shallice, Stuss and
colleagues (e.g. Stuss et al., 2000; Shallice et al., 2008) have
attempted to account for the deficits of several groups of
patients with focal frontal lobe lesions in terms of deficits
affecting specific executive functions which, they argue, are
effected by different regions of the prefrontal cortex. Thus,
the deficits of patients with left lateral prefrontal lesions
across a range of tasks are interpreted as reflecting impaired
task-setting, while the deficits of right lateral prefrontal
patients are interpreted as reflecting impaired monitoring.
Similarly, the deficits of patients with focal lesions affecting
inferior medial prefrontal regions are interpreted as
reflecting an impaired ability to sustain attention to a task,
while the deficits of patients with focal lesions affecting
superior medial prefrontal cortex are interpreted as
reflecting an impairment in “energisation”, i.e., mobilisation
of cognitive resources, corresponding phenomenologically
to cognitive effort.
Shallice et al. (2008) relate the four executive functions
discussed in the previous paragraph to the Supervisory
System, with a specific focus to how the two accounts relate
within a simple task-switching study. However these
authors provide only an informal characterisation of the
functions. They do not provide a precise computational
instantiation of the ideas. The goal of this paper is to
provide and evaluate such an instantiation. More
specifically we present a computational account of the
heterarchical organisation of the Supervisory System. The
account is grounded in a model of a specific task – the
Wisconsin Card Sorting Test (WCST). This widely used test
of executive function provides multiple dependent measures
that are sensitive to frontal lobe damage (Milner, 1963). We
report simulations of the behaviour of control subjects and
of four patient groups, comparing our results with those of
Stuss et al. (2000), who tested patients and controls on the
task.
The following sections briefly discuss the cognitive
architecture in which the model is framed, the Wisconsin
card sorting test and the neuropsychological group study
that provides the target data. Following this, we present the
model itself, the methodology for modelling control and

1354

Figure 1: The proposed functional organisation of the Supervisory System architecture. Hexagonal boxes represent
processes while rounded rectangles represent buffers or storage systems. Arrows show hypothesised connectivity between
components.
patient performance, and the respective simulation results.
We conclude by considering the implications of this work
for the computational specification of the Supervisory
System and more generally for the functional organisation
of higher cognition.

The Supervisory System Architecture
The Supervisory System proposed by Shallice, Stuss and
colleagues (e.g., Shallice et al., 2008) is a heterarchical
system comprising, amongst other things, four core subprocesses: task-setting, active monitoring, energisation and
attentiveness. The evidence for this organisation is drawn
from neuropsychological case studies where the nature of
deficits exhibited by frontal patients show subtle differences
based on the lesion location. For example, the impairment
exhibited by left prefrontal patients may be understood as
resulting from inefficient task strategy formation while right
prefrontal patients make errors that suggest poor ability to
monitor internal and external events. The deficits of inferior
medial prefrontal patients may stem from a characteristic
lack of attention while superior medial prefrontal patients
exhibit a longer (30%) start up delay in task execution
compared to other groups (for a review, see Shallice &
Cooper, 2011).
The cognitive architecture of the model described in this
paper is derived from the Contention Scheduling /
Supervisory System theory and is depicted in figure 1.
Processing within the Contention Scheduling components of
architecture is as follows: perceptual input enters Sensory
Stores. Potential responses are generated from this by Apply
Set subject to application of the current stimulus-response
mapping set. These responses are passed to a Response
Buffer before being generated as actions. The Generate
Response process also maintains Forward Model, which
represents the anticipated sensory feedback of the system’s
actions. The Supervisory System modulates the behaviour

of Contention Scheduling by two key processes: a)
Monitoring, which compares sensory feedback with
anticipated sensory feedback and rejects the current
stimulus-response mapping if there is a mismatch (i.e., an
unanticipated sensory input) by clearing Current Set, and b)
Task Setting, which sets a stimulus-response mapping when
Current Set is empty. Two other supervisory processes,
Attentiveness and Active Maintenance, work to counteract
decay which is assumed to operate on elements within
Current Set and Working Memory. With the exception of
Energisation, the model adequately represents all other subprocesses of the Supervisory System theory.

The Wisconsin Card Sorting Test
The Task
In order to evaluate the Supervisory System architecture we
consider its application to a specific task: the Wisconsin
Card Sorting Test (WCST). The WCST exists in various
forms. The version simulated here is the 64A version used
by Stuss et al. (2000). In this version of the task, subjects
are required to sort a deck of cards, 64 in total presented one
at a time, into four groups. Each card has a picture of a
specific shape in variable numbers and colours (e.g., one red
triangle or four blue squares; see figure 2). Four “target”
cards, differing with respect to the number, colour and shape
of items they depict, are provided and subjects are required
to place each successive card from the main deck under one
of the four target cards. In the 64A version, subjects are
informed of the three possible sorting criteria – sort by
colour, sort by number or sort by shape – prior to the test.
After each card is sorted, the subject is given feedback.
Based on the feedback, the subject should attempt to infer
the correct sorting rule and use it for subsequent sorts. Once
the subject correctly sorts 10 cards consecutively, the
experimenter changes the rule without warning. The ideal

1355

three or more consecutively correct responses) and other
errors. Patients with frontal lesions, compared to those with
non-frontal lesions and controls, exhibited more PPC, PPR
and set-loss errors. The error patterns exhibited by the
different frontal groups revealed subtle differences. For
example, in the 64A condition, all frontal groups except IM
showed significantly more PPC and PPR errors than
controls. In contrast, the IM group made significantly more
set-loss errors than patients from other frontal groups.

Modelling the WCST
Model Assumptions and Description

Figure 2: The Wisconsin Card Sorting Test, after two
cards have been sorted according to the colour of their
symbols and as a third card (two blue triangles) is
presented for sorting.
subject will detect this and select a new rule, based on the
feedback after each sorting attempt.
Neurologically healthy subjects have little difficulty in
this task. However patients with frontal lesions are prone to
perform poorly, frequently showing incapacity to change the
rule when the feedback is negative, i.e. they tend to
‘persevere’, but also showing ‘set loss’ errors, where they
appear to correctly infer a rule, but fail to follow that rule
for ten consecutive sorting trials, even with positive
feedback.

Neuropsychological Evidence
The motivation behind choosing the WCST for evaluation
of the supervisory system architecture over other executive
tasks is the availability of detailed empirical data published
by Stuss et al. (2000) on patients categorised with focal
lesions on the four brain regions of theoretical interest. The
empirical study carried out by Stuss et al. (2000) tested
seven groups of subjects. Four groups had focal frontal
lesions on left/right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
(LDL/RDL), superior medial (SM) and inferior medial (IM)
prefrontal regions. The fifth and the sixth patient groups had
lesions affecting left/right non-frontal brain regions and the
seventh group comprised neurologically healthy subjects.
The subjects were tested on three versions of WCST: 128,
64A and 64B. In the 128 version, subjects were not
provided any instructions on how to perform the test. In
64A version, subjects were informed of the three possible
sorting criteria beforehand, while in 64B version subjects
were also alerted when the rule was about to change. In each
case, the errors made by subjects were classified into four
categories: perseveration of preceding category (PPC: an
incorrect response that matches the preceding sorting
criterion), perseveration of preceding response (PPR: an
incorrect response that matches exactly the features on the
preceding trial), set-loss (an incorrect response following

The model discussed here is an elaboration of the
heterarchical Supervisory System theory (figure 1), with its
components configured for the WCST 64A condition of the
empirical study by Stuss et al. (2000). Consider first the
three buffers and two processes that make up Contention
Scheduling. When a card is to be sorted, a propositional
representation of the card appears in Sensory Stores. Apply
Set then consults Current Set for a representation of the
current sorting rule (e.g., sort by colour) and uses this in
conjunction with the representation in Sensory Stores (e.g.,
two blue triangles) to generate a putative response (e.g.,
place the card on the right-most pile) which is stored in
Response Buffer. Generate Response then produces the
actual response (storing a copy in Working Memory),
together with a representation of the anticipated
consequences of the response – the Forward Model. (In the
current implementation Forward Model is ignored, since the
anticipated consequence of any action is positive feedback.)
Processing within the Contention Scheduling components
is modulated by the Supervisory System components. First,
Monitoring may detect negative feedback in the sensory
store (or more generally, a mismatch between the contents
of Forward Model and Sensory Store). In such situations,
Monitoring will clear Current Set (on the assumption that
the current sorting rule is inappropriate). Second, Task
Setting may generate a putative sorting rule and place a
representation of that rule in Current Set. This occurs when
Current Set is empty (e.g., because the representation of the
previous sorting rule in Current Set has either decayed or
been explicitly deleted by Monitoring). Generation of a
putative sorting rule depends on the contents of Sensory
Buffer and recent responses stored in Working Memory.
Elements in the two supervisory buffers (Current Set and
Working Memory) have activation values that decay over
time. If the activation values fall below a threshold, the
buffer contents cannot be accessed. The supervisory
processes of Attentiveness and Active Maintenance work in
direct opposition to decay, exciting buffer elements so as to
prevent their loss
The model’s behaviour may be summarised as follows: At
the beginning of the task, the first sorting schema is
generated at random from among the three possible
schemas: sort-by-colour, sort-by-number and sort-by-form.
When a card is presented, the Contention Scheduler sorts

1356

Table 1: Parameters of the model.
Parameter
Monitoringexogenous
Monitoringendogenous
Tasksetnone
Tasksetrandom
Attentivenesspersistence

Range
0–1
0–1
0–1
0–1
0–1

Attentivenessboost

1 – 10

Attentivenessthreshold
Memorypersistence

0–1
0–1

Memoryboost

1 – 10

Memorythreshold

0–1

Description
If impaired, feedback is not acted upon
If impaired, drop in attention is not monitored
If impaired, unable to switch strategy
If impaired, unable to produce efficient strategy, a random strategy is chosen
The persistence (decay) rate associated with current-set activation
activationnew = Attentivenesspersistence × activationold ± noise
Boost rate associated with current-set activation, set at 1.25
activationnew = Attentivenessboost × activationold ± noise
Current-set activation threshold, set at 0.5
The persistence (decay) rate associated with working memory activation
activationnew = Memorypersistence × activationold ± noise
Boost rate associated with working memory activation, set at 1.25
activationnew = Memoryboost × activationold ± noise
Working memory activation threshold, set at 0.5

the card according to the sorting criterion stored in Current
Set. Feedback is monitored by Monitoring, a supervisory
process that clears Current Set in the event of negative
feedback. When Current Set is empty, Task Setting is
invoked. This process accesses Working Memory to gather
details of previous unsuccessful sorting attempts (if any can
be recalled) and generates a new potential sorting rule that
has not been recently used. If there is more than one
possible choice of rule consistent with current evidence,
Task Setting chooses at random from the available choices.
The model is implemented in the C programming
language. In order to ensure their independent nature, the
supervisory sub-processes and Contention Scheduling are
implemented as separate ‘threads’. Results are scored
according to the criteria followed by Stuss et al. (2000).

Behaviour of the Model
The model’s behaviour is dependent on a number of
parameters, which essentially determine the efficiency of
processing of the various sub-processes. Table 1 provides a
brief description of what these parameters represent and the
range of values they can take. There are essentially two
types of parameters: activation-related parameters
(thresholds, activation persistence and activation boost
parameters) and efficiency-related parameters. The latter
specify the probability of a subsystem functioning. For
instance, a value of 0.10 for Monitoringexogenous specifies that
monitoring is active roughly 10% of the time. The
remaining 90% of the time, the process does not function.
All parameters have optimal or ideal values. Thus, when
all efficiency parameters are set to 1.00, activation boost
rates are set to the reciprocals of corresponding persistence
rates (so that maintenance exactly counteracts decay), and
thresholds are set to 0.5, the model sorts optimally, correctly
sorting approximately 56 out of 64 cards, achieving 5
categories (i.e., correctly sorting 10 cards according to 5
different rules) and making errors only when it is attempting
to discover a rule following negative feedback.

Modelling Control Performance
When neurologically healthy subjects attempt the WCST
they generally do not perform at the optimal level. Thus the
control subjects of Stuss et al. (2000) achieved on average
3.9 categories, made occasional perseverative errors, where
they continued sorting by a rule even given negative
feedback, and also occasionally produced set-loss errors,
where they appeared to correctly infer the sorting rule, only
to forget it even though the feedback was positive (see
figure 3, right-most bars). In order to model control
performance, normally distributed random noise was added
to activation values of Working Memory and Current Set
elements, the persistence of activation values was decreased,
and the efficiency of supervisory processes was decreased.
Systematic exploration yielded performance similar to
controls when these parameters were set as follows: noise
standard deviation = 0.05; Monitoringexogenous =
Monitoringendogenous = Tasksetnone = Tasksetrandom = 0.90;
Memorypersistence = 0.70; and Attentivenesspersistence = 0.76.
With these values, the model generates perseveration and
set-loss errors at rates comparable to those of the control
subjects of Stuss et al. (2000) – see figure 3. The values
indicate that control performance can be modelled by
introducing slight imperfections to the Supervisory System.

Modelling Frontal Dysfunction
Based on the arguments of Shallice et al. (2008), we
associate exogenous monitoring (Monitoringexogenous), task
setting (Tasksetnone) and attentiveness (Attentivenesspersistence)
with right dorsolateral, left dorsolateral and inferior medial
prefrontal patients respectively. Although endogenous
monitoring (Monitoringendogenous) and task random setting
(Tasksetrandom) are important elements of monitoring and
task setting processes, analysis of the model’s behaviour
revealed that they do not contribute significantly to the
dependent measures and hence they have been excluded
from the analysis of frontal dysfunction. Moreover we do

1357

PPC%
30%

SimulaEon%data%

25%

Mean%PPC%

20%

Stuss%data%

22%
19%
15.7%

14.8%

15%

10%

10%

7.1% 7.5%

6.2%

5%
0%
Monitor_Ext%
(RDL)%%

TaskSet_Nil%
(LDL)%

ADenEveness%
(IM)%%

ctl%%(CTL)%

Thus an impairment level of 0.00 in Monitoringexogenous, 0.10
in Tasksetnone, and 0.74 in Attentivenesspersistence produced a
mean category measure comparable to RDL, LDL and IM
patients respectively. When setting these parameters to
model the impairments of the three patient groups, all other
parameters were fixed at the levels used to simulate control
subjects. Simulation data on three dependent measures –
PPC, PPR and set-loss errors – for each patient category
obtained in this way and averaged over 10 runs of the model
is shown in figure 3, plotted against the corresponding
patient data published by Stuss et al.

General Discussion

Group%

PPR%
25%

SimulaAon%data%
Stuss%data%

20%
15.9%

Mean%PPR%

15%
11.5%

13.1%
9%

10%
5%

1.5%

3%
1.1% 1.25%

0%
Monitor_Ext% TaskSet_Nil%(LDL)%% A@enAveness%
(RDL)%
(IM)%%

ctl%%(CTL)%

Group%

Set(Loss%
5$

SimulaDon$data$
Stuss$data$

4$

Mean%Set(loss%

3.2$
3$
2$

2.5$
1.8$
1.2$

1$

1.7$
1.1$

0.3$

1$

0$
Monitor_Ext$(RDL)$TaskSet_Nil$(LDL)$$ACenDveness$(IM)$$
*1$

ctl$$(CTL)$

Group%

Figure 3: Model performance versus that of the
patients of Stuss et al. (2000). Error bars represent
one standard error from the mean.
not attempt to account for the behaviour of the superior
medial prefrontal patients as the model does not have an
explicit representation of the energisation process.
We adopt the methodological approach of modelling
patient performance by reducing the efficiency of the
process held to be impaired in the corresponding patient
group. Specifically, we adjust the relevant parameter so that
the model accurately captures the mean number of
categories achieved by each set of patients in the Stuss et al.
study (0.6 categories for RDL patients, 1.3 categories for
LDL patients and 2.6 categories for IM patients), and then
compare the model’s behaviour on the three dependent
measures described above (PPC, PPR and set-loss errors).

As shown in figure 3, the model of WCST behaviour,
embedded within the broader Supervisory System /
Contention Scheduling architecture, is able to provide a
good account of control subject behaviour across four
dependent measures: categories obtained, PPC errors, PPR
errors and set-loss errors. This provides support – albeit
weak support – both for the Supervisory System /
Contention Scheduling architecture and for the model of
WCST within it. However, equally important for the current
work is the behaviour of the model when damaged and its
relation to that of neurological patients. When damaged in
theoretically motivated ways, the model reproduces several
key features of the behaviour of neurological patients. Most
critically, an impairment of exogenous monitoring leads to
elevated levels of PPC and PPR errors, as seen in right
dorsolateral prefrontal patients. An impairment of task
setting leads to a similar error profile, as seen in left
dorsolateral prefrontal patients. Finally, an impairment of
attentiveness leads to elevated set loss errors, as seen in
patients with inferior medial prefrontal lesions. This
provides further support for both the model and the
association of these supervisory functions with the different
regions of prefrontal cortex.
The results must be interpreted with caution, however.
First, the model performs similarly with impairments to
either exogenous monitoring or task setting. While this is
consistent with patient behaviour, it supports an argument
originally made by Stuss et al. (2000) that the erroneous
behaviour of their right dorsolateral and left dorsolateral
groups, whilst qualitatively and quantitatively similar, may
in fact be due to different functional impairments. The
model demonstrates that the WCST is unable to
discriminate between these functional impairments (at least
with respect to PPC and PPR errors), and that empirical
studies of the two patient groups on other, more
discriminating, tasks is necessary if one is to make the
argument that the functions of (exogenous) monitoring and
task setting are indeed supported by different regions of
prefrontal cortex.
The reverse side of this argument, however, derives from
the fact that inferior medial patients produce elevated
numbers of set-loss errors but not of PPC or PPR errors.
This pattern of behaviour is produced by an impairment to
the effectiveness of the attentiveness sub-process. Thus the

1358

model supports the treatment of ‘attentiveness’ as a
functionally and structurally distinct sub-process, as well as
the ‘impaired attentiveness’ account of inferior medial
prefrontal patient performance.
A second caution regarding the results concerns the rate
of set-loss errors in simulation of RDL patient performance,
which is lower than that seen in patient behaviour. This is in
part because the model must sort a minimum number of
consecutively presented cards correctly (and hence
demonstrate that it is following a rule) before an error can
be counted as a set-loss error. With severe impairments in
the model, this is rare. Hence the opportunity for set loss
errors is rare. We have simulated the RDL patient group by
setting Monitoringexogenous to 0.00 in order to match
performance on the number of categories correctly sorted.
Perhaps this level of impairment is too severe. This is an
issue to be addressed in future work.
The issue of severity relates to the methodology employed
in simulating patient behaviour. Patient performance was
modelled by choosing one parameter value to match the
number of categories achieved by the model to that of the
relevant patient group. This does not take account of the
heterogeneity of each patient group – not all patients were
equally severely impaired – and a more appropriate
methodology would be one that attempted to match the
varying severity of individual patients, rather than of each
group as a whole. This is an issue for further research,
though in the absence of individual subject data, a plausible
strategy may be to sample different levels of severity, as
used by Cooper et al. (2005) in modelling the action errors
of neurological patients.
Two more general questions concern the nature of
supervisory processes and the Contention Scheduling /
Supervisory System architecture within which the WCST
model is embedded. Considering first the architectural issue,
the model demonstrates that the functional decomposition of
Contention Scheduling and the Supervisory System is able
to support behaviour on a complex task, and so the
Contention Scheduling / Supervisory System architecture
provides a viable alternative to production system
architectures such as ACT-R, Soar and EPIC. At the same
time, the architecture remains relatively underspecified and
substantial elaboration of the architecture and its
subcomponents (e.g., through application to other tasks) is
required before it can be fully compared with these
alternatives.
With regard to the nature of supervisory processes, many
theorists appear to assume, at least implicitly, a distinction
between supervisory and non-supervisory processes. There
is, however, some debate about whether the supervisory
system is most appropriately viewed as a unitary system
(e.g., Duncan, 2010) or as functionally heterogeneous (e.g.,
Stuss, & Benson, 1986; Shallice, & Cooper, 2011), and
whether prefrontal cortex is better viewed as functionally
hierarchical (e.g., Badre, 2008) or functionally heterarchical
(Shallice & Burgess, 1996; Shallice et al., 2008). The model
described in this paper substantiates the theoretical stand of

Shallice and colleagues, but again further work is required.
A possible extension to the present model is to generalise it
to other executive tasks such as Tower of Hanoi, Tower of
London, Stroop test etc. Applying the architecture to other
executive tasks will allow for better validation of the
theoretical hypotheses, which are not adequately and
independently assessed by WCST.

References
Anderson, J. R. (2007). How Can the Human mind Occur in
the Physical Universe? Oxford University Press, Oxford,
UK.
Badre, D. (2008). Cognitive control, hierarchy, and the
rostro-caudal organization of the frontal lobes. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 12(5), 193-200.
Cooper, R.P., Schwartz, M.F., Shallice, T. & Yule, P.
(2005). The simulation of action disorganisation in
complex activities of daily living. Cognitive
Neuropsychology, 22, 959–1004.
Duncan, J. (2010). The multiple-demand (MD) system of
the primate brain: mental programs for intelligent
behaviour. Trends in Cognitive Science, 14, 172-179.
Kieras, D. E, & Meyer, D. E. (1997). An overview of the
EPIC architecture for cognition and performance with
application to human-computer interaction. HumanComputer Interaction, 12, 391-438.
Milner, B. (1963). Effects of different brain lesions on card
sorting. Archives of Neurology, 9, 90-100.
Newell, A. (1990). Unified Theories of Cognition. Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Norman, D. A. & Shallice, T. (1986). Attention to action:
willed and automatic control of behaviour. In R.
Davidson, G. Schwartz & D. Shapiro (eds.) Consciousness and Self Regulation, Volume 4. NY: Plenum.
Shallice, T., & Burgess, P.W. (1996). The domain of
supervisory processes and temporal organisation of
behaviour. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society of London, B351, 1405–1412.
Shallice, T., & Cooper, R.P. (2011). The Organisation of
Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Shallice, T., Stuss, D. T., Picton, T. W., Alexander, M. P., &
Gillingham, S. (2008). Mapping task switching in frontal
cortex through neuropsychological group studies.
Frontiers in Neuroscience, 2, 79-85.
Sood, M. R. (2012). Executive Function Deficits of
Neurological Patients with Frontal lobe injury: Analysis
using Computational Modelling. Unpublished master’s
thesis. Birkbeck, University of London, United Kingdom.
Stuss, D. T., & Benson, D. F. (1986). The Frontal Lobes.
New York: Raven Press
Stuss, D. T., Levine, B., Alexander, M. P., Hong, J.,
Palumbo, C., Hamer, L., Murphy, K.J. & Izukawa, D.
(2000). Wisconsin Card Sorting Test performance in
patients with focal frontal and posterior brain damage:
Effects of lesion location and test structure on separable
cognitive processes. Neuropsychologia, 38, 388–402.

1359

