UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
More is up… and right: Random number generation along two axes

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3cx722ps

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Winter, Bodo
Matlock, Teenie

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

More is up… and right: Random number generation along two axes
Bodo Winter (bodo@bodowinter.com)
Teenie Matlock (tmatlock@ucmerced.edu)
Cognitive and Information Sciences, University of California, Merced
Merced, CA 95403 USA
Abstract
Research on the mental representation of numbers has
focused on a horizontally aligned mental number line, but
more and more findings have begun to implicate a vertical
orientation as well. We investigate the relationship between
these two orientations when people generate random
numbers. In the horizontal condition, people generated larger
numbers when they looked right as opposed to left. In the
vertical condition, people generated larger numbers when
they looked up as opposed to down. We present two main
results based on analyses that compare the two spatial
orientations. First, we show that the vertical effect was
stronger than the horizontal one. Second, we show a weak
correlation between the vertical and the horizontal effect,
potentially suggesting a shared underlying mechanism.
Keywords: mental number line; SNARC;
representation; mathematical cognition; metaphor

numerical

Introduction
People use numbers for practically everything: counting
coins, ordering dinner, making an appointment, filling out
tax forms, and more. But how do they represent numbers in
the head? Research on numerical representation has focused
on the link between numbers and spatial cognition.
Neuroimaging studies consistently find that the intraparietal
sulcus is implicated in numerical as well as spatial tasks
(Hubbard, Piazza, Pinel, & Dehaene, 2005). And across
several neuropathological disorders, deficits in spatial
cognition are correlated with deficits in numerical cognition
(Zorzi, Priftis & Umiltà, 2002; Rotzer, Loenneker, Kucian,
Martin, Klaver & von Aster, 2009).
One proposal as to how we represent numbers is the idea
of a horizontally oriented mental number line, where smaller
numbers are associated with left perceptual space and larger
numbers with right perceptual space (at least in Western
cultures). Evidence for such a representation comes from the
Spatial-Numerical Association of Response Code effect
(SNARC), which revealed that people respond faster to
relatively larger numbers with their right hand, and faster to
relatively smaller numbers with their left hand (Dehaene,
Bossini & Giraux, 1993). This effect has been replicated in
over 100 experiments (Wood, Nuerk, Willmes &, Fischer,
2008), and similar effects have been found with pointing
(Fischer, 2003), body movements (Hartmann, Grabherr, &
Last, 2011), handwriting (Perrone, de Hevia, Bricolo, &
Girelli, 2010) and many other methodologies.
While there is much converging evidence for horizontally
oriented numerical representations, more and more findings

are emerging that also support the presence of a vertical
mental number line. For example, when people are moved
upwards by a lifting chair while they generate a “random”
sequence of numbers, generated numbers are “higher” than
when the chair is moving downwards (Hartmann, Grabherr
& Last, 2011). Similarly, an upwards directed eye
movement predicts that the next number in a randomly
generated sequence will be “higher” than the preceding
number (Loetscher, Bockisch, Nicholls, & Brugger, 2010).
Relatively larger numbers also facilitate upwards directed
saccades (Schwarz & Keus, 2004) and upwards directed
spatial attention (Pecher & Boot, 2011).
Evidence for a vertical representation of number also
comes from language processing: When people read
sentences that contain the word “more”, people are faster to
respond with an upwards oriented response button as
opposed to a downwards oriented response button (Sell &
Kaschak, 2012). The opposite is true for sentences that
contain the word “less”. Finally, the classic SNARC
paradigm, too, works with vertically oriented response
buttons (Ito & Hatta, 2004; Müller & Schwarz, 2007; Shaki
& Fischer, 2012), where larger numbers facilitate responses
to a high button and smaller numbers to a low button.
The potential existence of two orientations along which
numbers are represented naturally leads to the question:
What is the relation between the horizontal and vertical
mental number line? From the get-go, research on the
horizontal number line emphasized the cultural nature of
spatial numerical associations, where the orientation of the
horizontal axis is thought to stem from a culture’s writing
direction (Dehaene et al., 1993; Göbel, Shaki, & Fischer,
2011; for a related perspective focusing on cultural aspects,
see Núñez, 2011). As reading and writing are very
entrenched behaviors, one could imagine the horizontal
mapping to be stronger than the vertical one.
The vertical SNARC effect, on the other hand, has been
suggested to come from embodied interactions with the
world. Cognitive linguists working on Conceptual Metaphor
Theory (e.g., Lakoff, 1987) argue that we build up a mental
connection between verticality and quantity because we
repeatedly experience a correlation between these two
domains in our environment (e.g., when we pour water into
a glass, as quantity increases, verticality increases as well).
Given that the vertical mapping is also connected to
entrenched patterns of language use (“this is a high
number”, “rents are rising”), one could imagine vertical
SNARC effects to be stronger than horizontal ones.
Holmes and Lourenco (2011, 2012) explicitly compared
the two orientations by pitting them against each other:

3789

When participants had to respond to a top/left and to a
bottom/right button, people were quicker to respond to the
left button with smaller numbers and to the right button with
larger numbers. As this mapping goes against the vertical
mental number line but produces a regular horizontal
SNARC effect nonetheless, Holmes and Lourenco conclude
that the horizontal orientation “trumps” the vertical.
We follow up on the work by Holmes and Lourenco
(2011, 2012) by providing another comparison between
horizontal and vertical mappings with a different task,
namely, a random number generation task. We pursue two
main questions: First, we compare the relative strength of
the horizontal and the vertical effect. Second, we look to see
whether the horizontal and the vertical effect are related to
each other across individuals. Thus, rather than pitting the
two orientations against each other, we take an individual
differences perspective, comparing an individual
participant’s propensity to align numbers on the vertical axis
to her propensity to align numbers horizontally. This
approach is inspired by work suggesting considerable
individual differences in how numbers are mapped onto
space (e.g., Fischer & Campens, 2008; Fischer, 2008;
Beecham, Reeve, & Wilson, 2009). Moreover, studies on
individual difference have been used for a range of different
phenomena to investigate the question whether different
tasks potentially share the same underlying mechanism
(e.g., see Stanovich & West, 2000). Thus, if the vertical and
the horizontal effect are related across individuals, they can
be seen as tapping into the same system.

Experiment
The task was a random number generation task used by
Loetscher et al. (2008) and Hartmann et al. (2011) designed
to study spatial numerical associations. Participants called
out numbers during rhythmic head movements. In one
block, head movements were along the horizontal axis, in
another, along the vertical. In line with the horizontal
SNARC effect and the previous findings of Loetscher et al.
(2008), we expected numbers to be larger when people look
towards the right. In line with the vertical SNARC effect,
we expected numbers to be larger when people were looking
upwards.

Procedure
Participants were asked to call out numbers between 1-30 to
a beat of 0.5 Hz, played by an electronic metronome
(following the procedure of Loetscher et al., 2008). There
were three blocks: A horizontal block, vertical block, and
straight-ahead block. The order of horizontal vs. vertical
block was counter-balanced across participants. The straight
block was always last. We asked participants to generate 40
numbers in the straight block and 80 numbers in the vertical
and horizontal one. Half the participants started left in the
horizontal block and down in the vertical block, and the
other half started with the right and up positions.

We built up the procedure in pieces: We first instructed
participants to perform the rhythmic head movements to the
beat, “as large as possible while still being comfortable”.
Then, we introduced the random number generation
component, participants were told to be “as random as
possible” and to avoid counting sequences. We reminded
participants that randomness in this context means that each
number has equal likelihood, and that each number is
independent from the preceding one (see Towse & Cheshire,
2007). They were also asked not to call out the number
while performing the movement but when the head was
stationary in the corner positions of each axis. To avoid
bias, the experimenter never mentioned numbers or spatial
language to describe numbers (“high number”, “large
number”). Following Loetscher et al. (2008), we asked
participants to close their eyes while performing the task.

Participants
Sixty-five UC Merced undergraduates (all native speakers
of English) participated in the experiment for extra credit in
a social sciences course. A total of 6 participants (9% of the
total data) were excluded from the analyses because they
were unable to finish the task (frequent self-interruptions,
incapability of following the beat even after sustained
practice).

Analysis
Loetscher et al. (2008) binned numbers into large (>15) and
small (<15) numbers, but we took a more direct approach,
analyzing all generated numbers as a continuous measure.
We performed two separate analyses, one on absolute
numbers (whether the average was larger for one position
over the other), and another on relative numbers (whether
the average difference to the preceding number in the
sequence was smaller or larger).
We analyzed the data with mixed models using R (R Core
Team, 2012) and the package lme4 (Bates, Maechler &
Bolker, 2012). Our analysis controlled for the by-participant
variability in the response (e.g., some participants might
generate overall larger numbers than others), as well as for
differential responses to the head turning manipulation1.
Because Holmes and Lourenco (2012) had found that it
matters whether people are exposed to a vertical or a
horizontal block first (ibid. 1049, footnote 4), it was
necessary to control for the effect of Block Order. It was
necessary to control for the effect of Starting Orientation
(left/down vs. right/up) because people tend to have a
counting or “runs” strategy (see Towse & Cheshire, 2007).
Such a strategy could create spurious spatial mappings if
Starting Orientation were not controlled for. For example, a
participant who tended to count upwards and start at the
down position might generate numbers that are, on average,
higher in the up position than those in the down position.
1

In other words, the model included both random intercepts and
slopes (cf., Barr, Levy, Scheepers & Tily, 2013). We also tested
the interaction of Head Position with the control variables Block

3790

Finally, we also controlled for potential long-term changes
in each block to see whether the horizontal and vertical
effects would become stronger or weaker as the experiment
progressed.

2

Relative difference

1.5

Results
Compressive scaling Before examining the effect of spatial
position, we looked at whether participants’ randomly
generated numbers would exhibit a small number bias (see
Loetscher & Brugger, 2007). A regression of frequency on
number reveals that on average, per each increase of number
by 1, frequency decreased by 8.96 (SE = 1.78)
(F(1,28)=25.35, p=0.000025, R2=0.46). There was no
interaction between the small number bias and response
orientation (horizontal, vertical, straight) (F(2,84)=2.539,
p=0.085). Thus, within each condition (horizontal, vertical,
straight), the small number bias was of similar magnitude.

1
0.5
0
-0.5
-1
-1.5
-2

Left

Right

Horizontal

Down

Up

Vertical

Figure 1: Average relative difference
for the horizontal and vertical blocks. Error bars
indicate standard errors (taken from the model).

Order effects For absolute numbers, the control variables
(Block Order, Starting Orientation, Trial Order) did not
interact with Head Position in the horizontal block
(χ2(3)=1.36, p=0.71) or in the vertical block (χ2(3)=3.47,
p=0.32). For relative numbers, the control variables also
failed to produce any interaction in the horizontal block
(χ2(3)=3.56, p=0.31) and in the vertical block (χ2(3)=4.78,
p=0.19). This suggests that the effects reported below are
relatively independent from these other factors.

Effect sizes2 Standardized effect measures showed stronger
effects for the vertical than for the horizontal condition for
absolute and relative numbers. This is also reflected in the
larger coefficients for the vertical condition in the analyses
reported above, as well as the significant interaction
between Axis and Position for relative numbers.
Table 1: Effect sizes for absolute and
relative numbers by condition.

Absolute numbers Numbers generated were on average
0.26 (SE = 0.24) larger when people looked to the right
versus to the left, but the effect was not significant
(χ2(1)=1.2, p=0.27). There was, however, a significant effect
of vertical position (χ2(1)=7.91, p=0.0049), with numbers
being 0.67 (SE = 0.24) larger up as opposed to down. To
test whether the difference between the two axes is
significant, we coded “up” and “right” together and “left”
and “down”, combining them into a single factor “Position”.
There was no interaction between “Position” and “Axis
Orientation”. Thus, for absolute numbers, there is no
conclusive evidence for the vertical effect being stronger.

Analysis
Horizontal, absolute
Vertical, absolute
Horizontal, relative
Vertical, relative

Relative numbers There was a significant effect of
horizontal position (χ2(1)=4.31, p=0.038), with numbers
being +0.52 (SE = 0.25) larger than the preceding number
when people looked right versus left, and a significant effect
of vertical position (χ2(1)=8.13, p=0.004), with numbers
being +1.34 (SE = 0.46) larger than the preceding number in
the up position versus the down position (see Fig. 1). An
analysis that combined both axis orientations also yielded a
significant interaction of Axis Orientation and Position
(χ2(1)=10.706, p=0.001), with the vertical effect predicted to
be stronger by +0.82 (SE = 0.47).

Cohen’s d
0.17
0.43
0.44
0.72

Individual differences We analyzed individual differences
by looking at difference scores for right minus left
(henceforth “horizontal bias”) and for up minus down
(henceforth “vertical bias”). For the horizontal condition,
61.5% (40 participants) showed a horizontal bias (positive
difference score), in line with the SNARC effect for both
absolute and relative numbers. Similarly, 61.5% of all
participants showed a vertical bias for both absolute and
relative numbers.
While only ~15% (10 people) had no horizontal bias and
no vertical bias (hence, showing opposite effects of what
was predicted by both mappings), about 38% (25 people)
had both a horizontal bias and a vertical bias
simultaneously. However, the majority of participants (30
people, 46%) had either one bias or the other. Table 2
summarizes this result:

2

As there are no standardized effect size measures for mixed
models, we chose Cohen’s d as shorthand. To calculate this
measure, we used a by-participants analysis (averaging over trials).

3791

Table 2: Individuals with horizontal or vertical bias.

Vertical

yes
no

Horizontal
yes
no
25
15
15
10

The preceding discussion of individual differences
examined propensity to show vertical or horizontal effects
categorically (sign of the difference score), yet it is also
useful to carefully consider the relative strength of the
vertical or horizontal bias per person.

4

(a)

z-scored Vertical Difference

3
2
1
0
-1
-2
4

(b)

3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-2

-1

0

1

2

z-scored Horizontal Difference

Figure 2: Correlations of horizontal bias (x-axis) and
vertical bias (y-axis) for (a) absolute numbers and (b)
relative numbers. Dashed lines represent correlation
without influential points; solid lines with all data.
The solid lines that are shown in Fig. 2 reveal an apparent
correlation between the vertical and the horizontal bias. For
both absolute numbers and relative numbers, this correlation
became significant (absolute: t(63)=2.62, p=0.011; relative:
t(63)=2.35, p=0.022). However, visual inspection and
influence diagnostics revealed that there were a few
individuals with substantial leverage on the data. If data
points with large Cook’s distance (over 4/(N-k-1)) were
excluded, both correlations cease to be significant (absolute:
t(57)=0.9, p=0.37; relative: t(57)=0.57, p=0.57).

Discussion
Vertical versus horizontal mappings For both absolute
and relative numbers, we found stronger effects for the
vertical than for the horizontal axis (as indicated by Cohen’s
d and model coefficients), and for relative numbers, the
vertical axis produced significantly stronger results than the
horizontal axis.
Why did we find the vertical mapping to be stronger than
the horizontal one? And, does this necessarily stand against
the results of Holmes and Lourenco (2011, 2012) discussed
above? We are cautious to conclude that these differences in
effect size reflect a straightforward difference in the
“strength” or “entrenchment” of the underlying mappings.
There are several alternative reasons for why one mapping
could lead to stronger or more consistent effects than the
other. For example, people often perform smaller vertical
head movements than horizontal ones (Glenn & Vilis, 1992;
Pelz, Hayhoe, & Loeber, 2001), which could have made
vertical head movements more salient. People’s vertical
saccades are also known to be slower and less accurate than
their horizontal saccades (Collewijn, Erkelens, & Steinman,
1988). And research on the vertical-horizontal illusion
shows that people generally overestimate vertical extent
more than horizontal extent (Finger & Spelt, 1947;
Chapanis & Mankin, 1967; Prinzmetal & Gettleman, 1993).
Even though the difference in saccades and the verticalhorizontal illusion might be deemed irrelevant given that
our task required participants to close their eyes, overall,
these results point to fundamental asymmetries between
horizontal and vertical space. Thus, it is not impossible that
we found vertical effects simply because vertical space is
more salient than horizontal space.
This alternative explanation opens up many interesting
avenues for future research. As there are considerable interindividual differences in the amount and degree to which
individuals move their head (Fuller, 1992; Stahl, 1999), one
could correlate each participant’s “head movement
propensity” with the size of the vertical or horizontal effect.
Ideally, one would like to correlate the strength of the head
movement with the results of the number generation task on
a trial-by-trial basis. The vertical and horizontal biases are
predicted to be stronger for relatively larger movements.
Moreover, there are also individual differences in the
strength of the vertical-horizontal illusion (e.g., Coren &
Porac, 1987). The susceptibility to this illusion could also be
correlated with the horizontal or vertical bias. Here, people
who have a stronger vertical-horizontal illusion should show
stronger vertical effects. If, however, vertical space is more
“salient” across the board, it does not fully account for the
difference between Holmes and Lourenco (2011, 2012) and
the present study, because presumably, the same verticalhorizontal asymmetries should be at play.
Here, it is noteworthy that many studies that found
vertical effects either invoke random number generation
(present study, Loetscher et al., 2010 and Hartmann et al.,
2011) or approximate quantity information such as the
words “more” or “less” (Sell & Kaschak, 2012; Pecher &

3792

Boot, 2011). Moreover, Holmes and Lourenco (2012) found
vertical effects only after priming magnitude. This invites
the hypothesis that the vertical mapping might be stronger
in tasks that invoke a more approximate number system.
The small number bias observed in our participants’
responses would support this view, as a compressive scaling
of the mental number line is associated with the idea of the
approximate number system.
However, there are also linguistic reasons to expect that
vertical effects are stronger with approximate magnitude
representations: We frequently use the words “high” and
“low” and “rising” and “falling” to talk about numbers, but
we do not use horizontal spatial language the same way. The
linguistic vertical metaphors are degree words that
underspecify the exact quantity. The underspecification of
verbal metaphors might make the vertical mapping
particularly amenable for approximate magnitude
representations as opposed to exact quantity representations.
Finally, if, as cognitive linguists have claimed (Lakoff,
1987), the vertical mapping really comes from embodied
interactions with the world, a connection between
approximate magnitude and verticality might ultimately
have physical origins: The environmental correlation
between verticality and quantity often involves uncountable
quantities rather than exact numbers, for instance, when
pouring liquid into a container, or when creating a pile of
pebbles. The horizontal mapping, on the other hand, might
be more connected to exact numerical representations
because of its connection to writing and symbolic
representations of numbers, which are ideal for representing
exact sequences (e.g., calendars, numbers on keyboards,
rulers).

having neither. There was a weak correlation between a
participant’s vertical bias and a participant’s horizontal bias.
This may initially seem to suggest overlapping mechanisms
for the vertical and the horizontal mappings. However,
closer inspection revealed that this correlation was largely
due to a few individuals. Based on the results obtained in
the current study, it is clear that more research is needed to
determine whether the connection between the vertical and
horizontal mapping holds across different tasks.

Absence of order effects The absence of any order effects
in the current study is somewhat surprising. That Block
Order did not affect the results suggests that whatever
mapping is most preferred by a participant is not primed by
being exposed to a vertical or a horizontal block first. One
could imagine that the vertical or horizontal effects are
entirely task dependent, resulting only after a bit of
exposure to the up/down or left/right going movements. The
absence of an interaction between Trial Order and Head
Position suggests that this was not the case. Thus, it appears
that participants responded in line with horizontal or vertical
SNARC effects from the very beginning of each block. In
other words, the spatial numerical associations appear to
have been relatively stable.

References

Individual differences Finally, analyzing the data of
separate participants revealed considerable differences
between individuals, similar to other studies that have found
considerable differences in the way people respond to
numerical cognition tasks (Fischer & Campens, 2008;
Fischer, 2008; Beecham, Reeve, & Wilson, 2009). The most
prevalent pattern was that participants either had a
horizontal bias or a vertical bias, with a considerable
number (~38%) having both and only a handful (~15%)

Conclusions
We found that randomly generated numbers were “higher”
when people looked upwards and when people looked to the
right. We found the vertical effect to be stronger than the
horizontal one. There were also considerable interindividual differences: Some people were more easily
affected by the vertical manipulation, others, more easily by
the horizontal manipulation. Across individuals, there was a
weak correlation between the vertical and the horizontal
effect. Future research needs to find out under which
conditions vertical effects are stronger than horizontal ones,
and whether the weak relationship between these two effects
holds across different experimental paradigms.

Acknowledgments
We thank Michael Spivey, Drew Abney, Timo Röttger, and
Tyler Marghetis for helpful comments and suggestions. We
thank Anne Warlamount for making lab space available for
this experiment.

Barr, D.J., Levy, R., Scheepers, C. & Tily, H. (2013).
Random-effects structure for confirmatory hypothesis
testing: Keep it maximal. Journal of Memory and
Language, 68, 255-278.
Bates, D., Maechler, M. & Bolker, B. (2012). lme4: Linear
mixed-effects models using S4 classes. R package version
R package version 0.999999-0.
Beecham, R., Reeve, R. A., & Wilson, S. J. (2009). Spatial
representations are specific to different domains of
knowledge. PLoS ONE, 4, e5543.
Chapanis, A., & Mankin, D. A. (1967). The verticalhorizontal illusion in a visually-rich environment.
Perception & Psychophysics, 2, 249-255.
Collewijn, H., Erkelens, C. J., & Steinman, R. M. (1988).
Binocular co-ordination of human vertical saccadic eye
movements. Journal of Physiology, 404, 183-197.
Coren, S., & Porac, C. (1987). Individual differences in
visual-geometric illusions: Predictions from measures of
spatial cognitive abilities. Perception & Psychophysics,
41, 211-219.
Dehaene, S., Bossini, S., & Giraux, P. (1993). The mental
representation of parity and number magnitude. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 122, 371-396.

3793

Finger, F. W., & Spelt, D. K. (1947). The illustration of the
horizontal-vertical illusion. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 37, 243-250.
Fischer, M. H. (2003). Spatial representations in number
processing: evidence from a pointing task. Visual
Cognition, 10, 493-508.
Fischer, M.H. (2008). Finger counting habits modulate
spatial-numerical associations. Cortex, 44, 386-392.
Fischer, M. H., & Campens, H. (2008). Pointing to numbers
and grasping magnitudes. Experimental Brain Research,
192, 149-153.
Fuller, J. H. (1992). Head movement propensity.
Experimental Brain Research, 92, 152-164.
Glenn, B., & Vilis, T. (1992). Violations of listing's law
after large eye and head gaze shifts. Journal of
Neurophyshiology, 68, 309-318.
Göbel, S. M., Shaki, S., & Fischer, M. H. (2011). The
Cultural Number Line: A Review of Cultural and
Linguistic Influences on the Development of Number
Processing. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 42,
543-565.
Hartmann, M., Grabherr, L., & Last, F. W. (2011). Moving
along the mental number line: Interactions between
whole-body motion and numerical cognition. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 38, 1416-1427.
Holmes, K. J., & Lourenco, S. F. (2011). Horizontal trumps
vertical in the spatial organization of numerical
magnitude. In L. Carlson, C. Hölscher, & T. Shipley
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 2276-2281). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Holmes, K. J., & Lourenco, S. F. (2012). Orienting numbers
in mental space: Horizontal organization trumps vertical.
The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 65,
1044-1051.
Hubbard, E. M., Piazza, M., Pinel, P., & Dehaene, S.
(2005). Interactions between number and space in parietal
cortex. Nature Reviews, 6, 435-448.
Ito, Y., & Hatta, T. (2004). Spatial structure of quantitative
representation of numbers: Evidence from the SNARC
effect. Memory and Cognition, 32, 662-673.
Lakoff, G. (1987). Women, fire, and dangerous things:
What categories reveal about the mind. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Loetscher, T., Bockisch, C. J., & Brugger, P. (2008).
Looking for the answer: The mind’s eye in number space.
Neuroscience, 151, 725-729.
Loetscher, T., Bockisch, C., Nicholls, M. E. R., & Brugger,
P. (2010). Eye position predicts what number you have in
mind. Current Biology, 20, R264-265.
Loetscher, T., & Brugger, P. (2007). Exploring number
space by random digit generation. Experimental Brain
Research, 180, 655-665.
Loetscher, T., Schwarz, U., Schubiger, M., & Brugger, P.
(2008). Head turns bias the brain’s internal random
generator. Current Biology, 18, R60-62.

Müller, D., & Schwarz, W. (2007). Is there an internal
association of numbers to hands? The task set influences
the nature of the SNARC effect. Memory & Cognition,
35, 1151-1161.
Núñez, R. (2011). No innate number line in the human
brain. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 45, 651668.
Pecher, D., & Boot, I. (2011). Numbers in space:
Differences between concrete and abstract situations.
Frontiers in Psychology, 2, 11.
Pelz, J., Hayhoe, M., & Loeber, R. (2001). The coordination
of eye, head, and hand movements in a natural task.
Experimental Brain Research, 139, 266-277.
Perrone, G., de Hevia, M. D., Bricolo, E., & Girelli, L.
(2010). Numbers can move our hands: a spatial
representation effect in digits handwriting. Experimental
Brain Research, 205, 479-487.
Prinzmetal, W., & Gettleman, L. (1993). Vertical-horizontal
illusion: One eye is better than two. Perception &
Psychophysics, 53, 81-88.
R Core Team (2012). R: A language and environment for
statistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical
Computing, Vienna, Austria.
Rotzer, S., Loenneker, T., Kucian, K., Martin, E., Klaver,
P., & von Aster, M. (2009). Dysfunctional neural network
of spatial working memory contributes to developmental
dyscalculia. Neuropsychologia, 47, 2859-2865.
Schwarz, W., & Keus, I. M. (2004). Moving the eyes along
the mental number line: Comparing SNARC effects with
saccadic and manual responses. Perception and
Psychophysics, 66, 651-64.
Sell, A. J., & Kaschak, M. P. (2012). The comprehension of
sentences involving quantity information affects
responses on the up-down axis. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 19, 708-714.
Shaki, S., & Fischer, M. H. (2012). Multiple spatial
mappings in numerical cognition. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 38, 804-809.
Stahl, J. S. (1999). Amplitude of head movements
associated with horizontal saccades. Experimental Brain
Research, 126, 41-54.
Stanovich, K. E., & West, R. F. (2000). Individual
differences in reasoning: Implications for the rationality
debate?. Behavioral and brain sciences, 23, 645-665.
Towse, J. N., & Cheshire, A. (2007). Random number
generation and working memory. European Journal of
Cognitive Psychology, 19, 374-394.
Wood, G., Nuerk, H. C., Willmes, K., & Fischer, M. H.
(2008). On the cognitive link between space and number:
a meta-analysis of the SNARC effect. Psychological
Science Quarterly, 50, 489-525.
Zorzi, M., Priftis, K., & Umiltà, C. (2002). Neglect disrupts
the mental number line. Nature, 417, 138-139.

3794

