UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Motor experience interacts with effector information during action prediction

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/74m9x2tx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Colling, Lincoln
Thompson, William
Sutton, John

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Motor experience interacts with effector information during action prediction
Lincoln J. Colling (lincoln@colling.net.nz)
Donders Institute for Brain, Behaviour and Cognition, Radboud University Nijmegen
Nijmegen, Netherlands

William F. Thompson (bill.thompson@mq.edu.au)
ARC Centre of Excellence in Cognition and its Disorders, Macquarie University
Sydney, Australia

John Sutton (john.sutton@mq.edu.au)
ARC Centre of Excellence in Cognition and its Disorders, Macquarie University
Sydney, Australia
Abstract
Recent theory suggests that action prediction relies of a motor emulation mechanism that works by mapping observed actions onto the observer action system so that predictions can be
generated using that same predictive mechanisms that underlie
action control. This suggests that action prediction may be
more accurate when there is a more direct mapping between
the stimulus and the observer. We tested this hypothesis by
comparing prediction accuracy for two stimulus types. A mannequin stimulus which contained information about the effectors used to produce the action and a point stimulus, which
contained identical dynamic information but no effector information. Prediction was more accurate for the mannequin stimulus. However, this effect was dependent on the observer having previous experience performing the observed action. This
suggests that experienced and naı̈ve observers might generate
predictions in qualitatively difference ways, which may relate
to the presence of an internal representation of the action laid
down through action performance.
Keywords: Joint action; embodied cognition; perception–
action; action prediction.

Introduction
Many types of joint action require two actors to coordinate
their actions. Such coordination is especially demanding for
joint actions, such as ensemble music and dance performance,
where successful completion of the joint action requires precise temporal synchronisation. In these contexts, it is not possible for individuals to observe and then react to the actions
of their co-actors because this would introduce disruptive delays. Rather, individuals must anticipate the actions of their
co-actors so that they can plan actions that will align with
those actions. Because of these time constraints, researchers
have emphasised the role of prediction in recent theoretical
accounts of joint action coordination (Csibra, 2008; Wilson
& Knoblich, 2005).
Models of predictive mechanisms in motor control, such
as forward models and inverse models, can greatly inform
our understanding of joint action coordination. Both classes
of models are contained within the model of motor control
developed by Wolpert and colleagues (e.g., Wolpert, 1997).
According to this framework, forward and inverse models are
used in tandem to achieve goal-directed behaviour when regular feedback is unreliable because of delays or inaccuracies.

Inverse models act as controllers by transforming a goal
state into a series of control commands that are then sent to
the controlled system to produce the desired behaviour. In
the motor control system, this is implemented by a system
that takes the goal state and transforms it into a series of motor commands. Forward models, on the other hand, take the
motor commands and transform them into a goal state. The
limb also performs a forward mapping from motor commands
into a goal state. Therefore, the forward model can be used to
predict how the limb is expected to behave. A forward model
is particularly useful in motor control where it can be used
to bypass delays that occur because feedback must be transmitted from the periphery to centrally located motor control
regions. This can compensate for these delays by generating predicted feedback that can be substituted for the delayed
feedback.

Motor involvement in action prediction
In addition to their role in intrapersonal action prediction, forward models and inverse models are also implicated in the interpersonal action prediction needed for joint action. Csibra
(2008) has suggested that during action observation, an inverse model allows observers to reconstruct the motor codes
used to produce the observed action. To support this claim,
Csibra cites evidence from electrophysiological studies on
monkeys as well as neuroimaging studies from humans that
show that neurons in motor regions are active not only when
actions are produced but also when the same, or similar, actions are passively observed (for a review, see Rizzolatti &
Craighero, 2004). Additionally, Wilson and Knoblich (2005)
have proposed that observers are able to construct an internal
model of observed actions by mapping the actions onto their
own motor systems in a part-by-part, or isomorphic, manner.
This internal model acts as a forward model by generating a
real-time simulation of the observed action that runs in parallel with incoming sensory information. Information from
this model can be substituted for incoming sensory information that reaches the observer through observation. By using
internally generated information to drive action planning, delays that result from the processing of external actions can be
overcome, and this allows co-actors to plan and coordinate

2082

RSHO

LSHO

RLSH
RUPA
RFIN

RLEL

RMWR

joint actions in time critical situations. Taken together, forward and inverse models provide an effective mechanism that
allows actors to use their own action systems in order to emulate1 the actions of others. We refer to this proposal as the
emulator hypothesis of action prediction.
A key prediction of the emulator hypothesis is that traces
of the observer’s motor system should be manifested in the
predictions that they generate. The authorship effect provides
a means of assessing this. The authorship effect refers to the
finding that observers are more accurate at generating predictions about recordings of self-generated actions relative
to other-generated actions. More generally, the greater the
alignment between the motor dynamics of the observer and
the motor dynamics of the agent producing the observed action, the more accurate the predictions generated by the observer (Flach, Knoblich, & Prinz, 2003; Keller, Knoblich, &
Repp, 2007; Colling, Sutton, & Thompson, 2010, submitted).

In addition to the motor system’s role in predicting the actions, evidence from paradigms employing abstract stimuli
suggest that the motor system might also be used for sequence prediction in general. For example, findings from
fMRI implicate ventral premotor regions in tasks that require
participants to generate predictions about abstract sequences
(Schubotz & von Cramon, 2004). Similarly, lesions in premotor regions are associated with deficits in sequence prediction
(Schubotz, Sakreida, Tittgemeyer, & von Cramon, 2004).
Based on these findings, Schubotz (2007) has suggested
that motor simulation is a general mechanism for predicting
events. In the case of reproducible events—that is, human
actions—these events are simulated using the same means
that were initially employed to create the event, by using an
internal model of the action. However, in the case of event
that can’t be mapped onto the body Schubotz argues that predictions are generated using an action model of an effector
that best matches the general dynamics of the stimulus. Similarly, impoverished action stimuli lacking detail about which
effectors were used to produce the action, or actions that are
not in the observers repertoire, might be simulated using this
more general mechanism. While this might provide a good
general description of the stimulus dynamics it may fail to
replicate fine-grained details of the stimuli.
1 Emulate to refers to the process of replicating the functions of
a system (e.g., a conspecific’s motor system) using different means
(e.g., the observer’s motor system).

RFWT
RLWR

Figure 1: The zigzag (left) and wave (right) patterns used as
stimuli during the recording session.

Motor involvement in event prediction

RMEL
LFWT

Figure 2: Marker positions for recording session.

Aims of the current study
The primary aim of the present study is to examine the nature of the internal model that observers use during action
prediction. In particular, our aim is to examine whether
action prediction is achieved via a general purpose predictive system that, although implemented with the motor system, does not rely on a part-by-part simulation of the observed action. The present study measured prediction accuracy by means of an action synchronisation task similar to
that reported in Colling et al. (2010, submitted); however,
rather than examining differences in synchronisation accuracy for self-produced and other-produced actions, all participants viewed other-produced actions and we instead varied
the properties of the stimulus as well as the relevant motor experience of the observers. Both manipulations were designed
to modify the information that participants could access to allow them to map the observed actions onto their own action
systems. The motor experience manipulation was designed to
provide observers with an internal representation of the action
onto which they could map the stimulus, while the stimulus
manipulation was designed to modify whether the stimulus
could be directly mapped onto the observers’ bodies.
To modify the information content in the stimulus, we constructed two sets of stimuli so that the stimulus either contained information about what effectors were employed to
produce the action (full information) or only contained the
motion information required to perform the synchronisation
task, but excluded any information about the effectors used to
produce the action (point information).
A manipulation was also designed to examine the role of
motor experience on action emulation. This was achieved by
dividing the participants into two groups and only providing
one of the groups with experience with actually performing
the action that they would later observe. Schubotz (2007) has
suggested that when observers predict actions that are part
of their action repertoire, they emulate the actions using an
internal model of that action that has been laid down by the
experience of producing the action. Naı̈ve observers, on the
other hand, might only employ motor regions that match the
general dynamics of the movement. If this is the case, then we
can predict that the effect of stimulus content would be modulated by motor experience. In particular, we can predict that
naı̈ve observers would not incorporate information about the
effectors used to produce the movement into their predictive

2083

Advantage of Full Information (ms)

16
12
8
4
0
−4
−8
−12
−16

Figure 3: Example stimuli from the full information condition
(left) and the point information condition (right).

Figure 4: Improvement in synchronisation accuracy for the
full information condition relative to the point information
condition for the motor experience group and the naı̈ve group.
Error bars indicate the 95% confidence interval.

model; thus, the addition of this information should provide
no additional benefit on the synchronisation task.

Methods
Participants

capture data was rendered as an animated character consisting of an upper torso, right arm and hand, while the stimuli
for the point information condition consisted of only a single
point tracking the hand (see Figure 3).

The motor experience group contained of 13 participants (11
females, mean age of 28.1 years). The naı̈ve group contained
of 12 participants (8 females, mean age of 20.7 year). All
participants were right-handed, and all procedures were approved by the Macquarie University Human Subjects Ethics
committee.

Procedure

Stimuli
In order to create the stimuli for the test session, five righthanded females (mean age of 24.8 years) performed the
movement task while their movements were tracked with motion capture.
The movement task involved tracing out wave and zigzag
patterns (see Figure 1) as if drawing them on an imaginary
blackboard. The patterns were displayed on two large sheets
of cardboard measuring 0.594 m × 0.841 m. Both patterns
contained five upward and five downward movements alternating between long and short. The two patterns differed in
terms of the nature of the direction change at the apex of each
upward movement. The direction changed sharply for the
zigzag pattern, while there was a smooth, flowing direction
change for the wave pattern2 .
Movements were recorded using an 8-camera 3-D passive optical motion capture system (Vicon MX with 4 Vicon
MX-F20 and 4 Vicon MX13+ cameras) at a sampling rate
of 200 Hz from markers placed on the subject’s shoulders,
right arm, right hand, and waist (see Figure 2). Raw motion
capture data was resampled to 25 Hz and processed with CMotion Visual 3D (C-Motion INC, Rockville MD) to create
the test stimuli. For the full information condition, the motion
2 The difference between the wave and zigzag patterns is of no
theoretical interest. Two movement patterns were used only to increase task variety during the stimulus creation phase and ensure
participants remained engaged with the task. Statistical analyses
confirmed that there were no systematic differences in performance
on the test phase as a result of stimulus form (wave, zigzag) and,
therefore, this factor was dropped from the analyses reported below.

Motor Experience
Naïve
Motor Experience

Participants in the motor experience group undertook a movement session that was identical to the task employed during
stimulus creation. Participants performed 3 blocks containing
5 repetitions of each pattern (in random order) with their eyes
closed to limit visual experience. The movement session and
the test session were on average separated by 15.85 days (7
to 27 days).
The task in the test session was to press the response button
when the hand of the mannequin, or the marker tracking the
hand, reached the apex of each upward movement. Participants were instructed to synchronise the button-press with the
display as accurately as possible and were told that this may
require them to anticipate when the peak will occur. Each
participant performed 4 blocks containing 40 unique stimuli,
with equal numbers of full and point stimuli, and equal numbers of wave and zigzag stimuli. Participants in the naı̈ve
group were given a brief verbal description of the movement
task.

Results
Timing error was calculated as the absolute difference between the timing of the peak in the motion capture trajectory
and the timing of the button-press. Absolute timing error was
used as a dependent measure because it has been shown to
provide a good index of accuracy of hitting the target (Spray,
1986). Absolute timing error was analysed by means of a 2
× 4 × 2 mixed ANOVA with the within-subjects factors Information Content (full information, point information) and
Block (1, 2, 3, and 4), and the between-subjects factor of Experience (motor experience, naı̈ve). The Greenhouse-Geisser
procedure was used to correct for violations of sphericity.

2084

Peak timing and button-presses

Sample data

180

Timing
errror

Timing error (ms)

A
Peak position

Synchronisation
point
Buttonpress

B

140
120
100
80

Peak position

Motor Experience
Naïve

160

2

3
4
Peak position

5

Figure 6: Timing error as a function of peak position for the
motor experience group and the naı̈ve group.

Figure 5: (A) Evenly spaced button-presses results in timing
errors that vary as a function of peak number. (B) Timing
error that does not vary as a function of peak number is a
result of the timing of button-presses varying as a function of
peak number.

Where appropriate, we report uncorrected df s along with the
corrected p value.
There were no systematic differences in synchronisation
accuracy related to experimental block, as indicated by the
non-significant main effect for Block (F3,69 = 0.250, p = .861,
ε = .518, η2G = .002), and the non-significant interactions
for Information Content × Block (F3,69 = 0.368, p = .777,
η2G = .001), Block × Experience (F3,69 = 1.024, p = .352, ε =
.518, η2G = .006) and Information Content × Block × Experience (F3,69 = 0.609, p = .611, η2G = .001). There were
also no systematic differences in synchronisation accuracy
between the naı̈ve group and the group with motor experience, as indicated by the non-significant main effect of Experience (F1,23 = 0.460, p = .504, η2G = .016). Furthermore,
there were no systematic differences in synchronisation accuracy between the full information displays and point information displays when the data were collapsed across group
and block, as indicated by the non-significant main effect for
Information Content (F1,23 = 8.573, p = .008, η2G = .003).
As predicted, the results showed that the effect of information content was modulated by motor experience, as indicated
by the significant interaction for Information Content × Experience (F1,23 = 5.413, p = .029, η2G = .002). To decompose this interaction, the data were collapsed across block
and two paired t-tests were conducted to examine the difference between the two levels of Information Content (full
information, point information) for each Experience group.
The results of these t-tests showed that the information content effect was found only for the motor experience group
(t12 = 2.943, p = .012) but not the naı̈ve group (t11 = -0.411,
p = .689). This indicates that timing error was significantly
higher for the point stimuli relative to full stimuli for the motor experience group (M∆ = 6.855, 95CI[1.779][11.930]) but
not for the naı̈ve group (M∆ = -1.007, 95CI[-6.399][4.385]).
Therefore, only the motor experience group was able to take

advantage of the presence of limb and joint information to
enhance synchronisation accuracy (See Figure 4).
A further attempt was made to quantify the difference in
task performance between the motor experience group and
the naı̈ve group. We examined whether there were differences in task performance that related to whether participants
primarily responded to local aspects or global aspects of the
stimulus. In the stimuli, the duration of each upward movement alternated from long to short. This irregular pattern
leads to local variations in peak timing. Basing responses on
global aspects of the stimuli, such as average tempo, would
produce a pattern of timing errors that fluctuates from peak to
peak. However, by adjusting responses according to the local variations in the stimuli would produce timing errors that
are approximately equal for each button-press (see Figure 5).
Timing error for each of the final four button-presses (corresponding to each of the final four peaks) was analysed separately for each group by means of a one-way ANOVA with
the factor Peak Position (The first peak was dropped from the
analysis because the movement leading up to the first peak is
neither clearly long nor short).
Analyses showed a significant effect of Peak Position for
the naı̈ve group (F3,33 = 5.083, p = .031, ε = .453, η2G = .108),
and not for the motor experience group (F3,36 = 1.449,
p = .254, ε = .371, η2G = .020). This suggests that for the
naı̈ve group timing error changed in a low-high-low-high pattern as the trial progressed, while for the motor experience
group peak position did not significantly affect timing error.
These results are consistent with the naı̈ve group responding to global aspects of the stimuli and the motor experience
group responding to local aspects of the stimuli (see Figure
6).

Discussion
The primary aim of the present study was to investigate the
nature of the action emulation employed during action prediction. In particular, we wanted to investigate whether action
prediction relies on observers mapping the stimulus onto their
body in a part-by-part manner, or whether they just model

2085

the general dynamics of the action without modelling the
specifics of the effectors used to create the stimulus. Furthermore, our aim was to investigate the influence of motor
experience on action emulation. Schubotz (2007) has suggested that while abstract stimuli and actions that are not part
of the observer’s repertoire might be simulated using a general purpose mechanism, actions an observer has experience
producing are instead simulated using a model that incorporates the specifics of the effectors used to produce the movement. In order to examine these questions, we varied both the
information content of the stimuli and the motor experience
of the observers.

In the full information condition, the visual stimulus contained not only the movement information required to perform the task, but also information about the effector used
to produce the movement. In the point information condition, the visual stimulus only contained a single moving point.
While the point information condition also contained all the
movement information required to perform the task, it lacked
the additional information about the state of the effectors. As
predicted, the results showed enhanced prediction accuracy
when observing the full information stimuli.
An alternative explanation for these results is that a difference in the low-level visual features of the stimuli might account for the differences in prediction accuracy. For example,
it might be the case that the point information stimulus, which
overall contains less visual information, is harder to visually
track, and this may manifest as decreased prediction accuracy.
However, this could account for the differences in synchronisation accuracy, then this difference should be present in both
the experienced and the naı̈ve groups. This was not the case;
therefore, the results are not consistent with an explanation
based on low-level visual features.
The finding that limb and joint information was able to enhance synchronisation accuracy is also consistent with what
is known about the mirror-neuron system, the putative substrate of the action prediction system (Csibra, 2008; Wilson & Knoblich, 2005). Studies by Buccino and colleagues
(e.g., Buccino et al., 2004) have shown that during action
observation, regions of the motor cortex are activated in a
somatatopic fashion. That is, certain regions show specificity for particular effectors in a manner similar to Penfield’s
(1954) motor homunculus.

ing error for the small peaks was significantly different to the
timing error for large peaks.
A pattern of fluctuations would arise if participants kept a
relatively steady pace throughout the trial because the spacing
of the peaks was not constant throughout the trial, but instead
changed according to the height of the peaks. A relatively
steady pace for button-presses might occur if participants responded to the global properties of the stimuli, such as the
average rhythm (that is, the pace of movement production),
or to the general stimulus dynamics. In order to maintain a
relatively constant timing error, as seen in the experienced
group, participants would need to adjust the timing of each
button-press according to the local timing variations in the
stimuli that result from the alternating heights of the peaks.
This pattern of data, therefore, suggests a global/local bias in
stimulus processing that is modulated by motor experience.
The effect of motor experience on processing visual stimuli has recently been noted in several studies. For example, Casile and Giese (2006) have shown that motor training enhances a participant’s ability to make a fine-grained
visual discrimination of action. In their study, participants
were asked to make same/different judgments about gait patterns that they either did or did not have motor experience
with. The results showed that participants performed significantly better for trained, or familiar, gait patterns compared
with unfamiliar gait patterns, suggesting that in order to make
fine-grained visual judgments about the kinematics of an action, observers need to have an internalised model of the action. Similarly, Calvo-Merino, Ehrenberg, Leung, and Haggard (2010) found superior performance on a visual discrimination task of dance moves when those dance moves were
part of the observers action repertoire compared with dancers
who only had visual experience with the dance moves.
Our findings build on these earlier results, and suggest that
observers with motor experience for the observed action are
also better able to make fine-grained predictions about the
dynamics of a stimulus. This result is consistent with the
notion that experienced observers generate predictions about
observed actions by employing an internal model of that action that is acquired through motor experience. By mapping
the observed action onto their internal model for that action
they are better able to capture the fine-grained timing variations in the stimulus because their predictive model more
completely captures the constraints specific to the effectors
used to produce the action.

The effect of motor experience

Motor experience modulates stimulus effects

A secondary aim of the present study was to examine what
influence motor experience would have on prediction accuracy. The results show that motor experience modulated the
effect that stimulus type had on prediction performance. In
addition, motor experience had an effect on how participants
performed the task. In particular, these data show that while
the timing error for experienced participants was not affected
by the serial position of the peak, the timing error for naı̈ve
participants varied according to peak number, and the tim-

We have argued that participants with motor experience are
more sensitive to the fine-grained timing differences present
in an action because they, unlike naı̈ve observers, employ an
internalised model of the observed action in order to generate their predictions. This might also help to explain why the
influence of limb and joint information was restricted to the
group with motor experience. Several neuroimaging studies
have shown experience-related differences in motor system
activation when observers view actions performed by other

The effect of stimulus information

2086

people. For example, Calvo-Merino, Glaser, Grézes, Passingham, and Haggard (2005) asked expert dancers and nondancer controls to view videos of dancers performing in one
of two styles (ballet or capoeira). The results showed that activation in motor regions was greater when dancers viewed
performers of their own style, suggesting that the motor system is preferentially engaged when observing actions that are
familiar. A follow-up study (Calvo-Merino, Grézes, Glaser,
Passingham, & Haggard, 2006), using male and female ballet
dancers extended this finding by showing that motor regions
were preferentially activated when viewing gender-specific
dance moves. As both male and female dancers presumably have equal visual experience with opposite gender dance
moves, but different motor experience, this finding suggests
that motor engagement with visually presented stimuli is selective for actions for which observers have specific motor
familiarity over and above the effects of visual familiarity.
Studies by Schubotz and colleagues (for a review, see
Schubotz, 2007) have also implicated premotor regions in
prediction of abstract stimuli and in sequence prediction in
general. These stimuli cannot be mapped onto the observer’s
body and, therefore, they might rather be predicted by using
a predictive model that exploits the dynamics of an effector
that most closely matches the dynamics of the stimulus. Similarly, differences in motor system activation related to motor
experience might suggest that inexperienced observers employ general predictive mechanisms, such as those used for
sequence prediction, even when the observed action can, at
least in principle, be mapped onto their body in an isomorphic, or part-by-part, manner. The addition of limb and joint
information was designed to assist the process of mapping the
observed action onto the observer’s body; however, if, as the
neuroimaging data cited above suggests, naı̈ve observers less
readily map the observed action onto their body in an isomorphic manner, then providing information to assist this process
should provide no additional benefit. This is indeed what was
found in the present study.

References
Buccino, G., Lui, F., Canessa, N., Patteri, I., Lagravinese, G.,
Benuzzi, F., et al. (2004). Neural circuits involved in the
recognition of actions performed by nonconspecifics: An
fMRI study. J Cog Neuro, 16(1), 114–126.
Calvo-Merino, B., Ehrenberg, S., Leung, D., & Haggard, P.
(2010). Experts see it all: configural effects in action observation. Psych Res, 74, 400–406.
Calvo-Merino, B., Glaser, D. E., Grézes, J., Passingham,
R. E., & Haggard, P. (2005). Action observation and acquired motor skills: An fMRI study with expert dancers.
Cereb Cortex, 15(8), 1243–1249.
Calvo-Merino, B., Grézes, J., Glaser, D., Passingham, R., &
Haggard, P. (2006). Seeing or doing? influence of visual and motor familiarity in action observation. Curr Bio,
16(19), 1905–1910.
Casile, A., & Giese, M. A. (2006). Nonvisual motor training

influences biological motion perception. Curr Bio, 16(1),
69–74.
Colling, L. J., Sutton, J., & Thompson, W. F. (2010). Action
synchronisation with biological motion. In W. Christensen,
E. Schier, & S. J (Eds.), ASCS2009: Proceedings of the 9th
Conference of the Australasian Society for Cognitive Science (pp. 49–56). Sydney: Macquarie Centre for Cognitive
Science.
Colling, L. J., Sutton, J., & Thompson, W. F. (submitted).
Authorship effects in action synchronisation with biological motion.
Csibra, G. (2008). Action mirroring and action understanding: An alternative account. In P. Haggard, Y. Rossetti,
& M. Kawato (Eds.), Sensorimotor foundations of higher
cognition (pp. 435–459). New York: Oxford University
Press.
Flach, R., Knoblich, G., & Prinz, W. (2003). Off-line authorship effects in action perception. Brain Cogn, 53(3),
503–513.
Keller, P. E., Knoblich, G., & Repp, B. H. (2007). Pianists
duet better when they play with themselves: On the possible role of action simulation in synchronization. Conscious
Cogn, 16(1), 102–111.
Penfield, W. (1954). Mechanisms of voluntary movement.
Brain, 77(1), 1–17.
Rizzolatti, G., & Craighero, L. (2004). The mirror-neuron
system. Ann Rev Neuro, 27(1), 169–192.
Schubotz, R. I. (2007). Prediction of external events with
our motor system: towards a new framework. TiCS, 11(5),
211–218.
Schubotz, R. I., Sakreida, K., Tittgemeyer, M., & von Cramon, D. Y. (2004). Motor areas beyond motor performance: Deficits in serial prediction following ventrolateral
premotor lesions. Neuropsychology, 18(4), 638–645.
Schubotz, R. I., & von Cramon, D. Y. (2004). Sequences of
abstract nonbiological stimuli share ventral premotor cortex with action observation and imagery. J Neuro, 24(24),
5467–5474.
Spray, J. A. (1986). Absolute error revisited: An accuracy
indicator in disguise. J Motor Behav, 18(2), 225–238.
Wilson, M., & Knoblich, G. (2005). The case for motor
involvement in perceiving conspecifics. Psych Bull, 131(3),
460–473.
Wolpert, D. M. (1997). Computational approaches to motor
control. TiCS, 1(6), 209–216.

2087

