UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Multiword Sequences as Building Blocks for Language: Insights into First and Second
Language Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0tb0m5w7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Christiansen, Morten H.
Arnon, Inbal
Lieven, Elena
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Multiword Sequences as Building Blocks for Language:
Insights into First and Second Language Learning
Moderator: Morten H. Christiansen (christiansen@cornell.edu)
Department of Psychology, Cornell University, USA

Moderator: Inbal Arnon (inbal.arnon@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, University of Haifa, Israel

Elena Lieven (elena.lieven@manchester.ac.uk)
School of Psychological Sciences, University of Manchester, UK

Alison Wray (wraya@cardiff.ac.uk)
School of English, Communication & Philosophy, Cardiff University, UK

Keywords: formulaic language, language acquisition, language
processing, second language learning, usage-based learning

Understanding the different paths and outcomes of L1 and
L2 learning has wide-reaching implications for cognitive
science in terms of what it means to know a language, how
much of such knowledge is ‘built-in’, and how learning
changes as a function of prior knowledge and experience.
Crucially, while L1 acquisition, adult psycholinguistics, and
L2 learning are often studied separately, we bring together
insights from developmental psychology (Lieven),
psycholinguistics (Arnon), computational investigations of
language
structure
(Christiansen),
and
applied
psycholinguistics (Wray) to present a diverse and rich
perspective on multiword building blocks in language
learning and use.
The symposium participants have all worked extensively
on language acquisition and use. Lieven has been at the
forefront of developing the usage-based approach to
language learning and has conducted numerous studies on
the nature of children’s early language use and
representation. Arnon has been studying both the processing
of multiword sequences by adult native speakers and the
way chunk-based learning can impact adult performance in
artificial languages. Christiansen has conducted extensive
psycholinguistic and computational work exploring the units
of language learning and the way such units affect learning.
Wray has worked broadly on formulaic expressions in both
native and non-native speakers as well as more recently in
the language of Alzheimer’s patients. Together, the
participants have published more than 70 papers relating to
the role of multiword sequences in language.

Introduction
Many grammatical frameworks view words and rules as the
basic building blocks of language, with multiword
sequences being treated as peripheral exceptions in the form
of idioms, etc. (e.g., Pinker, 1999). The new millennium,
however, has seen a shift toward construing multiword
sequences not as linguistic rarities but as important building
blocks for language acquisition and processing. Based on a
growing bulk of evidence of sensitivity to multiword
sequences in language learning and use (see Ellis, 2012, for
a review), multiword sequences have come to figure
prominently in many current approaches to language,
including item-based learning (Lieven, 2010), formulaic
language (Wray, 2008), usage-based language processing
(Arnon & Snider, 2010), and chunk-based learning
(McCauley & Christiansen, in preparation). This
symposium brings together experts from these different
approaches to language to explore the idea that first (L1)
and second (L2) language learners differ with respect to
their ability to use multiword building blocks to learn and
process language, and that this difference affects learning
strategies and outcomes.
Unlike young children, adult learners rarely reach native
proficiency in pronunciation, morphological and syntactic
processing, or the use of formulaic language and idioms (see
Ellis, 2012, for a review). Yet adults do not have problems
with all aspects of novel language learning: they seem to
learn certain aspects of language (e.g., words) better than
others (e.g., grammatical relations, formulaic expressions).
Existing accounts of the differences between L1 and L2
language learning have tended to focus on biological,
cognitive, and neural differences between children and
adults. These accounts predict the general difference in
proficiency between the two populations, but struggle to
explain the specific patterns of language learning observed
in children and adults.

Lieven: Multiword Sequences in L1
Acquisition
Theoretical and empirical reasons suggest that children
build their language not only out of individual words but
also out of multiword strings. These are the basis for the
development of schemas containing slots. The slots are
putative categories which build in abstraction while the
schemas eventually connect to other schemas in terms of
both meaning and form. Evidence comes from the nature of

75

the input (Cameron-Faulkner et al., 2003); the ways in
which children construct novel utterances (Lieven et al.,
2009); and the computational modeling of children’s
grammars (Bannard et al., 2009). However, nearly all this
research is on English which is unusual in its rigid word
order and impoverished inflectional morphology. There has
also been much less research on the development of the
‘meaning pole’ in the form-meaning mappings of schemas. I
will address both these issues using our recent studies in
English, German, Polish and Chintang.

learning? This presentation will consider how certain
assumptions underpinning the existing body of knowledge
could constrain the research questions we ask. For instance,
how safe is the assertion that non-native speakers rarely
achieve nativelikeness (typically attributed to not mastering
formulaic sequences)? How appropriate is it to gauge the
formulaic language knowledge of adult L2 learners by
comparing it to what, for native speakers, is anchored in the
social and cognitive experiences of childhood? To what
extent can we assert that (all) L1 speakers know the same
things about how words fit together? How do recent
proposals by Hanks (2013), Port (2007) and Sinclair (Cheng
et al., 2009) that the word is not a reliable unit of form or
meaning impact on the growing evidence that multiword
strings might be?

Arnon: Multiword Sequences in Adult
Language Learning and Use
Prior studies have shown that native speakers are sensitive
to the distributional properties of multiword sequences
when processing language (see Ellis, 2012, for a review).
Results are presented suggesting that this sensitivity also
extends to language production and is not modulated by
syntactic constituency: higher frequency phrases are
phonetically reduced within and across syntactic boundaries
indicating the prominence of sequence based information. A
second study investigated whether such sensitivity to multiword sequences might be harnessed to improve L2 learning.
Adult learners showed better learning of an artificial
language incorporating a grammatical gender system when
first exposed to larger chunks (sentences) and only then
individual words (noun-labels). This result suggests that L2
learning of grammatical gender languages may be improved
by initially exposing learners to multiword sequences
instead of isolated words, thus mirroring the sensitivity to
multiword sequences in L1 acquisition and use.

Symposium Format
The symposium starts with a 5-minute introduction,
followed by four 20-minute presentations (including time
for questions), and concludes with a 15-minute general
discussion.

References
Arnon, I. & Snider, N. (2010). More than words: Frequency
effects for multi-word phrases. Journal of Memory and
Language, 62, 67-82.
Bannard, C., Lieven, E. & Tomasello, M. (2009) Modeling
children's early grammatical knowledge, Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 106, 17284-17289.
Cameron-Faulkner, T., Lieven, E. & Tomasello, M. (2003).
A construction based analysis of child directed speech.
Cognitive Science, 27, 843-873.
Cheng, W., Greaves, C., Sinclair, J. M. & Warren, M. (2009).
Uncovering the extent of the phraseological tendency:
Towards a systematic analysis of concgrams. Applied
Linguistics, 30, 236-252.
Ellis, N.C. (2012). Formulaic language and second language
acquisition: Zipf and the phrasal teddy bear. Annual Review
of Applied Linguistics, 32, 17-44.
Hanks, P. (2013). Lexical analysis: Norms and exploitations.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lieven, E. (2010). Input and first language acquisition:
Evaluating the role of frequency. Lingua, 120, 2546-2556.
Lieven, E., Salomo, D. & Tomasello, M. (2009). Two-yearold children’s production of multiword utterances: A
usage-based analysis. Cognitive Linguistics, 20, 481-508.
McCauley, S.M. & Christiansen, M.H. (in preparation).
Language learning as language use: A computational
model of children’s language comprehension and
production.
Pinker, S. (1999). Words and rules. New York: Basic Books.
Port, R. F. (2007). How are words stored in memory? Beyond
phones and phonemes. New Ideas in Psychology, 25, 143170.
Wray, A. (2008). Formulaic language: Pushing the
boundaries. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Christiansen: Computational Investigations of
Multiword Chunks in Language Learning
Computational modeling provides further means to
investigate the use of multiword chunks by different types
of language learners. The Chunk-Based Learner (CBL;
McCauley & Christiansen, in preparation) gradually builds
an inventory of chunks—consisting of one or more words—
used for both language comprehension and production. The
model learns incrementally from corpora of child-directed
speech using simple distributional information and
accommodating a range of developmental findings. Results
are presented indicating that multiword chunks provide a
useful basis for capturing children’s productions across a
number of different languages independent of their word
order. When applied to L2 learner corpora, CBL reveals that
the productions of such speakers rely less on multiword
chunks compared to speech of both L1 learners and adult
native speakers. Thus, these modeling results corroborate
our hypothesis about the differential use of multiword
building blocks by L1 and L2 learners.

Wray: Formulaic Expressions: Further Issues
Why have we not progressed further than we have, in
understanding the role of formulaic sequences in L2

76

