UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Multiple Proposal Memory in Observational Word Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5gp8j5qs

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Koehne, Judith
Trueswell, John C.
Gleitman, Lila R.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Multiple Proposal Memory in Observational Word Learning
Judith Koehne (judith.koehne@uni-bamberg.de)
Otto-Friedrich-Universität Bamberg
Markusplatz 3, 96045 Bamberg

John C. Trueswell (trueswel@psych.upenn.edu)
Lila R. Gleitman (gleitman@psych.upenn.edu)
Institute for Research in Cognitive Science, University of Pennsylvania,
3401 Walnut Street, Suite 400A, Philadelphia, PA, USA
Abstract

hne & Crocker, 2011). An important aspect that is ignored
in these studies, however, is the role that each learner’s individual learning path plays. It is therefore unclear whether
one and the same person in fact stores multiple possibilities
for a word and if this is the case, under which circumstances. One factor that has been shown to be relevant to
this question is the order in which the language novice has
encountered and re-encountered potential referents (Medina
et al., 2011).
We evaluate the way learners exploit observational word
learning situations within two experiments, employing the
standard paradigm of psychologically investigating crosssituational word learning. Importantly, we consider both the
learner’s individual learning path and the order of exposures
and re-exposures of potential referents. We moreover address the possibility that the different outcomes in different
studies may be due to the implemented experimental procedure. In particular, we compare a procedure, in which participants make a choice on each learning trial (Exp. 1) to a
passive look-and-listen learning phase (Exp. 2).

The temporal co-occurrence of a novel word and a visual referent undoubtedly facilitates establishing the meaning of a
word. It is less understood, however, how precisely learners
can keep track of the frequencies of these co-occurrences
across situations. Observational learning may rely on one or
few highly informative exposures (propose-but-verify) or it
may be driven by the collection of evidence in a more gradual
and parallel manner (multiple-hypotheses tracking). We
evaluated both hypotheses within two experiments and found
that learners were able to keep track of more than one hypothesis for a novel word. However, this memory was
strongly dependent on each learner’s individual learning path
(i.e., which meanings they had considered before) and influenced by the order of presentation of potential referents. We
argue for an account of a multiple-proposal memory rather
than a multiple co-occurrence memory.
Keywords: observational word learning; memory; crosssituational analysis; multiple hypotheses tracking; proposebut-verify; individual learning paths

Observational Word Learning
While observing the world can be a very direct path to the
meaning of a novel word (fast mapping, Carey, 1978), the
relationship between both sources of input is often too ambiguous to make a promising immediate guess. The learner
could solve this problem in various ways: On each learning
instance, she could store multiple possible solutions and
then identify the best solution across several learning instances through an intersective process, an assumption that
is commonly understood to underlie the idea of crosssituational word learning (Quine, 1960; Yu & Smith, 2007).
Alternatively, she could make an immediate guess about the
word’s meaning and wait for confirmation or rejection. In
this case, the learner would have no memory for the alternatives that were not guessed, but maximally a memory for the
different guesses tried along the way until the correct one is
identified.
While experiments reported in Medina, Snedeker,
Trueswell, & Gleitman (2011) and Trueswell, Medina, Hafri, & Gleitman (2013) support this latter idea (propose-butverify account), other studies indicate that learners are able
to extract multiple hypotheses on each learning instance
(Vouloumanos, 2008; Vouloumanos & Werker, 2009; Koe-

Learning based on Co-occurrence Frequencies
Trueswell et al. (2013) examined learners’ memory in observational learning situations in a series of experiments.
During the learning phase, participants were presented two
or five visual referents and a spoken sentence containing
one novel noun per trial. The task was to choose that referent (by mouse click) in each trial that the learner believed to
match with the novel noun. Trueswell et al. found that even
if the learning situations were greatly simplified but still
ambiguous (just two possible referents), participants later
showed no sign of memory for any referent other than the
one they had selected. Specifically, when a learner reencountered a noun (e.g., mipen), he was at chance at selecting the correct referent (e.g., bear) if he had made the wrong
choice the previous time he had encountered mipen (e.g., if
he had chosen door rather than the correct bear). Had he
remembered that the unselected (but correct) referent (bear)
had co-occurred with mipen, he could have unambiguously
identified it as correct in the current situation.
Interestingly, other studies indicate that learners are able
to precisely differentiate the co-occurrence frequencies of
different alternatives for one noun. Vouloumanos (2008)

805

employed a passive look-and-listen learning phase with one
referent and one noun per trial. Over the course of the experiment, each noun co-occurred with several referents with
varying frequencies. In a final forced-choice vocabulary
test, learners could differentiate between these alternatives
based on small differences in their co-occurrence statistics.
However, since there was only one referent per learning
trial, this study does not answer the question whether multiple possibilities are memorized from one situation. Addressing this issue, Koehne & Crocker (2011) integrated a learning procedure with four objects depicted for each novel
noun. As in Vouloumanos (2008), nouns co-occurred with
objects with different frequencies (83%, 50%, and 17%).
Interestingly, when the 83% referent was not available in a
final forced-choice test, learners preferred the 50% referent
over 17% alternatives. This result suggests sensitivity to
differences in co-occurrence statistics even when learning
trials are ambiguous.
Differences between Trueswell et al. and Koehne &
Crocker could be due to the experimental procedure (forced
choice vs. look-and-listen during learning). However, individual learning paths were not considered in Koehne &
Crocker: It is unclear whether selecting the 50% referent
depended on the choices, or proposals, the learner had made
before and whether one and the same learner had stored
multiple alternatives for one noun.
Indeed, as noted by Trueswell et al. (2013), the strictest
version of a propose-but-verify procedure, in which only a
single meaning is ever maintained, is inadequate because it
fails to explain the learning of ambiguous words. They
therefore propose that “when a confirmed (and even reconfirmed) hypothesis for a word is then not supported by a
later context, the learner would actively search memory for
past rejected hypotheses, and may … establish a second
meaning for the word.” Here we call this multiple-proposal
memory, in which only previously proposed meanings are
available in memory rather than entire referential sets from
past learning instances (i.e., the context) as stipulated by the
most common cross-situational accounts.
The method used in the two experiments presented here
allows us to differentiate between the predictions from the
propose-but-verify versus the multiple-hypothesis-tracking
account. In particular, it addresses the question whether one
and the same learner keeps track of more than one hypothesis for a novel word.

Data of 32 participants (11 Male, average age 22) was analyzed.

Experiment 1

Predictions Standard cross-situational accounts (such as Yu
& Smith, 2007, Vouloumanos, 2008, and Koehne &
Crocker, 2001) predict that learners precisely keep track of
the co-occurrence frequencies between nouns and referents.
The 50% referent should therefore be chosen at final test
above chance in all conditions, independent of both the
learning path and the order of (re-)exposures of 50%-present
trials.
According to a strict propose-but-verify account selection
of the 50% alternative at final test would occur if and only if
it is the current working hypothesized meaning - that is, if

Design, Materials, & Procedure The overall task of Experiment 1 was to learn the meanings of 16 novel nouns.
Learning trials consisted of one spoken English sentence
containing one of the novel words (e.g., I see a moke!) and
four objects that were depicted on the screen. During training, each noun had six learning trials, intermixed with the
other learning trials. Crucially each of the 16 nouns was
assigned two meanings with different co-occurrence frequencies: One referent was present whenever the noun was
present (six times, 100% referent, e.g., television), the other
referent was present in only half of the cases the noun was
(three times, 50% referent, e.g., dog). All other objects cooccurred only once with a noun (17%). We manipulated the
order in which trials including and excluding the 50% referent were presented within four levels (within participants):
Firstly, the 50%-present (P) and 50%-absent (A) trials could
be either blocked (AAAPPP and PPPAAA) or not blocked
(APAPAP and PAPAPA); secondly, the first encounter of a
noun could be either an A trial (AAAPPP and APAPAP) or
a P trial (PPPAAA and PAPAPA).
On each learning trial, participants selected by mouse
click the referent they thought belonged to the novel noun.
After each response, they gave a confidence rating for their
selection (on a scale from 1 to 9). No feedback was given
and participants were not informed that nouns may have
multiple meanings.
After all six learning trials had been encountered for a
word, a final test was given for each word, in which eight
objects and one spoken word were presented and learners
were asked to again select the matching referent and indicate their confidence. The 100% referent, however, was not
available which means that the 50% object was the one with
the highest co-occurrence rate - all other objects were 0%
and 17% referents.
The experiment consisted of two parts: Eight novel nouns
were taught and tested (Block 1) before the other eight noun
were taught and tested (Block 2). Order of presentation of
learning and test trials was pseudo-randomized: Between
two exposures of the same noun, there was always at least
one but not more than 8 trials with other nouns. Participants
were run individually and the experiment lasted approximately 30 minutes.

Experiment 1 addresses the questions of whether and how
learners track multiple meanings for a novel word and what
role both the learning path and the order of (re-) exposures
of potential referents play in this process.

Methods
Participants 36 participants were tested, four of which had
to be excluded due to technical and eye-tracking problems.

806

the 50% referent had been selected on the preceding learning instance. This is impossible when the 50% referent is
Absent on the last learning trial, predicting chance performance in conditions PPPAAA and PAPAPA. During the final
test in the other two conditions, the 50% alternative would
be selected above chance on those rare occasions when the
learner had selected the 50% referent on the last learning
instance (i.e., when they failed to learn the 100% target by
Instance 6).
According to the weaker propose-but-verify account, a final test with the 100% referent absent will trigger consideration of all past proposed meanings. This means that abovechance performance on the 50% referent is expected if and
only if the learner had previously selected (clicked on) a
50% referent during the learning phase. One might expect
such a memory to have a recency component: More recently
proposed meanings will be easier to remember. Moreover,
early encounters of a string of 50% referents (i.e., PPPAAA)
will increase the probability that this referent will be selected during the learning phase and thus more likely to be
recalled at test. Conversely, it is very unlikely during learning that the 50% referent will be selected on any trial when
these occurrences are grouped late in the sequence
(AAAPPP): Most learners will have already locked onto the
100% item as the referent by Instance 4, and thus rarely
select the 50% referent during learning. Therefore, they will
not select it at test either.

Previous Selection of the 50% Referent, that is, whether the
50% referent had been chosen in the previous encounter
when it had been present. Note that this trial was in different
positions depending on condition: It was the last trial in
Conditions AAAPPP and APAPAP, the second to last trial
in Condition PAPAPA, and the fourth to last trial in Condition PPPAAA.

Figure 1: Selections in test, Exp. 1
Consistent with the weaker version of propose-but-verify,
we found that participants were only above chance at selection of the 50% referent at test if they had selected the referent on its last encounter during learning (Figure 2). Note
that the number of observations contributing to each proportion differs in the way expected if learners were using the
weaker propose-but-verify procedure during the learning
phase; the 50% referent was selected on the previous encounter during learning only 24 times (out of 128) in
AAAPPP, but 56 times in PPPAAA. In APAPAP it was
chosen 27 times and in PAPAPA 32 times. If selected during learning however, it was recalled at final test at similar
rates regardless of condition (i.e., Figure 2).
To confirm the reliability of the effects in Figure 2, we
conducted a multi-level logistic regression using Condition
and Previous 50% Referent Accuracy as predictors of selecting the 50% referent at test, entering both as fixed effects
(using the lme4 package in R, Bates, 2005). Random intercepts and slopes of Subjects and Items were integrated. If a
model did not converge, random effects were reduced until
convergence was reached (always discarding the random
effect with the smallest effect). Main effects were tested
using model comparison (Chi-Square values are reported;
Baayen, Davidson, & Bates, 2008). We found a significant
effect of Previous 50% Referent Accuracy only (χ2(1) =
80.21, p < .001) but no effect of Condition (χ2(3) = 3.67, p
= .30) and no interaction (χ2(3) = 4.52, p = .21). T-tests
confirm that for that subset of trials for which it was not the
case that the 50% referent had been chosen in the previous
learning trial in which it had been present, selecting the 50%
referent was not above chance (t(31) = -.68, p = .50). This
reveals that, independent of condition, the 50% referent was
only chosen reliably if it had also been chosen in the previous encounter for which it had been present.

Data Analysis, Results, & Discussion
The results are most consistent with the weaker proposebut-verify account. Across conditions, participants selected
the 50% referent in the final test significantly more often
than chance (25.4% vs. 12.5% chance; t(31) = 7.77, p <
.001)1. Both confidence ratings and reaction times support
that this difference is meaningful: Ratings were significantly
higher (χ2(1) = 17.87, p < .001) and reaction times were
significantly lower (χ2(1) = 9.36, p < .01) when the 50%
referent was chosen than when it was not. Moreover, it was
chosen significantly more often than any other of the seven
(0% and 17%) objects.
While this trend holds for all four conditions, differences
to chance were significant only in Conditions PPPAAA
(34.4%; t(31) = 4.91, p < .001), PAPAPA (27.3%; t(31) =
4.32, p < .001), and APAPAP (23.4%; t(31) = 2.80, p < .05)
but not in AAAPPP (16.4%; t(31) = 1.02, p = .32; Figure 1).
This finding is inconsistent with a standard cross-situational
account because all conditions should have been above
chance independent of presentation order. It is also inconsistent with the strict propose-but-verify account because
PPPAAA and PAPAPA ought not be above chance, but they
are. Consistent with the weaker propose-but-verify,
PPPAAA offers the best performance overall whereas
AAPPP offers the worst.
To get insight into the roles of ordering and learning paths
on the final test, we analyzed the effects of Condition and
1

All t-tests are two-tailed.

807

Interestingly, 50% selection was still above chance when
it additionally was the case that the 100% referent had been
chosen two to five times during learning (t(25) = 6.43, p <
.001). This means that one and the same learner could consider the 100% referent as the correct referent and still be
sensitive to the fact that the 50% referent was a better candidate than the 17% objects as long as the 50% referent, as
well, had been considered.
This pattern of results supports the weaker version of the
propose-but-verify account: While in fact a referent is only
stored as the potential meaning if it has been actively considered before, this consideration does not need to happen in
the absolutely previous encounter of the noun but only in
the last common encounter of the noun and that referent.
This means that learners do not only memorize the last
guess they made for a noun but also less recent guesses. Our
results are clearly not in line with the hypothesis that learners are equipped with a general multiple co-occurrence
memory.

Design, Materials, & Procedure The learning paradigm,
design, materials, and procedure were exactly the same as in
Experiment 1 except that participants were asked to simply
look and listen during learning trials while trying to figure
out what the novel nouns mean. As in Experiment 2, however, trial change was self-paced (elicited by button press).
Moreover, participants’ eyes were tracked using a Tobii
1750 eye-tracker (sampling rate 50 Hz).
Predictions Hypothesizing that clicking does not influence
the learner’s behavior predicts that one will find the same
results as in Experiment 1. Hypothesizing that clicking enforces previous accuracy to be crucial on the other hand
predicts a weaker effect of the learning path on the memory
for the 50% referent.

Data Analysis, Results, & Discussion
Selecting the 50% referent in the test again was significantly more frequent than would be expected by chance
(22.7% vs. 12.5%; t(31) = 6.07, p < .001) and than selecting
any of the other candidates. As in Experiment 1, confidence
ratings were higher (χ2(1) = 13.12, p < .001) and reaction
times were lower (χ2(1) = 5.12, p < .05) when the 50% referent was selected than when another object was chosen.
Selection rates were (at least marginally) significantly
above chance in all four conditions (PPPAAA: 29.9%, t(31)
= 4.53, p < .001; PAPAPA: 18.8%, t(31) = 1.76, p = .09;
APAPAP: 22.7%, t(31) = 3.13, p < .01; AAAPPP: 19.5%,
t(31) = 1.83, p = .08, Figure 3).

Figure 2: 50% referent selections in test, Exp. 1
It is possible that the results from Experiment affected by
the employed learning procedure: Forcing a selection on
each trial may enforce the influence of the learning path
(i.e., previous accuracy). We address this possibility in Experiment 2.

Experiment 2

Figure 3: Selections in test, Exp. 2

Experiment 2 investigates whether learning path and conditions have the same effect on memorizing potential referents if learners are not forced to make a choice on learning
trials.

To evaluate the effect of the learning path although no
choices were made during learning, we used learners’ eye
movements as a predictor: Specifically, we coded test trials
for the frequency of 50%-present learning trials in which the
50% referent had been fixated more often than any of the
three other candidates after the novel noun was presented
(i.e., from onset of the noun until the self-paced end of the
trial). The rationale of this coding was that looking at a referent most reveals that participants had paid attention to it,
indicating that it was selected as the potential referent.
We then included this measurement of Previous 50% Referent Accuracy as a predictor, together with Condition (Fig-

Methods
Participants 39 participants were tested, seven of which
had to be excluded due to technical and eye-tracking problems. Data of 32 participants (16 Male, average age 23) was
analyzed.

808

ure 4). Similar to Experiment 1, we found that choosing the
50% referent at test was not predicted by Condition (χ2(3) =
.96, p = .31) but by Previous 50% Referent Accuracy (χ2(1)
= 7.49, p < .01). Again, there was no interaction (χ2(3) =
0.89, p = .83). And again the number observations across
conditions patterned like in Experiment 1 in terms of how
often the 50% referent was ‘selected’ (by eye) on its last
occurrence during learning (N = 22 for AAAPPP; N = 44
for PPPAAA; N = 24 for APAPAP; and N = 23 for PAPAPA).

Most important, however, is that even if the learner is not
forced to make decisions during learning, it is still crucial
for a potential referent to be paid particular attention to at
some point. We interpret this as a confirmation of our findings from Experiment 1: Learners show no sign of a general
multiple co-occurrence memory but they are able to memorize more than one proposal they have made.

Analyses Experiments 1 & 2
In order to evaluate a potential difference between Experiments 1 and 2 regarding the influence of Condition, we entered data from both into one analysis. Experiment (Experiment 1: click vs. Experiment 2: no click) and Condition
were used as fixed factors. We found a marginal effect of
Condition (χ2(3) = 7.61, p = .06), no effect of Experiment
(χ2(1) = 1.59, p = .21), and no interaction (χ2(3) = 3.22, p =
.36; Figure 5). We then grouped the four conditions into
two: 50% present in first trial (PPPAAA & PAPAPA) versus 50% absent in first trial (AAAPPP & APAPAP) and
repeated the analysis. While selecting the 50% object was
significantly more frequent in the first-trial present than the
first-trial absent conditions (χ2(1) = 6.63, p < .05), still neither an effect of Experiment (χ2(1) = 1.04, p = .31) nor an
interaction was found (χ2(1) = 2.31, p = .13). Within experiments, however, both condition groups differed significantly only for Experiment 1 (χ2(1) = 8.04, p < .01) but not
for Experiment 2 (χ2(1) = 0.51, p = .47). It is therefore not
quite clear whether the order of exposure and re-exposure
was equally meaningful to both Experiments. Possibly, it
was slightly more important in Experiment 1 than Experiment 2 that a referent’s first encounter happened early, as
also indicated by the missing significance of selecting the
50% referent in Condition AAAPPP in Experiment 1 (Figure 1). Either way, for both experiments, the effect of Previous Accuracy was a much clearer predictor than Condition.

Figure 4: 50% referent selections in test, Exp. 2
Interestingly, however, the 50% referent was still chosen
significantly more often than chance at test if it was not
looked at most often in the previous encounter (t(31) = 2.43,
p < .05). We therefore also coded test trials for whether the
50% referent had been looked at most in any (i.e., at least
one) learning trial (Any Accuracy). We found that if this was
not the case, selecting the 50% referent was not more frequent than chance (t(21) = -.21, p = .83). Any Accuracy was
a marginally significant predictor (χ2(1) = 3.44, p = .06)
whereas Condition was not (χ2(3) = 3.45, p = .33) and both
did not interact (χ2(3) = 1.27, p = .74).
Similar to Experiment 1, having looked at the 100% referent most often in two to five learning trials did not change
this pattern: The 50% referent was still chosen significantly
more often than chance as long as it was also looked at most
at least once (t(31) = 3.80, p < .001).
These results suggest that learners’ behavior when
choices were not forced during learning was similar to their
behavior when they were forced to respond (i.e., as in Experiment 1). While it may be less crucial that the 50% referent was paid particular attention to exactly the last time it
was encountered, the data indicates that it is was necessary
that it at some point in learning it had been attended to.
While this difference could suggest that memory in Experiment 2 was better than in Experiment 1 (i.e., that learners
stored all proposals rather than only the last one), the different measurements of Previous 50% Referent Accuracy cannot be perfectly compared with one another.

Figure 5: 50% referent selections in test, Exp. 1 & 2

Conclusions & General Discussion
Results from Experiments 1 and 2 reveal that learners successfully learned to differentiate between co-occurrence

809

frequencies of 50% versus 17% and 0% even though another referent co-occurred perfectly (100%). However, this
was only the case if the 50% referent was in the learner’s
attention at least once before (or if it even was actively selected). Importantly, the 50% referent was also stored even
if it was not the only referent that the learner had considered
(i.e., when both the 100% referent and the 50% referent
were in the learner’s focus of attention at some point during
learning). These findings clearly reveal that while cooccurrences were not generally all stored, ‘multiple proposal’ memory is possible in observational word learning.
This is not in line with the standard cross-situational account whereas it generally supports a propose-but-verify
account. Interestingly though, selecting the 50% referent
was above chance in conditions PPPAAA and PAPAPA;
unlike a strict propose-but-verify theory would predict,
learners can memorize more than the most recent choice
they have made.
Asking participants to select a referent during learning trials did not generally suppress memorizing multipleproposals. While it may be the case that it is more important
for a forced-choice learning procedure than the non-forced
choice one that the 50% referent is considered exactly in the
previous encounter of it, a clear comparison between choosing and looking is impossible. If the difference is real, it
would indicate that forcing a choice enhances the role of
previous consideration, possibly because a stronger memory
trace is built by actively (and physically) making a selection
than by mental consideration.
Our results moreover at least indicate that there is a possible influence of the order in which referents are firstly encountered and re-encountered: Early on, when the hypotheses space is still completely open, learners are more willing
to memorize co-occurring objects as potential meanings
than later, when other hypotheses (or considerations) have
already been made for a novel noun. This may be more
strongly the case when selections are forced even early on in
learning (in Experiment 1).

2011; Trueswell et al., 2013), our results can be accounted
for by a multiple-proposal memory rather than a multipleco-occurrence memory. Indeed, such a procedure is logically necessary to explain the learning of words with more
than one meaning (i.e., homophones). Future research is
necessary to explore the conditions under which ambiguous
words are successfully learned, taking into account the mutually exclusive occurrence of appropriate referents (Meaning 1 vs. Meaning 2), which was not modeled experimentally here (i.e., the 100% referent was simultaneously present alongside the 50% referent on each “P” learning trial).
Moreover, other distinguishing contextual features likely
support the differentiation of two meanings for the same
word. Finally, future work must examine how well these
observations hold for naturally occurring word-learning
environments in which referential ambiguity is greater and
the contexts of word use are more variable. Artificial stimuli
like those used here offer better experimental control and
thus allow for closer examination of the learning mechanism
but do not address how this mechanism responds to more
typical input (Medina et al., 2011; Trueswell et al., 2013).

References
Baayen, R., Davidson, D., & Bates, D. (2008). Mixedeffects modeling with crossed random effects for subjects
and items. Journal of Memory and Language, 59(4), 390–
412.
Bates, D. (2005). Fitting linear mixed models in r. R News,
(pp. 27–30).
Carey, S. (1978). The child as a word learner. In J. Bresnan
& G. Miller (Eds.), Linguistic theory and psychological
reality (pp. 264–293). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Koehne, J. & Crocker, M.W. (2011). The interplay of multiple mechanisms in word learning. In L. Carlson, C.
Hoelscher, & T. F. Shipley (Eds.), Proceedings of the
33rd Annual meeting of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
1930-1936). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Medina, T., Snedeker, J., Trueswell, J., & Gleitman, L.
(2011). How words can and cannot be learned by observation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America, 108, 914–919.
Quine, W. (1960). Word and Object. Cambridge, MA:
Cambridge University Press.
Trueswell, J., Medina, T., Hafri, A., & Gleitman, L. (2013).
Propose but verify: Fast mapping meets cross-situational
word learning. Cognitive Psychology, 66, 126–156.
Vouloumanos, A. & Werker, J. F. (2009). Infants’ learning
of novel words in a stochastic environment. Developmental Psychology, 45(6), 1611–7.
Vouloumanos, A. (2008). Fine-grained sensitivity to statistical information in adult word learning. Cognition,
107(2), 729–42.
Yu, C. & Smith, L. B. (2007). Rapid word learning under
uncertainty via cross-situational statistics. Psychological
Science: A journal of the American Psychological Society,
18(5), 414–20.

Summary
We investigated learners’ memory for co-occurrence frequencies in referentially ambiguous observational-word
learning situations within two experiments. Our data reveals
that while participants were able to recall more than one
potential meaning for a noun, this memory was dependent
on the person’s single considerations during learning: Only
if a potential meaning had been proposed before (i.e., selected or paid particular attention to), it was stored. However, learners memorized more than the most recent proposal they had made for a novel word. Moreover, a meaning
was more likely to be proposed if it co-occurred with a noun
early on the learning path. While this whole pattern was
very similar independent of the learning procedure (choice
made during learning, Experiment 1, vs. no choices made,
Experiment 2), the influence of being proposed early may
be enhanced when choices are made. In line with a moderate
version of the propose-but-verify account (Medina et al.,

810

