UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Not so innocent: Reasoning about costs, competence, and culpability in very early childhood

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9d77011c

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Jara-Ettinger, Julian
Tenenbaum, Joshua
Schulz, Laura

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Not so innocent: Reasoning about costs, competence, and culpability in very early
childhood
Julian Jara-Ettinger (jjara@mit.edu)
Joshua B. Tenenbaum (jbt@mit.edu)
Laura E. Schulz (lschulz@mit.edu)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA
Abstract

2003 for review). Consistent with a large body of prior work,
we assume that inferences about agents’ goal-directed actions
are governed by a principle of rational expectation: the idea
that agents act efficiently to achieve their goals (e.g., Scott &
Baillargeon, 2013; Gergely & Csibra, 2003). Computational
work on the principle of rational expectation as probabilistic
inference over rational planning has been used to successfully
model adults’ reasoning about agents’ goals (Baker, Saxe, &
Tenenbaum, 2009, 2011; Ullman et al., 2010; Jara-Ettinger,
Baker, & Tenenbaum, 2012).

Social evaluations depend on our ability to interpret other people’s behavior. In adults, these evaluations are influenced by
our perception of the competence and motivation of the agent:
helping when it is difficult to help is praiseworthy; not helping when it is easy to help is reprehensible. Here we look at
young children’s capacity to make competence attributions and
its relation to their social evaluations. We find that as early as
18-months, infants can use the time and effort associated with
achieving a goal-directed action to distinguish agents, and that
infants prefer more competent agents. When asked to choose
between two agents who act as moral bystanders and refuse
to engage in a helpful action, we find a sustained preference
for the more competent agent until the age of three, when the
preference is reversed. We argue that the ability to calculate
the cost and benefits of goal-directed action originates in early
childhood and plays a fundamental role in moral reasoning.
Keywords: Action Understanding; Morality; Social Cognition; Theory of Mind.

The principle of rational expectation is predicated on the
understanding that agents act in ways that will minimize costs
and maximize rewards. We propose that the ability to compute the costs and benefits of actions forms the heart of a
naı̈ve utility calculus that supports inference at the earliest
stages of children’s theories of agency. (See Jara-Ettinger,
Gweon, Tenenbaum, & Schulz in prep, for a detailed version
of this argument and experimental studies in childhood). Here
we provide an informal description of this approach and test
one of its qualitative predictions: that an analysis of the cost
functions associated with agent actions is central to the moral
judgments even of very young children.

Introduction
The past decade has seen a revolution in our understanding of psychosocial reasoning in early childhood. Recent
findings suggest that infants infer the false beliefs of others (Onishi & Baillargeon, 2005; Southgate, Senju, & Csibra, 2007; Kovács, Téglás, & Endress, 2010), distinguish
helpers, hinderers, and moral bystanders (Kuhlmeier, Wynn,
& Bloom, 2003; Hamlin, Wynn, & Bloom, 2007); draw different inferences about actions directed towards member of
in-groups and out-groups (Baillargeon et al., in press); predict actions based on social dominance (Thomsen, Frankenhuis, Ingold-Smith, & Carey, 2011), judge third party agents
transitively, based on how they interact with moral transgressors (Hamlin, Wynn, Bloom, & Mahajan, 2011; Sloane, Baillargeon, & Premack, 2012); and consider agents’ knowledge
about a target agent’s preferences in making moral judgments
(Hamlin, Ullman, Tenenbaum, Goodman, & Baker, 2013).
The discovery of infants’ sophisticated social intelligence is
among the most exciting recent developments in the field of
cognitive science. However, to date relatively little is understood about the types of computations that underlie these social judgments.

Intuitively, adult social evaluations are influenced by our
perception of how much an action will cost the agent who
performs it. Imagine for instance, that your neighbor, Sally,
watches a child struggle to reach a package on the top shelf
of a grocery store. Sally stands by and does nothing at all.
Although there is no intrinsic relationship between height and
moral worth, you may well judge Sally less harshly if she is
4’11” than if she is an NCAA Division 1 basketball player.
What analysis underlies this inference? We suggest that
in evaluating and predicting agents’ actions, observers automatically compute the cost of actions. The perceived cost of
an action (controlling for constraints imposed by the environment) reflects inferences about the agents’ level of competence; the perceived benefits of the action to the agent reflect
inferences about the agents’ level of motivation. Motivation
and competence jointly affect the probability of the agents’
actions so the two attributions trade-off with each other. If
we know that an agent is highly motivated and she fails to
act, we may infer that she is incompetent; conversely, if we
know the agent is highly competent and she fails to act, we
may infer that she is unmotivated. Morally, lack of competence to help is an exonerating factor; lack of motivation is
not.

Rational Planning, Social Evaluations, and a
Naı̈ve Utility Calculus
Here we propose a new approach to thinking about social reasoning in infancy, drawing on the insight that the ability to
reason about goal-directed action is at the core of our cognition about agents. (See Carey, 2009; Gergely & Csibra,

663

(a) Experiment 1

More generally social evaluations depend heavily on the
agent’s motivation (Cushman, 2008; Knobe, 2005; Young,
Cushman, Hauser, & Saxe, 2007). This may not be known
and must then be inferred. If the agent performs a morally
worthy action, then the higher our estimate of the cost of the
action, the higher our estimate of the agents’ motivation to
act morally. Similarly, if the agent fails to act, then the lower
our estimate of the cost of action, the lower our estimate of
the agent’s motivation. Ambiguity arises when the agent acts
but the cost of action is very low, or the agent fails to act
but the cost of action is very high; in such cases, we may be
unsure of the agent’s level of motivation. In our example, if
Sally is 4’11”, there is a high cost to reaching the shelf. This
renders her failure to act ambiguous. Did she not want to
help or was it simply too hard for her to do so? By contrast,
if Sally is an NCAA basketball player, we can infer that the
cost of reaching a shelf is low; thus we are more confident
that her failure to act derives from a morally suspect lack of
motivation.
We propose that these kinds of considerations are part of
a general calculation of a cost function that, even early in
development, is used to reason about goal-directed behavior
and interpret agents’ actions. However, to date no empirical work has looked at how differences in the cost function
of agent actions affect children’s evaluative and moral judgments. Similarly, no previous computational work has looked
at how learners might compute the cost function of agent actions; work on goal inference has implicitly assumed that the
cost function of actions is known (e.g., Baker et al., 2009;
Ullman et al., 2010).
Here we test the prediction that very young children can estimate the cost functions associated with agents’ actions and
that this analysis affects children’s moral judgments. In Experiment 1, we test the basic premise that children can use
the perceived cost of actions to estimate agents’ competence.
We predict that at baseline children will prefer more (versus
less) competent agents. In Experiment 2, we look at whether
children can use differences in the cost of actions to infer differences in agents’ motivations. We predict that when agents
are moral bystanders, children may overcome their baseline
preference for competent agents and be more likely to consider the merits of incompetent (but potentially more wellintended) agents.

*Press*
*Press*
*Press*
*Success*

Which one would
you rather play
with?

*Success*

(b) Experiment 2
Can you help
me play with
this toy?

No!
No!

Figure 1: Procedure for Experiments 1 and 2. Both experiments begin by introducing two puppets and a toy. One puppet (the Competent agent) was able to make the toy play music on the first attempt; the other puppet (the Incompetent
agent) succeeded only after many attempts. In Experiment 1
(blue arrow), children were then asked to choose one of the
puppets to play with. In Experiment 2 (green arrows), after
the child saw both puppets activate the toy, the parent turned
around and asked each puppet for help with the toy. Both puppets refused. As in Experiment 1, children were then asked
to choose one of the puppets to play with.
ban children’s museum1 . Five children were excluded from
analysis: four by decision of a blind coder and one for
parental interference (See Results). All subjects were tested
at an urban children’s museum.

Stimuli
Participants were shown two puppets and a yellow cylindrical
toy with a black button at the top. The toy played music when
the button was pressed.

Procedure
Participants were tested in a quiet room at the museum. The
child’s parent was seated on a chair facing away from the
testing table and the parent was asked to hold the toddler over
his or her shoulder. Thus the child could see the stimuli but
the parent could not.
Once the parent and toddler were positioned the experimenter presented the yellow toy to the child and introduced
the two puppets. See Figure 1. He said, ”Here are my two
friends! They are going to show you how the toy works.”
Both puppets were continuously present throughout the experiment and each puppet approached the toy (order counterbalanced between participants) one at a time. The puppet
said, ”It’s my turn!” and then pressed the button. When the
toy activated, the toy played a song for approximately 10 sec-

Experiment 1: Early Competence Attribution
In Experiment 1 we look at whether toddlers can use the time
and effort associated with achieving a goal-directed action to
estimate the cost of the action to the agents. We also look
at whether toddlers have an early preference for competent
agents.

Participants

1 12 additional toddlers were recruited but never included in the
study because they declined to participate in a warm-up task, in
which the child was asked to choose between two stuffed elephants.

Twenty-four toddlers (mean age (SD): 21.19 months (97
days), range 16.8-28 months, 16 males) were tested at an ur-

664

preferred the competent agent (p < 0.001 by binomial test).
See Figure 2.
In our design, the incompetent agent both made more attempts to activate the toy and took longer to activate the toy.
Additionally, after some initial failures, the incompetent puppet studied the toy before trying again. Thus there were redundant cues to the agent’s incompetence and we do not know
whether toddlers’ preferences were driven by the overall effort to achieve the goal, the time to achieve the goal (and
thus perhaps the relative novelty of the puppet who achieved
the goal more quickly), or a more abstract judgment about
these factors as indices of competence per se. Future research
might look at the range of factors that affect toddlers’ inferences about the cost of agent actions. However, the result of
Experiment 1 give strong evidence that by 18 months, children distinguish agents from differential cues to competence
and prefer agents who appear to incur fewer costs to achieve
a goal.

Experiment 1
**

15
14
13

Number of Children

12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

Competent
Choice
Agent

Incompetent
Agent

Experiment 2: Competence and Social
Evaluations

Figure 2: Results from Experiment 1: Number of children
choosing each agent. ∗∗ = p < .001 by binomial test.

In Experiment 2, we look at how children’s judgment of
agent competence affects their social evaluation. Because pilot work suggested that the task in Experiment 2 was more
demanding than the one in Experiment 1, we tested slightly
older children: two and three-year-olds.

onds and then the puppet released the button. During this
time, both puppets moved rythmically to the sound of the
song. After releasing the button, each puppet said ”Yay!” to
celebrate the success.
The puppets differed in how many attempts it took them
to activate the toy. The competent agent was always able to
make the toy play music on the first attempt. The incompetent puppet tried several times to activate the toy (flattening his hand over the button but not depressing it fully). After the third or fourth failed attempt, the incompetent puppet
backed away to look at the button, and then tried again. The
incompetent puppet made a few more failed attempts and then
successfully activated the toy. (The number of total attempts
ranged from 6 - 8 trials across participants, allowing some
flexibility in maintaining the child’s attention to the task.) After the show, the parent was asked to turn around and to place
their child at a marker on the middle of the edge of a lower table. The experimenter placed both puppets on opposite sides
of the table equidistant from the child and asked the child
which one she wanted to play with.

Participants
Seventeen two-year-olds (mean age (SD): 30.8 months (83
days), range 26.6-34.9 months, 9 males); one was dropped
from analysis for failure to make a choice. Thirty three-yearolds (mean age (SD): 42 months (104 days), range 36-50.09
months, 17 males) were recruited in the test condition; 7 were
dropped from analysis, 4 by decision of a blind coder and 3
for failures to make a choice. An additional 9 three-year-olds
(mean age (SD): 35.4 months (131.67 days), range 29.1-42.03
months, 4 males) were recruited for a control condition, 1 was
dropped from analysis due to failure to make a choice. All
subjects were tested at an urban children’s museum2 .

Stimuli
The stimuli used in Experiment 2 were identical to stimuli
used in Experiment 1.

Procedure
The protocol in Experiment 1 was identical to the protocol in
Experiment 2 with the following exceptions (See Figure 1).
Because the children were older, they were given a choice of
sitting in a small chair or standing in front of the testing table,
behind the parent’s chair. Additionally, before the experiment
began, the parents were given a script to read telling them that
when prompted to do so, they should turn around and pick up

Results and Discussion
All videotapes were coded by a coder blind to condition. Four
children were excluded from analysis due to the coders’ judgment that the puppets were not placed equidistant from the
child. One additional child was excluded from analysis due
to parental interference. The coder recorded the toddlers’ first
contact with a puppet following the prompt. If the child did
not make a choice within a 30-second window following the
prompt, the experiment was ended. Three children did not
make a choice. Of the 16 children who did make a choice, 15

24

additional two-year-olds and 3 three-year-olds were recruited
but never included in the study because they declined to participate
in a warm-up task, in which the child was asked to choose between
two stuffed elephants.

665

Experiment 2

Experiment 2: Children’s preferences as a function of age
Incompetent
Agent

●

●

●

●

●

●● ● ●

●

●●

●

●

●

●

Competent
Agent
Incompetent
Agent

12
11

Choice

10

●

●● ●

●

●

●●

●

● ●●

2.5

●●

3.0

● ●●

●

●

3.5

Age in years

●

● ●

●●

Number of Children

Competent
Agent

choice

13
●

●

4.0

9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2

Figure 3: Children’s choice of puppet in the test condition of
Experiment 2 as a function of their age. The logistic regression with 95% confidence interval is shown on top. At early
ages we find a preference for the competent agent, which disappears in older subjects.

1
0

2-year-olds
Test Condition

3-year-olds
Test Condition

3-year-olds
Control Condition

Figure 4: Number of subjects choosing to play with the competent (red) and incompetent agent (blue) in each age and
condition of Experiment 2. ∗ = p < .05.

the toy from the table. The experimenter would then place
one puppet at a time in front of them. Parents in the test
condition were instructed to ask each puppet: ”Can you help
me make the toy go?” Parents in the control condition were
instructed to ask each puppet ”Do you have a toy like this at
home?”
Otherwise, the first part of the protocol proceeded as in
Experiment 1. After both the competent and incompetent
puppets successfully made the toy play music, but before the
child was asked to make a choice, both puppets were removed
and the toy was placed in the middle of the table. At this point
the parent was asked to turn around. The parent picked up the
toy and the experimenter returned a puppet to the middle of
the table (order of puppets counterbalanced). Only one puppet was visible at a time. After the parent asked the puppet
the target question, the puppet looked at the toy, then at the
parent and said ”No!” The puppet then turned around and hid
under the table. This was repeated with the next puppet. To
ensure that the child understood, in the test condition the experimenter said, ”No one seems to want to help!” In the control condition he said, ”No one seems to have this toy!” The
questions and answers were then repeated with each puppet a
second time.
After each puppet had said ”no” twice, the experimenter
took the toy from the parent and asked the child to stand on a
marker in the center of a table edge. As in Experiment 1, the
experimenter then set each puppet on opposite sides of the
table, equidistant from the child and asked the child which
puppet she would rather play with.

of age on children’s preferences: older children were more
likely than younger children to choose the incompetent puppet (p < 0.02). See Figure 3.
We followed-up with planned comparisons of the two and
three-year-olds separately. See Figure 4. The two-year-olds
showed a robust preference for the competent puppet. Of the
16 two-year-olds who made a choice, 12 chose the competent
puppet (p < .05 by binomial test). By contrast, the threeyear-olds in the test condition chose between the puppets at
chance; 13 of the 26 three-year-olds chose the competent puppet (p = ns by binomial test).
These results are consistent with the possibility that threeyear-olds can use differences in agents’ competence to attribute differences in agents’ motivation, and can overcome
their baseline preference for competent agents if agents fail
to act helpfully. Arguably however, the three-year-olds chose
at chance because they simply forgot which puppet was more
competent (perhaps because the three-year-olds were more
engaged than the two-year-olds by the puppets’ refusals).
To see whether three-year-olds retained the competence information we looked at three-year-olds’ performance in the
control conditions. Failure to recall the more competent puppet seems unlikely to explain the results; preliminary results
from the control condition suggest that the three-year-olds
have no difficulty remembering which puppet was more competent when moral culpability is not at issue: 6 of the 8 threeyear-olds showed a preference for the more competent puppet.
These results suggest that by the age of three, children can
override a preference for competent agents if those agents act
as moral bystanders. Given that it is morally objectionable to
refrain from helping when a helpful action is relatively low
cost, three-year-olds seem to be able to look more favorably
on agents who have the excuse of incompetence to exonerate
them.
The current findings are consistent with previous work sug-

Results and Discussion
Results were coded from videotape by a coder blind to conditions, as in Experiment 1. Children were excluded from analysis if, in the coder’s judgment, the puppets were not placed
equidistant from the child or if children did not make a choice
within the 30-second window, resulting in 16 2-year-olds and
23 3-year-olds in the test condition and 8 3-year-olds in the
control condition (See Participants).
In the test condition, a logistic regression showed an effect

666

gesting that both toddlers (Tomasello et al., 2005) and chimpanzees (Call, Hare, Carpenter, & Tomasello, 2004) differentiate between agents who are unwilling to act helpfully from
those who are unable to act helpfully. Here we also find that
children distinguish competence to help from motivation to
help. Critically however, participants in the earlier studies
could assess the agents’ motivation directly, from overt behavioral cues: serious, if failed, attempts to help indicated a
motivated agent; ”teasing” indicated an unmotivated one. Additionally, the ”unable” agent in the earlier studies was genuinely unable: every attempt the agent made failed.
By contrast, in the current study, both agents were unwilling to help (both puppet said ”no” and turned away from the
parent) and neither agent was unable to help (both puppets
were in fact able to activate the toy). Children could only
evaluate the agents on the basis of graded differences in the
agents’ competence; however, this is precisely the kind of
ability children should have if, as we have proposed, social
reasoning in early childhood is informed by a naı̈ve utility
calculus, supporting computations of the costs and benefits
of actions.

gory; because both puppets in our paradigm refused to help,
toddlers might find them equally blameworthy. A final intriguing possibility is that both two and three-year-olds can
integrate judgments of agents’ competence with moral judgments, but the children find themselves in a moral dilemma
(and resolve the dilemma differently at different ages): they
believe the incompetent agent is less culpable; however, they
also believe it is a good idea to affiliate with competent
agents. Future work is necessary to disambiguate these possibilities.
Additionally, because the children were given a forced
choice between two agents, we do not know whether the one
and two-year-olds’ choices were based on a preference for
the competent agent, an aversion to the incompetent one, or
both. Similarly, we do not know whether the three-year-olds’
choices reflect a relatively greater preference for the less competent (and therefore morally exonerated) agent, a relative devaluing of the more competent (and therefore morally culpable) agent, or both. Further research might disambiguate the
specific attributions underlying children’s preferences.
What this study does show is that human beings are sensitive to the cost of actions very early in development and
form an early preference for competent agents. As children
progress through early childhood, they become increasingly
able to use inferences about an agent’s competence to draw
inferences about the agent’s moral status. At an age when
children themselves are still largely both incompetent and innocent, their ability to understand how the one characteristic
might bear upon the other suggests remarkably sophisticated
inferential abilities and highlights the importance of building a new theoretical synthesis for understanding the development social reasoning.

General Discussion
Consistent with the idea that a naı̈ve utility calculus is integral to children’s understanding of agents, we found that
inferences about the relative cost of agents’ actions affect
children’s social evaluations from very early in development.
Toddlers seem to be sensitive to cues associated with the relative competence of agents and prefer agents who achieve
goals quickly and easily to agents who achieve the same goals
at apparently higher costs. By the age of three, children seem
to be able to use differences in agent competence as grounds
for evaluating agents differently, even when the agents act
identically in refusing to act at all.
As noted, we provided redundant cues to the competence
and incompetence of these agents, including the time it took
for each agent to make the toy play music, and the number
of times each puppet pressed the button. We do not know to
what extent toddlers’ preferences were driven by each individual cue, or if their choice was guided by a more abstract
representation of competence. Future research can shed light
on the full range of cues we use to infer an agent’s competence both in the physical domain and the epistemological
domain, where some form of competence preference has also
been found (Koenig, Clément, & Harris, 2004; Pasquini, Corriveau, Koenig, Harris, et al., 2007).
There are several hypotheses consistent with the developmental change we observed between the age of two and three.
One possibility is that toddlers distinguish competent and incompetent agents, but they do not infer that relative competence implies an obligation to act helpfully, or that relative incompetence exonerates an agent from such actions. A related
possibility is that toddlers might make categorical distinctions
between classes of behavior (e.g., ”helping”, ”not helping”,
and ”hindering”) but make no distinctions within each cate-

Acknowledgments
We thank the Boston Children’s Museum and the families
who volunteered to participate. Thanks to Salvador Esparza,
Eric Garr, and Aviana Polsky for help with data collection.
We thank Rachel Magid for help with coding the data. Special thanks to Hyowon Gweon and Kim Scott for helpful comments and discussions. This research was funded by the National Science Foundation and the Simons Center for the Social Brain.

References
Baillargeon, R., Scott, R. M., He, Z., Sloane, S., Setoh, P.,
Jin, K., et al. (in press). Psychological and sociomoral
reasoning in infancy. APA Handbook of Personality and
Social Psychology: Vol. 1. Atittudes and Social Cognition..
Baker, C. L., Saxe, R., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2009). Action
understanding as inverse planning. Cognition, 113, 329–
349.
Baker, C. L., Saxe, R., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2011). Bayesian
theory of mind: Modeling joint belief-desire attribution. In
Proceedings of the Thirtieth Third Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society (p. 2469-2474).

667

Call, J., Hare, B., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (2004).
unwillingversus unable: chimpanzees understanding of human intentional action. Developmental science, 7(4), 488–
498.
Carey, S. (2009). The origin of concepts. Oxford University
Press, USA.
Cushman, F. (2008). Crime and punishment: Distinguishing
the roles of causal and intentional analyses in moral judgment. Cognition, 108(2), 353–380.
Gergely, G., & Csibra, G. (2003). Teleological reasoning
in infancy: The naı̈ve theory of rational action. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 7(7), 287–292.
Hamlin, J. K., Ullman, T., Tenenbaum, J., Goodman, N., &
Baker, C. (2013). The mentalistic basis of core social
cognition: experiments in preverbal infants and a computational model. Developmental science, 16(2), 209–226.
Hamlin, J. K., Wynn, K., & Bloom, P. (2007). Social evaluation by preverbal infants. Nature, 450, 557-560.
Hamlin, J. K., Wynn, K., Bloom, P., & Mahajan, N. (2011,
December). How infants and toddlers react to antisocial
others. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America, 108(50), 19931–6.
Jara-Ettinger, J., Baker, C. L., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2012).
Learning what is where from social observations. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Fourth Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 515–520).
Jara-Ettinger, J., Gweon, H., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Schulz,
L. E. (in prep). You can’t always get what you want: Inferring competence from preference in early childhood.
Knobe, J. (2005). Theory of mind and moral cognition: exploring the connections. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 9(8),
357 - 359.
Koenig, M. A., Clément, F., & Harris, P. L. (2004). Trust
in testimony: Children’s use of true and false statements.
Psychological Science, 15(10), 694–698.
Kovács, A. M., Téglás, E., & Endress, A. D. (2010, December). The social sense: susceptibility to others’ beliefs in human infants and adults. Science (New York, N.Y.),
330(6012), 1830–4.
Kuhlmeier, V., Wynn, K., & Bloom, P. (2003, September).
Attribution of Dispositional States by 12-Month-Olds. Psychological Science, 14(5), 402–408.
Onishi, K. H., & Baillargeon, R. (2005). Do 15-month-old
infants understand false beliefs? Science, 308(5719), 255–
258.
Pasquini, E. S., Corriveau, K. H., Koenig, M., Harris, P. L.,
et al. (2007). Preschoolers monitor the relative accuracy
of informants. Developmental psychology, 43(5), 1216–
1226.
Scott, R. M., & Baillargeon, R. (2013). Do infants really
expect agents to act efficiently?: A critical test of the rationality principle. Psychological Science.
Sloane, S., Baillargeon, R., & Premack, D. (2012). Do infants
have a sense of fairness? Psychological science, 23(2),
196–204.

Southgate, V., Senju, A., & Csibra, G. (2007). Action Anticipation through Attribution of False Belief By Two-YearOlds. Psychological Science, 18, 587–592.
Thomsen, L., Frankenhuis, W. E., Ingold-Smith, M., &
Carey, S. (2011, January). Big and mighty: preverbal infants mentally represent social dominance. Science (New
York, N.Y.), 331(6016), 477–80.
Tomasello, M., Carpenter, M., Call, J., Behne, T., Moll, H., et
al. (2005). Understanding and sharing intentions: The origins of cultural cognition. Behavioral and brain sciences,
28(5), 675–690.
Ullman, T. D., Baker, C. L., Macindoe, O., Evans, O., Goodman, N. D., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2010). Help or hinder:
Bayesian models of social goal inference. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems 22 (pp. 1874–
1882).
Young, L., Cushman, F., Hauser, M., & Saxe, R. (2007). The
neural basis of the interaction between theory of mind and
moral judgment. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 104(20), 8235-8240.

668

