UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Object motion continuity and the flash-lag effect

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2x911133

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Au, Ricky K.C.
Watanabe, Katsumi

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Object motion continuity and the flash-lag effect
Ricky K. C. Au1,2 (ricky@fennel.rcast.u-tokyo.ac.jp)
Katsumi Watanabe1 (kw@fennel.rcast.u-tokyo.ac.jp)
1

Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
2
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science, Tokyo, Japan

Abstract
When a visual object is briefly flashed, it appears to lag
behind another moving object (flash-lag effect; FLE).
Previous studies show that a sudden change to the moving
object at the time of the flash presentation can eliminate the
FLE. We examined whether the FLE is eliminated when a
moving object alternates in color as it moves. Observers
viewed a moving disc, the color of which did not change at all,
changed only once when another object flashed, or alternated
between two colors as it moved before the flash presentation.
The results showed that although the magnitude of the FLE
was reduced compared with the no-change condition, the FLE
observed with the moving object that changed color during
motion was significantly stronger than the FLE in the onechange condition. The results are discussed in relation to the
object updating account of the FLE.
Keywords: Flash-lag effect; Motion continuity; Object
updating

Introduction
Humans depend heavily on the perceptual system to collect
information about the surrounding environment, but the
perceptual system is sometimes prone to illusions that lead
to inaccurate judgments. In the domain of object localization,
one extensively studied illusion is the flash-lag effect (FLE),
a perceptual phenomenon where a briefly-flashed stationary
object appears to lag behind another moving object even
though the two objects are physically aligned when the flash
occurs (MacKay, 1958; Nijhawan, 1994). Studies on the
FLE have found that this effect occurs in various conditions.
For example, the FLE has been reported in objects with
continuously changing features (Sheth, Nijhawan, &
Shimojo, 2000), in objects moving in depth (Harris, Duke,
& Kopinska, 2006; Ishii, Seekkuarachchi, Tamura, & Tang,
2004), in audition, and across modalities (Alais & Burr,
2003). In addition, the FLE was also found to depend on
observers’ eye movements (Nijhawan, 2001) and the
perceptual organization of the moving object (Watanabe,
2004; Watanabe, Nijhawan, Khurna, & Shimojo, 2001).
Putting the effect in a two-dimensional context, Watanabe
and Yokoi (2006) found that the perceived position of the
flash is not uniformly displaced, but appears to converge
towards a single point behind the position of the moving
object.
Ever since Nijhawan (1994) revitalized interest in the
FLE within the psychology community, various
explanations have been formulated to account for the effect,
including motion extrapolation (Nijhawan, 1994, 1997),
differential latency in processing for the flashed object and
the moving object (Kanai, Carlson, Verstraten, & Walsh,

2009; Whitney & Murakami, 1998; Whitney, Murakami, &
Cavanagh, 2000), motion integration and postdiction
(Eagleman & Sejnowski, 2000), and attention (Baldo &
Klein, 1995; Krekelberg & Lappe, 2000). However, this
ongoing debate has not yet been settled.
Moore and Enns (2004) proposed a relatively new
explanation of the FLE. They view the effect as the result of
an ongoing object updating process based on the principle
of object substitution (Enns & Di Lollo, 1997). They
proposed that due to the ongoing updating process,
positional information of the moving object acquired
immediately after the flash presentation overwrites
(replaces) that acquired at the time of the flash presentation,
resulting in the illusory perception that the moving object
overshoots the flash. In the case where the moving object
stops at the time of the flash presentation, since there is no
new information about the moving object after the flash
presentation that can replace (update) previous information,
the alignment of the two objects can be accurately perceived.
In the same study, Moore and Enns (2004) further reported
that when the visual features of the moving object, such as
size and color, changed abruptly at the moment of the flash
presentation and changed back immediately after the flash
(we refer to this as the “One Change” motion stream),
observers tended to perceive that the moving object
appeared at two positions (one object with the changed
color and aligned with the flash, and the other with the
original color located in front of the flash) when asked about
the perception at the moment of the flash presentation. The
authors explained that the disruption of motion continuity
by a large, transient change leads the visual system to
interpret the scene as containing two separate objects. When
the original object reappears at a new position after the flash,
its position and color information is updated, while the
information acquired at the moment of the flash presentation
(which is interpreted as a different object) is spared from the
overwriting process. However, if a scene-based reason is
provided for the discontinuity, the object updating process is
spared from disruption, preserving the representation of the
original object, and thus, the FLE is observed (Moore,
Mordkoff, & Enns, 2007).
According to the idea above, whether object motion
continuity is preserved depends on whether only a single
(i.e., the same) object is identified throughout the motion
scene. The nature of object persistence has been widely
studied based on object file theory (Kahneman, Treisman, &
Gibbs, 1992). According to this theory, episodic
representations (object files) keep track of the individual
entities in a scene over space and time, and are updated

151

based on spatiotemporal information (i.e., location at
different moments). Object files store the representations of
persistent objects and mediate conscious perception,
informing the observer about “which went where” (Mitroff,
Scholl, & Wynn, 2005), and object identity information can
be stored on a scale of seconds (Noles, Scholl, & Mitroff,
2005). Empirical evidence has suggested that object files
encode identity information rather than semantic or precise
physical information (i.e., physical features) about objects,
and that object file representations are flexible (Gordon &
Irwin, 1996, 2000). Although Mitroff and Alvarez (2007)
showed that spatiotemporal information, but not surface
features, effectively determines object persistence (as
measured by standard object-specific preview benefits;
Kahneman et al., 1992), Moore, Stephens, and Hein (2010)
demonstrated that abrupt changes in surface features disrupt
preview benefits, and an object feature alone could
determine object persistence under some conditions. It is
therefore still unclear what role object surface features play
in the establishment and maintenance of object files.
An interesting question derived from the study of Moore
and Enns (2004) is what would be observed if a stream of
events consisted of an object moving in a uniform trajectory
while its surface feature (e.g., color) keeps changing? This
would represent a case in which spatiotemporal continuity
suggests only a single object moving throughout the journey,
but the information from surface features suggests that
multiple units exist. In the present experiment, we
investigated this question by introducing two conditions—
Alternating stream (in which the color of the moving object
alternates between two colors) and Random stream (in
which the color of the moving object changes randomly
between two colors)—in addition to the One Change and
No Change conditions employed in the original study by
Moore and Enns (2004). Based on previous work on object
file theory, if spatiotemporal information dominates the
formation and updating of episodic object files (so that the
visual system identifies only one object in the stream), we
would expect the FLE to occur even in the Alternating and
Random stream conditions. This would also mean that the
unexpected and highly salient change at the moment of flash
presentation in the One Change stream is a necessary
condition for breaking motion continuity (leading the visual
system to identify multiple objects in the stream) which
eliminates the FLE. In contrast, if object surface features
play a significant role in maintaining object files, the history
of color change in conjunction with motion would cause the
visual system to conclude that multiple objects exist in the
motion stream. In this case, the FLE might be eliminated
because the process of overwriting previous information at
each instant is largely disrupted by the color change.

Method
To examine the effect of object motion continuity on the
magnitude of the FLE, we compared performance across
three motion stream conditions (No Change, One Change,

and Alternating or Random) in two separate sessions with
two different groups of observers.

Participants
Twenty-four paid volunteers recruited at The University of
Tokyo participated as observers in the experiment. Twelve
observers were assigned to the session with the Alternating
stream condition, and twelve were assigned to the session
with the Random stream condition. All were naïve as to the
purpose of the study and had normal or corrected-to-normal
vision. Informed consent was obtained from the observers
prior to the experiment.

Stimuli and procedures
The stimuli used in the experiment were developed based on
the previous study by Moore and Enns (2004; Part 2), and
were programmed in MATLAB R2012b (MathWorks,
USA) using the Psychophysics Toolbox extension (version
3.0.8; Brainard, 1997; Pelli, 1997). The stimuli were
displayed on a CRT monitor with a refresh rate of 100 Hz
(resolution = 800 × 600 pixels), controlled by a personal
computer running the Windows 7 operating system.
Observers viewed the stimuli at a distance of 60 cm in a
dark and quiet environment.
All experimental stimuli were presented on a black
background (luminance = 0.022 cd/m2). The observer
initiated each trial by pressing the space bar on the keyboard.
After the space bar was pressed, a white fixation cross
consisting of one horizontal line and one vertical line
(length = 0.317°, width = 0.0453°) appeared at the center of
the screen and remained throughout the trial until a response
was made. Observers were required to fixate on the fixation
cross throughout the trial. When the trial was initiated, a
circular target stimulus (diameter = 0.907°) in either red or
green (luminance = 0.47 cd/m2) appeared either just above
or below the central fixation cross at a distance of 4.171°
and remained there for 500 ms. Then, the target stimulus
started to move in clockwise or counter-clockwise direction
on an imaginary circle (radius = 4.171°) around the fixation
cross for a random angular distance of 105°, 195°, 285°, or
375° at an angular speed of 15°/frame. Each frame was
displayed for 70 ms, and thus, the duration of the motion
stream was 490 ms, 910 ms, 1330 ms, or 1750 ms. One of
the following three possible motion streams was presented
on each trial: (i) No Change, (ii) One Change, and (iii)
Alternating or Random (depending on session assignment).
In the No Change stream, the color of the target remained
unchanged throughout the trial. In the One Change stream,
the target color changed to the other color during the second
last frame of the motion (which corresponds to the position
just above, below, to the left, or to the right of fixation, and
thus is always aligned with fixation), and then changed back
to its original color in the last frame of the motion. In the
Alternating stream, the color of the target alternated
between red and green in each frame of the motion. In the
Random stream, the color of the target changed randomly
(either red or green) in each frame of its motion.

152

The flash stimulus was a white disc (diameter = 0.544°,
luminance = 2.89 cd/m2) presented at the position just above,
below, to the left, or to the right of fixation (i.e., always
aligned with fixation) at a distance of 2.901°. The flash was
presented at either the third last, second last, or last frame of
the motion for a duration of one frame. These three flash
conditions resembled the “behind,” “aligned,” and “ahead”
conditions in Moore and Enns (2004; Fig. 1a and 1b). In
addition to these three flash conditions, there were also two
baseline flash conditions for each stream condition. In the
previous study, when the flash appeared, the target disc was
presented at the second last position of the motion in the No
Change condition, and was presented at the second last and
last position of the motion in the One Change condition
(Moore & Enns, 2004; Fig. 1c). However, in the present
study, we included both of these baseline conditions in all
stream conditions to reduce any possible difference or bias
in the magnitude of the FLE elicited by the different
baseline conditions in the No Change and One Change
streams, thus allowing a better comparison across different
stream conditions. Specifically, in the Baseline 1 condition,
the target stimulus stream was identical to the “aligned”
flash condition, except that the target disappeared along
with the flash; in the Baseline 2 condition, the target stream
was the same as the Baseline 1 condition, except that an
additional target was also presented in the second last frame
and disappeared along with the flash. This additional target
was presented at the position where the target should appear
in the last frame in a non-baseline condition (see the “small
change” and “large change” conditions in Fig. 1c of Moore
& Enns, 2004). Therefore, in the two baseline conditions,
the target discs were presented up to the second last frame
of the motion stream, and only the central fixation cross was
displayed in the last frame.
No Change

One Change

Moon
direcon
Flash

Last
frame

Moon
direcon
Flash

2nd last
frame

3rd last
frame

Last
frame

Alternang

2nd last
frame

3rd last
frame

Random

Moon
direcon
Flash

Last
frame

Moon
direcon
Flash

2nd last
frame

3rd last
frame

Last
frame

2nd last
frame

3rd last
frame

Figure 1: The four motion stream conditions employed in
the present study.

Observers were required to judge, upon the disappearance
of the target disc, whether the target disc was aligned with
the flash (and also the fixation) at the moment when the
flash occurred. They were also instructed to respond
“aligned” if they saw two target discs and either one of them
was aligned with the flash. There were a total of 480 trials
(3 Streams conditions × 5 Flash conditions × 2 Starting
Positions × 4 Travel Distances × 2 Starting Colors × 2
Motion Directions). Observers were instructed to take a
five-minute break halfway through the experiment. The
experimental session took about 35 minutes to complete.

Results
Following Moore and Enns (2004), we plotted the average
proportion of trials where the observers reported that the
target disc and the flash were aligned for each stream
condition. The data are plotted separately for the sessions
with Alternating and Random streams (Figure 2; only data
for the two baseline flash conditions and the flash condition
where the target disc and the flash were physically aligned
are shown).
Separate omnibus repeated measures ANOVAs were
conducted on the data in the Alternating and Random
sessions of the experiment. In the Alternating session, the
main effect of Flash condition [F(2,22) = 25.777, p < .001],
the main effect of Stream condition [F(2,22) = 33.997, p
< .001], and the Flash × Stream interaction [F(4,44) = 9.685,
p < .001] were all statistically significant. The main effect of
Travel Distance was not significant [F(3,33) = 2.630, p
= .066]. Specific comparisons revealed that when the target
disc and the flash were physically aligned (i.e., Aligned in
Figure 2), there was a significantly lower proportion of
“aligned” responses [i.e., P(“aligned”)] in the No Change
condition compared to the Alternating condition, while there
was a significantly higher proportion of “aligned” responses
in the One Change condition compared to the Alternating
condition (both at p < .01, adjusted for multiple
comparisons). No significant difference in proportion was
found between the three stream conditions in the Baseline 1
condition; a significant difference in the proportion of
“aligned” responses was found between the No Change vs.
One Change, and between the No Change vs. Alternating
conditions (both at p < .01) in the Baseline 2 condition.
Similar results were found in the Random stream session.
The main effect of Flash condition [F(2,22) = 11.581, p
< .001], the main effect of Stream condition [F(2,22) =
14.137, p < .001], and the Flash × Stream interaction
[F(4,44) = 6.795, p < .001] all reached statistical
significance. The main effect of Travel Distance was
marginally significant [F(3,33) = 2.927, p = .048], while
pairwise comparisons showed that the four Travel Distance
conditions did not differ significantly from each other.
Specific comparisons showed that when the target disc and
the flash were physically aligned (i.e., Aligned in Figure 2),
the proportion of “aligned” responses was significantly
lower in the No Change condition compared to the Random
condition, whereas there was a significantly higher

153

observers judged the target disc to be more salient in the
One Change stream compared to the Alternating (85.8%)
and Random (90.8%) streams. The control experiments
therefore suggest that both hypotheses (a) and (b) contribute
to explain the reduced, but not eliminated, FLE in the
Alternating and Random conditions.
1

P("aligned")

0.8
0.6
0.4
No change

0.2

One change
Alternang

0
Aligned

Baseline 1 Baseline 2

1

P("aligned")

0.8
0.6
0.4
No change

0.2

One change
Random

0
Aligned

Baseline 1 Baseline 2

Figure 2: The average proportion of trials the observers
reported alignment of the target disc and the flash stimuli
for the Alternating (upper graph) and the Random (lower
graph) sessions of the experiment; error bars represent the
standard error of the mean.
1
P(more smooth/salient
in No Change/One Change)

proportion of “aligned” responses in the One Change
condition compared to the Random condition. Similar to the
Alternating session, no significant difference in response
proportion was found among the three stream conditions in
the Baseline 1 condition; there was a significant difference
between the No Change vs. One Change, and between the
No Change vs. Random stream conditions (both at p < .01)
in the Baseline 2 condition.
The Baseline 1 condition appeared to more strongly
eliminate the FLE than the Baseline 2 condition did. One
possible reason for this difference is that, since the
experiment was mixed with both baseline conditions,
observers were aware that there was a condition where the
target disc and the flash were obviously aligned and
disappeared together (Baseline 1), possibly leading to lower
confidence reporting alignment in the Baseline 2 condition,
where there were two discs in different positions.
To summarize, the two sessions of the experiment
replicated the finding that inserting a single change in an
object’s appearance during motion (i.e., the One Change
stream) eliminated (or greatly attenuated) the FLE compared
with the No Change stream. Furthermore, our experiments
demonstrated that a motion stream where the object
alternates colors or changes color randomly elicits some
degree of FLE. These results imply that (a) the weakened
FLE in the Alternating and Random streams may be due to
impaired perceptual smoothness of motion compared to the
No Change stream, and (b) elimination of FLE in the One
Change stream may be due to the exceptionally high
salience of the target disc during the second last frame of the
motion; in the Alternating and Random streams, the disc
may no longer be salient at the moment of flash presentation
(cf. the One Change stream) because the surface feature is
continuously changing throughout the disc’s motion,
leading to survival of FLE under these conditions.
To verify these two hypotheses, we conducted short
control experiments with five additional observers, where
they were requested to judge the smoothness of the motion
stream or the salience of the target disc during the second
last frame of the motion. In each trial in the sessions where
smoothness of motion was evaluated, one No Change
stream and one Alternating stream (or a Random stream in a
separate session) were presented sequentially in a random
order, and observers were asked to indicate which of the two
motion streams exhibited greater smoothness in motion.
There were 24 trials in each session. In most of the trials,
the observers reported that the No Change stream was more
smooth than either the Alternating and Random streams
(average percentage of trials in which the No Change stream
was judged as more smooth in comparison to the
Alternating stream = 84.2%, Random stream = 84.2%). The
sessions testing target disc salience during the second last
frame of the motion were conducted in a similar manner,
but a One Change stream was presented instead of a No
Change stream. Observers were asked to judge which of two
sequentially presented streams showed a more salient target
disc during the second-last frame of the motion. The

0.8
0.6
Alternang
0.4

Random

0.2
0
Smoothness

Salience

Figure 3: The average proportion of trials that the observers
reported the motion of the No Change stream appears to be
more smooth than the Alternating/Random stream (left
panel), and that the target disc looks more salient at the
second last frame in the One Change stream than the
Alternating/Random stream (right panel); error bars
represent the standard error of the mean.

154

Discussion
The results of the present study showed that under
conditions where the target object kept changing color while
moving in a uniform trajectory (i.e., Alternating and
Random streams), a significant FLE was observed, although
it was somewhat attenuated compared to the No Change
condition. Furthermore, the results of the control
experiments suggested that (a) the attenuation of the FLE
under those conditions might be due to lower perceived
motion smoothness compared to the No Change stream, and
(b) the high salience of the target disc at the moment when
the flash occurred might be responsible for the elimination
of the FLE in the One Change stream. These results
therefore suggest that smooth motion defined by unchanged
physical surface features is not a necessary condition for the
FLE. As long as the visual system identifies a single entity
throughout motion, without a salient transient change (i.e.,
in the Alternating and Random streams), the observer can
still perceive the FLE as in physically smooth motion. A
highly salient change that occurs unexpectedly (i.e., in the
One Change stream) is required to break continuity and
cause the visual system to perceive multiple objects in the
stream.
In the context of the FLE, the present results support the
notion that spatiotemporal continuity dominates surface
feature in processing object persistence (Mitroff & Alvarez,
2007). Although under some conditions, surface features
can guide the mapping and updating of individual objects
(Moore et al., 2010), spatiotemporal information is weighted
more strongly in the computation of object persistence when
both types of information are available (Tas, Dodd, &
Hollingworth, 2012). A brain imaging study by Yi et al.
(2008) also provides strong evidence that discontinued
spatiotemporal trajectories can cause visually identical faces
to be represented as different individual objects, in which
the brain area involved was the most staunchly “featural”
area of the ventral visual cortex. The determination of object
persistence during object motion involves identifying the
correspondence between objects over short periods. This is
similar to how the visual system computes motion
correspondence in the apparent motion phenomenon, in
which solutions are sometimes needed to map multiple
objects at one instance to multiple objects at other locations
at the next instance; in such a case, spatiotemporal
information plays an important role in assisting the visual
system to arrive at an appropriate solution (Dawson, 1991).
From the results of the control experiments, we infer that
the perceived smoothness of object motion and the salience
of the transient change during motion mediate the
magnitude and determine the survival of the FLE. Our
results suggest that observers’ subjective perception of
smoothness was related to the magnitude of the FLE. In the
Alternating and the Random conditions, observers reported
less motion smoothness compared to the No Change
condition, and the results of the main experiment indicated a
significantly smaller FLE in the Alternating and Random
conditions compared to the No Change condition. This is

consistent with previous findings that perceived motion
smoothness (i.e., sampling rate of the motion trajectory) and
the magnitude of the FLE are highly correlated (Khurana,
Nijhawan, & Watanabe, 1998). Such a relationship between
motion smoothness and the magnitude of the FLE implies
that the maintenance of object files that give rise to the FLE
may be associated with smoothness of motion. In the
context of the present study, the rapid change in physical
features in the Alternating and Random streams impaired
perceived motion smoothness, and the maintenance of
object files was thus degraded, leading to a smaller FLE.
Although the maintenance of object files was interrupted,
the visual system still perceived only one object in the
motion stream. In terms of the salience of the transient
change at the time of the flash, our results are consistent
with the proposal of Moore and Enns (2004) that the FLE
depends on such a salient and unexpected change in smooth
motion, as abrupt changes in object features may disrupt
object representations (Moore et al., 2007). One possibility
is that the salient and unexpected change in the One Change
stream captured observers’ attention. At the moment of
flash onset, the abrupt change in the moving object
increases attention and allows the moving object to be
associated with the flash onset at its veridical position,
sparing it from the FLE. In the Alternating and Random
streams, since the color change was ongoing, any change
would become less salient and less able to capture attention,
thus preserving the FLE.
To summarize, the present study extended the results of
previous FLE experiments (e.g., Moore and Enns, 2004) and
showed that the FLE can occur in motion streams where the
physical features of the moving object continuously change
during motion. The magnitude and survival of the FLE was
determined by perceived motion smoothness and the
salience of the moving object at the time of the flash. We
propose that a rapid change in a physical feature partially
degrades the maintenance of the object file, but does not
eliminate the overall percept of only one object in the
motion stream. At the same time, it mostly reduces the
salience of the disc at the moment of flash presentation.
Future studies should focus on how attention at the moment
of the flash influences the FLE.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by Grant-in-Aid for Scientific
Research (KAKENHI) from the Ministry of Education,
Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT) of Japan;
and the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS).

References
Alais, D., & Burr, D. C. (2003). The “Flash-Lag” effect
occurs in audition and cross-modally. Current Biology, 13,
59-63.
Baldo, M. V., & Klein, S. A. (1995). Extrapolation or
attention shift? Nature, 378, 565-566.
Brainard, D. H. (1997). The Psychophysics Toolbox. Spatial
Vision, 10, 433-436.

155

Dawson, M. R. W. (1991). The how and why of what went
where in apparent motion: Modeling solutions to the
motion correspondence problem. Psychological Review,
98, 569-603.
Eagleman, D. M., & Sejnowski, T. J. (2000). Motion
integration and postdiction in visual awareness. Science,
287, 2036-2038.
Enns, J. T., & Di Lollo, V. (1997). Object substitution: A
new form of masking in unattended visual locations.
Psychological Science, 8, 135-139.
Gordon, R. D., & Irwin, D. E. (1996). What’s in an object
file? Evidence from priming studies. Perception and
Psychophysics, 58, 1260-1277.
Gordon, R. D., & Irwin, D. E. (2000). The role of physical
and conceptual properties in preserving object continuity.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 26, 136-150.
Harris, L. R., Duke, P. A., & Kopinska, A. (2006). Flash lag
in depth. Vision Research, 46, 2735-2742.
Ishii, M., Seekkuarachchi, H., Tamura, H., & Tang, Z.
(2004). 3D flash lag illusion. Vision Research, 44, 19811984.
Kahneman, D., Treisman, A., & Gibbs, B. J. (1992). The
reviewing of object files: Object-specific integration of
information. Cognitive Psychology, 24, 175-219.
Kanai, R., Carlson, T. A., Verstraten, F. A. J., & Walsh, V.
(2009). Perceived timing of new objects and feature
changes.
Journal
of
Vision,
9(7):5,
1–13,
http://journalofvision.org/9/7/5/, doi:10.1167/9.7.5.
Khurana, B., Nijhawan, R., & Watanabe, K. (1998).
Extrapolation of stroboscopically moving objects.
Presented at the Association for Research in Vision and
Ophthalmology Annual Meeting, Fort Lauderdale, Florida,
USA.
Krekelberg, B., & Lappe, M. (2000). A model of the
perceived relative positions of moving objects based upon
a slow averaging process. Vision Research, 40, 201-215.
MacKay, D. M. (1958). Perceptual stability of a
stroboscopically lit visual field containing self-luminous
objects. Nature, 181, 507-508.
Mitroff, S. R., & Alvarez, G. A. (2007). Space and time, not
surface features, guide object persistence. Psychonomic
Bulletin and Review, 14, 1199-1204.
Mitroff, S. R., Scholl, B. J., & Wynn, K. (2005). The
relationship between object files and conscious perception.
Cognition, 96, 67-92.
Moore, C. M., & Enns, J. T. (2004). Object updating and the
flash-lag effect. Psychological Science, 15, 866-871.
Moore, C. M., Mordkoff, J. T., & Enns, J. T. (2007). The
path of least persistence: Object status mediates visual
updating. Vision Research, 47, 1624-1630.
Moore, C. M., Stephens, T., & Hein, E. (2010). Features, as
well as space and time, guide object persistence.
Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 17, 731-736.
Nijhawan, R. (1994). Motion extrapolation in catching.
Nature, 370, 256-257.

Nijhawan, R. (1997). Visual decomposition of colour
through motion extrapolation. Nature, 386, 66-69.
Nijhawan, R. (2001). The flash-lag phenomenon: Object
motion and eye movements. Perception, 30, 263-282.
Noles, N. S., Scholl, B. J., & Mitroff, S. R. (2005). The
persistence of object file representations. Perception and
Psychophysics, 67, 324-334.
Pelli, D. G. (1997). The VideoToolbox software for visual
psychophysics: Transforming numbers into movies.
Spatial Vision, 10, 437-442.
Sheth, B. R., Nijhawan, R., & Shimojo, S. (2000). Changing
objects lead briefly flashed ones. Nature Neuroscience, 3,
489-495.
Tas, A. C., Dodd, M. D., & Hollingworth, A. (2012). The
role of surface feature continuity in object-based
inhibition of return. Visual Cognition, 20, 29-47.
Watanabe, K. (2004). Visual grouping by motion precedes
the relative localization between moving and flashed
stimuli. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 30, 504-512.
Watanabe, K., Nijhawan, R., Khurna, B., & Shimojo, S.
(2001) Perceptual organization of moving stimuli
modulates the flash-lag effect. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 27,
879-894.
Watanabe, K., & Yokoi, K. (2006). Object-based
anisotropies in the flash-lag effect. Psychological Science,
17, 728-735.
Whitney, D., & Murakami, I. (1998). Latency difference,
not spatial extrapolation. Nature Neuroscience, 1, 656657.
Whitney, D., Murakami, I., & Cavanagh, P. (2000). Illusory
spatial offset of a flash relative to a moving stimulus is
caused by differential latencies for moving and flashed
stimuli. Vision Research, 40, 137-149.
Yi, D.-J., Turk-Browne, N. B., Flombaum, J. I, Kim, M.-S.,
Scholl, B. J., & Chun, M. M. (2008). Spatiotemporal
object continuity in human ventral visual cortex.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America, 105, 8840-8845.

156

