UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
On The Possibility of an Extended, Yet Reductionist Mind

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3k95f1nf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Author
Ayala, Saray

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

On The Possibility of an Extended, Yet Reductionist Mind
Saray Ayala (saray@mit.edu)
Department of Humanities: Philosophy, Language & Literature
University Carlos III of Madrid - Madrid 126, 28903 – Getafe. Madrid. Spain
Department of Linguistics & Philosophy, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
77 Massachusetts Avenue, 32-d808, Cambridge, MA. 02139-4307. USA

Abstract
In the debate around the extended mind, the special alliance
that the extended thesis often has with functionalism usually
plays in favor of the former, with functionalism providing
support for the extended thesis. Here I want to consider this
alliance in the opposite direction: does the extended thesis
provide support for functionalism by promoting the need of a
level of explanation that is independent of implementational
(in particular neural) details? In spite of a seemingly
promising line of reasoning for an affirmative answer, I show
here that a commitment to the extended thesis or any version
of externalism neither paves the way for a functionalist (or
any other anti-reductionist) position nor is incompatible with
an explanatory reductionism about the mind. I arrive to that
conclusion after analyzing an argument by van Eck et al.
(2006) meant to conclude the opposite, and showing why it is
unsound.
Keywords: externalism; reductionism; functionalism; Marr’s
computational level.

Extended, therefore abstracted away from
implementational details?
When the thesis that the mind extends beyond the limits
of the head (in all its different versions: extended mind,
extended
cognition,
environmentalism,
wide
computationalism, etc. Extended thesis for short) is
developed together with some version of functionalism,
often the latter provides support for the former, by
guaranteeing the legitimacy of a coarse-grain level of
analysis where the implementational particularities do not
matter (e.g., Clark & Chalmers, 1998; Clark, 2010).
According to this extended functionalism, the details of
implementation (be it inside of outside the head) are not
what decide the mental status of a structure or process, but
rather the causal role it plays in the total economy of the
system. Thus, the functionalist stance paves the way for an
extended mind. Sometimes, though, this union becomes a
reason for criticism of the Extended thesis. One strong line
of criticism against some versions of the Extended thesis
that draw on this alliance, claims that there is no such
substantive theory about the (extended) location of minds,
but a mere consequence of functionalism (see Wheeler,
2010), which, in fact, does not care about where the
implementational base is located. Thus, it seems that the

Extended thesis would be better off by elaborating an
argument that does not rely on functionalist justifications. In
line with this predicament, a second wave of the Extended
thesis has been developed in the last years (Sutton, 2010;
Wilson, 2010).
Instead of the beneficial or not so beneficial role that
functionalism can play for extended theorizing, here I
address the opposite possibility. My goal is to test the
potential for externalist considerations in general to
legitimize the autonomy of a level of explanation above
implementational details, and therefore, to provide support
to anti-reductionist views like functionalism. My motivation
is the apparent appeal of a line of reasoning that takes
externalist considerations to justify the autonomy of such a
level, and so it justifies a functionalist position where what
matters for mentality is not the physical particularities of a
state but its functional profile, usually described in
computational terms.
That apparently appealing reasoning goes as follows: “if
environmental structures play a critical role in mental
processes, then our explanations of them cannot be limited
to neural descriptions, since we need to account for those
external elements. Therefore in order to explain cognition
we need to approach it from a higher level of explanation
that abstracts away from implementational details. A perfect
candidate for this is a computational level.”
This argument says that the inclusion of external elements
shows the necessity of a coarse-grain level of analysis. And
so it can be used to argue for an anti-reductionist position.
In Clark’s version of the extended thesis (Clark &
Chalmers, 1998), this coarse-grain level responds to the
need to account for what makes internal and external
elements mental, which is their computational role in the
total functional economy of the system. Here I want to show
why this apparently appealing reasoning is wrong. My
conclusion is that neither the Extended thesis nor in general
any version of (vehicle or content) externalism provide
support for the autonomy and legitimacy of an independentof-implementational-details
explanation
of
mental
phenomena. I will focus on a particular case where the
above argument has been applied, that is the work of van
Eck, Looren de Jong & Schouten (2006).

1
1798

The environment in visual perception
van Eck et al. (2006) provide us with an argument to
dismiss explanatory reductionism on the basis of empirical
research in visual perception suggesting the significance of
the environment in vision, and in general in cognitive
processes. Their conclusion is that the inclusion of the
environment in cognitive process shows the irreducible
nature of psychological explanations operating at the
computational level, since only at that level we can account
for the environmental elements.
Some relatively recent studies give support to the idea
that vision is not exclusively an internal process (e.g.,
Ballard et al., 1997). The phenomena of change blindness
(Rensink et al. 2000; Simons, 2000) and inattentional
amnesia (Wolfe, 1999) show, contra what traditional
representationalist theories claimed (Marr, 1982), that
subjects do not build a complete and detailed representation
of the outside world. Instead, they rely on the stability of the
environment, exploiting its resources. These recent findings
could be said to be sympathetic with Gibson’s idea that the
ecological context is a central component in visual
perception (Gibson, 1972). Although representations are
still on the arena and Marr’s (1982) classical computational
theory of vision is not challenged yet, these findings point
towards a more direct relation of the perceiver with her
environment: the subject is not representing the whole scene
(only part of it), but constantly consulting it, as if the
information needed to successfully perceive, was, as Gibson
defended, (at least partly) already there in the environment.
Norman (2002) proposes a theory where, apparently,
Marr’s emphasis on representations and informationprocessing on the one hand, and Gibson’s emphasis on
action and environment, can be reconciled. Norman’s Dual
Process Approach exploits the anatomical distinction
between two brain pathways serving two different functions.
The dorsal pathway is for action, while the ventral pathway
is for representation (this approach resembles the
perception-action model developed by Milner & Goodale
(1995), where vision is said to have two different functions,
carried out by two separate brain structures.)
We are interested in how van Eck et al. examine
Norman’s approach and conclude it is incorrect. The
findings mentioned above, point towards outside the brain,
while Norman’s approach restricts the action-related aspect
of vision to the functioning of the dorsal pathway within the
brain. That is, while Norman’s proposal recognises that
visual perception also serves to guide motor behaviour
(perception is here, as Gibson argued, related to action), it is
still internalist, situating the ingredients of perception inside
the head. Gibson’s direct perception proposal, however,
includes the organism’s environment, and it is this
environmental factor what van Eck et al. want to rescue
from inside the head.
van Eck et al. draw on Norman’s mistake, presenting it as
a confusion between different levels of explanation. Norman
seems to be missing the externalist implications of

recognizing the importance of the environment. In van Eck
et al. proposed clarification I find, however, two mistakes.
On the one hand, they confuse ontological and explanatory
issues; on the other hand, they make a controversial
identification between Marr’s computational level and
Gibson’s emphasis on the environment.

Internalism vs. Externalism
Norman is wrong in keeping everything inside the head.
Ecological perception (Gibson’s proposal) is not the
creation of action-based representations. It is not (only)
about internal mechanisms. In van Eck et al’s opinion,
“Norman ignores that environment constitutes an additional
level above internal processes” (2006, p. 21). According to
them, ecological Gibson-like theories cannot be equated
with neurophysiological accounts of the dorsal system.
Gibson’s view “is much broader than the level of (action)
representations, because ecological perception also
encompasses the environment” (ibid, p. 21). van Eck et al.
are here moving the debate towards internalism/externalism.
Are mental processes exclusively determined by intraorganism facts, or also by external factors? Gibson’s view
and the findings mentioned above seem to support some
version of an externalist position. Therefore any account of
visual perception solely in terms of internal mechanisms is
missing something (e.g. this account will be unable to
explain why the phenomenon of, for example, change
blindness, happens). The internalist mistake lies in ignoring
that other level, the environment. van Eck et al.’s
conclusion is that the environment constitutes a different
level of explanation, distinct from the internalist one.
This reasoning paves the way for their anti-reductionist
conclusion. To account for that extra level we need a
discipline that is not confined to lower-level processes; a
science that is concerned with mental processes and is not
restricted to neural, and therefore, internal processes. That is
psychology. Psychology explains mental processes at a
higher-level (describing them first at a computational level),
where not only neural, but also elements outside the
organism can be accounted for. Thus, this goes against any
reductionist attempt to explain mental processes with a
lower-level science like neuroscience. Thus, findings
supporting Gibson’s view are said to support an antireductionist project where psychology is necessary. Let’s
summarize van Eck et al.’s argument in bullet points:
(i) Environment plays a critical role in (visual) perception;
in order to understand this we need to consider organismenvironment interactions, and not only what is going on
inside the organism.
(ii) To account for organism-environment interactions we
need a description at a level wider than a merely internalist
one, like Marr’s computational level, where the function of
(visual) perception is described.
(iii) Psychology provides this kind of description, since it
draws on explanations at a level wider than that of
neuroscience.

2
1799

(iv) Psychology is therefore necessary to explain visual
perception.
It is now time to consider this argument critically.

Two Confusions
From externalism to anti-reductionism
In my opinion, van Eck et al.’s argument fails as an antireductionist defence. First, they confuse two different
discussions, that is, the internalism vs. externalism debate,
with the reductionism vs. anti-reductionism debate. It is
true, I believe, that they assume that many practices within
neuroscience are internalist (e.g., Bickle, 1998; 2003). So in
attacking internalism, their argument can count against
internalist reductionists (like Bickle seems to be). But
reductionism in general, as a not-necessarily-internalist
program, is left untouched.
Once we admit that empirical findings suggest the critical
role that environment plays in (visual) perception, we have
to account for that environmental factor. This however does
not in itself warrant the need for psychology. The need to
break the limits of the skull in order to describe the
explanandum does not warrant the necessity of a higher
level of explanation. That is, premise (ii) is not as obvious
as van Eck et al. seem to present it. We can hold an
externalist position and at the same time opt for the lower
level of explanation. To tell against reductionism van Eck et
al. would need, besides empirical findings suggesting that
environment is critical in visual perception (and in general
in any mental process), a conceptual claim asserting that to
account for the organism-environment critical interaction
we need to do so in an independent-of-implementation
level.
The key assumption in van Eck et al.’s argument, premise
(ii) is, in my opinion, a non sequitur. We can recognise that
the environment makes a critical contribution to cognitive
processes, and we can even say that the environment is a
constitutive part of the system (like some versions of the
Extended thesis claim), and it would still be a different thing
to claim that this contribution constitutes a different level
that needs to be accounted for by an autonomous science
that is independent of physical details.
Here it is relevant to bring up the distinction between
ontological and explanatory questions. The former seeks the
constitution of something, while the latter inquires into a
proper explanation of something. The ontological question
at issue here is what constitutes vision: processes
exclusively inside the organism or also states and features
outside the organism? The explanatory question asks for
how best to explain vision, or what counts as a (good)
explanation of it. The explanatory question that concerns us
here asks how we should deal (assuming we accept there is
such an ingredient) with the outside-the-organism
dimension(s) of vision. A particular response to the
ontological question does not (automatically) imply a

specific response to the explanatory question. These two
questions have to be answered separately.
Thus, from a claim about the constitution of vision, it is a
non sequitur to state that as a consequence vision has to be
explained in a particular way. Moreover, the (explanatory)
demand that an explanation of vision requires reference to
the environment still does not entail that a description at
Marr’s computational level is necessary. In order to assert
such an explanatory choice, an additional argument is
required. The ontological proof (i.e. that environment is part
of visual perception) is not sufficient, and neither is the
explanatory demand (i.e. that environment has to be
accounted for).
In conclusion, for van Eck et al.’s argument to
work, in particular, for their premise (ii) to be true, they
need to prove that the environmental factor needs to be
accounted for in a different, higher level explanation, where
the visual task is described in a functional way as an
information-processing task, and without mention of the
particular (physical) component parts. But they only provide
evidence for premise (i), that is, for the fact that
environment plays a significant role in vision. They rely on
Marr’s theory to claim that this critical role that
environment plays has to be described at Marr’s
computational level, where the function of vision is
described. It is debatable whether Marr’s theory is
internalist or externalist. In the former case, van Eck et al.’s
argument fails, since, if visual processes are (taxonomically)
located inside the organism, there is no need for this extra
level of explanation, and then their next step towards
psychology as the science that accounts for that level, does
not follow. If we concede that Marr’s theory is externalist,
according to what I have said above about the two different
types of questions (ontological vs. explanatory), they still
have not provided any argument for their explanatory
conclusion. It is one thing to maintain that environment is
part of our visual processes (ontological assertion), and
another, to state that to explain vision we need to do it at a
higher level (explanatory claim). The former claim (within
the internalist vs. externalist debate) does not imply the
latter (which is part of the reductionism vs. antireductionism debate).
It is important to notice here that the distinction between
ontological and explanatory questions does not map onto the
two different debates (internalism/externalism, and
reductionism /anti-reductionism). I am not assuming neither
that the former debate is exclusively ontological, nor that
the latter is solely an explanatory matter. On the one hand,
externalist considerations might respond to an explanatory
concern, i.e. what is the appropriate unity of analysis. On
the other, the debate around reductionism might be
presented as an ontological question, e.g. are psychological
properties reducible to properties of their implementation
basis? The argument I am examining here (i.e., van Eck’s et
al.’s), however, takes the ontological aspect of an externalist
position to conclude against an explanatory reductionism.
The reason why I find it misleading is not that this argument

3
1800

drags externalism towards explanatory fields, but that it
forces externalism to a particular explanatory position.

A wrong appropriation
van Eck et al.’s argument also fails for another reason:
they wrongly equate Gibson’s emphasis on the environment
with Marr’s emphasis on an independent-of-the-physicaldetails description where the cognitive ability to be
explained is described as an information-processing task.
Let us pay some attention to premise (ii) again.
They claim that the environmental factor has to be
explained at a level different from the strictly internal where
mechanisms responsible for the task are accounted for. They
could then simply rely on Marr’s model reputation, as
classical cognitive science has done, and claim that a
description at Marr’s computational level, where the
function of the cognitive task is described, is necessary to
understand that task. But they go further, and seem to
pursue legitimating Marr’s computational level. Empirical
findings point towards the necessity of including the
environment in our understanding of visual perception (what
we said to be premise (i)), and this partly supports Gibson’s
proposal. Interestingly enough, in van Eck et al.’s argument
these empirical findings are assumed to legitimate Marr’s
computational level, since it is at Marr’s computational level
where the interaction with the environment is approached
(that is the level of organism-environment interaction,
where the task at issue is described independently of the
algorithmic and physical details).
Once they claim that we have an “ecological level” to be
accounted for (that is, an environmental ingredient that,
according to them, calls for a new, higher level of
explanation above a purely neural one), Marr’s upper level
appears as the proper place for that explanation. After all,
Gibson’s theory is too simplistic, or so a fan of Marr’s
computational complexity would say, to account for the
complexity of organism-environment interaction. And so,
although it makes a good point about the importance of
environment, Gibson’s theory falls short to account for the
information-processing complexity that is involved.
Thus, van Eck et al. go from empirical findings to the
necessity of Marr’s computational level, via the assimilation
of Gibson’s ecological level into Marr’s three-level model.
And this assimilation is what attracts my attention. Gibson’s
emphasis on the environment does not imply another level
above the level of representations, but a completely different
anti-representational account of perception. Gibson’s
ecological level, as van Eck et al. label it, is not meant to
provide a competing, alternative account of the informationprocessing mechanisms of vision. Gibson’s theory is a
completely contrasting explanation of perception where
there is no room for internal addition and manipulation of
information.
It is this major difference between Gibson’s and Marr’s
theories that invalidates van Eck et al’s assimilation of
Marr’s computational level (where vision is decomposed as
an information-processing task) with Gibson’s ecological

level (where vision is considered as an interaction between
organism and environment and senses are decomposed into
their biological component parts). In my opinion, then, van
Eck et al’s are using Gibson’s emphasis on the ecological
level in an incorrect way. The ecological level has nothing
to do with Marr’s computational level, so it is not correct to
use Gibson’s ecological level (and the evidence supporting
the importance of environment) to legitimate Marr’s
computational level and the necessity of psychology.
We see that premise (ii) hides an incorrect assumption.
Proving the significant role that environment plays is not the
same as legitimating Marr’s computational level. Premise
(ii) (i.e. to account for environmental contribution we need a
description at Marr’s computational level, where the
function of -visual- perception is described) being incorrect,
premise (iii) (i.e. psychology provides this kind of
description) has no meaning, because it is unimportant
whether psychology provides the kind of descriptions that
are required at Marr’s computational level. Premise (i), let’s
remember, is only concerned with the necessity of including
the environment in our explanation, not with the necessity
of providing a particular kind of explanation. Only premise
(i) in van Eck et al.’s argument, where empirical findings
are reported, reveals as arguably correct. And it is easy to
see that empirical support for the importance of
environment is not evidence for the necessity of
psychology. Premise (i) by itself does not support their antireductionist conclusion.

Conclusion
By analyzing van Eck et al.’s argument, I tried to show
that externalist considerations, and the extended mind thesis
in particular (understood as a proposal about the location of
the object of study in our explanations of mental processes),
neither guarantee nor promote an anti-reductionist
methodology and the necessity of a higher level of
explanation where mental processes are described at a
computational level.
If my considerations above are on the right track, van Eck
et al.’s anti-reductionist argument is a poor one. On the one
hand, they are mixing explanatory and ontological
questions, extracting an explanatory conclusion from an
ontological claim. On the other hand, they wrongly equate
Gibson’s emphasis on the environment with Marr’s
emphasis
on
an
independent-of-the-physical-details
description where the cognitive ability to be explained is
described as an information-processing task. The
identification of the first mistake, so I have argued, reveals
that they only provide evidence for the ontological claim,
leaving the explanatory assertion without any defence. The
second mistake draws on the former. The empirical findings
suggesting that environment plays a decisive role in
cognitive processes supports Gibson’s emphasis on the
environment, but does not necessarily legitimates Marr’s
computational level of explanation, where organism-

4
1801

environment interaction is accounted for. By equating
Gibson’s emphasis on the environment with Marr’s
computational level, they are trying to provide the
functionalist sympathy for a description at Marr’s upper
level with empirical support. If their strategy were right,
empirical findings pointing towards the significance of the
environment would give support to the (computational)
functionalist claim that visual perception, and mental
processes in general, need to be approached as a platformfree information-processing task.
The empirical findings they mention might or might not
be said to be evidence for Gibson’s theory. What I think is
clear is that they do not give any support to the claim that
cognitive abilities need to be described at Marr’s
computational level. Their anti-reductionist conclusion is
not well supported by their argument. It would require more
and different argumentation to go from ontological claims
about the location of cognitive processes to an explanatory
anti-reductionism (e.g. some claim linking the inclusion of
environment in explanations of mental processes to the need
of accounting for it in an independent-of-theimplementational-details way).
An extended mind, and in general an externalist mind
where environmental factors are a key ingredient, does not
necessarily call for a high-level of explanation á la Marr’s
computational level. In our quest for cognition, we can go
out of the head and still expect to satisfy our explanatory
demands at the implementational level.

Milner, A. D. & Goodale, M. A. (1995) The Visual Brain in
Action, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Norman, J. (2002). “Two Visual Systems and Two Theories
of Perception: An Attempt to Reconcile the Constructivist
and the Ecological Approaches”, Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 25: 73-144.
Rensink, R. A., O’Regan, J. K. & Clark, J. J. (2000). “On
the Failure to Detect Changes in Scenes Across Brief
Interceptions”, Visual Cognition, 7: 127-46.
Simons, D. J. (2000). “Current Approaches to Change
Blindness”, Visual Cognition, 7:1-15.
Sutton, J. (2010). Exograms and interdisciplinary: history,
the extended mind and the civilizing process. In R.
Menary (Ed.), The extended mind (pp.33-81). Cambridge:
MIT Press.
van Eck, D., Looren de Jong, H. & Schouten, M. (2006).
“Evaluating New Wave Reductionism: The case of
Vision”, British Journal for Philosophy of Science 57:
167-196.
Wilson, R. (2010). Meaning making and the mind of the
externalist. In R. Menary (Ed.), The extended mind (pp.
167–188). Cambridge: MIT Press. 	  
Wolfe, J. M. (1999) “Inattentional Amnesia”, in V.
Coltheart (ed.), Fleeting memories, Cambridge, MA:MIT
Press, pp. 71-94.

	  
	  
	  

Acknowledgements
This work has been developed with the support of the
Alliance 4 Universities Program and the Department of
Humanities: Philosophy, Language and Literature at the
University Carlos III of Madrid. Special thanks to
TECNOCOG Research Group at Universitat Autònoma de
Barcelona.

References
Ballard, D., Hayhoe, M., Pook & Rao, R.P. (1997). Deictic
Codes for the Embodiment of Cognition, Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 20, 4: 723-767.
Bickle, J. (1998). Psychoneural Reduction: The New Wave.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bickle, J. (2003). Philosophy of Neuroscience: A Ruthlessly
Reductive Approach. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Kluwer
Academic Press.
Clark, A. (2010). Memento's revenge: The extended mind
extended. In R. Menary (Ed.), The extended mind (pp. 43–
66). Cambridge: MIT Press.
Clark, A. and Chalmers, D. (1998). The extended mind.
Analysis, 58, 7-19.
Gibson, J. J. (1979). The Ecological Approach to Visual
Perception. Houghton Mifflin: Boston.
Marr, D. (1982). Vision, San Francisco: W.H. Freeman.

5
1802

