UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Parent-Child Screen Media Co-Viewing: Influences on Toddlers' Word Learning and Retention

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1m4019fp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Sims, Clare
Colunga, Eliana

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Parent-Child Screen Media Co-Viewing:
Influences on Toddlers’ Word Learning and Retention
Clare E. Sims (Clare.Holtpatrick@Colorado.Edu)
Department of Psychology & Neuroscience, 345 UCB
Boulder, CO 80309-0345 USA

Eliana Colunga (Eliana.Colunga@Colorado.Edu)
Department of Psychology & Neuroscience, 345 UCB
Boulder, CO 80309-0345 USA
Abstract

relationship between parental behavior during active coviewing and children’s learning outcomes. The results
suggest meaningful links between characteristics of the
screen media viewing context and children’s learning of
video content. Exploring the attributes and effects of coviewing is vital for guiding further research on children’s
screen mediated learning and applying this work in practice.
In the remainder of the introduction we will briefly review
the evidence for the video deficit effect in the domain of
language as well as the existing research on co-viewing with
young children. Many questions on this topic remain, and
our approach of linking co-viewing to word learning in the
moment contributes to this emerging literature.

Screen media, such as television and videos, are a common
part of young children’s lives. Yet infants and toddlers have
been shown to learn less effectively from screens than from
interactions with another person. Using a quasi-experimental
design we explored how social factors of screen media coviewing impact children’s learning outcomes. We observed
parents co-viewing a novel word training video with their
children, then tested children for immediate and delayed word
learning. We then investigated the links between parental
speech during co-viewing and children’s subsequent word
learning. Parental speech that encouraged children to produce
the novel words predicted better retention of word learning,
whereas speech that focused more on the video itself rather
than the content was negatively associated with learning.

The Video Deficit in Language Learning

Keywords: Screen media; co-viewing; word learning.

Introduction
Screen media, such as television, videos, computers, and
hand-held devices like smartphones and tablets, are an
increasingly common part of young children’s lives.
Although the American Academy of Pediatrics recommends
that children under the age of two not watch any screen
media (AAP, 2010), survey data reveal that 43% of children
in this age group watch TV every day (Rideout & Hamel,
2006). This may be partly due to the recent proliferation of
screen media content aimed specifically at infants and
toddlers (e.g., Baby Einstein). Much of this content is
presented with educational claims, including in the domain
of language development (Fenstermacher et al., 2010).
However, research that actually compares children’s
learning from screen media to their learning from face-toface interactions with another person reveals a video deficit
effect (Anderson & Pempek, 2005). That is, across varied
experimental paradigms, infants and toddlers learn less
effectively from a screen than from a person.
Is it possible to effectively facilitate infants’ and toddlers’
learning from screen media? Factors that may impact this
learning include the complexity of the information on
screen, whether key information is highlighted or repeated,
or the presence of social cues that help children direct
attention to what is important. In the work presented here
we employed a quasi-experimental approach to investigate
the role of a common social context for screen mediated
learning: co-viewing a video with a parent. We explored the

From birth, infants are constantly exposed to language, both
from live and mediated sources. By manipulating whether
information to be learned is presented through screen media
or through face-to-face interactions, researchers have
identified a video deficit effect in the domain of language
development—infants and toddlers more effectively learn
language from a person than from screen media. The video
deficit has been demonstrated in two types of tasks in this
domain: phoneme distinction and word learning.
One study took advantage of a change in phoneme
discrimination that occurs in infancy. At six months of age
infants can discriminate phonetic speech contrasts from their
native language as well as from a non-native language to
which they have never been exposed (e.g., Werker, Gilbert,
Humphrey, & Tees, 1981). However, over the first year of
life, infants become attuned to distinctions between speech
sounds in their native language, leading to an inability to
recognize speech contrasts that do not exist in that language.
Kuhl, Tsao, and Liu (2003) tested what kinds of exposure to
non-native speech distinctions can prolong 9-month-old
infants’ ability to perceive those distinctions. These
researchers found a video deficit in maintaining phonetic
distinctions: infants exposed to non-native speech on video
lost their sensitivity to non-native speech distinctions,
whereas those exposed to live speech were still able to
discriminate between non-native phonemes. In fact, infants
in the video exposure group performed equivalently to a
control group with no exposure; screen mediated speech led
to the same outcome as no speech at all.

1324

Another major developmental step in language acquisition
is learning words. Researchers have looked at how young
children learn unfamiliar or novel words from various live
and screen mediated sources. In a typical word-learning
task, children are shown an object and told a label for that
object. To test for learning, the child is presented with an
array of objects, including the trained object and distractor
objects, and is asked to identify the object corresponding to
the trained label. One study found a U-shaped
developmental progression of the video deficit in word
learning: while children between 13 and 20 months of age
showed a significant deficit, younger children (aged 6 to 12
months) and older children (aged 21 to 24 months) did not
show a deficit (Krcmar, 2010). Another word learning study
found evidence for a video deficit among children between
15 and 24 months of age, which was actually stronger after
children were exposed to a commercial video compared to a
lab-created video (Krcmar, Grela, & Lin, 2007). While the
studies mentioned so far were conducted in a lab setting,
another study confirmed the video deficit in word learning
among 12- to 18-month-olds exposed to a commercial video
in their own homes (DeLoache et al., 2010). One study
using a slightly older age group did not find any evidence
for a video deficit in a word learning task among 30-montholds (O’Doherty et al., 2011). However, recent work in our
lab suggests that the video deficit may persist depending on
how word learning is assessed. We found that 30- to 36month-olds learned and retained one-to-one word-referent
mappings from a screen, but the same children showed a
video deficit in their retention of lexical categories (Sims &
Colunga, in preparation). When toddlers must generalize
what they previously learned from a screen, inferring
categories based on the words they learned, screen mediated
learning still seems to be at a disadvantage.
In sum, studies that compare language learning from
screen media to learning from a person show an early
emerging video deficit effect that diminishes with age and
depending on the type of task used. But why do children
struggle with screen mediated learning when they can easily
learn the same information in person? Some have proposed
that social factors of screen media, or lack thereof, drive the
video deficit effect (Richert, Robb, & Smith, 2011). The
screen mediated environment typically lacks the kind of rich
social interactions and contingencies that children get when
learning directly from a person. The video deficit may be
rooted in the socially impoverished nature of screen media
itself, particularly in the fundamentally social domain of
language learning. Therefore, the social context of screen
mediated learning is the focus of a related area of research,
including work on co-viewing.

Screen Media Co-Viewing
Most parents watch TV with their child either all or most of
the time (Rideout & Hamel, 2006). Parental co-viewing may
provide a social context for children’s screen media use. By
actively co-viewing with their children, parents have
opportunities to scaffold children’s learning from the screen.

Most of the work linking parent-child co-viewing and
children’s learning from a screen has looked at slightly older
age groups than studies of the video deficit effect. However,
more recent research is beginning to explore how coviewing impacts infants’ and toddlers’ attention to and
learning from screen media.
Some studies of preschoolers have experimentally tested
how different types of co-viewing interactions influence
children’s subsequent learning. For example, one set of
studies tested co-viewing in a context familiar to many
young children: Sesame Street episodes. In one study,
Reiser, Tessmer, and Phelps (1984) manipulated whether or
not adults asked content-specific questions and provided
feedback and encouragement while co-viewing segments
teaching letters and numbers. Children learned the content
of the video more effectively in the experimental condition
compared to the control condition, in which adults did not
provide any commentary. Reiser, Williamson, and Suzuki
(1988) added to this result by showing that asking questions,
with or without providing feedback, resulted in better
learning than simply directing children’s attention to the
screen when educational content was being shown. Together
these studies show that adult commentary and questions
during co-viewing can directly facilitate children’s learning
from real screen media content.
Fewer studies have linked co-viewing interactions to
outcome measures among infants and toddlers. Some
studies have linked qualities of parental behavior or parentchild interactions to a precursor for children’s screen
mediated learning: attention to the screen. Results show that
parents’ eye-gaze to a screen modulated 12- to 21-montholds’ attention to screen media (Demers, Hanson, Kirkorian,
Pempek, & Anderson, 2012). Further, sensitive and
reciprocal parent-child interactions during co-viewing
predicted 6- to 18-month-olds’ looking time to an infantdirected video (Fidler, Zack, & Barr, 2010). Another study
classified parental interaction styles based on co-viewing
behaviors (Barr, Zack, Garcia, & Muentener, 2008). Parents
were classified into different levels of scaffolding, and these
clusters of co-viewing behaviors predicted looking time and
responsiveness to infant-directed videos among 12-, 15-,
and 18-month-old infants. The high-scaffolding parents
tended to use verbalizations that oriented their children to
the video and focused on the content therein. Together these
studies show that parents who used eye gaze, high-quality,
responsive interactions, and content-focused verbalizations
were most effective in establishing joint attention to the
screen and getting their children actively involved in coviewing.
Only one study that we are aware of has started to link
observations of co-viewing to measures of learning
specifically among this younger age group. In this study,
parents co-viewed a video with their 12- to 25-month-old
children that was intended to teach words (Fender, Richert,
Robb, & Wartella, 2010). The authors observed parental coviewing behaviors as well as child verbalizations, and,
importantly, also asked parents which of the words in the

1325

video their child was unfamiliar with. In this way, the
authors measured learning by observing how often children
produced words that they had been unfamiliar with prior to
seeing the video. Parents tended to cluster into different
groups depending on how much their co-viewing behavior
was focused on teaching the words in the video to their
children. Children produced more words that they were
previously unfamiliar with when their parents had a higher
teaching focus during co-viewing. Further analyses showed
that these parents tended to focus specifically on the words
that they knew their children were unfamiliar with. This
result is particularly interesting in light of the literature on
the video deficit effect in word learning. This study shows
that sensitive parental scaffolding during co-viewing with
infants and toddlers may be able to reduce the video deficit.

Rationale and Predictions
In the current study, we investigated the link between
parental co-viewing behavior and toddlers’ word learning.
Parents and their 2½- to 3-year-old children watched a video
of a person teaching novel words for novel objects. Children
were subsequently tested on their word learning, both
immediately after watching the video and after a week-long
delay. Different kinds of parental speech during co-viewing
were coded, analyzed using principal component analysis,
and examined as predictors of children’s word learning.
This approach offers several contributions to the
literature. First, by training and testing children on novel
words for novel objects, we controlled for any prior
knowledge or exposure children may have had to the
content of the task. Second, by testing children on the
content of the video, both immediately and after a delay, we
were able to make direct links between parental speech
during co-viewing and children’s word learning and
retention. Third, we included an older age group compared
to most studies of the video deficit in word learning to see
what behaviors impact learning once children are becoming
better able to learn from a screen. Fourth, this work uses an
interdisciplinary approach, drawing on methodologies from
the fields of linguistics and psychology. The results will
provide a first step in identifying specific co-viewing
behaviors that facilitate, or possibly inhibit, word learning
and retention in young children.
Based on the work reviewed above, the extent to which
parents focus their speech on the key information to be
learned on screen should predict children’s word learning
performance. Parents who are responsive and help their
children focus on the content of the video should promote
their children’s attention to and learning from the screen. In
this study that means talking about specific objects shown
and novel words presented in the video. Further, parents
who focus more on the novel labels being taught in the task
should help children better learn the correct word-object
mappings. An emphasis on the novel labels concurrent with
the presentation of objects in the video should help children
establish and retain these mappings.

a

b

“Which one is an elg?”

Figure 1. a. Novel target objects taught to children in the
word learning task. b. Example word learning trial.

Method
Participants
Fifty children were recruited for participation from the
Boulder, CO area. Six subjects were excluded from analyses
due to missing or inadequate co-viewing data (two children)
or co-viewing speech being primarily in a language other
than English (four children). Therefore, the final sample
included here consisted of 44 children (Mage = 32.1 mo., SD
= 1.3 mo., 25 girls).

Materials
Children were taught six novel words (elg, ife, nork, gub,
zeb, and lug) for six novel objects (see Figure 1a). The novel
objects and words were presented in a lab-made training
video of a research assistant whom the children did not meet
during the study. In the video, the assistant presents one
novel object at a time, placing it on a table in front of her
and rotating it as she speaks. Addressing the camera
directly, she labels the object in three ways: “This is a/an __.
Do you see the __? This is my __.” After an object is
labeled, the video cuts to a 3 second still close-up image of
the object. Each object is presented two times each, and thus
labeled six times total, for a total video duration of 2
minutes and 50 seconds.
Two standardized vocabulary measures were used to
assess language development. Children were tested on the
Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test 4 (PPVT; Dunn & Dunn,
2007), a test of receptive vocabulary. Parents were given the
MacArthur-Bates Communicative Development Inventory
(CDI-III; Fenson et al., 2007), a checklist on which they
indicated words their children knew. Parents also completed
a survey on their children’s screen media use at home.
Parent-child interactions during training video co-viewing
were recorded and later transcribed in ELAN (Max Planck
Institute for Psycholinguistics, The Language Archive,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands: http://tla.mpi.nl/tools/tlatools/elan/; Brugman & Russel, 2004). Parental
verbalizations were subsequently coded using a scheme
adapted from Barr et al. (2008). We used codes from this
study and also developed codes specifically related to
labeling in our task (see Results section for detailed
description of the included codes).

1326

Table 1: Factor loading values for the four components resulting from the factor analysis.

Tag questions
Descriptions
Label elicitation questions
Confirmations
Evaluations
Interactive verbalizations
Wh- questions
Labels

Describing
Objects
.664
.853
.189
-.270
.141
-.245
-.411
-.179

Label Elicitation &
Feedback
.389
-.341
.777
.739
-.146
.020
-.199
-.190

Procedure
Training At the beginning of their first visit to the lab,
parents and children watched the novel word training video.
Parents were encouraged to actively co-view the video with
their children. The experimenter explained that the video
was meant to teach some new words and that the parent
could teach their child about the words in the video as they
would while watching at home. The experimenter left the
room for the remainder of training, and parent-child coviewing was videotaped for later analysis. When the training
video had ended, the experimenter re-entered the room.
Testing Children were tested both immediately after
watching the training video and again a week later. To test
word learning, children were presented with pairs of trained
novel objects and asked to identify one by name (e.g.,
“Which one is an elg?”; see Figure 1b). Each object was
asked for once, for a total of six testing trials. At the end of
their first visit to the lab children were given the PPVT
vocabulary test.
Children were given the same word learning test at their
second visit. Importantly, children were not re-trained on
any of the novel words or objects at this time. Therefore, the
delayed testing session captured retention of the novel
words.

Results
The first question to assess was how well children learned
and retained the novel word-object mappings. Children’s
proportions of correct target object choices at each testing
session were first compared to chance performance.
Children were accurate at above-chance levels both at
immediate (M = .57, SD = .22, t(43) = 2.20, p = .03) and
delayed testing (M = .58, SD = .20, t(43) = 2.58, p = .01).
Next, a paired t-test showed that accuracy did not differ
between visits (t < 1, p > .05), confirming that children
retained the word-object mappings they had learned
initially. It is worth noting that accuracy performance at the
group level was not particularly high, and yet varied a fair
amount across individual subjects. This may suggest that
something about the learning context of individual children
influenced their accuracy in the task.
The next question was how parent speech during coviewing related to children’s word learning performance.
We began with two common measures of the quantity of
parental speech: total word count and mean length of

Narrating
-.057
-.060
-.024
-.112
.831
.846
-.183
-.198

Open-Ended Questions vs.
Explicit Labeling
.125
-.040
.012
-.066
.007
-.061
-.774
.903

utterance (MLU). These variables were entered as predictors
of children’s word learning outcomes at each visit in two
multiple regression analyses. These measures of parental
speech quantity did not explain a significant proportion of
the variance in either immediate or delayed child word
learning performance (R2 < .18, F(2, 43) < 1, p > .05 for
both models). Further, neither total word count nor MLU
were significant predictors of word learning outcome at
either visit (t(41) < 1.50, p > .05 for all coefficients).
Because these parent speech quantity variables did not
predict learning outcome, we next explored the quality of
parental speech during co-viewing.
First, to reduce the dimensionality of the qualitatively
coded parent speech data, we conducted a principal
component analysis (PCA). After removing several codes
that were used by very few parents in the sample, eight
coding categories were entered into the PCA and resulted in
four components with Eigenvalues above 1.0. The first
component explained 19.47% of the variance, the second
18.94%, the third 18.74%, and the fourth 18.01% for a total
explained variance of 75.15%. An orthogonal Varimax
rotation was used to facilitate interpretation of the
components.
The four components are shown in Table 1 with factor
loadings on each included coding category. The first
component included tag questions and descriptions of the
items shown in the video. Tag questions, which are
statements with a question appended at the end, were
typically used by parents to talk about the items on screen.
Many of the observed instances of tag questions were also
descriptions (e.g., “it’s a green lug, huh?”). This component
will be referred to as describing objects because it captures
parents’ focus on the individual objects depicted on the
screen. The next component includes label elicitation
questions and confirmations, which also appeared together
often in co-viewing speech. This component will be referred
to as label elicitation and feedback because it captures how
often parents explicitly asked children to produce labels,
including giving positive feedback for doing so. The third
component
includes
evaluations
and
interactive
verbalizations. Parents often used evaluations to make
general comments about the video or item shown on screen
(e.g., “that’s a cool one”), and interactive verbalizations
were comments about the video itself (e.g., “it says let’s see
those again”). This component will be called narrating
because it captures parental speech about the video and

1327

Table 2: Multiple regression output for the novel word learning task at immediate and delayed testing.
Immediate Word Learning

Predictors
Age
Gender
Vocabulary Percentile
Screen Time
PCA Components
Describing Objects
Label Elicitation & Feedback
Narrating
O-E Questions v Explicit Labeling

Unstandardized
Coefficients
B
SE
-.017
.030
-.091
.075
-.001
.001
.000
.001
.021
.025
.005
.046

Standardized
Coefficients
Beta
-.102
-.209
-.076
.077

.036
.038
.036
.035

Note. p < .10. *p ≤ .05.
screen viewing context more broadly. The fourth and final
component includes wh- questions and explicit labeling.
These codes loaded in opposite directions onto this
component, so the component will be referred to as openended questions vs. explicit labeling. In the positive
direction this component captures the extent to which
parents provided the novel labels being taught on screen,
and in the negative direction it captures the extent to which
parents asked their children open-ended questions about the
video (e.g., “what is that?”).
Hierarchical multiple regression analyses were conducted
on children’s word learning outcomes at each visit. In each
analysis, the independent variables were entered in two
blocks. Demographic and standardized test variables were
entered in the first block. These included child age in
months, child gender (dummy coded), vocabulary percentile
score (averaged over the CDI-III and PPVT), and average
screen use per day in minutes. The second block included
the four co-viewing components from the factor analysis.
This method of analysis allowed for evaluating the
predictive value of the co-viewing components over and
above the other included variables.
Table 2 displays unstandardized and standardized
regression coefficients after entry of both independent
variable blocks for immediate and delayed testing. None of
the included variables significantly predicted immediate
word learning accuracy (R2 = .37, F(4, 43) = .68, p > .05
after entry of all independent variable blocks). Although the
full model did not reach significance (R2 = .48, F(4, 43) =
1.31, p = .27), delayed word learning accuracy was
predicted by two of the independent variables entered into
the regression.
Parental label elicitation and feedback was a positive
predictor of learning, indicating that the more parents asked
children to produce novel labels and provided positive
feedback, the better children retained word-object
mappings. Specifically, the model predicts that for every
standard deviation increase in parents’ use of label
elicitations and feedback, children’s delayed word learning
performance should increase by 0.34 standard deviations.
On the other hand, narrating was a marginally negative
predictor of retained novel word learning. This suggests that
parental speech that was focused on the video itself and the
content only in a general way actually inhibited children’s
correct retention of novel word-object mappings in this task.
Specifically, the model predicts that for every standard

.096
.114
.022
.211

Delayed Word Learning
Unstandardized
Coefficients
B
SE
.001
.025
.051
.063
.001
.001
.000
.001
-.020
.069
-.052
.015

.031
.032
.031
.030

Standardized
Coefficients
Beta
.010
.130
.169
-.104
-.101
.335*
-.269
.079

deviation increase in parents’ use of narrating speech,
children should be 0.27 standard deviations worse at
retaining the novel word-object mappings.

Discussion
The results of the current study show that although toddlers
as a group learned novel words from a video, certain aspects
of parental speech were associated with differences in this
learning. An exploratory factor analysis revealed several
variables of parent speech quality that characterized the coviewing linguistic environment and that predicted children’s
learning outcomes. Of note, the quality of parent speech
only predicted children’s retention of learning. This
suggests that toddlers’ immediate word learning from screen
media may be relatively robust, and less influenced by the
co-viewing environment. Yet the retention of this
information may be sensitive to parental intervention.
The first key result showed that the extent to which
parents elicited labels from their children and provided
feedback while watching the training video predicted
children’s retention of word-object mappings. Although the
finding that labels during co-viewing facilitated word
learning is in line with prior work and with our predictions,
the specific form of this labeling is informative. Children’s
retention was predicted not by hearing parents label the
items on screen, but by parents cuing children to produce
the labels themselves and providing responsive feedback.
Another key result was that the extent of parents’
narrating during co-viewing was negatively associated with
children’s retention of word learning. This shows that parent
speech about the video itself or general, non-specific speech
about what is shown on screen is not conducive to novel
word retention. This result suggests a negative impact on
learning due to focusing on the form rather than the content
of screen media. Further, this also suggests that general
evaluative speech about the content on screen is not much
more informative than talking about the video itself, and
both of these together may actually impede learning
outcomes.
Together these results are consistent with prior work
indicating that responsive behavior during co-viewing
promotes children’s attention to and learning from screen
media. The results build on prior work by demonstrating
specific co-viewing behaviors that are responsive and thus
scaffold children’s learning, as well as behaviors that are

1328

linked to detrimental learning outcomes. Together they
provide new insight into the role of co-viewing in learning.
The results of this study represent a first step in linking
specific co-viewing behaviors to children’s learning
outcomes in the context of screen media. There are various
ways to refine and build on this work. One future direction
would be to incorporate measures of child behavior and
parent-child interaction quality in the kinds of analyses
presented here. The relative timing of utterances and
responses between a child and parent may be particularly
predictive of word learning. For example, children may
learn most effectively when parents respond promptly and
provide information about the item that is the focus of the
child’s attention in that moment. The co-viewing data
collected for this study could be coded for contingencies in
interactions between parents and children. This kind of
analysis would also resonate with research on the social
aspects of screen mediated learning (e.g., Richert et al.,
2011). Although social information was not manipulated
directly in video training in this study, it could be
informative to test how different extents of social
contingency in co-viewing link to learning outcomes.
Another future direction for this work would be to guide
experimental investigations of co-viewing. The kinds of
analyses presented here can be used to develop experimental
manipulations of the linguistic environment surrounding
screen media co-viewing. For example, the current results
suggest that the type and extent of labeling during coviewing may impact learning in different ways. This could
be tested by manipulating whether labels are provided to
children or elicited from them and how many labels are used
during co-viewing. This would allow for greater control of
other characteristics of the co-viewing context, randomized
assignment of children to conditions, and causal conclusions
about the role of labels in screen mediated word and
category learning. Similar experiments could be designed to
test the effects of specific, content-focused speech compared
to broad, screen-focused speech during co-viewing. Future
work could also investigate co-viewing and learning
outcomes from real, professionally produced child-directed
media. In conclusion, the current study makes novel
contributions to the emerging literature on screen mediated
language learning in young children and highlights
directions for future research on facilitating this learning.

References
American Academy of Pediatrics, Council on
Communications and Media (2010). Media education.
Pediatrics, 126(5), 1012-1017.
Anderson, D. R., & Pempek, T. A. (2005). Television and
very young children. Am. Behav. Sci., 48(5), 505-522.
Barr, R., Zack, E., Garcia, A., & Muentener, P. (2008).
Infants' attention and responsiveness to television
increases with prior exposure and parental interaction.
Infancy, 13, 30-56.
Brugman, H., & Russel, A. (2004). Annotating multimedia/
multi-modal resources with ELAN. Proc. of LREC 2004.

DeLoache, J. D., Chiong, C., Sherman, K., Islam, N.,
Vanderborght, M., Troseth, G. L., Strouse, G. A., &
O’Doherty, K. (2010). Do babies learn from baby media?
Psych. Science, 21(11), 1570-1574.
Demers, L. B., Hanson, K. G., Kirkorian, H. L., Pempek, T.
A., & Anderson, D. R. (2012). Infant gaze following
during parent-infant coviewing of baby videos. Child
Dev.
Dunn, L. M., & Dunn, D. M. (2007). PPVT-4: Peabody
picture vocabulary test. Minneapolis, MN: Pearson
Assessments.
Fender, J. G., Richert, R. A., Robb, M. B., & Wartella, E.
(2010). Parent teaching focus and toddlers’ learning from
an infant DVD. Infant and Child Dev., 19, 613-627.
Fenson, L. et al. (2007) MacArthur-Bates communicative
development inventories: User’s guide and technical
manual. Baltimore, MD: Paul H. Brookes Pub. Co.
Fenstermacher, S. K., Barr, R. R., Salerno, K., Garcia, A.,
Shwery, C. E., Calvert, S. L., & Linebarger, D. L. (2010).
Infant-directed media: An analysis of product information
and claims. Infant and Child Dev., 19, 557-576.
Fidler, A.E., Zack, E., & Barr, R. (2010). Television
viewing patterns in 6- to 18-month-olds: The role of
caregiver-infant interactional quality. Infancy, 15, 176196.
Krcmar, M. (2010). Can social meaningfulness and repeat
exposure help infants and toddlers overcome the video
deficit? Media Psychology, 13(1), 31-53.
Krcmar, M., Grela, B., & Lin, K. (2007). Can toddlers learn
vocabulary from television? An experimental approach.
Media Psychology, 10, 41-63.
Kuhl, P. K., Tsao, F., & Liu, H. (2003). Foreign-language
experience in infancy: Effect of short-term exposure and
social interaction on phonetic learning. PNAS, 100(15),
9096-9101.
O’Doherty, K., Troseth, G. L., Goldenberg, E., Akhtar, N.,
Shimpi, P. M., & Saylor, M. M. (2011). Third-party social
interaction and word learning from video. Child Dev.,
82(3), 902-915.
Reiser, R.A., Tessmer, M.A., & Phelps, P.C. (1984). Adultchild interaction in children's learning from "Sesame
Street." Edu. Comm. & Tech. Journal, 32, 217-233.
Reiser, R.A., Williamson, N., & Suzuki, K. (1988). Using
"Sesame Street" to facilitate children's recognition of
letters and numbers. Edu. Tech. Res. and Dev., 36, 15-21.
Richert, R. A., Robb, M. B., & Smith, E. I. (2011). Media as
social partners: The social nature of young children’s
learning from screen media. Child Dev., 82(1), 82-95.
Rideout, V. J., & Hamel, E. (2006). The media family:
Electronic media in the lives of infants, toddlers,
preschoolers, and their parents. Henry J. Kaiser Family
Foundation.
Sims, C. E., & Colunga, E. (In preparation). Toddlers’ word
and concept learning from screen media.
Werker, J. F., Gilbert, J. H. V., Humphrey, K., & Tees, R.
C. (1981). Developmental aspects of cross-language
speech perception. Child Dev., 52(1), 349-355

1329

