UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Plausibility and Visualizability in Relational Belief Revision

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4t1592rc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Bucher, Leandra
Nejasmic, Jelica
Bertleff, Sabine
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Plausibility and Visualizability in Relational Belief Revision
Leandra Bucher (leandra.bucher@psychol.uni-giessen.de)
Jelica Nejasmic (jelica.nejasmic@psychol.uni-giessen.de)
Sabine Bertleff (sabine.bertleff@psychol.uni-giessen.de)
Markus Knauff (markus.knauff@psychol.uni-giessen.de)
Justus-Liebig University, Experimental Psychology and Cognitive Science, Otto-Behaghel-Str. 10F,
35394 Giessen, Germany
Abstract
Belief revision is required when new facts are incompatible
with existing beliefs. In the present experiment, participants
changed their mind about the spatial and non-spatial relations
between objects. The participants received information about
relations, which were subsequently contradicted by irrefutable
counterfacts. The task was to decide which of the initial
relations to retain and which ones to give up. Previous
experiments showed that these decisions are guided by the
linguistic asymmetry between located (LO) and reference
objects (RO). Reasoners have a strong preference to relocate
the LO of the counterfactual relation. Our experiment
explores whether this robust effect can be overwritten by the
plausibility of revised beliefs; and how visualizability of
problems affects revision. We found the LO-preference to be
robust even when the resulting representation is implausible;
and that revision is impeded when problems are easy to
visualize. The results shed new light on relational belief
revision in humans.
Keywords: Relational reasoning; Spatial reasoning; Belief
revision; Mental models, Visual impedance

Relational Reasoning and the Revision of
Beliefs
Imagine you involuntarily put on some weight over the
Christmas holidays. That is why, for the next couple of
months, in order to get rid of the additional pounds, you
consider nutrition which is low in fat and calories. You
know that pasta, buckwheat, potatoes, and fruits are all low
in fat, and further that potatoes are higher in calories than
buckwheat is, and that pasta provides more energy than
potatoes and fruits. Your ability to rank these, and even
more, different types of food according to the amount of
energy they provide enables you to conclude that fruits are a
good choice when you want to pursue your aim of weight
loss. This little example demonstrates that reasoning with
relations is essential in our daily life. In fact, it is ubiquitous
and it plays a vital role in higher cognitive processing, for
instance, in planning and categorizing (Halford, Wilson, &
Phillips, 1998; 2010; Hummel & Holyoak, 2005).
Now, imagine you learn about avocado fruits that they
contain high amounts of fat. You presumably integrate this
fact with ease into your knowledge base, although it is not
coherent with what you thought you knew about fruits (that
they were low in fat). The process of integrating nonconsistent pieces of information into already existing belief
sets is referred to as belief revision (e.g. Gärdenfors, 1988;
Elio & Pelletier, 1997; Wolf, Rieger, & Knauff, 2012).

Reasoners usually revise their beliefs about the state of the
world when confronted with contradicting evidence. Indeed,
we frequently encounter new facts that do not cohere with
our beliefs. When the source of a new piece of information
is reliable and the fact itself somewhat indisputable, we
might consider taking it into account. In case we do, it
entails that we update knowledge bases and revise current
sets of beliefs.
Frequently, there are multiple ways in which the revision
could be performed, implicating different decisions about
which beliefs to maintain and which ones to discard.
Consider your belief that fruits are a good choice when you
want to lose weight: do you maintain it in the face of the
fact that avocados are high in fat; or will you discard at least
avocados from the diet menu? Do you still think of
avocados as fruits after all? It is clear that belief revision is
often accompanied by uncertainty and ambiguity.
The current study relies on recent work done in the field
of relational belief revision. A recent finding in studies that
looked at belief revision about spatial relations is that the
revision is based on the variation of spatial mental models
(Bucher, Krumnack, Nejasmic, & Knauff, 2011; Krumnack,
Bucher, Nejasmic, & Knauff, 2011; Bucher & Nejasmic,
2012; Knauff, Bucher, Krumnack, & Nejasmic, 2013).
Often, there are multiple (logically equal) alternatives for
variations that would all re-establish consistency. However,
human reasoners hold strong preferences for specific
alternatives. These preferences can rely on linguistic cues
provided by relational statements. The experiment presented
here was designed to investigate whether reasoners still rely
on these cues during revision, even when the resulting
object relations are implausible. Furthermore, we compared
reasoners´ performance in problems that were easy to
visualize and easy to spatially represent.

Preferences in Spatial Belief Revision
Our recent experimental studies have focused on the
revision of object arrangements. Imagine a person has
reason to think that the objects X, Y, and Z are arranged in
this linear order. The spatial mental model that is
constructed can be sketched as:
X–Y–Z
Let us assume the reasoner then learns from a reliable and
trustworthy source that as an incontrovertible fact, “object Z
is to the left of object X”. This fact is inconsistent with the

1946

reasoner´s model. In order to take the fact into account and
– at the same time – keep changes to the model as little as
possible, the reasoner can vary the model in two different
ways: the X can be relocated; the Z can be relocated. These
two alternatives are comparable, from a logical point of
view.
The finding of recent studies is that reasoners encounter
this ambiguity with clear and robust preferences. Preferred
model revisions of the type introduced here are guided by
cues provided by the conflicting statements. Binary relations
- such as “Z left of X” - feature a functional asymmetry
between the two objects, well known as distinction of figure
and ground, target and anchor, or (the terminology used in
the present context) “located” (LO; the “Z” in “Z left of X”)
and “reference” object (RO; the “X” in “Z left of X”). The
asymmetry of LO and RO specifies the location of the LO
relative to the location of the RO (Miller & Johnson-Laird,
1976; Talmy, 1983; Landauer & Jackendorff, 1993).
Reasoners tend to perceive the RO´s position as fixed and
inflexible while the LO is considered to be more flexible
and locatable.
The following example sketches a reasoner´s
characteristic preference for the revision of a horizontal
linear arrangement of the objects X, Y, and Z:
Arrangement: X – Y – Z
Counterfact: Z is left of X,
with Z as the LO of the counterfact and X as the RO
Revisions:

(1) Z – X – Y
(2) Y – Z – X

The revised arrangement (1) results from the relocation of
the counterfact´s LO relative to its RO and is usually the
preferred revision. The logical equivalent but non-preferred
alternative (2), results from the relocation of the RO relative
to the LO. The LO-preference is a strong effect. Indeed,
reasoners apply this principle in around 90% of the
problems of the described type (Bucher et al., 2011;
Krumnack, Bucher, Nejasmic et al., 2011; Bucher &
Nejasmic, 2012; Knauff et al., 2013).
Note that abstract entities such as X, Y, and Z are neutral
with regard to the position within an arrangement. The same
applies for objects such as fruits (apple, mango, orange) and
tools (hammer, drill, pliers). Indeed these were the objects
used in the experiments so far.
Here, as a novelty, we manipulated two factors: the
plausibility of revisions and the visualizability of the
statements. We used spatial and non-spatial relations of
objects “that make sense”, e.g. “an elephant is bigger than a
fly”. The statements used in the problems differed with
regard to their visualizability, i.e. in their extent to which
they provoke picture-like representations (“mental images”).
The first question is: do reasoners still apply the LOprinciple when the revised model is implausible? In fact,
reasoners often base their problem solutions on the
plausibility of the content or on prior experiences within a

certain field (Newstead, Pollard, Evans, & Allen, 1992;
Klauer, Musch, & Naumer, 2000; Evans, 2008, DeNeys,
2006; Knauff, Budeck, Wolf, & Hamburger, 2010). These
content effects show the strong tendency of reasoners to
take into account what is meaningful or plausible. On the
other hand, the LO-preference is a strong effect.
The second question is: does the visualizability of a
problem modulate revision? Relations which are easy to
visualize, impede reasoning (Knauff & Johnson-Laird,
2002; Knauff, Fangmeier, Ruff, & Johnson-Laird, 2003;
Knauff & May, 2006; Knauff, 2009). Mental images are
considered to be irrelevant for reasoning itself but the
inspection of the images appears to slow down thinking and
makes it more prone to errors. This so-called visual
impedance effect occurs complementary to the facilitating
effect of spatial relations (Knauff, 2009; Knauff, 2013).
Spatial belief revision is conceived as the manipulation of
spatial mental models. The assumption for the current
experiment is that models which are easy to mentalize as
visual images should accordingly be harder to manipulate
by a reasoner than models constructed from easy to spatially
representable statements.
In order to prepare the manipulation of the experimental
problems´ visualizability, we conducted a pilot study.

Pilot study: the Visualizability of Statements
Participants of the pilot study rated statements with regard
to their visualizability. This procedure allowed the
allocation of statements to categories: visual, neutral, and
spatial.

Method
30 volunteers (14 male; aged from 19 to 55) participated in
the study. Each of them rated individually, 72 binary spatial
and non-spatial relational statements according to their
visualizability. The statements were accessible online via a
link sent by email. They were generated and the data
collected, using LimeSurvey, Version 1.92+ software.
Example statements are: “Asparagus is thinner than
cucumber”; “Cucumber is thinner than cabbage”; “Whisper
is quieter than speech”; “Speech is quieter than scream”.
Participants
rated
the
subjectively
perceived
visualizability of each statement on a scale with the points:
“very easy to visualize”; “easy to visualize”; “easy to
visualize and spatially represent”; “easy to spatially
represent”; very easy to spatially represent”; and “neither
easy to visualize nor to spatially represent”. The four most
clear-cut rated statements from the three categories, “very
easy to visualize”, “neither easy to visualize nor to spatially
represent”, and “easy to spatially represent” were chosen as
experimental material. In accordance with these ratings, the
relations were allocated to one of three experimental
conditions: “visual”; “neutral”, “spatial”. Table 1 shows
example statements.

1947

Table 1: Examples of statements used in the experiment
Visual
The cucumber is thinner than the pumpkin. The asparagus is
thinner than the cucumber.
Neutral
The bird is weaker than the dog. The dog is weaker than the polar
bear.
Spatial
Russia is further east than Poland. Poland is further east than
Germany.

Discussion of the Pilot Study
It is clear that many people experience their thinking as
inspection of visual images. However, our pilot study
indicates that some relations are more “visual” than others.
The results show that, on the one hand, the categories
“visual”, “neutral”, and “spatial” have no clear-cut borders.
On the other hand, however, the results also clearly show
that some relations are experienced as more visual than
others while some relations are experienced as more spatial
than others. So, we do not have relations that are purely
visual or spatial. However, for our main experiment we
could identify relations which are more visual or more
spatial than other relations.

Experiment: Plausibility and Visualizability
For the main experiment, the visualizabilty of the problems
and the plausibility of revisions, were manipulated.
Regarding plausibility, we relied on common knowledge.
We assumed that a statement such as “the father is younger
than the grandfather” is regarded as plausible, while the
invers relation, “the grandfather is younger than the father”
as implausible.

Method
Participants A new group of 20 volunteers (8 male; age
range from 20 – 35; all native speakers of German) gave
written informed consent to participation. They were tested
individually in a quiet lab room.
Materials, Procedure, and Design The experiment is based
on a 3 × 2 (within-subject) design. We manipulated the
factors visualizability (visual, neutral, spatial) and
plausibility (plausible, implausible). The experiment
consisted of 64 problems in the visual, neutral, and spatial
condition, respectively. During the revision phase,
participants chose between plausible and implausible
revised models.
In the first phase, the description phase, the participant
received two statements (premises, P) describing the
relations between three entities. In half of the problems, P1
was plausible and P2 implausible. In the other half, it was
reversed. The premises were presented in a sequential
manner, each at one time, by the participants´ own speed.
See an example problem of the “visual” condition below:

Description:
P1: “Asparagus is thinner than cucumber”
P2: “Pumpkin is thinner than asparagus”
The task of the participants was to order the entities
according to the description. Subsequently, two “models”
were presented on the left and the right side of the monitor.
One of the models was “correct”, i.e. it was in agreement
with P1 and P2, the other one was “incorrect”.
Models constructed from the description:
Correct:
Pumpkin Asparagus Cucumber
Incorrect:
Cucumber Asparagus Pumpkin
Presentation locations of correct and incorrect models on the
left and right side of the monitor were counterbalanced
across the experiment. Participants were asked to indicate
the correct model by pressing a left or right button. This step
of the “correct model choice” was implemented in order to
warrant that participants constructed the “correct model”
before entering the next phase of a problem.
There is evidence that reasoners order objects spatially
even when the relations are non-spatial. “Venus shines
brighter than the moon but the sun shines even brighter”,
can easily be reflected by the order: Moon – Venus – Sun.
Relations, also non-spatial ones, are thought to be closely
linked to space. The argument of many researchers is that
mental space is relational (rather than geometrical) space
(e.g. Knauff, 1999; Knauff, 2013). This notion is
corroborated by many findings, e.g. that spatial distance
effects also occur with non-spatial relations (Prado, Van der
Henst, & Noveck, 2008; Prado, Chadha, & Booth, 2011).
Indeed, participants´ performance was very accurate. In
more than 90 % of the cases (M = 92.90 %; SD = 0.26), the
correct models were selected. The few incorrect problems
were excluded from further analysis.
In the second phase, the participants received a third
premise which they were explicitly instructed to treat as an
incontrovertible fact (while the instruction included the hint
that the participant could not be entirely sure whether the
description was true). The “fact” was always plausible. In
half of the problems, it was consistent with P1 and P2; in
the other half (see the example below) it was inconsistent.
Counterfact:

“Cucumber is thinner than pumpkin”

The participants decided - using “yes”- and “no”-buttons whether the fact was in agreement with the initial statements
or not. Again, participants performed very accurate in this
phase. In 86.20 % (SD = 10.59) of the problems, the
participants decided correctly. Incorrect problems were
eliminated from further analysis, so were the consistent
ones.
The third phase, the revision, was the most interesting
part of the experiment. This part followed only if the
participant recognized a fact as inconsistent with the initial
description. Participants were then instructed to revise their

1948

assumption about the objects´ relations by taking into
account the counterfact. Two alternative revised models,
both variations of the initial model, taking into account the
fact while preserving as much of the initial information as
possible, were presented on the screen. The two revised
models were presented on the left and the right side of the
computer monitor. The task was to choose among the
models the one which matched the participant´s assumption
about the revised object relations. Choices were indicated by
left and right button presses. One of the revised models was
plausible; the other one was implausible. The question was
whether reasoners still apply the LO-principle or whether
they prefer revisions based on the plausibility. The two
alternative revised models for the example above were:
(1)
(2)

Cucumber Pumpkin Asparagus
Asparagus Cucumber Pumpkin

Note that model (1) results from the relocation of the LO of
the fact (which is the cucumber) but leads to an implausible
order of objects. Model (2), in contrast, results from the
relocation of the RO of the fact (which is the pumpkin) but
leads to a plausible order of the objects. Over the entire set
of problems, in half of the problems the LO-principle led to
implausible and the RO-principle into plausible relations of
the entities (as in the example above), in the other half of the
problems it was reversed.
Revision choices and duration were recorded. The
problems were presented in a random order. They were
preceded by eight practice trials (not analyzed). All stimuli
were generated, presented, and recorded with Superlab 4.0
(Cedrus Corporation, San Pedro, CA, 1999) with an RB-530
response box running on a standard personal computer
connected to a 19’’-monitor.

Results and Discussion
In the first analyses, we examined whether revision
preferences were based on plausibility. Subsequently, we
looked at the effects of visualizability. We also looked at the
interactions between plausibility and visualizability.
However, none of them reached the level of statistical
significance (ps > .05).
Plausibility: ANOVAs were calculated, with the factors
Plausibility (plausible, implausible) × Relocated Object
(LO, RO), separately for the frequency (in percent) of the
respective revision choices and revision duration (in
seconds). Both ANOVAs revealed a main effect of
Relocated Object (choices: [F (1,19) = 71.91; p < .001; η2part
= .79]; duration: [F(1,19) = 6.53; p = .019; η2part = .26]; all
other ps > .20). LOs were relocated more often and faster
compared to ROs. Choices LO vs. RO: M = 78.77 %; SD =
14.99 vs. M = 21.23 %; SD = 14.99; t(19) = 8.59; p < .001;
duration LO vs. RO: M = 2.69 s; SD = 1.71 vs. M = 3.46 s;
SD = 1.74: t(19) = -2.35; p = .03).

Figure 1. Revisions [%] and revision durations [s; error
bars indicate standard errors] of “located” (LO) and
“reference” objects (RO) showed an LO-effect. The
preference was not modulated by plausibility
Figure 1 provides a graphically overview of the data. The
result suggests that reasoners were guided by the distinction
of LO and RO provided by the counterfactual relation. They
followed the asymmetry of the objects and relied on the LOprinciple. Plausibility did not overwrite this preference.
Next, we examined the impact of the visualizability of the
statements. The question was: does the easiness to construct
a visual mental image or a spatial representation of the
problems affect reasoning and belief revision?
Visualizability: in order to compare the revision duration
of visual, neutral and spatial problems, an ANOVA with the
within-subject factor Visualizability (visual, neutral, spatial)
was calculated. It indicated a significant main effect
[F(2,18) = 4.80; p = .014; η2part = 2.02]. When the
statements were easy to visualize, the revision duration was
significantly higher (M = 3.00s; SD = 1.3) compared to
neutral and spatial problems (neutral: t(19) = -2.70; p =
.014; spatial: t(19) = -2.73; p = .013). Revision duration for
neutral (M = 2.60s; SD = 1.60) and spatial problems (M =
2.6s; SD = 1.3) were comparable (p > .85).
Figure 2 provides a graphical overview. The result clearly
suggests an impeding effect of statements that are easy to
visualize. We also looked at the interaction between
visualizability and relocated object, which was nonsignificant (p > .35).

1949

Figure 2. Mean revision durations of different relation types
[s; error bars indicate standard errors] indicate a visual
impedance effect

General Discussion
Belief revision is performed in order to re-establish
consistency within belief sets (Gärdenfors, 1988).
Frequently, there exists ambiguity because there are
multiple solutions for revision. The present experiment on
relational belief revision agrees with recent work suggesting
that reasoners solve this ambiguity with strong preferences.
Recent experiments used objects (e.g. fruits) which are
“neutral” regarding their position within object
arrangements. These objects were also not related to the
individuals´ prior knowledge or pre-existing beliefs. (e.g.
Knauff et al., 2013). The current experiment, in contrast,
addressed two novel aspects in reasoning with spatial and
non-spatial relations: the plausibility of a relation and the
visualizability of the reasoning problems. Both aspects have
been shown to affect reasoning in general (e.g. Evans, 2008;
e.g. Knauff, 2009).
A powerful theory in cognitive science puts forward that
reasoners represent situations and states of the world in
“mental models”; and that these models provide the basis
for reasoning (Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991; Goodwin &
Johnson-Laird, 2005; Krumnack, Bucher, Nejasmic, Knauff,
2010; Krumnack, Bucher, Nejasmic; Nebel, & Knauff,
2011). Indeed, the mental model theory is corroborated by
many phenomena. Moreover, model-based reasoning rather
than the application of formal rules (e.g. Rips, 1994) nicely
explains why reasoners often ignore the logical form of an
argument. In fact, reasoners often base their problem
solutions on the plausibility of the content or on prior
experiences within a certain field, rather than on the validity
of a conclusion (Newstead et al., 1992; Klauer et al., 2000;
Evans, 2008, DeNeys, 2006; Knauff et al., 2010). These
content effects show that reasoners have a strong tendency
to take into account what is meaningful or plausible to them,
even when this entails a trade-off with logic.
Recent findings on spatial belief revision suggest that
reasoners vary spatial mental models and that they prefer
certain variations above others. The variation of simple

spatial models of “neutral” objects was found to be based on
a principle which we call the LO-preference. The first aim
of the current experiment was to test whether reasoners hold
on to that preference, even when it leads to implausible
models. Our data suggest that they do. The LO-preference
remained the guiding revision principle even when the
resulting model was implausible.
Are there alternative interpretations of this result? One
alternative account is that the effect is due to the specific
layout of our experiment. In fact, during the construction
phase, reasoners were forced to partially “ignore”
plausibility of relations in order to construct the correct
initial model from plausible and implausible statements.
This might have triggered them to do the same in the
revision process. Thus, they also ignored the plausibility of
the revised model. We think that this might be a possible
explanation for the finding that the LO-preference was
stronger than the plausibility of the revised model.
However, we think that the robustness of the LOpreferences is still an important result. In our future
research, we will explore whether the plausibility effect is
more powerful in more complex revision tasks. We assume
that with more complex problems, the LO-effect on model
variation would disappear and “plausibility” would play a
more important role.
An important finding in the area of relational reasoning is
that the visualizablity of a relation can modulate reasoning
performance. Relations which are easy to visualize as
mental images impede reasoning (e.g. Knauff & JohnsonLaird, 2002). Reasoning with relations is best described by
the construction and the manipulation of spatial mental
models (e.g. Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991; Schaecken,
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & d’Ydewalle, 1996; Goodwin &
Johnson-Laird, 2005; Jahn, Knauff, & Johnson-Laird, 2007;
Nejasmic, Krumnack, Bucher, & Knauff, 2011). It is likely
that problems that are easy to spatially represent
accommodate reasoning because of their shared nature with
(spatial) mental models. Image-like representations, in
contrast, impede reasoning because they hold additional but
irrelevant information (Knauff, 2009; 2013). Our results
corroborate these assumptions. With the present experiment,
we found an influence of the visualizability on revision.
Problems that were easy to visualize appeared to impede the
revision process. Indeed, visual problems seem to provide
an additional effort which slows down the revision process.
In contrast, relations that were rated as easy to represent
spatially were manipulated faster during the revision phase.
This is in line with the assumption that those relations
accommodate revision because they share their spatial
structure with the spatial model that is varied. In our
experiment, spatial and neutral relations were both
processed faster than visual relations. This result supports
the assumption that spatial and non-spatial relations are both
easily integrated into spatial models. Pursuing this thought
could possibly reveal more interesting aspects of the mental
space as relational space (Knauff, 1999; Prado et al., 2008;
Prado et al., 2011).

1950

Acknowledgments
This work was funded by a grant from the DFG (KN 465/62). We thank Martin Becker and Pascal Pfendert for
assistance with the experiment.

References
Bucher, L., Krumnack, А., Nejasmic J., & Knauff, М.
(2011). Cognitive processes underlying spatial belief
revision. In L. Carlson, C. Hölscher, T. Shipley (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 3477-3482). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Bucher, L. & Nejasmic, J. (2012). Relocating multiple
objects during belief revision. In C. Stachniss, K. Schill,
& D. Uttal (Eds.), Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence:
Spatial Cognition (pp. 476-491). Berlin, Germany:
Springer.
De Neys, W. (2006).Dual processing in reasoning - Two
systems but one reasoner. Psychological Science. 17, 428433.
Elio, R., & Pellitier, F. J. (1997). Belief change as
propositional update. Cognitive Science, 2, 419-460.
Evans, J. St. B. T. (2008). Dual-processing accounts of
reasoning, judgment, and social Cognition. Annual
Review of Psychology, 59, 255–278.
Gärdenfors, P. (1988). Knowledge in flux. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Goodwin, G. P., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2005).Reasoning
with relations. Psychological Review, 112, 468-493.
Jahn, G., Knauff, M., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2007).
Preferred mental models in reasoning about spatial
relations. Memory & Cognition, 35, 2075-2087.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. J. (1991). Deduction.
Erlbaum, Hove (1991).
Klauer, K. C., Musch, J., & Naumer, B. (2000). On belief
bias in syllogistic reasoning. Psychological Review, 107,
852-84.
Knauff, M. (1999). The cognitive adequacy of Allen’s
interval calculus for qualitative spatial representation and
reasoning. Spatial Cognition and Computation, 1, 261290.
Knauff, M. (2009). A neuro-cognitive theory of deductive
relational reasoning with mental models and visual
images. Spatial Cognition & Computation, 9, 109-137.
Knauff, M. (2013). Space to Reason. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Knauff, M., Bucher, L., Krumnack, A., & Nejasmic, J.
(2013). Spatial belief revision. Journal of Cognitive
Psychology, 1, 1-10.
Knauff, M., Budeck, C., Wolf, A. G., & Hamburger, K.
(2010). The illogicality of stockbrokers: Psychological
experiments on the effects of prior knowledge and belief
biases on logical reasoning in stock trading. PLoS One,
5(10), e13483. doi:10.1371/ journal.pone.0013483.
Knauff, M., Fangmeier, T., Ruff, C. C., & Johnson-Laird, P.
N. (2003). Reasoning, models, and images: Behavioral

measures and cortical activity. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 15, 559-573.
Knauff, M., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2002). Visual imagery
can impede reasoning. Memory & Cognition, 30, 363371.
Knauff, M., & May, E. (2006). Mental imagery, reasoning,
and blindness. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 59, 161–177.
Krumnack, A., Bucher, L., Nejasmic, J., & Knauff, M.
(2010). Spatial reasoning as verbal reasoning. In S.
Ohlsson & R. Catrambone (Eds.), Proceedings of the
32nd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 1002-1007). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Krumnack, A., Bucher, L., Nejasmic, J., & Knauff, M.
(2011). Efficiency and minimal change in spatial belief
revision. In L. Carlson, C. Hölscher, & T. Shipley (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 2270-2275). Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.
Krumnack, A., Bucher, L., Nejasmic, J., Nebel, B., &
Knauff, M. (2011). A model for relational reasoning as
verbal reasoning. Cognitive Systems Research, 11, 377392.
Landau, B. & Jackendoff, R. (1993) “What” and “where” in
spatial language and spatial cognition. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 16, 217–265.
Miller, G. A. & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1976). Language and
Perception. Cambridge MA: Havard University Press.
Nejasmic, J., Krumnack, A., Bucher, L., & Knauff, M.
(2011). Cognitive processes underlying the continuity
effect in spatial reasoning In L. Carlson, C. Holscher, &
T. Shipley (Eds.), Proceedings of the 33rd Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 11271132). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Newstead, S. E., Pollard, P., Evans, J., & Allen, J. (1992).
The source of belief bias in syllogistic reasoning.
Cognition, 45, 257-284.
Prado, J., Chadha, A., & Booth, J. R. (2011). The brain
network for deductive reasoning: a quantitative metaanalysis of 28 neuroimaging studies. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 23, 3483-3497.
Prado, J., Van Der Henst, J.-B., & Noveck, I. (2008). Spatial
associations in relational reasoning: Evidence for a
SNARC-like effect. The Quaterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 61, 1143 – 1150.
Rips, L. J. (1994). The Psychology of Proof. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Schaecken, W., Johnson-Laird, P. N., & d’Ydewalle, G.
(1996). Mental models and temporal reasoning.
Cognition, 60, 205-234.
Talmy, L. (1983). How language structures space. In H. L.
Pick & L. P. Acredolo (Eds.), Spatial Orientation:
Theory, Research and Application (pp. 225-282). London,
UK: Plenum.
Wolf, A.G., Rieger, S., & Knauff, M. (2012). The effects of
source trustworthiness and inference type on human belief
revision. Thinking & Reasoning, 18, 417-440

1951

