UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Predicting similarity change as a result of categorization

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6jq5p18d

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Reppa, Irene
Pothos, Emmanuel

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Predicting similarity change as a result of categorization
Irene Reppa (i.reppa@swansea.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Swansea University, Swansea, SA2 8PP

Emmanuel Pothos (e.m.pothos@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, City University London, London, EC1V 0HB

Abstract
Learning a particular categorization leads to
corresponding changes in the similarity structure of the
categorized stimuli. The purpose of the current study was to
examine whether different category structures may lead to
greater or less similarity change. We created six category
structures and examined changes in similarity as a result of
categorization in between-participant conditions. The bestsupported hypothesis was that the ease of learning a
categorization affects change in similarity, with the most
change following learning of difficult category structures.
There was also support for the hypothesis that similarity
change is more likely to occur when the category boundary
was not aligned with the physical dimension of variation.
Finally, we discuss some methodological challenges in
addressing this important research topic.
Keywords: similarity; categorization; learning difficulty;
exemplar theory

There is widespread evidence that learning to categorize
stimuli in a particular way leads to corresponding changes in
the similarity structure of the stimuli (e.g., Gureckis &
Goldstone, 2008; Ozgen & Davies, 2002; Schyns & Oliva,
1999; Stevenage, 1998). For instance, stimuli categorized in
the same category tend to be perceived as more similar to
each other, compared to stimuli categorized in different
categories (e.g., Goldstone, 1994; Schyns, Goldstone, &
Thibaut, 1997), and stimuli on either side of a category
boundary tend to be more discriminable than stimuli on the
same side of the boundary (e.g., Harnad, 1987). Similarly,
differences have been reported on color perception across
different linguistic communities (Roberson et al., 2005).
Research on the influence of categorization on perception
has flourished for several reasons. It is theoretically
important since it is at the heart of answering core issues
regarding representation and the processing of sensory
input. Do we perceive a faithful representation of sensory
input? Or are our perceptual representations a compromise
between constraints from sensory input and whatever
categories are useful for the organism? Such research is also
important for formal models of categorization, as most of
them assume categorization models that assume
representations which are stable across learning (e.g.,
Nosofsky, 1984).
The present research examined the effects of
categorization on similarity. Changes in similarity might

correspond to perceptual changes or changes mediated
through the addition of a category label (e.g., Goldstone,
Lippa, Shiffrin, 2001; McMurray et al., in press; Roberson
& Davidoff, 2000; Sloutsky & Fisher, 2004). Choosing to
examine similarity is primarily a methodological
simplification, since exploring directly changes relating to
perception involves the technical challenge of eliminating
(possible) effects from linguistic labeling. However, if
across broadly matched category structures, for instance, in
terms of learning difficulty, we find similarity changes
following learning of some structures but not others, then
one can make the additional step of inferring similarity
changes over and above changes due to just the category
label (see also Roberson et al., 2007).
Despite the numerous reports on the effects of categories
on similarity, and perception in particular, there have been
some reports of failures of such influence (e.g., Goldstone,
1994; Jiang et al., 2007; Freedman et al., 2003). The aim of
present research was to examine possible factors might lead
to changes in similarity.
We created six two-dimensional category structures,
shown in Figure 1. Two category structures were designed
so that the width dimension was diagnostic (Width easy and
Width difficult), while the height dimension non-diagnostic,
and two more category structures were defined so that
height was the diagnostic dimension (Height easy and
Height difficult) and width was non-diagnostic. Two
versions of each category structure were created, one
designed to be easy (e.g., Width easy), and one designed to
be more difficult (e.g., Width difficult). Finally, two more
category structures were created where both dimensions
were relevant: the non-linearly separable (NLS) and the
Diagonal structure, explained in more detail later.
Three different hypotheses regarding the effect of category
learning on similarity changes were examined. One
hypothesis was that category learning difficulty would affect
the extent of similarity changes. A classification is easy (or
more intuitive) if it is more readily obvious to naïve
observers (Pothos & Chater, 2002; Pothos et al., 2011). For
example, when asked to freely classify a set of stimuli,
participants will generate more intuitive classifications more
frequently. These classifications will be typically easier to
learn than non-intuitive ones. Category learning difficulty
might influence similarity ratings in two ways. One
possibility is that learning the easy category structures
would lead to greater changes in similarity ratings. This is
because, for easy category structures participants are able to

1211

quickly learn the underlying categorization, perhaps with
less emphasis on encoding the individual exemplars (cf.
Ashby et al., 1999; Ashy & Ell, 2002). Such inexact initial
encoding of the exemplars may mean that exemplar
representations end up being developed in a way that is
more consistent with the underlying category structure (e.g.,
Edwards, Pothos, & Perlman, in press). Support for this
prediction comes from Folstein, Gauthier, and Palmeri
(2010), who manipulated the complexity of the underlying
stimulus space (not of category structure, as in the current
study). Unlike previous related evidence showing that
categorization does not influence similarity (e.g., Jiang et
al., 2007; Freedman et al., 2003), they showed significant
effects of categorization on perception, when the underlying
stimulus space was simple.
The converse prediction, regarding the effect of category
learning difficulty on similarity changes, is that learning a
difficult category structure might result in more significant
and enduring changes in the similarity structure of the
stimuli. This possibility is motivated by evidence showing
that supervised categorization processes can involve
processes of selective attention or other changes in
psychological space (e.g., through the sensitivity parameter;
Nosofsky, 1984), though such research does not tell us
whether such changes are enduring and on the actual
stimulus representations.
A second hypothesis is that the linear separability of the
learned categories might moderate changes in similarity.
Overall, there is quite a lot of controversy regarding the role
of linear separability in category learning and perhaps some
of this controversy can be ultimately explained in terms of
corresponding changes in the similarity structure of the
categorized stimuli. Note that connectionist models require
that NLS problems are transformed into linearly separable
ones at their hidden layer, otherwise learning is not possible
(indeed, the inability of perceptrons to learn NLS category
structures has been at the heart of the critique of Minsky &
Papert, 1969; see also Rumelhart & McClelland, 1986).
To examine possible influences of linear separability in
relation to similarity changes, two categories were created to
be broadly equal in terms of complexity but differ in
whether they were LS or not. One was the NLS and the
other was the Diagonal condition (Figure 1). In diagonally
separated category structures, the members of one category
can only be discriminated from their nearest neighbors in
the other category with fine distinctions along both
dimensions of variation. They have proved to be challenging
for participants to learn (e.g., Ashby, Queller, & Berretty,
1999; Ashby & Ell, 2002).
If the cognitive system shares processing constraints with
connectionist systems, maybe it would try to re-represent a
NLS classification in an LS way, so that there would be
more similarity change in learning an NLS classification,
compared to an equally complex but LS one (the Diagonal
one). Alternatively, it could be the case that more complex
classifications are associated with less similarity change, if,
for example, category learning of such classifications

involves rote memorization of the training exemplars (Blair
& Homa, 2003). In this case, NLS and Diagonal
classification would lead to equivalent similarity changes.

Figure 1. The six category structures employed in the study.
Finally, a third hypothesis is that similarity change
depends on whether the category boundary is aligned with a
dimension of physical variation (e.g. height). According to
the COVIS model of categorization (Ashby et al., 1999;
Ashby & Ell, 2002), whether the category boundary is along
a physical dimension of variation can determine whether the
executive (frontal) or the procedural system is engaged. To
examine this hypothesis, the Diagonal category structure
was compared against the condition best matched for
difficulty with it (which turned out to be the Height Difficult
category structure).
Participants and Design
One hundred and eighty experimentally naïve participants,
all Swansea University students, were tested. There were 20
participants in each of the six experimental groups, each
learning one of the six different classifications shown in
Figure 1. For all six classifications, successful learning is
achieved when participants recognize that items in clusters
A and B are in one category and items in clusters C and D
are in another category. The dependent variable was
changes in similarity as a result of category learning. The
procedure for computing changes in similarity is described
in the Results section.
Three independent variables were considered, to allow
examination of the hypotheses examined. The first was

1212

category structure learning difficulty, which was defined adhoc in terms of the number of trials to criterion. For this
variable the Height Easy and Width Easy conditions were
compared with their corresponding Height Difficult and
Width Difficult conditions.
The second independent
variable was whether the category boundary was aligned
with the dimension of physical variation or not. The third
independent variable was linear separability with two levels,
linearly versus non-linearly separable category structures.
For each of the six category structures, there was a
corresponding control group providing similarity ratings for
the stimuli, but without having gone through the
categorization task first. For the Width Easy, Height Easy,
and NLS conditions there was a common control group of
20 participants. For the Width Difficult and the Height
Difficult conditions a different control of 20 participants,
and for the Diagonal group yet another control group of 20
participants. The experiment lasted approximately 50
minutes for the experimental groups and 30 minutes for the
control groups.

16x16=256 stimulus pairs were presented and participants
were asked to rate their similarity on a 1-9 scale, such that 1
corresponded to ‘very dissimilar’ and 9 to ‘very similar’.
Participants were encouraged to use the entire scale.
Participants in the control groups went through the
similarity ratings, without having done the categorization
task first.

Materials
We used yellow surface-rendered arrow-like shapes that
varied in terms of two dimensions: the width of the
arrowhead (horizontal dimension) and the length of the
arrow (vertical). The smallest arrow’s trunk measured 4.5
centimeters (cm) in height and its head measured 3.0 cm
wide. Twenty-four more stimuli were created by
incrementing trunk height and head width by 12%. The
stimuli employed in the experimental conditions were
subsets of this original set of stimuli. The shortest arrow
trunk in all six conditions was 4.5cm high and the narrowest
arrow head 3.0cm wide. The tallest arrow trunk was 12.5cm
in the Width Easy, Height Easy, Diagonal, and NLS
conditions and 7.1cm in the Width Difficult and Height
Difficult conditions. The widest arrow head was 8.3cm in
the Width Easy, Height Easy, and NLS conditions, 4.7cm in
the Width Difficult and Height Difficult conditions and
5.3cm in the Diagonal condition.

Learning Results
Trials to criterion and errors correlated highly with each
other (r=.84, p<.0005). Both the trials to criterion and the
errors varied across category structures [F(5,105)=15.25,
p=.0005 and F(5,105)=11.75, p=.0005, respectively]. The
‘easy’ versions of category structures were easier to learn
than the ‘difficult’ versions of the classifications. Also,
participants found it easier to learn the ‘width’
classifications than the ‘height’ ones, a result showing that
the perceptual salience of the two dimensions was not
equivalent. Category structures defined along a single
dimension (Width easy/difficult & Height easy/difficult)
were easier to learn than those defined along two
dimensions (NLS and Diagonal), t(109)=5.94, p=.0001.
There was no difference in ease of learning between LS
category structures and the NLS one, t(109)=.48, p>.05.
Finally, and as expected, the NLS and Diagonal
classifications were the most difficult ones to learn, with no
difference between them (p>.05).

Procedure
A standard supervised categorization task was employed. A
stimulus was presented at the center of a computer screen
against a white background, until the participant decided
whether it belonged to category A or B, at which point
he/she received corrective feedback. Participants continued
to categorize stimuli until no mistakes were made for 32
consecutive trials (i.e., all stimuli shown twice) or for a
maximum of 256 trials. Five participants failed this criterion
(three in the NLS condition and two in the diagonal
condition) and these participants were not asked to complete
the similarity part of the study. Participants, who completed
the categorization task successfully subsequently received
the similarity ratings task. In that task, each trial started with
a ‘Ready?’ prompt at the center of the screen. Two stimuli
appeared at the screen center for 500ms each, one after the
other, with an inter-stimulus interval of 500ms. All possible

Results
Data cleaning
There were two simple checks that the participants were
sufficiently attentive during the similarity ratings task.
Participants who did not use the whole similarity rating
scale (1-9) and those who did not rate two identical stimuli
as identical (by giving them an average rating of seven or
above) were excluded from the data. This procedure led to
the elimination of 3 participants from the Width Easy group,
3 from the Height Easy group, 2 from the Width Difficult, 1
from the NLS group, and 3 participants from the control
groups.

Similarity measures
Change in similarity as a result of learning could be
quantified in various ways. The measures typically
employed in studies of changes of perception, as a result of
categorization, emphasize discriminability along diagnostic
vs. non-diagnostic dimensions (e.g., Folstein, Gauthier, &
Palmeri, 2010; Goldstone, 1994). However, in the present
study, any putative similarity changes as a result of
categorization would relate to the categorization objective,
that is, learning the different category structures. Therefore,
it is more appropriate to consider a measure of similarity
change, which is informed by the category structures in each
case. Following theory on the determinants of category
structure (Rosch and Mervis, 1975; Love, Medin, &
Gureckis, 2004; Pothos & Chater, 2002; Pothos & Bailey,
2009) and categorization work in general (e.g., Mathy et al.,

1213

in press), we employed two dependent variables for how the
similarity structure might change as a result of
categorization: within category and between category
similarity change. Note that similarity in these definitions is
empirical similarity from participant ratings. Within and
between category similarity change allow us to directly
explore the circumstances when the similarity structure for a
set of stimuli becomes more consistent with a learned
categorization. Within category similarity was the average
similarity from all possible pairs in the same category and
between category similarity was the average similarity
ratings for all pairs across different categories.
Table 1. Trials to criterion, errors, and change in within and
between similarity values, as a result of learning, for the six
category structures employed in this study. The category
structures have been ordered in terms of difficulty of
learning. Asterisks indicate that the difference between
experimental and control groups for each condition,
revealed by independent-samples t-tests, was significant.
Positive values indicate that the mean similarity value was
higher for the experimental group compared to the control
group, while negative values indicate the opposite.
Similarity change
Category structure
Width Easy

Trials to
criterion
45.50

Errors

Within

Between

7.2

.28*

-.13

Width Difficult

71.00

5.6

.45*

.11

Height Easy

71.50

15.0

.19

-.07

Height Difficult

101.35

21.1

.59*

.11

NLS

102.60

34.6

.57*

.14

Diagonal

172.00

35.9

.41

-.43*

To provide baseline similarity values, within and
between category similarity was calculated for the control
participants, following the calculation procedure for their
respective experimental groups.
Once similarity values were computed for all groups (both
experimental and control), similarity change values were
computed for each experimental group. Clearly, any
changes in similarity as a result of categorization are only
meaningful compared to a pre-learning baseline. For
example, suppose a participant provided similarity ratings
for the stimuli after learning the Width Easy classification.
We would then compute her, e.g., between similarity change
value as the between similarity value from her similarity
ratings minus the average between similarity value of all
corresponding control participants. Henceforth, when we

refer to change in similarity values we imply similarity
values computed in this way from the similarity ratings of
the control participants, for each category structure.
Adopting this analytical approach considerably simplifies
comparisons of similarity changes across different category
structures. Within and between similarity change can be
understood as acquired equivalence and distinctiveness,
respectively, but defined in terms of the learned
categorizations, rather than stimulus dimensions.
Table 2. The F-tests examining the three hypotheses
regarding similarity changes as a result of category learning.
Hypothesis
Learning difficulty
(Height vs. Width,
easy and difficult)
Category boundary
aligned with physical
variation
(Height Difficult vs.
Diagonal)
Linear separability
(Height difficult &
Diagonal vs. NLS)

Within

Similarity change
Between

F(1,68)=5.40,
p=.02

F(1,68))=.92,
p=.89

F(1,36)=.48,
p=.49

F(1,36)=5.66,
p=.02

F(1,55)=.13,
p=.72

F(1,55)=.04,
p=.84

Similarity Analyses
Similarity change for the six category structures we
employed are shown in Table 1. For within similarity
changes, positive values indicate changes in the similarity
structure of the items more consistent with the learned
classification. For between similarity changes, it is the other
way round; between similarity is defined in terms of the
similarity of items in different categories, so that if between
similarity is negative this means that items in different
categories become less similar (and therefore consistent
with the learned classification).
The hypothesis that learning difficulty influences
similarity change was examined in a 2 (Dimension: width
vs. height) x 2 (Difficulty: easy vs. difficult) ANOVA. For
within similarity changes, there was a significant main
effect of Difficulty (shown in Table 2), with greater
similarity change for difficult category structures than easy
ones. There was no main effect of Dimension, F(1, 68)=.03,
p>.05, nor a significant interaction, F(1, 68)=.90, p>.05. For
between similarity change, there was no main effect of
Difficulty, F(1, 68)=.92, p>.05, or Dimension, F(1, 68)=.01,
p>.05, and no significant interaction, F (1, 68)=.02, p>.05.
The hypothesis that similarity changes would be
determined by whether the category boundary is aligned
with the dimension of physical variation, or not was
examined in a one-way ANOVA (Height Difficult VS.
Diagonal category structures). As shown in Table 2 this
hypothesis was supported for between but not for within
similarity changes. Finally, linear separability did not
predict within or between similarity changes (Table 2).

1214

Discussion
There has been considerable interest in changes in
similarity (and perception) induced as a result of
categorization, though few researchers have attempted a
systematic study of the factors that make such changes
likely (for an exception see Folstein et al., 2010). The
overarching question in this research was whether the nature
of the category structure is a relevant factor in trying to
understand changes in similarity as a result of
categorization. Three main possibilities were considered.
The first possibility was that category difficulty would
influence similarity change. We suggested that in cases
where there are well-separated categories, similarity change
may correspond more to within similarity change (cf. ChinParker & Ross, 2004), but for more poorly separated
categories between similarity change may be more
pronounced. In either case, more difficult category
structures were expected to lead to greater similarity change.
Our findings supported this hypothesis, but only partially.
Difficulty of learning a category structure predicted changes
in within category similarity, with stimuli in the same
categories becoming more similar for more difficult,
compared to the easier category structures.
The second possibility was that similarity changes are
influenced by whether the category boundary was aligned
with a dimension of physical variation. Indeed, this
hypothesis was supported only for between category
similarity change: when the category boundary was not
aligned with a dimension of physical variation, then stimuli
in different categories became less similar following
categorization training. Although the influence of this factor
could not be anticipated by prior work on similarity changes
(e.g., work on categorical perception; Harnad, 1987), its role
can be predicted within modern categorization theory (e.g.,
Ashby et al., 1998; Ashby & Ell, 2002). For instance, when
the category boundary is aligned with a dimension of
physical variation, even when the categories are poorly
separated, participants focus on within category
information, rather than on between category contrasts.
Work on the COVIS model of categorization shows that
category boundaries aligned with a dimension of physical
variation are simpler than ones which are not, even for
poorly separated categories (Ashby et al., 1999). Therefore,
the complexity of the category boundary instead of the
actual difficulty of the category structures (as defined in this
study), may be a factor driving between similarity change.
This possibility needs further work to be fully supported.
Finally, linear separability predicted neither within nor
between similarity changes, even though this factor was
manipulated across conditions, which were broadly matched
for learning difficulty.
One debate in the literature concerns the extent to which
similarity changes reflect perceptual changes, changes in
item representation, changes in the category’s internal
structure, the addition of a label as a feature in determining
similarity, or simply task demands. This is an important
issue that is beyond the scope of the current research. It is

important to note, however, that our finding that task
difficulty influences the magnitude of similarity changes, is
inconsistent with the view that similarity changes are due to
the addition of category label to stimulus representations.
That is, if a category label was added to stimulus
representations in all cases, we should not have observed
different degrees of similarity change for different category
structures.
The current research revealed several methodological
challenges in the study of changes in similarity as a result of
categorization. First, several kinds of category structures are
needed. Second, it is clearly of crucial importance to specify
an appropriate index of similarity change, which takes into
account possible differences between category structures.
Indeed, in the present study, we did not observe equivalent
results across the measures we introduced within and
between similarity change. Researchers specifically
interested in perception often consider acquired
distinctiveness or equivalence, as a result of categorization
(e.g., Goldstone, 1994; Harnad, 1987). Such measures are
suitable when there are stimuli on either sides of a category
boundary, but they are perhaps less suitable when the
nearest neighbor stimuli on either side of a category
boundary may be distant from each other in psychological
space. This will often be the case for category structures that
are meant to correspond to naturalistic ones (cf. Pothos et
al., 2011).
A major methodological challenge was comparing effects
of categorization on similarity for the different category
structures. To do this we computed similarity values on the
basis of similarity ratings, after they have been potentially
modified by category learning (experimental participants)
and without any categorization learning (control
participants). Consequently, the dependent variables
corresponded to the change of similarity ratings as a result
of categorization. While we believe our solution to this
problem to be adequate, it would be worthwhile to explore
alternative approaches in future research.
Overall, the issue of whether some category structures
are more or less likely to lead to corresponding changes in
the similarity structure of categorized stimuli is a novel and
exciting one. Here we presented a promising design to
address it and a range of preliminary conclusions.

References
Ashby, G. F. & Ell, S. W. (2002). Single versus multiple
systems of category learning: Reply to Nosofsky and
Kruschke (2002). Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9,
175-180.
Ashby, F. G., Queller, S., & Berretty, P. M. (1999). On the
dominance of unidimensional rules in unsupervised
categorization. Perception & Psychophysics, 61, 11781199.
Blair, M. & Homa, D. (2001). Expanding the search for a
linear separability constraint on category learning.
Memory & Cognition, 29, 1153-1164.

1215

Blair, M. & Homa, D. (2003). As easy to memorize as they
are to classify: The 5-4 categories and the category
advantage. Memory & Cognition, 31, 1293-1301.
Chin-Parker, S. & Ross, B. H. (2004). Diagnosticity and
prototypicality in category learning: A comparison of
inference learning and classification learning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 30, 216-226.
Edwards, D. J., Pothos, E. M., & Perlman, A. (in press).
Relational vs. absolute representation in categorization.
American Journal of Psychology.
Folstein, J.R., Gauthier, I., & Palmeri, T. J. (2010). Not all
spaces stretch alike: How the structure of morphspaces
constrains the effect of category learning on shape
perception. Vision Sciences Society, 10th annual meeting.
Freedman, D. J., Riesenhuber, M., Poggio, T., and Miller, E.
K. (2003). A comparison of primate prefrontal and
inferior temporal cortices during visual categorization.
Journal of Neuroscience, 23, 5235-5246.
Goldstone, R. L. (1994). Influences of Categorization on
Perceptual Discrimination. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 123, 178-200.
Goldstone, R. L., Lippa, Y., Shiffrin, R. M. (2001). Altering
object representations thought category learning.
Cognition, 78, 27-43.
Gureckis, T. M. & Goldstone, R. L. (2008). The effect of
the internal structure of categories on perception. In B. C.
Love, K. McRae, & V. M. Sloutsky (Eds.), Proceedings
of the 30th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society (pp. 843). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Harnad, S. (Ed.) (1987). Categorical Perception. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Jiang, X., Bradley, E., Rini, R.A., Zeffiro, T., Vanmeter, J.,
and Riesenhuber, M. (2007). Categorization training
results in shape- and category-selective human neural
plasticity. Neuron 53, 891-903.
Love, B. C., Medin, D. L., & Gureckis, T. M. (2004).
SUSTAIN: A network model of category learning.
Psychological Review, 111, 309-332.
Mathy, F., Haladjian, H. H., Laurent, E., & Goldstone, R. L.
(under review). Similarity-dissimilarity competition in
disjunctive classification tasks.
McMurray, B., Aslin, R. N., Tanenhaus, M.K., Spivey, M.
J., & Subik, D. (in press). Gradient sensitivity to withincategory variation in words and syllables. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance.
Medin, D. L. & Schwanenflugel, P. J. (1981). Linear
Separability in Classification Learning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Learning and Memory,
7, 355-368.
Minsky, M. L. & Papert, S. A. (1988). Perceptrons. 3rd
Edition. MIT Press: Cambridge, MA.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1984). Choice, similarity, and the context
theory of classification. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 10, 104114.

Ozgen, E. & Davies, I. R. L. (2002). Acquisition of
categorical color perception: A perceptual learning
approach to the linguistic relativity hypothesis. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 131, 477-493
Pothos, E. M. & Chater, N. (2002). A simplicity principle in
unsupervised human categorization. Cognitive Science,
26, 303-343.
Pothos, E. M. & Chater, N. (2005). Unsupervised
categorization and category learning. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 58A, 733-752.
Pothos, E. M. & Bailey, T. M. (2009). Predicting category
intuitiveness with the rational model, the simplicity
model, and the Generalized Context Model. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 35, 1062-1080.
Pothos, E. M., Chater, N., & Stewart, A. J. (2004).
Information about the logical structure of a category
affects generalization. British Journal of Psychology, 95,
371-386.
Pothos, E. M., Perlman, A., Bailey, T. M., Kurtz, K.,
Edwards, D. J., Hines, P., & McDonnell, J. V. (2011).
Measuring category intuitiveness in unconstrained
categorization tasks. Cognition, 121, 83-100.
Roberson, D. & Davidoff, J. (2000). The categorical
perception of colors and facial expressions: The effect of
verbal interference. Memory & Cognition, 28, 977-986.
Roberson, D., Davidoff, J., Davies, I. R. L., & Shapiro, L.
R. (2005). Color categories: Evidence for the cultural
relativity hypothesis. Cognitive Psychology, 50, 378-411.
Rosch, E. & Mervis, C. B. (1975). Family Resemblances:
Studies in the Internal Structure of Categories. Cognitive
Psychology, 7, 573-605.
Rumelhart, D. E. & McClelland, J. L. (1986). Parallel
distributed processing: explorations in the microstructure
of cognition. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Ruts, W., Storms, G., & Hampton, J. (2004). Linear
separability in superordinate natural language concepts.
Memory & Cognition, 32, 83-95.
Schyns, P. G. & Oliva, A. (1999). Dr. Angry and Mr.
Smile: When categorization flexibly modifies the
perception of faces in rapid visual presentations.
Cognition, 69, 243-265.
Schyns, P., Goldstone, R. L., & Thibaut, J. (1997). The
development of Features in object concepts. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 21, 1-54.
Sloutsky, V. M. & Fisher, A. V. (2004). Induction and
categorization in young children: A similarity-based
model. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
133, 166-188.
Smith, J. D., Murray, M. J. Jr.,& Minda, J. P. (1997).
Straight talk about linear separability. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 23, 659-680.
Stevenage, S. V. (1998). Which twin are you? A
demonstration of induced categorical perception of
identical twin faces. British Journal of Psychology, 89,
39-57.

1216

