UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Preschoolers' Understanding of Preferences is Modulated by Linguistic Framing

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5mt9f83n

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Holubar, Taylor
Markman, Ellen

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Preschoolers' Understanding of Preferences is Modulated by Linguistic Framing
Taylor F. Holubar (tholubar@stanford.edu)
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

Ellen M. Markman (markman@stanford.edu)
Department of Psychology
Stanford University

Abstract

consequence of a non-representational theory of mind could
be that a child’s evaluative opinions (such as whether she
finds ice cream delicious or not) are also taken as direct
reflections of objective properties of the world. Such a
belief should lead pre-representational children to expect
everyone else also to find ice cream delicious, and the
subjective, idiosyncratic nature of preferences to be lost.
Some evidence does exist that very young children in fact
treat subjective properties like “deliciousness” as features of
objects rather than as mental states tied to individuals.
Gergely, Egyed, & Király (2007) report that 14-month-olds
expect adults to treat an object in accordance with the total
amount of liking or disliking for the object the infant has
witnessed, irrespective of whether a particular adult has
previously demonstrated liking or disliking for the object. In
other words, infants do not reason about an object’s
likability in terms of a particular person’s opinion about that
object. Instead, they seem to aggregate information across
individuals and associate that totality with the object, not
with the individuals who produce the information. This
finding is consistent with a relatively impoverished
understanding of mental states, whereby children
conceptualize beliefs (including those about an item’s
likability or desirability) as reflecting objective states in the
world.
At the same time, the strongest version of this hypothesis
is not borne out in the data: at least in some cases, slightly
older children respond appropriately to desires different
from their own. Children as young as 18 months recognize
that adults may desire different foods than they themselves
do: when an adult who has previously shown positive affect
towards broccoli and negative affect toward goldfish
crackers requests more food, 18-month-olds (but not 14month-olds) respond appropriately to requests for food
(Repacholi & Gopnik, 1997). In some contexts, two-yearolds also show similar understanding of others’ desires (Ma
& Xu, 2011). For example, children predict that a character
will be happy when she satisfies her desire to play with a
given toy, even when the participant has previously said she
would choose to play with a different toy over that toy
(Wellman & Woolley, 1991).
Given these discrepant findings, important work remains
in charting out how children develop an adult-like
understanding of preferences. In this paper, we present two
studies in which we specifically probe how preschoolers
reason about unconventional preferences--preferences that,
while likely not espoused by the child, nonetheless are not

Reasoning about others' preferences is an important aspect of
understanding the social world. Although there is some
evidence that young children reason appropriately about
others' discrepant preferences, there are reasons to suspect this
ability remains fragile through the preschool years. In
particular, we argue that the way preferences are expressed
may tap into humans' lifelong tendency toward naïve realism,
the belief that my way of seeing the world is the normative,
correct one. We present data demonstrating that tolerance for
unconventional opinions increases during the preschool years
but remains susceptible to influence by linguistic framing.
Keywords: theory of mind; preferences; naïve realism;
linguistic framing effects.

Introduction
Statements of preference are a profoundly strange
phenomenon. In principle, preferences are subjective:
although finding ice cream delicious may be normative and
all but universal, “ice cream is delicious” is not true or false
in the way that “ice cream is sugary” is true or “ice cream is
hot” is false. Yet statements of this form--describing a
subjective valuation as if it were an objective fact--are
widespread and remarkably unremarkable. Could talking
about preferences as if they were facts influence the way
people reason about preferences? We suggest that
preferences are a difficult concept to reason about (and
particularly susceptible to effects of framing) because they
hold a fundamentally different epistemic status from facts.
They require acknowledging that one’s own (often strongly
held) beliefs are not verifiably correct, and that even totally
opposite beliefs should be respected as valid. These
recognitions require sophisticated perspective taking skills,
which preschoolers notoriously lack. However, adults also
show similar biases, as the literature on naive realism
demonstrates (Robinson, Keltner, Ward, & Ross, 1995).
These observations lead us to ask: how do children reason
about preferences that differ from their own? Does the way
we talk about preferences impact their reasoning?
It is well documented that preschoolers begin passing
classic tests of false-belief understanding around age four
(see Wellman, Cross, & Watson, 2001, for a meta-analysis).
A prominent explanation of this shift is that children
develop the insight that the mind operates on representations
of the world, rather than veridical copies of the world. In
other words, for a pre-representational child, mental states
are taken as exactly reflecting the state of the world. One

603

simply false or mistaken in the way that facts can be. We
argue that achieving this understanding is an on-going
process through the preschool years. Our evidence suggests
that preschoolers’ understanding of the subjective nature of
preferences is fragile and easily disrupted.

Study 1
Participants
68 preschoolers from Bing Nursery School at Stanford
University participated. Twenty-three 3-to-5-year-old
children (12 boys) participated in a marked framing
condition. The mean age was 4 years 6 months. Forty-five
3-to-5-year-old children (21 boys) participated in an
unmarked framing condition. The mean age was 4 years 5
months.

Procedure
To evaluate how children understand unconventional
preferences, we developed a paradigm in which participants
were shown pictures of other children who were said to
have answered questions about familiar foods. Questions
either concerned factual properties, such as a food’s color or
texture, or subjective qualities, such as how appealing the
food is. All foods used for opinion questions were chosen to
be conventionally popular, desirable foods. Characters’
responses to opinion questions were either conventional or
unconventional (i.e., expressed a positive or negative
attitude towards a popular food). Responses to factual
questions were either true or false. This permitted us to
analyze how children treated conventional and
unconventional responses to opinion questions and to
compare their treatment of opinion questions with their
treatment of factual questions. Each child heard responses to
two examples of each of the four statement types (true and
false facts, conventional and unconventional opinions) for a
total of eight items.
To examine how framing might influence performance,
we manipulated how characters responded to opinion
questions. In an unmarked framing condition, responses
took the form “Ice cream is delicious” or “Ice cream is
yucky.” In a marked framing condition, responses took the
form “I like ice cream” or “I don’t like ice cream.” We
expected children to be more likely to reject an
unconventional opinion when it was unmarked than when it
was marked as an opinion with “I like.”
To assess children’s reactions to characters’ statements,
we directed four questions to participants after each
question and statement pair. First, children were asked to
explain why the character had made that statement (e.g.,
“Why did Martin say ice cream is delicious?”). Next,
children were asked if the character made a mistake and if
the character was “just being silly.” (These two questions
were designed to cover two of the most frequent categories
of explanations that adults gave in pilot work.) Finally,
children were shown a picture of another character who was
said to hold the opposite belief of the first character (i.e., to
hold a negative attitude when the first character held a

Figure 1: Summary of experimental design.
positive attitude or to hold a false belief when the first
character expressed a true belief, and vice versa). They were
then asked if that contrasting statement “could be right.” We
thus had three converging yes/no measures of whether
children deemed a statement acceptable or mistaken, as well
as an open-ended explanation of the characters’ beliefs.
Although we are primarily interested in children’s
judgments about opinion statements, including factual
questions allowed us a baseline estimate of how often
children would label as mistaken statements that adults
would also describe as mistakes, against which we could
compare children’s treatments of opinion statements.

Results: yes/no questions
For the three yes/no questions, we scored each response as
correct or incorrect as follows. True facts should be judged
as not a mistake and not silly; when the second character
expressed the opposite belief (i.e., a false fact), his response
should be judged as not right. False facts should be judged
as a mistake and as silly; when the second character
expressed the opposite belief (i.e., a true fact), his response
should be judged as right. Conventional and unconventional
opinions, on the other hand, should be judged the same way
as each other: as neither a mistake nor silly. When the
second character expressed the opposite opinion (whether
conventional or unconventional), their response should be
judged as right. To test for possible developmental changes,
we divided children into older and younger groups based on
the median age for each condition.
As a first analysis, we conducted a logit mixed model
using statement type, framing, and age (older or younger) to
predict correct responding. We found a significant three-way
interaction between statement type, framing, and median
age, b=-3.4, S.E.=1.5, z=-2.1, p=.04. To unpack this threeway interaction, we next analyzed each statement type
separately, examining effects of framing and age on
children’s performance.

604

True factual statements We first asked how children
treated true factual statements (e.g., “Milk is white”). A logit
mixed model using framing condition and age group to
predict correct responding to questions about true factual
statements showed a significant developmental difference
(b=2.4, z=2.4, p=.01). The effect of framing was nonsignificant, as expected, since the factual statements were
the same across framing conditions. This confirms that
children did not differ in their baseline responses to identical
statements of true facts across conditions.
To examine performance in a more fine-grained fashion,
we created composite scores for each participant by
summing the number of correct responses to all yes/no
questions for each statement type (e.g., true fact,
conventional opinion). The maximum possible score was 6
(three questions per two items for each statement type). In
the marked framing condition, both older and younger
children appropriately answered questions about true facts at
well above chance rates (older: M= 5.5 out of 6, SD=.52,
t(10)=16.2, p<.001; younger: M=4.3, SD=1.8, t(11)=2.5, p=.
03). However, as the logit model indicated, older children
performed significantly better, t(12.9)=2.2, p=.05. In the
unmarked framing condition, similar patterns emerged, with
both older (M=5.4, SD=1.4) and younger children (M=4.3,
SD=1.8) performing above chance rates, t(21)=8.1, p<.001
and t(22)=3.4, p=.003 respectively. As in the marked
framing condition, older children somewhat out-performed
younger children, t(41.1)=2.3, p=.03. Thus preschoolers
seem to appropriately answer questions about true facts,
judging that they are not mistakes at well above chance
rates.

pragmatics of asking whether a manifestly true fact (like
milk being white) is a mistake; it is plausible that younger
children answered “yes” to those questions due to some
uncertainty about the experimenter’s intentions. In any case,
these data provide robust evidence that children understand
the notion of mistaken facts, leading us to ask how they
apply these concepts to opinions.

False factual statements We then asked how children
treated false factual statements (e.g., “Milk is green”). A
logit mixed model using framing condition and age group to
predict correct responding to these questions showed neither
the main effect of age or of framing, nor their interaction,
reached significance. The non-significance of the effect of
framing was, again, expected, since factual statements were
identical across conditions.
On the composite measures, performance was strong for
all groups. Questions about false facts were answered
appropriately by older children in the marked framing
condition at a rate significantly above chance (M=5.2 out of
6, SD= 1.08), t(10)=6.7, p=<.001. Likewise, younger
children also answered appropriately at a rate that exceeded
chance (M=4.8 out of 6, SD=1.14), t(11)=5.32, p<.001.
Their overall performance was comparable to that seen for
the older children, t(21.0)=-.93, n.s.
In the unmarked framing condition, younger children
answered an average of 5.2 questions correctly (SD=1.0),
which exceeded the number expected by chance, t(22)=10.2,
p<.001. Similarly, older children answered an average of 5.3
questions correctly (SD=.98), again more than expected by
chance, t(21)=10.8, p<.001. Older children’s performance
was not significantly better than younger children’s,
t(43.0)=.18, n.s. It is not clear why older children would
out-perform younger children when questions were asked
about true facts but not about false facts. Anecdotally, we
have observed that some children are perplexed about the

Unconventional opinion statements A different picture
emerged when we analyzed preschoolers responses to
unconventional opinions (“I don't like ice cream” or “Ice
cream is yucky”). The logit mixed model predicting correct
responses with framing and age showed a marginal main
effect of framing but a significant interaction between
framing and age. For younger children, framing had little
effect: performance was weak in both framing conditions. In
the marked framing condition, younger children correctly
answered only 1.6 of the 6 questions about unconventional
opinions (SD=2.2), a rate significantly below chance,
t(11)=-2.2, p=.05. In the unmarked framing condition,
younger children answered an average of just .70 questions
correctly (SD=.93), again well fewer than expected by
chance, t(22)=-11.0, p<.001.
Older children showed a relatively strong understanding
of unconventional opinions in the marked framing condition
(at least compared to younger children), answering an
average of 3.7 correctly (SD=1.5). However, unlike for all
other statement types, this success rate did not differ from
chance, t(10)=1.6, n.s. Older children’s performance was,
however, significantly better than younger children’s,
t(19.4)=-2.8, p=.01. In the unmarked framing condition,
performance dropped dramatically for older children. Older
children answered an average of only .59 questions correctly
(SD=.80), again fewer than expected by chance,
t(21)=-14.2, p<.001. The difference between conditions was
highly significant for older children, t(12.9)=6.5, p<.001.

Conventional opinion statements Preschoolers' treatment
of conventional opinions (“I like ice cream” or “Ice cream is
delicious”) was similar to their treatment of true facts. A
logit mixed model using framing condition and age group to
predict correct responding to questions about conventional
opinion statements showed neither the main effect of age or
of framing, nor their interaction, reached significance. When
asked about conventional opinions, preschoolers showed a
high degree of acceptance without major developmental
differences or strong influences of framing. In the marked
framing condition, younger children correctly answered
these questions at above-chance rates (M=4.7, SD=1.78),
t(11)=3.25, p=.008, as did older children (M=4.8 out of 6,
SD=1.33), t(10)=4.54, p=.001. The mean number of
questions answered correctly did not differ by age group,
t(20.2)=-.23, n.s.
In the unmarked framing condition, younger children
answered an average of 4.5 questions correctly (SD=1.5),
more than expected by chance, t(22)=5.0, p<.001. Likewise,
older children correctly answered an average of 5.0
questions correctly, also more than expected by chance,
t(21)=6.5, p<.001. Performance did not differ by age groups
on questions about conventional opinions.

605

Unmarked
Marked

Figure 2: Summary of performance by statement type, condition, and age.
Performance in the unmarked framing condition was
equally poor for both age groups, t(42.5)=.41, n.s.
Taken together, these data indicate that younger children
did not answer our questions about unconventional opinions
correctly in either framing condition. Older children did
better than younger children in the marked framing
condition, although not as well as they had done with
questions about facts or conventional opinions. However,
framing had a pronounced impact on how older children
reasoned about unconventional opinions, reducing their
performance to the same level as was seen for younger
children.

whether they indicated agreement or disagreement with the
character’s statement. Below, we report the mean number of
times children disagreed with each statement type. There
were two trials featuring each statement type, so the
maximum number of disagreements is two. Unlike with the
yes/no questions, no main effects of framing or age were
found, but for consistency’s sake we present means broken
down by those variables.
True factual statements Disagreements were rare in
response to true factual statements. Younger children in the
unmarked framing condition expressed a mean of .25
disagreements, while no disagreements were seen for older
children in the unmarked framing condition or in either age
group in the marked framing condition.

Results: open-ended explanations
While the yes/no questions allow us one way of probing
children’s reasoning about unconventional opinions, there
are concerns in the literature that such explicit measures
might underestimate children’s ability to reason in a
sophisticated, adult-like fashion about others’ opinions
(Banerjee et al., 2007). Exploring children’s open-ended
explanations for why characters might respond with an
unconventional opinion provides a less constrained window
into children’s spontaneous reactions to unconventional
opinions.
It is worth noting that children’s “explanations”
frequently did not constitute what an adult would call an
explanation. Frequently, they were simply comments on or
responses to what the character had said. Whatever we call
them, though, these comments provide a useful probe. To
analyze these data, we coded children’s responses as to

False factual statements Disagreements were much more
frequent in response to false factual statements. In the
marked framing condition, younger children disagreed an
average of 1.2 times, while older children disagreed an
average of 1.1 times. In the unmarked framing condition,
younger children disagreed an average of 1.0 times, while
older children disagreed an average of 1.2 times Thus across
age groups and framing, children expressed disagreement
with false facts on more than half of trials. This may not
seem terrifically high, but it is worth reiterating that children
were asked to explain why the character had made their
statement. Disagreements then weren’t particularly good
answers for the question that had been posed.

606

Conventional opinions In the marked framing condition,
only one younger child ever disagreed, and did so on only
one trial. Similarly, in the unmarked framing condition, a
total of one disagreement was recorded among younger
children and one among older children.

One possibility, then, is children's relatively poor
understanding of unconventional opinions in study one is
that our framings made characters' preferences sound
immutable and permanent. If children associate these
features with facts but not with desires, children might
show themselves to be more tolerant of unconventional
opinions if the framing emphasized the transient nature of
the unconventional opinion. Below, we present work in
progress that tests this possibility by implementing a “want”
framing.

Unconventional opinions. In the marked framing
condition, younger children disagreed on an average of .75
trials, while older children disagreed on an average of only .
25 trials. In contrast, in the unmarked framing condition,
younger children disagreed on an average of .85 trials, while
older children disagreed on an average of .68 trials.
To test whether preschoolers’ tendency to disagree
differed across statement types, we conducted a logit mixed
model using statement type to predict whether the child
disagreed on a trial. Contrasts were specified to treat the
unconventional opinion as the baseline. Children were
significantly less likely to disagree with true factual
statements (b=-3.2, z=-5.5, p<.001) and conventional
opinions (b=-4.1, z=-5.2, p<.001) than they were to disagree
with unconventional opinions. However, children were more
likely to disagree with false factual statements than with
unconventional opinions (b=1.5, z=4.7, p<.001).
These data present a somewhat different picture from that
observed with the yes/no questions. To begin with, age and
and framing did not exert significant influences on whether
children disagreed with statements. Moreover, although
children disagreed with unconventional opinions relatively
often, they did not disagree with unconventional opinions as
often as they did with false facts. Thus, whereas the yes/no
data might lead us to suggest that preschoolers--especially
younger ones--robustly fail to understand that opinions
differ from facts in that even unconventional opinions are
not wrong, our open-ended explanations suggest that
preschoolers’ understanding is somewhat more nuanced and
that they do not entirely conflate facts and opinions.

Procedure
The procedure was identical to that of Study 1, except
opinion statements were presented using a “want” framing
instead of marking them with “I like” or not marking them.
Thus, characters who expressed a conventional opinion said,
for example, “I want some ice cream” while characters who
expressed an unconventional opinion said, for example, “I
don't want some ice cream.”

Results
Data collection is on-going. However, in the condition of
interest, unconventional opinions, it is clear that this “want”
manipulation has not improved performance. The modal
number of correct responses is zero; the maximum number
of correct responses thus far is three out of six. This pattern
is virtually indistinguishable from that seen for the
unmarked condition reported above.
We do not wish to over-interpret this preliminary data.
Nonetheless, the performance of children in this pilot
indicates that using a want framing is no magic bullet.
Using language that emphasizes that an unconventional
desire might be temporary does not seem to radically
improve children's performance.

General Discussion

Study 2

Much has been made of quite young children's ability to
reason about preferences in several different circumstances.
There is no denying that children's appreciation of others'
mental lives is far richer than was once thought, but the data
we present here underscore that developing a theory of mind
is a complex and protracted process. In our samples, even
older four-year-olds—who, the literature suggests, would
pass traditional tests of false-belief understanding—rejected
unconventional opinions as mistaken or silly, at least when
those opinions were expressed using factual-sounding
language.
Given that toddlers seem able to respond appropriately to
desires they do not share, why would our substantially older
preschoolers persist in rejecting unconventional
preferences? The possibility remains that reasoning about
enduring, temporally unbounded likes or dislikes might be
more demanding than reasoning about a desire in a specific
situation. Our data collected thus far, however, suggests that
a very simple change to the framing of characters' desires—
using the stem “I want” instead of “I like”-- is not enough to
render preschoolers accepting of unusual wants. It is
premature to jump to conclusions, of course. A more explicit

An important feature of both the framings that we have used
above is that they articulate properties of long duration. If
ice cream is delicious, it is always delicious, not merely
delicious right now. Likewise, if I like ice cream, the
suggestion is that I like ice cream in general, not just right
now. This permanence (or at least longevity) is very
characteristic of facts. In contrast, desires are frequently
temporary; they disappear when they have been satisfied.
Importantly, even if I like ice cream or agree that ice cream
is delicious, I may not always want ice cream, right now. In
the literature reviewed above, preferences have always been
conceptualized or demonstrated in terms of a situationspecific want. For example, Wellman and Woolley (1991)
probe 2-year-olds' understanding of discrepant desires by
asking participants which of two equally desirable activities
they would want to engage in and saying the character
wanted to do the other. This situation of choosing between
two attractive options and temporarily prioritizing one is
likely to be familiar even to 2-year-olds, and likely poses
weaker demands on children's incipient theory of mind
abilities.

607

change to the framing to emphasize the temporariness of the
desire might have a greater impact.
It may also be more difficult for preschoolers to reason
about discrepant preferences when the preferences are
highly surprising. In the existing literature, children were
asked to reason about comparably attractive options
(Wellman & Woolley, 1991). In these cases, children in fact
probably like both alternatives but picked one over the other
on that occasion. It might not be difficult to recognize that
someone might prefer to go to the park and someone else to
the beach on a given occasion. Children also succeed on
relatively unfamiliar items (Ma and Xu, 2011), where they
may have only a weak opinion of their own.
Moreover, children are highly attuned to statistical
information, as work in a broad array of domains
demonstrates (Gergely et al., 2007; Kushnir, Xu, &
Wellman, 2010; Ma & Xu, 2011; Saffran, Aslin, & Newport,
1996). Liking for ice cream is likely highly overlearned,
perhaps so much so that children cannot conceive of
someone disliking it. Such a sensitivity to statistical
regularities could interact with a non-representational theory
of mind, reinforcing the notion that some mental states are
veridical copies of the world itself.
Importantly, adults show analogous difficulties with
reasoning about preferences and opinions in some
circumstances. Ross, Greene, & House (1977) coined the
term “false consensus effect” to describe the robust bias in
adults to assume that more people will endorse a belief
when the participant also endorses that belief. This is of
course a more subtle phenomenon than outright rejecting
opinions that do not concord with one's own. Nonetheless,
many of the explanations that have been offered to explain
the false consensus effect in adults may shed light on
children's behavior. For example, adults using anchoring
and adjustment heuristics, whereby a person makes an initial
prediction about others' behavior based on one's own
behavior and then adjusts for others' idiosyncrasies, tend to
systematically under-adjust (Epley & Gilovich, 2006). If
children are prone to egocentrism, the failure to adjust
sufficiently for differences among people might be
especially pronounced.
Likewise, motivational effects have been posited to
explain adults' false consensus effects: adults simply want to
be in the mainstream, and assuming others agree with them
makes them feel good (Marks & Miller, 1987). The idea of
social norms is becoming especially salient in the preschool
years (Nucci & Turiel, 1978), and children may well view
liking the right foods as one such norm. Indeed, liking the
right foods is an important social signal for adults (e.g.,
eating caviar or eating french-fries). Not wanting the right
foods may thus be a mistake in preschoolers' eyes in a social
sense that differs from the way they apply that term to false
facts.
These considerations illustrate the range of cognitive
factors that underpin reasoning about preferences. Even as
children's understanding of mental lives increases through
the preschool years, many of the factors that lead to naïve
realism in adults render children's understanding of
unconventional preferences susceptible to the influence of
linguistic framing. The robustness with which children

reject unconventional preferences provides a compelling
demonstration of the challenges children face in learning to
reason about the social world in an adult-like fashion.

References
Banerjee, R., Yuill, N., Larson, C., Easton, K., Robinson, E.,
& Rowley, M. (2007). Children’s differentiation between
beliefs about matters of fact and matters of opinion.
Developmental Psychology, 43(5), 1084–96.
Epley, N., & Gilovich, T. (2006). The anchoring-andadjustment heuristic: Why the adjustments are
insufficient. Psychological Science, 17(4), 311–318.
Gergely, G., Egyed, K., & Király, I. (2007). On pedagogy.
Developmental Science, 10(1), 139–46.
Kushnir, T., Xu, F., & Wellman, H. M. (2010). Young
children use statistical sampling to infer the preferences
of other people. Psychological science, 21(8), 1134–40.
Ma, L., & Xu, F. (2011). Young children’s use of statistical
sampling evidence to infer the subjectivity of preferences.
Cognition, 120(3), 403–11.
Marks, G., & Miller, N. (1987). Ten years of research on the
false-consensus effect: An empirical and theoretical
review. Psychological Bulletin, 102(1), 72–90.
Nucci, L. P., & Turiel, E. (1978). Social interactions and the
development of social concepts in preschool children.
Child Development, 49(2), 400–407.
Repacholi, B. M., & Gopnik, A. (1997). Early reasoning
about desires: Evidence from 14- and 18-month-olds.
Developmental Psychology, 33(1), 12–21. doi:
10.1037/0012-1649.33.1.12
Robinson, R. J., Keltner, D., Ward, A., & Ross, L. (1995).
Actual versus assumed differences in construal: “Naive
realism” in intergroup perception and conflict. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 68(3), 404–417.
Ross, L., Greene, D., & House, P. (1977). The “false
consensus effect”: An egocentric bias in social perception
and attribution processes. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 13(3), 279–301.
Saffran, J. R., Aslin, R. N., & Newport, E. L. (1996).
Statistical learning by 8-month-old infants. Science,
274(5294), 1926–1928.
Wellman, H. M., Cross, D., & Watson, J. (2001). Metaanalysis of theory-of-mind development: The truth about
false belief. Child Development, 72(3), 655–84.
Wellman, H. M., & Woolley, J. D. (1990). From simple
desires to ordinary beliefs: The early development of
everyday psychology. Cognition, 35, 245–275.

608

