UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Preschoolers’ ability to navigate communicative interactions in guiding their inductive
inferences

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/25c0g5hx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Butler, Lucas
Markman, Ellen

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Preschoolers’ ability to navigate communicative interactions in guiding their
inductive inferences
Lucas P. Butler (lucas_butler@eva.mpg.de)1,2 & Ellen M. Markman (markman@stanford.edu)2
1

Department of Developmental and Comparative Psychology
Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology
Deutscher Platz 6, 04103 Leipzig, Germany
2

Department of Psychology, Stanford University
Jordan Hall, Building 420, 450 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305 USA

Abstract

2011; Gelman, Star, and Flukes 2002; Hollander, Gelman,
& Raman, 2009), there are many potential non-linguistic
contexts in which children observe others’ actions and must
evaluate whether the information those actions produce is
generic. How do children carry out this process?
Previous research with infants suggests that even infants
are sensitive to cues that someone is deliberately
communicating information for their benefit (see Cisbra,
2010), and that this sensitivity appears to change how
infants process that information. Specifically, they appear to
encode information conveyed communicatively as more
kind-relevant and stable than information produced noncommunicatively (Gergely, Egyed, & Király, 2007; Futó,
Téglás, Csibra, & Gergely, 2010; Yoon, Johnson, and
Csibra, 2008). Does this early sensitivity to communicative
cues also play a role in older children’s ability to assess
whether information is generic?
In recent research, Butler and Markman (2012)
demonstrated that by age 4 children utilize cues that
someone is deliberately communicating information for
their benefit to guide such inductive inferences. Three- and
4-year- old children were first taught a label (“blicket”) for a
novel object. Children then observed perceptually identical
evidence that this object was magnetic, but produced with
subtly different actions: the experimenter accidentally used
the object as a magnet; did so intentionally; or did so while
conveying that they were acting communicatively and
pedagogically for the child’s benefit.
Importantly, after being taught the object’s name, children
engaged in a short, unrelated distractor task. This was done
in an attempt to create a clear break between the
pedagogical word-learning phase and the experimental
manipulation so that children would not interpret every
action as meant “for them,” simply because the adult had
previously been teaching them something about this kind.
After seeing this evidence, children were given 10
additional blickets that were identical, but which upon
exploration turned out not to be magnetic. To assess the
strength of children’s inductive inferences, we measured
their continued exploration of the inert objects when they
discovered that they failed to have the novel property (after
Schulz, Standing, & Bonawitz, 2008): specifically how long
and how many attempts children made to try get the inert

Evaluating whether information is generalizable, essential
knowledge about a novel category is a critical component of
conceptual development. In previous work (Butler &
Markman, 2012) 4-year-old children were able to use their
understanding of whether information was explicitly
communicated for their benefit to guide such reasoning, while
3-year-olds were not. In two experiments, we further
investigate this finding. Four-year-olds were adept at
navigating pedagogical interactions, judiciously identifying
which specific actions in an ongoing interaction were meant
as communicative demonstrations for their benefit, while 3year-olds did not distinguish between the manners of
demonstration even in a simpler context. Taken together,
these experiments illustrate that this powerful learning
mechanism for facilitating children’s conceptual development
is under construction during the preschool years.
Keywords:
Social
cognition;
inductive
generalization; pedagogy; communication.

inference;

Introduction
A foundational developmental process is the acquisition of
generic knowledge about kinds and categories that supports
the construction of a coherent conceptual understanding of
the world (Gelman, 2003; Gelman & Wellman, 1991; Keil,
1989; Markman, 1989). But acquiring such knowledge often
requires making inductive inferences on the basis of limited
information. For example, imagine that a person learns a
new fact about an individual animal, say that a bird has a
particular shape of feather. Should this person infer that all
birds of this kind have similar feathers? That all birds have
similar feathers? Or alternatively, that these feathers are
unusual and idiosyncratic to only this individual, or to a
limited set of related birds? One could arguably make each
of these generalizations with equal legitimacy based on the
given evidence (cf., Goodman, 1965).
Determining the scope of a generalization is a challenge
for young children, who experience a flood of new
information and must rapidly construct a conceptual
framework for understanding the world (Lopez, Gelman,
Gutheil, & Smith, 1992). Although in many cases children
can tackle this problem by relying on linguistic cues that
mark generic knowledge (e.g., Cimpian & Markman, 2009,

263

blickets to pick up paperclips. This persistence in the face
of such negative evidence is an index of how strongly
children inferred that the property should generalize.
Four-year-olds showed significantly more such
exploration in the pedagogical condition, suggesting they
made stronger inductive generalizations about the property
when it was demonstrated communicatively. So by age 4
preschoolers are able to use communicative cues to guide
their reasoning about whether information represents
generic knowledge about a kind. Interestingly, 3-year-olds
also based their inferences on the intentions of the adult, but
did so purely on the basis of whether the evidence was
produced intentionally rather than accidentally. That is, 3
year olds treated intentional and pedagogical actions as
warranting similarly strong inferences, more so than an
accidental action. Thus there appears to be a developmental
difference in how children identify and make use of
communicative acts in guiding their inductive inferences.
This developmental difference is intriguing. It seems
unlikely that 3-year-old children fail to recognize the
communicative cues that signal that an action is meant for
their benefit. Indeed, infants as young as 10 months appear
to recognize such cues, and having information conveyed
with those communicative cues does appear to impact how
they treat new information. (Csibra, 2010; Csibra &
Gergely, 2009). The hypothesis we consider here is whether
there may be a developmental difference in the ability to
assess, in real time, which actions within a given context are
pedagogical. Even within a pedagogical interaction adults
may perform a number of actions that are not meant to carry
meaningful information, but which could potentially be
misinterpreted as acts of teaching. Imagine that a child is
watching her mother or father preparing a snack. The adult
is interacting with a number of kitchen tools, occasionally
interrupting an action to attend to a forgotten item or
ingredient, and then returning to the task at hand. In such a
dynamic, flowing context, if a child is going to utilize her
sensitivity to whether or not an action is meant for her, she
needs to be able to identify which actions are truly meant as
demonstrations, and which are merely incidental,
unnecessary, or part of a different embedded event.
The current research aims to shed initial light on this
issue, taking two complementary approaches. First, we ask
what factors might play a role in driving the effect seen
previously in older children. How best can we characterize 4
year olds’ use of communicative cues to guide their
inferences, and how nuanced is this learning mechanism?
Second, what might be preventing younger children from
using this distinction to guide their inferences? Does a
manipulation that might make it easier for children to draw
the distinction between the conditions reveal a similar
pattern of inferences at a younger age?

discriminating those actions that are truly meant for their
learning benefit from those that are not.
As discussed earlier, in Butler and Markman’s (2012)
task, in which children learned that an object was called a
“blicket,” and then saw that it was magnetic, they were
given an unrelated distractor task between the word learning
and evidence phases, in an attempt to distance the
pedagogical teaching of the word from the experimental
manipulation of how the key evidence was produced. Thus
the distractor task was meant to provide a clear interruption
of the ongoing pedagogical interaction, potentially implying
that the subsequent actions were not necessarily meant for
the child’s benefit, unless they were clearly marked as
communicative acts. This opens up a question about the
nature of 4-year-olds’ ability to selectively use
communicative cues to guide their inferences about novel
information. How adept are they at identifying an action
meant for their benefit when the target action is embedded
within a still-continuing pedagogical interaction?

Method
The procedure for Experiment 1 was closely modeled after
Butler and Markman (2012), in which children were
presented with evidence that a novel object had a novel
function, in one of three subtly different ways:
communicatively, intentionally, or accidentally. In order to
directly address the question of how adept 4-year-olds are at
applying their sensitivity to communicative cues in an
ongoing context, we manipulated the the position of the
distractor task within the continuous stream of events (see
Figure 1), thus varying whether or not the ongoing
pedagogical interaction was clearly interrupted prior to the
evidence phase. If 4-year-olds are truly conducting a
nuanced, moment-by-moment analysis of an adult’s
communicative intentions at each particular point in time,
they may distinguish between pedagogical and intentional
actions even within an ongoing pedagogical interaction,
regardless of the position of the distractor task.
Materials The materials in Experiment 1 were 11 PVC
pipes, 5 cm in diameter and 7.5 cm tall. The active object
had a noisemaker inside that made an animal noise when it
was flipped upside down. The 10 inert objects had several
pebbles taped to the inside of the PVC piping in order to
give them an equivalent weight and feel as the active object.
All 11 objects were covered with blue duct tape, on one end
and around the sides, and had yellow duct tape covering one
end. The objects were perceptually indistinguishable.

Experiment 1
In utilizing their sensitivity to communicative cues to
guide their inductive inference, children need to be able to
do so while navigating ongoing interactions with adults,

264

Participants The participants were 96 children from a
university preschool (Mage = 4 years, 8 months). An
additional 9 children were excluded because of
experimenter error, or because they did not attend to or
finish the procedure. Participants were randomly assigned to
one of two orders and three experimental conditions, with
the constraint that all six condition-order groups were
matched for gender and age.

amount of time children spent exploring the inert objects,
and how many times they attempted to elicit the property
from those inert objects.
Children’s exploration violated assumptions of normality
and homogeneity of variance. Thus we used non-parametric
Mann-Whitney tests to conduct pairwise comparisons
between conditions, and ordinal logistic regressions (see
Cimpian & Cadena, 2010; Cimpian & Markman, 2009) to
assess the overall impact of condition and order.

Procedure The procedure was modeled after that used in
Butler and Markman (2012) and described above, but the
order of the procedure was manipulated (see Figure 1). In
the interruption order, the sequence of events was identical
to that used previously. The experimenter brought out the
target object and four distractor objects, and proceeded to
teach the child a novel word (“femo”) for the target object.
All children successfully picked out the target object when
asked for it by name on two successive trials. The
experimenter then said, “Now let’s do something really fun!
We can make a boat out of colored paper!” and then
proceeded with the distractor task. In the no interruption
order, the placement of the word learning and distractor
phases was switched. Children first participated in the boatmaking task as a warm-up game. The experimenter then
brought out the target object and the four distractors and
conducted the word learning procedure. In both orders, after
the second phase of the procedure the experimenter then
said, “I’m going to put a few of my things away” and
proceeded to put away each of the distractor objects, finally
picking up the target object.
In the evidence phase, the experimenter moved the object
from one hand into the other, flipping it upside down in the
process and placing it yellow-side-down on the table, all in
one continuous action. This action was identical in the
pedagogical and intentional conditions, except that in the
pedagogical condition the experimenter made eye contact
with the child and said, “Look, watch this.” The action in
the accidental condition was nearly identical, but the
experimenter appeared to lose her grip on the object as she
was picking it up and moving it, saying, “Oops!” and then
appeared to catch it with her other hand and place it on the
table. In all three conditions the experimenter then said,
“Wow!” after placing the object on the table.

Results
In order to assess the overall impact of condition and order
on children’s exploration, we conducted ordinal logistic
regressions (OLR) on our two principal measures
exploration (number of attempts to elicit the property from
the inert objects and time exploring the inert objects), with
condition and order as predictors. There was a significant
effect of condition on both number of attempts (Wald χ2 =
16.06, p < 0.001) and time exploring (Wald χ2 = 16.67, p <
0.001). There was no effect of order of the distractor task on
number of attempts (Wald χ2 = .064, p = .801), nor was
their an interaction between order and condition (Wald χ2 =
.345, p = .841). There was a marginal effect of order on time
exploring (Wald χ2 = 3.52, p = .061), but there was no
interaction between order and condition (Wald χ2 = .255, p
=.880). Overall, these analyses suggest that the experimental
condition (pedagogical, intentional, or accidental) had a
significant effect on 4 year olds’ exploration, and that while
the order might have had an effect, it did not alter the effect
of condition. To explore these results further, we now
compare the results across condition for each order.
Interruption Order The patterns of exploration across
conditions in the interruption order clearly replicated the
findings of Butler and Markman (2012).
Four-year-olds made significantly more attempts to elicit
the property from the inert objects in the pedagogical
condition (Mpedagogical = 9.37, SD = 7.20) than in either the
intentional (Mintentional = 2.69, SD = 3.77; Mann-Whitney Z =
3.07, p = .002) or accidental (Maccidental = 3.94, SD = 5.20;
Mann-Whitney Z = 2.38, p = .017) conditions (see Figure
2). There was no difference between the intentional and
accidental conditions (Mann-Whitney Z = .218, p = .828).

Mean number of attempts

16

12

8

Pedagogical
Intentional
Accidental

4

0

Figure 1: Overview of task structure in the two orders of
Experiment 1.

Figure 2: Mean number of attempts in each condition in the
interruption order of Experiment 1. N = 64 (16 per
condition). Error bars represent +/- 1 SEM.

Coding & Data Analysis Two independent judges watched
only the exploration phase of each video, and coded both the

265

modulated the strength of their inductive generalizations on
the basis of whether or not the experimenter explicitly
demonstrated that action for their benefit. This suggests that
4-year-olds’ inferences are driven a moment-by-moment
analysis of whether or not each individual action or series of
actions is meant for them.
A judicious application of this learning mechanism is
important for the accuracy of young children’s developing
conceptual representations. If children simply made a broad
inference about whether an adult is currently teaching them
or not, they might be misled about the importance of various
pieces of information that they might witness in such
contexts. If children did not engage in a moment-bymoment analysis of which actions were deliberately meant
for them, they might mistakenly generalize even an
incidental action action as what one does with this kind of
object, even though in fact this is an idiosyncratic, unusual
way to use this kind of object. Simply put, it is helpful for
children to use their understanding of others’
communicative intentions to guide the inferences if they can
do so selectively. The results of this experiment suggest
that, at least by age 4, children appear to be capable of using
communicative cues to guard against such over
interpretation, ensuring that the information that does make
it into their representations is likely to be important, generic
information about the kind.

Four-year-olds also spent significantly longer exploring
the inert objects in the pedagogical condition (Mpedagogical =
13.94 s, SD = 10.54) than in either the intentional (Mintentional
= 3.87 s, SD = 5.05; Mann-Whitney Z = 2.97, p = .003) or
accidental (Maccidental = 5.44 s, SD = 9.03; Mann-Whitney Z
= 2.59, p = .010) conditions. There was no difference
between the intentional and accidental conditions (MannWhitney Z = .276, p = .783).
No-Interruption Order Despite the marginal overall effect
of order on time exploring seen in the OLR analyses, the
patterns of exploration by children who saw the distractor
first, and then learned the word, followed immediately by
the evidence phase with no interruption, were nearly
identical to those who saw a clear interruption between
these phases.
Four-year-olds made significantly more attempts to elicit
the property from the inert blickets in the pedagogical
condition (Mpedagogical = 10.37, SD = 10.12) than in either the
intentional (Mintentional = 3.94, SD = 4.22; Mann-Whitney Z =
1.97, p = .048) or accidental (Maccidental = 3.67, SD = 4.98;
Mann-Whitney Z = 2.07, p = .038) conditions (see Figure
3). There was no difference between the intentional and
accidental conditions (Mann-Whitney Z = .270, p = .787).

Mean number of attempts

16

Experiment 2
12

8

The results of Experiment 1 shed light on the sophistication
of 4-year-olds’ ability to navigate ongoing interactions in
order to identify which actions are meant as communicative
acts for their benefit, and thus what information ought to be
taken as important and generalizable. Even when children
have to conduct a more nuanced moment-by-moment
analysis of the interaction, 4-year-olds show a consistent
pattern of making stronger inferences about evidence that is
demonstrated communicatively for their benefit.
This contrasts with the findings with 3-year-olds from
Butler and Markman (2012). In three experiments, 3-yearolds consistently showed an analogous effect for
pedagogical demonstration compared to seeing the same
action done accidentally. However, 3-year-olds did not
distinguish between the pedagogical and intentional actions,
making similarly strong inferences in both conditions.
What might account for this developmental difference?
Moreover, as we have suggested this inference requires that
children not only recognize that an action is for them, but
have to be able to navigate an ongoing interaction, assessing
moment-by-moment whether or not particular actions are
indeed meant for them, even when they occur within a
communicative context. If younger children struggle with
identifying individual pedagogical actions within an
overarching stream of actions, it might take a more explicit
demarcation of the specific actions that produce the relevant
evidence in order to elicit the pattern of reasoning seen in
older children.

Pedagogical
Intentional
Accidental

4

0

Figure 3: Mean number of attempts in each condition in
the no interruption order of Experiment 1. N = 64 (16 per
condition). Error bars represent +/- 1 SEM.
Four-year-olds also spent significantly longer exploring
the inert blickets in the pedagogical condition (Mpedagogical =
24.50 s, SD = 20.65) than in either the intentional (Mintentional
= 10.31 s, SD = 11.72; Mann-Whitney Z = 2.11, p = .035) or
accidental (Maccidental = 8.07 s, SD = 9.92; Mann-Whitney Z
= 2.35, p = .019) conditions. There was no difference
between the intentional and accidental conditions (MannWhitney Z = .353, p = .724).

Discussion
The results of Experiment 1 help clarify how older
preschoolers use communicative cues to guide their
inductive inferences. Regardless of whether or not they were
given a clear interruption in the overarching pedagogical
interaction, a deliberate break between engaging in an
overarching pedagogical interaction and seeing the target
action producing the evidence, children selectively

266

In Experiment 2, we take a first step at asking whether
presenting this manipulation in a context that might make it
easier for children to navigate the ongoing interaction and
identify which actions are truly made for their benefit, might
lead 3-year-olds to be more successful at selectively using
communicative cues to guide their inferences.

color for 60 s while she pretended to write something down,
not making eye contact or otherwise engaging with the child
during this distractor task. The experimenter then said “I’m
going to put these away” and began to clean up each of the
distractor objects, finally picking up the target object and
using the object to magnetically pick up the paperclips. This
evidence was produced one of two three subtly different
ways, as in Experiment 1: pedagogically or intentionally
(but non-communicatively). As our main interest was in
whether these younger children would distinguish between
the pedagogical and intentional conditions (and not whether
patterns of exploration in these two conditions would differ
from the accidental condition), only these two conditions
were run..
The key change from previous studies was the use of this
non-interactive distractor task. This was done as an attempt
to provide children with a clearer interruption in the ongoing
pedagogical interaction. If 3-year-olds’ failure to distinguish
between the intentional and pedagogical conditions in
previous studies was due to an overall sense of being in a
pedagogical interaction, this change might help them
disengage from this and discriminate whether or not the
target action is truly meant as an act of communication.

Method
Recall that in Experiment 1, we investigated the importance
of the distractor task in potentially facilitating children’s
ability to navigate the ongoing interaction and identify
which actions were and were not meant for them. For older
children this did not seem to have any tangible impact—
even without any clear interruption between the word
learning and evidence phases, 4-year-olds were readily able
to selectively use the communicatively demonstrated
evidence to make a stronger inference about the novel
property. But this interruption seems like a logical place to
start in asking whether manipulating the complexity of the
context might help facilitate 3-year-olds’ ability to engage
in the same inference process.
In Experiment 2, we attempted to boost the clarity of the
break provided by the distractor task by making it clearly
non-pedagogical, non-communicative, and even noninteractive. We hypothesized that 3-year-olds have a more
global sense of whether or not they are engaged in a
pedagogical interaction, and that this may be leading them
to over interpret everything that occurs in this context as
likely pedagogical unless otherwise marked. If so, then
establishing a clearer break between the pedagogical word
learning and the evidence phase might help them distinguish
between the pedagogical and intentional actions.

Results
Replicating the findings from Butler & Markman (2012),
3-year-olds did not appear to make any distinction between
the pedagogical and intentional conditions. Children were
equally likely to explore the inert objects in both the
pedagogical (8 children, 75%) and intentional (7 children,
58%). Moreover, children made similar numbers of attempts
to elicit the property form the inert objects in both the
pedagogical (Mpedagogical = 3.17, SD = 3.49) and intentional
(Mintentional = 4.08, SD = 4.80, Mann Whitney Z = .240, p =
.810). Children also spent a similar amount of time
exploring the inert objects in both the pedagogical
(Mpedagogical = 8.67 s, SD = 10.31) and intentional (Mintentional
= 8.42 s, SD = 11.76, Mann Whitney Z = .090, p = .928).

Materials Having established in Experiment 1 that previous
findings were not an artifact of the materials used in those
studies, in Experiment 2 we returned to using materials
identical to those used in Butler and Markman (2012): 1
target magnetic object, 10 identical inert objects, and metal
paperclips.

Discussion

Participants The participants were an additional 24
children from a university preschool (Mage = 3 years, 5
months). Participants were randomly assigned to one of two
experimental conditions (Pedagogical or Intentional), with
the constraint that the conditions be equated for gender and
age.

Providing younger children with a clearer break between
the pedagogical word learning and evidence phases did not
facilitate their ability to selectively use communicative cues
to guide their inferences. Even when we had a 60 s break in
which the experimenter did not interact with the children,
these children still failed to distinguish the pedagogical
demonstration and the intentional, but non-pedagogical,
action, making similarly strong inferences in both cases.
Although we cannot compare children’s inferences in these
conditions to an accidental condition, across three studies in
Butler & Markman (2012), 3-year-olds consistently
distinguished between intentional or pedagogical and
accidental conditions, and there is little reason to expect
them not to do so in this experiment. Moreover, the key
point for our conclusion is that children failed to distinguish
between a pedagogical and identical, but non-pedagogical,
action, even given a clearer break.

Procedure As in Butler & Markman (2012) and the
Interruption order of Experiment 1, children were first
explicitly taught a label for the target object. After children
were taught the novel word and had successfully indicated
the target object on two successive trials, the experimenter
brought out the paperclips, colored pencils, and a sheet of
paper with a simple triangle outline on it, and said, ““And
here’s a picture to color! Why don’t pick out your favorite
color to color the triangle with, and then I can write your
name on your picture!” The experimenter then let the child

267

However, it should be noted that there was still an
overarching pedagogical context. That is, children still came
to the room with a knowledgeable adult and engaged in a
brief pedagogical interaction with them. If the distinction
between pedagogical and intentional is more global for
these younger children, happening on the level of the
overarching context rather than moment-by-moment
actions, this may explain why having the ongoing
pedagogical interaction interrupted by a clearly noncommunicative, non-interactive distractor task was not
enough to enable them to fully disengage from the
pedagogical expectation and evaluate whether the individual
instrumental action was deliberately done for their benefit.

members of the Markman Lab for helpful discussion of this
work.

References
Butler, L. P., & Markman, E. M. (2012). Preschoolers use
intentional and pedagogical cues to guide inductive
inferences and exploration. Child Development, 83, 14161428.
Cimpian, A., & Markman, E. M. (2009). Information
learned from generic language becomes central to
children’s biological concepts: Evidence from their openended explanations. Cognition, 113, 14-25.
Cimpian, A., & Markman, E. M. (2011). The
generic/nongeneric distinction influences how children
interpret new information about social others. Child
Development, 82, 471-492.
Csibra, G. (2010). Recognizing communicative intentions in
infancy. Mind & Language, 25, 141-168.
Csibra, G., & Gergely, G. (2009). Natural pedagogy. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 13, 148-153.
Futó, J., Téglás, E., Csibra, G., & Gergely, G. (2010).
Communicative Function Demonstration induces kindbased artifact representation in preverbal infants.
Cognition, 117, 1-8.
Gelman, S. A. (2003). The essential child: Origins of
essentialism in everyday thought. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Gelman, S. A., Star, J., & Flukes, J. (2002). Children’s use
of generics in inductive inferences. Journal of Cognition
and Development, 3, 179-199.
Gelman, S. A., & Wellman, H. M. (1991). Insides and
essences: Early understandings of the non-obvious.
Cognition, 38(3), 213-244.
Gergely, G., Egyed, K., & Király, I. (2007). On pedagogy.
Developmental Science, 10, 139-146.
Goodman, N. (1965). Fact, fiction, and forecast.
Indianapolis, IN: Bobbs-Merrill Company.
Hollander, M. A., Gelman, S. A., & Raman, L. (2009).
Generic language and judgements about category
membership: Can generics highlight properties as central?
Language and Cognitive Processes, 24, 481-505.
Keil, F. C. (1989). Concepts, kinds, and cognitive
development. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lopez, A., Gelman, S. A., Gutheil, G., & Smith, E. E.
(1992). The development of category-based induction.
Child Development, 63, 1070-1090.
Markman, E. M. (1989). Categorization and naming in
children: Problems of induction. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Schulz, L. E., Standing, H. R., & Bonawitz, E. B. (2008).
Word, thought, and deed: The role of object categories in
children’s inductive inferences and exploratory play.
Developmental Psychology, 44, 1266-1276.
Yoon, J. M. D., Johnson, M. H., & Csibra, G. (2008).
Communication-induced memory biases in preverbal
infants. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the USA, 105, 13690-13695.

General Discussion
To return to our original research question, how best to
we characterize preschoolers’ ability to use communicative
cues to guide their inductive inferences? Our perspective is
that although younger children most certainly are capable of
recognizing communicative cues (Cisbra, 2010), they may
be less adept at navigating pedagogical interactions in order
to identify which actions are meant for their benefit. On this
account, younger children may have a more global sense of
whether or not they are currently engaged in a pedagogical
interaction with a knowledgeable adult, and may interpret,
or even over-interpret, a variety of intentional actions as for
them, even if they are not clearly meant as such, and only
disengage from this interpretation when an action is clearly
marked otherwise, for example as accidental.
The results of these experiments are consistent with this
interpretation. Although 4-year-olds judiciously identified
which actions were meant for them even when embedded in
an ongoing pedagogical interaction, even when 3-year-olds
were given a clear break between being taught the word and
seeing the evidence produced either communicatively or
non-communicatively, they did not use that distinction to
guide their inferences. Thus simply interrupting the
pedagogical interaction does not seem to be enough to
disengage children’s overall pedagogical interpretation of
the situation.
More broadly, the learning mechanism explored in this
paper clearly has powerful implications. Preschoolers are
highly sensitive to communicative cues that indicate a
particular action is meant for their benefit, and use this to
guide stronger and inferences about novel information. But
important questions remain about how best to characterize
this learning mechanism, what inferential processes are
children engaged in, and how this develops over the
preschool years.

Acknowledgments
This research was based on a doctoral dissertation submitted
to Stanford University, and was supported by a NSF
Graduate Research Fellowship.. Special thanks to the
parents, children, teachers, and staff at the Bing Nursery
School. We also thank Kimmy Scheible for assistance with
data collection and coding, and Andrei Cimpian and

268

