UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Priming randomness increases the evaluation of ritual efficacy

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/39g6d57r

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Souza, Andre L.
Legare, Cristine H.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Priming randomness increases the evaluation of ritual efficacy
André L. Souza (andre.souza@crdh.concordia.ca)
Concordia University
Department of Psychology, 7141 Sherbrooke St. W.
Montreal, QC H4V 1N3 Canada

Cristine H. Legare (legare@psy.utexas.edu)
The University of Texas at Austin
Department of Psychology, 1 University Station, A8000
Austin, TX 78712 USA
Abstract
Reestablishing feelings of control in the face of uncertainty is
a fundamental motive for human behavior. We propose that
rituals (i.e., socially stipulated, causally opaque practices) provide a means for coping with the aversive feelings associated
with randomness due to the perception of a connection between ritual action and a desired outcome. Two experiments
were conducted (one in Brazil [N = 40] and another in the U.S.
[N = 94]) to evaluate how the perceived efficacy of rituals is
affected by feelings of randomness. In a between-subjects design, the Scramble Sentence Task was used as a priming procedure in three conditions (i.e., randomness, negativity, and
neutral) and participants were then asked to rate the efficacy of
rituals used for problem-solving purposes. The results demonstrate that priming randomness increased participants’ perception of ritual efficacy relative to negativity and neutral conditions. Implications for increasing our understanding of the
relationship between perceived control and ritualistic behavior
are discussed.
Keywords: Randomness; Ritual; Perception of Control; Supernatural Cognition.

Introduction
Anthropologists have long noted that the use of rituals for
instrumental purposes is linked to conditions of risk and uncertainty (Malinowski, 2004). When Malinowski visited the
Trobriand Islands of New Guinea, for example, he noted that
at times the Trobrianders would base their behavior on practices with clear causal rationales while at other times they
would rely on causally opaque practices such as ritual. The
Trobrianders rarely relied on ritual when fishing in a reliable
and safe setting such as the lagoon; they described their successes and failures in terms of skill. In contrast, extensive ritual preceded the uncertain and dangerous conditions of deepsea fishing.
The Trobriand fishermen are not alone in their use of ritual to restore feelings of control when confronted with uncertainty (Souza & Legare, 2011). On college campuses, for
instance, up to 70% of students employ such strategies to assist with performance on exams (Gallagher & Lewis, 2001) or
athletic competitions (Bleak & Frederick, 1998; Ciborowski,
1997; Todd & Brown, 2003; Van Raalte, Brewer, Nemeroff,
& Linder, 1991; Vyse, 2000; Womack, 1992).
To the extent that the rituals have little or no actual bearing on the success of instrumental outcomes (Lobmeyer
& Wasserman, 1986) through a process of physical causation (Legare & Herrmann, 2013; Legare & Souza, 2012;

Humphrey & Laidlaw, 1994), we propose that one of the
functions of rituals is to maintain an illusion of control, a
phrase coined by Langer (1975). An illusion of control is
inferred when participants believe or respond as if contingencies between their behavior and the outcome exist, even if the
outcomes are random (Alloy, Abramson, & Viscusi, 1981;
Matute, 1994). Regardless of how the illusion of control is
manipulated, all dependent measures reflect a belief that one’s
actions can influence an outcome that is, in fact, outside of
their control.
There is considerable empirical evidence demonstrating
that lack of perceived control – an individual’s belief that
he or she cannot predict and affect future events – has applied consequences and is associated with a number of negative outcomes. For example, it contributes to the tendency
to demonstrate depressive and pessimistic behavior and avoid
facing challenging situations (Fast, Gruenfeld, Sivanathan, &
Galinsky, 2009). Conversely, feelings of control promote increased self-esteem, optimism and greater sense of agency
(Scheier, Carver, & Bridges, 1994). Despite the benefits associated with feelings of control (Kofta, Weary, & Sedek, 1998),
people frequently experience situations in which they lack the
capacity to exert the control they desire. Many of the most
pervasive ailments that afflict humans such as chronic illness
(e.g., cancer), economic insecurity (e.g., unemployment) and
interpersonal problems (e.g., infidelity) are often not within
our control.
When people are unable to control and predict their environment, attributional biases are activated and strategies
are implemented to restore feelings of control (Underwood,
1996; Vaughn & Weary, 2003; Weary & Jacobson, 1997;
Weary, Jacobson, Edwards, & Tobin, 2001). For example,
people detect correlations among random sets of stimuli that
are presumably unrelated when they are primed with feelings
of lack of control (Whitson & Galinsky, 2008). There is also
evidence that when desire for a coveted item and uncertainty
are high and personal control is lacking, people may be more
likely to help others, as if they can encourage fate’s favor by
doing good deeds proactively.
Seminal work on the illusion of control and magical thinking has examined first-person experiences with superstitious
behavior (Keinan, 1994) or procedures that approximate rituals (Rudski, 2001; Rudski & Edwards, 2007). Keinan (1994)

3437

explains the increase in superstitious behavior under conditions of stress and uncertainty as an attempt to regain control.
Rituals, which we define as conventional, causally opaque
procedures may provide a means for coping with the aversive
feelings associated with randomness by reestablishing feelings of control. We propose that the structure of ritual can
be interpreted in light of intuitive causal beliefs (Legare &
Souza, 2012) and predict that intuitive causal reasoning, not
familiarity with the content of particular rituals, drives how
ritual efficacy is evaluated.
Despite the fact that engaging in causally opaque practices
may seem to be a paradoxical means of increasing perceived
control, we hypothesize that this is possible because rituals
provide a socially stipulated and culturally sanctioned opportunity to exert agency through action, thereby giving the illusion of increased control (Thompson, Armstrong, & Thomas,
1998). We propose that priming randomness increases the activation of attributional biases to detect a connection between
action and outcome as a means of reestablishing feelings of
control. The perception of a connection increases the evaluation of ritual efficacy. We predict that this effect occurs
not only in first-person experiences with uncertainty (Keinan,
1994, 2002) but also implicitly when evaluating the experiences of others. Two studies investigated this prediction directly by examining whether priming randomness affects the
perception of the efficacy of rituals.
Study 1 was conducted in Brazil, a cultural context in
which a particular type of ritual – called simpatia – is used to
treat a variety of problems. Simpatias are ritualistic remedial
procedures used to solve everyday biological (e.g., sinusitis, asthma), psychological (e.g., depression, anxiety), and
interpersonal problems (e.g., attracting a partner, infidelity).
They are available to the general population, are relatively
low-cost, and do not require any specialized expertise to be
performed. Despite the lack of a physical-causal mechanism
underlying their efficacy, simpatias are widely endorsed and
used for a greater variety of problem-solving purposes. For
example, a simpatia to cure depression might require a person to drink coconut water straight from the coconut and then
bury the coconut husk in a garden full of flowers (Legare &
Souza, 2012).
Legare and Souza (2012) designed experimental simpatias
to match the characteristics and content of existing ones. A
selection of these simpatias was used in the current studies
to assess perceptions of ritual efficacy. To prime feelings of
randomness, we used a previously validated task called The
Scrambled Sentence Task – SST (Kay, Moscovitch, & Laurin,
2010). A more detailed description of the task is provided
below.

Study 1
Methods

the southeastern region of Brazil. They were recruited from
public health centers located in a peripheral neighborhood of
Belo Horizonte. The public health centers (known as Posto
de Saúde) are centers maintained by the city administration,
and serve the population from the community in which the
center is located.
According to the Brazilian Institute of Geography and
Statistics, Belo Horizonte has a population of over 6,082,776
people. The ethnic composition of the population is 47%
Black, 41% Pardo (mixed-race), and 12% White.. In terms
of religious composition, over 68% of the population selfidentify as Catholic, 19% Protestant, and 8% of the population reported not having any religious affiliation. Although
census data has traditionally failed to capture the range of religious traditions available in Brazil (especially those of AfroBrazilian roots), the endorsement of simpatias exists across
all religious groups.
Materials To assess the perceived efficacy of rituals, we
used simpatias designed by Legare and Souza (2012). They
were designed to match the characteristics of existing simpatias to maximize ecological validity. A previously validated task called The Scrambled Sentence Task – SST was
used to prime randomness in one condition and negativity in
the other (Kay et al., 2010). A baseline condition containing
neutral words was also created. In the SST, each participant is
given 20 scrambled sentence strings composed of five words
each. Participants were asked to rearrange four of the five
words to form a meaningful sentence and then to cross out
the one word left out. For half the participants, the word sets
contained words related to randomness (e.g., chaotic) and for
the other half, these words were replaced with negatively valenced control words (e.g., lazy). This procedure is similar to
the one used by Kay et al. (2010).
Procedure Participants were randomly assigned to one of
the two conditions (i.e., randomness condition and negativity
condition). The second author, a native speaker of Brazilian
Portuguese, interviewed each participant individually. Each
participant was given a set of words (according to the condition assigned) and was asked to form sentences. Participants
were allowed to take as long as they wanted to for the sentences. For the randomness condition, 10 of the 20 lists contained randomness-related words, whereas for the negativity
condition, these 10 words were replaced with negatively valenced words.
Following the priming task, participants were presented
with six simpatias paired with specific problems. The order of presentation was randomized across participants. Then
participants were asked: “In a scale from 1 to 10, 1 being
EFFECTIVE and 10 being INEFFECTIVE, how much do you
think this simpatia is effective for treating this specific problem?”

Participants Forty Brazilian Portuguese-speaking adults
participated in the study. Participants were recruited from
the metropolitan area of the city of Belo Horizonte located in

3438

Results and Discussion
Preliminary analysis revealed that the priming manipulation
affected all six simpatias equally, that is, in terms of efficacy
ratings, there was no main effect of specific simpatia used
and no interaction between specific simpatias and the priming procedures. Thus, the ratings of the six simpatias were
averaged to form a single index of ritual efficacy for each participant. Results revealed that participants in the randomness
condition rated the simpatias as significantly more effective
(M = 4.33, SD = .31) than participants in the negativity condition (M = 4.64, SD = .40), t(38) = 2.65, p < .05, (simpatias
with lower ratings were judged to be more effective than simpatias with higher ratings).
This finding supports the hypothesis that the evaluation of
ritual efficacy increases when the motivation to reestablish
control is primed. Rituals may provide a mechanism for accomplishing this goal (Keinan, 2002). Alternatively, however, this pattern of data could potentially be explained by the
possibility that negativity reduced perceptions of efficacy, instead of randomness increasing perceptions of efficacy. To
address this potential alternative explanation, in Study 2 we
included a third condition containing neutral words. In previous research by (Legare & Souza, 2012), the evaluation of
ritual efficacy did not vary between populations familiar with
(e.g. in Brazil) and unfamiliar with (e.g. in the U.S.) simpatias. Thus to examine the generalizability of the results from
Study 1 in a population unfamiliar with the content of these
culturally specific rituals, Study 2 was conducted in the U.S.

Study 2
Methods
Participants Ninety-four undergraduate students at a large
research university located in the southwest of the United
States participated in Study 2 for course credit.
Materials The materials used in Study 2 were identical to
the materials used in Study 1 except that they were translated
from Brazilian Portuguese into American English by the second author.
Procedure The procedure for Study 2 was identical to
Study 1 except that the simpatias and efficacy ratings questions were presented using E-Prime rather than being read
to participants. Again, participants were asked to rearrange
four of the five words to form a meaningful sentence and
then to cross out the one word left out. For 33 participants
(randomly selected), the word sets contained words related to
randomness (e.g., chaotic), for 32 participants, these words
were negatively-valenced words (e.g., lazy) and finally for 29
participants, the words were neutral words extracted from the
ANEW database (Bradley & Lang, 1999).

Results and Discussion
The objectives of Study 2 were to examine the generalizability of the effect in a cultural context unfamiliar with simpatias and explore the possibility that negative words reduced

Figure 1: Mean Efficacy Ratings per Condition in Study 2
the evaluation of ritual efficacy. As predicted, although the
simpatias were rated as less effective in the U.S. sample than
in the Brazilian sample (consistent with Legare & Souza,
2012), a one-way ANOVA revealed a main effect of condition, F(2,91) = 5.07, p < 0.05, η2 = .10 on the efficacy ratings. Post-hoc tests (Bonferroni corrected) demonstrated that
participants primed with randomness rated the simpatias as
significantly more efficacious (M = 8.06, SD = 1.64) than participants in the neutral condition (M = 9.01, SD = .97), t(60) =
-2.71, p < .002, and marginally more efficacious than participants in the negativity condition (M = 8.84, SD = 1.02), t(63)
= 2.27, p = 0.02. Notably, there was no significant difference
between the efficacy ratings of people in the neutral condition
and negativity condition (See Figure 1). The results demonstrate that even with unfamiliar content, priming randomness
increased ritual efficacy evaluations, consistent with the results of Study 1. Moreover, the lack of difference between
the negativity and neutral condition suggest that randomness
increases perceptions of ritual efficacy, rather than negativity
decreasing ritual efficacy evaluation.

Discussion
In the face of randomness, attributional biases are activated
and strategies are used to cope with feelings of lack of control
(Weary & Edwards, 1994; Weary & Jacobson, 1997; Weary
et al., 2001; Wichman, Brunner, & Weary, 2008). We propose that rituals provide a means for coping with the aversive
feelings associated with lack of control. The current studies
sought to examine this possibility empirically by investigating the extent to which priming feelings of randomness influences perceptions of ritual efficacy.
Our results support the hypothesis that perceptions of the

3439

efficacy of ritualistic behavior are influenced by the drive to
regain a sense of control. Participants primed in the randomness condition rated simpatias as significantly more efficacious than participants in the control condition. One potential explanation for this effect is that the experience of randomness triggered by the manipulation activated a need to
reestablish perceived control. Rituals may provide a mechanism for accomplishing this by providing an opportunity to
posit a connection between action and outcome.
Examining the interplay of perceived control and ritual is
of pervasive interdisciplinary interest with longstanding roots
in both anthropology and experimental psychology (Keinan,
1994; 2002; Rudski & Edwards, 2007). Despite this interdisciplinary interest, these studies are the first to examine
the relationship between priming randomness and reasoning
about the efficacy of ritualistic practices used by others. By
examining this relationship experimentally, we have demonstrated that ritual may serve as a mechanism for reestablishing
the perception of control and have provided insight into the
cognitive underpinnings of the evaluation of ritual efficacy.
Studying ritual from this perspective contributes to the body
of research (Boyer & Liénard, 2006; Kay, Gaucher, Napier,
Callan, & Laurin, 2008; Kay et al., 2010; Keinan, 1994, 2002;
Rudski, 2001) demonstrating that one of the functions rituals
serve is to make the world seem more comprehensible, certain, and predictable.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful for funding from the Cognition, Religion, and
Theology Program funded by the John Templeton Foundation.

References
Alloy, L., Abramson, L., & Viscusi, D. (1981). Induced mood
and the illusion of control. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 41(6), 1129.
Bleak, J., & Frederick, C. (1998). Superstitious behavior in
sport: Levels of effectiveness and determinants of use
in three collegiate sports. Journal of Sport Behavior.
Boyer, P., & Liénard, P. (2006). Precaution systems and
ritualized behavior. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
29(06), 635–641.
Ciborowski, T. (1997). ” superstition” in the collegiate baseball player. The Sport Psychologist; The Sport Psychologist.
Fast, N., Gruenfeld, D., Sivanathan, N., & Galinsky, A.
(2009). Illusory control a generative force behind
power’s far-reaching effects. Psychological Science,
20(4), 502–508.
Gallagher, T., & Lewis, J. (2001). Rationalists, fatalists, and
the modern superstitious: Test-taking in introductory
sociology. Sociological inquiry, 71(1), 1–12.

Humphrey, C., & Laidlaw, J. (1994). The archetypal actions
of ritual: a theory of ritual illustrated by the jain rite
of worship. Clarendon Press Oxford.
Kay, A., Gaucher, D., Napier, J., Callan, M., & Laurin, K.
(2008). God and the government: testing a compensatory control mechanism for the support of external
systems. Journal of personality and social psychology,
95(1), 18.
Kay, A., Moscovitch, D., & Laurin, K. (2010). Randomness,
attributions of arousal, and belief in god. Psychological
Science, 21(2), 216–218.
Keinan, G. (1994). Effects of stress and tolerance of ambiguity on magical thinking. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 67(1), 48.
Keinan, G. (2002). The effects of stress and desire for control on superstitious behavior. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 28(1), 102–108.
Kofta, M., Weary, G., & Sedek, G. (1998). Personal control in action: Cognitive and motivational mechanisms.
Springer.
Langer, E. (1975). The illusion of control. Journal of personality and social psychology, 32(2), 311.
Legare, C., & Herrmann, P. (2013). Cognitive consequences
and constraints on reasoning about ritual. Religion,
Brain & Behavior, 3(1), 63–65.
Legare, C., & Souza, A. (2012). Evaluating ritual efficacy:
Evidence from the supernatural. Cognition, 124, 1–15.
Lobmeyer, D., & Wasserman, E. (1986). Preliminaries to
free throw shooting: Superstitious behavior? Journal
of Sport Behavior.
Malinowski, B. (2004). Magic, science and religion and
other essays 1948. Kessinger Publishing.
Matute, H. (1994). Learned helplessness and superstitious behavior as opposite effects of uncontrollable reinforcement in humans. Learning and Motivation, 25(2), 216–
232.
Rudski, J. (2001). Competition, superstition and the illusion
of control. Current Psychology, 20(1), 68–84.
Rudski, J., & Edwards, A. (2007). Malinowski goes to college: Factors influencing students’ use of ritual and superstition. The Journal of general psychology, 134(4),
389–403.
Scheier, M., Carver, C., & Bridges, M. (1994). Distinguishing optimism from neuroticism (and trait anxiety, selfmastery, and self-esteem): a reevaluation of the life orientation test. Journal of personality and social psychology, 67(6), 1063.
Souza, A., & Legare, C. (2011). The role of testimony in
the evaluation of religious expertise. Religion, Brain &
Behavior, 1(2), 146–153.
Thompson, S., Armstrong, W., & Thomas, C. (1998). Illusions of control, underestimations, and accuracy: a
control heuristic explanation. Psychological bulletin,
123(2), 143.
Todd, M., & Brown, C. (2003). Characteristics associated

3440

with superstitious behavior in track and field athletes:
Are there ncaa divisional level differences? Journal of
Sport Behavior.
Underwood, G. (1996). Implicit cognition. Oxford University
Press.
Van Raalte, J., Brewer, B., Nemeroff, C., & Linder, D. (1991).
Chance orientation and superstitious behavior on the
putting green. Journal of Sport Behavior.
Vaughn, L., & Weary, G. (2003). Causal uncertainty and correction of judgments. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 39(5), 516–524.
Vyse, S. (2000). Believing in magic: The psychology of
superstition. Oxford University Press, USA.
Weary, G., & Edwards, J. (1994). Individual differences in
causal uncertainty. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 67(2), 308.
Weary, G., & Jacobson, J. (1997). Causal uncertainty beliefs
and diagnostic information seeking. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 73(4), 839.
Weary, G., Jacobson, J., Edwards, J., & Tobin, S. (2001).
Chronic and temporarily activated causal uncertainty
beliefs and stereotype usage. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 81(2), 206.
Whitson, J., & Galinsky, A. (2008). Lacking control increases
illusory pattern perception. Science, 322(5898), 115–
117.
Wichman, A., Brunner, R., & Weary, G. (2008). Immediate
and delayed effects of causal uncertainty inductions on
uncertainty accessibility. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 44(4), 1106–1113.
Womack, M. (1992). Why athletes need ritual: A study of
magic among professional athletes. Sport and religion,
191–202.

Lack of Luck Get an orange, peel it, squeeze its juice and
bury its flesh. Place the peel on top of the dirt. Drink the
juice three times a day (morning, afternoon, and evening).
Lack of Money Collect seven red apples directly from an
apple tree. In the morning, before eating anything, peel
the apples, eat them and save the peel. Right before going
to bed, make a tea with the peel.

APPENDIX - Experimental Simpatias
Employment In the first day of last quarter phase of the
moon, take the milk from a coconut and give it to the unemployed person to drink. After that, ask the person to spit
three times in the hole made in the coconut. Following this,
light up a brand-new white candle and drop the wax around
the hole until the hole is sealed. Take the coconut to a far
away beach or river.
Depression For five days, the person with depression should
go to a crossroad. While there, the person should say: ”Depression, stay here!” The person should not walk through
the crossroad for one year.
Infidelity Throw a shoe and a shirt of the unfaithful person
into a streaming river unbeknownst to the person. As the
river flows away, you say: “I hope the river takes the infidelity away as fast as it can.” Take some of the water from
the river and keep it somewhere in the house.
Evil-Eye Fill a cup with sand spit inside the cup. Seal the
cup and bury it upright before the sunrise.

3441

