UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Priming and Conceptual Pacts in Overhearers’ Adoption of Referring Expressions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2k5493g0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Behnel, Marieke
Cummins, Chris
Sichelschmidt, Lorenz
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Priming and Conceptual Pacts in Overhearers’ Adoption of Referring
Expressions
Abstract
Current theories of communication yield predictions about
the expression choice of overhearers as well as primary
discourse participants. We discuss three such theories and
evaluate them with reference to new data on object naming
elicited through a confederate priming paradigm. Our results
show that participants adopt primed referring expressions if
they are highly involved in the task, but mere exposure to
the object labels yields very limited priming effects. Also,
common ground is a relatively marginal factor in expression
choice here. We interpret these results as supportive of the
importance of grounding and challenging for interactive
alignment-based accounts of expression choice.

Introduction
Inter-personal communication is customarily taken to
involve processes of cooperation and coordination
between interlocutors at a number of levels. At the level of
the conversational turn, speakers cooperate with hearers by
making their contribution appropriate to the current
purpose of the talk exchange, as observed by Grice (1975).
They also coordinate with hearers by making their
intentions understood (Grice 1957). At a discourse level,
speaker and hearer work together to achieve
conversational goals, which might involve the sharing of
information, the making and satisfying of requests, the
formation of joint plans, etc. (Clark 1996).
A diverse range of theories have been proposed to
account for how speakers and listeners successfully
engage in this process of communication, with particular
reference to dyadic interactions such as dialogues. An
influential account of dialogue, the interactive-alignment
model (Pickering & Garrod 2004), places low-level
processes of priming at the heart of communication. In this
account, interlocutors align their representations as a result
of dialogue. This alignment commences at a surface level,
in that the dialogue participants converge at a lexical and
syntactic level, due to the priming effects exerted by the
use of particular words and syntactic forms. The resulting
alignment then percolates up through the system,
eventually reaching the level of situation models. The goal
of communication, on this account, is to accomplish the
alignment of situation models. However, the fundamental
drivers of this are low-level, automatic and unconscious
processes, specifically priming processes. Consequently,
this account posits little involvement of strategic factors in
the success of dyadic communication.
A contrary viewpoint is that interlocutors are highly
aware of each other’s mental states and that this awareness
informs their behaviour. Clark and Schaefer (1989) argue
that successful contributions to a discourse requires
grounding; that is, speaker and hearer must mutually
believe that the speaker’s meaning has been understood.
The notion of common ground (CG) – the shared
knowledge, beliefs and assumptions of the interlocutors
(Clark & Marshall 1981) – thus becomes relevant here.
The goal of the interaction involves building and updating

CG, and doing this requires consideration of the existing
CG state. A simple example is the use of a referring
expression: if a speaker predicates a new property of an
entity (e.g. “John is away”), this can only be successful as
a discourse contribution if the hearer correctly identifies
the entity. This requires the speaker to take account of the
hearer’s knowledge about how this entity is labelled. Such
knowledge may be presumed on the basis of linguistic
community membership, but it may also arise from
previous referential success, or on the basis of the
formation of “conceptual pacts” (Brennan & Clark 1996).
Distinctively, conceptual pacts involve the establishment
of partner-specific labels for entities, which can then be
successfully used in interaction with that specific partner
but are not preferred for general use with other
interlocutors.
An intermediate position between these two viewpoints
is occupied by Keysar (2007). He argues that “when
people communicate, they do not routinely take into
account the mental states of others” (ibid., p.72). Instead,
drawing upon evidence from Theory of Mind experiments,
he argues for the primacy of egocentric processing, and
contends that “one’s own perspective is dominant…the
consideration of others’ beliefs is not automatic” (ibid.,
p.75). Unlike the interactive-alignment model, this
approach entails conscious reasoning about the choice of
referring expression, but unlike Clark and colleagues,
Keysar considers CG to be a relatively peripheral issue,
and the role of the hearer and his/her mental state to be a
marginal factor in the speaker’s choice of expression. In
support of this, Barr and Keysar (2002) provide
experimental evidence that people (unconsciously) expect
new conversational partners to adhere to conceptual pacts
that have previously been established, even though the
new partner is not privy to this pact. This in turn suggests
that conceptual pacts are not triadic relations between two
interlocutors and an entity, in which both agree to refer to
this entity in a particular way within their interaction, but
rather pairs of relations in which both parties separately
agree to refer to this entity by a particular label.
Experimental work on dialogue has been conducted
from numerous theoretical perspectives, including those
outlined above. However, relatively little attention has
been paid in this literature to non-dyadic interactions, for
instance those in which a third individual is present but not
directly engaged in the conversation 1 . In this paper, we
aim to extend findings about the choice of referring
expression into the domain of non-dyadic interactions.
There are several motivations for this move. First, the
potential relevance of third parties in conversation has
long been acknowledged (see Clark & Carlson 1982) but
the implications of this for expression choice have
attracted relatively little attention. Secondly, such
1

A partial exception to this is Keysar and Henly (2002), but their
primary focus is on using overhearers to evaluate the likely
communicative success of utterances, rather than on examining
the effect of dialogue on overhearers themselves.

1869

situations are common in everyday interaction, and
understanding the dynamics of conversation in such
settings is an end in itself. Thirdly, and perhaps most
importantly, non-dyadic interactions represent a testing
ground in which the factors governing expression choice
can be disentangled to a certain extent, thus offering useful
insights as to the relative strengths of the competing
factors.
In the following section, we consider how the
competing theories of Pickering and Garrod, Clark, and
Keysar naturally yield distinctive predictions about the
behaviour of overhearers in a non-dyadic setting. We then
introduce an experiment to test the effects attributable to
priming, egocentricity and conceptual pacts, specifically
examining whether and under what conditions overhearers
select referring expressions according to their status in a
preceding dialogue.

Critical Predictions about Overhearer
Behaviour
Although the specific accounts discussed in the previous
section are primarily oriented towards explaining dyadic
interactions, the mechanisms that they posit should apply
also in non-dyadic interactions. If so, predictions can be
drawn about overhearer behaviour, as we articulate in the
following paragraphs. Of course, the falsification of such a
prediction would not imply the incorrectness of the theory
in the dyadic case. However, it would suggest that
additional machinery would need to be posited to cover
non-dyadic interactions. We would interpret it as
favourable for a theory if it makes correct predictions
about both types of interaction without further stipulation.
In particular, we focus on a specific scenario of nondyadic interaction. In this scenario, two interactants are
playing a game in which they match picture cards that
display tangram figures. Both have matching packs of
cards. One of them (the ‘director’) selects a card and
describes the figure, and the other (the ‘matcher’) has to
identify which card is being talked about. There is also an
overhearer, who does not participate in the game. When
the game is completed, the overhearer plays the game,
taking the role of director. The question is whether, and to
what extent, the overhearer will re-use the descriptions
that were used by the original director in the previous
phase of the game.
Turning first to Pickering and Garrod’s (2004) account,
priming is predicted to occur automatically upon exposure
to the relevant labels. They predict stronger alignment
effects for addressees than overhearers (ibid., 174), on the
basis that the former engage their production systems
during the interaction (anticipating that they will speak at
some point) whereas the latter do not need to. However,
overhearers are still expected to exhibit some priming
effects. Crucially, this does not depend upon the
establishment of full common ground, which is argued
only to occur “when radical misalignment becomes
apparent” (ibid., 179). Rather, it relies merely on implicit
common ground, defined as the information shared
between the interlocutors, to which the overhearer might
reasonably be supposed to have access. Hence, in this

experimental paradigm (where there are no observable
failures in communication), their account predicts priming
of overhearers, a possible effect of involvement, and no
effect of common ground. It further predicts that priming
will be boosted if the overhearer’s production system is
activated.
Contrastingly, for Clark and colleagues, high-level
conscious processes are critical to determining whether the
overhearer adopts the referring expressions that have been
used. These expressions should be used only if they have
been observed to be successful, which entails that the
overhearer is sufficiently engaged in the dialogic process
to determine whether this is the case: merely hearing the
expressions will not do. In particular, where conceptual
pacts have been formed, the status of the addressee with
respect to these pacts should also be relevant. When
addressing someone who was involved in the conceptual
pact (in our scenario, someone involved in the first phase
of the game), the former overhearer is predicted to re-use
the established referring expression to a greater extent than
they would if addressing a new individual. So in brief, this
account predicts no priming unless the overhearer is
sufficiently involved in the discourse, and more priming
when common ground is also present.
The predictions arising from Keysar’s (2007) account
differ from Clark’s with respect to common ground.
According to Keysar, the choice of expression should be
egocentrically motivated in the first instance, and therefore
it should be irrelevant whether or not the hearer has a prior
conceptual pact about that referent. Whether the
overhearer should adopt any of the expressions used by the
previous director is not clear on this account: as Keysar
does not posit a role for low-level priming, this should not
occur automatically, although it might be feasible for the
overhearer to learn new labels under certain conditions
(see General Discussion). In sum, we take this account to
predict no priming unless the overhearer is sufficiently
involved in the discourse, but no effect of common
ground.

Establishing Baseline Naming Probabilities
In order to establish our baseline naming probabilities, we
ran an online elicitation study with EFS Survey
(http://www.unipark.info). Participants were asked to
provide names for 50 configurations of tangram pieces,
which were presented in silhouette. One tangram was
presented per page, with the task being to give a name to
the presented graphical display (no information was given
as to whether the display was a picture or representation of
a specific object).
331 participants were recruited via the University’s
mailing list and leaflets around the campus. All were
students and native speakers of German. Participants were
entered into a prize draw to win €10 cash or one of 10 €10
Amazon vouchers.
For the following experiments, we selected 15
tangrams for each of which a specific response had
occurred at rates of 5-15%. These responses could be
considered plausible but dispreferred, in that they were
neither unique to an individual respondent nor were they
the ‘obvious’ description for the tangram in question. The

1870

use of such items in the following experiments reduces the
probability that the participant selects the target expression
just by chance. The mean rate of usage for the relevant
descriptions across these 15 tangrams was 8.29%
(278/3353).

Experiment 1: Effects of Involvement and
Common Ground
Experiment 1 was designed to show whether an
overhearer’s involvement in the interaction, and the extent
to which they shared common ground with their
subsequent addressee, influenced their uptake of
dispreferred referring expressions.

Participants
86 participants (47 female), all native speakers of German,
were paid for participation in the experiment. They were
divided randomly between the four test conditions.

Materials
Three sets of 15 white cards (74 x 105mm) were used,
each with a black tangram on the upper half of the card.
The confederate director and the matcher each had one set
of cards. Each set of cards showed identical figures: the
confederate director’s cards also showed the names that
were to be used for the tangrams. Video and audio
recordings were made of each trial.

presented with a sheet displaying all 15 tangram shapes
prior to the first matching phase of the experiment. In the
low-involvement conditions, overhearers were not shown
the shapes that were being discussed. Instead, they were
asked to count the number of times that /t/ was uttered
during the interaction (cf. Bavelas, Coates & Johnson
2000), in order to ensure that they were attending to the
linguistic material being uttered. In the high common
ground condition, the confederate who was the director in
phase 1 of the experiment became the matcher in phase 2
of the experiment, whereas in the low common ground
condition, a new confederate who had not participated in
phase 1 of the experiment was the matcher in phase 2.
The transcript of phase 2 was analysed in order to
establish whether the participant preferentially re-used
descriptions that had been used by the confederate in
phase 1. The participant’s descriptions were considered
according to two criteria: a strict lexical priming criterion,
in which only identical or similar words (modulo
morphosyntactic alternations) were considered to ‘match’,
and a more liberal semantic criterion, in which expressions
of similar concepts and synonyms were also considered as
matches.

Results
The results are summarised in Table 1, for semantic
priming, and Table 2, for lexical priming.
Table 1: % semantic priming effects in Experiment 1

Procedure
For each condition, the experimental setting comprised an
interacting dyad of director and matcher, plus an
overhearer. All three individuals were separated by opaque
screens. They were instructed that they were to play a
game in which the object was to match the order of 15
cards. The director’s cards were arranged in a stack in the
correct order, while the matcher’s cards were arranged on
the table top and all were visible. Both were instructed not
to change the orientation of the cards.
The director was instructed to proceed by naming the
card on top of the pile so that the matcher could find the
corresponding card, using names that were as short and
spontaneous as possible but as long as necessary. Matchers
were allowed to ask for additional descriptions but were
told that they would lose points for doing so. These
instructions were devised to avoid the use of detailed
descriptions rather than impressionistic names for the
tangrams.
The experiment proceeded in two phases, using the
confederate priming paradigm. In the first phase, the
director was a confederate and used pre-specified
descriptions (chosen from the pre-test results as discussed
above). The matcher was also a confederate, and the
experimental participant was the overhearer. In the second
phase, the game was played again, with the participant
now playing the role of director, but having no direct
access to the list of descriptions that had previously been
used.
A 2 x 2 design was used, within which levels of
involvement and common ground were manipulated. In
the high-involvement conditions, overhearers were

Condition
- involvement
+ involvement

- CG
14.8
(49/330)
41.0
(129/315)

+ CG
15.3
(46/300)
50.4
(174/345)

Table 2: % lexical priming effects in Experiment 1
Condition
- involvement
+ involvement

- CG
13.0
(43/330)
36.2
(114/315)

+ CG
14.3
(43/300)
47.0
(162/345)

In all conditions, the use of primed expressions was
significantly higher than their rates of spontaneous use in
the pre-study (binomial, all p < 0.001). We applied a
logistic mixed model with full random slopes to the
semantic priming results. This showed a highly significant
main effect of involvement (β = 1.88, SE = 0.259, Z =
7.28, p < 0.001), but the main effect of common ground
did not reach significance (β = 0.255, SE = 0.203, Z =
1.26, p = 0.21), despite the numerical trend in the high
involvement condition. In a second model we also posited
an interaction term, but this did not reach significance (β =
0.58, SE = 0.411, Z = 1.4, p = 0.16), while involvement
remained significant and common ground non-significant.
This pattern of effects was replicated for the lexical
priming results.

1871

Discussion
The results of Experiment 1 indicate that the degree of the
participants’ involvement is highly relevant to their uptake
of dispreferred referring expressions. In the conditions in
which overhearers were allowed to see the set of tangram
figures, they were effective at acquiring the labels used in
phase 1 of the experiment. When they were not allowed to
see the figures, they exhibited much smaller priming
effects, using the primed labels only slightly more
frequently than would have been expected in spontaneous,
unprimed description.
The presence of common ground led to numerically
more frequent reuse of primed descriptions, but this effect
did not reach significance in our sample after subject and
item effects were taken into consideration.
We interpret these results as potentially supportive of
the positions of Clark or Keysar. In particular, it is not the
case that overhearers frequently use dispreferred
descriptions just as a consequence of having heard these
object labels; they must also be aware of the referent
picked out by the label. In the terminology of Clark and
Brennan (1991), the use of the label must be “grounded”.
It could of course be argued that the overhearers in our
experiment do not have the opportunity to ground the
labels with certainty, even in the high involvement
conditions, as they cannot be sure which referent is picked
out by which expression. Nevertheless, the results suggest
that our participants were generally adept in solving this
mapping problem, and having done so, used this
information to inform their choice of referring expression.
These results can be reconciled with the account of
Pickering and Garrod (2004) if we assume that the
participant in the high involvement condition is
sufficiently engaged in the discourse to have an activated
production system, making them effectively a discourse
participant rather than merely an overhearer. From that
perspective, we could see these results as indicative of the
degree of involvement that is required in order for the third
individual to be subject to substantial priming effects. On
this account, although the priming effect still persists in
the absence of the referents (in that primed expressions are
used at above-baseline rates), it is very much weakened.
The lack of a strong effect of common ground speaks
in favour of the egocentric view proposed by Keysar and
colleagues. However, the trend towards greater reuse of
priming expression to familiar interlocutors in the high
involvement condition suggests that some participants
may be influenced by the existence of a prior conceptual
pact. If this were the case, it would challenge both the
egocentric account and the assumption of Pickering and
Garrod (2004) that common ground is only consulted
when there is some kind of difficulty in the dialogue, such
as deceit or extensive repair. Further work is required to
confirm or exclude the existence of this trend.

Experiment 2: Task-Specific Effects
A question arising from the first experiment is whether the
manipulation of involvement also influenced the
participants’ expectations about their task. Could it be the
case that the participants who were presented with a copy
of the tangram pictures inferred that their task was to learn

how to describe these images? This could in turn result in
greater activation of their production mechanisms,
predicted by Pickering & Garrod (2004) to lead to greater
priming effects. To address these possibilities, we
conducted a further experiment in which the overhearers
were not given access to pictures of the tangrams,
similarly to the original low involvement condition, but
were told that after the first part of the experiment, they
would then be playing the game, in the role of director.

Participants
41 participants (27 female), all native speakers of German,
and none of whom participated in Experiment 1, were paid
for participation in the experiment. They were assigned to
the two new test conditions (common ground and no
common ground, as in Experiment 1).

Materials
The same materials were used as in Experiment 1.

Procedure
The same procedure was used as in the low involvement
condition of Experiment 1, with the exception that the
participants were not asked to perform t-counting, on the
basis that this might interfere with their ability to follow
the task (and potentially the engagement of their
production systems). Instead, they were instructed to listen
to what was going on and told that they would be asked
about how successful the interaction had been. Before the
experiment began, participants were told that they would
be taking the role of director in the second part of the
experiment.

Results
The results are summarised in Table 3.
Table 3: Results of Experiment 2
Condition
- CG
+ CG

Semantic
priming %
16.0
(48/300)
15.9
(50/315)

Lexical
priming %
13.0
(39/300)
15.2
(48/315)

In both conditions, the use of primed expressions was
significantly higher than their rates of spontaneous use in
the pre-study (binomial, both p < 0.001). Comparing these
results with the low involvement conditions of Experiment
1, logistic regression analyses showed no significant main
effect of task awareness.

Discussion
The results of Experiment 2 suggest that awareness of the
potential usefulness of the descriptions that are employed
does not suffice, on its own, to enable the overhearer to
pick up dispreferred expressions in this paradigm. Without
access to depictions of the referents, the participants in this
experiment exhibited very limited evidence of priming
effects. This suggests that the higher rates of priming

1872

attested in the high involvement condition of Experiment 1
are largely attributable to the perceptibility of the figures,
rather than the participants drawing any specific inferences
about the way in which they were expected to perform the
task.

General Discussion and Conclusions
Our experiments strongly suggest that overhearers are able
to acquire dispreferred labels for objects, but that they do
so to a very limited degree if they do not have perceptual
access to the object that is being referred to.
We take these results to point to limitations in the
power of ‘pure priming’ effects; that is, the view that
access to the phonetic content of labels will lead to their
adoption by hearers, as a consequence of percolation
(Pickering & Garrod 2004). In the confederate priming
paradigm, it appears that such access is not enough: the
label must also be associated with an object in order for it
later to be adopted. This suggests that the process by
which speakers align on object labels is not merely
bottom-up, but requires the presence of a referent or
meaning as well as the verbal label.
Nevertheless, it could be argued that our results do
point to non-zero priming effects, with increased uptake of
primed expressions even among uninvolved overhearers
who do not see the potential referents and are not attending
to the dialogic process that is occurring. Such effects could
indeed be attributable to the type of processes that
Pickering and Garrod (2004) posit. However, at least in
this paradigm, these effects are much smaller than the
priming effects in the high involvement condition.
A possible explanation of the effect of involvement,
within the Pickering and Garrod account, is that the
overhearers’ production mechanisms are more highly
activated in the high involvement condition. Given the
results of Experiment 2, we consider this unlikely to be the
sole cause of the involvement effect. The results of
experiment 2 suggest that, even when participants are
explicitly informed that they will later be called upon to
describe the same figures, and hence might be assumed to
engage their production systems in preparation to
participate in a dialogue, they do not exhibit greater uptake
of the primed expressions.
Of course, it may be the case that the effect of
involvement is a matter of attention, and that overhearers
in the low involvement condition are less engaged in the
task in general. However, in experiment 1, these
overhearers are obliged to attend to the phonetic content of
the utterances, which should in principle be sufficient to
initiate priming effects via percolation. This explanation
might be tenable if we modify the ‘pure priming’ account
to require that lexical items must be heard and understood
in their entirety in order to be primed.
The strong effect of involvement is straightforwardly
explicable in Clark’s approach: according to this view,
expressions are re-used as a result of their observable
effectiveness in the prior interaction, and it is the highly
involved participants who are in a position to discern this.
However, it can also be captured by the egocentric
approach, articulated by Keysar and colleagues. Here we
must also posit that the condition of high involvement –

which presented participants with a visual representation
of the tangram figures being talked about – enabled the
overhearers to learn the referring expressions
corresponding to (some of) these figures. Given that there
were no ‘right’ or ‘wrong’ answers in our experiment, it is
perhaps slightly counter-intuitive that ‘egocentric’
overhearers should bother to learn the names of tangrams,
when they could simply describe them as they saw fit. It is
possible that learning the names in this way represents an
economical strategy that obviates the need for any
decisions about how to describe the tangrams later on
(although participants in Experiment 1 were not told that
they would need to do so). We cannot, therefore, exclude
the possibility that hearing the primed names in the high
involvement condition merely shaped the egocentric
preferences of the overhearers, and that this was later
manifested in their choice of expression.
Our experiments documented a numerical tendency
towards common ground effects, but this might be
attributable to random variation. If this effect is replicated
in further research, it would more seriously challenge
Keysar’s (2007) claim that the speaker’s choice of referent
should initially be egocentrically motivated, irrespective of
conceptual pacts. Note that, in this experiment, there were
no failures of communication (as the matcher was a
confederate), hence there was no need for the director to
reformulate his or her utterance: purely egocentric
behaviour would, to all intents and purposes, have done
just as well. The preferential reuse of primed expressions
when the matcher was familiar would suggest that
awareness of conceptual pacts may, at least for some
speakers and on some occasions, be influencing the initial
choice of utterance.
In short, our results so far do not permit us to exclude
the possibility of egocentrism on the part of our
participants, and can be reconciled with a slightly
modified version of the form-based priming account of
Pickering and Garrod (2004). Nevertheless, the results
appear to fit most naturally with the viewpoint articulated
by Clark and colleagues. Specifically, in order for
expressions to be adopted, it appears to be broadly
necessary for overhearers to understand the purpose of the
expressions or to experience them being used effectively
(our experiments do not distinguish these possibilities).
Crucially, it is not sufficient merely to hear expressions
that are not grounded, even if you know that you will be
called upon to produce similar expressions in the future.
However, two aspects of these results are unexpected from
the perspective of Clark’s approach: firstly, as discussed
above, the effect of conceptual pacts is, at most, marginal
in these experiments. A definitive absence of such effects
would speak in favour of Keysar’s view. Secondly,
expressions can (occasionally) be picked up spontaneously
by uninvolved overhearers without awareness of the
current discourse goals, as predicted by the model of
Pickering and Garrod. Further investigations might show
whether the apparent examples of this in our data are
actually attributable to the overhearer attending to the
discourse, or whether they should be treated as genuine
instances of automatic priming effects that are not
predicted by Clark’s theory.

1873

References
Barr, D. J., & Keysar, B. (2002). Anchoring
comprehension in linguistic precedents. Journal of
Memory and Language, 46, 391-418.
Bavelas, J. B., Coates, L., & Johnson, T. (2000). Listeners
as co-narrators. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 79, 941-952.
Brennan, S. E., & Clark, H. H. (1996). Conceptual pacts
and lexical choice in conversation. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 22, 1482-1493.
Clark, H. H., & Brennan, S. E. (1991). Grounding in
communication. In L. B. Resnick, J. M. Levine, & S. D.
Teasley (eds.), Perspectives on Socially Shared
Cognition. Washington DC: APA Books.
Clark, H. H., & Carlson, T. B. (1982). Hearers and speech
acts. Language, 58, 332-373.
Clark, H. H., & Marshall. C. (1981). Definite reference
and mutual knowledge. In A. K. Joshi, B. L. Webber, &
I. A. Sag (eds.), Elements of Discourse Understanding.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Clark, H. H., & Schaefer, E. F. (1989). Contributing to
discourse. Cognitive Science, 13, 259-294.
Grice, H. P. (1957). Meaning. Philosophical Review, 66,
377-388.
Grice, H.P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole &
J. Morgan (eds.), Syntax and Semantics, vol. 3. New
York: Academic Press.
Keysar,
B.
(2007).
Communication
and
miscommunication: The role of egocentric processes.
Intercultural Pragmatics, 4, 71-84.
Keysar, B., & Henly, A. S. (2002). Speakers’
overestimation of their effectiveness. Psychological
Science, 13, 207-212.
Pickering, M. J., & Garrod, S. (2004). Toward a
mechanistic psychology of dialogue. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 27, 169-226.

1874

