UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Primacy/recency effects in infant categorisation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/92f4h97p

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Gliozzi, Valentina
Althaus, Nadja
Mayor, Julien
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Primacy/recency effects in infant categorisation
Valentina Gliozzi (gliozzi@di.unito.it)1
Dipartimento di Informatica, Università di Torino
Corso Svizzera 185, 10149 Torino, Italy

Nadja Althaus (nadja.althaus@psy.ox.ac.uk )1
Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford
South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3UD, UK

Julien Mayor (julien.mayor@unige.ch)
FPSE, University of Geneva
40, Boulevard du Pont-d’Arve 1211 Genève 4, Switzerland

Kim Plunkett (kim.plunkett@psy.ox.ac.uk )
Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford
South Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3UD, UK
Abstract
We provide evidence that primacy and / or recency effects play
a crucial role in infant visual categorization. First, we demonstrate that a connectionist model of infant categorization based
on a self-organizing map (Gliozzi, Mayor, Hu, & Plunkett,
2009) predicts an increased influence of the first and the last
stimuli during familiarization on the category boundaries. We
then present data from 10-month-old infants which confirm
these effects. Future research will allow to discriminate between a primacy or a recency effect.
Keywords:infant categorization, self-organizing maps, connectionist modelling

Introduction
familiarization/novelty preference paradigms have been
widely used in experiments on infant categorization. In these
types of experiment, infants are first familiarized with a sequence of stimuli. After the familiarization phase, infants
are tested by simultaneously showing them two test stimuli: a within-category test stimulus and an out-of-category
test stimulus. After the test phase is completed, category formation is assessed by comparing looking time at the withincategory test stimulus and looking time at the out-of-category
test stimulus. Novelty preference – longer looking time at the
out-of-category test stimulus than at the within-category stimulus – is taken as an indication for categorization: if looking
time is indexed as a measure of surprise, this indicates that the
out-of-category test stimulus is less familiar than the withincategory one, and therefore that infants have formed one category over the familiarization stimuli.
The assumption underlying the novelty preference test is
that infants form a category representation close to the central tendency of the stimuli. In other words, this representation is equidistant from all the stimuli and represents them
equally well, in a process that is unaffected by the order of
the stimuli presentation. In this paper, we question this assumption, and argue that the process of category formation is
1

Both authors contributed equally to this work.

more disordered than this, and depends on many familiarization contingencies. In particular, we argue that a primacy or
recency effect will affect the category formation process: the
number and type of categories formed is modulated by the
identity of the first, or last, stimuli presented. Future research
will aim at distinguishing the relative roles of primacy and
recency effects.
We will first show how the hypothesis of a primacy/recency
effect was derived from the analysis of the behavior of a computational model, closely related to the model presented by
Gliozzi et al. (2009). The model’s predictions have been subsequently tested and validated by testing 10-month-old infants in Oxford. This manuscript results from of a strong interplay between computational simulations and experimental
results.

Literature and Previous Results
Although it is clear that infants can form categories from visual familiarization stimuli (Younger, 1985; Eimas & Quinn,
1994; Mareschal & Quinn, 2001), the way in which familiarization contingencies impact category formation remained elusive until recently (Kovack-Lesh & Oakes, 2007;
P.C.Quinn & R.S.Bhatt, 2010; Bomba & Siqueland, 1983;
Mather & Plunkett, 2011) and the nature of the categories
formed is yet to be understood.
In a previous experiment, Mather and Plunkett (2011)
showed that the order of presentation of the familiarization
stimuli can affect categorization. In particular, Mather and
Plunkett (2011) compared infant categorization under two familiarization conditions that differ in the order by which the
same set of stimuli (those used by Younger (1985)) is presented to infants during familiarization. Examples of familiarization stimuli, as well as of within-category (average), and
out-of-category (peripheral) test stimuli can be found in Figure 1. In the high distance condition, infants were familiarized with sequences that maximize the Euclidean distance in
feature space between successive stimuli whereas in the low

2410

Figure 1: Example of familiarization sequences in the high distance condition with mild start/end stimuli and of the test stimuli
distance condition the Euclidean distance between successive
stimuli is minimized. Mather and Plunkett (2011) found that
only infants in the high distance condition successfully exhibited novelty preference at test, indicating that they had formed
a category over the familiarization stimuli. Despite seeing the
same items, with the only difference being the order of successive stimuli, infants in the low distance condition failed
to discriminate between the test stimuli. The authors gave
some potential explanations for this finding, ranging from
faster habituation in the low distance condition, to the fact
that infants in the high distance condition explore a bigger
feature space than infants in the low distance condition, hence
achieving more robust representations, until the fact that it
may be more difficult to discriminate between small changes
in feature space in successive stimuli in the low condition than
when incremental changes in feature space are larger, as it is
the case in the high distance condition. In this paper we provide a further explanation, while trying to gain further insight
into the mechanisms underlying category formation with different familiarization contingencies.
Mather and Plunkett (2011)’s results are the starting point
of this work. We first reproduce Mather and Plunkett (2011)’s
results with a slightly-modified version of the model introduced by Gliozzi et al. (2009). As we will see, the updated
model not only captures Mather and Plunkett (2011)’s results
but also suggests an interpretation of its behavior which is
different from the set of potential explanations provided by
Mather and Plunkett (2011). Similarly to Mather and Plunkett (2011), we argue that categorization is affected by the order of presentation of the stimuli. However, in contrast from
Mather and Plunkett (2011), we suggest that the largest effect impacting categorization is the identity of the first or last
stimulus of the sequence, rather the average Euclidean distance in feature space between successive stimuli. In other
words, we argue for a primacy/recency effect. As we will
see, the experiments with infants confirm this hypothesis.

high level of abstraction, we can be confident that the map
architecture and learning algorithms used in the paper can be
implemented at a physiological level of information processing. Psychological plausibility is added to our model by the
fact that the map can be trained by following the same schedule of infants: by presenting each familiarization stimulus
only once (instead of hundreds of times as in standard networks). The model receives visual inputs which are vectors
with four dimensions (e.g. [1, 1, 5, 5]) that represent the stimuli by Younger (1985) used by Mather and Plunkett (2011)
(see Figure 1). Each value in the vectors corresponds to one
feature in the cartoons presented to infants: length of the
neck, length of the legs, the ears’ orientation and the size
of the tail. The encoding of the stimuli is the same used by
Gliozzi et al. (2009), following Mareschal and French (2000).
The stimuli can be either “mild”, containing feature values
close to the overall average (items with feature values 2 and
4 in Figure 1, with mild length legs and neck, etc), or “extreme”, containing features further away from the overall average (combinations of values 1 and 5 in Figure 1, with very
long or very short legs, very long or very short neck, etc)).
The model, like any self-organizing map, consists of a set
of units, spatially organized in regular grids. Each map unit
u is associated with a weight vector Wu of the same dimension as the input vectors. All weight vectors taken together
can be seen as the map’s representation of the world. The
weight vectors are initialized to small random values. During training, the input vectors are presented to the network.
After each presentation of a vector, its best matching unit is
identified. This is the unit whose weight vector is closest to
the input vector itself (in Euclidean distance). Next, the best
matching unit’s weights are adjusted to decrease the difference between the associated weight vector and the current
input vector, according to the equation

Computational Model

where Wu (t + 1) and Wu (t) are the weight vectors associated
to unit u at time t + 1 and t respectively. I(t) is the input vector presented to the network at time t. For the best matching
unit u and for input I(t), the difference I(t) −Wu (t) is called
the quantization error (qerr) of the network with respect to
I(t). Adjusting the weights can be seen as corresponding to
an adaptation of the map’s internal representation to accommodate for the new incoming familiarization stimulus. With
respect to standard self-organizing maps our model is simpli-

The model
The model we consider here is an adaptation of the model presented by Gliozzi et al. (2009). The model is a self-organizing
map (Kohonen, 1997), which is recognized as a psychologically plausible neural network model (Kohonen, 1993), implementing a biologically plausible approach to human information processing: although our implementation is at a

Wu (t + 1) = Wu (t) + a(t)(I(t) −Wu (t))

2411

fied and does not have any neighborhood function, due to its
limited size. Results extend to a larger version of the model
in which there is a (non-shrinking) neighborhood function.
Finally, a(t) is the √learning rate at time t, defined as
max(0, min(1, β ∗ expα∗ qerr )) (with α = 4.5, β = 0.05). Results are robust (hold in more than 50% of the cases) when
α ranges from 1 to 10, and β ranges from 0.04 to 0.4. We
have also studied a decreasing√variant of the learning rate
a(t)0 = max(0, min(1, β ∗ expα∗ qerr ))/t that allows to replicate results under some parameters’ combinations. In the following we restrict our attention to the non-decreasing learning rate. The model’s adaptive learning rate has two important properties. The first of these is that it is usually higher
than in standard self-organizing maps. This allows the network to be trained in analogy to an infant familiarization
procedure: rather than training the network over hundreds
of epochs, effectively presenting each stimulus many times,
here each stimulus is only presented to the map once. The
second property of the learning rate is that it depends on the
quantization error: roughly speaking, the more novel the incoming stimulus is, the higher the learning rate will be. The
consequence of this is that the learning rate can be considered as a computational counterpart of attention in infants:
the adaptive learning rate corresponds to the general finding
that infants pay more attention to novel stimuli rather than to
familiar ones.

The model’s predictions
In order to replicate Mather and Plunkett (2011)’s results, we
have trained our model in the same way in which infants have
been familiarized in Mather & Plunkett’s (2011) study: we
produced 24 maps per condition (low distance condition versus high distance condition), and each of these was trained
with the encoding corresponding to the sequence presented
to an infant, with the same schedule used in infant familiarization, i.e. presenting each stimulus exactly once.
After each network was trained, we assessed whether a
category had been formed by measuring the network looking time, defined as the quantization error (as in Mareschal
and French (2000) and Westermann and Mareschal (2004)).
In analogy to the infant experiments, network categorization
was assessed during a test phase in which network looking
time at the overall average test stimulus was compared to
looking time at the peripheral test stimulus: a proportion
lower than chance indicates that the stimuli presented during
familiarization have been organized in a cluster whose centroid is closer to the overall average test stimulus than to the
peripheral one.
For each condition, the average of the ratios for all networks was calculated, and compared to the corresponding ratio calculated by Mather and Plunkett (2011). The model reproduces Mather and Plunkett (2011)’s results with infants:
networks familiarized in the high distance condition exhibit
a stronger novelty preference for the peripheral test stimulus
than those familiarized in the low distance condition.
Although the model successfully reproduces Mather and

Plunkett (2011)’s results, the organization of its internal representation during training suggests an explanation of the results which is different from that provided by Mather and
Plunkett (2011). Indeed, the model predicts that the nature
of the start and end stimuli impacts categorization more than
the Euclidean distance, as suggested by Mather and Plunkett
(2011). In particular, novelty preference on test is stronger for
maps familiarized with sequences starting and ending with
mild values than for those familiarized with sequences starting and ending with extreme values.
In order to understand how Euclidean distance, on the
one side, and the nature of start-end stimuli, on the other
side, influence the model’s behavior, we have conducted simulations in a 2*2 design considering four different conditions. The conditions are obtained by varying the average
Euclidean distance between successive stimuli as well as the
nature of the start and end stimuli (whether mild or extreme).
We thus consider the four possible combinations: low distance & mild start/end stimuli (Low/Mild); low distance &
extreme start/end stimuli (Low/Extreme); high distance &
mild start/end stimuli (High/Mild); high distance & extreme
start/end stimuli (High/Extreme). In all conditions start and
end stimuli are either both mild or both extreme
The model predicts a main effect of start/end stimuli on
categorization. For some choices of the learning rate’s parameters (α and β) one obtains an interaction between start/end
stimuli and Euclidean distance.
In the following we give an intuitive idea of the model’s
mechanisms that lead to the prediction. Roughly speaking,
the prediction derives from the way in which successive stimuli are organized throughout the training phase: an internal representation (or several internal representations) corresponding to the stimuli experienced is formed and updated
run-time, after each stimulus presentation (in line with several other models, as Gliozzi et al. (2009); Gureckis and Love
(2004); Westermann and Mareschal (2004)). Depending on
the strength of the update of this internal representation after each stimulus presentation (i.e. depending on the value
of the learning rate), at the end of the familiarization phase
the internal representation is close to the first or last stimulus experienced during familiarization. For our sequences,
where start and end type were bound, sequences starting and
ending with mild stimuli lead to internal representations of
the familiarization stimuli containing mild attributes’ values,
whereas sequences starting and ending with extreme stimuli
lead to internal representations containing extreme attributes’
values. For this reason, maps familiarized in the mild condition will find the average test stimulus (that also contains mild
values) much more familiar than the peripheral test stimulus,
whereas for maps familiarized in the extreme condition the
difference will be much less dramatic.
Do infants tested with the same 2*2 design exhibit the same
behavior? Can we say that they process the familiarization
stimuli in a way similar to the model?
We will see in the next section that infant data reflect the

2412

model’s predictions. The question naturally arises on how
precisely the model’s behavior and infant behavior parallel
each other. We address this question by considering looking
time throughout familiarization/training. As we will see in
the next section, infant looking time decreases throughout the
familiarization phase in the low-distance condition while remaining stable in the high distance condition. However, the
original model does not exhibit this kind of behavior. In order
to achieve this behavior in the model we have to add two elements to the learning mechanism : (i) a form of weight decay:
the weights associated to the maps’ units that are not involved
in training (because they are not selected as the best matching
unit) slowly decay towards the initial values, and (ii) a form
of habituation: the learning rate decreases if the same unit is
the best match over multiple trials. With these two new elements, the network looking time mimics infant looking time
also in the familiarization phase.

Figure 2: Looking time during familiarization.

Experiments
Methods
Participants In total, 104 infants (mean age: 310 days; 52
females) took part in this study. An additional 31 infants were
excluded due to technical reasons (N=12) or a failure to reach
the looking time criterion (N=19; criterion: a minimum of 6
trials with looking time data including trials 1 and 8, total
looking time greater than two standard deviations below the
mean). Infants were recruited at the maternity ward of the
local hospital.
Procedure Infants were seated on the caregiver’s lap in
front of a large television screen (110 cm x 95 cm) at a distance of approximately 90 cm. They were presented with
eight familiarization trials, followed by four test trials (see
Figure 1); all trials were 10 seconds in duration. During
the eight familiarization trials, a single familiarization image
(subtending ca. 14 degrees visual angle) was displayed either on the left or right hand side of the screen. During the
test trials, two images were shown side by side. The first two
test trials paired one of the peripheral stimuli with the overall
average, with a location switch between the trials, and counterbalancing the position of the average stimulus on Test trial
1 across subjects. Test trials 3 and 4 involved one pairing of
the novel stimulus with the average stimulus, and one pairing
of the novel stimulus with the peripheral stimulus shown during tests 1 and 2 (order of trials and location of stimuli were
counterbalanced). The infant’s face was filmed by two cameras mounted above the screen to the left and right. Throughout the procedure, the experimenter monitored infants’ gaze
from a control room next to the testing booth. Trials were
initiated manually by the experimenter after confirming that
the infants gaze was directed at the screen, or re-directing the
infant’s gaze at the screen through verbal communication via
microphone (e.g. “Look (baby’s name)! What s next?”).

Figure 3: Looking time during categorization test trials

Results
The video streams from left and right cameras were manually
scored for infants’ gaze direction (left vs. right).
Looking time during familiarization A mixed ANOVA
on the looking times for familiarization trials (see Figure 2)
with within-subjects factor Block (Block 1: trials 1-4, Block
2: trials 5-8) and between-subjects factors Distance (low,
high) and Start/End Stimulus (mild, extreme) revealed a main
effect of Block (F(1,98)=8.253, p=.005) and a Block x Distance interaction (F(1,98)=4.072, p=.046). T-Tests confirmed
that looking time decreased between Block 1 and 2 in the
low-distance conditions, but remained the same in the highdistance conditions.
Categorization: Test trials 1 and 2 In order to assess categorization performance, looking preference scores were obtained for each test trial from each participant by dividing
the time spent looking at the average stimulus by the time
spent looking at either test stimulus, average or peripheral
(see Figure 3 for results). The resulting preference scores
from the first test trial were subjected to an ANOVA with
factors distance (low vs. high) and start and end stimulus
(extreme vs. mild). This revealed a main effect of start/end
stimulus (F(1,92)=6.242, p=.014). All other effects remained
non-significant (all Fs < .31, ps > .57). Follow-up t-tests

2413

showed that infants in the mild start/end stimulus conditions exhibited a preference for the peripheral stimulus on
Test trial 1 (Looking proportion for average stimulus 3333:
M=41.7%, SE=2.9%; t(50)=2.882, p=.006), whereas infants
in the extreme start/end stimulus condition exhibited no preference (Looking proportion for stimulus 3333: M=51.4%,
SE=2.4%; t(44)=.564, p=.576). On Test trial 2, the observed
pattern of behavior was different. An ANOVA with factors
distance and start/end stimulus revealed a significant interaction between distance and start/end stimulus (F(1,93)=5.534,
p=.021). No other effects were significant (all Fs < .75, ps
> .39). Further analysis of the interaction showed that only
infants in the high/extreme condition had a significant preference, again for the peripheral stimulus (t(23)=2.198, p=.038).
Preferential looking in all other conditions did not differ from
chance (0.5; all ts < 1.2, ps > .24).
Novelty preference: Test trials 3 and 4 In order to establish that looking on the first test trials was driven by novelty preference rather than familiarity preference, preference
scores were obtained for test trials 3 and 4 by dividing the
amount of looking at the novel stimulus by the total looking
time for each trial. The preference scores were subjected to
an ANOVA with factors Test type (novel vs. average, novel
vs. peripheral), Trial order, (novel vs. average first, novel
vs. average second), Distance, and Start- and End-stimulus.
This revealed a main effect of Trial order (F(1,84)=4.895,
p=.03). All other effects were non-significant. Follow-up
t-tests showed that there was always a significant novelty
preference on the first of the two trials (Novel vs. Peripheral: M=.66, SE=.04, t(50)=4.6, p <.001; Novel vs. Average: M=.57, SE=.03; t(46)=2.03, p=.048), but on the second
test trial infants only exhibited a (marginally) significant novelty preference if they had previously seen the pairing of the
novel stimulus and a peripheral stimulus, and were now looking at the average and the novel stimulus (M=.57, SE=.04;
t(46) = 2.0,p=.051). Infants who saw the novel stimulus
paired with the overall average first did not exhibit a preference on the second novelty preference test trial (M=.55,
SE=.03;t(46)=1.6, p=.107). These results are consistent with
Mather & Plunkett’s (2011) findings.

Discussion of Experimental Findings
The main effect of start and end stimulus found for Test trial 1
suggests that a recency or primacy effect determines looking
on Test trial 1. This is consistent with the model predictions
described above. As expected, infants who saw a mild stimulus on familiarization trials 1 and 8 exhibited a preference
for the peripheral stimulus on Test trial 1. For these groups,
the average stimulus appears particularly familiar when they
get to Test trial 1. Infants in the groups with extreme start and
end stimuli on the other hand do not exhibit any preference on
Test trial 1. This is, empirically, the more surprising result:
Younger (1985) reported merely an overall preference for the
peripheral stimulus on the equivalent test trial. A conservative
interpretation of our data would assume that no category was

formed in the extreme conditions. However, the model’s performance indicates that instead of no category being formed
the category’s central tendency is merely closer to the peripheral stimulus than in the mild condition. This suggests that
the null preference we observe is merely due to the fact that
with this shifted category representation the average and peripheral test stimuli are equally interesting to the infants.
Test trial 2 is harder to interpret, as the pattern of preferences is very different from Test trial 1. Such order effects
are common in familiarization / novelty preference paradigms
(for a discussion see Schöner and Thelen (2006)). A likely
cause for this is that learning does not stop at the end of familiarization: infants may incorporate both test stimuli presented
on Test trial 1 in their category, and this will influence looking
preferences on Test trial 2. Further work is required in order
to explain the exact patterns observed, but the fact that all
four conditions differ on this test trial indicate that Euclidean
distance has a secondary impact, i.e. Mather and Plunkett
(2011) assumption still holds. Looking times during familiarization imply that Euclidean distance is an important factor for maintaining infants interest during learning. Infants in
the high distance conditions maintained looking, whereas infants looking times in the low distance conditions decreased,
indicating that they began to habituate. This behavior is consistent with Mather and Plunkett (2011) interpretation of the
impact of Euclidean distance on infants’ attention.

General Discussion
Decades of research on early categorization have assumed
that categorization patterns were not impacted by the order
of presentation of the familiarization stimuli. familiarization
sequences were randomised and results averaged over different realisations. Recently, Mather and Plunkett (2011) challenged this view and showed that the order of presentation of
the familiarization stimuli had an impact on infant category
formation. Reasons for this behavior are yet unclear, which
is why we decided to implement a model so as to evaluate the
role of the order of presentation of the stimuli on the pattern
of categorization.
First, we created a variant of the neural network model introduced by Gliozzi et al. (2009). The model is built with
a simple self-organizing map and successfully reproduces
Mather and Plunkett (2011)’s results. However, the model
proposes an explanation of these results which is different
from that provided by Mather and Plunkett (2011). In particular, the model predicts a primacy/recency effect: category
formation depends on the nature of the first or last stimuli
used in the training sequence.
The model’s predictions have been confirmed by data from
infants. 104 10-month-old infants were familiarized with sequences in the same four conditions presented to the network.
Novelty preference scores on test indicate that responses are
mainly driven by primacy/recency effects, whereas the average Euclidean distance influenced looking time during familiarization. This implies that, at odds to common assump-

2414

tions about familiarization, 10-month-old novelty preference
responses can be heavily influenced by familiarization stimuli at the start or end of the familiarization sequence, a factor
which is often ignored in infant familiarization studies.
Our results are consistent with both primacy and recency
effects, and future research will determine whether category
formation is more heavily influenced by either primacy or recency.
In conclusion, this paper questions the traditional view underlying the novelty preference procedure suggesting that familiarization stimuli are categorized in an abstract representation of all the stimuli. In this traditional view, the representation formed is independent from familiarization contingencies. On the contrary, our results show that infants are sensitive to the order of presentation of the stimuli and support
models that advocate infant category learning as an incremental process by which, on a moment-by-moment basis, infant
refine the boundaries of new categories (Gliozzi et al., 2009;
Gureckis & Love, 2004; Westermann & Mareschal, 2004). In
contrast, our results cannot be explained by models in which
the infants only establish the category boundaries once they
have sampled all familiarization items.

Mareschal, D., & Quinn, P. C. (2001, Sep). Categorization
in infancy. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 5, 443–450.
Mather, E., & Plunkett, K. (2011). Same items, different
order: Effects of temporal variability on infant categorization. Cognition, 119, 438–447.
P.C.Quinn, & R.S.Bhatt. (2010). Learning perceptual organization in infancy:The effect of simultaneous versus
sequential variability experience. Perception, 39, 795–
806.
Schöner, G., & Thelen, E. (2006). Using dynamic field theory
to rethink infant habituation. Psychological Review,
113, 273–298.
Westermann, G., & Mareschal, D. (2004). From Parts to
Wholes: Mechanisms of Development in Infant Visual
Object Processing. Infancy, 5(2), 131–151.
Younger, B. (1985). The segregation of items into categories by ten-month-old infants. Child Development,
56, 1574–1583.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by Wellcome Grant
084386/Z/07/Z to Kim Plunkett and the Winkler Career
Development Fellowship at St Hugh’s College, University of
Oxford, to Nadja Althaus. We wish to thank all parents and
infants who participated in this study.

References
Bomba, P. C., & Siqueland, E. R. (1983). The nature and
structure of infant form categories. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 35, 294–328.
Eimas, P., & Quinn, P. (1994). Studies on the formation
of perceptually based basic-level categories in young
infants. Child Development, 65, 903–917.
Gliozzi, V., Mayor, J., Hu, J.-F., & Plunkett, K. (2009). Labels as Features (Not Names) for Infant Categorization:
A Neurocomputational Approach. Cognitive Science,
33, 709–738.
Gureckis, T., & Love, B. (2004). Common mechanisms in
infant and adult category learning. Infancy, 5(2), 173–
198.
Kohonen, T. (1993). Physiological interpretation of the
self-organizing map algorithm. Neural Networks, 6(7),
895–905.
Kohonen, T. (1997). Self-Organizing Maps, volume 30
of Springer Series in Information Sciences. Springer,
Berlin.
Kovack-Lesh, K. A., & Oakes, L. M. (2007). Hold your
horses: How exposure to different items influences infant categorization. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 98, 69–93.
Mareschal, D., & French, R. (2000). Mechanisms of categorization in infancy. Infancy, 1, 59–76.

2415

