UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Prior Linguistic Knowledge Influences Implicit Language Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6kh2b1dw

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Leung, Janny H.C.
Williams, John N.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Prior Linguistic Knowledge Influences Implicit Language Learning
Janny H.C. Leung (jannyleung@hku.hk)
School of English, The University of Hong Kong,
735 Run Run Shaw Tower, Centennial Campus, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong

John N. Williams (jnw12@cam.ac.uk)
Department of Theoretical and Applied Linguistics, University of Cambridge
9 West Road, Cambridge CB3 9DP, United Kingdom
Natural language learning is a case in point – some
believe that linguistic universals constrain both first
and second language acquisition (Chomsky, 2006;
Hawkins, 2004) and that in both cases the
theoretically interesting learning processes operate at
the implicit level. Even those who dispute the nature
of such linguistic universals would accept that second
language acquisition (SLA) is heavily influenced by
first language (L1) knowledge, or L1-based
processing strategies (MacWhinney, 2008; Ellis &
Sagarra, 2011). Second language (L2) learners
approach SLA with existing linguistic knowledge and
habits they have gathered from their first language
acquisition experience. Cross-linguistic influence is
well documented in the SLA literature, much of
which is concerned with identifying the ways in
which elements from one language get incorporated
into another, accounting for errors, contrastive
analysis, and interaction of transfer effects with other
factors. Ellis (1994/2001: 300) argues that no theory
of SLA “can be considered complete” if it ignores the
learner’s prior linguistic knowledge. In a similar vein,
if IL is posited as an underlying mechanism of
language acquisition, one must also consider whether
and how the influences of prior linguistic experience
on learning take place implicitly. In the SLA
literature, cross-linguistic influences are sometimes
thought of in terms of hypothesis testing and learner
strategies (Corder, 1981; Tomasello & Herron, 1989),
implying a certain degree of intention and awareness
in the process. Although it is difficult to imagine that
such influences involve only explicit processes, there
does not seem to be empirical effort to demonstrate
such influences operating at the implicit level during
learning. Moreover, cross-linguistic influence is
found to be subject to general constraints such as
language proficiency, sociolinguistic factors,
markedness, prototypicality, language distance and
psychotypology, and developmental factors (Ellis,
1994/2001). The interaction of such constraints with
domain general learning mechanisms begs for
research.

Abstract
We report three experiments that explore the effect of
prior linguistic knowledge on implicit language
learning. Native speakers of English and native
speakers of Cantonese participated in implicit
learning (IL) experiments that involved different
learning materials. In Experiment 1, both participant
groups showed evidence of learning a mapping
between articles and noun animacy. In Experiment 2,
neither group showed learning of the mapping
between articles and a linguistically anomalous
concept (the number of capital letters in an English
word or the number of strokes in a Chinese character).
In Experiment 3, the Chinese group, but not the
English group, showed evidence of learning a
mapping between articles and a concept derived from
the Chinese classifier system. It was concluded that
first language knowledge affected implicit language
learning, and that IL, at least when natural language
learning is concerned, is not a completely
unconstrained domain-general mechanism.
Keywords:
implicit
learning;
form-meaning
connections; vocabulary learning; second language
acquisition; cross-linguistic influence

Introduction
Traditional implicit learning (IL) (as contrasted with
explicit learning, EL) research has sought to
minimise the effect of prior knowledge, either by
using artificial grammars (e.g., Reber, 1967) or
artificial event sequences (e.g., serial reaction time
experiments; e.g., Nissen & Bullemer, 1987).
Perruchet and Pacton (2006: 237) suggest that even
arbitrary materials may not be “neutral” enough, for
they may interact with related situational knowledge.
It is typically assumed that domain general
mechanisms underlie IL, but in many real life
situations the learner may bring relevant domainspecific prior knowledge or dispositions, so the
question arises as to whether, or how, these impact
upon the IL process.

Our earlier work has begun to show that learning
processes supporting implicit language learning

2866

effects are not completely unconstrained. Leung and
Williams (2012) used an efficiency measure (Seger
1994) to measure learning of a semi-artificial article
system comprising the pseudowords gi, ul, ro, ne.
Participants were told that the use of the articles
depended on the distance of the object described by
the accompanying noun (gi and ul were used with an
accompanying noun which referred to a near object;
ro and ne were used if it referred to a far object).
Unbeknownst to them, article use also depended on
noun animacy (gi and ro were used with animate
objects and ul and ne with inanimate objects).
Objects were pictorially presented, along with an
audio presentation of the corresponding noun phrase.
The task for the participants was to respond as
quickly as possible whether the noun referred to a
living or a non-living thing1. Learning was measured
by an increase in reaction time when the hidden
regularity was violated (Violation trials) compared
with reaction time in grammatical trials (Control
trials). After performing 272 training trials in the task,
native speakers of English who claimed to be
unaware of the hidden regularity (as revealed in a
standardised verbal report) nevertheless slowed down
significantly in animacy decisions when the
correlation between article use and noun animacy
was reversed. In contrast, in a second experiment
article use correlated with the relative size of objects
rather than their animacy. This time there was no
significant change in relative size decision times
when the mapping between article use and relative
size of the objects described by the nouns was
reversed. The findings suggest that some meanings
are more amenable to the IL of form-meaning
connections than others. One possible explanation for
this is the availability of grammatical processes and
representations based on participants’ existing
linguistic knowledge, but to probe into this issue,
comparisons between participants with different first
languages have to be made.

Experiment 1
Objective
To test whether animacy, a conceptually salient
feature, may be implicitly mapped onto articles by
native speakers of English and Chinese.

Participants
Thirty native speakers of English from the University
of Cambridge and 27 native speakers of Cantonese
Chinese from the University of Hong Kong, with a
varied second language background. All Hong Kong
participants spoke English as an L2, and some also
knew other second/foreign languages.

Materials and Procedure
All experimental materials were digitalized and
presented with E-Prime software.
Participants were told that they would be introduced
to a miniature article system from a language not
known to them (Table 1). They were told that the
articles 2 were used to encode the distance between
the speaker and the object (gi and ro for near objects
and ul and ne for far objects). Therefore gi dog may
be read as ‘the near dog’, ro table as ‘the near table’,
ul mouse as ‘the far mouse’, and ne car as ‘the far
car’. Participants could spend as much time as they
needed to remember the mapping between the articles
and the distance system. Participants were however
not told that the use of these articles also depended
on the animacy of the accompanying noun (gi and ul
for animate objects and ro and ne for inanimate
objects).
Table 1 The miniature article system in Experiment 1
Miniature article
system
Participants
near
were told
far

The present study aims to consolidate and extend our
earlier work by further exploring potential first
language influences on IL of a semi-artificial
grammatical system. We report below three
experiments involving different learning materials
and two language groups (native Chinese and native
English speakers).

Participants not told
animate inanimate
gi
ro
ul
ne

A total of 176 animate and inanimate nouns were
used for the experiment, each appearing twice (once
with each possible article). In the training phase,
participants were exposed to visually presented noun
phrases (article and noun combinations). While the
same article system was used for all participants, the
nouns were presented in each participant group’s first
2

Since the Chinese language has no article system, Chinese
participants were simply told that these were words that
were used before the noun. The Chinese participants were
however familiar with the concept of articles from their L2.

1

Although the task drew attention to meaning, it did not
draw attention to the form-meaning connection which was
the target of learning.

2867

language (i.e., English or Chinese; see table 2). For
instance, an English subject may see gi fox and a

resulting in two presentation lists. Note that although
nouns were repeated from Block 2 to Blocks 3 and 4,
no article-noun combination was repeated throughout
the experiment. After Block 4 participants filled out a
questionnaire which probed awareness of the
relevance of animacy to article usage, awareness of
violations, and at what point in the experiment
awareness of the regularity developed. Participants
who reported no awareness were then encouraged to
guess what factors (apart from near/far) determined
when the articles were used. The whole experiment
took about 45 minutes to complete.

Chinese subject may see gi 狐狸 (‘fox’) on the screen.
The task for the participants was first to make a
decision about the animacy of the object (living or
non-living, M or C key) described by the noun. The
noun phrase then disappeared and was replaced by
the prompt “N/F”. Participants had to indicate the
distance meaning of the article (M = near, K = far).
Both decisions had to be made as quickly as possible
and reaction time was recorded. Response buttons
were configured such that the near/far buttons were
in a logical arrangement - one above the other, which
also helped reduce interference with the other
decision which is in a horizontal arrangement; see
figure 1 for visualisation. Reaction time for the
animacy decision was measured from the onset of the
noun phrase; reaction time for the near/far decision
was measured from the onset of the N/F (near/far)
prompt, which appeared immediately after the
animacy response. Feedback was provided; if
participants gave a wrong response, the display did
not change. Eight practice trials were provided before
the experiment started. A total of 204 grammatical
trials were presented in the training phase, with equal
numbers of trials presented with each article. These
trials were divided into four blocks, although no
division between blocks was apparent to the
participants. The first block consisted of 84 trials,
which were made up of 84 nouns used in
combination with an equal number of one of the two
grammatically possible articles for each noun. Block
2 contained 60 trials, comprising 60 new nouns,
again in combination with an equal number of
appropriate articles. In Block 3, 28 of these nouns
were repeated with a correct article of opposite
distance from Block 2 (e.g. if gi pig had occurred in
Block 2, then ul pig occurred in Block 3). Within
Blocks 1 to 3 the trials were divided into fixed groups
of four, with each article occurring once. For each
participant the order of trials within groups was
randomised as was the order of groups. This
procedure meant that no more than two successive
trials would involve the same article. In Block 4 the
remaining 32 nouns from Block 2 were repeated.
Half of them occurred with an article of different
distance from Block 2, but correct animacy (e.g., if ul
parrot had occurred in Block 2 then gi parrot
occurred in Block 4). These were Control trials. The
other half of the Block 4 trials occurred with the
article of opposite distance and animacy (e.g. if ro
tent had occurred in Block 2, then ul tent occurred in
Block 4). These were Violation trials. Control and
Violation trials were randomly intermixed, and the
nouns were rotated around conditions across subjects,

Table 2. Sample animate and inanimate nouns used in
Experiment 1
gi/ul
English Chinese
version version
fox
狐狸
buffalo
水牛

ro/ne
English
Chinese
version
version
piano
鋼琴
microscope 顯微鏡

gorilla

大猩猩

telescope

望遠鏡

seal

海豹

kettle

水壺

Figure 1. Configuration of response buttons on
millisecond accurate keyboard/response box.

Results
In the post-experiment debriefing, two levels of
unawareness were assessed: a failure to report
knowledge of the hidden regularity, and a failure to
suggest any relevance of the target concept to article
use when prompted to guess. Data from participants
who failed to report knowledge are reported below;
data from participants who failed to guess were found
to show a pattern consistent with the summarized
findings and are not reported here.
Outlying response times, at cutoff limits at ±2.5
standard deviations from each subject’s mean in the
Control and Violation blocks respectively were
removed. In addition, data were excluded from any
participant whose mean response time for the first
decision over the two critical conditions was more
than 2.5 standard deviations from the group mean.

2868

Considerable variability in response times was
observed, possibly because participants varied in how
they distributed processing time over the two
decisions and so inordinately slow participants were
excluded on the basis that they may have been
approaching the task in a different way from the
majority.

linguistically unnatural learning target is adopted in
the following experiment to investigate this.

Experiment 2
Objective
To test whether a linguistically anomalous, formbased, distinction may be implicitly mapped onto
articles by native speakers of English and Chinese.

Evidence of learning is based on the difference in
reaction time across Control and Violation trials, as
tested by a paired-sample t-test. Only data for the
first (in this case animacy) decision are reported (no
effects in any experiment were obtained for the
second, near/far, decision).

Participants
Twenty three native speakers of English from the
University of Cambridge and 29 native speakers of
Chinese from the University of Hong Kong, with a
varied second language background, participated in
the study.

Twenty native English and 20 native Chinese did not
report relevant knowledge of the regularity in
response to the first debriefing question (awareness
rates 33% and 26% respectively). One Chinese
participant was excluded due to slow overall animacy
decision response times. Response times to make
animacy decisions were significantly slower for
Violation than Control trials even for participants
who showed no awareness of the relevance of
animacy, or related concepts, to article usage (see fig.
2, ‘English animacy’ and ‘Chinese animacy’),
indicating that the animacy rule has been learned
implicitly. The combination of alphabetical articles
with characters is orthographically odd for the
Chinese, but this did not seem to have affected their
learning.
1300
1200
1100
1000
900
800
700
600

Materials and Procedure
The experiment shares a similar design with
Experiment 1. The animacy system was now replaced
by a non-semantic distinction for each participant
group. In the English version, the hidden regularity
was that the choice of article depended on whether
the word had one capital letter or two. In the Chinese
version, the hidden regularly was whether the first
character in a two-character noun has more strokes
than the second and vice versa, with a strokes
difference between the characters being big enough
that no counting would be necessary (see Table 3
below).

control
violation

*

Table 3. Sample nouns used in Experiment 2
gi/ro
English
Chinese
version
version
(case)
(stroke)
foX
天鵝

*
**

RT (ms)

ul/ne
English
Chinese
version
version
(case)
(stroke)
goRillA
獅子

piAno

月餅

TelesCope

剪刀

buffaLo

牙醫

sEAl

學生

miCroscope

天橋

kEttlE

瀑布

The design and procedure were the same as
Experiment 1 except that here participants had to
indicate, as their first decision, whether the noun
contained one or two capital letters (M and Z keys
respectively) or whether there were more strokes in
the second or first character (M and Z keys
respectively). The second decision indicated whether
the article meant ‘near’ (M) or ‘far’ (K), as before.

Figure 2. Reaction times (RT) in milliseconds (ms)
for unaware participants in all three experiments,
* p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01 for difference between control
and violation conditions
The question that follows is whether anyone with any
language background will learn any regularity. A

Results

2869

Twenty native English and 28 native Chinese did not
report relevant knowledge of the regularity in
response to the first debriefing question (awareness
rates 13% and 3% respectively). One slow English
unaware participant was excluded.

The design and procedure were the same as in
previous experiments except that here participants
had to indicate, as their first decision, whether the
noun referred to an object that was long (M key) or
flat (Z key). The second decision indicated whether
the article meant ‘near’ (M) or ‘far’ (K), as before.

In both language groups, the reaction times across
Control and Violation trials for unaware participants
were not significantly different (see fig. 2), indicating
that implicit language learning in this domain does
not occur for a linguistically unnatural, and nonsemantic, distinction. The next experiment examines
whether learning occurs for any linguistically natural
semantic distinction, regardless of whether it is
reflected in the first language.

Results
Twenty four native English and 26 native Chinese
did not report relevant knowledge of the regularity in
response to the first debriefing question (awareness
rates 11% and 19% respectively). One slow English
and two slow Chinese unaware participants were
excluded. A significant slowdown in Violation trials
when compared with the Control trials was obtain
among the unaware Chinese participants but not the
unaware English participants (see fig. 2), suggesting
that implicit language learning is sensitive to prior
linguistic knowledge.

Experiment 3
Objective
To test whether a concept derived from the Chinese
classifier system, which is not grammaticised in
English, may be implicitly mapped onto articles by
native speakers of English and Chinese.

Discussion
One might imagine that in this paradigm participants
merely learn associations between articles and
patterns of keystrokes, e.g., that ‘gi’ is associated
with the sequence M (living) – M (near), or ‘ne’ with
Z (non-living) – K (far). Control trials respect these
patterns, but Violation trials break them, e.g. ‘gi’
would occur with the sequence Z (non-living) – M
(near). However, if this were the case, then the nature
of the categorization being performed on the noun
should have made no difference whatsoever. The fact
that it did suggests that the learning effects were due
to learning associations between the articles and
conceptual categories.

Participants
Twenty seven native speakers of English from the
University of Cambridge and 32 native speakers of
Chinese from the University of Hong Kong, with a
varied second language background, participated in
the study.

Materials and Procedure
The learning target in this experiment is derived from
a shape distinction in the Chinese classifier system.
The Chinese classifier 張 (zoeng1 in Cantonese) is
generally used with thin flat objects (e.g., sheets of
paper, photos, blankets), and the counter 條 (tiu4 in
Cantonese) is generally used with long thin objects
(e.g., rivers, straws, ties) 3. Both classifiers frequently
occur in daily usage.

It is important to note that in all of the experiments
the relevant ‘hidden’ conceptual distinction had to be
attended and computed in order to perform the task.
But this did not guarantee that the association with
the articles would be learned. Some equate statistical
learning with IL (e.g., Conway & Christiansen, 2006),
but statistical computations should not be sensitive to
the nature of the data (Perruchet & Pacton, 2006).

The same design as the above experiments was
adopted, except that the long/flat distinction became
the hidden regularity governing article use in this
experiment. The same article system was used with
the two participant groups; nouns were presented in
the first language of the participants. For example,
one may find items such as gi shoelace and ro
envelope in the English version, and their equivalents
in the Chinese version (e.g., gi 鞋帶 and ro 信封).

The finding that IL effects are sensitive to the nature
of the concepts involved points to an interaction
between the domain general learning mechanism and
linguistic knowledge, which, according to many
linguists, is domain specific. Semantic IL in natural
language is constrained by the availability of
conceptual distinctions to grammaticisation, which
varies cross-linguistically.

3

In both cases exceptions exist. For instance, zoeng1 is also
associated with furniture items. Such exceptional items
were not included in the experiment.

Where no evidence of learning was obtained, it is
possible that measurable learning would develop over

2870

time. This is to say that linguistically unnatural or
unfamiliar semantic categories may not be
unlearnable. However, the variable amount of
learning obtained after equivalent exposure shows
that implicit language learning is sensitive to prior
linguistic knowledge. The present study thus extends
the existing literature and is congruent with studies
which show that cross cultural processing biases also
apply to unconscious knowledge (such as a
preference for local versus global perspectives in
Kiyokawa et al., 2012), and can help explain SLA
studies which find L1 semantic structures in L2
processing (e.g., Jiang 2004).

References
Conway, C. M. and Christiansen, M. H. (2006)
Statistical Learning Within and Between
Modalities: Pitting Abstract Against StimulusSpecific Representations. Psychological Science,
17:10, 905-912.
Chomsky, N. (2006) Language and Mind. Cambridge
University Press.
Corder, P. (1981) Error analysis and interlanguage.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ellis, N. C. & Sagarra, N. (2011) Learned attention in
adult language acquisition: A replication and
generalization study and meta-analysis. Studies in
Second Language Acquisition, 33: 4, 589-624.
Ellis, R. (1994/2001) The Study of Second Language
Acquisition. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press.
Hawkins, John. A. (2004) Efficiency and complexity
in grammars. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University
Press.
Jiang, N. Semantic Transfer and Its Implications for
Vocabulary Teaching in a Second Language. The
Modern Language Journal, 88:3, 416-432.
Kiyokawa, S., Dienes, Z., Tanaka, D., Yamada, A.
and Crowe, L. (2012) Cross cultural differences in
unconscious knowledge. Cognition, 124: 16-24.
Leung, J. H. C. and Williams, J. N. (2012)
Constraints on Implicit Learning of Grammatical
Form-Meaning Connections. Language Learning,
62: 2, 634–662.
MacWhinney, B. (2008) A Unified Model. In N. Ellis
& P. Robinson (Eds.) Handbook of cognitive
linguistics and second language acquisition.
Lawrence Erlbaum Press.
Nissen, M.J., & Bullemer, P. (1987) Attentional
requirements of learning: Evidence from
performance measures. Cognitive Psychology, 19:1,
1-32.
Perruchet, P. and Pacton, S. (2006) Implicit learning
and statistical learning: one phenomenon, two
approaches. Trends in Cognitive Science, 10:5,
233-238.
Reber, A. S. (1967). Implicit learning of artificial
grammars. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 6, 855-863.
Tomasello, M. and Herron, C. (1989) Feedback for
Language Transfer Errors. Studies in Second
Language Acquisition, 11, 386-395.
Williams, J. N. (2005). Learning without awareness.
Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 27, 269–
304.

We provide evidence that cross-linguistic influences
may take place implicitly, and caution against a
presumption that L1 transfer is based on hypothesis
testing or learner strategy. It remains unclear to what
degree such influences take place implicitly, or
explicitly, or both implicitly and explicitly, in
different SLA settings, and it seems likely that
individual differences exist. A better understanding
of the mechanism underlying cross-linguistic
influences has obvious theoretical and pedagogical
implications. Theoretically it sheds light on debates
in language acquisition on domain specificity and
linguistic universals; pedagogically it informs
teaching/learning methodologies that aim to promote
or discourage different kinds of influences.
But the kind of cross-linguistic influence that we
have demonstrated may have gone beyond simple
transfer. In our experiments, English participants
were only sensitive to animacy – a fundamental
conceptual distinction, even though it is only subtly
marked in English, and there is no article-noun
agreement. Chinese participants were sensitive to all
semantic (but not non-semantic) distinctions,
presumably through experience of their classifier
system, but generalizing to novel distinctions.
Although many assume that first language acquisition
is essentially implicit, it is only recently that research
has shown possibilities of adult SLA taking place
implicitly. Apart from further exploring the
mechanisms of crosslinguistic influence, which are
pertinent to SLA research, future research into
implicit language learning may also inform IL
research as to its nature and constraints.

Acknowledgments
This project (code RES-000-22-3030) has been
generously supported by a joint research scheme
under Research Grants Council, Hong Kong, and
Economic and Social Research Council, United
Kingdom.

2871

