UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Producing gestures facilitates encoding of spatial relation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3mg475gn

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Chong, Amy
Choi, Ben
Kwong, Elena
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Producing gestures facilitates encoding of spatial relation
Amy Chong (S1155009099@Mailserv.Cuhk.Edu.Hk)
Ben Choi (S1155016253@Mailserv.Cuhk.Edu.Hk)
Elena Kwong (S0960192@Mailserv.Cuhk.Edu.Hk)
Department of Psychology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong

Jennifer Chan (S1155004719@Mailserv.Cuhk.Edu.Hk)
Irina Chong (S1155004024@Mailserv.Cuhk.Edu.Hk)
Mavis Ip (S1155003387@Mailserv.Cuhk.Edu.Hk)
Department of Educational Psychology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong

Christopher Yeung (S1155003299@Mailserv.Cuhk.Edu.Hk)
Department of Psychology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong

Wing Chee So (WINGCHEE@Cuhk.Edu.Hk)
Department of Educational Psychology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong

Abstract
This paper examines whether producing gestures would
facilitate encoding of spatial relation in a navigation task. In this
experiment, we focused on gestures produced without
accompanying speech. Adult participants were asked to study
spatial sequence of routes shown in four diagrams, one at a time.
Participants rehearsed the routes with gestures, actual hand
movements (actually drew the routes on papers), or mental
simulation. They then were asked to reconstruct the routes with
sticks. Participants who moved their hands (either in the form of
gestures or actual drawing) recalled better than those who
mentally simulated the routes and those who did not rehearse,
suggesting that hand movements produced during rehearsal
facilitate encoding of spatial relation. Interestingly, participants
who gestured the routes in the air recalled better than those who
drew them on papers, suggesting that gesture, as a kind of
representational action, exerts more powerful influence on
spatial relation encoding.
Keywords: Gesture; Spatial Cognition; Action; Encoding;
Embodied Cognition.

Introduction
Spatial knowledge consists of three major skills,
including spatial visualization, spatial relation, and spatial
orientation (Lohman, 1979). The present study focuses on
spatial relation. Understanding relational information
enables us to form a spatial representation regarding relation
between locations, objects, and paths. Such understanding is
particularly useful when we are processing spatial
information of how starting points and destinations are
considered in relation to one another. Therefore, developing
techniques to facilitate encoding of spatial relation has
received increasing attention from cognitive and educational
psychologists all over the world.

In the present study, we examine whether embodied
movements like gestures might be effective in encoding
spatial relation. Previous research has shown that producing
gestures is directly involved in encoding new information
but those studies focused on mathematics domain. Children
who were told to gesture when explaining their solutions to
a math problem benefited more from the subsequent math
lesson, compared to children who were told not to gesture
(Broaders, Cook, Mitchell, & Goldin-Meadow, 2007).
Children who were instructed to reproduce teacher’s
gestures while acquiring new mathematics concepts learnt
and memorized mathematics knowledge better than did
those who were instructed to reproduce teacher’s verbal
instructions only (Cook, Mitchell, & Goldin-Meadow,
2008). However, no experimental work has examined
whether gestures strengthen spatial relation encoding.
Gestures are spontaneous hand movements. They are
produced in space, and thus are inherently spatial (McNeill,
1992; 2005). Therefore, learners can exploit the spatial
properties of gestures to encode spatial relation between the
starting point and destination. For example, when encoding
spatial sequence of a route, learners may trace the steps with
an index finger in the air by moving it to the right, upwards,
and to the right again.
In fact, gestures and spatial relation are tightly linked.
Previous studies have shown that speakers produce cospeech gestures (gestures that are co-occurring with speech)
when they convey spatial relation to listeners in speech. For
example, they use co-speech gestures to depict spatial layout
of an area (Emmorey, Tversky & Taylor, 2000) and spatial
arrangement of objects (Sauter, Uttal, Alman, GoldinMeadow, & Levine, 2012). In addition, previous studies
have reported that speakers produce co-speech gestures
frequently when they are identifying spatial relation
between two characters in narratives (So, Coppola,
Liccidarello, & Goldin-Meadow, 2005; So, Kita, & GoldinMeadow, 2009). They also increase gesture production

2000

when encountering difficulty in describing complex spatial
patterns (Hostetter, Alibali, & Kita, 2007; Melinger & Kita,
2007).
The present study asks whether asking participants to
produce gestures while encoding spatial relation information
would enhance subsequent spatial recall. We here focus on
gestures produced while thinking silently (i.e., co-thought
gestures, see Chu & Kita, 2011). If co-thought gestures
merely depict spatial relation, then participants who are told
to gesture when rehearsing spatial sequence silently should
recall comparable number of steps than those who are told
not to gesture. However, if co-thought gestures do more
than simply conveying spatial relation, i.e., they are
involved in encoding and constructing spatial relation, then
participants who are told to gesture during rehearsal should
recall more steps than those who are told not to gesture.
In order to test the above hypotheses, adult participants
were told to study various routes and to rehearse the routes
by producing co-thought gestures (e.g., index finger moves
up and then to the right). We then compared their recall
performance to another three groups of learners who were
instructed, respectively, to rehearse the routes by actually
drawing them out on papers, to mentally rehearse the routes
while having their hand movements prohibited, and to read
letters that prevented rehearsal.

Method
Participants
One hundred and twelve Chinese-speaking undergraduates
(53 men, age range: 19-21 years) were recruited and each of
them was paid for HKD$30 for their participation. All of
them had correct or correct-to-normal vision. All but one
participant were right-handed. They were undergraduates at
the Chinese University of Hong Kong. The participants
were randomly assigned to one of the four experimental
conditions: 1) co-thought gesture; 2) actual drawing; 3)
hand movement prohibited; and 4) no rehearsal, with 28
participants in each condition.

Stimuli
We designed the stimuli that purposefully examined spatial
relation. Four diagrams were created by the software
“Edraw Max”. In each diagram, there were seven vertical
lines and ten strokes that were horizontal, diagonal, or curly
connecting or not connecting with the vertical lines. The
strokes that were connected to vertical lines formed a route
navigating from the starting point to the destination. See
Figure 1 for one of the diagrams (top) and its route
highlighted in red (bottom). For the sequence of this route,
one should move down, then move diagonally downwards,
move up, move to the right, move down, move to the right,
move down, cross the curly road, move up, move diagonally
upwards, move down, cross the bridge, and finally move to
the destination. There were thirteen steps in each route.

Figure 1. The top figure shows one of the maps tested in this
experiment. The bottom figure shows the route navigating
from the starting point to the destination.

Procedure
Participants were tested individually. They were asked to
study four routes, one at a time, and later on describe the
routes to an experimenter. Each time they were presented
with a diagram that showed a complete route on an A4-sized
paper (see the bottom figure in Figure 1). In order to help
them to get familiar with the steps, participants were told to
trace the complete route twice with a highlighter. They
should trace every step and not to pause at any junctions of
the route. Then we removed the diagram.
Participants then received different instructions for
rehearsal in different conditions. In the co-thought gesture
condition, participants were told to rehearse the route from
the starting point to the destination with their hands. In the
actual drawing condition, participants were instructed to
draw the route from the starting point to the destination once
on a piece of blank A4-sized paper. Participants were told
that they were not required to draw the route in the same
scale as that shown in the previous diagram. They were also
told that neatness of their drawing would not be evaluated.
In the hand movement prohibited condition, participants
were told to visualize or mentally simulate the route
sequence from the starting point to the destination once
while holding a softball in both hands. Then they informed
the experimenter when they finished visualizing a complete
route. In the no rehearsal condition, participants were given
an A4-sized paper with different alphabets randomly printed
on it. They were told to read the alphabets aloud for 20
seconds in order to prevent them from mentally rehearsing

2001

the route. Before this experiment, we conducted a pilot
study and found that on average participants spent 20
seconds on rehearsing a complete route in the hand
movement prohibited condition. Therefore, we asked
participants to read letters aloud for 20 seconds. We also
expected that reading letters aloud would not interfere with
participants’ spatial representations because the letters were
randomly printed on an A4-sized paper such that they did
not form any clear spatial pattern.
Then all participants recalled the route they had just
rehearsed. They were given thirteen sticks with the same
length and told to reconstruct the route sequence from the
starting point to the destination on a table. They were told
that they were not required to reconstruct the route in the
same scale as that shown in the diagrams.
Before they studied the second route, participants were
required to work on a set of mathematics problems for two
minutes in order to prevent proactive interference of the
directions from the previous route. Then the second diagram
was presented and the aforementioned procedures were
repeated. The experiment was complete after all four routes
were studied. The order of diagrams was randomized across
participants. The whole experiment was videotaped.

Coding
We measured the average amount of time (in seconds) each
participant spent on rehearsing a complete route (including
pauses and self-corrections, if any) across four diagrams in
different conditions (except the no rehearsal condition). We
also examined the mean number of steps participants
rehearsed in the co-thought gesture and actual drawing
conditions.
We then assessed the accuracy of recall by considering
how many steps (out of thirteen) were correctly
reconstructed by sticks for each diagram. A step was
considered recalled correctly if the direction and sequence
of the corresponding stick matched those in the diagram.
The mean proportion of steps correctly recalled in each
diagram was calculated for each participant, which was the
number of steps correctly recalled, divided by thirteen (i.e.,
the total number of steps in the diagram). We also measured
the average amount of time (in seconds) each participant
spent on reconstructing each route (including all pauses and
hesitations)
Reliability was assessed by having a second coder coded
a subset (20%) of the data. Inter-rater agreement was 98%
(Cohen’s Kappa = .95) for measuring the time spent on
rehearsal; 91% (Cohen’s Kappa = .88) for identifying the
number of steps rehearsed in the co-thought gesture in the
air, and actual drawing conditions; 95% for determining the
accuracy of steps reconstructed (Cohen’s Kappa = .92); and
100% for determining the duration of reconstruction
(Cohen’s Kappa = 1).

Results

All participants in the co-thought gesture condition gestured
when they were rehearsing the routes and most of them used
their index fingers. All but one participant gestured with
their right hands. On average, participants in the co-thought
gesture condition spent 17.86 seconds (SD = 2.32) to
rehearse a route. Participants in the actual drawing and hand
movement prohibited conditions spent 24.81 seconds (SD
=3.14) and 19.18 seconds (SD = 1.19) respectively. Oneway ANOVA showed that there was a significant difference
in the rehearsal duration among different conditions, F (2,
82) = 12.19, p < .001. Tukey posthoc tests showed that the
time spent on rehearsing a complete route in the actual
drawing condition was significantly longer than that in the
co-thought gesture, p < .001, and hand movements
prohibited condition, p < .002. There was no difference
between co-thought gesture and hand movement prohibited
conditions, ps = ns.
The mean number of steps participants rehearsed in the
co-thought gesture was 11.83 (SD = 3.54) and that in the
actual drawing condition was 11.91 (SD = 5.43), t (54) = .88,
ns. Thus, participants in both conditions rehearsed
comparable number of steps.
We then examined the proportion of steps accurately
reconstructed, which was our main interest. Figure 2 shows
the mean proportion of steps correctly reconstructed in the
four conditions. We conducted ANOVA with condition (cothought gesture, actual drawing, hand movement prohibited,
no rehearsal) as the between-subject independent variable
and the proportion of steps correctly reconstructed as the
dependent variable.

Figure 2. The mean proportion of steps correctly recalled
in the co-thought gesture, actual drawing, hand movement
prohibited and no rehearsal conditions.
There was a significant effect of condition, F (3, 107) =
12.81, p < .001, 2 = .35. Planned contrasts using
Bonferroni correction showed the proportion of steps
correctly reconstructed in the co-thought gesture condition
was higher than that in the actual drawing condition, p
< .001, that in the hand movement prohibited condition, p
< .001, and that in the no rehearsal condition, p < .001. The
proportion of steps correctly reconstructed in the actual

2002

drawing condition was also higher than that in the hand
movement prohibited condition, p < .04, and that in the no
rehearsal condition, p < .001. Participants in the hand
movement prohibited condition reconstructed more steps
than those in the no rehearsal condition, p < .02.
On average, participants spent comparable amount of
time (in seconds) in reconstructing a route in all conditions:
28.32 seconds (SD = 3.51) in the co-thought gesture in the
air condition; 29.48 seconds (SD = 3.19) in the actual
drawing condition; 28.38 seconds (SD = 3.29) in the hand
movement prohibited condition; and 30.26 seconds (SD =
3.41) in the no rehearsal condition, F (3, 107) = .89, ns.
Therefore, the greater reconstruction accuracy in the cothought gesture conditions was not attributed to the time
spent on recall.

Discussion
To summarize, participants who were instructed to gesture
reconstructed more steps than those who were told to
mentally rehearse the routes and those who did not rehearse
the routes at all, suggesting that producing co-thought
gestures during rehearsal facilitates encoding of spatial
relation. Besides gesturing, drawing the routes on a paper
also yielded better spatial recall than mentally rehearsing the
routes. Therefore, hand movements produced during
rehearsal, either in the forms of gestures or actual drawing,
enhance spatial relation encoding, which in turn promote
subsequent recall.
There are very few studies to date that show the role of
gesture in encoding spatial relation or spatial learning in
general, despite the fact that gesture itself is spatial in nature
(McNeill, 1992) and it often represents visuo-spatial
information (e.g., Alibali, 2005; Lavergne & Kimura, 1987;
McNeill, 1992; Kita & Özyürek, 2003; So, Coppola,
Liccardello, Goldin-Meadow, 2005). Of a few studies, Chu
and Kita (2011) found beneficial roles of co-thought
gestures in mental rotation task; Ehrlich, Levine, and
Goldin-Meadow (2006) reported that frequency of cospeech gestures is positively associated with children’s
performance in the mental rotation task. The findings in the
present study contribute to the field of gesture research in a
way that producing co-thought gestures while encoding
spatial information of route sequence increases recall
accuracy.
Our findings converge with the embodied viewpoint of
cognition. According to the theories of embodied cognition,
our bodily actions are interconnected with mental
representation of objects and events (e.g., Barsalou, 1999;
Glenberg, 1997; Wilson, 2002). However, most of the
previous studies that supported the theories of embodied
cognition focused on actions on real objects. For example,
Beilock, Lyons, Mattarella-Micke, Nausbaum, & Small
(2008) found that expert ice-hockey players understood
hockey-language scenarios better than did hockey novices,
suggesting that previous action experience facilitates the
comprehension of action-related language. Casasanto and
Dijkstra (2010) also reported that participants who were told

to move marbles upward retrieved positive memories more
often and faster than did those who moved marbles
downward, suggesting a causal link between bodily action
and cognition. Previous research has also shown that actual
movements improved spatial skills. For example,
Weidenbauer, Schmid, and Jansen-Osmann (2007) found
that participants who were trained to use a joystick to rotate
two-dimensional figures had better performance in the
mental rotation task than did those who were not trained.
Similarly, Wexler, Kosslyn, and Berthoz (1998) showed that
participants who were required to turn a joystick while
solving the mental rotation task had faster response rate and
higher accuracy when the direction of hand movements was
congruent with the direction of mental rotation than when it
was not congruent. Our findings provide additional support
to the theories of embodied cognition by demonstrating that
actual movements like drawing routes on papers facilitate
encoding of spatial relation. However, we here take a step
further and find that representational actions, i.e., gestures,
produced during rehearsal also exert significant influence on
encoding and retention of spatial information. Hence,
embodied movements, both real and representational, would
influence our spatial cognition.
In addition, although it was not part of our prediction, our
findings showed that participants in the co-thought gesture
condition had better recall than those in the actual drawing
condition. Participants who gestured the routes recalled
more steps than did those who drew them on paper. As a
result, co-thought gestures seem to bring a greater impact on
encoding and retaining spatial relation than actually drawing
on paper. The better performance in the co-thought gesture
condition, as compared to the actual drawing condition,
might indicate that less concrete actions provided a greater
cognitive benefit in reinforcing the spatial representation. It
is possibly because producing co-thought gestures might
solidify the spatial information better than drawing on paper.
In the actual drawing condition, participants could see the
route sequences drawn on paper and they might rely on
those sequences for the rehearsal of the subsequent steps. As
such, it was not necessary for them to maintain the steps
actively in their memory. In contrast, participants in the cothought gesture condition did not leave visible trails. Hence,
they might have to keep rehearsing the previous steps in
order to proceed to the subsequent ones. As a result,
producing co-thought gestures would help participants to
maintain and create a richer mental representation of the
path than drawing on paper. The findings might advance our
understanding about the effects of different kinds of
embodied movements on spatial learning. While embodied
movements in general enhance spatial relation encoding,
representational movements (i.e., gestures) seem to be more
effective than actual movements in improving encoding and
retrieval of the path information.
However, one might contend that drawing was also
involved in facilitating encoding of spatial relation in the cothought gesture condition. This is because participants in
this condition traced the complete paths twice while

2003

studying the routes before they produced co-thought
gestures during rehearsal. Hence, their recall performance
might be attributed to dual encoding of spatial relation by
drawing and gesturing (Paivio, 1971). In contrast,
participants in the actual drawing condition seemed to
repeat what they were doing (i.e., drawing on papers) when
they were learning and rehearsing the routes. However,
participants did see the complete routes on papers while
they were tracing the routes on papers whereas they did not
see those routes during rehearsal. As a result, although
participants drew on papers when learning and rehearsing
the routes, they might use different mental processes to
encode spatial relation.
While our results provide strong evidence that cothought gestures play a causal role in encoding spatial
relation, they do not tell us how gesture is involved in the
encoding process. We propose that co-thought gestures can
facilitate encoding of spatial sequence in various ways. First,
they provide participants with rich sensori-motor
representation of the sequence of steps (Hegarty, Mayer,
Kriz, & Keehner, 2005; Hostetter & Alibali, 2008). In
addition, they help participants to maintain the
representation active in memory (de Ruiter, 1998; Wesp,
Hesse, Keutmann, & Wheaton, 2001). They also help
participants to offload intermediate representations of the
spatial sequence to their hands in order to reduce the chance
of forgetting those representations (Chu & Kita, 2011;
Goldin-Meadow, Nasbaum, Kelly, & Wagner, 2001).
To our knowledge, this study is the first one to test the
hypothesis that co-thought gesture is more powerful than
actual movement in facilitating spatial relation encoding.
Producing co-thought gestures allows us to construct the
spatial information and retain it in our memory with
relatively little effort. Further research should also address
whether gestural encoding can be applied to other spatial
tasks and how long its mnemonic effect lasts for. Based on
the findings in this study, however, we could start practicing
moving our fingers in the air when we are learning a
direction in a new environment.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by Faculty Supportive Fund at
the Chinese University of Hong Kong.

References
Alibali, M. W. (2005). Gesture in spatial cognition:
Expressing, communicating and thinking about spatial
information. Spatial Cognition & Computation, 5, 307331.
Barsalou,
L.W.
(1999).
Perceptual
Symbol
Systems. Behavioral and Brain Sciences (22) 577–660.
Beilock, S. L., Lyons, I. M., Mattarella-Micke, A.,
Nusbaum, H. C., & Small, S. L. (2008). Sports
experience changes the neural processing of action
language. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, USA, 105, 13269-13273.

Broaders, S., Cook, S.W., Mitchell, Z., & Goldin-Meadow,
S. (2007). Making children gesture reveals implicit
knowledge and leads to learning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 136, 539-550.
Casasanto, D. & Dijkstra, K. (2010). Motor action and
emotional memory. Cognition, 115(1), 179-185.
Chu, M., & Kita, S. (2011). The nature of the beneficial role
of
spontaneous
gesture
in
spatial
problem
solving. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
140, 102-116.
Cook, S. W., Mitchell, Z., Goldin-Meadow, S. (2008).
Gesturing makes learning last. Cognition, 106, 1047-1058.
de
Ruiter,
J.P.
(1998). Gesture
and
speech
production. Doctoral dissertation at Catholic University
of Nijmegen, Netherlands.
Ehrlich, S. B., Levine, S., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (2006).
The importance of gesture in children’s spatial reasoning.
Developmental Psychology, 42, 1259–1268.
Emmorey, K., Tversky, B. & Taylor, H.B. (2000). Using
space to describe space: Perspective in speech, sign and
gesture. Spatial Cognition and Computation, 2, 157-180.
Glenberg, A. M. (1997). What memory is for. Behavioral &
Brain Sciences, 20, 1-55.
Goldin-Meadow, S., Nusbaum, H., Kelly, S.D., & Wagner,
S. (2001). Explaining math: Gesturing lightens the load.
Psychological Science, 12, 6, 516-522
Hegarty M, Mayer S, Kriz S, & Keehner M. (2005). The
role of gestures in mental animation. Spatial Cognition
and Computation, 5:333–56
Hostetter, A. B., Alibali, W. M., & Kita, S. (2007). I see it
in my hand's eye: Representational gestures are sensitive
to conceptual demands. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 22(3), 313-336.
Hostetter, A. B., & Alibali, M. W. (2008). Visible
embodiment: Gestures as simulated action. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 15(3), 495–514
Kita, S. & Özyürek, A. (2003). What does cross-linguistic
variation in semantic coordination of speech and gesture
reveal?: Evidence for an interface representation of
spatial thinking and speaking. Journal of Memory and
Language, 48, 16-32.
Lavergne, J. & Kimura, D. (1987). Hand movement
asymmetry during speech: no effect of speaking topic.
Neuropsychologia, 25, 689-693.
Lohman, D. F. (1979). Spatial ability: Review and reanalysis of the correlational literature. Stanford
University Technical Report No. 8.
Melinger, A. & Kita, S. (2007). Conceptual load triggers
gesture production. Language and Cognitive Processes,
22, 4, 473-500.
McNeill, D. (2005). Gesture and Thought. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Paivio, A (1971). Imagery and verbal processes. New York:
Holt, Rinehart, and Winston.
Sauter, M., Uttal, D.H., Alman, A.S., Goldin-Meadow, S.,
Levine, S.C. (2012).Learning what children know about
space from looking at their hands: the added value of

2004

gesture in spatial communication. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, Apr;111(4):587-606
So, W.C., Coppola, M., Licciardello, V. & Goldin-Meadow,
S. (2005). The seeds of spatial grammar in the manual
modality. Cognitive Science, 29, 1029-1043.
So, W. C., Kita, S., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (2009). Using the
Hands to Identify Who Does What to Whom: Gesture and
Speech Go Hand-in-Hand. Cognitive Science, 33, 115125.
Weidenbauer, G., Schmid, J., & Jansen-Osmann, P. (2007).
Manual training of mental rotation. European Journal of
Cognitive Psychology, 19(1), 17-36.
Wesp, R., Hesse, J., Keutmann, D., & Wheaton, K. (2001).
Gestures maintain spatial imagery. The American Journal
of Psychology, 114, 591–600.
Wexler, M., Kosslyn, S. M., & Berthoz, A. (1998). Motor
processes in mental rotation. Cognition, 68, 77-94
Wilson, M. (2002). Six views of embodied cognition.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9, 625–636.

2005

