UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Rapid Learning of Morphological Paradigms

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1th7s1mb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Finley, Sara
Wiemers, Elizabeth

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Rapid Learning of Morphological Paradigms
Sara Finley (sara.finley@waldorf.edu)
Department of Psychology, Waldorf College
Forest City, IA, 50436, USA

Elizabeth Wiemers (wiemerse@net.elmhurst.edu)
Department of Psychology, Elmhurst College
Elmhurst, IL, 60126, USA
This study specifically looks at learning of
morphologically complex words. Morphemes are parts of
words that do not break down into smaller segments with
meanings. For example, the word flying contains two
morphemes: fly and –ing. Morphology plays an important
role in language learning (as well as in learning linguistic
categories) because morphology involves both the form of
the morpheme (e.g., -ing) as well as its meaning (i.e.,
progressive). Because morphological forms are often bound
– attached to the stems of each word in the category,
learners must be able to recognize morphemes within
complex words. In order to learn the morphology of one’s
language, the learner must be able to separate words in
terms of their morphological parts. This ability is referred to
as morpheme segmentation.
Because all morphemes involve form and meaning, there
is a question as to when both aspects of the morpheme are
learned. Given that infants are exposed to complex words in
speech before they know the meaning of many words, it is
likely that infants are able to segment morphological
information without semantics. Studies have shown that by
15 months, infants can use distributional cues to learn nonadjacent dependencies, which are necessary for learning
syntactic categories (Gomez & Maye, 2005), and by 18
months, can begin to acquire categories (Mintz, Newport, &
Bever, 2002). Gomez and Gerken (2000) suggest that some
learning of categories occurs at the very earliest stages of
life. These studies suggest that morpheme segmentation can
occur without knowledge of the specific meaning of the
words. In addition, these results also suggest the possibility
that early learners are equipped with biases to learn
linguistic systems using distributional cues. Because
languages tend to show broad similarities with respect to the
nature of complex morphological rules, it is possible that
languages evolved to accommodate biases within the
learner.
The nature of learning biases in young infants raises the
question as to why there are differences between child and
adult language learners. Any theory of learning biases,
innate or otherwise, must explain how biases change (and
remain the same) over time, in order to explain why children
and adults show differences in language learning strategies
(Newport, 1990). One hypothesis is that adults have lost the
abilities for acquisition that children have (MacWhinney,
1983), but in some cases of artificial language learning,
adults outperform children. Specifically, Braine, Brody, and
Brooks (1990) showed higher rates of learning for adults

Abstract
The present study presents a novel paradigm for testing the
ability for adults to rapidly learn novel morphological
categories in the wake of irrelevant information: specifically
number markings intermixed with irrelevant gender cues.
Using an artificial language learning paradigm, participants
were exposed to picture-sound pairs in which pictures of
animals varied by number (singular, dual and plural), but
with irrelevant gender information intermixed with the
exposure items (masculine, feminine and neuter). Auditory
stimuli were presented in CVCVCV forms (e.g., [zovabu])
in which the first two syllables denoted the animal (e.g.,
[zova] for snail) and the final syllable denoted number. (e.g.,
[bu] for single). Results revealed that participants were able
to learn which category the suffix endings referred to, based
on a two-alternative forced-choice generalization task.
Implications for the learning of complex paradigms are
discussed.
Keywords: statistical learning, number, morphology.

Introduction
Languages are governed by complex sets of rules in which
sentences are formed through a systematic combination of
words. The rule-governed nature of sentences relies heavily
on the use of morphological rules and syntactic categories.
Words of the same syntactic categories (e.g., nouns and
verbs) share similarities beyond meaning. For example,
while verbs typically describe actions, in English verbs
frequently follow a noun and precede a prepositional phrase
(as in The dog sat on the carpet). In addition, syntactic
categories share morphological properties, such as tense,
gender and number. These morphological indicators are
often present as prefixes or suffixes.
The specific
phonological form of these morphemes appears to be
arbitrary in many languages, as in the use of /-s/ as plural in
English. However, there is some evidence that languages
with complex systems of gender and number morphology
such as French, German, and Hebrew may show signs of
systematicity within subcategories (Brooks, Braine,
Catalano, and Brody, 1993). In this paper we explore how
adults are able to learn complex systems of morphology,
and whether learners are sensitive to differences in the
arbitrariness of morphological patterns.

442

compared to children when learning novel suffix endings.
Another hypothesis suggests adults have learned new
methods for acquisition that override the initial learning
biases (McWhinney, 1983).
While there are clear differences between children and
adults, there is evidence that adults still show biases towards
certain morphemes. For example, several studies have
shown that children learn suffixes more quickly than adults,
and adults learn prefixes more quickly than children (Frigo
& McDonald, 1998; MacWhinney, 1983), but research has
also shown that adults can parse suffixes with no additional
distributional cues (Finley, 2010). In addition, Finley and
Newport (in prep) showed that adult learners are biased
against typologically infrequent morphological patterns such
as infixation. By studying when adults are able to learn
patterns that deviate from their native language (and when
they cannot), we can better understand the biases that exist
for language learning, as well as to better understand how
adults can better achieve native-like competence in learning
a second language. If adults show biases for particular
patterns that are common, but against patterns that are rare
or unattested in natural language, it suggests that biases
about language learning persist into adulthood that may help
to shape how languages across the world are structured.
The present study focuses on how morphological patterns
are learned when the pattern itself differs from the native
language, and there is information in the input that is
irrelevant to the morphological parsing. The question is
whether adults can easily ignore the irrelevant parsing, and
learn a morphological pattern that is similar to the native
language (English) but differs in important respects. For
example, number marking of nouns in English follows a
singular-plural distinction in which singular nouns are
unmarked, but plural nouns are marked with a suffix. There
are also languages that have a three-way number marking
system in which singular, dual and plural are marked each
with a specific suffix, as in Slovene (Greenberg, 2006). This
type of system poses a specific challenge for an adult
learner because the participant may enter the experiment
with the assumption that number marking works exactly like
English, but will have to undo these assumptions in order to
learn that all numbers are marked and that there is a
distinction between ‘two’ and ‘plural’ that is not found in
English.
Previous research has explored how adults and children
learn novel category patterns. The bulk of these studies
focused on the statistical properties of the items themselves,
such as the frequency of presentation, the role of immediate
feedback (Braine, et al., 1990), similarity of words
belonging to each class (Brooks, Braine, Catalano, & Brody,
1993) and the density and overlap between subcategories
(Reeder, Newport, & Aslin, 2013; Reeder, Newport, &
Aslin, 2009, 2010). Finley and Newport (2010; 2011)
focused on the statistical cues that allow for morpheme
segmentation without semantic information. In addition, it
has been shown that providing visual word cues can

enhance speech segmentation of a novel language
(Cunillera, Laine, Camara, & Rodriguez-Fornells, 2010).
The present paper extends previous research by focusing
specifically on morphological paradigms that relate to a
specific system of form-meaning combinations that can
extend to novel words as in a wug test (Berko, 1958). While
Finley and Newport (2010, 2011) focused on learning a
novel language in which all words were systematically
marked by a morpheme, the morphemes had no meaning
associated with them, and so it was not clear how the
morphemes worked together to form a morphological
system, or paradigm. A morphological paradigm is a set of
morphemes that marks specific classes (e.g., three suffixes,
each marking a different number, /-bu/ ‘singular’, /-ke/
‘dual’, /-mi/ ‘plural’). In this study, we test the role of
distributional information in learning novel morphological
systems, thus extending Finley and Newport (2010, 2011) to
include morphologically complex systems where both form
and meaning are required to learn the language. In order to
understand what aspects of the system participants learn, we
measured generalization to novel items. This involved
measuring responses to test items that appeared in the set of
training words in addition to a new set of test words.
In addition, the present study explored whether learners
can cope with irrelevant cues when learning a novel pattern.
For example, when exposed to a novel label, the learner
must weigh many possibilities, many of which are not part
of the intention of the speaker (Medina, Snedecker,
Trueswell, & Gleitman, 2011). The same is true in learning
novel morphological patterns. If the word ending has a
specific morphological meaning (e.g., /-ing/ in English
/running/ as opposed to /-ing/ in /string/), the learner must
discern whether (and when) this ending has semantic
significance, and what (if any) that semantic significance is.
In the present study, participants were exposed to a novel
language in which all words were nouns that marked
number (singular, plural and dual). However, gender
information was provided for the nouns, simulating the
problem of ambiguity in learning novel instances in a
controlled manner.

Methods
The present study used an artificial language that
contained a large number of stem words and fewer suffixes,
mirroring the fact that many natural languages have many
more open class morphemes (stems) than closed class
morphemes (affixes). Participants were exposed to a
miniature language with nouns marked for number, in the
form of picture-word pairings. Following exposure,
participants were provided with a test in order to determine
whether the participant was able to discriminate between the
different suffixes and their appropriate meanings.

Participants
All thirteen participants were adult native English
speakers recruited from Elmhurst College and the
surrounding community. Each participant was given a $10

443

gift card for participating. Some participants may have
previously participated in an artificial grammar learning
experiment, however no participant had been exposed to the
stimuli used during the present experiment.

Training consisted of 12 stems (each corresponding to a
different animal), combined with two of the three suffixes,
creating 24 total training items. Each stem and each suffix
appeared with equal frequency across the 24 training items.
Exposure consisted of repeating the 24 training items eight
times. While each sound could be paired with three different
pictures (e.g., if /ganubu/ signified a single giraffe, the
appropriate picture would be for any gender: female, male
and neuter), the same picture was used for each pictureword pairing for all eight cycles of the training stimuli. The
irrelevant information (e.g., gender markings on the training
pictures) was distributed throughout the training items.
Participants were tested on their knowledge of the
language as well as their ability to generalize the suffix
information to novel stem forms using a two-alternative
forced-choice test. In the test, participants matched two
spoken words to a single picture. Participants were told one
of the words would be from the language they had been
listening to and the other word would not be from the
language. Participants chose which of two words correctly
corresponded to the picture shown. There were twelve items
in three different test conditions, described in more detail
below, with examples in Tables 2-4.

Design
The experiment was designed to test the ability of adult
learners to integrate learning form and meaning when the
form is arbitrary. A miniature language was developed for
the study that contained only words with stems and suffixes.
Stems of the words were paired with a type of animal (e.g.,
/befa/ denotes a ladybug). Each suffix corresponded to the
number of animals. The suffix /-bu/ denoted ‘singular’ (e.g.,
/befabu/ ‘one ladybug’), the suffix /-ke/ denoted ‘dual’,
(e.g., /befake/ ‘two ladybugs’), and the suffix /-mi/ denoted
‘plural’ (e.g.. /befami/ ‘more than two ladybugs’).
Exposure to the language was created via picture-word
pairings in which the sound of the word was paired with a
picture of the appropriate number of animals. The gender of
the animal varied randomly throughout, and served as
irrelevant information. The gender of the animal was
denoted using a bowtie for males, purses for females and no
marking for unmarked gender. Examples of the picturesound pairings can be found in Table 1.

Familiar Stem-Familiar Picture The first type of test item
specifically tested the learner’s ability to match a picture
seen in training to its corresponding word. Participants
heard two words with the same bi-syllabic stem. One word
was heard during training, and the other word was a word
not heard in training but contained the same stem as the
‘correct’ test item. If the participant was able to match the
picture to the correct suffix, it demonstrates that the
participant had learned the suffix-picture pairings. Because
the two options contained the same stems, the options were
highly similar, and could thus not rely on the stem to make
the correct response.

Table 1: Examples of Picture-Naming Pairings.
Sound
ganubu

Picture

ganuke

Table 2: Familiar Stem-Familiar Picture Test Items
Correct Item

fegeke

befabu

Decoy
Item
befake

sufemi

sufebu

ganuke

ganumi

Picture

fegemi

All stems were of the form CVCV and all suffixes were
of the form CV (/-bu/, /-ke/ and /-mi/), where C is a
consonant and V is a vowel. All words were therefore
CVCVCV. Consonants were all from the set [b, d, g, k, m,
n, p, s, t, v, z] and vowels were from the set [a, e, i, o, u].
No words overlapped with English words, and each
consonant and vowel was presented equally often in each
position.

Familiar Stem-Novel Picture The second type of test item
probed the learner’s ability to generalize the suffixes to the
items that were not heard in training. For every stem, there
were three possible suffix pairings, but only two were heard

444

in training. In this test condition, the picture shown
corresponded to the stem+suffix pairing that was not heard
in training, and the decoy item was a stem+suffix item that
was heard during training. Both options had the same stem,
meaning that participants had to rely on the suffix to choose
the correct response. Because the decoy item was familiar to
the participant, if participants chose the item that was most
familiar, they would be incorrect. Examples of these test
items can be found in Table 3, below.

All stimuli were recorded by an adult female native
speaker of English in a sound attenuated booth at 12,000 Hz
(though participants were allowed to adjust headphones to a
comfortable volume during the experiment). Stress was
placed on the first syllable using standard English
pronunciation, with the exception that no vowels were
reduced, meaning all syllables contained partial stress (as
English reduces unstressed syllables). All stimuli items were
normalized for intensity (set at 70dB) using Praat (Boersma
& Weenink, 2005). All phases of the experiment were run in
Psyscope X (Cohen, MacWhinney, Flatt, & Provost, 1993).
Participants were given both written and verbal instructions.
The entire experiment took approximately 20 minutes.

Table 3: Familiar Stem-Novel Picture Test Items
Correct Item
befake

Decoy
Item
befami

sufebu

sufemi

ganumi

ganubu

Picture

Results
Proportion of correct responses for all three test items are
given in Figure 1. We compared each test item to 50%
chance via three separate one-sample t-tests. All three test
items were significantly above chance; the Familiar StemFamiliar Picture test items had a mean of 0.88, t(12)=7.91,
p<0.001, the Familiar Stem-Novel Picture test items had a
mean of 0.85, t(12)=75.69, p<0.001 and the Novel WordNovel Picture test items had a mean of 0.88, t(12)=7.37,
p<0.001, suggesting that the participants learned the
suffixation pattern.

Novel Word-Novel Picture The third type of test item
probed the learner’s ability to generalize to novel stem
items. This served as a comprehension version of a wug test.
Participants heard two stem+suffix combinations, in which
the stems were identical in both conditions. The picture
shown corresponded to one of the suffixes. Participants
could only rely on knowledge of the suffix to get these
items correct, as the participants had not seen these stem
items in training.

Figure 1: Test Item Results.

Table 4: Novel Word-Novel Picture Test Items
Correct Item
pumubu

Decoy
Item
pumumi

pazimi

pazike

koveke

kovebu

Picture

Because the novel language contained contrasts and
markings for number (singular-dual-plural) that are not
found in English, we divided responses by number marking,
to ensure that all three number markings were learned by
participants. These are presented in Figure 2.
Figure 2: Number-Marking Results.

There were 12 tokens of each of the three test sets of test
items. These items were presented in a random, mixed
fashion. The 12 items in each test condition were balanced
such that the correct response was singular, plural and dual
an equal number of times (four). The items were also
balanced such that all possible suffix combinations were
heard an equal number of times (e.g., in a test trial where
/bedemi/ is pit against /bedeke/, the two suffix options are
/ke/ and /mi/. This suffix combination occurred equally
often as /ke/ vs. /bu/ and /mi/ vs. /bu/).

445

We compared the results via a 3x3 within-subjects ANOVA.
There were no main effects for Test Type, (F(2, 24)= 1.29,
p = 0.29), Number Type (F(2, 24)= 1.79, p = 0.19), and no
Interaction (F(4, 48)= 1.71, p = 0.16). This suggests that all
three number markings were learned equally well.
We hypothesized that the difference between dual and
plural may be the most difficult to learn because dual and
plural are not distinguished in English. We therefore
performed planned comparisons between dual and plural
test items. There were no differences between dual and
plural test items for either the Familiar Word-Familiar
Picture, t(12)=0.32, p=0.75, or the Familiar Word-Novel
Picture, t(12)=1.10, p=0.29 test items. There was a
significant difference between the dual and the plural test
items for the Novel Word-Novel Picture test items,
t(12)=2.50, p=0.028. This suggests that if there is a
difference in the difficulty of learning novel number
markings, that this is most likely to appear during
generalization to novel stems.
The learning rates were relatively robust across
participants. Of the 13 participants, only two had overall
means less than 80% (50% and 41.67% respectively). For
these two participants, the difference in number was most
pronounced. These participants were most accurate on dual
test items (70.83% correct), around chance for singular
items (45.83% correct) and below chance for plural items
(20.83% correct). Because so few participants scored below
80% correct, no inferential statistics can be made. However,
these results may indicate that those who have difficulty
learning novel morphological systems may only have
trouble with specific number markers.

The results showed relatively few differences between
test items that probed for knowledge of the different number
markings, despite the fact that the dual number marking was
novel to the English speakers. This suggests that learners are
adaptable to novel number markings. Interestingly, the two
participants who showed poor performance overall, seemed
to show differential responses to different number
categories, suggesting that problems in learning novel
morphology may be specific to a specific morpheme, rather
than the entire morphological paradigm. Because these
trends can only be made for two participants, more research
is needed to understand why some learners have difficulty
learning novel morphological structures, while others have
little difficulty.
The present study presented a novel paradigm for
exploring how adults are able to learn novel morphological
systems. The results demonstrated that adults are able to
rapidly and robustly learn novel number marking systems
despite irrelevant gender cues. The present paradigm
provides a tool for future research to explore how complex
systems of form and meaning are learned and generalized to
novel items. The present paradigm allows the experimenter
to control for how much information is relevant to the
morphological system and how much is irrelevant.
The paradigm specifically allows the researcher to
explore novel questions about how complex morphological
systems are learned. In many languages, the same
phonological unit is used to mark multiple morphemes. For
example, /-s/ is used in English to mark both plural as well
as third person singular, present tense verbs. In German,
/der/ is used to mark nominative singular case, as well as
plural genitive case. In these instances, the learner must sort
out when each morpheme is used. The present paradigm
may help to sort out what aspects of the morphological
paradigm are most helpful to learning a complex paradigm.
Future research will explore how phonological regularities
and semantic consistency contribute to learning a novel
morphological paradigm.
The present study makes use of adult participants. While
studying children is often ideal when examining language
learning, adult studies are also extremely useful in terms of
understanding how learning biases persist into adulthood.
The present paradigm is well suited to adapt to child
language studies, allowing future research to easily make
adult-children comparisons in learning. However, there are
many reasons that using adults in the present study has
theoretical importance. Throughout life, novel stimuli are
presented in a language no matter how long ago the
language was learned. New words come into the language
(e.g., as each new generation adds to the list of slang
words). Adult studies increase the knowledge about
continuing language learning in the first language and
learning in general. In addition, studying adults in a second
language environment will help to understand the biases that
adults use in second language learning, which may provide
insight into making adult second language learning easier.
In addition, studies of adult second language learning often

Discussion
The results of the present study provide important insights
into how novel complex morphological systems are learned.
First, consistent endings along with consistent number cues
allowed the vast majority of participants to infer that the
final suffix referred to number, and that this final suffix
applied to novel items, both for stems heard during
exposure, as well as novel items not heard during exposure.
Second, this ability is very robust in adults. Of the thirteen
participants, only two showed means below 80% suggesting
that these relatively complex patterns are learned with ease,
without any feedback from the learning paradigm. Third, the
number markings in the present experiment differed from
those found in English: all different numbers were marked
(as opposed to only plural in English), and a distinction was
created between dual and plural (as opposed to only plural
in English).
The stimuli in the present experiment included irrelevant
cues to gender, which the participants were able to rule out.
Because both gender and number cues were provided, the
paradigm allows for future research to study both gender
and number markings simultaneously. It also demonstrates
that learners are able to cue into the relevant aspects of
novel data, and ignore irrelevant aspects.

446

reveal deficiencies in learning the morphology of the
language (Johnson & Newport, 1989; Newport, 1990).
Thus, understanding adult learning biases for morphological
learning may have direct implications for understanding
these deficits (and possibly finding methods to correct
them).
The present study adds to the growing number of studies
that demonstrate that learners are able to make use
distributional cues to learn the regular (rule-based) aspects
of language. When forms (e.g., suffixes) are paired
consistently with a meaning, the learner infers a general rule
that can apply to items that have never been seen or heard
before. This is done despite additional, irrelevant cues that
could potentially disrupt the learning mechanism. The fact
that learners are able to sort out which cues are relevant
without any direct feedback, demonstrates the enormous
inferential power of the human mind.

Franich, K. Iserman & K. L. (Eds.), BUCLD 34
Proceedings Supplement, online. Boston: BUCLD.
Finley, S., & Newport, E. (in prep). Morpheme
segmentation in artificial grammar learning.
Finley, S., & Newport, E. N. (2011). Morpheme
segmentation in school-aged children. In A. Fine (Ed.),
Rochester working papers in the language sciences.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Frigo, L., & McDonald, J. L. (1998). Properties of
phonological markers that affect the acquisition of
gender-like subclasss. Journal of Memory and Language,
39, 218-245.
Gomez, R. L., & Gerken, L. (2000). Infant artificial
language learning and language acquisition. Trends in
Cognitive Science, 4(5), 178-186.
Gomez, R. L., & Maye, J. (2005). The developmental
trajectory of nonadjacent dependency learning. Infancy,
7(2), 183-206.
Greenberg, M. (2006). A short reference grammar of
standard
Slovene.
from
http://www.theslovenian.com/articles/2008/greenberg.pdf
Johnson, J. S., & Newport, E. (1989). Critical period effects
in second language learning: The influence of
maturational state on the acquisition of English as a
second language. Cognitive Psychology, 21, 60-99.
MacWhinney, B. (1983). Miniature Linguistic Systems as
Tests of the Use of Universal Operating Principles in
Second-Language Learning by Children and Adults.
Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 12(5), 467-478.
Medina, T. N., Snedecker, J., Trueswell, J. C., & Gleitman,
L. R. (2011). How words can and cannot be learned by
observation. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 108(2), 9014-9019.
Mintz, T., Newport, E., & Bever, T. G. (2002). The
distributional structure of grammatical categories in
speech to young children. Cognitive Science, 26, 393-424.
Newport, E. (1990). Maturational constraints on language
learning. Cognitive Science, 14, 11-28.
Reeder, P., Newport, E., & Aslin, R. (2013). From shared
context to syntactic categories: The role of distributional
information in learning linguistic form-classes. Cognitive
Psychology, 66, 30-54.
Reeder, P., Newport, E., & Aslin, R. N. (2009). The role of
distributional information in linguistic category
formation. In S. Ohlsson & R. Catrambone (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (Vol. 32, pp. 2063-2068).
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Reeder, P., Newport, E., & Aslin, R. N. (2010). Novel
words in novel contexts: The role of distributional
information in form-class category learning. In S. Ohlsson
& R. Catrambone (Eds.), Proceedings of the 32nd Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Matt Goldrick, Patricia
Reeder, Elissa Newport, Emily Kasman, Morgan Smith and
Elizabeth Jennings, members of the Aslin-Newport Lab, as
well as participants at the 2012 Psychonomics Meeting for
helpful comments and discussion. In addition, we would
like to thank the Elmhurst College Psychology Department
and the participants at Elmhurst College. S. Finley assumes
all responsibility for any errors. Funding was provided by a
student-faculty collaboration grant from Elmhurst College.

References
Berko, J. (1958). The child's learning of English
morphology. Word, 15, 150-177.
Boersma, P., & Weenink. (2005). Praat: Doing phonetics by
computer.
Braine, M. D. S., Brody, R. E., Brooks, P. J., Sudhalter, V.,
Ross, J. A., Catalano, L., et al. (1990). Exploring
language acquisition in children with a miniature artificial
language: Effects of item and pattern frequency, arbitrary
subclasses, and correction. Journal of Memory and
Language, 29, 591-610.
Brooks, P. J., Braine, M. D. S., Catalano, L., & Brody, R. E.
(1993). Acquisition of gender-like noun subclasses in an
artificial language: The contribution of phonological
markers to learning. Journal of Memory and Language,
32, 76-95.
Cohen, J. D., MacWhinney, B., Flatt, M., & Provost, J.
(1993). PsyScope: A new graphic interactive environment
for designing psychology experiments. Behavioral
Research Methods, Instruments and Computers, 25, 257271.
Cunillera, T., Laine, M., Camara, E., & Rodriguez-Fornells,
A. (2010). Bridging the gap between speech segmentation
and word-to-world mapping: Evidence from an
audiovisual statistical learning task. Journal of Memory
and Language, 63, 295-305.
Finley, S., & Newport, E. (2010). Morpheme segmentation
from distributional information. In J. Chandleee, K.

447

