UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Response direction and sentence-tense compatibility effects: An eye tracking study

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4z625450

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Becker, Raymond
DeCot, Bridgette
Guerra, Ernesto
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Response direction and sentence-tense compatibility effects: An eye tracking study
Raymond B. Becker (rbecker@cit-ec.uni-bielefeld.de)
Bridgette DeCot (bdecot@cit-ec.uni-bielefeld.de)
Ernesto Guerra (ernesto.guerra@uni-bielefeld.de)
Pia Knoeferle (knoeferl@cit-ec.uni-bielefeld.de)
Cognitive Interaction Technology Excellence Cluster and Department of Linguistics, Bielefeld University,
Morgenbreede 39, 33615, Bielefeld, Germany

Rolf Zwaan (zwaan@fsw.eur.nl)
Department of Psychology, Erasmus University
Burgemeester Oudlaan 50, 3062 PA, Rotterdam, The Netherlands
Abstract
Recent evidence shows tense-response compatibility effects
only when the task relates to sentence tense (Ulrich &
Maienborn, 2010). In two eye-tracking experiments, we
investigated tense-response compatibility effects. In our first
experiment (E1, where sentence tense was relevant to the
task) we found compatibility effects at the beginning of the
sentence (e.g., Yesterday versus Tomorrow), which shifted to
interference effects by sentence end. Overall, we also found
compatibility effects in response times, replicating Ulrich and
Maienborn. Both compatibility effects in Experiment 1 (E1)
were stronger for low- compared to high-WM readers. In
Experiment 2 (E2, where tense was irrelevant), we found
compatibility effects for high-WM readers, but only in early
reading measures. These results suggest that compatibility
effects are weaker depending on the task, but not eliminated;
an implication which may help refine a strict view of
embodied cognition.
Keywords: Mental timeline,
differences, eye-tracking.

embodiment,

individual

Introduction
Research over the last decade has continued to refine
embodiment theory (Barsalou, 1999; Glenberg, 1997), and
this refinement was prodded along by criticism (Machery,
2007; Mahon & Caramazza, 2008). For example, Mahon &
Caramazza argued that embodiment theory could not
adequately explain how JUSTICE and other abstract
concepts are understood through bodily experience because
they do not reliably correspond to sensory or motor
information. However, conceptual metaphor theory has laid
out the groundwork for how abstract concepts such as TIME
are mapped onto concrete concepts such as SPACE (Lakoff
& Johnson, 1980; 1999). Torralbo, Santiago, & Lupiáñez
(2006) found evidence that corroborated this potential
mapping mechanism. In their Experiment 1, participants
saw the silhouette of a human head looking either rightward
or leftward on a screen. A word with a temporal connotation
in a speech bubble was presented either in front of or behind
the silhouette. Participants judged whether the person
represented via the silhouette was contemplating the past or
the future. When a past word appeared on the left, responses
were faster than when it appeared to the right; when a future
word appeared on the right side, responses were faster than

when it appeared to the left (this interaction of responselocation with tense has been credited to a ‘mental timeline’,
i.e., the use of a spatial left-right line to represent time in our
mind). These results suggest that left- and right-hand
response preparation interacts with linguistic temporal cues
(past and future tense respectively). Thus it appears that
abstract concepts such as TIME are grounded in experiential
and bodily schemas. Meanwhile, the focus of inquiry in this
area has changed from whether grounding effects occur for
abstract concepts to how rapidly they occur and whether
they are task-dependent. In addition, the role of participants’
working memory in these kinds of congruence effects is
unclear. To contribute to these research questions we
examined the time course of time- response location
congruence effects during sentence comprehension as (low
and high working memory) participants planned a right or
left hand movement in two different tasks. Below we
motivate in more detail the investigation of tense-response
location congruence effects are modulated by task and
working memory.

Accommodating tense-response-location
congruence effects
Task appears to play an important role for tense-response
location congruence effects. In a recent study, compatibility
effects of tense (e.g., past versus future) and left/right
response locations were eliminated in a task where tense
was irrelevant. When participants paid attention to sentence
tense, tense-response location compatibility effects
emerged. For example, participants pressed a button labeled
Past on the left in response to a past tense sentence more
quickly than when the Past button was on the right. A
similar compatibility effect was found for future-tense
sentences and right-hand responses. However, when the task
was time-irrelevant (sentence-sensibility judgments),
compatibility effects were eliminated, suggesting that timeresponse location compatibility effects occur only when
people pay attention to time. If that were the case, then both
embodied (e.g., Barsalou, 1999) and non-embodied
accounts such as amodal symbol systems (Collins & Loftus,
1975, Collins & Quillian, 1969) could accommodate these
results. Non-embodied accounts could accommodate the

1851

results via a traditional spreading activation network
composed of disembodied, or amodal, symbols. A similar
reasoning has been proposed for emotion and embodiment,
but it was ruled out as it was shown that compatibility
effects between emotional sentences and facial expression
were task-independent (Glenberg, Havas, Becker, & Rinck,
2005). Nevertheless, the lack of tense-response
compatibility effects in a time-irrelevant task (Ulrich and
Maienborn, 2010) left the door open for accounts via hybrid
embodiment theories (Mahon & Caramazza, 2008;
Louwerse & Jeuniaux, 2008) or via cross-modal integration
(Kemmerer & Gonzalez-Castillo, 2010).
There are at least two key differences between hybrid
embodiment accounts and views of embodiment in which
mental representations are strictly composed of perceptual
symbol systems (henceforth ‘strict embodiment’). First,
hybrid accounts argue that the hierarchical processing of
amodal symbols occur before additional top-down context
from perceptual symbols (Kemmerer & Gonzalez-Castillo,
2010) and this takes more time than a direct mapping of
TIME onto SPACE. Second, strict embodiment proposes
automaticity (Glenberg, 1997, p4). Automaticity refers to
whether the sensorimotor system is involved in processing
the meaning of abstract concepts (temporal cues in a
sentence) regardless of task. Strict embodiment would thus
have predicted task-independent activation of the mental
timeline. Ulrich & Maienborn’s results of task-dependent
tense-response location compatibility effects appeared to
support a hybrid view of embodiment; however, they did
not explicitly address the implications of their findings for
this debate. Moreover, we cannot be certain that the lack of
tense-response location compatibility effects with timeirrelevant tasks is at least in parts due to the coarse-grained
response time measure they used. By monitoring eye
movements during reading in addition to response times at
sentence end in the same tasks that they used, we can assess
the time course of tense-response location compatibility
effects and determine whether the null findings are due to
the nature of the measure.

Working memory and embodiment
Strict embodied cognition draws on attention and memory
functions (Barsalou, 1999; Glenberg, 1997). For example,
Glenberg and Gallese (2010; Koziol, Budding, & Chidekel,
2011) argued that higher order processes such as executive
function are for motor control, and also part of language
comprehension (see Repovš & Barch, 2012 for a possible
link between working memory (WM) and cerebellum
function). However, the notion of working memory as an
important component of theories in cognitive psychology
(see Baddeley, 2012 for a review) and psycholinguistics
(Huettig, Olivers, & Hartsuiker, 2011; Lewis, Vasishth, &

Van Dyke, 2006), has been studied very little by strict
embodiment theorists like Glenberg or Barsalou1.
Due to the scarcity of research on embodiment and
working memory, we drew from work on temporal order
and working memory (Münte, Schiltz, & Kutas, 1998). This
previous research suggested that participants with high-WM
used temporal cues such as Before versus After immediately
to aid sentence processing. For example, in the following
sentences, the initial temporal adverb and verb tell the
reader that this sentence describes an event that occurred in
the past (1) or the future (2):
(1) Früher in dieser WocheADV | falteteVP | JenniferNP1
im WohnzimmerPP | die WäscheNP2.
‘Earlier this weekADV | foldedVP | JenniferVP
in the living roomPP | the laundryNP2’.
(literal translation).
(2) Später in dieser WocheADV | faltetVP | JenniferNP1
im WohnzimmerPP | die WäscheNP2.
‘Later this weekADV | foldsVP | JenniferVP
in the living roomPP | the laundryNP2’.
It would be consistent with the findings of Münte, Schiltz,
and Kutas (1998) if high- (but not low) WM immediately
processed the temporal cue ‘Earlier / Later’. A question that
could be asked with respect to the role of working memory
in embodied cognition is whether participants immediate
integrate temporal cues in addition to response-location as
they make a sensibility judgment about a sentence.

The present study
Using eye-tracking, the present studies thus investigated the
time course of tense-response location compatibility effects
as a function of (a) task (time-focus vs. no time focus), and
(b) participants’ working memory. The use of eye tracking
and a between-experiment task manipulation permitted us to
test the strict embodied hypothesis.
In Experiment 1, participants performed a tense
evaluation task (was the sentence in the past or in the
future)? One gaze pattern in support of strict embodiment
would be an early-peaking, quickly decaying Simon-like
effect consistent with the action and perception literature
(Symes, Tucker, & Ellis, 2005). This pattern would suggest
both a rapid (tied to first-pass measures) and automatic
(insensitive to task) tense-response location congruence
effects in first-pass times at the verb and potentially also the
1
We would like to thank an anonymous reviewer for suggesting
the Coherent Working Models theory proposed by Santiago and
colleagues. Unfortunately, due to time and page limit constraints,
we have not integrated their proposal with our current framing or
the discussion of our results. However, we will review the data
supporting the Coherent Working Models theory, and how well our
results fit with it in an extended manuscript in preparation.

1852

next sentence region. If it is rapid and automatic but quickly
decays, then there may be no effect in a relatively late and
course-grained measure such as response times. By contrast,
the amodal views would predict no tense-response
compatibility effect for time-irrelevant tasks: symbols
representing the concepts of FUTURE and PAST would not
become bound to right and left procedural symbols and in
turn not become activated. Hybrid accounts, would predict
task-independent effects but these should occur later than in
strict embodiment accounts.
We further hypothesized that high-WM readers would
rapidly process the sentence-initial temporal cue (see
Münte, Schiltz, & Kutas, 1998). In order to come up with a
hypothesis regarding working memory and tense-response
location congruence effects, we drew from one of the more
important ideas in embodied cognition which is that people
can “offload” cognition to the environment (Clark, 1997;
Spivey, 2008). To the extent that cognitive load can be
offloaded onto the environment, a left-right mental timeline
in which left indexes the past and right the future could
assist in processing temporal information. And if the results
from Münte et al. generalize to tense-response location
congruence effects, then high-WM participants should
process tense-response location congruence earlier. We
predicted longer first-pass times in the subject noun phrase
region (NP1 in sentences (1) and (2)) for incompatible (vs.
compatible) tense-response location for high-WM
participants because the region is potentially where
participants would shift their attention from the tense
processing to the sensibility judgment. This effect could
extend to the locative prepositional phrase region as well
because the attention shift could take time even for highWM readers (see sentences (1) and (2)). By contrast, for
low-WM readers congruence effects should emerge at the
end of the sentence, because in Münte et al. low-WM
readers did show evidence that they were processing the
temporal cues but later than the high-WM readers. In
response times, both groups should show a compatibility
effect replicating Ulrich and Maienborn (2010).
When time is not relevant for the task (Experiment 2), and
if the null effect in Ulrich and Maienborn is an artifact of
the post-sentence response time measure, then we should
see similar yet more subtle effects than in E1 (compatibility
effects in first-pass times, potentially also earlier for highWM than low-WM readers). However, these patterns of
reading times should not result in compatibility effects in
response times based on the findings by Ulrich and
Maienborn.

Experiment 1: Time-relevant task
In Experiment 1, we replicated the procedure of the first
experiment by Ulrich and Maienborn (2010). Participants
were asked to pay attention to sentence tense and registered
their decision via a button press if the sentence made sense.
Thinking about time was part of the task because
participants made explicit decisions about sentence tense.

Method
Participants 48 members (17 male with mean age 24; SD =
3 years) of Bielefeld University participated in the
experiment. All participants were native German speakers
with no second language exposure prior to 6 years of age;
had normal or corrected-to-normal vision; were naïve with
respect to the purpose of the study; and received €6 for their
participation or course credit. All gave informed consent.
Materials Items consisted of 48 past and future tense
sentences beginning with a temporal adverb and 48
nonsense sentences of the same syntactic structure The
nonsense sentences included the same words as those used
in Ulrich and Maienborn (2010), but were restructured to be
similar to the critical sentences, where the temporal adverb
was always at the beginning of the sentence.
Procedure Participants were asked to judge whether the
sentence referred to the past or future. However, they were
also asked to respond only if the sentence made sense (see
Figure 1). For nonsense sentences, participants were
instructed to wait until the trial timed out. Their eyemovements were recorded at 1000 Hz using an Eyelink
1000 desktop mounted tracker. Participants’ WM was tested
by the automated reading span test (Unsworth, Redick,
Heitz, Broadway, & Engle, 2009).

Figure 1: Example trial from E1.

Analysis
Prior to analysis fixations were cleaned using a 4-stage
procedure. In the first stage fixations less than 80ms were
merged with the nearest neighboring fixation if it was longer
than 80ms and within 0.5 degrees of visual angle away
along the x-axis. Similarly, in the second stage fixations less
than 40ms were merged with the nearest neighboring
fixation if it was longer than 40ms and within 1.25 degrees
away along the x-axis. In stage 3, every interest area was
checked for at least three fixations less than 140ms and none
larger than 140ms. If an interest area was found that met
these criteria, these fixations were merged with the larger
ones. Lastly, all fixations less than 80ms and 1200ms were

1853

removed. Trials with incorrect answers and nonsense
sentences were not analyzed. Participants were split into
high- and low-WM groups using a tertile split forming three
groups of 16 people each, but only the high- and low-WM
groups were included in order to do an extreme groups
analysis. We conducted a 2 (WM) x 2 (tense) x 2 (response
location) linear mixed effects model analysis to test for
tense-response compatibility effects in each sentence region;
starting with the full model and removing parameters until
we found the most parsimonious model that best fit the data
(Baayen, Bates, & Davidson, 2008)2.

Figure 3: Tense-response location compatibility effects for
low- (left) and high-WM (right) groups for total dwell times
in the temporal adverb region. Error bars indicate the SE.

Results

Discussion

There were no significant effects in first-pass reading times
for any sentence region. In total dwell times in the sentenceinitial temporal adverb region, we found a significant tenseresponse compatibility effect, t(30) = -2.16, p < 0.05 (see
Fig. 2). Further, low-WM readers showed the compatibility
effect, whereas high-WM readers did not, as evidenced by a
3-way interaction, t(30) = 2.22, p < 0.05 (see Fig. 3).
Surprisingly, interference effects emerged at sentence end
for both groups, t(30) = 2.08, p < 0.05 (see Fig. 4). In
response times, we replicated the congruence effect from
Ulrich & Maienborn, (2010), t(30) = -3.87, p < 0.05.
However, the congruence effect was driven by the low-WM
group as evidenced by a 3-way interaction, t(30) = 2.71, p <
0.05 (see Fig. 5).

The response time results from Experiment 1 replicate prior
tense-response location congruence effects in response
times (Experiment 1 in Ulrich and Maienborn, 2010).
However, the pattern of the compatibility effects over the
course of the sentence, and as a function of working
memory showed that there is more to the story. The
response time compatibility effects in the low-WM group,
but not the high-WM, are similar to the pattern for both
groups. The same pattern can also be seen in the total
reading times of the sentence-initial region (e.g., ‘earlier’ /
‘later’) for low-WM readers only.

Figure 4: Tense-response location interference effects in
total times in the sentence-final region. Error bars indicate
the SE.
Figure 2: Tense-response location compatibility effects for
both WM groups for total dwell times in the temporal
adverb region. Error bars indicate the standard error (SE).

2

Thank you to an anonymous reviewer for pointing out the fact
that eye-tracking researchers enjoy many degrees of freedom in
their research (e.g., regions of interest, first-pass readings versus
total times, etc...). And further that our effects are quite small and
potentially would not stand up to Bonferroni correction. Because
we are in a crisis in psychology of false positives and failures to
replicate, we used linear mixed effect models, backward model
selection, and report the pMCMC values (Barr, Levy, Scheepers,
& Tily, 2013).

Figure 5: Tense-response location compatibility effects for
low- (left) and high-WM (right) groups for response times.
Error bars indicate the SE.
Next, we attempted to replicate the procedure of Ulrich
and Maienborn’s (2010) Experiment 2 to assess whether we
would find early compatibility effects undetectable in fullsentence response time, and how that may vary as a function
of working memory ability. Participants’ task was to make a

1854

sentence-sensibility judgment, and then press a button to
indicate their decision. In this case thinking about time is
irrelevant to the task, because it is not the decision that
participants have been asked to make about the sentence.

compatibility effects in response times for tense (see Figure
8 and Ulrich & Maienborn, 2010).

Experiment 2: Time irrelevant task
Method
Participants We tested a further 48 students (11 male with
the mean age of 23; SD = 3 years) who met the same criteria
as those in E1.
Materials and Procedure The materials were identical to
those in E1. Participants judged sentence sensibility, thus
time, or tense, was irrelevant to the task (Fig. 5). This
procedure is identical to the second experiment in Ulrich &
Maienborn (2010). Again, the only difference was that the
sentences always had the same word order and always
included a prepositional phrase after the verb.

Figure 6: Example trial from Experiment 2.

Results
Data filtering and separating of participants into two WM
groups was done in the same way as in E1. For first-pass
reading times, we found a significant 3-way interaction in
the verb region, t(30) = -2.07, p < 0.05 (see Fig. 7).

Figure 7: Sentence-tense compatibility effects for low- (left)
and high-WM (right) groups for first-pass reading times in
the verb region. Error bars indicate the standard error.
Next, both first-pass, t(30) = 2.11, p < 0.05, and
regression-path duration, t(30) = 2.15, p < 0.05, revealed a
significant interaction in the sentence-initial temporal
adverb region. For both measures, durations were longer
when the adverb indicated a past tense sentence and the
participants were planning a left response compared to a
right response, whereas for future-indicative adverbs there
was no reliable difference between left and right response
locations. Lastly, we replicated the absence of reliable

Figure 8: This figure illustrates the absence of sentencetense compatibility effects for low- (left) and high-WM
(right) groups in response times. Error bars indicate the SE.

General Discussion
Consistent with Ulrich and Maienborn (2010), we found
compatibility effects in the response times when participants
judged sentence tense (Experiment 1, E1) but not when they
judged sentence sensibility (Experiment 2, E2). However,
eye tracking revealed additional details about the time
course and individual differences of the compatibility
effects in E1 and the null finding in E2.
When the task was to decide on sentence tense (E1), we
found compatibility effects in the earliest sentence region
(e.g., ‘Earlier’), but in a relatively “late” measure; in total
times. This replicated the region of the sentences where
temporal processing occurred, similar to Münte et al. (1998)
but it is later in the time course than we initially predicted.
In contrast to Rapid Serial Visual Presentation used by
Münte et al., total times include re-readings and thus
potentially later processes. One possible reason why
compatibility effects emerge only at this region and not in
the verb region is because that region is central to judging
sentence tense, and foregrounds tense processing.
Two further unexpected findings in Experiment 1 were
the sentence-final interference effect and that the response
time compatibility effect was driven by the low-WM
readers. The interference effect could index that as
participants’ prepare for the tense decision and gauge
sensibility at the end of the sentence, they may momentarily
inhibit temporal information. Because the temporal
information has already been mapped into the environment,
freeing up resources from WM needed for further language
comprehension may be aided by the suppression of
environmental patterns, in this case tense-response
mappings (Glenberg, 1997, p4). The compatibility effects
for low-WM readers at the sentence-initial temporal region
are consistent with this idea: Perhaps low WM-readers are
slower than high-WM readers to inhibit tense information,
and thus show compatibility effect in total times at the
sentence-initial region while these effects are absent for
high-WM readers. The assumption here is that low-WM
readers are slower because they have more difficulty
updating their WM, which according to Glenberg is a
conscious and effortful use of memory.
For Experiment 2, when the task did not involve a
sentence-tense decision, we replicated the absence of a

1855

tense-response location compatibility effect in response
times (Ulrich & Maienborn, 2010). By contrast,
compatibility effects emerged as predicted at the verb region
in first-pass reading times, but only for high-WM readers.
The null effect for low-WM readers may indicate that unless
the temporal information is part of the task, low WM
readers do not integrate tense information in relation to
response location.
Overall, thus, tense-response location compatibility
effects varied as a function of task and comprehenders’
working memory. Our findings highlight the importance of
using continuous measures: While end-of-sentence response
times suggested task can eliminate compatibility effects,
these effects were clearly present in gaze measures during
sentence reading even when the task did not ask participants
to focus on tense cues. With regard to embodiment theory, it
seems that tense-response location compatibility effects are
not eliminated by tasks in which tense is irrelevant but there
is a need to accommodate their variation by task and
working memory.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by the Cognitive Interaction
Technology Excellence Center (German Research
Foundation, DFG).

References
Baayen, R.H., Davidson, D.J. and Bates, D.M. (2008)
Mixed-effects modeling with crossed random effects for
subjects and items. Journal of Memory and Language, 59,
390-412.
Baddeley, A. (2012). Working memory: Theories, models,
and controversies. Annual Review of Psychology, 63, 129.
Barr D. J., Levy R., Scheepers C. & Tily, H. (2013).
Random-effects structure for confirmatory hypothesis
testing: Keep it maximal. Journal of Memory and
Language, 68, 255-278.
Barsalou, L. W. (1999). Perceptions of perceptual symbols.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 637-660.
Clark, A. (1997). Being there: Putting brain, body, and
world together again. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Collins, A. M., & Loftus, E. F. (1975). A spreadingactivation theory of semantic processing. Psychological
Review, 82, 407-428.
Collins, A. M., & Quillian, M. R. (1969). Retrieval time
from semantic memory. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 8, 241-248.
Glenberg, A. M., Havas, D., Becker, R., & Rinck, M.
(2005). Grounding Language in Bodily States: The Case
for Emotion. In R. Zwaan and D. Pecher (Eds.) The
grounding of cognition: The role of perception and action
in memory, language, and thinking. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Glenberg, A. M., & Gallese, V. (2010). Action-based
language: A theory of language acquisition,
comprehension, and production. Cortex, 48, 905-922.

Huettig, F., Olivers, C. N. L., Hartsuiker, R. J. (2011).
Looking, language, and memory: Bridging research from
the visual world and visual search paradigms. Acta
Psychologica, 137, 138-150.
Kemmerer, D., & Gonzalez-Castillo, J. (2010). The twolevel theory of verb meaning: An approach to integrating
the semantics of action with the mirror neuron system.
Brain and Language, 112, 54-76.
Koziol, L. F., Budding, D. E., & Chidekel, D. (2011). From
Movement to Thought: Executive Function, Embodied
Cognition, and the Cerebellum. Cerebellum, 11, 505-25.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the flesh.
New York: Basic Books.
Lewis, R. L., Vasishth, S., & Van Dyke, J. A. (2006).
Computational principles of working memory in sentence
comprehension. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 10, 447454.
Louwerse, M. M., & Jeuniaux, P. (2008). Language
comprehension is both embodied and symbolic. In M. de
Vega, A. Glenberg, & A. C. Graesser (Eds.), Symbols and
embodiment: Debates on meaning and cognition (pp. 309326). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Machery, E. (2007). Concept empiricism: A methodological
critique. Cognition, 104, 19-46.
Mahon, B. Z., & Caramazza, A. (2008). A critical look at
the embodied cognition hypothesis and a new proposal for
grounding conceptual content. Journal of PhysiologyParis. 102, 59-70.
Münte, T. F., Schiltz, K., & Kutas, M. (1998). When
temporal terms belie conceptual order. Nature, 395, 7173.
Repovš, G., & Barch, D. M. (2012). Working memory
related brain network connectivity in individuals with
schizophrenia and their siblings. Frontiers in Human
Neuroscience, 137, 1-15.
Spivey, M. (2008). The continuity of the mind. New York,
NY: Oxford University Press.
Spivey, M., & Geng, J. (2001). Oculomotor mechanisms
activated by imagery and memory: Eye movements to
absent objects. Psychological Research, 65, 235-241.
Symes, E., Ellis, R., & Tucker, M. (2005). Dissociating
object-based and space-based affordances. Visual
Cognition, 12, 1337-1361.
Torralbo, A., Santiago, J.,& Lupiáñez, J. (2006). Flexible
conceptual projection of time onto spatial frames of
reference. Cognitive Science, 30, 745-757.
Ulrich, R., & Maienborn. C. (2010). Left–right coding of
past and future in language: The mental timeline during
sentence processing. Cognition, 117, 126-138.
Unsworth, N., Redick, T. S., Heitz, R. P., Broadway, J. M.,
& Engle, R. W. (2009). Complex working memory span
tasks and higher-order cognition: A latent-variable
analysis of the relationship between processing and
storage. Memory, 17, 635-654.

1856

