UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Returning the Ticket – Mental Time Travel Reconsidered

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3sb0d9s3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Author
Kneer, Markus

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Returning the Ticket – Mental Time Travel Reconsidered
Markus Kneer
Institut Jean Nicod
kneer@ens.fr
Mental Time Travel (MTT) is, roughly, an individual’s capacity to project herself into the past or future by
remembering or imagining first-personal experiences respectively. MTT is further presumed to have a
distinct, concrete though dispersed neural correlate, and hence describes a neuro-cognitive
phenomenon.
Opening with a brief sketch of the development and current state of the art, the essay pursues three
central aims: Firstly, it constitutes a plea for more conceptual rigour on the cognitive side of the fence,
so as to ensure that meaningful lessons can be drawn from neurological enquiry about it. Secondly, a
partial conceptual qualification of the necessary requirements of MTT as traditionally conceived is
proposed, as they seem vague, uninformative and arbitrary. Finally, a revision of MTT is attempted,
which aspires to include a variety of mental states so far not associated with MTT. MTT, as it is currently
defined and investigated, I will argue, stands too heavily in the genealogical debt of research into
episodic memory, and suffers from an astonishing neglect of considerations pertaining to imagination.

1. What is Mental Time Travel?
The fact that certain types of imagination
activate the same brain zones as episodic
memory provoked the hypothesis that there is
a single neuro-cognitive system which
enables human beings to engage in mental
time travel (MTT). Mental time travel is,
roughly, an individual’s capacity to project
herself into the past or future by remembering
or imagining first-personal experiences
respectively.
As
a
neuro-cognitive
phenomenon, MTT is presumed to have a
distinct, though dispersed, neural correlate.
Evidence from various disciplines is
consistent with the MTT hypothesis. Studies
in ontogenetics have confirmed that episodic
memory and prospection (mental time travel
into the future) emerge in parallel in children
aged around three to four. Furthermore,
episode specific details decrease with age
both for generated past and future events.1
Lesion studies show that ventromedial frontal damage leads to loss of
episodic memory and prospection, while
leaving large parts of the cognitive apparatus
in tact.2 Moreover, patients with hippocampal
amnesia are unable to generate everyday
imaginary experiences.3

1

E.g. Atance & O’Neill (2001), Bischof-Koehler (2000),
Moore & Lemmon (2001), Povinelli (2001), Suddendorf &
Busby (2005), Levine et al. (2002), Addis, Wong & Schacter
(2008).
2
E.g. Tulving, Hayman & Macdonald (1991), Klein, Loftus
& Kihlstrom (2002).
3
Hassabis et al. (2007).

Neuroimaging draws a similar picture.
According to a variety of studies, episodic
states about future and past have a common
underlying cerebral base: When talking freely
about past or future events, PET and fMRI
scans revealed shared activity in regions
including the ventromedial prefrontal cortex,
and parts of the medial temporal lobe.4
I’ll open with a brief sketch of the leading
account of mental time travel. 5 I will then
proceed to argue that this account is
misconceived for two fundamental reasons:
(1) Its genealogical debt to episodic memory
and autonoetic consciousness as well as the
shallow conception of imagination in play give
rise to an ad hoc and unnecessarily
constrained account of episodic states. (2)
The necessary capacities for MTT as
traditionally conceived are unfounded, their
formulation is conceptually vague and
uninformative. This will severely obstruct
empirical research into the ontogenetic and
neurological foundations of the phenomenon.
2. Foundations of the Traditional Account
MTT has developed out of the psychological
study of memory, and in particular Tulving’s
(1972)
landmark
distinction
between
semantic and episodic memory. The former
takes propositional form since it is factual. I
4

Okuda et al. (2003), Szpunar, Watson & McDermott
(2007), Addis, Wong & Schacter (2007), Buckner &
Carroll (2007).
5
The core references are Wheeler, Stuss & Tulving
(1997) and Tulving (2002). An alternative, but similar
account is proposed by Suddendorf & Corballis (1997;
2007).

2752

can e.g. recall that Paris is the capital of
France. Episodic memory, by contrast, refers
to an individual’s engaging in an episode of
past personal experience, e.g. when I
remember what my first arrival in Paris was
like. It is characteristically accompanied by a
particular feeling of “warmth and intimacy“
(W. James, 1890), in other words it is
phenomenologically rich. Later on, autonoetic
– “self-knowing” – consciousness became the
distinguishing mark of episodic memory.
Tulving, who coined the term “autonoetic
consciousness”, defines it as “the kind of
consciousness that mediates an individual’s
awareness of his or her existence and identity
in subjective time extending from the
personal past through the present to the
personal future” (1985: 1). In response to
neuropsychological findings, the restriction of
episodic states soon dropped away; episodic
states were henceforth considered to
encompass mental time travel both into the
past and future.
My first criticism concerns the scope of the
leading account: MTT is restricted to episodic
states exclusively concerned with an
individual’s personal past, present and future.
Employing a detailed typology of imaginative
states I will draw up a rival account which
construes the phenomenon in question more
broadly. I will argue from the following two
hypotheses:
Common Kind Hypothesis:
There exists a basic mental state, called
“episodic state”, in which we undergo
phenomenologically rich experiences from a
first person perspective. Such states are
“quasi-perceptual” in so far as they resemble
perceptions, and draw heavily on past
perceptual and proprioceptive intake, but are
not direct representations of reality. Episodic
states comprise of episodic memory – quasiperceptions of the past, and participatory
imagination
–
quasi-perceptions
of
hypothetical and potentially future episodes.
Common Capacity Hypothesis:
Episodic states supervene on a single type of
brain state; they can be characterized by a
differentiated neuronal correlate and are the
product of a particular neurosystem of the
brain.

3. Problems of Scope and a Rival Account
MTT, as it is traditionally conceived, is
construed unnecessarily narrow, since it
insists on (i) a clearly defined temporal
component, which (ii) involves an explicit
awareness of a narrative self and concerns
(iii)
episodes
which
are
explicitly
personal/autobiographical – in the sense that
the subject involved must be the thinker’s
empirical self, and the scenarios must be true
past or probable future experiences. Both
constraints can be directly derived from
Tulving’s characterization of MTT taking
place in “subjective time extending from the
personal past through the present to the
personal future” and countless other
passages. They are equally present in
Suddendorf & Corballis (1997, 2007).
The main reason for the narrow construction
of MTT seems to lie in the genealogy of the
term, coming from episodic memory and
hence focusing heavily both on a temporal
component and some sort of autobiographical
element. Autonoetic awareness as the central
property of episodic states has further helped
to foster such a questionable conception. The
problem extends into the experimental
paradigms: Not only is rather few research
done on future MTT (i.e. the imagination
component as narrowly conceived), but
furthermore hardly any experiments included
imagination not structured autobiographically
or temporally in the relevant way.
Mental voyage, as I propose it, explicitly
includes three types of episodic imagination
which are not encompassed in MTT: (i)
Episodes about what would have happened
to myself if I had acted differently in the past.
(ii) Imaginations involving my empirical self in
scenarios which do not have a temporal
specification whatsoever. (iii) Imaginations
not involving my empirical self, but another
self, or a general self – i.e. episodes
concerning what it is like for Jack to win an
Oscar, or for someone to win the lottery
respectively.6

6

The proposal to define MTT wider than is commonly
done is not revolutionary. A similar point of view is
shared by D’Argembeau & Van der Linden (2005),
Hassabis (2007) and Buckner and Caroll (2007).

2753

4. Central Capacities for MTT
Methodological Considerations
Mental time travel is generally conceived as a
neuro-cognitive or brain/mind system7, that is,
as a mental capacity which has a real,
singular, though dispersed neural correlate.
Crucially, the description of its functions and
properties take place in two conceptual
spaces: an abstract vocabulary pertaining to
mind as elaborated in psychology and
philosophy and the vocabulary referring to
concrete phenomena of the brain as
employed by neuroscience. The mental
vocabulary is dominant due to our still very
limited
understanding
of
the
brain.
Hypotheses concerning the functioning of the
brain as well as experiential paradigms are
largely formulated in mental terms, which
gives rise to a variety of complications: (i) The
conceptions of the mind and its capacities are
manifold, so a choice has to be taken which
(ii) is likely to leave its mark on the
formulation of the respective hypothesis,
experiments, and hence the empirical
“findings”. (iii) A neuro-cognitive hybrid
vocabulary facilitates conceptual confusion if
(for instance) a brain phenomenon is
“associated” with a mental phenomenon
which gives rise to different interpretations in
distinct conceptual frameworks of the mind.
Given the complications arising from two
distinct types of interacting vocabularies,
empirical underdetermination, and the
sensitivity of the subtraction method in
hemodynamic techniques (PET and fMRI),
two things should be clear: Adequate enquiry
into such neuro-cognitive phenomena can
only succeed if its constituents are (i)
conceived of in minimal, rather than complex
units and (ii) defined as rigorously as possible
on the cognitive side so as not to obstruct
and confuse enquiry on the neurological side.
The literature on MTT does not adhere to
these criteria. The central capacities of MTT
are both theoretically ad hoc and so ill
defined that while scholars take themselves
to be in conceptual agreement they frequently
operate with – and do empirical research
based on – radically different concepts. We
will now turn both to the misspecification of
7

Cf. Tulving (2002), Wheeler, Stuss & Tulving (1997),
Suddendorf & Corballis (1997, 2007).

the central capacities of MTT and the latent
conceptual anarchy.
Autonoetic Consciousness
The central criterion of episodic memory and
states of mental time travel more generally, is
autonoetic awareness (Wheeler, Stuss &
Tulving, 1997; Tulving 2002; Suddendorf &
Corballis 1997, 2007). Though a relatively
recent, and entirely technical concept,
astonishingly there are four conceptions of
autonoetic consciousness which stand in
rivalry.
Autonoetic consciousness understood as the
distinguishing mark of mental states which
have a particular “feel” to them is roughly
equivalent with Block’s (1995) “phenomenal
consciousness”. Autonoetic awareness in this
sense is usually cashed out by reference to
the feeling of “warmth and intimacy” (W.
James, 1890), or the “subjectivity” of such
states in comparison to, for example,
“objective” semantic memory. A second
account puts the stress on (narrative) selfawareness, reasonably enough, since
autonetic consciousness has frequently been
characterized
as
“self-knowing”
consciousness (Tulving, 1985), and it is due
to autonoesis that an individual is supposedly
able to project his self into the past and
future. A third account focuses on the kind of
(phenomenal) feature which allows us to
distinguish, for instance, an episodic memory
from an imagination or a daydream. Episodic
states seem to come pack and parcel with a
certain phenomenological feature pertaining
to time, which allows us not to confound past,
present and future episodic states; in the
case of memory we witness, for instance, a
“feeling of pastness”. Finally, there are
various hybrid accounts which include some
or
all
of
the
mentioned
features.
Unsurprisingly, with autonoesis - “the
hallmark of episodic memory” (Tulving) –
being such a promiscuous concept, the
episodic/semantic memory distinction is also
drawn in all sorts of ways.
The three mentioned aspects, phenomenality,
narrative self-awareness, and subjective
temporal indexing are neither inconsistent nor
necessarily unrelated, but nonetheless
distinct. Problematically, however, different
authors seem to work with different

2754

definitions. 8 There is, furthermore, no
apparent reason for lumping them together especially inexplicitly, and in varying
constellations. In fact, it seems favourable to
keep them separate so as to curb the
spreading conceptual confusion, and in
particular so as to control – as far as possible
- separately for each in experiments.
Consciousness
How best to reorganize what is left of
autonoetic consciousness? Block (1995)
distinguishes four concepts of consciousness:
Self-consciousness
constitutes
the
possession and competent mastery of the
concept of the self; monitoring consciousness
is the metacognitive process of one’s
realizing to be in a certain state (e.g. to know
that one believes X). Access-consciousness
is the property of a representation which “is
broadcast for free use in reasoning and for
direct “rational” control of action (including
reporting)”. Finally, and for our purposes
probably
most
importantly,
there
is
phenomenal
consciousness,
which
is
notoriously hard to define. Under phenomenal
consciousness
we
understand
the
experiential properties of a conscious state,
or what it “is like” to be in that state.9 Block
highlights that phenomenal and access
consciousness are conceptually distinct,
though admits that they might contingently
always appear in parallel in human subjects.
My proposal is to abolish the concept of
autonoetic awareness since it is vague and
unnecessarily lumps together all sorts of
phenomena which are best kept separate.
Phenomenal
consciousness
(or
phenomenality) is most salient in perceptual
experiences, however it also characterizes
episodes of remembering and sensory
imagination,
though
the
phenomenal
properties are not as pronounced. It is
probably phenomenality, intimately related to
the
first-person
perspective,
which
determines the distinctions between episodic
8

The first conception of autonoetic consciousness is
prevalent e.g. in D’Argembeau & Van der Linden’s
(2004, 2006), Gardiner’s (2001) and some of Tulving’s
work. Fink et al (1996), Gerrans and Tulving (2002:2)
seem to opt rather for the second, whereas Wheeler,
Stuss and Tulving (1997) seems to work strongly with
the third conception of autonoetic consciousness.
9
Cf. also Nagel (1975).

and semantic memory and between sensory
and propositional imagination in the first
place.
Subjective Time
As mentioned before, time (like colour or
smell,
for
instance)
also
seems
phenomenologically salient, in particular,
duration (“an instant seeming an eternity”)
and the subjective temporal location (“it being
early”; “something being a long time ago”). It
is a feature of episodic states that they
frequently present themselves as a particular
episodic state (e.g. memories through an
attached feeling of “pastness”). However, as
pointed out above, various types of
participatory imagination do not have an
explicit temporal component, and are hence
not located in what Tulving calls “subjective
time” (Tulving, 2002, 2005; a feature
reproduced in virtually all articles on MTT).
Furthermore, though there frequently seems
a phenomenally salient indicator present in
episodic states, it can easily be wrong (as for
example in implanted or false memory,
possibly in states of déjà-vu experiences if
one wants to count them amongst episodic
states).10
In short, the temporal component should be
abolished, as there is reason to include
episodic states without them into the common
kind; the fact that temporal features do not
form part of memory traces (Friedman, 1993)
leaves us with the perfectly viable option of
their being “attributed” by an extra capacity, if
at all.
Involvement of the Self
Self-awareness to a rather high extent is
considered a fundamental prerequisite of
MTT by all leading accounts. 11 For Tulving
10

This observation seems to be well in line with
Suddendorf & Corballis’ account of MTT: Drawing on a
survey of episodic memory by Friedman (1993), they
highlight that neither chronology nor a “sense of
‘pastness’” are basic properties of memory traces.
Nevertheless, and in contrast to our account,
Suddendorf & Corballis are convinced that experiences
of episodic states always have such phenomenal
properties concerning time.
11
Gerrans & Sander (MS) propose a radically different
account in which MTT is conceived as a non-conscious,
implicit phenomenon not involving explicit (overt)
representation – and hence does not require (narrative)
self-awareness.

2755

and colleagues, the relevant degree of selfawareness required for MTT corresponds to
Stuss & Benson’s (1986) third functional level
of the frontal lobes12. The latter provides “the
ability to introspect on one’s own thoughts
and to realize the relation of self to one’s
social environment” (1997:334), and is further
deemed “intimately related” to autonoetic
consciousness.
Mitchell’s (1994) threefold account of the self
is employed by Suddendorf & Corballis with
questionable success to illuminate the role of
the self in MTT. In Mitchell’s framework, the
second type of self – a “self as built on
kinaesthetic-visual matching” allows us to
engage in pretense, planning, imaginative
experience and fantasy. Suddendorf &
Corballis deem this insufficient for MTT,
which apparently calls for a self “built on
symbols, language and artefacts” so as to
allow the individual to understand social
norms, and to dissociate self and other. It
rests obscure, however, how pretense,
imagination and fantasy (i.e. second-level
activities) are possible without the capacity to
dissociate from one’s present states (only
available on the third level) and hence
whether Mitchell’s account is not rather ad
hoc.13
Ignoring the specificities of the two proposed
accounts of the self, let us note that they both
share two essential features: Firstly, they
require
the
mastery
and
competent
application of an explicit concept of the self,
and secondly, they pertain to what is
frequently called a “narrative” account of the
self.
The narrative self contrasts with the “minimal”
self, i.e. immediate awareness of oneself as
the subject of experience. A minimal self is
conceived to be little more than “a bare locus
of consciousness, void of personality” (G.
Strawson, 1999: 493), aspects of continuity
over time are neither included in the definition
nor deemed necessary. By contrast, an
12

The first two (and hence more basic) levels deal
roughly with the ordering or representation of
information and executive functions respectively.
13
Furthermore, Suddendorf & Corballis themselves
seem to be skeptical about the requirement of linguistic
abilities for MTT, so it is surprising that they opt for
Mitchell’s third level, rather than the second.

adequate account of the latter – i.e. of how to
explain an awareness of oneself from past to
present and future, both in terms of one’s
individual experience and testimony of others’
– is the centrepiece of “narrative” conceptions
of the self (cf. Gallagher, 2000 for a recent
review). Both minimal and narrative self
demand the competent mastery of a selfconcept. However, even simpler conceptions
are thinkable, amounting to no more than a
point of consciousness to which action and
experience is relativized.
The Self Reconsidered
Though self-awareness in the general sense
is undoubtedly an important aspect of MTT, it
is difficult to say something insightful about it.
Coherent ad hoc stories about the
involvement of a narrative self in MTT can be
told to abundance within the framework of our
mental vocabulary; however, it rests entirely
in the dark of what should constitute (and
how to test for) the involvement of narrative
self-consciousness on the level of the brain.14
Rather than working with the proposed,
extremely complex notions of self-awareness
as necessary capacities for MTT, it seems
preferable to focus on minimal, separable
ingredients.
Episodic
thought
is
not
fundamentally characterised by its relation to
the subject’s self, but rather by being a
particular mode of thought – it is essentially
first-personal,
but
not
essentially
autobiographical
as
often
presumed.
Furthermore, episodic thought is susceptible
to a certain measure of control: I can bring
out more vividly, or shift attention to, different
aspects of a past event; in imagination the
freedom of control is even more pronounced.
On top of narrativity, we might be inclined to
question mastery of a self-concept as a
necessary requirement of MTT. Perry (1998)
for
instance,
contrasts
agent-relative
knowledge with self-attached knowledge. The
former takes place “from the perspective of a
particular agent who does not need to have
an idea of self, or a notion of himself” (BBB)
but who is nonetheless capable of placing
14

Dennett (1991), one of the most prominent
proponents of the narrative self, is pessimistic about the
inquiry into a self which is more than just an abstract,
theoretical postulate in our models of the mind.

2756

himself within his environment. One way to
make this process explicit are utterance
involving demonstratives, e.g. when he
thinks/says “There is an apple”. In selfattached knowledge, by contrast, the agent
disposes of a self-notion and expresses his
knowledge by means of the (pure) indexical
“I”, e.g. “I see an apple”. Both involve the firstperson perspective, essential for episodic
states, but only the latter type of subject can
make this explicit to herself.
Interestingly, the first kind of knowledge, and
the very basic type of self involved would
satisfy a variety of episodic states: If I engage
in a phenomenally rich first-person episode
with the content “There was an apple”, or
follow the instruction “Imagine an apple”, I do
not necessarily need the first-person
indexical; an appropriately imagined content
of the kind “There is a juicy red apple” fulfils
the demand no less than “I see a juicy red
apple in front of the eye of my mind”.
However, whenever the person who
remembers or imagines is to take himself as
the object of his episodic state, he or she is
required to have an explicit notion of himself,
otherwise
he
couldn’t
attribute
any
experiences or properties to himself. What
this confirms, once again, is that the capacity
to engage in episodic states is – at least in
principle – independent of the capacity to
engage in autobiographical episodic states
(though due to the contingent set-up of the
brain this might not actually be so).
A variety of insights follow from this: Firstly,
we have another argument why autonoesis –
i.e. “self-knowing consciousness” – might not
be a fundamental requirement of MTT in so
far as there exists a kind of basic episodic
state which does not depend on the mental
time traveller having even a very basic notion
of himself. Secondly, and relatedly, the firstperson perspective might be entirely severed
form any type of complex narrative self in so
far as there is a variety of possibilities to “fill”
it: Apart from one’s own self, it could be
another’s or a general self. Thirdly, it might be
hypothesized that MTT is intimately related to
the mastery of demonstratives (and as
concerns autobiographical episodic states,
also indexicals) and temporal concepts, or
their respective non-conceptual counterparts.
So an important open question is to what

extend the non-conceptual and pre-linguistic
resources (e.g. of small children) suffice for
MTT.15
In short, there is no need to presume MTT in
the need of an awareness of a complex
narrative self, whose involvement will most
likely prove impossible (or very difficult) to
test for. Furthermore, it is not clear why
complex
introspective
abilities,
metarepresentation and awareness of one’s social
environment etc. should be necessary for
basic episodic thought. As has been argued,
the only true requirements for basic MTT are
the
involvement
of
the
first-person
perspective and a given measure of control of
the episodic content. Non-autobiographical
episodic states (There was an elephant or
This will be wet and cold etc.) might not even
demand an explicit notion of the self. Finally,
at least in so far as mental voyage is
concerned, it will be extremely misleading to
stress the requirement of (narrative) selfawareness, both in so far as certain types of
participatory
imagination
are
neither
relativized to “subjective time” (i.e. are not
locatable within a subject’s personal
narrative) or to the subject’s own self at all.
They might simply be about what it would be
like to win the Nobel Prize or how it would
feel to have one’s neighbour’s problems.
Rather than operating with various ad-hoc
accounts of the narrative self, it seems
advisable to take the first-personal mode and
control (or sense of agency) as the basic
requirements for MTT, and to devise abilities
allowing us to judge to what extent an explicit
notion of the self, and conceptual abilities are
required as well.
Bibliography
Addis, D. R., A. T. Wong, et al. (2007). "Remembering the past
and imagining the future: Common and distinct neural
substrates during event construction and elaboration."
Neuropsychologia 45(7): 1363-1377.

15

Macphail (2000) contents that MTT is dependent on
language; Suddendorf & Corballis (1997) disagree.
Clayton et al. 2000 hold that it is impossible to
investigate MTT in non-human animals, since language
is the only agreed-upon medium to report it.
Suddendory & Busby (2003, 2005) challenge this
opinion; they hold that MTT is also expressed in action
through „pantominiming past events, practice rehearsal
of anticipated events and in acts that only make sense
in the light of anticipated future events“ (2005: 114).

2757

Addis, D. R., A. T. Wong, et al. (2008). "Age-Related Changes
in the Episodic Simulation of Future Events." Psychological
Science 19(1): 33-41.
Atance, C. M. and D. K. O'Neill (2001). "Episodic future
thinking." Trends in Cognitive Sciences 5(12): 533-539.
Bechtel, W. (2002). "Decomposing the Mind-Brain: A LongTerm Pursuit." Brain and Mind 3(2): 229-242.
Bechtel, W. (Forthcoming in Skipper et al. (eds.): Philosophy
and the Life Sciences: A Reader. MIT Press. ). "The
Epistemology of Evidence in Cognitive Neuroscience."
Bermúdez, J. L. (1998). The Paradox of Self-Consciousness,
MIT Press.
Bischof-Köhler, D. (2000). Kinder auf Zeitreise Theory of Mind,
Zeitverständnis und Handlungsorganisation. Bern Göttingen
[u.a.], Huber.
Block, N. (1995). "On a confusion about a function of
consciousness." Behavioral and Brain Sciences 18(2): 227287.
Botzung, A., E. Denkova, et al. (2008). "Experiencing past and
future personal events: Functional neuroimaging evidence on
the neural bases of mental time travel." Brain and Cognition
66(2): 202-212.

D’Argembeau, A. and M. Van der Linden (2006). "Individual
differences in the phenomenology of mental time travel: The
effect of vivid visual imagery and emotion regulation
strategies." Consciousness and Cognition 15(2): 342-350.
Dennett, D. C. (1991). Consciousness explained, Little, Brown
and Co Boston.
Fink, G. R., H. J. Markowitsch, et al. (1996). "Cerebral
Representation of One''s Own Past: Neural Networks Involved
in Autobiographical Memory." Journal of Neuroscience 16(13):
4275.
Friedman, W. J. (1993). "Memory for the time of past events."
Psychological bulletin 113(1): 44-66.
Friston, K. J., C. J. Price, et al. (1996). "The Trouble with
Cognitive Subtraction." Neuroimage 4(2): 97-104.
Gallagher, S. (2000). "Philosophical conceptions of the self:
implications for cognitive science." Trends in Cognitive
Sciences 4(1): 14-21.
Gardiner, J. M. (2001). "Episodic Memory and Autonoetic
Consciousness: A First-Person Approach." Philosophical
Transactions: Biological Sciences 356(1413): 1351-1361.
Gerrans, P. K., J. (MS). "Moral Meta-Cognition."
Gerrans, P. S., D. (MS). "Implicit Mental Time Travel."

Bub, D. N. (2000). "Methodological issues confronting PET
and fMRI studies of cognitive function." Cognitive
neuropsychology(Print) 17(5): 467-484.
Buckner, R. L. and D. C. Carroll (2007). "Self-projection and
the brain." Trends in Cognitive Sciences 11(2): 49-57.
Buckner, R. L. and W. Koutstaal (1998). "Functional
neuroimaging studies of encoding, priming, and explicit
memory retrieval." Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 95(3): 891.
Buckner, R. L., M. E. Raichle, et al. (1996). "Functional
Anatomic Studies of Memory Retrieval for Auditory Words and
Visual Pictures." Journal of Neuroscience 16(19): 6219.
Cabeza, R., F. Dolcos, et al. (2002). "Similarities and
Differences in the Neural Correlates of Episodic Memory
Retrieval and Working Memory." Neuroimage 16(2): 317-330.
Cabeza, R. and L. Nyberg (2000). "Imaging Cognition II: An
Empirical Review of 275 PET and fMRI Studies." Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience 12(1): 1-47.
Cermak, L. S. and F. I. M. Craik (1979). Levels of processing
in human memory, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates New York:
Distributed by Halsted Press Division, Wiley, Hillsdale, NJ.
Clayton, N. S., T. J. Bussey, et al. (2003). "Can animals recall
the past and plan for the future?" Nat Rev Neurosci 4(8): 68591.
Clayton, N. S., D. P. Griffiths, et al. (2000). "Declarative and
episodic-like memory in animals: Personal musings of a Scrub
Jay." The evolution of cognition: 273–288.
D'Argembeau, A., C. Comblain, et al. (2003). "Phenomenal
characteristics of autobiographical memories for positive,
negative, and neutral events." Applied Cognitive Psychology
17(3): 281-294.
D'Argembeau, A., S. Raffard, et al. (2008). "Remembering the
past and imagining the future in schizophrenia." Journal of
Abnormal Psychology 117(1): 247-251.

Hassabis, D., D. Kumaran, et al. (2007). "Patients with
hippocampal amnesia cannot imagine new experiences."
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 104(5):
1726.
Hassabis, D. and E. A. Maguire (2007). "Deconstructing
episodic memory with construction." Trends in Cognitive
Sciences 11(7): 299-306.
James, W. (1890/2007). The Principles of Psychology, Cosimo
Classics.
Jennings, J. M., A. R. McIntosh, et al. (1997). "Cognitive
Subtractions May Not Add Up: The Interaction between
Semantic Processing and Response Mode." Neuroimage 5(3):
229-239.
Klein, S. B., J. Loftus, et al. (2002). "Memory and temporal
experience: The effects of episodic memory loss on an
amnesic patient’s ability to remember the past and imagine the
future." Social Cognition 20(5): 353-379.
Levine, B. (2004). "Autobiographical memory and the self in
time: Brain lesion effects, functional neuroanatomy, and
lifespan development." Brain and Cognition 55(1): 54-68.
Levine, B., E. Svoboda, et al. (2002). "Aging and
autobiographical memory: dissociating episodic from semantic
retrieval." Psychol Aging 17(4): 677-89.
Loftus, E. F. (1995). "The reality of repressed memories."
Annual Progress in Child Psychiatry and Child Development,
1994.
Loftus, E. F. and D. Davis (2006). "Recovered memories."
Annual Review of Clinical Psychology 2: 469–498.
Macphail, E. M. (2000). "The search for a mental Rubicon."
The Evolution of Cognition, MIT Press, Cambridge.
Nagel, T. (1974). "What is it like to be a bat." Philosophical
Review 83(4): 435-450.

2758

Neisser, U. (1988). "Five kinds of self-knowledge."
Philosophical Psychology 1(1): 35–59.
Nelson, K. (2001). "Language and the self: From the
‘‘experiencing I’’to the ‘‘continuing me’’." The self in time:
Developmental perspectives: 15–33.

Tulving, E., C. A. Hayman, et al. (1991). "Long-lasting
perceptual priming and semantic learning in amnesia: a case
experiment." J Exp Psychol Learn Mem Cogn 17(4): 595-617.
Zentall, T. R. (2006). "Mental time travel in animals: A
challenging question." Behavioural Processes 72(2): 173-183.

Nyberg, L., R. Cabeza, et al. (1996). "PET studies of encoding
and retrieval: The HERA model." Psychonomic Bulletin and
Review 3(2): 135-148.
Okuda, J., T. Fujii, et al. (2003). "Thinking of the future and
past: the roles of the frontal pole and the medial temporal
lobes." Neuroimage 19(4): 1369-1380.
Perry, J. (1998). "Myself and I." Philosophie in Synthetischer
Absicht: 83-103.
Povinelli, D. J. (2001). "The self: Elevated in consciousness
and extended in time." The self in time: Developmental
perspectives: 75–95.
Price, C. J., C. J. Moore, et al. (1997). "Subtractions,
conjunctions, and interactions in experimental design of
activation studies." Human Brain Mapping 5(4): 264-272.
Schacter, D. L. and D. R. Addis (2007). "On the constructive
episodic simulation of past and future events." Behavioral and
Brain Sciences 30(03): 331-332.
Squire, L. R., J. G. Ojemann, et al. (1992). "Activation of the
hippocampus in normal humans: a functional anatomical study
of memory." Proc Natl Acad Sci US A 89(5): 1837-41.
Steinvorth, S., S. Corkin, et al. (2006). "Ecphory of
autobiographical memories: An fMRI study of recent and
remote memory retrieval." Neuroimage 30(1): 285-298.
Strawson, G. (1999). "The Self and the SESMET." Journal of
Consciousness Studies 6(4): 99-135.
Suddendorf, T. and J. Busby (2003). "Like it or not? The
mental time travel debate: Reply to Clayton et al." Trends in
Cognitive Sciences 7(10): 437-438.
Suddendorf, T. and J. Busby (2003). "Mental time travel in
animals?" Trends in Cognitive Sciences 7(9): 391-396.
Suddendorf, T. and J. Busby (2005). "Making decisions with
the future in mind: Developmental and comparative
identification of mental time travel." Learning and Motivation
36(2): 110-125.
Suddendorf, T. and M. C. Corballis (1997). "Mental time travel
and the evolution of the human mind." Genetic, Social, and
General Psychology Monographs 123(2): 133-167.
Szpunar, K. K., J. M. Watson, et al. (2007). "Neural substrates
of envisioning the future." Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 104(2): 642.
Tulving, E. (1972). "Episodic and semantic memory."
Organization of memory: 381-403.
Tulving, E. (1985). "Memory and consciousness." Canadian
Psychology-Psychologie Canadienne 26: 1–12.
Tulving, E. (1993). "What Is Episodic Memory?" Current
Directions in Psychological Science 2(3): 67-70.
Tulving, E. (2002). "Episodic memory: From mind to brain."
Annual Review of Psychology 53(1): 1-25.

2759

