UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Rural and urban differences in language socialization and early vocabulary development in
Mozambique

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5tn4654w

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Vogt, Paul
Mastin, J. Douglas

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Rural and urban differences in language socialization and early vocabulary
development in Mozambique
Paul Vogt (p.a.vogt@uvt.nl)
Tilburg center for Cognition and Communication, Tilburg University
P.O. Box 90153, 5000 LE, Tilburg, The Netherlands

J. Douglas Mastin (j.d.mastin@uvt.nl)
Tilburg center for Cognition and Communication, Tilburg University
P.O. Box 90153, 5000 LE, Tilburg, The Netherlands
Abstract
We investigate the amount of speech and (co-speech) gestures
addressed to infants at 1;1 years of age in rural and urban
Mozambique, and correlate these amounts with vocabulary
size measured at 1;5 and 2;1. We found that urban infants are
exposed to more than three times as much speech and cospeech gestures than rural infants. The results show that the
amounts of co-speech gestures and speech predict later
vocabulary development in the urban community, but not in
the rural community. The results further show that rural
infants are delayed in their vocabulary development, which
may in part be explained by a transition in the socialization
style rural infants experience between the age of 1;1 and 1;5.
Keywords: Child language acquisition; child-directed speech;
co-speech gestures; vocabulary development; Mozambique.

Introduction
When children learn language, they must have exposure
to the target language. It is well established that the amount
of exposure correlates strongly to vocabulary development
(Hart & Risley, 1995; Pan, Rowe, Singer, & Snow, 2005).
This does not only hold for the amount of speech children
are exposed to, but also for the amount of gestures directed
at children (Iverson, Capirci, Longobardi, & Caselli, 1999;
Rowe & Goldin-Meadow, 2009). In this report we
investigate how the amounts of speech and gestures
addressed to infants vary among rural and urban
communities in Mozambique, and show how these amounts
correlate with vocabulary sizes during infants’ early
development.
One obvious predictor of children’s vocabulary
development is the amount of verbal input addressed to
them. Various studies have, indeed, revealed a strong
correlation between parental verbal input and vocabulary
development (Hart & Risley, 1995; Pan et al., 2005). It is
not just the amount of words a child is exposed to, but also
the variety of words that correlates to later vocabulary size
(Hart & Risley, 1995). It has further been found that the
amount of parental verbal input addressed to children, as
well as the speed of children’s vocabulary development,
relates to the parents’ social economic status (SES) – the
higher the parents’ SES, the more words they tend to

address to children, and the larger these children’s
vocabularies become (Hart & Risley, 1995).
As with speech, the amount of hand gestures addressed to
infants, such as pointing, showing, or iconic gestures, are
good predictors of vocabulary development (Iverson et al.,
1999; Pan et al., 2005). Infants’ gesture use also predicts
vocabulary size (Pan et al., 2005), possibly due to a
correlation between parental gesture use and infants gesture
use (Iverson et al., 1999). As with the amount of speech,
SES predicts the amounts of parents’ and infants’ gesture
use, which relates to later vocabulary size (Rowe & GoldinMeadow, 2009). One explanation for the role that gestures
have on vocabulary development is that gestures help to
establish and sustain joint attention, which in turn supports
vocabulary development (Carpenter, Nagell, Tomasello,
Butterworth, & Moore, 1998).
It is important to realize that most of these studies were
carried out in industrialized societies, but socialization
towards children can differ greatly across cultures, and
many non-industrial cultures have different attitudes
towards child rearing (Schieffelin & Ochs, 1989). For
instance, there are cultural differences regarding the amount
of socialization a child is involved in - typically there is
relatively little speech directed towards infants from nonindustrialized cultures (Lieven, 1994). Moreover, multiparty interactions are more frequent in non-industrialized
than in industrialized communities, and infants tend to have
multiple caregivers, including siblings (Brown, 2011;
Harkness, 1977). Also, the amount of language socialization
depends on the developmental status of a country - mothers
from countries higher on a developmental scale tend spend
more time stimulating their children by reading books,
telling stories, naming, counting and other cognitive tasks
(Bornstein & Putnick, 2012).
Within culture differences may exist between urban and
rural communities. Keller (2012), for instance, has proposed
that, in addition to prototypical Western urban communities,
there are prototypical rural and urban communities in nonindustrialized countries. She has described a number of key
characteristics in which non-industrialized rural and urban
communities differ. The subsistence-based farming lifestyle

3687

in rural communities, for instance, demands from children
that they develop motoric skills and knowledge of social
rules. Verbal skills are considered less important. Urban
societies tend to be higher educated and expect from their
children to receive a good education as well. As a result,
linguistic interactions tend to become more important
(LeVine et al., 1996). However, non-Western urban
communities still adhere to many cultural traditions rooted
in their rural decent, such as the role of communal
responsibilities from the extended family members in child
rearing (Keller, 2012).
In sum, these observations predict that infants from nonindustrialized urban communities would be exposed to more
child-directed speech than infants from rural communities.
Since there is a tight link between speech and gesture
(McNeill, 1985), we would expect to find similar
differences regarding the use of gestures and co-speech
gestures addressed to infants. A previous analysis of the
same observations presented in the present paper, however,
has revealed no significant differences between a rural and
an urban community in Mozambique regarding the amount
of social interactions that young infants have with the
members of their extended families (Mastin & Vogt, 2013).
These social interactions were based on the infants' attention
states (Bakeman & Adamson, 1984), and include both
verbal and non-verbal interactions. This raises the question
whether there are actual differences in the amount of speech
addressed to the infants.
Based on the above-mentioned studies, which have
demonstrated that speech and gestures are sound predictors
for vocabulary development, we further expect to find that
the amounts of speech, gestures, and co-speech gestures
predict later vocabulary. In this paper, we try to confirm
these predictions using a longitudinal ethnographic study
among infants from rural and urban Mozambique.

Methods
Participants and field sites
We selected two field sites in Mozambique: one site
compiled from two adjacent residential suburbs in the
country’s capital of Maputo; the other site was made up of
three small villages just outside the rural, provincial town of
Chokwe in Gaza province, about 200 kilometers away from
the capital. From each community we recruited 22-25
families with an infant in the range of 1;0 to 1;2 years old
(1;1 on average) at the start of our study. Our local research
assistants explained the general purpose and procedures of
our study to the participating families in their native
language, and we obtained a signed informed consent from
the infants’ mothers. During the course of our longitudinal
study, we lost various participants due to illness, mortality
or relocation. In addition, we removed two participants from
our analysis, because the parental reports on vocabulary
development showed a decrease in expressive vocabulary,

which rendered their data unreliable. As a result, we provide
results for 14 participants from each field site.
The participants from the rural community were all native
Changana speakers (a Southern Bantu language spoken in
parts of Mozambique and South Africa); in most cases this
was the only language spoken in the household. Only in a
few families was another related local language occasionally
spoken. In the urban community, most families raise their
children bilingually in Mozambique’s official language of
Portuguese, and Ronga, a language that is mutually
intelligible with Changana.
Table 1 shows some
demographic information concerning our participants.
Table 1: Demographic information. Note: Primary education
in Mozambique is organized in two levels of primary
school: EP1 for 5 years and EP2 for another 2 years.
Participant information
Males / Females
Avg age (SD)
Education level mothers
None
EP1
EP2
Higher

Rural
(n=14)
7/7
1;1.8
(0;0.26)

Urban
(n=14)
9/5
1;1.6
(0;0.28)

6
5
3
0

1
5
6
1

There was a fairly balanced split in the number of males
and females participating, and the average age was
equivalent in both sites. To have an indication of the
families SES, we report the mothers’ education level. The
majority of rural mothers have either completed no
education or only the lower levels of education, whereas
urban caregivers have all received some education: five
mothers have completed the lowest level of education, six
have the second level of education, and one has received
secondary education. Since the data on education is ordinal,
we performed Fisher’s exact test to verify whether the
education levels of both communities differ significantly
and found that it appears not (p=.115). However, when we
compared the rural community with the urban community
from our (unpublished) norming study using the Chisquared test, we found a significant effect in educational
level (χ2(3)=32.414, p<.001), while the urban participants’
education fits nicely with our norming study (χ2(3)=1.318,
p=.725).

Materials
We adapted the MacArthur-Bates Communicative
Development Inventories (MBCDI) Short Form Vocabulary
Checklist (Fenson et al., 2000) into both Portuguese/Ronga
and Changana to obtain a parental checklist of words used
to measure vocabulary size and development in both
Mozambican communities. To do this, we compiled a list

3688

from Fenson et al.'s Level I for infants and extended this
with 13 additional items from the Level II checklist to allow
the list to be used for children older than 16 months. We
then identified vocabulary that was not applicable to the
environment, culture or lifestyle of our participants, and
replaced these items with appropriate vocabulary that
matched the same syntactic or semantic functions as the
original English word. The list was further adapted during
extensive piloting of the checklist. With the adapted CDIs
we conducted a norming study in both communities to
obtain expected values of vocabulary development. For
details on the adaptation and norming of the MBCDI,
consult Mastin and Vogt (2013).

Data collection
Data was collected longitudinally at three periods during
the course of one year, while the infants were on average
1;1, 1;5 and 2;1 years old. At each time-period, we visited
each family twice. At the first visit, we administered a short
survey with questions concerning the demographics of our
participants. We also videotaped the infants’ interactions
with their families to allow them to accommodate to our
presence. During the second visit, we started with video
taping the infants from 45 up to 75 minutes during natural
free behavior for data analysis. At both visits, we instructed
the families to continue their daily routines and to act as if
we were not present. After the video recording was finished,
the adapted MBCDI was administered through face-to-face
interviews held by a local research assistant to estimate the
infants’ vocabulary development. In the current study, we
report on the video recordings at 1;1 and correlate these to
the infants’ expressive vocabulary at 1;5 and 2;1 as
measured using the MBCDI.

Coding procedures
The videos recorded during the second visits were coded
for 30 minutes in segments of prolonged duration in which
the infant was displaying ‘natural’ behavior (i.e.: not
sleeping, not off camera, not interacting with or disturbed by
the experimenters). We also excluded prolonged periods
(roughly more than 2 minutes) of breastfeeding, as this
might have introduced a bias toward dyadic interactions. For
this article, we present results on only child-directed speech
and gestures.
Child-directed utterances Two local research assistants,
while closely supervised by the authors, transcribed all
child-directed speech. All intelligible speech was first
transcribed into the local language and subsequently
translated into Portuguese. All unintelligible speech were
coded as unknown vocalizations, but were included in our
current analyses. Because not all speech was intelligible, we
measured the number of utterances (i.e. individual speech
acts), rather than number of words.

Gestures We coded gestures during episodes of joint
engagement (Mastin & Vogt, 2013), which are activities in
which the infants are socially interacting with one or more
other individuals. These activities involve dyadic person
interactions, as well as different types of triadic joint
attention interactions based on those defined by Bakeman
and Adamson (1984). Since many interactions observed
involved multi-party interactions, we only coded those
gestures produced by the communication partner nearest to
the child. We adopt a broad definition of gestures as any
physical activity with the hand or body that has a clear
communicative intent (Zukow-Goldring, 1996). The
following gestures were coded:
• Pointing is a gesture where the gesturer extends the arm
to indicate an object with the hand or index finger from
some distance.
• Showing is a gesture in which an object is indicated
using zero proximity, e.g. by tapping on the object or
by holding up the object.
• Demonstrating is a gesture where the speaker
manipulates an object to show the infant how that
object is used, or the type of actions that can be
performed upon it.
• Reaching occurs when someone extends his/her arm to
obtain or to touch an object, but can (or does) not reach
this object. Also requests for objects by extending the
hand were included in this category.
• Offering occurs when the speaker offers (or gives) an
object or good to the infant.
• Taking occurs when someone takes over possession of
an object from someone else.
• Conventional gestures comprises gestures that are
symbolic of nature, such as emblematic gestures, but
also gestures that bear an iconic relationship with their
referent. For example, waving bye-bye, or indicating
the size of the target object with the hands.
• Ritualized play accounts for all ritualized interactions or
displays that occur between infants and communication
partners. For instance, dancing, clapping hands or turntaking games, such as patty-cake.
• Embody occurs when someone directs another by
physically “putting them through the motions of some
activity” (Zukow-Goldring, 1996, p. 200), provided this
has a communicative (or otherwise intentional)
function. For example, placing the child on the
mother’s lap, pushing the infant in a certain direction,
or taking someone's hand to demonstrate an action.
• Request for attention comprises any gesture that seeks
for the attention of the interaction partner.
For the present study, we collapsed all gesture categories
and report on the average number of gesture tokens
addressed to the infants.
Both authors coded approximately half of all videos each,
after which the coding was assessed and refined using
improved coding schemes twice by trained research
assistants. Both authors then coded approximately 20% of

3689

the video material to calculate inter-rater agreement with the
final results. The resulting Cohen’s kappa was measured to
be 0.67 (84.9% agreement), which according to Landis and
Koch (1977) can be classified as ‘substantial’.
Co-speech gestures After coding all gestures, we marked
those gestures accompanied by a child-directed utterance as
a co-speech gesture. We report the average number of cospeech gestures addressed to infants.
300
Rural

250

Urban
200
150
100
50
0
Utterances

Gestures

Co-speech gestures

Figure 1: This figure shows the average amounts of childdirected utterances, gestures and co-speech gestures in the
rural and urban areas at 1;1. Error bars indicate standard
deviations. All differences between communities are
significant (p<.001).

Table 2 shows the Spearman correlations between the
amounts of utterances, gestures and co-speech gestures
produced at the infants’ age of 1;1 and expressive
vocabulary sizes at infants’ ages of 1;5 and 2;1. The first
observation we can make is that urban child-directed
utterances and co-speech gestures have significant
correlations to expressive vocabulary size at 1;5 (utterances:
rs[14]=0.554, p<.05; co-speech gestures: rs[14]=0.667,
p<.05) and at 2;1 (utterances: rs[14]=0.607; p<.05). Note
that all other correlations from the urban community
approach significance (p<.10). The second observation is
that from the rural community, no significant correlations
with vocabulary are revealed.
Given the differences in the amount of cognitive
stimulation between both communities, we would expect to
also see differences in the language development between
the two communities, and we do (Table 3). The urban
infants have a substantially larger expressive vocabulary
than the rural infants. According to a two-way ANOVA on
Age x Site, we see a main effect for age (F(2,78)=79.91;
p<.001) and for site (F(1,78)=13.41; p<.001), and no
interaction (p=.221). A Tukey post-hoc test confirms the
main effect of age (p<.001).
Table 3: The average scores and standard deviations on
expressive vocabulary from the MBCDI at 1;5 and 2;1 for
both field sites. Note: Differences between urban and rural
are significant as indicated with *p<.05 and **p<.01.

Results
Figure 1 shows the average number of utterances,
gestures and co-speech gestures addressed to the infants
from the rural and urban communities. The graph reveals
that urban communication partners address substantially
more utterances, gestures and co-speech gestures than their
rural counterparts. The number of child-directed utterances
observed in the urban community is 5.7 times higher than
observed in the rural area (according to the Mann-Whitney
U test, U=8; p<.001). The number of gestures – both with or
without simultaneous speech – is 2.0 times higher in the
urban community than in the rural (U=29; p=.001). The
frequency of child directed co-speech gestures occurs 3.2
times more in the urban community (U=22, p<.001).
Table 2: Spearman correlations rs of total amounts of child
directed utterances, gestures and co-speech gestures at 1;1
with expressive vocabulary development at both 1;5 and
2;1. Note: *p<.05.
At 1;5
At 2;1
Rural
Urban
Rural
Urban
Utterances -0.178
0.554*
0.055
0.607*
Gestures
-0.270
0.482
0.256
0.508
Co-speech
-0.061
0.667*
0.139
0.520
gestures

Rural
Urban

At 1;5
17.71 (12.23)
29.00 (19.61)*

At 2;1
50.85 (23.59)
72.92 (23.18)**

Discussion
The objective of this paper is to investigate whether
infants from rural Mozambique experience less verbal and
non-verbal stimulation than infants from urban
Mozambique, and to assess how this correlates to later
vocabulary development. The results clearly demonstrate
that there are substantial differences between the rural and
urban communities at all measured levels, i.e. the amounts
of speech (as measured in utterances), gestures and cospeech gestures. This confirms Keller's (2012) predictions,
but appears in contrast to our earlier findings that the total
amounts of social interactions the same infants engage in –
whether these are verbal or non-verbal – are roughly the
same in both communities (Mastin & Vogt, 2013).
The difference in child-directed stimulation between rural
and urban is largest regarding the number of utterances,
which is 5.7 times higher in the urban community than in
the rural community. This is considerably more than the
difference in the amount of gestures (2.0 times higher) or
the amount of co-speech gestures (3.2 times higher). Further
analysis of the results from Figure 1 reveals that in both
communities people use gestures more often than

3690

utterances. However, this happens more in the rural
community than in the urban community (3.5 times vs. 1.2
times). Moreover, we can infer that, on average, almost each
utterance in the rural community is accompanied by a cospeech gesture, while in the urban community every other
utterance is accompanied by a co-speech gesture.
These findings demonstrate that in the rural community
relatively many social interactions with infants are nonverbal interactions. For instance, mothers may massage the
infant's body, feed the infant or point to an object without
talking. However, when the rural infant is addressed
verbally, a gesture usually accompanies the speech. Urban
infants are talked to much more frequently, but only half of
the utterances addressed to them are accompanied by a
gesture. In addition, although the link between speech and
gesture appears less strong in the urban community, the
absolute amount of child-directed gestural input for urban
infants is much larger than for rural infants. Thus, the urban
community, indeed, provides a richer language environment
for the young than the rural communities do (Keller, 2012;
LeVine et al., 1996).
The reason for this difference may well be due to the
needs that different lifestyles demand of children when they
grow older (Keller, 2012). In the rural community there is
more need for children to help in the field or in the
household, whereas the urban community value educational
prospects for their children. However, other factors may
contribute to these differences as well. For instance, there is
a small difference regarding the educational levels that
mothers obtained, so SES is likely to be a factor (Hart &
Risley, 1995; Rowe & Goldin-Meadow, 2009). Also, due to
globalization, the urban community may have adopted a
more Western-like child-oriented socialization pattern
(Schieffelin & Ochs, 1989). Furthermore, there is the
possibility that mothers in the rural area are less socially
attached to their children until a certain age, either because
of the high child mortality rates or because of cultural
beliefs. Results from interviews we held indicate that in the
rural area many mothers do not consider their child part of
the community until well past their first birthday, while in
the urban area most mothers considered their child a
community member at birth or at least before they reach 6months (Mastin & Vogt, 2013). Of course, additional issues
such as health may play a role, and most likely a
combination of factors explains why urban infants are
exposed to more speech and gestures. Further research is
required to understand why there is so much less childdirected speech in the rural community than in the urban.
Although on average the urban community do not gesture
with each utterance, the amount of co-speech gestures
correlates strongly to vocabulary size at 1;5. Moreover, the
amount of utterances addressed to infants in the urban
community reveals significant correlations to vocabulary
both at 1;5 and 2;1. So, these findings correspond well to
results from earlier research in Western cultures (Hart &

Risley, 1995; Iverson et al., 1999; Rowe & Goldin-Meadow,
2009). However, the amounts of speech and gesture do not
correlate to vocabulary development in the rural area, which
contradicts these previous studies and is hard to explain.
One possible explanation is as follows: a yet unpublished
analysis of the amount of social interactions infants engage
in with different communication partners reveals that the
amount of interactions with mothers is stable over time
during infants’ second year of life in the urban community.
In the rural community, however, the amount of motherinfant interactions reduces substantially between 1;1 and
1;5, while interactions with siblings increase by
approximately the same amount, and which come to equal
those of caregivers in frequency by the age of 2;1. Thus,
rural infants need to adapt more to changing caregiving
structures than urban infants do, with the consequence that
the rural socialization structure at 1;1 is neither the same as
the socialization structure at 1;5 nor at 2;1. The amounts of
speech and gestures at 1;1 may therefore not be viable
predictors for vocabulary development in the rural area.
Analysis of speech and gesture use at 1;5 and 2;1 should
shed new light on this issue. If the interpretation provided
here is correct, we expect that co-speech gesture use at 1;5
in the rural community to be a better predictor for
vocabulary size at 2;1 than its use at 1;1.
The results from the scores on the vocabulary checklist
(Table 3) suggest a difference in the development of
vocabulary in both communities. Despite the absence of a
correlation between input and vocabulary in the rural
community, the most likely candidate for this difference is
indeed the difference in the amounts of speech, and
consequently the amount of co-speech gestures, that infants
are exposed to (Hart & Risley, 1995; Pan et al., 2005).
However, Harkness (1977) observed in rural Kenya that
children spending more time with adult caregivers tend to
talk more and become linguistically more advanced than
children who spend more time with sibling caregivers. So,
the differences in the socialization structure may be another
candidate. A deeper analysis of who infants socialize with
more frequently over time and how this relates to
vocabulary development should provide new insights into
the role of different caregivers on the infants' word learning
processes.
The data presented in this paper are being annotated to
develop corpora of multimodal interactions between infants
and their social environment that can be incorporated in
computer models (Matusevych, Alishahi, & Vogt, 2013;
Vogt & Mastin, 2013). Using these corpora, we aim to
mimic the observed interactions between infants and their
surroundings as realistically as possible in multi-agent
simulations. With such simulations, we plan to investigate
various socio-cognitive theories explaining language
development using realistic scenarios in which agents
interact socially using speech and gestures according to
observed frequencies, and measure the vocabulary

3691

development of the simulated children. One possible
application of such a simulation could be to analyze the
socio-cognitive mechanisms that underlie the findings from
this paper. The envisioned approach will thus provide novel
avenues to study cultural and social aspects of multimodal
interactions
in
children's
language
acquisition
computationally in a verifiable manner.
To conclude, we have observed that rural infants are
much less exposed to child-directed speech and childdirected co-speech gestures than urban infants, which
correlates to their vocabulary development over their second
year of life. These findings are in line with predictions based
on Keller's (2012) distinction between rural and urban
communities. These differences seem to affect vocabulary
development as well, but while the results from the urban
area are consistent with predictions from western studies
(Hart & Risley, 1995; Pan et al., 2005; Rowe & GoldinMeadow, 2009), those from the rural community are
inconsistent. More fine-grained analyses of the data are
undertaken to investigate these differences. In addition, we
are currently analyzing data collected from middle class
urban families in the Netherlands to carry out a comparative
study involving all three prototypical communities proposed
by Keller (2012).

Acknowledgements
This research was supported with a VIDI grant from the
Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO,
grant number 276-70-018). Field research would not have
been possible without the assistance of Wona Sanana,
Associação Communitária Ambiente da Mafalala, and our
Mozambican research assistants. Thanks to Ingrid Masson,
Mohamad Hafiz and Van Le for their assistance in coding.
Finally, we offer a special thanks to our participant families
for their kind hospitality and collaboration.

References
Bakeman, R., & Adamson, L. B. (1984). Coordinating
attention to people and objects in mother-infant and
peer-infant interaction. Child Development, 12781289.
Bornstein, M. H., & Putnick, D. L. (2012). Cognitive and
socioemotional caregiving in developing countries.
Child Development, 83(1), 46-61.
Brown, P. (2011). The Cultural Organization of Attention.
In A. Duranti, E. Ochs & B. Schieffelin (Eds.), The
Handbook of Language Socialization: Blackwell
Publishing Ltd.
Carpenter, M., Nagell, K., Tomasello, M., Butterworth, G.,
& Moore, C. (1998). Social Cognition, Joint
Attention, and Communicative Competence from 9
to 15 Months of Age. Monographs of the Society
for Research in Child Development, 63(4).
Fenson, L., Pethick, S., Renda, C., Cox, J. L., Dale, P. S., &
Reznick, J. S. (2000). Short-form versions of the

MacArthur
communicative
development
inventories. Applied Psycholinguistics, 21(1), 95116.
Harkness, S. (1977). Aspects of social environment and first
language acquisition in rural Africa. Talking to
children: Language input and acquisition, 309316.
Hart, B., & Risley, T. R. (1995). Meaningful differences in
the everyday experience of young American
children: Paul H Brookes Publishing.
Iverson, J. M., Capirci, O., Longobardi, E., & Caselli, C. M.
(1999). Gesturing in mother-child interactions.
Cognitive Development, 14(1), 57-75.
Keller, H. (2012). Autonomy and relatedness revisited:
Cultural manifestations of universal human needs.
Child Development Perspectives.
Landis, J. R., & Koch, G. G. (1977). The measurement of
observer agreement for categorical data.
Biometrics, 159-174.
LeVine, R. A., LeVine, S., Dixon, S., Richman, A.,
Leiderman, P. H., Keefer, C. H., & Brazelton, T. B.
(1996). Child care and culture: Lessons from
Africa: Cambridge University Press.
Lieven, E. V. M. (1994). Crosslinguistic and crosscultural
aspects of language addressed to children. In C.
Gallaway & B. J. Richards (Eds.), Input and
interaction in language acquisition. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Mastin, J. D., & Vogt, P. (2013). Correlations between
infant engagement levels and vocabulary
development: An observational study of
Mozambican infants from 1;1 to 2;1. Under review.
Matusevych, Y., Alishahi, A., & Vogt, P. (2013). Automatic
generation of naturalistic child–adult interaction
data CogSci 2013.
McNeill, D. (1985). So you think gestures are nonverbal.
Psychological Review, 92(3), 350-371.
Pan, B. A., Rowe, M. L., Singer, J. D., & Snow, C. E.
(2005). Maternal correlates of growth in toddler
vocabulary production in low income families.
Child Development, 76(4), 763-782.
Rowe, M. L., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (2009). Differences in
early gesture explain SES disparities in child
vocabulary size at school entry. Science,
323(5916), 951.
Schieffelin, B., & Ochs, E. (1989). Language socialization
across cultures. Cambridge, UK.: Cambridge
University Press.
Vogt, P., & Mastin, J. D. (2013). Anchoring social symbol
grounding in children's interactions. Künstliche
Intelligenz, 27(2), 145-151.
Zukow-Goldring, P. (1996). Sensitive caregiving fosters the
comprehension of speech: When gestures speak
louder than words. Early development and
parenting, 5(4), 195-211.

3692

