UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Scales of Cognition Evident in Action

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5q28m01t

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
O'Hara, Denis
Duran, Nicholas D.
Dale, Rick
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Scales of Cognition Evident in Action
Denis O’Hora (denis.ohora@nuigalway.ie)
School of Psychology, NUI Galway
University Road, Galway, Ireland

Nicholas D. Duran (nduran2@ucmerced.edu)
Rick Dale (rdale@ucmerced.edu)
Cognitive & Information Sciences
University of California, Merced
5200 North Lake Rd., Merced, CA 95343

Jonathan B. Freeman (jon.freeman@dartmouth.edu)
Psychological and Brain Sciences, Dartmouth College
6207 Moore Hall, Hanover, NH 03755

John M. Tomlinson, Jr. (tomlinson@zas.gwz-berlin.de)
Zentrum für Allgemeine Sprachwissenschaft (ZAS),
Berlin 10117 Germany
Abstract

havioural data. Put simply, it may now be possible to investigate ongoing action for evidence of purported cognitive
processes. The dynamic characteristics of ongoing behaviour
provide a testbed for the comparison of models in various areas of cognitive science. The papers in this symposium will
report on applications of the analysis of the action dynamics of cognition at four very different scales. The first talk
will address the dynamics of basic choice processes by studying the dynamics of movement while those choices are made.
The second talk addresses sentence process and pragmatic inferences. The third showcases the dynamics of false responding as a model of cognitive processes involved in deception.
Finally, the fourth talk discusses the application of these dynamic techniques to social cognition. The symposium will
end with 20-minute interactive discussion of the relationship
between action and cognition, the impact of these measures
on theoretical issues across scales, and the inevitable differences in how measures behave at these levels and their different tasks.

When cognitive processes occur alongside observable actions,
it is possible for characteristics of these processes to influence
the ongoing performance of those actions. This satisfies everyday intuitions. For example, negotiators and poker players
claim to be attuned to ‘tells,’ these early behavioral indicators
of eventual decisions. Going beyond intuitions, however, several researchers have exploited this fine-grained source of behavior to highlight online cognitive processing. Using even a
simple measure such as computer-mouse tracking can reveal a
wide range of cognitive processing. Four participants in this
symposium report on applications of the analysis of the action
dynamics of cognition across multiple scales: (i) basic decisions, (ii) language processing, (iii) false responding, and (iv)
social processes. The similarities and differences in expression
of these processes in action highlight important continuities
and discontinuities across cognitive and neural processes.
Keywords: action dynamics; social cognition; learning; decision making; language

Cognition and Action
A perhaps still prevailing notion of the relationship between
cognition and action is that motor movement takes place
mostly near the end of a cognitive process or decision. Implicit in this notion is that the systems are relatively independent, potentially modular and encapsulated. An outcome of
this attitude is that action has, to some extent, been neglected
in many quarters of the cognitive sciences (for review on this
issue, see Rosenbaum, 2005). In contrast, recent work suggests that action and cognition facilitate one another to such
a degree that one can understand action as “part and parcel”
of cognition (Freeman, Dale, & Farmer, 2011). In this work,
researchers extract the computer-mouse cursor movements of
participants who carry out a cognitive task. By analyzing dynamic properties of the cursor, such as motion latencies, velocities, complexity of movement, and so on, new insights
into cognitive processing are possible.
A tighter relationship between cognition and action has inspired explorations of cognition using densely-sampled be-

(i) Mechanics of Choice and Decision-Making
Our everyday language about choice and decision making is,
in English at least, replete with dynamic physical metaphors.
We are ‘pulled’ or ‘drawn’ towards choices that we sometimes ‘cannot resist’. When we make a decision, we might
be asked, ‘How did you come to this conclusion?’ and we
might feel were ‘pushed’ towards it or that we ‘fell into it’.
These metaphors highlight certain characteristics of decisionmaking. First, decision making takes time; our preferences
gradually develop from less stable to more stable as we
choose. Second, how we make our decisions tells us much
about the quality of the decision, whether it was easy or difficult, fearful or hopeful, and so on. Indeed, the dominant
models of preferential decision-making within cognitive science include the dynamic evolution of choice in that repeatedly sampling information biases the unfolding decision.

97

Within a short discrimination learning task, Denis O’Hora
and colleagues manipulated the strength of attraction to available choices by changing the points available for making
these choices. He will describe how they used this method
to investigate choice trajectories under a range of conditions
of choice conflict.

ner in a game of 20-questions, thus confusing them about a
target objects of the game (Duran & Dale, 2012).

(iv) Cognitive Processes in Social
Categorization
Mere exposure to a social target has long been known to
trigger spontaneous categorization along multiple dimensions
(e.g., sex, race, age). Such categorizations are extremely
rapid and efficient, yet also reflect the complex integration of
a variety of bottom-up (e.g., facial and vocal cues) and topdown (e.g., stereotypic expectations, motivation) information
sources. Jonathan Freeman will discuss recent work exploiting the tight link between cognitive and action dynamics to
understand the underlying social categorization process.
In one series of studies, for example, participants were presented with sex-typical and sex-atypical faces and asked to
categorize the targets sex by clicking on a male or female
response on the screen (Freeman, Ambady, Rule, & Johnson, 2008). During categorization of sex-atypical faces, hand
trajectories were continuously attracted to the opposite sexcategory before settling into the correct response. These findings and others support an account of social categorization in
which dynamic competition is central; perceived facial, vocal, and bodily cues (among other constraints) simultaneously
weigh in on multiple partially-active category representations
that dynamically evolve over time into stable categorical perceptions (Freeman & Ambady, 2011).

(ii) Interplay between Pragmatic and
non-Pragmatic Inference
Unlike most linguistic phenomena, the derivation of pragmatic inferences is optional. For example if a speaker is
asked, “Are Todd and Sam coming to the party,” and she responds, “Todds coming,” the listener could interpret the utterance as 1) the speaker only knows that Todd is coming but
doesnt know about Sam or 2) derive the inference that only
Todd is coming and Sam is definitely not. In both cases, listeners at least know that Todds coming. Because pragmatic
inferences are highly context dependent, research on the comprehension of inferences needs to tease part the likelihood
of making an inference from the process of deriving on one
(Bott, Bailey, & Grodner, 2012).
John Tomlinson will present work on how action dynamics cannot only capture this important distinction, but also
how action dynamics provide clearer insight into how pragmatic inferences are derived. In several of studies, listeners motor movements show strong initial preference for nonpragmatically enriched interpretations for scalar implicatures
before correcting towards pragmatic interpretations. Studies
will be presented on how intonation, context, and speaker information can streamline these inferences. Critical for this
symposium is how action dynamics, specifically time normalized mouse movements, can provide new insights into how
such factors above and beyond that of real time data analyses
such as reaction times and eye-movements.

References
Bott, L., Bailey, T. M., & Grodner, D. (2012). Distinguishing speed from accuracy in scalar implicatures. Journal of
Memory and Language, 66(1), 123–142.
Duran, N. D., & Dale, R. (2012). Increased vigilance in monitoring others’ mental states during deception. In Proceedings of the 34th annual meeting of the cognitive science
society. Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Duran, N. D., Dale, R., & McNamara, D. S. (2010). The action dynamics of overcoming the truth. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 17(4), 486–91.
Freeman, J. B., & Ambady, N. (2011). A dynamic interactive
theory of person construal. Psychological Review, 118(2),
247–79.
Freeman, J. B., Ambady, N., Rule, N. O., & Johnson, K. L.
(2008). Will a category cue attract you? Motor output reveals dynamic competition across person construal. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 137(4), 673–
90.
Freeman, J. B., Dale, R., & Farmer, T. a. (2011). Hand in
motion reveals mind in motion. Frontiers in Psychology, 2,
59.
Rosenbaum, D. A. (2005). The Cinderella of psychology:
the neglect of motor control in the science of mental life
and behavior. The American Psychologist, 60(4), 308–17.

(iii) Action Dynamics Reveal False Responses
Human beings are surprisingly adept at responding to questions with information that is in opposition to what is known
to be true. There remain, however, many open questions
about how deception is possible. Do we hold in mind what
is known to be true, and actively inhibit it to respond falsely?
Does it matter whether that information is biographically relevant, or is simply a statement that can be readily falsified
in our own semantic memory? Does answering falsely get
easier if our cognitive system can prepare for it?
Questions such as these pertain to the underlying cognitive processes that contribute to deception. Yet it is extremely
difficult to create experimental situations that permit direct
access into such mechanisms. In this presentation Dale and
Duran survey a variety of experiments that utilize the mousetracking methodology to explore the dynamics of false responses. For example, in one experiment, participants were
prompted to respond falsely about their personal experiences
and biography (Duran, Dale, & McNamara, 2010). In another, participants were prompted to lie to an imagined part-

98

