UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Schema-Driven, Space-Supported Random Accessible Memory Systems for Manipulation of
Symbolic Working Memory

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2gp633gw

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Noori, Nader
Itti, Laurent

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Schema-Driven, Space-Supported Random Accessible Memory Systems for
Manipulation of Symbolic Working Memory
Nader Noori (nnoori@usc.edu), Laurent Itti (itti@usc.edu)
Department of Computer Science, University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90089 USA
Abstract

in the domain of cognitive psychology (CP) share is a metaconcept for their execution models which can be referred to
as the dichotomy of process-storage. Applying this metaconcept to management of information for human working
memory was one the most important contributions of Alan
Baddeley and Graham Hitch to cognitive psychology which
was originally presented in their seminal work (Baddeley &
Hitch, 1974), and ever since has become the common denominator of all models of WM in CP. In this dichotomy which
was inspired by Von Neumann’s architectural design for modern digital computers (Von Neumann, 1982), the role of execution and processing is given to a central processing unit
—namely the Central Executive (CE)—which controls the
flow of information between and within storage slave units.
However, a long debate over the nature of storage in CP community (Jonides et al., 2008) has restricted elaborations on
functional mechanisms of CE.

We present an execution model for manipulation of working
memory content during intellectual symbolic working memory
tasks, which allows random access of WM content through a
schema-operated sensory-motor spatial working memory. The
core concept of this framework is binding symbolic items to
spatial locations which are accessible via selective mechanisms of attention in space. An operational schema implements basic WM management operations such as insertion,
deletion and fetching through sequences of shifts in spatial attention towards registry locations. We apply the model to a serial recall task (both forward and backward orders). We show
that the model provides a better fit to human data in backward
recall compared to forward recall, which conforms with the
evidence for leveraging spatial strategies for backward recall
and phonological strategies for forward recall in normal subjects. We discuss additional possible implications of our model
and its assumption of spatial organization of WM content and
access through shifts of attention.
Keywords: Memory Manipulation; Operational Schema; Forward Recall; Reverse Recall; Computational Modelling; Intellectual Tasks; Working Memory.

Introduction
Cognitive psychologists use the term working memory (WM)
to emphasize on the use of temporarily stored information in
connection with cognitive tasks that involve processing information (Baddeley, 1992). However, a review of the literature shows that the information processing aspect of cognitive tasks mostly applies to and have been explored using
intellectual tasks with symbols. Tasks such as random digit
generation, forward and backward digit or word span, mental arithmetic, n-back recall, double counting and sorting are
prevalent in the context of cognitive psychology to explore
the ability for manipulation and maintenance of information
in working memory (see Repov and Baddely’s review paper
(Repovs & Baddeley, 2006)).
Although the credit for popularizing the term working
memory goes to cognitive psychologists, the concept of working memory as the ability of temporarily storing information
for the use in the upcoming task has been applied in other
domains and to tasks that lack symbolic or intellectual features. For example, working memory which is of the interest
in the perception community is related to maintenance and
manipulation of information for sensory tasks such as visual
search (Oh & Kim, 2004), or in action-perception domain for
performing action routines (Arbib, 1987).
However what distinguishes WM in different domains is
beyond differences in particular instances of information and
indeed is mostly related to their execution models: the functional principles for management or manipulation of information. In particular what different models of working memory

The concept of CE in WM management did not prove
as successful as its counterpart in Von Neumann’s proposal
in achieving a working memory management schema which
helps information processing. What distinguishes the central
processing unit (CPU) in Von Neumann’s architecture from
CE in Baddeley’s proposal is that the CPU had all mechanisms for control of storage units built in, while Baddeley
and Hitch use the central executive as a metaphor for a central and powerful executive unit with no specific detail as to
how CE controls slave storage units (Baddeley, 1992). As
Baddeley himself has stated in several occasions because of
this lack of specificity, CE has become the rag bag of unanswered questions(Repovs & Baddeley, 2006) or a homunculus (Repovs & Baddeley, 2006; Baddeley, 1996). What is
known about the executive role of the central executive, for
the most part, is postulated by Baddeley and colleagues. Inspired by Norman and Schallice’s idea of the Supervisiory
Attentional System (SAS) (Norman & Shallice, 1986), Baddeley has proposed that CE plays a role in controlling limited
resources of executive attention (Repovs & Baddeley, 2006;
Baddeley, 1996). However, adding the function of controlling executive attentional resources has not been able to fill
the void of a paradigm for an executive model for manipulation of information and to yield a model that explains how
executive paradigm are encoded.
To give an example of an alternative meta-concept for manipulation of information we can refer to Arbib’s work on information processing in perception-action loops. Arbib in his
neuroethologic studies used the concept of information processing in a mechanistic fashion (Arbib, 1980) which was in-

1085

formed by Norbert Wiener’s theory of control and the concept
of interplay between information and action in controlling biological organisms (Wiener, 1948). The term ‘Schema’ was
the key concept in Arbib’s terminology for describing how
neural systems interplay to exchange information to achieve
a biological goal (Arbib, 1992). In his later work on modeling
visually-guided actions, he included the concept of working
memory as a mechanism for sustaining information representations relevant to upcoming actions, as long as they remain
relevant (Arbib, 1987).
While we share our target of study with contemporary cognitive psychologists, in devising an execution model for manipulation of information in the intellectual and symbolic domain, we are influenced by Wiener’s system-theoretic and
biologically-plausible concept of flow of information, and by
Arbib’s schema-theoretic approach (Arbib, 1992). We also
have one specific additional assumption for our execution
model for memory manipulation, which is the use of spacesupported sensory-motor systems in manipulation of information. We argue that, from an evolutionary standpoint, it
is plausible that the capacity of performing intellectual symbolic tasks, which are very recent in our evolutionary history,
might have emerged by re-using or co-opting rudementary
systems for action and perception. Thus, we try to re-use
sensory-motor systems as the building blocks of our approach
to a model of working memory for intellectual working memory tasks.
We refer to this schema-driven and space-supported
sensory-motor system which provides a random-accessible
memory system for manipulation of information as the spatial
registry system (SRS). The following section of this paper explains the general concepts of SRS. To demonstrate the power
of this paradigm, we present a simple SRS model for immediate forward and backward recall. We show that the model explains the human patterns of errors in backward recall, which
has been argued to utilize space for memory organization. Finally, we discuss what we learned from this simulation effort.

The Spatial Registry System (SRS)
The focus of this section is description of a system for random access of symbolic content of working memory during
intellectual mental tasks. Random-accessible working memories are the critical components for dynamic manipulation
of information. Yet, they are not the only working memory systems in the context of intellectual working memory
tasks. We later discuss a serially-accessible memory as an
additional utility memory which collaborates with SRS systems for achieving a complete functioning working memory
system.
We propose that symbolic items of the working memory
can register with spatial locations in a grounded sensorymotor system which is supported by a spatial representation. Examples of such system –as we presented elsewhere
(Noori & Itti, 2011) – can be occulomotor system, or a kinesthetic system that helps proper configuration of body parts in

space using proprioception and muscle movements (think of
a profoundly blind individual’s ability for performing tasks in
space without any visual reference).
This registry mechanism provides spatial addressing for
random access to items of working memory. What is critical is how this addressing is used in the process of memory
manipulation. The critical component is spatial selective attention (SSA) as a means to shift between items that are registered with space. An operational schema (OS) defines the
sequence of shifts between registry locations.
For example, imagine the case of a concurrent mental headcounting of adults and children in a party. As your gaze shifts
to a person in the living room, first your visual system becomes engaged in identifying whether the person at focus is
an adult or a child. In the next step, one of two running counts
that matches the identified category should be increased by
one. The challenge is keeping track of two numbers and associating them to categories. A spatial registry strategy is associating the existing count of adults na to location la (e.g., left
side in visual field or under pinky finger of the left hand) and
the existing count of children nc to location lc (e.g., right side
of visual field or under index finger of the left hand). Identifying the next child will trigger a shift of spatial attention to lc ,
to fetch the current count of children. Once the increment operation is applied on the current count the result will replace
(by first deletion and then insertion) the old count. Note how
attention shifts might be used both for perception of the external world and for selection of WM items, which, under the
SRS hypothesis, might give rise to conflicts in some situations, which in turn provides ways to test the hypothesis (see
Noori and Itti’s paper in this proceedings (Noori & Itti, 2013)
where they report the effect of congruency of shift of spatial
attention for target detection and shift of selective attention in
internal domain during triple-counting of visual targets).
The operational schema can be conceptualized as a list
of mappings of the current state onto the next action. Here
is a formal representation of an alternative OS for our
head-counting scenario.
OS 1 : {child ⇒ shi f t to lc ; adult ⇒ shi f t to la }
OS 2 : {at lc ⇒ f etch nc ; at la ⇒ f etch na }
OS 3 : { at lc & nc is retrieved ⇒ nc → nc + 1
; at la & na is retrieved ⇒ na → na + 1}
OS 4 : {shi f t the gaze to next person & identi f y the category}
Each of these schemas may include other sub-schemas.
For example nc → nc + 1 in OS 3 may include a sequence of
operations over internal representation such as deletion and
insertion (binding to space).
We have discussed the neural evidence for this hypothesis
elsewhere (Noori & Itti, 2011). Here we only mention one
neuropsychological study which provides a critical evidence
for our proposed model(Koenigs, Barbey, Postle, & Grafman,
2009). Koenig et al. showed that patients who have sustained
damage to their superior parietal lobule (SPL) generally lose
their capacity for mental operations that need rearrangement

1086

of information and thus they concluded that SPL is critical
for manipulation of information in working memory. Interestingly, SPL is a part of the association cortex in the posterior parietal cortex (PPC) and sits at the junction of several
sensory processing regions, with projections to motor area of
the brain. SPL is shown to be critical for a wide range of routines that need sensory-motor integration, such as navigation,
visual search, etc (Rizzolatti, Fogassi, & Gallese, 1997).
We need to add that the spatial registry system is not a
unitary system and several SRS systems might collaborate in
running the executive machinery of working memory. However, what all SRS instances have in common is, first, their
build-in internal space representation, second, a mechanism
to shift the attention to those locations, and, third, a binding
mechanism which can associate locations with symbolic representations.
In our view, spatial registry systems are complemented by
other systems that mimic a serially-accessible memory, to
provide a layer of working memory for intellectual symbolic
tasks. An example of such system can be the sensory-motor
system that supports speech perception-vocalization (Wilson,
2001) which is believed to be critical for spoken language acquisition (Baddeley, Gathercole, & Papagno, 1998).

A Spatial Registry System for Serial Recall
Here we present an SRS model for the immediate serial recall
task for both forward and backward recall directions. As we
will discuss later in our review of the literature, experimental
evidence suggest that forward and backward recall draw on
different brain systems. Forward recall seem to take impact
from phonological characteristics of the list items (Bireta et
al., 2010), suggesting that forward recall relies on phonological resources of the brain. On the other hand, backward recall is disrupted in individuals with deficit in spatial cognition
(Rudel & Denckla, 1974), suggesting that backward recall relies on spatial encoding. We used a spatial registry model applied to both directions of recall; however, as we will discuss,
we learned that our SRS model provides a better fit for human behaviour, which conforms with what is assumed about
involvement of different systems of working memory in two
immediate recall directions.

A brief review of the literature
Serial digit span tasks are common in both clinical assessment
and neuropsychological studies (Rudel & Denckla, 1974).
However, forward recall, disproportionately, has received
more attention in modeling attempts. This is mainly related
to the importance of temporal serial order in everyday tasks
(Glasspool, 2005). As the result, there are many neural models, behavioural models, and mathematical models dedicated
to describing forward recall. In contrast, for backward recall, theoretical efforts mostly have focused on augmenting
or reusing models of forward recall. In the face of abundant behavioural and neural evidence that serial recall in forward and backward directions draw on different brain mechanisms, it is not surprising that models of backward recall

have obtained remarkably less success in describing human
behaviour compared to forward recall (Bireta et al., 2010).
Only flexible mathematical models with enough degrees of
freedom ,such as the Temporal Ratio Model (Brown, Neath,
& Chater, 2007), have been able to successfully model both
recall tasks in one shot (Bireta et al., 2010).
In terms of similarity, recalling in both orders shows
recency and primacy effect (Henson, 1996; Li &
Lewandowsky, 1995). Yet ,in forward recall a stronger primacy effect is observed (Henson, 1996), while in backward recall a stronger recency effect is observed (Li &
Lewandowsky, 1995). Several studies have revealed the difference between recalling in two directions. Bireta et al.
tested four benchmark effects that demonstrate the role of
phonological resources in immediate forward recall tasks –
the word length effect, the irrelevant speech effect, the acoustic confusion effect and the concurrent articulation effect–
for both directions of recall. They reported that the benchmark effect ‘was either absent or greatly attenuated with
backward recall despite being present with forward recall’.
On the other hand, Li and Lewandowsky observed that altering visual-spatial characteristics of the recall list affected
backward recall and not forward recall (Li & Lewandowsky,
1995).
Neuropsychological evidence also supports that neurological damage to phonological resources of the brain impairs forward digit span while damage to spatial resources of the brain
impairs backward digit span (Rudel & Denckla, 1974). Consistent with these observations, neuroimaging studies also
have revealed differences in cortical regions which are active during the two different recall orders (Sun et al., 2005;
Hoshi et al., 2000). In particular, these studies have revealed
significant activation of cortical areas with spatial processing
characteristics in backward recall compared to forward recall.
In terms of modling efforts, Bietra et al. have briefly reviewed existing models. Their review indicated that those
models that take the phonological aspect of forward serial
recall are not successful in modeling backward recall, and
only models that are agnostic to the difference in underlying
mechanisms of serial recalls in two different directions are
relatively successful in modeling both tasks.
In sum, available evidence suggests that a model that confers a special role to space may be necessary for a mechanistic
model for the backward recall. In the following section we
detail such a model, built based on the specifications of the
SRS model for visuospatial working memory as the spatial
registry.

Simulation
A population coding of a one dimensional space in the form
of an array of neurons was used as the registry space. Population coding of neurons has been extensively explored
(Pouget, Dayan, & Zemel, 2000) in the literature and is popular for neural modeling of visuospatial working memory
(Constantinidis & Wang, 2004). This array of neurons encoded a parametric space spanning the range of -1 to 1. The

1087

tuning curve for neurons in this array was characterized by
σ0 + xn × κ where σ0 is the tuning band parameter of the neuron at the center of space, xn is neuron’s peak response location, and κ a constant which controls the variability of tuning
band in the array of neurons.
Registering with a specific location would trigger noisy activation in the population around the target memory field. The
share of a registry at xr in activation amplitude of a neuron at

Par

Description
Spatial tuning at the center
Bias factor
Damping factor
Binding scale factor
Mean for binding duration
Mean for fetching duration

σ0
β
τd
λ
µb
µr

(x −x )2
− r n

(xri −xn )2
2×σn 2

)

Parameters of the SRS model for serial recall

(1)

i=1

0.5

0.5

0.3

0.3

Error

−

Human performance

where i is the index for registered items, xri is the registry
location of the item i and Ai (t) denotes the effective amplitude
of the ith registry at time t which is defined by:

Two-way best ﬁt

0.1

1

t−t

A0

− i
× e τd

S
σb
σr

Description
Tuning band var factor
Noise factor
Binding shape factor
Saturation factor
STD for binding duration
STD for fetching duration

Error

N

κ
ν
K

Table 1

xn is determined by A0 e 2×σn 2 . In case of registering several items in the activation of a neuron is defined as the sum
of evoked signals of all registries as long as the sum of signals is less than a saturation value S . So the base response
amplitude of neuron n is defined as follow:
max(S , ∑ Ai (t) × e

Par

(2)

where ti is the registry time of item i and τd , the damping
factor, controls the decay rate of registry effects.
The schema for the immediate recall task includes two
phases: binding and recall. During the binding phase, independent of the recall order, items of the list orderly register with locations from left to right so that each item in
the list registers on the right side of previously registered
item (except the first item). The exact times and locations
of registries are perturbed by different random distributions.
The distances between registry locations are determined by
a Weibull distribution with two parameters (shape factor and
scale factor). Duration of registry and recall processes are defined by two separate Gaussian distributions, which adds four
more parameters to our model.
In the recall phase, a part of the schema is independent
of recall direction, which is the condition for identifying the
most active neuron, and for selecting the next item (until all
items are removed from the registry space). Neurons in the
array compete for gaining control of a registry recalling unit.
The item at the closest registry location to the selected neuron will be recalled. Recalling memory items from registry
involves inhibiting neurons in the array associated with registration of the recalled item.
Another part of the recall schema which is sensitive to the
direction of recall is characterized by a bias. The bias is applied by a multiplicative exponential factor of the position
which acts as a biased modulation of neural activities. For
forward recall, this bias will enhance the activity of neurons
on the left side of the space, and during the backward recall
this bias enhances activities of neurons on the right side of the
space. So, a part of the schema for recall is selecting the bias
direction; however, once the bias direction is selected items
will be selected only based the order of most active neurons.

2

3
Position

4

(a) Forward Recall

5

1

2

3
Position

0.1

4

5

(b) Backward recall

Figure 1: Positional error for the best two-way fit for both directions of recall compared to the human performance.

This implementation only accommodates positional or
movement errors in which items are recalled in the wrong
order. This type of error is the most prevalent error among
adults (McCormack, Brown, Vousden, & Henson, 2000) in
recall tasks. However there are other types of errors such
as omissions, intrusions and repetitions with less significant
effect. Table 1 summarizes all parameters of this implementation.

Results and Discussion
To explore tuning parameters we used serial position error
for a list of five items from Li and Lewandowsky’s study
(Li & Lewandowsky, 1995). An evolutionary algorithm was
used to optimize the parameters based on the sum of absolute distance of predicted positional error over the ground
truth data for both directions. So optimization of parameters was performed with regard to ground truth data for both
directions simultaneously and forward and backward error
data played equal roles in the evaluation function. However
a closer inspection of the result revealed that the final parameters shifted in favour of the backward data. The best
fitting parameters among 2857 independently generated solutions yielded a prediction for backward recall with 5.6%
absolute distance to the human data (out of 500% maximum possible distance) while the same set of parameters
yielded a prediction for the forward recall with 14.8% absolute distance to the human data (see Figure 1). Further analysis of best first 100 independent solutions of the optimiza-

1088

used for forward recall. In fact previous studies have shown
that articulatory suppression during working memory task
with written verbal material can eliminate the effect of other
signature effects such as word length effect or acoustic confusion effect without diminishing subjects’ capacity for remembering the serial order (Wilson, 2001). These evidences
suggest that once the speech recognition-vocalization system
as the primary source of encoding serial recall is no longer
accessible (by articulatory suppression) and working material
are presented in visual format, another mechanism is utilized
for encoding serial recall which does not rely on phonological resources. We argue that one could use a visual-spatial
strategy for forward recall too. In this case, the prediction of
our SRS model is that the overall performance would not be
significantly better (see Figure 1a). However, using phonological resources for the forward recall has at least one advantage, which is freeing visual-spatial resources for other
tasks. In contrast the ability to perform a backward recall
task with impaired spatial resources is restricted (Rudel &
Denckla, 1974), in agreement with our finding that visualspatial resources are used for backward recall.
0.7
0.6

Proportion of Movements

tion process showed that the quality of predicted solution for
backward recall was significantly better than forward recall
(t(198) = 47.93, p < 0.0001), where the difference between
mean of fitness qualities was 6.6% in favour of the backward
recall.
Moreover, a closer inspection of all generated parameter
sets during during optimization process revealed two highly
distinguishable modes for σ0 , the first order tuning curve parameter. A population of solutions with narrow tuning curve
at the center peaked around σ0 = 0.04 which included 847
solutions all with σ0 < 0.1. Another population of wide tuning curve at the center peaked around σ0 = 0.57 all with
σ0 > 0.38 included 2010 solutions. Later analysis of the
fitness values of these solutions showed that the population
of wide tuning curve (WTC) on average scored better fitness
value than the population of narrow tuning curve (NTC). The
wide tuning curve population (WTC) generally scored better
in each of recall types compared with the narrow tuning curve
population. Moreover, WTC and NTC populations were also
highly separable with regard to other parameters including
the bias factor, and temporal characteristics of binding and
recall of item. In particular the for WTC the average duration
of the task was correlated with the damping factor of neural
activity while the duration of the task was independent of the
damping factor of neural activities. In sum, WTC population
provided both better solutions and more plausibility.
To test the predicting power of the model we used the parameter of the best solution discovered in the optimization of
the previous phase to simulate the movement errors (the distance between order of an incorrectly recalled item, and its
true order; e.g., if item 3 is recalled as item 2, the movement
error is 1) in forward recall data for six items, from another
study (McCormack et al., 2000). Note that number of items
for training was different than for testing. Moreover, positional error data, which is used for optimization of parameters, is independent of movement errors (which we confirmed
through simulation, not shown here).
Figure 2 shows the result of our simulation in the same
graph with the data of two adult human subject groups, tested
in two different experiments with different settings for a forward recall task (McCormack et al., 2000). Our simulation
result sits in between the data points for two different results
for adult human subject groups, which demonstrates that our
prediction is in the range of the variability of the performance
of human subjects, and clearly demonstrates the predictive
power of the model.
In sum, the result of our simulation shows that SRS for immediate serial recall can account for human behaviour. However, as it was explained, the quality of our solution for backward recall is significantly better than the quality of our result
for forward recall once both recall orders played the same role
in optimization of parameters. This may be related to the fact
that normal subjects leverage their phonological resources for
forward recall (Bireta et al., 2010).
This does not mean that visual-spatial resources cannot be

Human Exp 1
Simulation
Human Exp 2

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
1

2

3
4
Distance

5

Figure 2: Prediction of SRS model along experimental data for
movement errors during serial recall of six items.

General Discussion
In this paper we presented the idea of a space-supported,
schema-driven, random-accessible memory system in the domain of intellectual working memory tasks of cognitive psychology. Our proposal included a strong evolutionary assumption about what would constitute an executive model
for a working memory system in the intellectual domain,
which can be built atop sensory-motor systems that support
perception-action routines. Perception-action routines, such
as prey catching, evolutionarily, preceded the intellectual routines, such as mental subtraction, and thus we suggest that
sensory-motor working memory systems for regulating the
former routines might have been reused for maintaining and

1089

manipulation of information needed by the evolutionary more
recent latter routines.
The presented model provides a randomly-accessible
working memory, yet to get a full-function working memory model that explains human behaviour across different
domains, one may need to take a serially-accessible working memory subsystem into consideration too. A speech
perception-vocalization subsystem –which resembles the
phonological loop in Baddeley and Hitch’s three-component
model of working memory (Baddeley & Hitch, 1974)– may
be considered as an alternative serial component of working
memory machinery in the domain of symbolic tasks. However, we argue that a serial system is not sufficient to explain
humans’ flexible memory manipulation of symbolic information in the intellectual domain, and one may need to include a
faster and more flexible working memory system for random
access to its content.
Finally one may argue that the visuospatial sketchpad in
Baddeley and Hitch’s model (Baddeley & Hitch, 1974) can
achieve the same function of our proposed SRS system. We
can summarize the differences or our spatial registry system
and the visuospatial sketchpad as follow.
First, while visuospatial sketchpad is merely a visualspatial system our SRS is a generic schema-driven system and
as previously suggested several instances of sensory-motor
working memory systems (e.g. occulomotor or kinesthetic
system) may fulfil the characteristics of SRS.
Second, our SRS comes with a built-in executive system
in the form of the operational schema (OS), while the visuospatial sketchpad outsources the execution functions to the
CE, with no specifications of how this executive functions are
exerted. In this sense, SRS provides a mechanistic model of
manipulation of WM items while the sketchpad is a passive
storage resource.
Third, in Baddley’s model visuospatial sketchpad is a
domain-specific storage slave unit which stores task-relevant
visual-spatial information, while in our proposal an SRS system may play a general role in manipulation of symbolic information with no immediate visual or spatial features.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation
(CRCNS Grant No. BCS-0827764), the Army Research Office
(W911NF-11-1-0046), and the U.S. Army (W81XWH-10-2-0076).

References
Arbib, M. (1980). Interacting schemas for motor control. Tutorials
in motor behavior, 71–81.
Arbib, M. (1987). Levels of modeling of mechanisms of visually
guided behavior. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 10(03), 407–
436.
Arbib, M. (1992). Schema theory. Encyclopedia of artificial intelligence, 2, 1427–1443.
Baddeley, A. (1992). Working memory. Science, 255(5044), 556.
Baddeley, A. (1996). Exploring the Central Executive. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology Section A: Human Experimental Psychology, 49(1), 5.

Baddeley, A., Gathercole, S., & Papagno, C. (1998). The phonological loop as a language learning device. Psychological review,
105(1), 158.
Baddeley, A., & Hitch, G. (1974). Working memory. The psychology of learning and motivation, 8, 47–89.
Bireta, T., Fry, S., Jalbert, A., Neath, I., Surprenant, A., Tehan, G.,
et al. (2010). Backward recall and benchmark effects of working
memory. Memory & cognition, 38(3), 279–291.
Brown, G., Neath, I., & Chater, N. (2007). A temporal ratio model
of memory. Psychological Review, 114(3), 539.
Constantinidis, C., & Wang, X. (2004). A neural circuit basis for
spatial working memory. The Neuroscientist, 10(6), 553–565.
Glasspool, D. (2005). Serial order in behaviour: Evidence from
performance slips. Connectionist models in cognitive psychology,
241.
Henson, R. (1996). Unchained memory: Error patterns rule out
chaining models of immediate serial recall. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology: Section A, 49(1), 80–115.
Hoshi, Y., Oda, I., Wada, Y., Ito, Y., Yamashita, Y., Oda, M., et al.
(2000). Visuospatial imagery is a fruitful strategy for the digit
span backward task: a study with near-infrared optical tomography. Cognitive Brain Research, 9(3), 339–342.
Jonides, J., Lewis, R. L., Nee, D. E., Lustig, C. A., Berman, M. G.,
& Moore, K. S. (2008, January). The Mind and Brain of ShortTerm Memory. Annual Review of Psychology, 59(1), 193–224.
Koenigs, M., Barbey, A. K., Postle, B. R., & Grafman, J. (2009).
Superior Parietal Cortex Is Critical for the Manipulation of Information in Working Memory. J. Neurosci., 29(47), 14980–14986.
Li, S., & Lewandowsky, S. (1995). Forward and backward recall:
Different retrieval processes. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 21(4), 837.
McCormack, T., Brown, G. D. A., Vousden, J. I., & Henson, R. N. A.
(2000, July). Children’s Serial Recall Errors: Implications for
Theories of Short-Term Memory Development. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 76(3), 222–252.
Noori, N., & Itti, L. (2011). Spatial Registry Model: Towards a
Grounded Account for Executive Attention. Proceedings of the
33rd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 3187–
3192.
Noori, N., & Itti, L. (2013). Where what you count is what really
counts. In Proceedings of the 35th annunal conference of the
cognitive science society.
Norman, D. A., & Shallice, T. (1986). Attention to Action: Willed
and Automatic Control of Behavior. In Consciousness and selfregulation (Vol. 4, pp. 1–18). New York: Plenum.
Oh, S., & Kim, M. (2004). The role of spatial working memory in
visual search efficiency. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 11(2),
275–281.
Pouget, A., Dayan, P., & Zemel, R. (2000, November). Information
processing with population codes. Nat Rev Neurosci, 1(2), 125–
132.
Repovs, G., & Baddeley, A. (2006, April). The multi-component
model of working memory: Explorations in experimental cognitive psychology. Neuroscience, 139(1), 5–21.
Rizzolatti, G., Fogassi, L., & Gallese, V. (1997). Parietal cortex:
from sight to action. Current opinion in neurobiology, 7(4), 562–
567.
Rudel, R., & Denckla, M. (1974). Relation of forward and backward digit repetition to neurological impairment in children with
learning disabilities. Neuropsychologia, 12(1), 109–118.
Sun, X., Zhang, X., Chen, X., Zhang, P., Bao, M., Zhang, D., et
al. (2005). Age-dependent brain activation during forward and
backward digit recall revealed by fMRI. Neuroimage, 26(1), 36–
47.
Von Neumann, J. (1982). First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC.
In R. B. (Ed.), The Origins of Digital Computers (pp. 383–92).
Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
Wiener, N. (1948). Cybernetics; or control and communication in
the animal and the machine.
Wilson, M. (2001). The case for sensorimotor coding in working
memory. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 8(1), 44–57.

1090

