UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Scientific Diagrams as Traces of Group-Dependent Cognition: A Brief Cognitive-Historical
Analysis

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1v2245wx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Author
Sheredos, Ben

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Scientific Diagrams as Traces of Group-Dependent Cognition:
A Brief Cognitive-Historical Analysis
Ben Sheredos (sheredos@uscsd.edu)
Department of Philosophy and Center for Chronobiology, UC San Diego,
9500 Gilman Dr., La Jolla, CA 92103 USA

Abstract

between social-professional groups. To do this I develop a
new strategy of inquiry: analyzing published scientific
diagrams which document the history of research. My case
study concerns research into the mechanisms of circadian
rhythmicity in cyanobacteria (blue-green algae). One goal of
the paper is to show how such a “literature review” can
serve to investigate scientists’ group-dependent cognition.

Recent research has begun to explore the role of diagrams as
cognitive tools. Here I develop new conceptual and
methodological tools for exploring the sociality of cognition
involving diagrams. First, I distinguish two varieties of groupdependent cognition. Second, extending Nersessian’s method
of cognitive-historical analysis, I show how a suitablyinformed “literature review” of diagrams published in
scientific articles offers a window into the group-dependent
cognition of scientists. I end by sketching future avenues of
inquiry, and how this approach may inform science education.

Extending the Cognitive-Historical Method

Keywords: chronobiology; cognitive-historical analysis;
group cognition; member cognition; scientific diagrams.

Introduction
Diagrams as Cognitive and Social Tools
Cognitive scientists have recently adopted a variety of
approaches to studying graphical practices (“GPs”). Tversky
applies her work on embodiment, spatial cognition and
navigation to study spatial graphics and spatial design more
generally (2011a; 2011b; Tversky, Heiser, Lee, & Daniel
2009). Hegarty focuses on the cognitive abilities underlying
the “spatial intelligence” which facilitates learning from
diagrams by students in the sciences (2004; 2010; 2011).
Cheng explores how suitably constrained, innovative GPs
support learning the conceptual structure of highly
mathematized domains (Cheng 1997; 2002; 2009; 2011).
The focus of such research has tended to be on the
consumption of completed diagrams as a cognitive activity
of individuals.1 A few studies have also addressed the
production of diagrams by individuals. However,
constructing and reasoning with GPs are also social
practices. Some researchers have recently developed
ethnographic methods to study group cognition involving
completed diagrams (Alač, 2008; 2011; Kirsh, 2009).
Here I take a different approach. First, I highlight social
aspects of cognition in diagram production. GPs often
integrate ideas from a variety of earlier sources, and
diagrams indicate the designer’s understanding of her field:
GPs inform us about how individuals perceive the social
and professional groups of which they are members.
Second, I stress the social effects of diagram consumption:
creating and disseminating diagrams is a manipulation of
the social environment which helps to define boundaries
1
This is especially true of the experimental literature in which
isolated subjects complete tasks involving diagrams.

The present paper extends the method of cognitive-historical
analysis (Nersessian, 1992; 1995; 2002; 2008). The method
is historical in that it takes as data the existing record of
investigative practices in the science(s) of interest. In early
work, Nersessian focused on the work of notable individuals
(e.g., Maxwell), highlighting specific developments in their
thinking. Here, I examine a years-long record of published
figures depicting multiple authors’ conceptions, at various
stages of inquiry, of the known and hypothesized
mechanisms of circadian rhythmicity in cyanobacteria.
The cognitive aspect of the methodology is rooted in a
continuum hypothesis – that “the cognitive practices
scientists have invented and developed over the course of
the history of science are […] sophisticated outgrowths of
the kinds of cognitive strategies humans employ in coping
with their environments and in problem solving of a more
ordinary kind” (Nersessian, 2008). Scientists, like other
humans, form cooperative groups to tackle large-scale tasks,
and freely draw inspiration from peers when it is available.2
I shall show that with careful attention to the field-wide
context in which diagrams are developed, we can clearly
identify aspects of GPs which indicate group-dependent
cognition among scientists. In this initial demonstration, I
focus on diagrams from review-style articles, penned by
(sometimes several) well-known and respected authors in
the field. The express purpose of such publications is to
offer a window into the social, conceptual, and evidential
context constituting the current state of play in the field.
Nersessian has always stressed that a full understanding
of cognitive activities must embed them within their social
context. Recently, she and her colleagues have directly
studied the interplay between social and cognitive factors in
scientific practice (Osbeck, Nersessian, Malone, &
Newstetter, 2011). Drawing upon their insights, I hold that
the lines between “individual” and “group” cognition are
2
Scientific research is not fully communal and cooperative;
great incentives promote individual achievement as well.

3396

not always clear-cut, since properly attending to social
context sometimes requires reconceiving an individual’s
cognitive activities as group-dependent.

Delineating Group-Dependent Cognition
Classical cognitive science maintains that individuals
exhibit forms of cognition which do not clearly depend
upon their membership in a group. Call this individual
cognition, or i-cognition. As Hutchins (1995) argued,
cognition might also be distributed across a group of
cognizers so that the group instantiates a higher-order
cognitive architecture. Call this group-level cognition, or gcognition. I emphasize that individuals exhibit a third,
unique variety of cognition when they self-identify as
members of a group (whether or not that group exhibits gcognition). Call this member cognition, or m-cognition.
Like i-cognition (and unlike g-cognition) m-cognition is
attributable to (first-order) individuals, rather than to groups.
However, like g-cognition (and unlike i-cognition) mcognition depends upon an individual’s group-membership.
Osbeck et al. provide paradigmatic examples of m-cognition
in their analysis of how scientists position themselves and
negotiate their identity: “Identity negotiation can be
considered a form of sense-making” (what they elsewhere
call seeking coherence) “directed to the meanings one
applies to oneself within social groups that include but are
not limited to the particular research laboratory, one’s field
of practice… and science as a tradition of inquiry” (2011).
To illustrate how I conceive of m-cognition, consider the
following objections to my proposed method. First, by
looking to published diagrams, I am guaranteed to miss
many (i-) cognitive activities involved in their production.
The creator(s) of a diagram often discard a variety of
“failed” versions, deploying expertise in choosing what to
represent and how best to do so. Only access to the
unpublished, discarded diagrams could really shed light on
the process of problem-solving that led to the finished
product. Second, publication requirements imposed by
journals may add a layer of cognitive opacity, as the
designer loses the ability to do just as they like. Published
diagrams might be cognitively “whitewashed,” so to speak.
While this line of thought is correct as far as it goes, it
neglects one important reason for pursuing this inquiry:
when authors prepare materials for publication, they
knowingly work within the constraints imposed by “outside”
powers. Publication is a de facto requirement for active
membership in a professional science, and part of one’s
professionalism consists in navigating the pitfalls of
publication. If part of scientists’ practice involves
“whitewashing” their individual cognitive products, making
them ready for public consumption, the whitewashing itself
depends upon interesting forms of m-cognition which reflect
an individual’s self-identification as a member of a group –
e.g., awareness of professional-bureaucratic norms, and selfmonitoring with respect to those norms.

More relevant, for my purposes, are the ways scientists
self-monitor with respect to the empirical and evidential
norms of their field. When a scientist prepares a publication
for consumption by her peers, her professional reputation
depends upon cognizance of: the empirical support accorded
to various hypotheses; which sources of evidence have been
deemed reliable; which findings have been replicated or
reinterpreted, etc. These are just some of the m-cognitive
activities which an individual engages in to negotiate her
specific expertise, self-identifying as an able practitioner of
some method(s) or authority on some topic(s).
These norms are especially relevant to the production of
my source materials: authoritative review articles presenting
the current state of a field. The production of diagrams is an
integral part of crafting such articles. Thus, I suggest that
cognitive-historical analysis of such published diagrams can
plausibly begin with the hypothesis that these GPs, as part
of the professional practice of scientists, are guided by mcognition regarding empirical and evidential norms in the
relevant discipline(s). It follows that such diagrams are
amenable to analysis as visual traces of m-cognition. My
task in what follows is to demonstrate that this is the case.

Three Snapshots of Cyanobacterial
Chronobiology
I turn now to canvass three stages of research regarding
circadian rhythms in the cyanobacterium Synechococcus
elongatus. Here I must be selective in every aspect of my
inquiry.3 In this section I introduce the details of my casestudy. Cognitive analysis occurs in the section thereafter.

Stage One: First Steps
A biological system’s circadian rhythmicity (“CR”) is its
endogenously controlled production, once every ~24 hours,
of some phenomenon (e.g., waking, onset of metabolic
processes, peak transcription of a gene). For decades, while
research into the CR of eukaryotes flourished, it was
thought that no similar phenomena would be discovered in
prokaryotic cells. Prokaryotes lack membrane-bound
organelles, exhibit relatively simple metabolic activities,
and frequently have lifespans of less than 24 hours.
Prevailing wisdom taught that such an organism would have
no use for anticipating local day-night cycles.
CR was eventually discovered in S. elongatus (Ishiura,
Kutsuna, Aoki, Iwasaki, Andersson, Tanabe, Golden,
Johnson, & Kondo, 1998). Since then this system has
become a mainstay of circadian research, owing in part to its
high genetic manipulability. In an early review article,
Kondo & Ishiura (1999) made an explicit attempt to
shoehorn cyanobacterial rhythmicity into the accepted
mechanism for eukaryotic systems. Evidence from a variety
of eukaryotic systems had suggested that the CR of single
cells was controlled by a Transcription-Translation

3397

3

For details, cf. Johnson & Xu (2009) and Huang & Lin (2009).

Feedback Loop (TTFL). A generic eukaryotic TTFL is
shown at left in Figure 1. A “clock gene” (dark blue bar) is
transcribed, leading to the translation of a corresponding
“clock protein” (dark blue oval) outside the nucleus. After
undergoing state-changes in the cytoplasm, the clock protein
returns to the nucleus, where it interrupts the effect of an
“activator” (red oval) at a promoter region (light blue bar).
The clock protein(s) thus inhibit further transcription of the
clock gene(s). By hypothesis, a TTFL constituted a cell’s
core circadian “clock” or “pacemaker” and the CR in the
expression of other (“clock-controlled”) genes was thought
to be dependent upon the activity of clock proteins.
The critical functional arrangement of the TTFL is the
interplay of positive and negative elements: activation at the
promoter increases transcription of clock genes, but clock
proteins feedback to inhibit transcription of their own genes.
Such systems can instantiate a limit cycle oscillator. With
the right time constants, the system could oscillate with a
24-hour period, giving rise to the organism’s observed CR.
At right in Figure 1, the authors attempt to fit
cyanobacterial CR into the same scheme. Early research
(Ishiura et al., 1998) had shown (a) that deletion of any gene
in the kai gene cluster (containing genes kaiA, kaiB, and
kaiC) abolished CR in S. elongatus, and (b) that a variety of
single amino acid mutations to any of the kai genes
(resulting in the corresponding production of subtly altered
Kai proteins) either disturbed or abolished CR. It was thus
concluded that the core clock in S. elongatus involved the
kai gene cluster and the Kai proteins working in concert.
The same study also showed that while kaiC
overexpression resulted in rapidly decreased activity at the
promoter (“PkaiBC” in Figure 1) which controls the
transcription of kaiB and kaiC, kaiA overexpression resulted
in increased activity of the same promoter. Thus, the Kai
proteins appeared capable of participating in a TTFL, with
KaiC playing the role of a traditional “negative element”
(note the re-use of the dark blue oval) which inhibits its own

gene’s transcription, and KaiA playing the role of a
traditional “positive element” (note the re-use of the red
oval) which promotes KaiC’s transcription.
These initial results were consistent with a cyanobacterial
TTFL, but left much underdetermined. For example, it was
unknown how Kai proteins might influence the transcription
of kai genes, since the Kai proteins lacked DNA binding
motifs, and were thus incapable of directly influencing
promoters (Ishiura et al., 1998). Given the success of the
TTFL model in other systems, the authors of Figure 1
posited intervening entities (“x,” “y,” “z”) to mediate
between the Kai proteins and transcriptional regulation.

Stage Two: Troubles with TTFLs
A few years later, Johnson (2004) published a “minireview”
in which he proposed the alternative “Oscilloid” model
shown in Figure 2. The interactions between Kai proteins
had by now been further determined. As shown top-right
KaiC alternates between a highly phosphorylated state (with
“P” attached) and an unphosphorylated state (no “P”). KaiA
facilitates KaiC’s phosphorylation, and inhibits its
dephosphorylation. KaiB inhibits those activities of KaiA,
biasing KaiC towards dephosphorylation. The result is a 24hour rhythm in the phosphorylation state of KaiC, which is
a determining factor in KaiC’s downstream effects.
Meanwhile, the problem of how the Kai proteins might
regulate transcription had become more pressing. It had
been shown that KaiC expression not only (somehow)
repressed transcription of its own gene (and of kaiB), but
also globally repressed transcription of virtually every gene
in S. elongatus’ genome (Nakahira, Katayama, Miyashita,
Kutsuna, Iwasaki, Oyama, & Kondo, 2004). Investigators
had also shown that rhythmicity in kaiC expression could be
attained in strains in which kaiC transcription was
controlled by a promoter taken from another organism’s
genome (Xu & Johnson, 2003; Nakahira et al., 2004). These
were departures from eukaryotic TTFLs, in which positive

Figure 1: Kondo & Ishiura’s (1999) Figures 3 (left) & 4 (right). At left is the TTFL model of rhythmicity in
eukaryotic cells. At right, available data in S. elongatus are fitted into a similar scheme. See text for discussion.

3398

and negative feedback loops compete for dominance in the
activation and inhibition of specific, native promoters.
The same researchers recommended an elegant solution.
KaiC had been shown to be part of a large family of DNA
recombinases (Leipe, Aravind, Grishin, Koonin, 2000).
KaiC was thus hypothesized to be capable of altering the
shape and structure of cyanobacterial chromosomes in a
rhythmic fashion, thereby globally affecting gene
transcription (including, as just one example, the kaiABC
cluster). At middle-left in Figure 2, Johnson added this to
the hypothetical model of CR in S. elongatus.

Stage Three: Surviving 2005
Not long after Johnson’s minireview, a pair of momentous
reports showed conclusively that cyanobacterial CR was not
dependent upon a TTFL. An initial report showed that CR
in KaiC’s phosphorylation state persists even when both
transcription and translation are globally inhibited (Tomita,
Nakajima, Kondo, & Iwasaki, 2005). Shortly thereafter, it
was reported that KaiC’s phosphorylation rhythm could be
reconstituted in vitro, using a mixture containing only the
three Kai proteins and ATP (Nakajima, Imai, Ito, Nishiwaki,
Murayama, Iwasaki, Oyama, & Kondo, 2005). The core
clock in cyanobacteria, it seemed, was instantiated entirely
in post-translational entities and processes, and required no
transcriptional regulation whatsoever. Transcriptional and
translational regulation were reconceived as effects of clock
functioning, not operations constitutive for clock function.4
After 2005, researchers pursued the molecular details of
KaiC phosphorylation rhythms. Here I cannot discuss this

research in detail. Figure 3, a representative example of the
period, displays no details concerning chromosomes,
transcriptional regulation, or transcriptional rhythms.

Analysis
By attending to the social and evidential contexts
surrounding the production of Figures 1-3, we gain insight
into the m-cognition of these diagrams’ designers. In this
way we can provide cognitive answers to questions about
scientists’ GPs. We simultaneously gain insight into how
GPs helped shape the social environment of chronobiology.
Consider Figure 1. A pertinent question to ask regarding
this figure is: Why did the authors construct this diagram as
they did, drawing an analogy between eukaryotic and
prokaryotic CR?
At the time of publication, no data substantively
confirmed the presence of a TTFL in S. elongatus. Available
data were merely consistent with such a model. What drove
Kondo & Ishiura to produce this diagram was a broader
awareness of hypotheses accepted elsewhere in
chronobiology. Eukaryotic TTFLs were then considered the
sole concrete examples of circadian limit cycle oscillators in
living systems. The group of “chronobiologists” was de
facto defined by an interest in such mechanisms. By
hypothesizing that the newly discovered CR in
cyanobacteria fit the same model, the authors explicitly
positioned themselves in the broader theoretical community
of chronobiologists.
The text of the article supports this interpretation.
Kondo& Ishiura aim to show how cyanobacteria could fit
the “basic circadian model” of a limit-cycle oscillator, and
explicitly recommend strategies for further-extending this
model to CR in plants (1999, p. 171). Kondo & Ishiura also
stress the importance of assimilating cyanobacteria to the
TTFL model, forming a theoretically unified chronobiology:
“Cyanobacteria could be a model system for molecular
approaches to the circadian clock, because it is the simplest
organism that has a clock” (1999, p.172). The subsumption
of cyanobacterial CR to the TTFL model would lend
credence and generality to the working assumptions of
chronobiologists at large.

Figure 2: Johnson’s (2004) Oscilloid model.
4
Transcriptional regulation was later seen as stabilizing or
supporting the Kai-based clock (Johnson, Mori, & Xu 2008).

Figure 3: Mackey & Golden’s (2007) visual summary of the
stages of the core Kai-based oscillator in S. elongatus.

3399

Figure 1 is the visual depiction of this shared theoretical
framework: the authors literally drew the analogy between
the models of CR in eukaryotes and prokaryotes which
unified the theoretical framework of chronobiology. Kondo
& Ishiura were positioning themselves as (and encouraging
other researchers to recognize themselves as) members of a
single, theoretically-unified group of “chronobiologists.”
Their GP is (partly) explained by appeal to this m-cognition;
the graphic itself is a trace of that m-cognition.
Consider next Figure 2. A pertinent question to ask
regarding this diagram is: Why did the author depart from
earlier GPs in the field, especially by including a novel
depiction of the entire chromosome of cyanobacteria?
New data showed that circadian transcriptional regulation
in S. elongatus was not specific to individual promoters, in
contrast to eukaryotic TTFLs. Since previous data had been
consistent with a cyanobacterial TTFL and had shown that
Kai proteins do (somehow) participate in regulating
transcription, it was a “surprise” to find these discrepancies
with the eukaryotic model (Johnson 2004, p.217.2). It is
these data, plus the persisting field-wide theoretical
assumption that transcriptional regulation is somehow
constitutive for clock function, which “suggests a broadly
global mechanism for the cyanobacterial clock system”
(Johnson, 2004, p.217.3). It is within these constraints that
he appeals to the broader literature regarding chromosome
topology in cyanobacteria, and articulates the Oscilloid
model to provide a novel hypothesis regarding
transcription-translation feedback in cyanobacterial CR.
Thus in Figure 2, Johnson breaks the struct visual analogy
with eukaryotic, as was demanded by evidence showing that
“the clock system in cyanobacteria is different from that in
eukaryotes” (2004, p.217.4). Despite this, the view of
transcriptional regulation as a process constitutive for clock
function remained part of the shared theoretical framework
of a still-unified chronobiology. For this reason, Johnson
stresses that the cyanobacterial data might lead us to
consider the hypothesis that eukaryotic clocks themselves
involve chromosomal topology as a mechanism of
transcriptional regulation. He writes that “If this proves to
be the case, the investigations of the cyanobacterial clock
may lead to fundamental insights that are broadly applicable
to all organisms” (2004, 217.4). In either case a unified
chronobiology would need to refine its theoretical
framework to incorporate cyanobacterial data.
Figure 2 is the visual depiction of the new model for
cyanobacterial transcription-translation feedback. The
graphical disparity from earlier depictions of the
cyanobacterial clock reflects the conceptual departure from
the TTFL model. Johnson positioned himself as (and
encouraged other cyanobacterial researchers to recognize
themselves as) a member of a distinct sub-group of
chronobiologists which was helping to refine the general
theoretical framework of chronobiology. Johnson’s GP is
(partly) explained by appeal to this m-cognition; the graphic
is itself a trace of this m-cognition.

Finally, consider Figure 3. A pertinent question to ask
regarding this diagram is: Why have the authors departed
from earlier GPs, especially by excluding all reference to
transcriptional regulation?
The core clock in S. elongatus had been identified as a
post-translational oscillation in the phosphorylation state of
KaiC (involving interactions with other proteins). The data
showed that “transcriptional regulation is apparently a
dispensable layer of reinforcement on a post-translational
clock in the cyanobacterium” (Mackey & Golden 2007,
p.382). Transcriptional regulation (local or global) was no
longer considered part of the core clock in S. elongatus.
Figure 3 above is the visual depiction of the new model of
the cyanobacterial clock. By excluding any depiction of
genes, chromosomes, transcriptional feedback, and the like,
Mackey and Golden underscore the distinction between
cyanobacterial and eukaryotic clocks. Cyanobacterial
chronobiology was no longer theoretically yoked to
molecular hypotheses drawn from eukaryotic systems: the
hypothesis that some form of transcriptional regulation
would be constitutive for the function of every circadian
limit-cycle oscillator had been excised from the general
theoretical framework of chronobiology. Cyanobacterial
chronobiologists had distinguished themselves as a unique
subgroup of chronobiologists. Mackey and Golden’s GP can
be (partly) explained by appeal to this m-cognition, and the
diagram itself is a trace of this m-cognition.

Concluding Remarks
In this brief case study, I have demonstrated that the method
of cognitive-historical analysis may be fruitfully extended to
reveal scientific diagrams as visual traces of groupdependent cognition (m-cognition). In doing so, I have
sketched how scientists’ GPs help demarcate the boundaries
between groups of researchers. It is hoped that with the
benefit of future elaboration, this approach can take its place
as a compliment to other empirical methods of examining
the cognitive activities involved in GPs.
With this initial demonstration completed, I suggest that
inquiry into diagrams may be especially well-suited for
investigating the m-cognition of scientists. As in the cases
above, published diagrams frequently offer “at a glance” a
window into authors’ construal of the state of the art in their
field. While I have not emphasized it, the examples also hint
at the extent to which authors recycle old formats (often
citing their original designers), positioning themselves as
members of a persisting group and building extended
“lineages” of GPs. Further research might fruitfully explore
the “cognitive” lineages of which these are visual traces.
Finally, I suggest that such analyses might fruitfully
inform science education. The foregoing demonstrates how
published figures provide a visual record of the empirical
and theoretical developments which fuel scientific fields’
growth and subdivision, and how they can serve as a
window into researchers’ conception of their own field. As I
hope to have shown, when such graphics are presented with
appropriate context, and when they are queried in a suitable

3400

manner, they can serve as intuitive scaffolds to help novices
gain a rich understanding of the course of expert thinking in
a field of study.

Acknowledgments
This material is based upon work supported by the National
Science Foundation under Grant no. 1127640. I learned
much from other members of UCSD’s Center for
Chronobiology while supported by a UCSD Chancellor’s
Interdisciplinary Collaboratory Grant. Feedback from
members of the WORGODS research group (Daniel
Burnston, Adele Abrahamsen, and William Bechtel) and
from two reviewers strengthened the paper considerably.

References
Alač, M. (2008). Working with brains: digital images and
gestural interaction in fMRI laboratory. Social Studies of
Science, 38, 483-508.
Alač, M. (2011). Handling Digital Brains. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Cheng, P.C.-H. (1997). Components of a cognitive theory of
problem solving and discovery with law encoding
diagrams. In M. Anderson (Ed.) Reasoning with
Diagrammatic Representations II (pp.85-93). (Tech. Rep.
FS-97-02). Menlo Park, CA: AAAI.
Cheng, P.C.-H. (2002). Electrifying diagrams for learning:
principles for complex representational systems.
Cognitive Science, 26, 685-736.
Cheng, P.C.-H. (2011). Probably good diagrams for
learning: representational epistemic recodification of
probability theory. Topics in Cognitive Science, 3, 475498.
Hegarty, M. (2004). Mechanical reasoning by mental
simulation. TRENDS in Cognitive Sciences, 8, 280-285.
Hegarty, M. (2010). Components of Spatial Intelligence.
Psychology of Learning and Motivation, 52, 265-297.
Hegarty, M. (2011). The cognitive science of visual=spatial
displays: implications for design. Topics in Cognitive
Science, 3, 446-474.
Huang, T-.C., & Lin, R-.F. (2009). Circadian rhythm of
Cynothece RF-1 (Synechococcus RF-1). In J.L. Ditty,
S.R. Mackey, & C.H. Johnson (Eds.) Bacterial Circadian
Programs. Heidelberg, DE: Springe-Verlag.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the Wild. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Ishiura, M., Kutsuna, S., Aoki, S., Iwasaki, H., Andersson,
C.R., Tanabe, A., Golden, S.S., Johnson, C.H., & Kondo,
T. (1998). Expression of a gene cluster kaiABC as a
circadian feedback process in cyanobacteria. Science,
281, 1519-1523.
Johnson, C.H., (2004). Global orchestration of gene
expression by the biological clock of cyanobacteria.
Genome Biology, 5: 217.
Johnson, C.H., Mori, T., & Xu, Y. (2008). A cyanobacterial
circadian clockwork. Current Biology, 18, R816-R825.
Johnson, C.H. & Xu., Y. (2009). The decade of discovery:
how Synechococcus elongatus became a model circadian

system 1990-2000. In J.L. Ditty, S.R. Mackey, & C.H.
Johnson (Eds.) Bacterial Circadian Programs.
Heidelberg, DE: Springe-Verlag.
Kirsh, D. (2009). Thinking with external representations. AI
& Society, 25, 441-454.
Kondo, T., & Ishiura, M. (1999). The circadian clocks of
plants and cyanobacteria. Trends in Plant Science, 4, 171176.
Leipe, D.D., Aravind, L., Grishin, B.V., Koonin, E.V.
(2000). The bacterial replicative helicase DnaB evolved
from a RecA duplication. Genome Research, 10, 5-16.
Mackey, S.R. & Golden, S.S. (2007). Winding up the
cyanobacterial circadian clock. Trends in Microbiology,
15, 381-388.
Nakahira, Y., Katayama, M., Miyashita, H., Kutsuna, S.,
Iwasaki, H., Oyama, T., & Kondo, T. (2004). Global gene
repression by KaiC as a master process of prokaryotic
circadian system. PNAS, 101,881-885.
Nakajima, M., Imai, K., Ito, H., Nishiwaki, T., Murayama,
Y., Iwasaki, H., Oyama, T., & Kondo, T. (2005).
Reconstitution of circadian oscillation of cyanobacterial
KaiC phosphorylation in vitro. Science, 308, 414-5.
Nersessian, N. J. (1992). How do scientists think? Capturing
the dynamics of conceptual change in science. In R.N.
Giere (Ed.) Cognitive Models of Science (pp. 3-45).
Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Nersessian, N.J. (1995). Opening the black box: Cognitive
science and the history of science. Osiris, 10, 194-211.
Nersessian, N.J. (2002). “The cognitive basis of modelbased reasoning in science. In P. Carruthers, S. Stich, M.
Siegel (Eds.) The Cognitive Basis of Science (pp. 133153). Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Nersessian, N.J. (2008). Creating Scientific Concepts.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Osbeck, L., Nersessian, N., Malone, K., & Newstetter, W.
(2011). Science as Psychology. Cambridge, MA:
Cambridge University Press.
Sheredos, B., Burnston, D., Abrahamsen, A., & Bechtel, W.
(forthcoming). Why do biologists use so many diagrams?
Philosophy of Science.
Tomita, J., Nakajima, M., Kondo, T., & Iwasaki, H. (2004).
No transcription-translation feedback in circadian rhythm
of KaiC phosphorylation. Science, 307, 251-254.
Tversky, B., Heiser, J., Lee, P., and Daniel, M.-P. (2009).
Explanations in gesture, diagram, and word. In K.R.
Coventry, T. Tenbrink, & J.A. Bateman (Eds.) Spatial
Language and Dialogue (pp. 119-131). Oxford: OUP.
Tversky, B. (2011a). Visualizations of thought. Topics in
Cognitive Science, 3, 499-535.
Tversky, B. (2011b). Spatial thought, social thought. In
T.W. Schuber & A. Maass (Eds.) Spatial Dimensions of
Social Thought (pp. 17-39). Boston, MA: Walter de
Gruyter GmbH & Co.
Xu, Y., Mori, T., & Johnson, C.H. (2003). Cyanobacterial
circadian clockwork: roles of KaiA, KaiB, and the kaiBC
promoter in regulating KaiC. EMBO Journal, 22, 2117.

3401

