UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Searching Semantic Memory as a Scale-Free Network: Evidence from Category Recall and a
Wikipedia Model of Semantics

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9mk6c2sc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Thompson, Graham
Kello, Christopher
Montez, Priscilla

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Searching Semantic Memory as a Scale-Free Network:
Evidence from Category Recall and a Wikipedia Model of Semantics
Graham William Thompson (gthompson2@ucmerced.edu)
Christopher T. Kello (ckello@ucmerced.edu)
Priscilla Montez (pmontez@ucmerced.edu)
Cognitive and Information Sciences
University of California, Merced
5200 North Lake Road, Merced, CA 95343 USA
Abstract
How is semantic memory structured and searched? Recalling
items from semantic categories is a classic assay of semantic
memory, and recall dynamics tend to exhibit semantic and
temporal clustering, as if memory items are organized and
retrieved in clusters. Recent analyses show this clustering to
be approximately scale-free in terms of distributions of interretrieval intervals (IRIs). This finding is replicated and
extended in the present study by asking participants to type as
many animals as they can recall from semantic memory. To
begin to explain these results, the organization of semantic
memory is modeled as a network based on Wikipedia entries
for nearly 6,000 animals. The Wikipedia animal network is
found to be scale-free in terms of its degree distribution, and
aspects of the network are found to correlate with aspects of
recall. Semantic similarity based on Wikipedia entries is
found to compare favorably with a measure based on latent
semantic analysis. It is concluded that semantic memory
processes can be usefully theorized as searches over scalefree networks.
Keywords: semantic memory, scale-free networks, Lévy
foraging; category recall; latent semantic analysis; Wikipedia

Introduction
Category recall is a classic approach to investigating
semantic memory. Participants produce as many items from
a semantic category as possible in a specified period of time
(Bousfield & Sedgewick, 1944). Items tend to be recalled in
clusters. For the category of “animals”, for instance, part of
a typical sequence might be “lion, tiger, cougar, leopard…
kitten, cat, tabby”. This sequence contains two groups of
semantically similar items, big wild cats followed by house
cats. Such clusters can be of varying kinds and sizes, and
they tend to correspond with short IRIs, relative to longer
pauses when switching from one cluster to the next
(Grunewald, Lockhead & Gregory, 1980).
Clustering seems to be a general feature of semantic
memory. Work in this area has a long history, with early
experiments showing that, when participants memorize
words presented in random order, they tend to recall those
words in clusters based on semantic categories (Bousfield &
Sedgewick, 1953). Therefore clustering must be related to
memory encoding, retrieval, or both. In clinical work,
semantic category recall is used as a diagnostic for mental
disorders. Schizophrenic patients, people with semantic
dementia and people with Alzheimer’s all show specific
deficits in category generation tasks (see Murphy, Rich &
Troyer, 2006).

Previous work has sought to account for clustering in
category recall with patch foraging models (see Hills, Jones
& Todd, 2012). Patch foraging theorizes semantic memory
as a set of patches of similar items. Memory search consists
of series of quick retrievals of items from within a patch,
interleaved by longer times for switching to the next patch
when a sufficient number of items in the current patch have
been found. Framed this way, optimal foraging can be
expressed in terms of the time to leave a patch. It is optimal
to switch when the instantaneous rate of recall per unit time
drops below the long-term expected rate of recall (Charnov,
1976). Category switch times, and times in other human
search tasks, have been found to be consistent with patch
foraging (Cain, Vul & Mitroff, 2012).
Patch foraging models lead one to expect short and long
IRIs corresponding to successive recalls within patches
versus between patches, respectively. However, recent work
on category generation tasks has examined distributions of
IRIs and found them to have no particular mean or means
(Rhodes & Turvey, 2007). When the category recall task
was conducted for sufficiently long periods of time (e.g. ten
to twenty minutes for recalling animals), IRIs were found to
be power law distributed. In particular, the frequency of
IRIs were inversely related to their size, P(IRI) ~ 1/IRIα.
Such power law distributions have no characteristic scale in
theory, which means that their means and variances diverge
as more samples are drawn. The implication is that the
organization of semantic memory is scale-free rather than
just patchy.
Power law IRI distributions fall outside the purview of
patch foraging models, but they have been studied
extensively in animal foraging models (Viswanathan et al.,
1996). Unlike patch models, animal foraging models
explicitly consider the space in which items are to be found,
such as trees and bushes in a meadow where birds are
foraging for nuts and berries. Interestingly, the same power
law distribution found in category recall is also found in
IRIs during foraging for a wide range of species (Sims,
Southall & Humphries, 2003). Theorists have related these
findings to so-called Lévy walks (Mandelbrot, 1982), which
are random walks with path lengths drawn from a power
law distribution. While it is unlikely that foraging paths are
literally random Lévy walks, they may capture an important
property of foraging. The reason is that Lévy walks
sometimes may be efficient search strategies when their
exponent α is near 2 (Viswanathan et al., 2000). Consistent

3533

with this idea, IRIs in animal foraging and category recall
have both been found to resemble Lévy walks with α ~ 2
(Rhodes & Turvey, 2007; Sims, Southall & Humphries,
2003).
What do these findings tell us about the process of
searching semantic memory in category recall? They
suggest that simple Lévy walks might characterize much
about memory search, but they also might tell us about the
structure of semantic memory. Items in memory are often
theorized in terms of networks, in which case one is led to
ask whether these networks are structured in such a way that
searching them results in power law IRIs. As it turns out,
recent work on semantic networks provides evidence that
their degree distributions also follow an inverse power law,
termed scale-free networks (Steyvers & Tenebaum, 2005).
A network consists of interconnected nodes, and the
degree of a node is its number of connections. Scale-free
networks are those whose distributions of node degrees
follow an inverse power law. Many natural and manmade
networks are scale-free, such as power grids, brain networks
and the World Wide Web (Strogatz, 2001). Steyvers and
Tenenbaum (2005) analyzed three different types of data as
reflections of semantic networks: word associations,
WordNet entries (Miller, 1995) and Roget’s Thesaurus. In
all three cases, data were used to link items in a network
based on similarity or associative relations, and in all cases
networks were scale-free.
This evidence for scale-free networks suggests that items
fall into clusters with no characteristic size, analogous to the
power law IRI distributions. This analogy suggests that
scale-free semantic networks might account for power law
IRI distributions, as well as the semantic clustering of items
in category recall tasks. In the present study, we collected
data in a category recall task, and tested whether recall
sequences and IRIs can be explained by a scale-free model
of semantic memory.
We draw and expand upon previous studies as follows.
Category recall data were collected via typed instead of
spoken responses, as in previous studies. This difference
allowed us to test whether previous findings replicate when
response dynamics are on the order of seconds (typing)
instead of milliseconds (speech). Typing also allowed us to
test whether the same power law distribution occurs in IRIs,
as well within responses (typing durations). If so, we would
have evidence that recall processes unfold continuously
throughout the task, rather than in alternating stages of
recall and response execution (Kawamoto, Kello & Jones,
1998; Spivey & Dale, 2006).
We then built a semantic network of animals using over
6000 pages from Wikipedia. We followed an information
theoretic method used previously to show that the entirety
of Wikipedia can be formalized as a scale-free network
(Massuci et al., 2012). We test whether this method
replicates when analyzing only one subset domain of
Wikipedia, and we test whether the resulting measures of
animal similarity and network structure can be used to
explain category recall data. We also compare Wikipedia

measures of semantic similarity with those generated from
latent semantic analysis (LSA) of linguistic corpora
(Landauer & Dumais, 1997). LSA has become a standard
co-occurrence method, whereas Wikipedia is a new
encyclopedic method. Thus LSA provided a baseline for
evaluating our new method. We end by discussing the
implications of our results for Lévy and patch foraging
models, semantic memory, and search processes in general.

Experiment
Methods
Participants and Procedure. Nineteen undergraduates at
University of California, Merced participated for course
credit. Participants were instructed to recall as many
members from the category of “animals” as they could in
twenty minutes, after first completing three minutes of
practice with naming colors. Responses were typed and
recorded using a Flash interface that stored the timing of
each key press. Key press times were used to calculate the
interval from the end of one response to the start of the next,
termed inter-response interval (IRI), and the time from start
to end of the response, termed typing duration (TD).

Results
The average number of animals produced by each
participant was 117 (SD = 38.6). Distributions of IRIs and
typing durations were plotted in logarithmic coordinates to
gauge whether they resembled power law distributions. As
shown in Figure 1, the negative linear relation is indicative
of a power law, and multi-model inference tests (Akaike,
1974) confirmed that 4 subjects were best fit by a power
law, and the other 15 were best fit by a lognormal (which is
akin to a constrained or truncated power law in this case).
The deviations from linear at left end of these distributions
were due to minima that constrained and thereby distorted
the power law relationship. Distortion aside, the slope of
these distributions in logarithmic coordinates was near -2,
which replicates the category recall findings of Rhodes and
Turvey (2007). Thus memory retrieval dynamics followed
the same pattern for slower typed responses, relative to
faster spoken responses.
Typing durations also followed the same power law
relation, suggesting that memory retrieval is ongoing during
response execution. To test whether this result may have
been due to variations in response length, typing durations
were normalized by the number of letters in each response.
As shown in Figure 1, normalized distributions had the
same overall shape as the others. Thus response length did
not factor into the results.
In addition to IRIs, the category recall task also yields
series of recalled animals. Visual inspection of these series
(not shown herein) indicated that, as expected, semantically
related animals tended to be recalled in close proximity
compared with less related animals. Next we describe the
Wikipedia semantic network model and test whether it can

3534

account for the relative positioning and clustering of items
in recall sequences.

JSD can be thought of as providing a measure of how often
the same lemmas are used with the same frequency between
two Wikipedia pages.
Semantic Network. JSDs were calculated for all pairs of
probability distributions, and an undirected semantic
network was created by connecting any two animals with a
JSD similarity below a given threshold. The threshold was
chosen to be just high enough to merge 90% of the animals
into a single, interconnected network (every node could be
reached from every other node by traversing the network,
and unconnected nodes were removed from analysis).

Figure 1. Response histograms in logarithmic coordinates.

Semantic Memory Modeling
The network method developed by Masucci et al. (2011)
is based on transforming each given Wiki page into a
probability distribution over lemmas, and then using JensenShannon divergence (JSD) to measure the distance between
two probability distributions. Animal Wiki pages were
found using the Dbpedia ontology (Auer, Bizer &
Kobilarov, 2007) which contains a list of all articles in
Wikipedia associated with a given tag. A list of 129,027
animal articles in Wikipedia was compiled and all stub
articles, redirect pages and articles with less than 500 words
of main text were removed. This left us with 5,701 animal
pages. Formatting, references, and function words were
removed from these pages, and remaining words were
lemmatized to collapse across different inflectional forms.
The resulting frequency counts over lemmas on each page
were normalized to create probability distributions, and each
distribution served as a semantic representation of the
corresponding animal. These representations can be used to
determine which animals are and are not linked in a
semantic network, provided there is a good measure of
similarity between probability distributions. Note that two
distributions for two given pages may overlap only partially
in their corresponding sets of lemmas. This means that our
similarity measure must encompass and normalize over
varying degrees of overlap.
A well-known measure of similarity between two
probability distributions is the Kullback-Liebler (KL)
divergence, defined as

This divergence is asymmetric and non-normalized, whereas
JSD is a symmetric extension of KL divergence, normalized
between zero and one:

Figure 2. Degree distribution of the Wikipedia semantic
network in logarithmic coordinates.
The structure of the resulting network was sparse, smallworld and approximately scale-free. Average minimum path
length was 3.65, average clustering coefficient was 0.529,
the diameter of the network was 14 and the degree
distribution followed a power law distribution (Figure 2).
This finding replicates Masucci et al. (2011) for a subset of
Wikipedia, and it provides convergent evidence with
Steyvers & Tenenbaum (2005) that semantic memory can
be expressed as a scale-free network.

Accounting for Category Recall Results
Semantic networks are often compared with offline
human behaviors that can be expressed as structures.
Wikipedia provides crystallized, idealized representations of
animals, but it stands to reason that online measures of
human behavior would be sensitive to these representations.
We examine three such measures from our category recall
data: 1) Animal response similarity as a function of distance
in recall sequences, 2) First-order transitions in recall
sequences, and 3) IRIs as a function of shortest path length
in the scale-free semantic network.
To provide a benchmark for these three measures, we also
computed semantic similarity using LSA. As a cooccurrence method, LSA has strengths and weaknesses
compared with our Wikipedia-based method. Its main
strength is that LSA can provide a representation for every
word in a set of documents, whereas the Wikipedia method
can only provide representations for existing entries.

3535

However, each Wikipedia entry unambiguously corresponds
to a particular semantic item. By contrast, LSA merges all
the different meanings and usages of each given word, like
“fish”, into a single semantic representation. Also, LSA
vectors cannot be combined to form compound word
representations that correspond to animals like “flying fish”
and “zebra finch”.
Responses were corrected for spelling mistakes, and
multi-word responses like “black bear” were reduced to
their superordinate category, i.e. "bear" in this case. LSA
vectors were calculated using a term by term comparison
from the “general reading to first year college” corpus. Of
the 299 unique animal names produced in the category
recall experiment, we were able to compute LSA vectors for
196 of them, and Wiki probability distributions for 293 of
them.

Figure 3. Mean JSD and LSA measures as a function of
relative positions, with standard error bars.
Recall Proximity. The first measure we examine is
related to evidence marshaled for patch foraging models.
Hills et al. (2012) used a co-occurrence method called
BEAGLE (Jones & Mewhort, 2007) to show that items

produced within a patch are more semantically related as a
function of proximity in a sequence. Given the evidence for
patches of all sizes, and hierarchical nesting of patches as
evidenced by power laws, we tested whether the analysis
could be extended to all items in category recall sequences,
without setting patch boundaries.
JSD and LSA measures were computed between pairs of
animal responses in category recall sequences, as a function
of the relative position of items, from 1 (adjacent) to 10
(nine intervening items). JSD and LSA measures of
semantic similarity were averaged for each relative position,
and then normalized by the mean and standard deviation for
all pairwise JSD and LSA similarities, across all relative
positions. Results are shown in Figure 3.
The JSD and LSA measures produced comparable results
showing that semantic similarity decreased as a function of
positional distance in sequences. This result confirms visual
inspection of sequences, as well as previous research
(Bousfield & Sedgewick, 1953) showing that similar items
tend to be recalled in nearby positions. Both measures also
compared favorably with the Hills et al. (2012) results,
which showed a distinct effect of similarity only for
immediately adjacent items in recall sequences. Quantitative
differences between LSA and Wikipedia methods were also
observed: Compared with Wikipedia, LSA registered
relatively higher similarities for immediately adjacent items,
but similarity fell off more quickly with increasing distance.
Transitional Probabilities. LSA and JSD measures used
in the recall proximity analysis can serve as a basis for
predicting performance in category recall. We used LSA
and JSD measures to compute first-order transition
probabilities as a simple means of predicting each recall
item in a sequence, based only on the previous item. This
analysis extends the previous one because each transitional
probability is computed relative to all possible recall items,
which is more akin to a model of category recall that
simulates dynamics of semantic memory, e.g. by traversing
a scale-free semantic network.
For each recalled item, all animals that could be recalled
next were arranged according to the JSD or LSA similarity
between them, creating a ranking of possible transitions.
Transitions to every ranking were normalized by the total
number of JSD or LSA transitions. Probabilities were
standardized by setting them relative to random chance. In
particular, each probability was divided by random chance
for each analysis (1/293 and 1/196, respectively) to show
proportion above or below chance.
As shown in Figure 4, for both JSD and LSA measures,
participants were most likely to transition from each animal
name to the name estimated to be most semantically similar.
JSD transitions to the highest ranked word made up around
7% of total transitions, and for LSA it was around 3%. This
effect falls off after the first 30-50 most similar items, and is
most pronounced for the JSD measure. The JSD measure
appears to be better at predicting transitional probabilities
compared with the LSA method.

3536

disparate two nodes are in the context of an interconnected
network, and will directly impact any walker or spreading
activation mechanism used to formulate network dynamics.

Figure 5. Mean logged IRI between words with different
minimum path length separation in the semantic network.

Figure 4. Standardized probability of first-order
transitions between items by similarity ranking for JSD and
LSA measures.
Accounting for IRIs. The previous two analyses focused
on the sequencing of recalled items, but the times between
recalls are arguably more at issue in theories of semantic
memory. Both patch and Lévy foraging theories aim to
explain IRI effects—patch transition times for the former,
and IRI distributions for the latter. We tried using JSD and
LSA similarities alone, as in the previous two analyses, to
account for IRIs. However, they did not correlate reliably
with IRIs under any transformation of the data we tried.
Despite the lack of a direct link between semantic
similarities and IRIs, a semantic network built from
similarities still may account for IRIs by virtue of network
structure and dynamics that capture interactions among
items in memory. We used the scale-free semantic network
reported earlier, based on Wikipedia JSDs, to account for
IRIs observed in our category recall experiment. We did not
build a network based on LSA values because the lack of
semantic representations for word phrases like “tiger shark”
prohibited us from creating a sufficiently rich network.
Simulating network dynamics is beyond the present
scope, but we accounted for IRIs using a standard measure
of network structure that is likely to have a strong influence
on network dynamics. Minimum path length is the
minimum number of links needed to traverse from one node
to another. Minimum path length provides a measure of how

Minimum path lengths were computed between all
adjacently recalled items in all sequences from the category
recall experiment. Minima ranged from 1 to 6, but we only
examined pairs from 1 to 4 because there were too few at 5
and 6 to afford analysis (1 each). IRIs were logarithmically
transformed due to their heavy tails, and mean log IRIs were
computed for each minimum path length, as shown in
Figure 5. There was a significant effect of path length on log
IRIs, = .403, t(1067) = 7.44, p < .001, and they accounted
for a significant proportion of variance R2 = .049, F(1,
1067) = 55.36, p < .001. IRIs were shorter for immediately
connected items compared to the baseline mean IRI, and
IRIs were progressively greater than baseline as path length
increased from 2 to 4. This result provides evidence that a
scale-free semantic network may account for IRIs in
category recall experiments, even when semantic
similarities alone are not enough to account for the data.

Discussion
In the present study, we showed that category recall
performance can be modeled using scale-free semantic
networks. The category recall data were collected as series
of typed responses, and IRI distributions had the same shape
as in previous experiments using spoken responses. This
replication suggests that the present analyses should
generalize to other semantic memory paradigms. Typed
responses also indicated that memory dynamics unfold
during response execution as well as the pauses between
responses, which will be important to account for in future
models and simulations.
Previous studies have provided behavioral evidence that
semantic memory is organized as a scale-free network
(Steyvers & Tenenbaum, 2005), and we showed that a
semantic network of animals built from Wikipedia pages is
indeed scale-free. We used a measure of Wikipedia page
similarity to account for basic aspects of recall sequences,
and we showed that this measure of similarity compared

3537

favorably with a more standard LSA measure. We also
showed that a basic aspect of scale-free network structure
explained some of the variance in category recall IRIs.
The next step in this line of work is to implement network
dynamics to test whether scale-free network structure can
account for the scale-free, power law distribution of IRIs
observed in category recall tasks. This test will bear on
Lévy foraging theories that would explain power law IRIs in
terms of random or correlated walkers. A parallel step will
be to test whether network dynamics can account for
evidence suggesting that foragers spend optimal amounts of
time foraging within patches, and switch to new patches
when current rates of recall fall below the long-run average.
While our model does not have clear delineations between
patches, because items fall into nested clusters with no
characteristic scale, it may still account for patch evidence.
Recent modeling work showed that random walks on
semantic networks might account for this evidence without
reference to patches (Abbott, Austerweil & Griffiths, 2012).
Finally, it will be informative to apply the Wikipedia
method of network creation to other phenomena of semantic
memory, in other semantic domains. In doing so, it will be
important to compare this method with a range of cooccurrence methods, as well as other encyclopedic methods.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a grant from the National
Science Foundation, BCS 1031903 (PI Kello). The authors
thank members of the Cognitive and Information Sciences
graduate group for helpful comments and feedback.

References
Abbott, J., Austerweil, J., & Griffiths, T. (2012). Human
memory search as a random walk in a semantic network. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 25 (pp.
3050-3058).
Akaike, H. (1974). A new look at the statistical model
identification. Automatic Control, IEEE Transactions on,
19(6), 716-723.
Auer, S., Bizer, C., Kobilarov, G., Lehmann, J.,
Cyganiak, R., & Ives, Z. (2007). Dbpedia: A nucleus for a
web of open data. The Semantic Web, 722-735.
Bousfield, W. A., & Sedgewick, C. H. W. (1944). An
analysis of sequences of restricted associative responses.
Journal of General Psychology; Journal of General
Psychology.
Bousfield, WA. 1953. The occurrence of clustering in
recall of randomly arranged associates. The Journal of
General Psychology, 49, 229–240.
Cain, M. S., Vul, E., Clark, K., & Mitroff, S. R. (2012). A
Bayesian optimal foraging model of human visual search.
Psychological Science, 23(9), 1047-1054
Charnov, E. L. (1976). Optimal foraging, the marginal
value theorem. Theoretical population biology, 9(2), 129136.

Gruenewald, P. J., & Lockhead, G. R. (1980). The free
recall of category examples. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Learning and Memory, 6(3), 225-240.
Hills, T. T., Jones, M. N., & Todd, P. M. (2012). Optimal
foraging in semantic memory. Psychological review, 119(2),
431-440.
Jones, M. N., & Mewhort, D. J. (2007). Representing
word meaning and order information in a composite
holographic lexicon. Psychological Review, 114(1), 1-37.
Kawamoto, A. H., Kello, C. T., Jones, R., & Bame, K.
(1998). Initial phoneme versus whole-word criterion to
initiate pronunciation: Evidence based on response latency
and initial phoneme duration. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 24(4), 862885.
Landauer, T. K., & Dumais, S. T. (1997). A solution to
Plato's problem: The latent semantic analysis theory of
acquisition, induction, and representation of knowledge.
Psychological Review, 104(2), 211-240.
Mandelbrot, B. B. (1982). The fractal geometry of nature.
Times Books: 232-244.
Masucci, A. P., Kalampokis, A., Eguíluz, V. M., &
Hernández-García, E. (2011). Extracting directed
information flow networks: an application to genetics and
semantics. Physical Review E, 83(2), 1-6.
Masucci, A. P., Kalampokis, A., Eguíluz, V. M., &
Hernández-García, E. (2011). Wikipedia information flow
analysis reveals the scale-free architecture of the semantic
space. PloS one, 6(2), e17333.
Murphy, K. J., Rich, J. B., & Troyer, A. K. (2006). Verbal
fluency patterns in amnestic mild cognitive impairment are
characteristic of Alzheimer's type dementia. Journal of the
International Neuropsychological Society, 12(4), 570-574.
T. Rhodes & M.T. Turvey. (2007). Human memory
retrieval as Levy Foraging. Physica A, 385, 255–260
Sims, D. W., Southall, E. J., Humphries, N. E., Hays, G.
C., Bradshaw, C. J., Pitchford, J. W., & Metcalfe, J. D.
(2008). Scaling laws of marine predator search behaviour.
Nature, 451(7182), 1098-1102
Spivey, M. J., & Dale, R. (2006). Continuous Dynamics
in Real-Time Cognition. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 15(5), 207–211.
Steyvers, M., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2005). The large-scale
structure of semantic networks: statistical analyses and a
model of semantic growth. Cognitive science, 29(1), 41–78.
Strogatz, S. H. (2001). Exploring complex networks.
Nature, 410(6825), 268-276.
Viswanathan, G. M., Afanasyev, V., Buldyrev, S. V.,
Murphy, E. J., Prince, P. A., & Stanley, H. E. (1996). Lévy
flight search patterns of wandering albatrosses. Nature,
381(6581), 413-415.
Viswanathan, G. M., Afanasyev, V., Buldyrev, S. V.,
Havlin, S., Da Luz, M. G. E., Raposo, E. P., & Stanley, H.
E. (2000). Lévy flights in random searches. Physica A:
Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 282(1), 1-12.

3538

