UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Semantic Implicit Learning in Language

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2vm869mc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Paciorek, Albertyna
Williams, John

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Semantic Implicit Learning in Language
Albertyna Paciorek (awp23@cam.ac.uk)
John N. Williams (jnw12@cam.ac.uk)
Department of Theoretical and Applied Linguistics, University of Cambridge
9 West Road, Cambridge CB3 9DP, United Kingdom
Abstract

(Ellis, 1994) and shared attention (Bloom, 2000) one
might suspect not. However, these arguments relate
to learning referential meaning. Others have
hypothesised that other aspects of word meaning,
such as connotation and collocational behaviour,
might be learned implicitly by the non-declarative
system (Paradis, 2004). Here we test this proposal in
the context of semantic preferences of verbs.

Previous studies of semantic implicit learning in
language have only examined learning grammatical
form-meaning connections where learning could have
been supported by prior linguistic knowledge. Also,
these studies assessed awareness by verbal report,
which is arguably not the most reliable measure. Here
we target the domain of verb meaning, specifically
semantic preferences of novel verbs (e.g. a novel
verb takes abstract objects). Using a reaction time
methodology we show that after exposure to correct
verb-noun combinations, reaction times to incorrect
combinations are slowed down even for participants
who are unaware of the semantic regularity. This
effect was also obtained even when the semantic
regularity was irrelevant to the tasks being performed,
suggesting that the semantic generalisation is learned
and exerts its influence automatically, hence
satisfying one criterion for implicitness. Combined
with a lack of verbalisable knowledge in any
participant these experiments provide strong evidence
for semantic implicit learning in language.

Previous research on semantic implicit learning in
language has focused exclusively on article-noun
agreement regularities (e.g. Williams, 2005; Leung &
Williams, 2012). This work has demonstrated
sensitivity to the semantic properties of nouns in
learning about the distribution of articles in miniature
semi-artificial languages, and has provided evidence
of implicitness of knowledge through postexperiment verbal report. The present experiments
extend this work in terms of generalizability to other
aspects of language, and in terms of methodology.
We will discuss methodology in Experiment 2, but
with regard to generalizability, there was evidence in
these earlier experiments that implicit learning was
dependent upon prior knowledge of article agreement
systems in other languages (Williams, 2005). There
was also evidence that learning depended on the
semantic regularity in question, since effects were
obtained for agreement based on animacy, but not on
relative size (Leung & Williams, 2012). Putting these
two together one might argue that learning was
dependent both on prior knowledge of the potential
for article noun agreement, and on dispositions based
on the “potentially encodable distinctions” that can
be grammaticised in language (Bickerton, 1999). The
question arises, therefore, whether similar effects
could be obtained for an aspect of language that falls
outside the realm of grammar, and is not so
potentially affected by prior dispositions. This
motivated the current investigation of learning the
collocational behaviour, specifically semantic
preferences, of novel verbs.

Keywords: implicit learning; consciousness; formmeaning connections; vocabulary learning; verb
learning, second language acquisition; automaticity.

Introduction
Most research on implicit learning has examined
regularities at the level of form, be they in sequences
of letters generated by artificial grammars, screen
positions in repeating sequences, and in the domain
of language, phonological (Dell et al., 2001) and
orthographic (Pacton et al., 2001) patterns. This
limits generalizability to other aspects of language
learning where regularities might be conditioned by
distinctions at the level of meaning, as opposed to
form. Some research in visual perception has exposed
semantic-based implicit learning, notably using the
contextual cuing paradigm, where target locations are
predicted from semantic properties of contexts,
(Goujon, 2007). But can semantic implicit learning
effects be obtained in the domain of language,
especially in the adult language learner? Given
arguments that even in children vocabulary
acquisition requires declarative, explicit, memory

A semantic preference can be understood as a
particular type of collocation, where collocation
refers to higher than chance co-occurrence of two or
more words. Collocates sound natural together and
substituting one of them with a near-synonym results

3211

in a loss of naturalness for native speakers. For
example in English it is better to say fast car and fast
food, rather than *quick car or *quick food.
Conversely, it is more natural to say quick glance and
quick meal instead of *fast glance or *fast meal. It
has been traditionally proposed that collocations
reflect syntagmatic relations between words, and are
related to surface form, rather than paradigmatic
relations regarding meaning (Firth, 1957). However,
syntagmatic regularities may not be the optimal, or
the sole way of accounting for the existence and
acquisition of semantic preferences. After all, new
collocates can be freely generated, as long as they
follow implicit assumptions regarding applicable
semantic sets. For example, knowing that pack
collocates with dog, hounds, wolves etc. while swarm
with bees, mosquitoes, bats, naturally suggests other
animals which would be appropriate in either set. It
makes sense therefore, to predict that the existence of
such semantically preferred sets of collocates
involves generalisations at a level higher than form.
The question is, can such semantic generalisations be
learned implicitly?

In Experiment 2 participants saw only the verb
phrases, but this time they had to decide whether the
noun conveyed positive or negative connotations (a
decision that is subjective and irrelevant to the hidden
regularity).
This
was
followed
by
the
increase/decrease decision, as before. Any effect here
would arguably provide stronger evidence for
implicit learning, and would speak to the
automaticity of the semantic activation underlying
the effect.

The present experiments used four novel verbs,
powter, mouten, gouble, and conell. The participants
were exposed to these verbs in verb phrases
containing a direct object noun. Their task required
them to think about whether the verb conveyed an
‘increase’ or ‘decrease’ meaning, either as inferred
from the context (Experiment 1) or as they had
learned before the experiment (Experiment 2). What
they were not told was that powter and gouble took
abstract collocates, whereas mouten and conell took
concrete collocates (Table 1). For example, correct
verb phrases would be powter the significance,
gouble the power, mouten the calcium, conell the
chocolate. We tested whether participants would
learn the semantic preferences of these novel verbs
implicitly using two techniques. Experiment 1
embedded the verb phrases in sentence contexts, and
required participants to make an explicit concreteness
decision on the nouns, and indicate whether the verb
meant increase or decrease at the end of the sentence.
The prediction was that after exposure to many
correctly formed trials concreteness decision times
and/or increase/decrease response times would be
faster to new verb-noun combinations that respect the
rule than to combinations that do not (e.g. powter
with a concrete collocate such as compost). These
will be referred to as the New Grammatical (NG) and
New Ungrammatical (NU) conditions respectively. If
learning is implicit then this effect would be obtained
even for participants who evinced no awareness of
the relevance of concreteness to the collocational
behavior of the verbs, as assessed by a post-test.

Participants

Table 1. The novel verbs used in the experiments

Participants told
to infer from
context

increase
decrease

Participants not told
Abstract Concrete
collocate collocate
powter
mouten
gouble
conell

Experiment 1
40 students of the University of Cambridge
participated in the experiment. 17 were native
speakers of English. All of the nonnative participants
had achieved at least IELTS 7.5.

Materials and Procedure
A total of 80 sentences were created, 20 for each
novel verb, in which the verb conveyed either an
‘increase’ or ‘decrease’ meaning with respect to the
object. For procedural reasons the word order was
scrambled so that the verb phrase occurred at the
beginning of the sentence. Examples are shown in
Table 2.
Table 2. Example sentences from Experiment 1
POWTER the prestige of wealthy families, artists
can.
GOUBLE the role of nuclear weapons, Obama
stresses the need to.
MOUTEN the nutrients you need, make sure you.
CONELL the histamine stores, the sweating helps to.
The experiment comprised two blocks of trials,
although the participants were not aware of any
division between them. In the first block there were
44 training trials in which each novel verb occurred
equally often. The collocates occurred with both
increase and decrease verbs (e.g. POWTER the

3212

prestige and GOUBLE the prestige occurred, but in
different sentence contexts). Block 2 contained 32
critical trials in which the novel verbs occurred in
new sentences and with new collocates not
encountered in Block 1. Half of these items respected
the semantic preference rule (“new grammatical”,
NG, condition), and half violated it, for example by
pairing a concrete noun with POWTER (“new
ungrammatical”, NU, condition). The new collocates
in the critical test items were chosen so as to be
roughly synonymous with an object noun that
occurred in the training phase (e.g. POWTER the
importance occurred in training, and POWTER the
significance occurred in test). Each object noun
appeared only once in the critical trials. Assignment
of items to conditions was rotated around two
presentation lists so as to control for item effects.
Block 2 also contained an additional 44 grammatical
sentences so as to provide more reinforcement for the
rule. These were sentences repeated from Block 1.
The order of trials in Blocks 1 and 2 was
independently randomized for each subject.

The experiment was run using Superlab software and
a Cedrus response box.

Results and Discussion
Out of 40 participants, 13 revealed at least
fragmentary explicit knowledge in the postexperiment debriefing, and were classified as ‘aware’.
The remaining 27 participants were classified as
‘unaware’. For each participant, response times that
were more than 2.5 standard deviations above the
mean response time over the 32 critical trials were
winsorized (i.e. replaced with the next highest value).
Additionally, in cases where an error was made on
the first (abstract/concrete) decision, the response on
the second decision was removed from the analysis.
This was because participants were likely to have
been distracted on the subsequent increase/decrease
decision by just having had to correct themselves.
An initial analysis of the data revealed that for both
the aware and unaware groups there were no
differences in either reaction time or error rate
between the NG and NU conditions on the first,
concrete/abstract, decision. This was rather surprising
because we expected that if the regularity had been
learned the verb would set up an expectation of a
certain type of collocate. However, a significant NUNG reaction time difference was obtained on the
second, increase/decrease, decision. After excluding
two unaware participants with excessively long
response times (of 3231 msecs and 3359 msecs) the
remaining 25 unaware participants had a mean
response time of 1101 msecs in the NG condition and
1332 msecs in the NU condition, F(1,23) = 5.11, p <
0.05, η2 = 0.20. There was no difference in error
rates (25.2% and 23.4% respectively). As for the
aware participants, despite showing a large numerical
difference between the NG and NU conditions on the
increase/decrease decision (1478 msecs and 1611
msecs respectively) this difference was not
significant, F(1,11) = 1.70, p = 0.23. Neither was
there an effect in errors (22.5% and 23.9 %
respectively).

The sentences were presented word by word in the
centre of the screen. First the noun, e.g. POWTER,
was presented in capital letters for 600 msecs
followed by the article the for 600 msecs. This was
followed by a noun, e.g. prestige, in red lower case
letters. The participants were instructed to indicate as
quickly as possible whether this noun referred to an
abstract or a concrete object by pressing the left or
right buttons on a response box. If they made an error
the word remained on the screen until they pressed
the correct button. Upon a correct response the
display changed to a recall prompt ‘___ the ___’ and
they had to recall the noun phrase aloud, i.e. say
“powter the prestige”. They then pressed a response
button and the remainder of the sentence appeared at
a rate of 600 msecs per word, e.g. of wealthy families
artists can. At the end of the sentence the prompt +/appeared on the screen and the participants had to
indicate as quickly as possible whether they thought
the verb conveyed a broadly increase or decrease
meaning by pressing the right or left buttons on the
response box.

A post hoc analysis was carried out to check for
potential differences in performance between the
native and non-native English-speaking participants.
An ANOVA revealed no interaction between
grammaticality and native/non-native speaker status,
F < 1.0.

In order to assess awareness, at the end of the
experiment the participants were presented with 8
new sentences from which the verb had been
removed. They were asked to indicate which of the
four novel verbs they thought should be used in that
context and to think aloud as they made their decision.
Any participant who referred to the abstract/concrete
distinction, or similar, was classified as ‘aware’,
regardless of their actual performance on the post-test.

This experiment provides evidence of implicit
learning of a semantic preference rule. The fact that
learning effects are apparent on the decisions
involving purely the indication of whether a

3213

Experiment 2

particular verb meant to ‘increase’ or ‘decrease’ is
particularly compelling, since the decision was being
made with reference to the meaning of the verb, not
the collocate, and knowledge of the semantic
preference rule does not directly inform this decision.
This effect actually provides stronger evidence of the
use of implicit knowledge than if it had occurred on
the concreteness decision (a point which we will
elaborate below).

This experiment employed a reaction time
methodology similar to Experiment 1. Two main
changes were made. First, a simplified procedure was
employed in which only verb phrases were presented.
Participants
were
informed
about
the
increase/decrease meanings of the verbs prior to the
experiment. The second change was that instead of
making a concreteness decision on the collocates
participants now had to indicate whether the collocate
had positive, negative, or neutral connotation. For
example, chocolate and holidays would be expected
to receive positive judgments, whereas horror would
be expected to receive a negative judgment.
Participants were informed that the choices were
subjective and that there was no correct answer.
Crucially, the semantic preference rule was exactly
the same as in Experiment 1; powter and gouble went
with abstract nouns and conell and mouten with
concrete nouns. Given that no systematic alignment
between connotative meaning judgments and
concreteness is expected this means that there will be
no systematic relationship between the button pressed
on the first decision and the second increase/decrease
decision. Thus, learning is unlikely to be based on
associations between nonsense verbs and patterns of
button presses. This also means that any influence of
noun concreteness on the second decision must
reflect automatic activation of this aspect of meaning,
rather than explicit retrieval as part of the task (as
was the case in Experiment 1).

Having said this, it is not clear how the effect of
grammaticality on the increase/decrease decision
arises. One possibility is that the mismatch between
the verb and noun in the NU condition somehow
disturbed
the
process
of
deriving
the
increase/decrease meaning from the verb and its
context. It may also have caused confusion about the
identity of the verb (since the collocate would have
suggested other verb possibilities than the one that
occurred). However, there is an alternative
explanation that cannot be ruled out at this stage. The
effect may not reflect learning of a semantic
regularity at all, but rather associations between
novel verbs and patterns of button presses (e.g.
POWTER was associated with successive responses
on the right-hand button). Experiment 2 was designed
to rule out this possibility, as well as creating
conditions under which awareness of the hidden
regularity was much less likely to occur, and under
which any effect of knowledge on behavior was more
likely to reflect automatic, as opposed to controlled,
behavior.
Even if we suppose that the effect obtained in
Experiment 1 was semantic in origin, the question
remains as to the nature of the generalization that was
formed. Although the noun collocates in the critical
test items were different from those that occurred in
training they were in fact roughly synonymous with a
noun that had occurred in the training phase. This
means that it is hard to defend the claim that what
was learned was a correlation between verbs and the
abstract/concrete distinction as such. Rather the effect
could have reflected the similarity between individual
nouns in training and test. In order to address this
issue, the noun collocates in Experiment 2 were
changed so as to represent a more heterogeneous set
of abstract and concrete nouns, and no noun in the
test phase was a synonym of a noun in the training
phase. Learning over these items would be more
likely to reflect abstraction of a broad concreteness
distinction.

Participants
46 students of the University of Cambridge
participated in the experiment. Three participants
were excluded due to problems with the task. Of the
remaining group of 43 participants, 22 were native
speakers of English. All of the nonnative participants
had achieved at least IELTS 7.5.

Materials and Procedure
The experimental design was identical to Experiment
1. The nouns for the training and test items were
changed so as to comprise a more heterogeneous set
of abstract and concrete nouns. The broadened
category of abstract nouns included ones as different
as happiness, wisdom, impact, understanding. The
category of concrete nouns was similarly broadened
to include, for example, chocolate, luggage, metal
and paper. Only verb phrases were presented.
Participants were first informed about the
increase/decrease meanings of the novel verbs. The

3214

simplified procedure in Experiment 2 comprised the
following sequence of events. First the verb was
presented in capital letters for 600 msecs. This was
followed by the word the for 600 msecs, followed by
the noun in red. The participants made their decision
about the connotation of the noun within an allocated
time of 3 secs. Responses were entered on a
millisecond accurate keyboard where M indicated
‘positive’, Z ‘negative’, and space bar ‘neutral’.
Upon making any response the noun was replaced by
the ‘inc/dec’ prompt and the participant indicated
whether the verb meant increase or decrease by
pressing M and Z respectively. After every two
stimuli participants received prompts that required
them to recall out loud one of the phrases they had
just seen. The prompt revealed either the first part of
the phrase, for example “MOUTEN the _______”, or
the second part: “_______
the prestige”, and
participants were asked to pronounce the complete
phrase. The memory task was to encourage full
attention to the materials and the data were not
analysed. All stimuli were presented in the centre of
the screen. The experiment was followed by a posttest similar to that in Experiment 1.

Condition was significant, F(1,37) = 8.74, p < 0.01,
η2 = 0.19. Follow-up ANOVAs showed that the
learning effect was only significant for the native
speaker group F(1,17) = 9.13, p < 0.01, η2 = 0.34.
There were no significant effects on errors.
Experiment 2 provides stronger evidence for
semantic implicit learning than Experiment 1 because
the learned generalisation was unrelated to the tasks
being performed. Knowledge of the correlation
between verbs and noun concreteness was unrelated
both to the decision being made on the noun
(connotative meaning) and to the increase/decrease
decision. It has been argued that implicit knowledge
should exert its influence on behaviour in an
automatic rather than controlled way (Cleeremans &
Jimenez, 2002), and that the strongest test of implicit
knowledge is to be obtained in situations where
knowledge has an effect on performance even though
it is irrelevant to the task at hand (Tzelgov, 1997;
Vinter & Perruchet, 1999). The present experiment
seems to satisfy those criteria. Furthermore, on this
occasion none of the participants demonstrated
awareness of the semantic regularity in the post-test,
which in itself suggests that the relevant knowledge
was well below the level of awareness.

Results and Discussion
None of the participants appeared to have any
awareness of the correlation between the novel verbs
and the concreteness of the noun (whereas in
Experiment 1 32.5% of the participants were classed
as aware). The data were treated in the same way as
in Experiment 1. Two of the native participants were
excluded on the basis of excessively long second
decision response times. As before there were no
reaction time effects on the first decision. This time
there were no effects on the second,
increase/decrease, decision either. Response times in
the NG and NU conditions were 616 msecs and 627
msecs respectively, and error rates were 6.1% and
6.7% (note that reaction times were much faster than
in Experiment 1, presumably because the decision
was made immediately after the noun, rather than
being delayed until the end of a sentence). When the
data for the native English-speaking and non-native
groups were compared an interesting pattern emerged.
For the natives, reaction times in the NG and NU
conditions were 556 msecs and 612 msecs, with error
rates of 7.2% and 5.9%. In contrast for the nonnatives the reaction times in the NG and NU
conditions were 690 msecs and 655 msecs, with error
rates of 5.1% and 7.4%. An ANOVA was performed
on the reaction time data with Group (native or nonnative) and Presentation List as between-subjects
factors, and Condition (NG vs NU) as a withinsubjects factor. The interaction between Group and

Experiment 2 also shows that the effects obtained in
Experiment 1 were not due to learning associations
between the novel verbs and patterns of keystrokes.
This was because the nouns in the abstract and
concrete categories would have elicited a range of
‘positive’ (M), ‘negative’ (Z) and ‘neutral’ (space bar)
responses. Thus the effects must have had a semantic
origin. Furthermore the learning effect in natives was
obtained over sets of nouns that were more
heterogeneous than in Experiment 1, and the critical
test nouns were not synonyms of any nouns in
training. Therefore the learning effect must have been
supported by a broad generalisation, which we
assume is essentially based on the abstract versus
concrete distinction.
The fact that in this experiment learning was not
obtained for non-native speakers is perhaps not
surprising. There is a wealth of evidence that the
mapping from second language words to meaning is
less automatic than from first language words. For
example, automatic semantic priming from second
language words can only be obtained at very high
levels of proficiency (Basnight-Brown & Altarriba,
2007). Thus, in a situation in which a decision is
made about one aspect of meaning it is not surprising
that the non-natives in Experiment 2 did not activate
other aspects of meaning with sufficient strength to
produce a learning effect.

3215

Conclusion

References

The present experiments demonstrate that semantic
implicit learning of linguistic regularities can be
obtained outside of the realm of grammar, and can
extend into learning about verb meaning. However,
this is not to say that all aspects of word meaning
have the potential to be learned implicitly. Paradis
(2004) has proposed that learning referential meaning
requires the declarative system, and hence
presumably depends upon awareness of the
connection between form and meaning. But other
aspects of meaning, such as semantic preferences,
could be acquired implicitly. Although it is not clear
whether the kind of learning demonstrated here
actually depends on the operation of the procedural
system, as hypothesised by Paradis, the present
results do show that this aspect of verb meaning is
amenable to implicit learning.

Basnight-Brown, D. M., & Altarriba, J. (2007).
Differences in semantic and translation priming
across languages. Memory & Cognition, 35, 953965.
Bickerton, D. (1999). Creole languages, the language
bioprogram hypothesis, and language acquisition.
In W. C. Ritchie & T. K. Bhatia (Eds.), Handbook
of child language acquisition: Academic Press.
Bloom, P. (2000). How Children Learn the Meanings
of Words: MIT Press.
Cleeremans, A., & Jiménez, L. (2002). Implicit
learning and consciousness: A graded, dynamic
perspective. In R. M. French & A. Cleeremans
(Eds.), Implicit Learning and Consciousness (pp.
1-40). Hove: Psychology Press.
Dell, G. S., Reed, K. D., Adams, D. R., & Meyer, A.
S. (2000). Speech errors, phonotactic constraints,
and implicit learning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology-Learning Memory and Cognition, 26,
1355-1367.
Ellis, N. C. (1994). Vocabulary acquisition: The
explicit ins and outs of explicit cognitive mediation.
In N. C. Ellis (Ed.), Implicit and Explicit Learning
of Languages (pp. 211-282). London: Academic
Press.
Firth, J. R. (1957). Modes of Meaning. Papers in
Linguistics 1934-1951 (pp. 190–215). Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Goujon, A., Didierjean, A., & Marmeche, E. (2007).
Contextual cueing based on specific and
categorical properties of the environment. Visual
Cognition, 15, 257-275.
Leung, J. H. C., & Williams, J. N. (2012).
Constraints on implicit Learning of grammatical
form-meaning connections. Language Learning, 62,
634-662.
Pacton, S., Perruchet, P., Fayol, M., & Cleeremans, A.
(2001). Implicit learning out of the lab: The case of
orthographic regularities. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 130, 401-426.
Paradis, M. (2004). A Neurolinguistic Theory of
Bilingualism.
Amsterdam/Philadelphia:
John
Benjamins.
Tzelgov, J. (1997). Specifying the relations between
automaticity and consciousness: A theoretical note.
Consciousness and Cognition, 6, 441-451.
Vinter, A., & Perruchet, P. (1999). Isolating
Unconscious Influences: The Neutral Parameter
Procedure. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Section A, 52, 857-875.
Williams, J. N. (2005). Learning without awareness.
Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 27, 269304.

It should also be stressed that the present experiments
demonstrate learning semantic preferences in a
situation in which some aspect of the meaning of the
verbs (i.e., their increase or decrease meaning) is
already explicitly known (as in Experiment 2) or
being intentionally inferred from context (Experiment
1). Thus, we regard these learning effects as
essentially reflecting the process of ‘tuning’ an
already-established meaning of which the participants
are aware. Whilst this tuning process undoubtedly
forms an important part of word learning through
usage, it has to be distinguished from the process of
actually forming new form-meaning connections
from scratch.
Finally, the fact that there was no semantic implicit
learning effect in Experiment 2 for non-native
speakers provides a cautionary note in relation to the
role this process may play in second language
acquisition. The implication is that semantic
regularities will be most effectively learned when
attention is drawn to the relevant aspects of meaning
by the task. Otherwise semantic implicit learning
effects may be limited unless semantic access from
known words in the context is highly automatic. This
does not mean, though, that learners have to be aware
of the actual underlying regularities. Even if in some
cases it may be necessary to be aware of both form
and meaning, it is not necessary to be aware of the
semantic generalisations that they license.
Acknowledgments
The first author gratefully acknowledges the support
of the AHRC of Great Britain.

3216

