UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Sequential Sampling Models Representing a Unifying Framework of Human Decision
Making

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8c48r9j4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Busemeyer, Jerome
Diedrich, Adele
Heathcote, Andrew
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Sequential Sampling Models Representing a
Unifying Framework of Human Decision Making
Jerome Busemeyer
(jbusemey@indiana.edu)

Antonio Rangel
(rangel@hss.caltech.edu)

Department of Psychology, Indiana University
Bloomington, IN, USA

California Institute of Technology
Pasadena, CA, USA

Adele Diederich
(a.diederich@jacobs-university.de)

Jörg Rieskamp
(joerg.rieskamp@unibas.ch)

School of Humanities and Social Sciences
Jacobs University Bremen, Bremen, Germany

Department of Psychology, University of Basel
Basel, Switzerland

Andrew Heathcote
(andrew.heathcote@newcastle.edu.au)

Marius Usher
(marius@post.tau.ac.il)

School of Psychology, University of Newcastle
Australia

Department of Psychology, University of Tel Aviv
Tel Aviv, Israel

Accumulation of Information with Attention
Shifting Across Attributes

Keywords: Decision Making, Sequential Sampling Models,
Evidence Accumulation, Attention Shifts, Cognitive Modeling

Adele Diederich* & Jerome Busemeyer*
Sequential sampling models have been applied for
describing the cognitive processes underlying various
psychological processes such as memory, perception, or
value-based decision making. They share the common
assuming that people accumulate information stochastically
over time and once the accumulated information passes a
decision boundary a response is made. Depending on the
cognitive domain the models differ in the specific nature of
the accumulation process. In particular, they differ in their
assumption about what type of information is processed,
how the information is represented, and how the boundary is
defined.
In this symposium we will illustrate how sequential
sampling models successfully explain human behavior for
various cognitive domains. For the decision making domain
we show how people construct their preferences by
accumulating options’ attributes values over time once a
decision threshold is reached. For the perceptual domain we
show how gradual accumulation of sensory evidence over
time explains people’s perceptual decisions. Furthermore,
we illustrate that sequential sampling models do not only
predict the final outcome of a cognitive process but also
present a description of the cognitive process itself. As such
the symposium will illustrate how the analyses of response
time distributions provide evidence for the dynamic
accumulation process. Furthermore, the neurological basis
of the dynamic accumulation process has recently also been
explored. In sum, the symposium will illustrate the strength
of sequential sampling model as a unifying framework for
explain human cognition and behavior across many
domains.

Most applications of sequential sampling (diffusion)
models to decision making assume that information is
sampled from a constant or stationary, albeit noisy, source
of information during the accumulation period leading up to
a decision. Formally, these models usually employ a
constant mean drift rate throughout the accumulation
process leading up to a decision. However, many cognitive
and decision tasks provide conflicting attributes that could
compete for selective attention to guide the accumulation
process while making a decision. For example, when
choosing a consumer product, a person needs to shift
attention between quality and cost; when a security agent
scans a bag, the person needs to shift attention to different
objects in the bag; when making a social choice, a person
can attend to either implicit attitude feelings or explicit
rational arguments.
Diederich (1997) developed a multiple stage diffusion
model that represents this attention shifting as a Markov
process that changes the drift rate across stages of the
decision. This work describes the multiple stage model and
reviews five major applications which compared the
multiple stage model to stationary models with respect to
their ability to account for perceptual decisions involving
conflicting attributes. This includes behavioral studies
modeling choice and response time as well as
electrophysiological studies that used the model to account
for the trajectory of neural activation during evidence
accumulation. Based on this body of evidence, we conclude
that there is substantial empirical support for an attention
shifting process during multi-attribute decision making.

73

A Two-Phase Theory of
Choice Conflict Tasks
Andrew Heathcote* & Kirsty Hannah
We propose a theory of how decision processes are
affected by response conflict. The theory is developed to
account for the fine-grained time course of both response
speed and accuracy as quantified by delta functions and
conditional accuracy functions. The theory, Two-Phase
Evidence Accumulation (TPEA), extends Brown and
Heathcote’s (2008) Linear Ballistic Accumulator (LBA)
model to provide a unified account of three tasks that have
been central to the study of cognitive interference the
Stroop, Simon and Flanker tasks. The theory is explicated
by demonstrating that it provides a coherent parametric
account of Stroop and Simon effect delta functions shown
by Pratte, Rouder, Morey and Feng (2010) to be
incompatible with existing theories. We then show that,
without modification, TPEA is also able to account for
White, Ratcliff and Starns’ (2011) flanker data.

The Attentional Drift-Diffusion-Model:
Eye-tracking and Neurobiological Evidence
Antonio Rangel*
We propose a computational model of value-based binary
choice in which fixations guide the comparison process. The
model is an extension of the classic Drift-Diffusion-Model
to an environment in which attention matters. We provide
eye-tracking evidence showing that the model can
quantitatively explain complex relationships between
fixation patterns and choices, as well as several fixationdriven decision biases. We also provide fMRI evidence
showing that key elements of the model are consistent with
the operations of the decision-making circuitry at the time of
choice.

Decision Making With Non-stationary
Evidence, Adaptation and Decision-Confidence
Marius Usher*
The integration of evidence supporting different choice
options is a fundamental process underlying all of our
decisions, ranging from the simplest perceptual decisions
(e.g., detect the presence of an enemy-rocket signal
embedded in a noisy radar stream) to complex economic
ones (e.g., which apartment to buy). A limitation of most
studies that examined evidence-integration, however, is that
they focussed on situations in which the evidence is
stationary. I will present recent computational and
experimental studies that examines decision-making under
non-stationary evidence, characterized by temporal
uncertainty: Observers detected visual luminance “signals”
embedded within longer streams of “noise” with signals
varying in duration and occurring at different onset
latencies. Using a computational model, we showed that
optimizing performance under such conditions, requires a
leaky (“forgetful”) integration process, the time-scale of

which is matched to the expected signal duration. In
subsequent psychophysical experiments, we tested whether
human observers can indeed control their integration-time
scale, such as to flexibly adapt it to the characteristic signal
duration. The results provide strong support for this idea.
Finally, I will discuss how the evidence-integration
framework can account for data that requires the observers
to report their decision-confidence.

Comparing Perceptual and Preferential
Decision Making
Gilles Dutilh & Jörg Rieskamp*
What are the differences between perceptual and
preferential decisions? In a perceptual decision the decision
maker aims for a correct decision and there is an outside
criterion that determines which decision is correct. In
contrast, in a preferential task the decision maker’s goals are
subjective, so that no correct option exists. Despite these
differences sequential sampling models have successfully
been applied to both types of decisions. In our study we
explore the overlap and the differences between perceptual
and preferential decision making. To do so, we developed
an experimental task that can be presented as either a
perceptual or a preferential task. We show that the classic
speed-accuracy trade-off and effects of stimulus difficulty
are elicited in the perceptual version of this task. In the
preferential version of the task, the stimulus array reflects a
gamble that the participant can choose to play or not. In this
gamble, the black and white dots represent potential gains or
losses. We show that people behave risk and ambiguity
averse in this task. The diffusion model is applied to both
versions of the task for identifying the essential differences
between the two types of decision making. We conclude
that similar evidence accumulation processes could underlie
rather different decision making processes, but that the
model parameters have to be interpreted differently.

Acknowledgments
We like to acknowledge the Australian research council
professorial fellowship awarded to Andrew Heathcote and
the SNSF research grant (SNSF100014_143854/1) awarded
to Gilles Dutilh and Jörg Rieskamp.

References
Brown, S.D., & Heathcote, A. (2008) The simplest complete
model of choice reaction time: Linear ballistic accumulation.
Cognitive Psychology, 57, 153-178.
Diederich, A. (1997). Dynamic stochastic models for decision
making with time constraints. Journal of Mathematical
Psychology, 41, 3, 260 - 274.
Pratte, M. S., Rouder J. N., Morey R. D., & Feng C. (2010).
Exploring the Differences in Distributional Properties Between
Stroop and Simon Effects Using Delta Plots. Attention,
Perception, & Psychophysics, 72, 2013-2025.
White, C.N., Ratcliff, R., & Starns, J.J. (2011). Diffusion models
of the flanker task: Discrete versus gradual attention selection.
Cognitive Psychology, 63, 210-238.

74

