UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Shape categorization in Autism: Does it follow the pattern of typical development?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1v21h9rp

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Amaral, Joseph
Collins, Susan
O'Connor, Shannon
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Shape categorization in Autism: Does it follow the pattern of typical development?
Joseph L. Amaral (amaraljl@mail.uc.edu)
University of Cincinnati Department of Psychology, Mail Location 0376
Cincinnati, OH 45221 USA

Susan Collins (collinsu@mail.uc.edu)
University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 231 Albert Sabin Way
Cincinnati, OH 45267 USA

Shannon O’Connor (oconnosl@mail.uc.edu)
University of Cincinnati, Department of Psychology, Mail Location 0376
Cincinnati, OH 45221 USA

Shealan McAlister (mcalissd@mail.uc.edu)
University of Cincinnati Department of Psychology, Mail Location 0376
Cincinnati, OH 45221 USA

Heidi Kloos (heidi.kloos@uc.edu)
University of Cincinnati Department of Psychology, Mail Location 0376
Cincinnati, OH 45221 USA

Carol D. Luzzi (cluzzi@memorialsb.org)
Memorial Hospital of South Bend, 100 Navarre Place, Suite 5550
South Bend, IN 46601 USA

Abstract
When identifying basic-level categories (e.g., airplane, cow),
typically developing (TD) children commonly use the overall
shape of objects as basis for their judgments. This so-called
shape bias is tied to the size of a child’s vocabulary and as
such might be a way of adaptively organizing an evergrowing vocabulary. The current study looks at whether the
same is true for children with autism spectrum disorder
(ASD). A group of participants with ASD and TD controls
were asked to categorize objects that differed in the amount of
item detail. Results show that vocabulary size was related to
success in categorizing objects for TD participants, but not for
ASD participants. We discuss the degree to which a link
between shape bias and vocabulary size in ASD children may
be an indication of differentiated patterns of adaptation.
Keywords: categorization; language development; autism

The overall shape of items is important when it comes to
learning the words of basic-level categories. Whether we
consider a dog, a car, an airplane, or a cake, the most salient
difference among these items is their overall shape. Indeed,
typically developing (TD) children show a pronounced bias
toward the overall shape of objects (e.g., Diesendruck &
Bloom, 2003). For example, when children are asked to
group novel objects, they overwhelmingly group objects
based on their overall shape rather than other features (e.g.,
texture, color etc.; Samuelson & Smith, 2005). The global
feature of overall shape supersedes details.
While the “shape bias” has been documented repeatedly,
it was found only recently that this bias is linked to the size

of a child’s vocabulary (Pereira & Smith, 2009). In Pereira
& Smith (2009), participants were TD toddlers with varying
vocabulary sizes. They participated in multiple trials of a
task in which they were asked to decide which of three toy
objects (e.g., a car, a plane, a cake) matched the label
offered by the experimenter (e.g., “show me the car”).
Importantly, the degree of detail of the presented objects
differed as a function of trial type. In some trials, objects
were highly detailed, providing information about color and
fine-grain shape. In others trials color was omitted, leaving
details only about the fine-grain shape. And finally, in the
third trial type, the objects were mere shape abstractions,
missing both color and fine-grain shape. Results indicated
that a child’s productive count noun vocabulary (as
compared to receptive vocabulary or general vocabulary)
had a significant effect on performance. While children
could categorize the detailed objects equally well, only
children with larger count-noun vocabularies could identify
the objects represented as shape abstractions.
In a similar vein, research has demonstrated that TD
children with small vocabularies benefit from teaching
props that focus their attention to the overall shape of items
(Son, Smith & Goldstone, 2008). Son and colleagues (2008)
taught children the names of new objects that either had
large amount of detail (e.g., texture, color, fine-grain shape)
or were mere shape abstractions. In this latter case, shape
abstractions approximated the overall shapes of the objects.
Results show that training with shape abstractions yielded

1732

better performance later identifying detailed objects from
the same category than the training with detailed objects.
Focusing children’s attention on the overall shape of objects
by removing irrelevant information promoted better
learning. The ability to see gist, Gestalts, and global features
appears integral to how TD children learn, categorize, and
identify objects.

Detail Focus in ASD
Compared to their TD peers, children with ASD have a
tendency to focus on specific details. This may include
fixation with the parts of objects (e.g., the wheels of a toy
car) or having very limited and particular interests (e.g.,
former Secretaries of the Interior). Indeed, these types of
detail orientation are included in the diagnostic criteria for
ASD (American Psychiatric Association, 2000). Theorists
have argued that the focus on detail may stem from what
they describe as “weak central coherence” (WCC), or a
decreased push toward Gestalts (e.g., Happé & Frith, 2006;
Happé & Booth, 2008). This account of ASD does not
postulate that children with ASD are incapable of
processing global information, but rather that they tend to
gravitate toward details. That is, when absolutely pressed,
children with ASD are able to see Gestalts, but all things
equal, will focus on detail.
The best example of this difference in focus was
established with the classical Navon task, a task in which
stimuli consist of many small letters configured in the
arrangement of a large letter (cf., Navon, 1977). For TD
participants, results show a distinct interference of large
letters on the perception of small letters, both in children
(Plaisted, Swettenham, & Rees, 1999) and in adults (e.g.,
Navon, 1977). In particular, when participants are asked to
focus on small letters, reaction time is longer for trials in
which large and small letters differ than on trials in which
large and small letters match. This global interference is
indetectable in participants with ASD: They perform equally
fast in both letter-mismatch trials and letter-match trials, in
both cases with high accuracy (e.g., Plaisted et al., 1999).
Another example of weak central coherences in ASD
comes from face perception tasks. The identity of a face is
defined not only by its individual parts (e.g., nose, eyes,
mouth), but also by the holistic configuration of these parts,
something that appears to be disrupted when faces are
presented upside down. For TD children, recognition
accuracy decreases when faces are presented upside down,
compared to trials in which faces are presented upright
(Mondloch, Le Grand, & Maurer, 2002). In contrast,
children with ASD do not perform differently as a function
of face orientation (e.g., Tantam, Monaghan, Nicholson, &
Stirling, 1989). Along the same lines, participants with ASD
could classify faces better when local rather than global
features were exaggerated (through the use of a high-pass
vs. low-pass filter; Deruelle, Rondan, Salle-Collemiche,

Bastard-Rosset, & Da Fonséca, 2008). The inverse pattern
of results was obtained for TD children.
Applied to language learning, children with ASD do not
show evidence of the same shape bias found in TD children
(Tek, Jaffery, Fein, & Naigles, 2008). While TD children
demonstrated movement toward categorizing objects by
global shape, ASD children did not. Compared to their TD
peers, children with ASD also often have difficulty
communicating, frequently displaying atypical language
development (American Psychiatric Association, 2000).
However, it is not clear whether the connection seen
between vocabulary size and object categorization style
exists in ASD as it does in TD. The current study aims to
explore this explicitly, potentially providing evidence for
differentiated patterns of adaptive mental functioning.

Rationale for the Current Study
Very little research exists exploring how children with ASD
categorize typical objects and what role shape might play.
For TD children, the development of a bias toward
categorizing objects based on shape may relate to the
emergence of an overall tendency to focus on Gestalts,
which may have an adaptive function. Compared to TD
children, children with ASD tend to focus on details and do
not show a natural shape bias. This may indicate an atypical
pattern of adaptive functioning. To begin exploring this line
of research, the current study aims to compare TD children
and children with ASD who possess similar productive
count-noun vocabularies on a task in which they are asked
to identify objects that afford various degrees of detail.

Method
Participants
Seventy TD children (39 boys and 31 girls) were recruited
from Cincinnati area schools and a local children’s museum
Ages ranged from 14-29 months (M = 20.78, SD = 3.67).
Twenty-five children with ASD (22 boys and 3 girls) were
recruited from Cincinnati area treatment centers and special
needs schools. Their ages ranged from 2 years, 9 months -17
years, 5 months (M = 5 years, 11 months; SD = 3 years, 7
months) Diagnoses of ASD were confirmed through
contacting their pediatricians or therapists after written
consent was obtained from their guardians.

Language Measure
To assess each child’s vocabulary, parents were asked to fill
out the MacAurthur-Bates Communicative Development
Inventories (MCDI; Bates, Dale & Thal, 1995), a survey for
parents that is widely used in the language development
literature. Parental report of language abilities has been
demonstrated to be a valid measure of both TD and ASD
language abilities (Luyster, Lopez & Lord, 2007;
Tomasello, 1994). Parents completed the entire survey, but
for the purposes of the current study, only the sum of items
representing count nouns each child could understand and

1733

say were used for comparison and analysis. It was a child’s
productive count noun vocabulary that Pereira and Smith
(2009) tied to his or her ability to categorize objects based
on global features.

Materials
Stimuli were constructed to represent 12 noun categories
commonly known by young children. These categories
were: horse, cow, pig, fish, bird, butterfly, turtle, car,
airplane, cake, shoe, and hamburger. Categories were
represented by three objects, each from a different condition
based on how much information they afforded the child.
The first object for each category, referred to as the
detailed object, consisted of a toy or model purchased from
toy stores. It contained detailed color, texture, and shape
information (see Figure 1A). The second object, referred to
as the rich-shape object, was constructed using a duplicate
of the detailed object covered with black modeling clay.
This clay served to remove the color and textural
information while maintaining detailed shape (see Figure
1B). The object from the third condition, referred to as the
shape abstraction, was made of Styrofoam. It was designed
to represent the overall shape of the object category without
providing any detailed information (see Figure 1C).
Detailed objects served to confirm that children were able to
identify the object categories. Shape abstractions, in
contrast, provided information about whether children were
able to identify global abstractions of objects. The
intermediate, rich-shape condition served to help illuminate
potential trends in identification abilities.

labeled the object on one of the photos and asked the child
to point to it. Performance did not affect the child’s
eligibility to participate in the rest of the study.
For the main task, the experimenter told participants that
they were going to play with some toys from a toy box. The
experimenter then placed a red wooden tray (60 cm by 30
cm) in front of the child so that it was out of reach. This
served as a platform for stimuli and to help children focus
their attention on the testing space. For each test trial, the
experimenter placed three detailed objects, three rich-shape
objects, or three shape abstractions on the board (see Figure
2 for an example). One object served as a target, the other
two as distractors. The experimenter then asked for the
target (e.g., “Give me horse.”), and pushed the tray within
reaching distance of the child. Clear pointing or picking up
the target were considered correct responses. Regardless of
whether or not the child was correct, neutral feedback was
given. The experimenter recorded responses on a laptop
computer. This procedure was repeated for 12 testing trials.
Children never saw multiple versions of an object category.
For example, if presented with a shape distraction airplane,
children would not see the detailed airplane. Types of object
were balanced across participants.

Figure 2: Example test trial showing a fish, car and pig in
the shape abstraction condition.

Results

Figure 1: Examples of (A) a detailed turtle, (B) a rich-shape
turtle, and (C) a shape abstraction turtle.

Procedure
The procedure for the current study was adapted from
Pereira and Smith (2009). To begin, there were four practice
trials, carried out on a laptop computer, designed to
acclimate the child to the researcher and, for lower
functioning children, to ensure that they were able to follow
directions. During each practice trial, the researcher showed
the child two photographs of easily discriminable, common
nouns (e.g., dog, bunny, train, and kitty). The experimenter

For both TD children and children with ASD, productive
count noun vocabularies ranged from 0-199 words (TD M =
78.17, SD = 66.5; ASD M = 79.59, SD = 66.91). Similar to
previous work by Smith (2003), participants from both the
TD and ASD groups were divided into subgroups based on
their productive count noun vocabulary sizes: Children
whose productive count-noun vocabulary was between 0
and 100 words were classified as being in the LowVocabulary group (the largest vocabulary in this group was
92), and children with a vocabulary between 100 and 200
nouns were classified as being in the High-Vocabulary
groups (the smallest vocabulary in this group was 102). The
vocabulary groups, as well as associated descriptive
statistics are shown in Table 1. Because analyses conducted
utilizing divisions based on mean and median vocabularies
yielded similar results, the above method was utilized to
maintain continuity with previous work.

1734

Table 1: Descriptives of TD and ASD Participants, Mean
Age and Number of Count-Nouns in Productive Vocabulary
Separated by 2 Vocabulary Groups.

Mean Proportion Correct

ASD

Vocabulary Group
< 100 nouns
> 100 nouns
N = 45
N = 25
M age = 19.00 months
M age = 24.00 months
(SD = 2.88)
(SD = 2.60)
M vocab = 34.29
M vocab = 157.16
(SD = 28.46)
(SD = 33.95)
N = 14
N = 11
M age = 5 yrs, 10 months M age = 6 yrs, 1 month
(SD = 4 yrs, 1 month)
(SD = 3 yrs)
M vocab = 30.57
M vocab = 135.55
(SD = 34.48)
(SD = 41.23)

Categorization Performance: TD Sample
The average performance on detailed objects, rich-shape
objects, and shape abstraction for TD children in the Lowand High-Vocabulary groups are shown in Figure 3.
A 2 X 3 (Vocabulary Group X Object Condition) mixed
measures analysis revealed a significant effect of
Vocabulary Group, F(1,68) = 33.31, p < .001, with better
performance for the High- than the Low-Vocabulary Group
(MH = 88.46%, SDH = 34.12%; ML = 60.93%, SDL =
27.25%). There was also a significant effect of Object
Condition, F(1,68) = 48.50, p < .001, with highest
performance for detailed objects (M = 80.71%, SD =
22.99%), followed by rich-shape objects (M = 68.57%, SD
= 27.15%), and followed by shape abstractions (M =
58.21%, SD = 27.16%). While the interaction was not
significant, p > .90, TD children in the Low-Vocabulary
group performed better on detailed object trials than richshape trials, t(48) = 2.07, p <.05, and better on rich-shape
trials than shape abstraction trials, t(48) = 2.08, p < .05. In
contrast, performance for TD children in the HighVocabulary group did not differ between rich-shape and
shape abstraction trials, t(48) = 1.31 (though there was a
difference between detailed object and rich-shape trials,
t(48) = 2.07, p <.05).

1
0.75
0.5
0.25
0
< 100
> 100
Vocabulary Size
Shape Abstraction
Rich-Shape
Detail

Figure 3: Mean proportion correct responses across object
conditions for TD children as a function of vocabulary size.

Categorization Performance: Comparing Samples
Categorization performance was compared between
diagnostic groups for both the Low- and High-Vocabulary
groups. For children in the Low-Vocabulary groups,
performance did not differ between children with ASD and
TD children on detailed object and rich-shape trials, ps >
.37. However, children with ASD from the Low-Vocabulary
group performed significantly better than TD children with
similar vocabularies on shape abstraction trials, t(57) = 2.43,
p < .02. Children with ASD from the High-Vocabulary
group outperformed TD children on detailed object trials,
t(24) = 2.14, p < .05, but differences were not significant for
rich-shape or shape abstraction trials, ps > .33.

Categorization Performance: ASD Sample
The average performance of children with ASD from the
Low- and High-Vocabulary groups across the detailed, richshape, and shape abstraction trials is illustrated in Figure 4.
As was done with the TD sample, a 2 X 3 (Vocabulary
Group X Object Condition) mixed measures analysis was
conducted. Surprisingly, there was only a marginal effect of
Vocabulary Group, F(1, 23) = 3.18, p = .063 (MH = 89.39%,
SDH =25.79%; ML = 72.02%, SDL = 31.33%). However, as
was found with TD children, there was a significant effect
of Object Condition, F(1, 23) = 7.07, p < .02. Across
vocabulary groups, performance was best for detailed
objects (M = 88.00%, SD = 22.96%), second best for rich-

1735

Mean Proportion Correct

TD

shape objects (M = 78.00%, SD = 32.33%), and lowest for
shape abstractions (M = 73.00%, SD = 32.21%).
Importantly, the interaction was not significant, p > .50.
Looking at simple effects within vocabulary groups,
performance did not differ between detailed object and richshape trials, ps > .30. There was also no difference between
rich-shape and shape abstraction trials, ps > .30.

1
0.75
0.5
0.25
0
< 100
> 100
Vocabulary Size
Shape Abstraction
Rich-Shape
Detail

Figure 4: Mean proportion correct responses across object
conditions for children with ASD as a function of
vocabulary size.

Discussion
Results provide evidence for a difference in the relation
between count-noun vocabulary sizes and categorization
abilities in TD children versus children with ASD. In
particular, while there was a characteristic difference
between TD children in the Low- versus High- Vocabulary
group, this difference disappeared for ASD Children. Note
that the TD finding is not as robust as previously found
(e.g., Pereira & Smith, 2009; Smith, 2003). Nevertheless,
TD children in the High-Vocabulary group performed
equally well in the rich-shape and shape abstraction
conditions, whereas TD children in the Low-Vocabulary
group performed differently across all three object
conditions.
In contrast, children with ASD from both vocabulary
groups demonstrated similar performance patterns across
conditions. When performance patterns between diagnostic
groups were compared directly, children with ASD from the
Low-Vocabulary group performed better than their TD
peers on shape abstraction trials, and equally well in other
trials. Performance across the rich-shape and shape
abstraction trial types were equivocal for TD children and
children with ASD from the High-Vocabulary groups.
Before interpreting how the current results relate to global
processing and contextual changes, the current study makes
several assumptions. The first assumption is that vocabulary
size is a contextual factor. The second assumption is that
categorization of shape abstraction objects translates to the
ability to process Gestalt information. The third assumption
is that Gestalt processing is an adaptive function that arises
when contexts make tasks difficult (in this case, as
vocabulary size increases). Under these assumptions, the
fact that children with ASD did not demonstrate stratified
performance seen in TD children may suggest that they do
not adapt to contextual changes in the same manner. The
generally high performance for children with ASD across
object conditions regardless of vocabulary size is in line
with the argument that the focus on detail commonly seen in
ASD does not equate to an inability to process global
information, but rather a preference for local features.
Could alternate claims explain the findings? Most
prominent is the issue of how vocabulary was measured.
The MCDI only allows parents to indicate words that they
believe their child does not understand, words that they
understand, but cannot say, and words that they understand
and say. Many children with ASD use alternate forms of
communication, such as sign language or exchange cards.
Thus, the MCDI may not have been an accurate measure of
each child’s true productive count-noun vocabulary.
Furthermore, the MCDI only lists words that TD children
tend to learn in the first few years of life. Children with
ASD who learn language later in life may not learn the same
first words. Thus, it is possible that a greater proportion of
their produced words were not captured by this measure.
Given the issues with the MCDI, it is possible that a more

detailed assessment of language, including receptive
vocabulary, could influence results.
Other issues that could affect the interpretation of results
include the current sample size of children with ASD and
the methods used to confirm diagnoses. Only 25 children
with ASD were included in the final sample. The current
study also based diagnosis on physician confirmation, rather
than using standardized measures, such as the Autism
Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS; Lord et al.,
2000). Though best diagnostic practice suggests the use of
standardized measures (Ozonoff, Goodlin-Jones, &
Solomon, 2005), the individual practices of clinicians may
vary.
Nevertheless, even given the alternate explanations for the
results of this study, there is evidence from previous
research which supports the current claims. First, previous
work that explored how children with ASD see Gestalts
demonstrated that they have the ability to identify both
global and local features (e.g., Ozonof et al., 1994; Plaisted
et al., 1999). Second, there is an indication that the shape
bias in children with ASD is different from the shape bias of
TD children (Tek et al., 2008). Combined, these studies
suggest that there is also a weakened connection between
global processing and vocabulary. In the current study,
children with ASD tended to perform well on shape
abstraction objects regardless of their vocabulary size,
indicating that they were, in general, able to categorize
objects based on their overall shape.
Research involving children with language delays, socalled late talkers, may also provide evidence for current
claims. In similar object categorization tasks, they
demonstrate performance patterns are similar to both TD
children and children with ASD. Like TD children, late
talkers show a developmental trend in their ability to
categorize objects by shape (Jones & Smith, 2005).
Specifically, Jones and Smith (2005) found that neither a
late talker‘s receptive count-noun vocabulary nor age was
significantly related to their ability to categorize objects
based on overall shape. Productive count-noun vocabulary
size, instead, was related. However, like children with ASD,
they tend to not show an innate tendency to categorize
objects by shape, and thus have an atypical shape bias
(Jones, 2003). Though this provides evidence that in another
clinical group, productive count-noun vocabulary size
relates to categorization abilities, it does not address the
issue of the accuracy of the MCDI for children with ASD.
The current study is a preliminary step towards better
understanding the relationship between vocabulary size and
object categorization style in children with ASD. It appears
that though they may not have a bias toward global features,
even those with poor verbal language skills have the
capacity to categorize objects based on overall shape. This
may have important clinical implications.

1736

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Cathy Walker, Heather
Baker and Lori Hood for their help on this project.

References
American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed., text rev).
Washington, DC: Author.
Bates, E., Dale, P. S., & Thal, D. (1995). Individual
differences and their implications for theories of language
development. In P. Fletcher & B. MacWhinney (Eds.) The
handbook of child language. Oxford, UK: Basil
Blackwell.
Deruelle, C., Rondan, C., Salle-Collemiche, X., BastardRosset, D., & Da Fonséca, D. (2008). Attention to lowand high- spatial frequencies in categorizing facial
identities, emotions and gender in children with autism.
Brain and Cognition, 66, 115-123.
Driesendruck, G. & Bloom, P. (2003). How specific is the
shape bias? Child Development, 74(1), 168-178.
Happé, F. G. E. & Booth, R. D. L. (2008). The power of the
positive: Revisiting weak coherence in autism spectrum
disorders. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 61, 50-63.
Happé, F., & Frith, U. (2006). The weak coherence account:
Detail-focused cognitive style in autism spectrum
disorders. Journal of Autism and Developmental
Disorders, 36(1), 5-25.
Jones, S. (2003). Late talkers show no shape bias in a novel
name extension task. Developmental Science, 6(5), 477483.
Jones, S. & Smith, L. B. (2005). Object name learning and
object perception: A deficit in late talkers. The Journal of
Child Language, 32, 223-240.
Lord, C., Risi, S., Lambrecht, L., Cook, E. H., Jr.,
Leventhal, B. L., DiLavore, P. C., Pickles, A., & Rutter,
M. (2000). The autism diagnostic observation schedulegeneric: A standard measure of social and communicative
deficits associated with the spectrum of autism. Journal of
Autism Developmental Disorders, 30, 205–223.
Luyster, R., Lopez, K., & Lord, C. (2007). Characterizing
communicative development in children referred for
autism spectrum disorders using the MacArthur-Bates
Communicative Development Inventory (CDI). Journal
of Child Language, 34, 623-654.
Mondloch, C.J., Le Grand, R., & Maurer, D. (2002).
Configural face processing develops more slowly than
featural face processing. Perception, 31, 553-566.
Navon, D. (1977). Forest before trees: The precedence of
global features in visual perception. Cognitive
Psychology, 9, 353–383.
Newport, E. (1990). Maturational constraints on language
learning. Cognitive Science, 14(1), 11-28.
Ozonoff, S., Goodlin-Jones, B. L., & Solomon, S. (2005).
Evidence-based assessment of autism spectrum disorders
in children and adolescents. Journal of Clinical Child and
Adolescent Psychology, 34(3), 523-540.

Pereira, A. & Smith, L. B. (2009). Developmental changes
in visual object recognition between 18 and 24 months of
age. Developmental Science, 12(1), 67-83.
Plaisted, K., Swettenham, J., & Rees, L. (1999). Children
with autism show local precedence in a divided attention
task and global precedence in a selective attention task.
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry and Allied
Disciplines, 40(5), 733–742.
Samuelson, L. K. & Smith, L. B. (2005) They call it like
they see it: Spontaneous naming and attention to shape.
Developmental Science, 8 (2), 182-198.
Smith, L. B. (2003) Learning to recognize objects.
Psychological Science, 14 (3), 244-250.
Son, J., Smith, L. B. & Goldstone, R. (2008). Simplicity and
Generalization: Short-cutting Abstraction in Children's
Object Categorizations. Cognition, 108 (3), 626-638.
Tantam, D., Monaghan, L., Nicholson, H., & Stirling, J.
(1989). Autistic children’s ability to interpret faces: A
research note. Journal of Child Psychology and
Psychiatry, and Allied Disciplines, 30(4), 623-630.
Tek, S., Jaffery, G., Fein, D., & Naigles, L.R. (2008). Do
children with autism spectrum disorders show a shape
bias in word learning? Autism Research, 1(4), 208-222.
Tomasello, M. M. (1994). The instrument is great, but
measuring comprehension is still a problem. Monographs
of the Society for Research in Child Development, 59(5),
174-179.

1737

