UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Social Learning in Complex Networks: The Role of Building Blocks and Environmental
Change

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8081t772

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Barkoczi, Daniel
Galesic, Mirta

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Social Learning in Complex Networks:
The Role of Building Blocks and Environmental Change
Daniel Barkoczi (barkoczi@mpib-berlin.mpg.de)

Center for Adaptive Behavior and Cognition, Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Lentzeallee 94,
14195, Berlin, Germany

Mirta Galesic (galesic@mpib-berlin.mpg.de)

Center for Adaptive Behavior and Cognition, Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Lentzeallee 94,
14195, Berlin, Germany

Abstract
We explore the interaction between information sampling and
the structure of the social environment in the case of two
prominent social learning strategies: imitate-the-best and
imitate-the-majority. In a series of simulations a group of
agents made repeated choices between options. We varied the
building blocks of the strategies used by agents, the structure
of the social network and characteristics of the task
environment. A key factor influencing strategies’ success is
the speed with which they are able to respond to
environmental change. In general, imitate-the-best provides a
faster response compared to imitate-the-majority and larger
samples help the former but hurt the latter. Less efficient
networks decrease the performance of both, but are more
detrimental for imitate-the-majority. Our findings highlight
the role of sampling and social structure in the study of social
learning, an area not sufficiently explored before.
Keywords: Social learning; information sampling; social
networks; simple heuristics; simulation; decision-making

Introduction
Humans and other animals obtain information via social
learning. This is an efficient way to save the time and effort
involved in individual trial-and-error learning and is known
to underlie our capacity for culture. Despite the diverse list
of empirical evidence for its use in the wild (Laland, 2004;
McElreath, et al. 2008), theoretical models exploring the
adaptive nature of social learning strategies lack sufficient
detail to explain when we should expect to observe them.
Most models study unstructured groups and focus only on
the decision phase of implementing a strategy (e.g. imitatethe-majority), leaving open an important dimension
affecting strategy performance: the interaction between
information sampling and the structure of the social
environment. The present study is an attempt towards filling
this gap in the literature.
Social learning is often based on limited samples of the
social environment. Most communities consist of sizable
groups where an individual cannot survey all other group
members within reasonable time before making a decision.
Consider migrating animals deciding between multiple
directions, individuals in an organization trying to jointly
1

solve a problem or stock traders trying to predict the best
investment option (Couzin, Krause, Franks & Levin, 2005;
March, 1991). In such situations the way information about
options is sampled from the social environment is likely to
be an important aspect of any strategy. The structure of the
social network in which social learning takes place can then
in turn affect the options available for sampling. Previous
work has shown that different network structures and their
efficiency can affect the diversity of options in the
population and the time it takes groups to converge on a
solution (Lazer & Friedman, 2007; Mason & Watts, 2012).
How does the performance of different strategies depend on
the way they sample information and on the social
environment in which they are embedded?
To address this question we study two representative
social learning strategies: imitate-the-best and imitate-themajority (Boyd & Richerson, 1985; Laland, 2004) and
model them as decision heuristics that consist of different
building blocks: search, stop and decision rules (Gigerenzer,
Todd & the ABC Research Group, 1999). By explicitly
modeling these three phases we are able to test their relative
contribution to strategy success in different social
environmental structures.
Overall, a general characteristic shared by many social
learning strategies, including those we study here, is that
they alter the structure of the social environment by
increasing the frequency of the correct option (i.e. the one
with the highest payoff) and simultaneously decreasing the
diversity of options in the group. This is a result of their bias
towards specific sources (best member, majority) and their
selectiveness (e.g. copy only if payoff better)1 . This property
has been extensively studied in the context of biased cultural
transmission (Boyd & Richerson, 1985) and suggests a key
factor influencing strategy success in a changing
environment: the speed with which they increase the
frequency of the correct option in the group and, therefore,
their ability to respond to environmental change. Our goal
here is to show how this speed can be influenced by the
strategy’s building blocks (their sampling and decision rule)
and by the structure and efficiency of the social network.
In what follows we derive specific expectations, based on
previous literature and preliminary analytic calculations,

One can relax this assumption if other selective forces (e.g. natural selection) are at work.

1821

about the effects of different building blocks and network
structures on imitate-the-best and imitate-the-majority.
We consider a hypothetical situation where a group of
agents make repeated choices between two options (one
correct, the other incorrect). Whenever the environment
changes, the previously correct option becomes incorrect
and vice versa.
Effects of decision rules. In general, as long as the correct
option is used by the majority of agents in a group and the
environment is stable, both imitate-the-best and imitate-themajority will converge to the correct option. However,
under the assumption that the best member can be reliably
identified within the sample, the imitate-the-best will always
converge faster because it requires only a single agent with
the correct solution to reach a decision, whereas imitate-themajority requires at least two out of three. As soon as the
environment changes, the correct option will be in minority.
In this case, imitate-the-best will still be able to find it,
however, as predicted by the Condorcet Jury Theorem
(CJT), imitate-the-majority will never find the correct
option because it requires that the proportion of agents with
the correct option be higher than 0.5 (e.g. Grofman, Owen
& Feld, 1983).
Effects of information sampling and sample size. The
CJT prediction may no longer hold when sampling is
involved. Even if the correct option is in minority, imitatethe-majority may still be able to find it. Sampling as
opposed to group-level aggregation can create situations
where the correct option is more frequent in one’s sample
than overall in the group. When agents with such samples
choose the correct option, this further increases the correct
option’s frequency in the group as a result of the
environment altering feature of social learning discussed
earlier (Boyd & Richerson, 1985). Smaller samples are
more likely to produce such situations, both because they
are more likely to be biased and because they require fewer
agents with the correct option in order to reach a decision.
This suggests two situations where smaller as opposed to
larger samples should benefit imitate-the-majority. First,
whenever the group is converging towards the incorrect
option, smaller samples will delay this process and keep the
payoffs of the group higher for the longer time. Second,
when the correct option is in minority, smaller samples will
make it more likely to accidentally have a majority of agents
with the correct option. In contrast, for imitate-the-best
larger samples are always more advantageous, because they
increase the chance of finding at least one agent with the
correct solution.
Effects of network structure. Previous studies have
demonstrated that higher network efficiency increases the
speed with which information spreads and consequently
decreases the diversity of information in the group. More
efficient networks should, therefore, favor all strategies.
Network efficiency depends on a variety of factors (Mason
& Watts, 2012); here we focus on clustering and average
path length. As networks become more clustered and
average path lengths increase, their efficiency decreases,
and they maintain diversity for a longer time (Lazer &
2

Friedman, 2007). We hypothesize that in such networks, the
speed with which different strategies can find the correct
option will become more important. As a result, the
difference in speed between imitate-the-best and imitatethe-majority should become even larger. More clustered
networks could have an additional effect by enabling the
occurrence of relatively homogeneous clusters using the
same option. If this option is incorrect, imitate-the-majority
using a sample within that cluster will not be able to find the
correct option. In contrast, imitate-the-best should be less
affected by diversity of information as it only requires a
single agent with the correct option.

Method
Overview
We simulated a situation where multiple agents (N=100) had
to make repeated choices between different number of
options by acquiring information from their contacts. The
choices they made directly affected their payoffs.
We created three social networks differing in their
efficiency (as measured by clustering and average path
length). Each agent had the same number of contacts in the
network (d=10) and was assigned one of four decision
strategies. Each strategy sampled randomly among one’s
contacts but differed in its stopping and decision rule. The
agents’ task was to make repeated choices between different
number of options (2 or 10) at each time-step using their
decision strategy. The environment could change on each
time-step (ti) with some probability (pc) affecting the payoff
of options at the next time-step (ti+1). The simulation was
run for t=1000 time-steps and each condition was replicated
30 times2. To evaluate the performance of different
strategies we tested them both in isolation and in an
evolutionary competition where better performing strategies
could replace worse performing ones. More specifically the
simulation consisted of the following steps:
1) at t=0 agents were placed in the networks and randomly
assigned a decision strategy and an initial option
2) from t=1 onwards, agents sampled the options and
corresponding payoffs at ti-1 of their contacts
3) made a choice between sampled options based on their
decision rules
4) only in the evolutionary competition: switched strategies
with a small probability (introduced from t=50)
5) the environment changed with a certain probability,
leading to a different option with the highest payoff
6) payoffs for the choice from step 3) were determined
Note that there is a lag between the information acquired
from contacts and the realization of the agent’s payoff in the
sense that information is collected before environmental
change occurs, thus allowing for the possibility of acquiring

Sensitivity analyses revealed that running the simulation for 2000 time-steps and 60 replications produced identical results.

1822

outdated information when the environment changes to a
new state.

Decision strategies
We studied four decision strategies that differed in their
building blocks (see Table 1). For each strategy we assumed
that agents sample among their contacts randomly, and stop
after collecting either a small (n=4) or a large sample
(n=10)3 . They then decide to try an option that is either
endorsed by the majority of the sample contacts or by the
agent that had the best payoff in the last time-step. In all
cases agents only switch to a new option if that option’s
payoff was higher at the previous time-step than the option
they are currently using. In situations where these two
payoffs are equal or when the majority rule results in ties,
agents chose randomly.
Table 1: Decision strategies
Sampling rule
random
sample of
contacts

Stopping rule

Decision rule

n=4
n=10
n=4
n=10

imitate-the-majority
imitate-the-majority
imitate-the-best
imitate-the-best

In order to keep track of a changing environment any
social learning strategy requires that there is some form of
individual learning generating novel options, therefore, we
allowed new information to enter the population through
copying error, a parameter we fixed at pe=0.01. That is, on
each step there was a 0.01 chance that the agent does not
consider the option used by its contacts, but a randomly
selected option, however, agents only switched to this
option if it had a higher payoff at the previous time-step.
This lies in contrast with other studies which allowed new
information to enter the group by assuming that whenever
other agents’ payoffs are lower or equal, the agent does not
stick with its own option but explores other options
randomly (Lazer & Friedman, 2007; Mason & Watts, 2012).
These studies, therefore, allowed for a higher amount of
innovation than our model. In this way we explore the
performance of social learning strategies when aided with
only a minimum amount of individual learning.

Decision environment

10 respectively. At any given time, only one option had the
highest payoff. On the first time-step agents were assigned
options randomly. In conditions with 2 options, we varied
the initial proportion of the correct option in the group
(pinit=0.2, 0.5 or 0.7). For 10 options each option had the
same initial proportion. For the second factor we assumed
that the payoffs of options can change on each time-step
with probability pc=0.001, 0.01, 0.1 or 0.4 reflecting a
discreet scale between slow and fast rates of change. We ran
all possible combinations of environmental change on all 3
network structures described below.

Network structure
Three different networks were created, ranging from most
efficient to least efficient as measured by two standard
indicators in the network science literature (Mason & Watts,
2012): clustering coefficient and average path length. The
clustering coefficient measures the extent to which the
network is dominated by isolated cliques, which from a
communication perspective decreases the efficiency of a
network by making it harder for information to spread the
higher the clustering. Consider an example where small
groups of tightly connected agents exchange information but
because groups are isolated from other groups information
spreads much slower between these small units.
Another measure of efficiency is average path length, the
average number of steps it takes to get from any agent to
any other agent in the network. The shorter the path length
the more easily information can spread. The efficiency of a
network is known to affect how quickly information spreads
from one part to another, however, it can also enable
maladaptive information to spread more rapidly as in the
case of panics following flu pandemics or stock bubbles.
Many real-world networks are known to have both high
clustering and low average path lengths thus representing an
intermediate level of efficiency. These small-world
networks (Watts & Strogatz, 1998) can be mimicked by
performing random re-wirings on edges of a lattice. In line
with previous studies (e.g. Schwenk & Reimer, 2007), we
started by first generating a random directed lattice and then
rewired it with a 0.1 probability to obtain a small-world
network4. In addition we created a fully-connected network
absent of any structural properties to be able to compare to
previous studies that focused on unstructured groups (see
Table 2). All three networks had a fixed degree of 10 and a
total of 100 nodes (d=10, n=100).

Two factors affecting the decision environment were varied
in different simulations: a) the number of options available
and b) the rate of environmental change. To manipulate the
first factor we assumed that agents choose either between 2
or 10 options with payoffs ranging from 1 to 2 and from 1 to
3

Sensitivity analyses with sample sizes n=3 and n=9 produced similar results and we do not report them here.

4

Other networks with lower values of rewiring produce similar results, therefore, we omit them.

1823

Table 2: Types of networks used in the simulation
(n=100, d=10)
Clustering
coefficient
Lattice
0.67
Small world 0.31
Fully
1
connected
Network

Average
path length
5.55
2.35

Rewiring
probability
p=0
p=0.1

1

p=1

competition averaged across networks for the same
environmental condition. Overall, imitate-the-best
consistently outperforms imitate-the-majority both in
homogeneous and heterogeneous groups. This result holds
in all network structures and in environmental conditions.

Evolutionary competition
In order to properly evaluate each strategy we look at
their performance both in isolation (in homogeneous groups
using the same strategy) and by directly testing different
strategies against each other (heterogeneous groups) in an
evolutionary competition. In the former we are interested in
isolating the factors contributing to the success of different
strategies, whereas in the latter we wish to evaluate them in
a competitive setting where the performance of a strategy
can depend on the strategies used by other agents in the
group. Evolutionary competitions are a popular method in
the study of social learning (e.g. Rendell, et al. 2010) where
the strategy accumulating the highest payoff has the best
chance of reproducing and spreading in the population,
while the worst performing strategies die out. The
prevalence of a strategy is, therefore, a clear-cut measure of
its success in a given environment.
There are many ways to implement an evolutionary
dynamic. Here we chose the ‘imitation process’ (Nowak,
2006) in order to reflect a plausible real-life scenario. We
assumed that on each time-step, randomly selected agents
change their strategies to one of their contacts’ strategy with
a probability proportional to the cumulative payoff of that
contact. If none of the contacts has a higher payoff, the
agent keeps its strategy, and in situations of equal payoff
random choice is implemented. We fixed the parameter
specifying the probability of strategy change to ps=0.02 thus
expecting 2 agents switching strategies on each time-step.
Evolutionary dynamics were introduced from the t=50 timestep to allow for a burn-in period.

Simulation results

Figure 1. Panel A. Performance of strategies observed in
isolation. Panel B. Frequency of strategies in the
evolutionary competition. Results are shown for
environmental conditions pc=0.001 and pinit=0.5, averaged
across networks.

Effects of information sampling

Figure 1A shows the overall performance of the four
different decision strategies observed in isolation, measured
by their rate of environmental tracking (percentage of agents
using the correct option on each time-step). We show the
results for 2 options, probability of environmental change
pc=0.001, and initial probability of correct option pinit=0.5,
averaged across networks5. To make the main results easier
to view, we focus on the time-steps before and after
environmental change occurring at t=100. Figure 1B shows
the frequency of different strategies in the evolutionary

From Figure 1A we can see the number of time-steps it
takes groups using each of the strategies to converge on the
correct solution after the environment has changed. As
expected, imitate-the-best benefits somewhat from larger
samples, however, even its small sample version
outperforms both versions of imitate-the-majority. The
opposite is the case for imitate-the-majority, which is hurt
by larger samples and actually performs better when it
samples fewer people. This result highlights that speed with
which different strategies can recover after environmental

5

Results for 10 options and other rates of environmental change and initial probability of correct option do not change the main
conclusions and we do not present them here.

1824

change is crucial to their success and demonstrates that
different sampling regimes should be adopted depending on
the decision rule used.
As mentioned before, without sampling, imitate-themajority will converge on an incorrect option whenever the
proportion of agents using the correct option is smaller than
0.5. As expected, these results do not hold when decisions
are based on sampled information as opposed to overall
group aggregation. As visible in Figure 1A, imitate-themajority is able to find the correct option even when the
proportion of agents using it falls under 0.5. As a sensitivity
check, we reran our simulations with pinit=0.2 and copying
error of pe=0, allowing no new information to enter the
population. Even then, imitate-the-majority can still
converge on the correct option, in particular when it uses
small samples.

Effects of network structure
Overall, we find that regardless of strategy, more efficient
networks are faster at spreading information and that this
helps groups in all conditions. However, we observe an
effect for network structure on the relative difference
between strategies. Figure 2 shows that the difference
between strategies is least pronounced in the fully connected
network absent of any structural properties, however, as
networks become more structured (thereby decreasing the
efficiency and speed with which information flows), the
difference between imitate-the-best and imitate-the-majority
becomes more pronounced.
The effect of network structure is especially visible
immediately after environmental change. In networks with
high clustering and long path lengths such as lattice,
relatively isolated agents may form homogeneous groups
possessing the same information. In these situations,
imitate-the-majority has problems finding the correct option.
The larger the sample, the more prone is this strategy to get
stuck. As expected, the performance of imitate-the-best is
less affected by network structure.

Discussion

Figure 2. Performance of different strategies in the three
network structures. Results are shown for environmental
conditions pc=0.001 and pinit=0.5

Our goal was to study how information sampling and the
structure of the social environment affect the performance
of two representative social learning strategies: imitate-thebest and imitate-the-majority. We modeled social learning
strategies as heuristics consisting of different building
blocks and embedded them in three social networks in a task
involving repeated choices between multiple options.
Overall, we find that imitate-the-best consistently
outperforms imitate-the-majority and our results suggest
that the reason underlying this finding is the speed with
which different strategies are able to respond to
environmental change. This speed is affected both by
different building blocks and the structure of the social
environment. Imitate-the-best is always faster at finding the
good option because its decision rule requires fewer correct
instances in the sample and larger samples are always
beneficial. In contrast, sample size has a counterintuitive
effect on imitate-the-majority with smaller samples
increasing the likelihood and thereby the speed of finding
the correct option. The relative difference between imitatethe-best and imitate-the-majority, however, is moderated by
network structure. More efficient networks (those with
lower clustering and shorter path lengths) benefit all
strategies and decrease the difference between them while
less efficient networks (with more clusters and longer path
lengths) increase the difference by having a worse impact on
imitate-the-majority.
Information sampling as opposed to group-level
aggregation has an additional effect on imitate-the-majority:
it can still converge on the correct option, even if less than
50% of the group is using it. This result lies in contrast to
the predictions of the Condorcet and related Theorems on
full group-level aggregation of information in a single trial
(Grofman, Owen & Feld, 1983).

1825

Both imitate-the-best and imitate-the-majority have been
extensively studied both theoretically and empirically (e.g.
Conradt & Roper, 2003; Garcia-Retamero, Takezawa &
Gigerenzer, 2006; Hastie & Kameda, 2005; Katsikopoulos
& King, 2010; McElreath, Wallin & Fasolo, 2012). Much of
this work has studied small and unstructured groups and
focused exclusively on the decision-phase of implementing
these strategies (but see Pachur, Rieskamp & Hertwig, 2005;
Schwenk & Reimer, 2007 for exceptions in other contexts).
We believe that this leaves many important details affecting
strategy success unaddressed and can be one reason why
some studies reach different conclusions. The present study
is a first step towards developing a more general framework
for capturing the interactions between the building blocks of
social heuristics and the structure of the social and task
environments that they exploit. We propose that their study
can bring novel insight into our understanding of social
phenomena including the evolution of different social
learning rules, the diffusion of innovations in cultures or the
strategy selection process in social domains.

Acknowledgments
The authors wish to thank Konstantinos Katsikopoulos and
Henrik Olsson for helpful comments on an earlier draft and
the Max Planck Institute for Human Development for
financial support.

References
Boyd, R., & Richerson, P. J. (1985). Culture and the
Evolutionary Process. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Conradt, & Roper, T. J. (2003). Group decision-making in
animals. Nature, 421, 155-158.
Couzin, I. D., Krause, J., Franks, N. R. & Levin, S. A.
(2005). Effective leadership and decision-making in
animal groups on the move. Nature, 433, 513-516.
Garcia-Retamero, R., Takezawa, M. & Gigerenzer, G.
(2006). How to learn good cue orders: When social
learning benefits simple heuristics. In R. Sun & N.
Mikaye (Eds.), Proceedings of the 28th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
1352-1357). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum
Gigerenzer, G., Todd, P. M., & the ABC Research Group.
(1999). Simple Heuristics that Make Us Smart. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Grofman, B., Owen, G. & Feld, S. C. (1983). Thirteen
theorems in search of the truth. Theory and Decision, 15,
261-278.
Hastie, R. & Kameda, T. (2005). The Robust Beauty of
Majority Rules in Group Decisions. Psychological
Review, 112, 494-508.
Katsikopoulos, K. & King, A. J. (2010). Swarm Intelligence
in Animal Groups: When Can a Collective Out-Perform
an Expert? Plos ONE, 5, 1-5.
Laland, K. N. (2004). Social learning strategies. Learning &
Behavior, 32, 4-14.

Lazer, D., & Friedman, A., (2007). The Network Structure
of Exploration and Exploitation. Administrative Science
Quarterly, 52, 667-694.
Mason, W. A., & Watts, D. J. (2012). Collaborative learning
in networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 109, 764-769.
March, J. G. (1991). Exploration and Exploitation in
Organizational Learning. Organizational Science, 2,
71-78.
McElreath, R., Bell, A. V., Efferson, C., Lubell, M.,
Richerson, P. J. & Waring, T. (2008). Beyond existence
and aiming outside the laboratory: estimating frequencydependent and pay-off-biased social learning strategies.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 363,
3515-3528.
McElreath, R., Wallin, A. & Fasolo, B. (2012). The
Evolutionary Rationality of Social Learning. In R.
Hertwig & U. Hoffrage & the ABC Research Group
(Eds.), Simple Heuristics in a Social World. New York:
OUP.
Nowak, M. A. (2006). Evolutionary Dynamics: Exploring
the Equations of Life. Harvard University Press.
Pachur, T., Rieskamp, J., & Hertwig, R. (2005). The social
circle heuristic: Fast and frugal decisions based on small
samples. In K. Forbus, D. Gentner, & T. Reiger. (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 26th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 1077-1082). Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Rendell, L., Boyd, R., Cownden, D., Enquist, M., Eriksson,
K., Feldman, M. W., Fogarty, L., Ghiranda, S., Lillicrap,
T., & Laland, K. N. (2010). Why Copy Others? Insights
fomr the Social Learning Strategies Tournament. Science,
328, 208-213.
Schwenk, G., & Reimer, T. (2007). Social Influence and
Bounded Rationality: Heuristic Decision Making in
Complex Networks. In D. S. McNamara & G. Trafton.
(Eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
1497-1484). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Watts, D. J., & Strogatz, S. H. (1998). Collective dynamics
of ‘small-world’ networks. Nature, 393, 409-410.

1826

