UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Social and Environmental Contributors to Infant Word Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6192j64f

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Bergelson, Elika
Swingley, Daniel

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Social and Environmental Contributors to Infant Word Learning
Elika Bergelson (elikab@psych.upenn.edu)

Department of Psychology, 3401 Walnut St, 400a
Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA
Daniel Swingley (swingley@psych.upenn.edu)

Department of Psychology, 3401 Walnut St, 400a
Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA
Abstract

and have been the focus of a great deal of research,
primarily among children older than the infants we
consider here. Studies show that each of the factors we
examine is very likely to be important at some point in
development. What we begin to address here is the extent
to which they might explain the developmental course we
have found in infants’ word understanding.

Infants demonstrate comprehension of early nouns (e.g.
“hand”) around six months, and comprehension of early
non-nouns (e.g. “eat”) around 10 months. In two
experiments, we explore the reasons for this lag. Expt. 1 is
a gaze-following study, the results of which suggest an
improvement in point-following around ten months, and
reveal correlations between pointing and both overall and
non-noun vocabulary. Expt. 2 is a set of corpus analyses,
the results of which suggest that word frequency does not
explain the difference between noun and non-noun age of
acquisition, while suggesting that the co-presence of words
and their referents may play an important role. The results
of these experiments contribute to our understanding of
word-learning across word classes, and lend support to
environmental and social factors as having an impact on the
trajectory of word learning in the first year of life.

Frequency
The Frequency hypothesis maintains that nouns are more
frequent than non-nouns in infants’ early experience, and
that this leads to their being learned earlier, once a
sufficient mass of exposure has occurred. Frequency may
aid learning because learning is incremental over
exposures, or because with more tokens the likelihood of
a very useful exposure instance increases (Medina,
Snedeker, Trueswell, & Gleitman, 2011).
This hypothesis has several forms. The simplest is that
infants just hear the non-nouns less often than the nouns.
A more specific hypothesis is that infants hear nouns in
isolation (in one-word utterances) more often than nonnouns, which might lead to earlier learning of nouns
(Brent & Siskind, 2001). We can evaluate whether
frequency differences might explain infants’ relatively
late learning of non-nouns by measuring whether there are
corpus frequency differences between the tested nouns
and non-nouns.

Keywords: language acquisition; word learning; cognitive
development; infancy; psycholinguistics; corpus analysis

Introduction
Infants learn words by taking in the environment around
them and, over time, creating links between bits of
language and bits of the world, with abstraction at both
ends. Not all words are learned with equal ease, a
phenomenon having the potential to help explain how
word learning works. Diary studies and databases of
parental
checklists
show
that
infants’
early
comprehension and production vocabularies, while quite
broad, numerically favor nominals over action words,
modifiers, and social expressions (Benedict, 1979; Dale &
Fenson, 1996).
These findings agree with comprehension studies in
which infants who were asked to look at referents of
nouns like “apple” and “hand” succeeded by 6 months of
age (Bergelson & Swingley, 2012a; Tincoff & Jusczyk,
1999, 2012), but did not reliably show understanding of
non-nouns like ‘uh-oh’ and ‘eat’ until around 10 months
of age (Bergelson & Swingley, 2013; See table 1).
The reasons for this developmental lag could rest within
the child, within the nature of the linguistic elements, or
within the environment. Here, we examine several broad
hypotheses about the source of this lag, which we
consider in light of new behavioral research (Expt.1) and
corpus analyses (Expt. 2). These hypotheses are not new,

Environment
The Environment hypothesis we consider here maintains
that nouns and non-nouns differ in the degree to which the
contexts of their typical use support learning, where
“support” refers to environmental conditions that prior
research suggests are relevant to word learning. For
example, non-nouns may appear in a broader number of
situation-settings (e.g. playing, eating) than nouns, or may
involve different amounts of attention-getting movement.
Parents’ use of nouns may go along with tactile support or
clear signs of visual attention. Nouns may be used more
often while the referent is present than is the case for nonnouns. All of these features are reasonable candidates as
factors that support word learning (e.g., Kersten & Smith,
2003; Meyer, Hard, Brand, McGarvey, & Baldwin, 2011;
Tomasello & Kruger, 1992).

187

Social Skill

In Expt. 1 we tested 6-14 month olds (n=37) in a gazefollowing task. Parents also completed vocabulary
checklists (MCDI, Dale & Fenson, 1996). Most of these
subjects (n=25) also participated in a noun comprehension
eyetracking study on the same day. The goal of this
experiment was to look for specific mappings between
social behaviors and word understanding. To date we
have tested individual infants on nouns and on gaze
following, with the intent to examine non-nouns and gaze
following as well; this study speaks to the Social Skill
Hypothesis.
In Expt. 2 we investigated how nouns and non-nouns
appear in infants’ environment, through analyses of audio
and video corpora of infants interacting with their
caregivers, with the goal of gaining a better understanding
of whether the environment of these two types of words
differs in relevant ways. If frequency and environmental
factors affect noun and non-noun learning differentially,
we expect to find differences in these measures across the
word types in the corpus. This study speaks to the
Frequency and Environment hypotheses.
In both studies we used a set of nouns and non-nouns
tested in previous eyetracking studies (Bergelson &
Swingley, 2012a, 2013). See Table 1.
For both sets of items a corpus of 16 mothers speaking
to their infants (Brent & Siskind, 2001), and a database of
vocabulary checklists (MCDI, Fenson et al., 1994) were
used to select a pool of items that were used often by most
mothers and reportedly understood by a large percentage
of 12-18 m.o. infants. Items were then selected among
candidates based on imageability, and phonological
properties.
The nouns are all foods and body parts, as the authors
had a secondary interest in these abstract categories as
such. , Given that infants early vocabularies are indeed a
smorgasbord of different parts of speech (Benedict,
1979), and that is it not always easy to determine that the
word class an item belongs to for a young infant
corresponds to its word class in adults’ vocabulary, the
non-nouns were simply the most common imageable
words heard by infants that were not concrete objects

The Social Skill hypothesis maintains that between six
and ten months infants gain skills of social cognition that
underlie the capacity for learning more abstract words—
skills that might not be criterial for learning nouns but
which, by hypothesis, may be imperative for learning
non-nouns. Existing research points to important changes
in social-cognitive skills in the second half of the first
year. For example, gaze-following improves substantially
over this period, and may facilitate word learning
(Morales, Mundy, & Rojas, 1998). Evidence of increasing
social skills around 9-10 months indirectly supports the
possibility that a social skill that was not necessary for
learning nouns may be necessary for learning non-nouns.
Prior experiments testing gaze-following showed that 10–
and 11-month-olds but not 9-month-olds were more likely
to follow the gazer’s regard when his eyes were open than
when they were closed, and that this skill correlated with
language scores at 18 months (Brooks & Meltzoff, 2005;
Brooks & Meltzoff, 2008).

Conceptual Difficulty
The Conceptual hypothesis proposes that non-nouns are
harder to learn because of the nature of the concepts and
categories involved. Instances of a word like ‘uh-oh’ vary
more and thus may be harder to recognize as having a
common semantic core than instances of ‘hand’. This
hypothesis can be expressed as stemming from higherlevel differences in the kinds of linguistic roles played by
nouns in contrast with adjectives, exclamations, verbs,
and social greetings. It can also be thought of as a lowlevel difference in what ‘features’ must be summed over:
in the noun case, visual features such as shape, size, and
color, in the case of e.g., banana, which may be easily
graspable from the environment, while non-nouns require
more abstract (perhaps second-order) features that are
harder to posit or grasp. A related hypothesis concerns
biases in word-learning; it could be the case that in the
absence of further evidence, infants choose to posit that a
new content word they have isolated from the speech
stream refers to a noun before they consider that it may
refer to another part of speech.

NonNouns

Overview of the Present Research

all gone, bye, dance, drink, eat, hi, hug, kiss,
more, sleeping, smile, splash, uh-oh,wet,

Nouns

apple, banana, bottle, cookie, ear, eye/s, face,
foot/feet, hair, hand/hands, leg/s, milk, mouth,
nose, spoon, yogurt
Table 1: Previously Tested Nouns and Non-Nouns

The hypotheses laid out above overlap; for example,
conceptual difficulty might cause a need for social skills
in learning non-nouns. Still, evidence can be brought to
bear that favors or disfavors these hypotheses. Our two
concrete research questions are:
1) Do we find evidence that gaze- and/or pointfollowing correlate with early word comprehension in
laboratory tasks and/or vocabulary checklists?
2) Are there frequency-based or environmental
differences between nouns and non-nouns when
examining naturalistic interactions between infants and
their caregivers?

Experiment 1
Methods
Participants
The gaze-following study tested 37 infants (R= 6.014.9mo., M=9.8mo.), of which 25 infants also
participated in a word-comprehension study just prior to
the gaze-following study (R=6.6-12.8 mo., M=9.2mo.).

188

All participants were healthy, typically-developing
monolingual English-exposed full-term infants with
normal hearing and vision, recruited in the Philadelphia
area. 8 additional infants were excluded from the gazefollowing study (technical error, n=5; fussiness, n=1;
parental interference n=1, premature birth status n=1); 10
additional infants were excluded from the wordcomprehension study (technical error, n=6; fussiness,
n=2; parental interference n=1, premature birth status
n=1).

means. MCDI scores were calculated based on the
number of words parents said their child understood or
said on the MCDI; we looked at MCDI scores overall,
and at the specific sets of nouns and non-nouns for which
we found a developmental lag (Bergelson & Swingley,
2012a; 2013, see Table 1). Noun-comprehension subject
means were calculated from infants’ performance in the
noun-comprehension experiment that preceded the gazefollowing_study.2
Gaze Condition

Proportion of Target Looking

Design
All parents first completed consent, background, and
vocabulary checklist forms. Infants sat on their parent’s
lap and watched short video clips on a computer outfitted
with a remote eyetracker (Eyelink, SR Research). Parents
wore a visor to block their view of the screen, but not of
their child. Infants wore a small sticker on their forehead
to facilitate tracking. After calibration, infants saw a
series of 16 test trials. In each test video, infants saw an
actress with two toys, one on either side of her. At the
beginning of each clip, the actress looked down at the
table (2s), looked up at the camera and smiled (3s), and
then turned her head to the left or right and gazed (gaze
trials, n=8) or gazed and pointed (point trials, n=8) to one
of two toys1. She kept her gaze there until the trial ended
(5s; this was the time window of interest, hereafter “postturn window”). Each video was 10s long, and side of
look, point, and toy were counterbalanced within and
across subjects.
For the infants in the word comprehension study, the
design was identical to that in Bergelson & Swingley,
(2012a), except that the experimenter spoke the words in
lieu of the parent (as in Bergelson & Swingley, 2012b).
Briefly, infants were presented with images of foods and
body-parts, one of which was named by the experimenter,
while their eyegaze was monitored.

Gaze & Point Condition

0.3
!

0.2
0.1

Vocabulary Size
! 0−3 words
4−50 words
>50 words

!
!

0.0
!

!
!
! !

!
!
!

−0.1

!

−0.2
6

8

10

12

14

Age (months)

6

8

10

12

14

Age (months)

Figure 1: Expt. 1 Subject Means by Age in the Gaze- and
Point-Following Task. Each dot represents each subject’s
proportion of target looking averaged over trials, for each
condition. The symbol used for the dot represents infants’
vocabulary size, binned into three groups (see legend).
Infants performed above chance in the Gaze & Point
condition in the over-10 month age group (the right side
of the right graph).

Results
Across both age groups, infants failed to look more to
the side the actress looked at on gaze trials (<10 mo.:
12/26 infants with positive performance, M=.012, Mdn=.00019, p=1; >10 mo.: 8/11 infants, M=.031, Mdn=.041
p=.10).3 For point trials, infants under 10 months
performed at chance (14/26 infants, M=.023, Mdn=.018,
p=.35), while infants over 10 months succeeded (9/11
infants, M=.13, Mdn=.15 p=.008).
We next examined the correlations between infants’
vocabulary size, as reported by their parents, and their
gaze-following behavior. Infants’ MCDI scores correlated
with proportion target looking on point trials, but not on
gaze trials (point trials: (Kendall’s) τ=.26, p=.024; gaze
trials: τ=.09, p=.43). Looking at the MCDI subset
containing nouns and non-nouns that were tested in
previous eyetracking studies (Bergelson & Swingley,
2012a, 2013), we found correlations between point trials
and non-noun vocabulary (τ=.28, p=.019) and a marginal

Data Analysis
We quantified infants’ performance in the gaze-study as
proportion target looking. For each subject, we computed
a difference score consisting of the proportion of infant
gaze to the target, minus the proportion to the distracter,
averaged over trials. This measure ignores gaze at the
actor’s face or hand and compares correct and incorrect
looks. Indiscriminate looking at target and distracter
would yield, on average, a score of zero.
Given our interest in infants’ increased comprehension
of non-nouns at ten months, we split subjects into two
groups around this age.
We also correlated infants’ performance in the gazefollowing study with two different vocabulary measures:
MacArthur CDI scores and noun-comprehension subject

2
For details on how subject means were computed, please see
Bergelson & Swingley, 2012.
3
All subsequent tests are two-talked Wilcoxon tests unless
noted otherwise; all “X/X infants” results indicate the number of
infants with positive performance. M is mean; Mdn is the
pseudo-median estimate of the Wilcoxon test.

1

Point-only trials were not included given that such trials
would pit gaze and point against each other; moreover, pointing
one place and looking another is rarer in day-to-do life.

189

correlation between point trials and noun vocabulary
(τ=.21, p=.080). Noun and non-noun correlations with
gaze trials were not significant (non-nouns: τ=.022,
p=.89, nouns: τ= .11; p=.37). For the subset of subjects in
the noun-comprehension study (n=25), performance in the
gaze-following study and noun-comprehension study
were not significantly correlated (gaze trials: τ=.11,
p=.44, point trials: τ=-.05, p=.73). See figure 1.

environmental factors in the lag between noun and nonnoun learning.

Experiment 2
Methods
We examined mothers’ use of the set of nouns and nonnouns that we have tested in eyetracking experiments in
both the Brent Corpus (an audio corpus of 16 mothers
interacting with their 9-15 m.o. infants; Brent & Siskind,
2001), and in 20 videos of the Providence Video Corpus
(5 mothers interacting with their young children; we
selected a subset in which children ranged from 11 to 18
mo; Demuth, Culbertson, & Alter, 2006). In the Brent
Corpus we compared frequency counts in isolation (i.e.,
in one-word utterances) and overall. In the Providence
corpus we extracted 919 utterances in which both the
caregiver and child were clearly visible, and in which one
of our words of interest was said.
These utterances were coded for a number of features,
including whether the referent of the word was present
(e.g. is there an apple when ‘apple’ is said, is someone
eating when ‘eat’ is said, did something fall accidentally
when ‘uhoh’ was said, etc.), what the parent was looking
at/touching, what the child was looking at/touching, the
situation the word was used in, what (if anything) was
moving, whether the word was said before, during, or
after attention to the relevant referent transpired, and what
was present in the room. In the case of body-parts, coders
noted ‘presence’ only when the relevant part was involved
in the interaction in any important sense: e.g., if the
mother was looking at a child who had yogurt all over her
mouth and said “look at your messy face!” this counted as
‘presence’ of the word ‘face’; in contrast, if the mother
was holding her crying child while singing “if you’re
happy and you know it clap your hands”, this did not
count as an instance in which ‘hands’ were considered
‘present’.

Discussion
These results suggest that around ten months, when
infants begin to show comprehension of non-nouns, they
show an increase in their ability to follow pointing and
gaze, but not gaze alone. This ability is correlated with
non-noun and overall vocabulary, assessed by parental
checklist.
While previous work has found links between infants’
gaze-following and vocabulary size at 18 months (Brooks
& Meltzoff, 2005), here we find a correlation between
point-following and current vocabulary size, and in
particular, with knowledge of non-nouns tested in
previous work.
The finding that infants’ noun comprehension task
behavior did not correlate with point-following is in
keeping with the marginal correlation we found on the
MCDI noun subset. The possibility remains that although
noun comprehension is evidently not strongly correlated
with point-following ability, non-noun comprehension
may be, a hypothesis we cannot address directly yet.
Vocabulary size and age are correlated (τ=.46,
p<.0001). This makes it difficult to untangle their
relationship to point-following4. However, the results
suggest that point-following seems to be a categorical
ability attained around ten months (See figure 1). Before
ten months, performance is variable and centered around
zero; after ten months virtually all children are above
zero. This, coupled with the result that age and
residualized vocabulary both predict pointing suggests
that age and vocabulary are not redundant predictors.
Thus, in answer to our first question, the timing of
point-following success and correlations between MCDI
and point-following data provide indirect evidence for the
Social Skills Hypothesis. Thus, point-following is a
strong candidate social skill that might be useful in nonnoun learning but which is apparently not necessary for
noun learning, inasmuch as our somewhat exaggerated
pointing materials test point-following in natural contexts.
An alternate possibility is that a third skill emerges
around ten months, and that this skill mediates both pointfollowing and non-noun learning.
Thus, with evidence for the social hypothesis garnered
in Expt. 1, we turn to a set of corpus analyses that will
allow us to assess the roles of frequency and

Results
A series of analyses was conducted to test whether the
difference in eyetracking-task performance between nonnouns and nouns might be due to higher frequency of the
nouns rather than something more fundamental about the
words’ meanings. Frequency was estimated using the
Brent corpus. There was not a significant difference in the
frequency of the nouns and non-nouns5. Descriptively,
each noun occurred 45-562 (M=262, Mdn= 244) times
within the corpus while each non-noun occurred 33-1292
(M=453, Mdn= 219) times. Across each set of words, the
total number of usages did not vary significantly (244 vs.
219, p=.98 by Wilcoxon test). Given that previous
research supports a link between word learning and

4

5

In a linear model pointing behavior is significantly predicted
by both age, and by vocabulary residualized by age, suggesting
that vocabulary predicts behavior above and beyond age alone.

Within each corpus’s frequency counts, we did not constrain
word class; ‘kiss’ occurring as a noun or verb was counted for
‘kiss’, just as ‘apple blueberry sauce’ was counted for ‘apple’.

190

frequency of isolated word tokens (Brent & Siskind,
2001), we also examined this variable here. The sets of
words were not differentially likely to occur in isolation
either: nouns occurred 2-92 (M=26) times and non-nouns
occurred 0-1091 times (M=152); this difference was not
significant (noun Mdn=19, non-noun Mdn=11; p=.95 by
Wilcoxon test.).
Analyses of the Providence Corpus subset revealed that
there too, our nouns and non-nouns occurred with similar
frequency: each non-noun occurred 1-94 times (M=37,
Mdn=23), there were 523 non-nouns total. Nouns
occurred 5-46 times (M=21, Mdn=19), with 396 nouns
tokens total (estimated difference per word type: 7 words;
p=.29 by Wilcoxon test over words). Similarly, nouns and
non-nouns as a group did not differ in number of isolated
occurrences (72 isolated non-noun tokens total, R=1-7
over words; 35 isolated noun tokens total, R=1-3 over
words; estimated difference 1.8 words; p=.13 by
Wilcoxon test over words).
Hand-coding of interactional features during parental
use of the tested words revealed a large word-type (noun
versus non-noun) difference in whether the referent of the
word was present as part of the interaction. Non-nouns
were said much more often than nouns when their referent
was not present—e.g., saying “hi!” when no-one was
newly on the scene, or “kiss” when there were no evident
attempts at kissing. By contrast, nouns (“a banana!”)
were more often spoken in the presence of the referent (an
actual banana, or a picture of one). For non-nouns the
referent was not present 39% of the time; for nouns, 15%.
This pattern held for 5/5 children in the corpus, and was
significant over words (estimated difference =.24, p<.012
by Wilcoxon test over words). See figure 2.
No significant difference between word-types was
found in what mothers or children were touching or
looking at, the number of situation-types that the word
occurred in (e.g. playing, eating, interacting, bookreading), what in the scene was moving (e.g. child or
mom, their hands, other objects, etc), whether the word
was said before, during, or after attention to the relevant
referent transpired, nor what was present in the room (all
ps>.05 by Wilcoxon tests, and not significant predictors in
logistic regressions of word-type). In short, on most coded
variables, nouns and non-nouns did not differ in various
features of the learning environment–except whether the
referent was present or not.6

These findings fail to support the Frequency
Hypothesis, and lend support to the Environmental
Hypothesis, insofar as we found non-nouns were said
more often in less ideal learning environments (i.e. when
the referent was not present). While it remains possible
that other environmental factors varied across the words
as well, of those we coded this was the only one that
differed significantly across word groups.
One limitation of this study is that the videos were of
infants older than ten months, leaving open the possibility
that at younger ages there are other word-type differences.
Such an account would stipulate that parents interact
differently with children once children know some nonnouns.
Thus, in response to our second question, when
examining naturalistic interactions between infants and
their caregivers, we did not find support for frequencybased differences between nouns and non-nouns, but did
find support for environmental differences.

500

400

Present
as Image

Referent
Present

Present
as Image

Count

300

200

100

Referent
Not Present

Referent
Present

Referent
Not Present

0
Non−Noun

Noun

Word Type

Figure 2: Referent Presence as a function of Word-type
in the Providence Corpus Subset. This figure depicts the
counts of instances of nouns and non-nouns of interest
(see table 1). Color distinguishes whether the referent was
present as an image (top), present (middle) or not present

General Discussion
In two studies we have explored the underpinnings of
early word learning, seeking to explain why infants are
able to understand different types of words at different
ages. More specifically, through a gaze-following
experiment and corpus analyses, we have sought to
explain infants’ ability to understand nouns around six
months and non-nouns around ten months.
We found some support for the Social Hypothesis, in
that point-following emerged around ten months and was
correlated with overall vocabulary and, more strongly,
non-noun vocabulary. We found support for the
Environmental Hypothesis in that nouns were used in the
presence of their referent with much greater regularity
than was the case for non-nouns. We did not find support
for the Frequency Hypothesis, or for other versions of the

Discussion
Expt. 2 showed that nouns are used in speech to infants
when their referents are present; non-nouns are used when
their intended referents are present about 60% of the time.
However, nouns and non-nouns appear to be said at
equivalent rates both in sentence context and as one-word
utterances.
6

Separate analysis of non-nouns as verbs and performatives
showed the same overall pattern as non-nouns combined.

191

Environmental hypothesis related to situation, attention,
or motion-related factors.
Both of these experiments leave open the Conceptual
Hypothesis, whereby non-nouns are learned later because
they are more complicated, either due to the inherent
linguistic word-class that the words belong to, or due to
the nature of the visual features that need to be tracked to
learn non-nouns as opposed to nouns. One way to
examine this hypothesis is to teach infants novel nouns
and non-nouns in very similar linguistic and
environmental conditions to examine whether with
equivalent exposure some types of words may be, simply
put, harder to learn. Such work is ongoing in our lab.
The hypotheses we tested here are not new to this
research, and so our evidence supporting these notions (in
some cases) corroborates prior work. Perhaps most
surprising, then, are the null effects: little evidence for the
importance of frequency (among these already frequent
words), and little evidence for a broad range of
environmental variables that would, a priori, seem
reasonable predictors of infants’ success in learning. Of
course, it is always possible that more sensitive measures
would reveal influences that did not emerge here;
however, a strength of the present approach is that we are
testing learning that takes place in infants’ ordinary,
daily-life experience.
It is unlikely that any one cause is responsible for
infants’ later learning of non-nouns than nouns. It is
probable that skills underlying pointing and the
environmental conditions in which words appear play a
role in how easily and at what age words are learned. But
a simple frequency-based account does not seem viable
for accounting for this difference. Further work is needed
to examine the interactions of conceptual, environmental,
and social factors in early word-learning of different word
types.
Our findings about the developmental timeline of noun
and non-noun acquisition suggest that it takes infants
nearly as long to learn their first non-nouns as it took to
learn their first nouns. Understanding the mechanisms
underlying this lag, which we have begun to explore here,
requires understanding the intertwined roles of social
development, the structure of the world, and the structure
of concepts as expressed in natural language. This line of
research, in turn, has implications for word-learning,
language acquisition, and cognitive development on a
much broader scale.

Bergelson, E., & Swingley, D. (2012a). At 6-9 months,
human infants know the meanings of many common
nouns. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 109(9), 3253-3258.
Bergelson, E., & Swingley, D. (2012b). Talkerindependence in word comprehension before 12
months. Paper presented at the Boston University
Conference on Language Development.
Bergelson, E., & Swingley, D. (2013). The Acquisition of
Abstract Words by Young Infants. Cognition, 127(3),
391-397.
Brent, M. R., & Siskind, J. M. (2001). The role of
exposure to isolated words in early vocabulary
development. Cognition, 81(2), B33-B44.
Brooks, R., & Meltzoff, A. N. (2005). The development
of gaze following and its relation to language.
Developmental Science, 8(6), 535-543.
Brooks, R., & Meltzoff, A. N. (2008). Infant gaze
following and pointing predict accelerated vocabulary
growth through two years of age: a longitudinal, growth
curve modeling study. Journal of Child Language,
35(01), 207-220.
Dale, P. S., & Fenson, L. (1996). Lexical development
norms for young children. Behavior Research Methods
Instruments & Computers, 28(1), 125-127.
Demuth, K., Culbertson, J., & Alter, J. (2006). Wordminimality, epenthesis and coda licensing in the early
acquisition of English. Language and Speech, 49(2),
137-173.
Kersten, A. W., & Smith, L. B. (2003). Attention to novel
objects during verb learning. Child Development, 73(1),
93-109.
Medina, T. N., Snedeker, J., Trueswell, J. C., & Gleitman,
L. R. (2011). How words can and cannot be learned by
observation. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 108(22), 9014-9019.
Meyer, M., Hard, B., Brand, R. J., McGarvey, M., &
Baldwin, D. A. (2011). Acoustic packaging: Maternal
speech and action synchrony. Autonomous Mental
Development, IEEE Transactions on, 3(2), 154-162.
Morales, M., Mundy, P., & Rojas, J. (1998). Following
the direction of gaze and language development in 6month-olds. Infant Behavior & Development, 21(2),
373-377.
Tincoff, R., & Jusczyk, P. W. (1999). Some beginnings of
word comprehension in 6-month-olds. Psychological
Science, 10(2), 172-175.
Tincoff, R., & Jusczyk, P. W. (2012). Six-month-olds
comprehend words that refer to parts of the body.
Infancy, 17(4), 432-444.
Tomasello, M., & Kruger, A. C. (1992). Joint attention on
actions: Acquiring verbs in ostensive and non-ostensive
contexts. Journal of Child Language, 19(2), 311-333.

Acknowledgments
This work was funded by an NSF GRFP & IGERT grant
to EB, and NIH Grant R01-HD049681 to DS.

Reference
Benedict, H. (1979). Early Lexical Development Comprehension and Production. Journal of Child
Language, 6(2), 183-200.

192

