UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Social pragmatic factors in reasoning from disjunctions of numerical estimations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/27d8v010

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Mackiewicz, Robert
Koniak, Pawe

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Social pragmatic factors in reasoning from disjunctions of numerical estimations
Robert Mackiewicz (rmackiew@swps.edu.pl)
University of Social Sciences and Humanities
Chodakowska 19/31, 03-815 Warsaw, Poland

Paweł Koniak (pkoniak@swps.edu.pl)
University of Social Sciences and Humanities
Chodakowska 19/31, 03-815 Warsaw, Poland

statement of politician B is false leads to a contradiction, i.e.
the average holiday time is both lower than 19 days and
higher than 32 days.

Abstract
The paper presents two studies that investigated how
individuals reason from disjunctive statements that use
numerical estimations. In the experiments two types of such
statements were used. In the first type both constituents of a
disjunction could be a logically correct answer. That is, if
“The average life time of a fruit fly is either 9 or 27 days”,
any of those numbers is logically possible. In the second type
that truth of one constituent excluded the truth of the other,
e.g. “The average time of holidays in the EU is either higher
than 9 days or else higher than 27 days”. A simple repetition
of any of those figures is an illusory inference as it renders
both constituents true. The results of Experiment 1 proved
that although the participants showed a tendency to repeat one
of the disjuncts as their answer, this tendency was smaller
when the content of the statements referred to politics and
social life in comparison with the general knowledge
questions. The results of Experiment 2 showed that
individuals reveal the tendency to repeat opinions coming
from speakers who are more likeable, even if such opinions
are incorrect illusory inferences. The results of both studies
show that illusory inferences appear also in the domain of
numerical cognition but they may be reduced by pragmatic
factors such as the content of the message and the knowledge
about its source.

Mental models and the principle of truth
When two statements are presented in the form of a
disjunction, one has to represent the fact that if one of them
is true, then the other must be false. But naïve individuals
seldom do this, as they typically represent only what is true
at the expense of what is false. Forgetting about false
possibilities is one of the principles of the theory of mental
models (the model theory for short, Johnson–Laird, 2007).
The basic assumption of the model theory is that mental
representations are iconic and they represent different
possibilities as different mental models. Specifically,
models represent what is common in all “possible worlds”
when a certain type of relation holds. Therefore, the
structure of models corresponds to the structure of what they
represent (Johnson-Laird, 2006). The same objects may be
represented by different types of mental models depending
on the relation that was made salient in a given context. For
example, if one is informed that the average life of a
common fruit fly is three times longer than 9 days, he or she
will understand this expression as a multiplication problem
and will know that the correct answer is 27, even though an
experimenter has not yet started to ask any questions. On the
other hand, if a participant of a psychological study was
informed that:
The average life of a fruit fly is either shorter than 9 days
or else it is shorter than 27 days.
he or she might see this expression as a disjunction of two
possibilities, and represent them as two separate mental
models:
shorter than 9 days
shorter than 27 days
As none of those mental models represent false cases (i.e.
not shorter than 27 days in the first model and not shorter
than 9 days in the second model), the model theory predicts
that individuals without training in logic should see both
possibilities as equally probable. But choosing any of them
as the correct answer is a so-called illusory inference as
shorter than 9 means also shorter than 27 and shorter than
27 does not exclude it being shorter than 9.

Keywords: reasoning, mental models, persuasion, illusory
inferences, social pragmatics

Introduction
Imagine that you heard the following statements from two
different politicians:
Politician A: The average number of holiday days in The
European Union is lower than 19 days.
Politician B: The average number of holiday days in The
European Union is lower than 32 days.
How would you answer a question about the average
number of holiday days in the EU, if you were informed that
one of the above statements is definitely true and the other is
definitely false? If both politicians are equally likely to be
speaking the truth, it seems quite reasonable to expect one
of their statements to be the correct answer. However,
assuming that both options are equally possible would be a
logical mistake as the truth of one of them excludes the truth
of the other. Therefore, the correct estimate of the number
of holiday days in the EU must lie between 19 and 32 days,
which comes from the fact that the statement of politician A
is false and the statement of politician B is true. This is the
only possible answer because an assumption that the

948

The model theory predicts such illusory inferences in all
those reasoning tasks when models fail to represent what is
false (e.g. Johnson-Laird & Savary, 1999). Such illusory
inferences have been proved to exist in different domains of
the study of reasoning, e.g. conditionals (Barrouillet &
Lecas, 2000), probabilistic reasoning (Johnson-Laird &
Savary, 1996), quantified reasoning (Yang & JohnsonLaird, 2000), and relations (Mackiewicz & Johnson-Laird,
2012). All those studies prove that illusory inferences are
quite compelling and in some of them all the participants
succumb to drawing erroneous conclusions.

In this case 14 days makes both disjuncts false and therefore
it is logically incorrect. There is still a possibility that one
may know that different types of companies require
different legal formalities. Such a person would probably
withdraw from giving any estimate of the time necessary to
start a new business, claiming that the information given in
the premises is incomplete.
As the study of Gigerenzer, Hoffrage, and Kleinbölting
(1991) shows, people may use different types of background
knowledge in order to arrive at numerical estimations of
different facts. For example, they may think that a city that
has a soccer team in the first league should be larger than
one which team plays in the lower league. We believe that
many such cues are available when numerical estimations
refer to the domain of social life (e.g. percent of households
connected to internet, average time of holiday in the EU) or
governmental fiscal policy (e.g. public debt per capita,
unemployment rate, percent of the EU funding used in the
recent year). We used statements from those domains in our
first experiment. As they are frequently mentioned in media
coverage of politics, we refer to such statements as political
in the rest of the paper. On the other hand, when no
pragmatic clues are available, naïve reasoners should more
often repeat one of the figures available from the premises
as their own answer. We refer to such statements as general
knowledge questions and in our studies we included in this
group estimations of different facts of natural life (e.g.
number of wolves hunting alone, average height of trees)
and everyday human activities (e.g. number of words in the
average email, number of letters in the average sentence).
We predict that naïve individuals rarely go beyond the
principle of truth and in most cases they should err when the
correct answer requires envisaging the situations in which
some statements are false. However, it should happen less
often in the case of political than general knowledge
questions because pragmatic knowledge may suffice in
recalling correct information from memory in the first type
of questions. We verified this prediction in our first
experiment.
Pragmatic modulations may also help individuals to see a
certain set of premises not as a logical inference but rather
as an attempt at persuasion. Recently, Mercier and Sperber
(2011) have put forward a hypothesis that the main goal of
reasoning is argumentation. Therefore, the main purpose of
reasoning is to provide a set of logically related arguments
that would support certain thesis. Or, if one is the target of a
persuasion attempt, reasoning might be used in order to
falsify the statements that other person uses to convince
someone to his or her beliefs. Such social pragmatic factors
may also include inferences about the intention or
credibility of the source of a persuasive message (Bohner,
Ruder, & Erb, 2002) or its truthfulness (Eisend, 2006). In
the case of reasoning in the political domain, some
individuals might even rely on peripheral clues such as
personal attractiveness of a politician (Bohner, Moskowitz,
& Chaiken, 1995) or potential gains and losses that he might
attain (Priester & Petty, 1995). In our second experiment we

Pragmatic modulations of reasoning process
Some researchers have tried to find antidotes to illusory
inferences. The typical experimental manipulation in such
studies provides some of the participants with an
opportunity to learn how to falsify certain premises. For
example, in the study of Newsome and Johnson-Laird
(2006) the participants were explicitly asked to find
conditions that make different statements false. Another
method is to make the distinctive character of two premises
more visible. Santamaria and Johnson-Laird (2000) used
this type of manipulation by informing the participants that
they should treat different pieces of information as different
physical objects; in this case it was different advertisements
cut from a newspaper. All such manipulations are semantic
in nature as they aid the process of constructing fully
explicit models.
The process of reasoning can be also modulated in a
pragmatic way (Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 2002). That is,
general knowledge in the long-term memory or some
information available from the context may help in forming
the expanded representation of a problem (Sperber &
Wilson, 1995). In such a case reasoners may go beyond the
logical form of the premises presented to them. For
example, if you are informed that
The average time required to fulfill legal requirements
necessary to open a new company is less than 9 days or
else it is less than 27 days.
you may invoke from your memory a program recently
presented on TV that urged for shortening the period of
establishing a new company. Although you may not
remember the details of this program, you might think that
the whole process is definitely longer than a week and
shorter than a month, and you could estimate its length at,
say, 14 days. Such an answer is logically correct as it
renders the first disjunct false and the second true. However,
the process of arriving at this conclusion would be not a
result of the analysis of what is true and what is false about
the possibilities. Indeed, based on the same kind of
recollections one would probably give the same estimation
of 14 days, even if the disjunction was presented in the
following way:
The average time required to fulfill legal requirements
necessary to open a new company is less than 9 days or
else it is more than 27 days.

949

inferences. Three of the illusory inferences used “higher”
relations in both disjuncts and the other three used the
predicate “lower”. Three of the control inferences used
“higher” – “lower” relations and the other three used exact
numbers. Our main independent variable: general
knowledge or political content was manipulated as a
between group factor. Therefore, half of the participants
were presented with general knowledge problems and half
with political ones.
We used different contents for each of 12 general
knowledge problems and for each of the political
statements. Examples of both types of content are provided
in the introductory section. The pairs of numbers presented
in each of those problems were different. Nevertheless, each
pair from the political domain matched one pair of numbers
from the list of those presented with the general knowledge
questions.
All problems were presented in the form of a small
booklet. The instructions informed that the experiment was
not a test of either intelligence or the personality of the
participants. The instructions informed the participants that
they would see different pairs of statements and that in each
pair one of the statements is true and the other is false, but it
is not possible to say which is true and which is false. The
participants were also informed that they should give their
own estimations only on the basis of the content that was
used in each pair of statements. The two key instruction
sentences were phrased in the following way: “Try to give
your own estimate in each of the situations described below
only on the basis of the information provided here. (…)
Please write a number that reflects your estimation or, if you
are not able to give your own answer, write “X” in the
answer line”.

wanted to check if reasoners are more likely to choose as
their own answer an opinion presented by a person who is
more likeable. So in this study we dissociated the content of
the problem (politics vs. general knowledge questions) and
the source of the message (likeable vs. non – likeable
politician).

Experiment 1
The first experiment compared how naïve individuals reason
through disjunctions of general knowledge and political
statements. We used two versions of both types of such
disjunctions. In the first version, repetition of one of the
disjuncts led to an illusory inference. We shall call them
illusory problems throughout the rest of the paper. Two
examples of such problems were given in the introductory
section. Apart from the statements of the form
A is lower than X or else A is lower than Y.
we also used statements:
A is bigger than X or else A is bigger than Y.
In all such statements the correct answer is any number that
lies between X and Y as the principle of truth excludes all
other possibilities.
The second set of disjunctions used pairs of statements
that could not be both true at the same time but the falsity of
one of them did not exclude the other as a possibly correct
answer. We used two types of such statements:
A is lower than X or else A is higher than Y.
A equals X or else A equals Y.
An example of the second type would be:
Either the average life time of the fruit fly equals 9 days
or else it equals 27 days.
Given that one of those statements is true and the other is
false, one cannot give any precise estimate of the average
life time of the fruit fly. If the first disjunct is true than the
other is false and vice versa. Such statements are typically
tagged as control problems in the model theory research and
so we will use this label throughout the rest of the paper.

Results and discussion
Our main concern was to investigate how often the
participants repeat the figures provided in the disjunctive
statements. In all control problems such repetitions should
be considered as possibly correct answers, while in illusory
problems a simple repetition was considered as an incorrect
answer. Table 1 presents percentages of different types of
answers for illusory and control problems with the general
knowledge and the political content.
Similarly to all studies investigating illusory inferences,
we obtained a strong effect of the type of disjunction. In
general, the participants were more often correct on control
than on illusory problems: 73% and 14%, respectively
(Wilcoxon test z = 4.02, p < .001). As we predicted, the
participants were more likely to repeat numerical estimates
from the general knowledge statements than from those
pertaining to the world of politics. As repetitions were
correct in the control problem, this resulted in a bigger
number of correct answers in the control problems with the
general knowledge content in comparison with the political
ones (Wilcoxon test z = 2.43, p = .008, one tailed).
However, in the case of illusory inferences repetitions were
logically incorrect and so there were more such answers

Method
Participants. 27 undergraduate psychology students from
the Warsaw University of Social Sciences and Humanities
took part in the study in exchange for a course credit.
Although none of them had participated in a higher – level
course in logic, it must be noted that an elementary course
in this subject is obligatory at all higher education
institutions in Poland. Participating in such a course should
not, in fact, influence the results of our studies as it provides
only basic level knowledge.
Design and materials. Participants acted as their own
controls and were asked to give their own numerical
estimations for twelve problems presented in the form of
disjunctions “Either X or else Y”. Half of them were
illusory, as in the examples described in the introduction to
this experiment, and the other six were the control

950

with the general knowledge questions than with the political
content (Wilcoxon test z = 2.16, p = .015, one tailed). The
participants did not show any regular tendency to choose the
first or the second disjunct as their answer. However, the
first one was chosen slightly more often in abstract (47%
choices of the first vs. 39% choices of the second disjunct)
than in political problems (24% for the first one and 34% for
the second one).

speakers as participants’ own estimations. As many of the
studies from persuasion research show, one of the key
factors that makes a message more persuasive is the
attractiveness of its source (Petty & Wegener, 1998).
Following that, we hypothesized that participants would
more often repeat the statements provided by more than less
likeable speakers, even though endorsing the conclusions of
such speakers may be logically incorrect.

Table 1. Percentages of answers repeating and not repeating
the numbers provided in disjunctive statements in
Experiment 1. (The column for the correct non repetitions in
control problems is empty, as only repetitions could be
considered as correct answers; the percentages of logically
correct answers are marked by italics.)

Method

Correct
repetitions
Content
Political

49%

General
knowledge

85%
Incorrect
repetitions

Political
General
knowledge

61%
88,5%

Participants. We recruited a group of 27 participants from
the same population as those described in Experiment 1.
They were tested in small groups in exchange for a course
credit.
Design and materials. We used the same two sets of 12
general knowledge and 12 political problems as those in
Experiment 1. The design of this study was exactly the same
as that of Experiment 1 with one exception. Both in political
and general knowledge settings we wrote in the instructions
that all the statements came from two different politicians.
We manipulated their likeability by informing our student
participants that one of them said in a television interview
that “students are more mature than it is commonly
believed”, while the other said that “students are spoiled and
do not know the true life”. We assigned those two
descriptions at random to both politicians, so the statements
within each pair were assigned once to a likeable and once
to a non – likeable politician. We also measured the
sympathy for those two politicians by
asking the
participants to rate their likeness on a five-point scale with
higher numbers meaning higher liking. The key instruction
sentences were the same as in Experiment 1, so the
participants were asked to give their own estimates only on
the basis of the information provided in the experiment, and
write “X”, only if they were not able to figure out their own
answers.

Control problems
Correct non- Incorrect
repetitions
nonrepetitions
51%
15%
Illusory problems
Correct non- Incorrect
repetitions
nonrepetitions
23%
16%
4%

8%

As all illusory problems were of the form: “A is higher
(lower) than X or else A is higher (lower) than Y, the
correct answers to all of them were estimates that fell
between those two numbers provided in the statements. We
called all such answers “correct non – repetitions” in Table
1. Very rarely did the participants gave such estimates in the
general knowledge problems but they did it more often in
the political ones (Wilcoxon test z = 1.72, p = .043, one
tailed).
In sum, the results of Experiment 1 proved our
hypotheses. The participants were less likely to repeat
numbers from the statements referring to broadly defined
political issues than in the general knowledge problems.
Although, generally there were more correct answers in
control than in illusory problems, the caution evoked by the
political content resulted in a smaller number of incorrect
repetitions in illusory problems and more logically correct
answers in those problems.

Results and discussion
Again, we proved that there is a strong tendency to repeat
numerical estimations provided in the form of disjunctions.
As in Experiment 1, this led to correct answers in the
control problems (57%) and incorrect in the illusory
problems (31%). Only in 14% of their answers to illusory
problems did the participants gave correct estimations that
fell between two figures provided by the politicians depicted
in the instructions (Wilcoxon test for comparison with
correct answers in control problems yielded a significant
result: z = 3.4, p = .001). In comparison with the previous
experiment the difference between the repetitions in general
knowledge and political problems was not significant,
though it was in the predicted direction: 69% versus 52%
(Wilcoxon test z = 1,49, p = .07, one tailed). And also there
was no difference between numbers of correct answers in
illusory problems concerning general knowledge (18%) and
those connected with the world of politics (10%).
As our main objective was to see if the participants tended
to repeat the statements from a likeable politician more

Experiment 2
The previous study examined the influence of social
pragmatic modulation on the tendency to repeat numbers
provided in the form of a disjunction. Our Experiment 2
investigated whether it was possible to convince the
participants to use the statements provided by some

951

often than from a non – likeable one, we first checked the
effectiveness of our manipulation. Indeed, a politician
presented as a person who liked students scored on average
3.96 on a five-points sympathy scales. This number was
significantly higher than the average for a person who did
not seem to be fond of students: 2.04 (Wilcoxon test z =
3.97, p < .001). To check our main prediction for this
experiment we calculated the Spearman correlations
between the attractiveness scores of a likeable politician and
the tendency to repeat his statement as the correct answer.
The correlation coefficients are given in table 2.

General Discussion
The main purpose of the current study was to investigate
how naïve individuals solved problems that used a pair of
numerical estimations presented in the form of a logical
disjunction. We used two versions of such problems. In the
first version, one example being A is lower than X or else A
is higher than Y, the verbatim repetition of any of the
statements had to be considered as a logically correct
answer. However, in the second set of trials, including for
example A is lower than X or else A is lower than Y, the
correct answer fell between X and Y and simple repetition
of one of the disjuncts did not take into account that in such
a case both disjuncts are true at the same time. Following
the tradition in the psychological study of reasoning
(Johnson-Laird & Savary, 1996) we referred to such
problems as illusory inferences.
A number of researches have tried to find an antidote to
illusory inferences. Most of the previous research used
direct exemplifications of situations in which logical
statements are false. We used a different approach and
manipulated the pragmatic factors that led our participants
to look for alternative possibilities. In Experiment 1 we
compared frequencies of illusory answers for disjunctions in
which the statements referred to the general knowledge
questions (e.g. the average life of a fruit fly) with the
problems referring broadly to social life and politics (e.g.
the average time necessary to open a new company). We
assumed that social and political issues trigger more cues
from the long term memory that participants could use to
arrive at their own answers. Our predictions were
confirmed. In Experiment 1 the participants were
significantly more often correct in illusory problems from
the political domain than the general knowledge problems
that did not induce pragmatic cues. The “illusory effect”
was also present in our Experiment 2 in which we wanted to
cue the participants to repeat an opinion presented by a
more likeable politician. In this experiment the difference
between the proportions if illusory answers in political and
the general knowledge questions was lost but indeed we
observed a significant tendency to repeat an opinion of a
more likeable politician. Our manipulation of the likeability
that we used in Experiment 2 might seem suspicious to our
student participants, so they more often avoided direct
repetitions of opinions coming from a politician who may
know nothing about the subject matter of a given question.
We guess, however, that it is possible to design a
manipulation that would more directly cue the participants
to choose one of the provided opinions. Therefore the
current results of Experiment 2 provide a useful stepping
stone for future research.
Both experiments showed that illusory inferences can be
elicited in the domain of numerical cognition. Although
there are many studies in the cognitive psychology of
reasoning that explicitly use numbers in experimental
materials (cf. Oaksford, Chater, & Larkin, 2000), they
mainly use them as labels of probabilities or frequencies.
Our study differs from such accounts as we investigated

Table 2. Correlations between the ratings of likability of a
politician and the frequency of choosing his answer by the
participants in Experiment 2. Correlations marked with an
asterisk are significant at p < .05.

Inference
content
General
knowledge
Political

Type of relation between
disjunctions
Control
Illusory
problems
problems
.62*

.63*

.53*

.39

As Table 2 reveals, we observed significant positive
correlations between the sympathy ratings of a politician
who was presented as likeable and the frequency of
choosing his statements as answers in both control and
illusory problems that required some general knowledge.
However, the participants were more skeptical about the
expertise of a politician in illusory problems that used the
content for the political domain. Only in this case the results
did not follow our prediction but it was mainly due to a
bigger frequency of participants’ refraining from giving any
estimates. From the logical point of view, this is also an
incorrect answer but we counted the correlations only for
answers that repeated the opinion of one of the politicians
described in the instructions to this experiment.
The results of Experiment 2 repeated our findings from
Experiment 1: the participants were more likely to repeat
one of the statements as their own answers. This led to
illusory inferences in those problems where the truth of one
statement excluded the truth of the other. As our
correlations show, there was quite a strong tendency to
choose more often the estimates given by a more likeable
politician. Our manipulation could seem somehow
suspicious to the participants of the study: it is hard to
believe that a politician knows anything about the life span
of a fruit fly. We observed a smaller tendency of repetitions
in illusory problems in this experiment than in the previous
one. But possible skepticism did not lead to a bigger number
of correct answers in illusory problems in comparison with
Experiment 1. It seems as the participants in Experiment 2
more often refrained from giving any numerical estimates in
comparison with those taking part in Experiment 1.

952

how individuals reason from relational predicates such as
“higher than X” or “lower than X”. As it seems they do not
only treat numbers as the representations of abstract
numerical quantities, but are also able to treat numerical
statements as entries into logical arguments.
Our study also differed from those typical for the area of
persuasion research. Such studies normally measure the
change of attitudes between and after the presentation of a
persuasive message (e.g. Bohner, Einwiller, Erb, & Siebler,
2003). In our research we asked the participants to draw
logically valid conclusions taking into account only the
information given in the premises. As it turned out, the
reasoners were more likely to go beyond the logical form of
the problem when its content provided pragmatic cues that
triggered the search for available facts in the long term
memory (Exp. 1). Although they tended to repeat more
often an opinion from a person who was presented as more
likeable, it did not help them when it came to finding the
logically correct answers (Exp. 2).
As asserted by Gilbert (1991), understanding the message
entails believing that it is true at least until it is falsified by
some other clues or statements. The results of our
experiments show that indeed people believe that two
statements that are not overtly contradictory can be both true
at the same time. Individuals do not assume that one of them
can be false and, what is more, they do not follow the
consequences of such assertions. Such an attitude may have
an important influence on the world of politics and the role
of democratic institutions. It is quite likely that during
election campaigns voters do not analyze the relations
between statements of different politicians but they rather
choose those they would like to believe on the basis on
pragmatic factors, such as the likeability of the source of the
message.

Eisend, M. (2006). Source credibility dimensions in
marketing communication – a generalized solution.
Journal of Empirical Generalisations in Marketing
Science, 10, 1-33.
Gigerenzer, G., Hoffrage, U., & Kleinbölting, H. (1991).
Probabilistic mental models: a Brunswikian theory of
confidence. Psychological Review, 98, 506-528.
Gilbert, D.T. (1991). How mental systems believe.
American Psychologist, 46, 107-119.
Johnson-Laird, P.N. (2006). Mental Models, sentential
reasoning, and illusory inferences. In C. Held, M. Knauff,
& Q. Vosgerau (Eds.) Mental Models in Cognitive
Psychology, Neuroscience, and Philosophy of Mind (pp.
1-25). Rotterdam: Elsevier.
Johnson-Laird, P.N. (2007). How we reason. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R.M. (2002). Conditionals:
A theory of meaning, pragmatics, and inference.
Psychological Review, 109, 646-678
Johnson-Laird, P.N, & Savary, F. (1996). Illusory
inferences about probabilities. Acta Psychologica, 93, 6990.
Johnson –Laird, P.N., & Savary, F. (1999). Illusory
inferences: a novel class of erroneous deductions.
Cognition, 71, 191-229.
Mackiewicz, R., & Johnson-Laird, P.N. (2012). Reasoning
from connectives and relations between entities. Memory
& Cognition, 40, 266-279.
Mercier, H., & Sperber, D. (2011). Why do humans reason?
Arguments for an argumentative theory of reasoning.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 34, 57-74.
Newsome, M.R., & Johnson-Laird, P.N. (2006). How falsity
dispels fallacies. Thinking & Reasoning, 12, 214-234.
Oaksford, M., Chater, N., & Larkin, J. (2000). Probabilities
and polarity biases in conditional inference. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory &
Cognition, 26, 883-899.
Petty, R.E., & Wegener, D.T. (1998). Attitude change:
Multiple roles for persuasion variables. In D. Gilbert, S.
Fiske, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), The handbook of social
psychology (pp. 323-390). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Priester, J.R., & Petty, R.E. (1995). Source attributions and
persuasion: Perceived honesty as a determinant of
message scrutiny. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 21, 637-654.
Santamaria, C., & Johnson-Laird, P.N. (2000). An antidote
to illusory inferences. Thinking & Reasoning, 6, 313-333.
Sperber, D., & Wilson, D. (1995). Relevance.
Communication and Cognition. Oxford: Blackwell.
Yang, Y., & Johnson-Laird, J.P. (2000). Illusory inferences
with quantified assertions: how to make the impossible
seem possible, and vice versa. Memory & Cognition, 28,
452-465.

Acknowledgments
This research was made possible by The Polish Ministry of
Science and Education grant no .2836/01/E/560/S/2012 to
both authors. We are grateful to Wojciech Cwalina and Phil
Johnson-Laird for discussions and advice.

References
Barrouillet, P., & Lecas, J-F. (2000). Illusory inferences
from a disjunction of conditionals: A new mental models
account. Cognition, 76, 167-173.
Bohner, G., Einwiller, S., Erb, H.-P., & Siebler, F. (2003).
When small means comfortable: Relations between
product attributes in two-sided advertising. Journal of
Consumer Psychology, 13, 454-463.
Bohner, G., Moskowitz, G.B., & Chaiken, S. (1995). The
interplay of heuristic and systematic processing of social
information. In W. Stroebe, & M. Hewstone (Eds.),
European Review of Social Psychology (Vol. 6, pp 3368). Hoboken: Wiley.
Bohner, G., Ruder, M., & Erb, H.P. (2002). When expertise
backfires: Contrast and assimilation effects in persuasion.
British Journal of Social Psychology, 41, 495-519.

953

