UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Space and Time in the Parietal Cortex: fMRI Evidence for a Neural Asymmetry

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/41g9w85r

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Gijssels, Tom
Bottini, Roberto
Rueschemeyer, Shirley-Ann
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Space and Time in the Parietal Cortex: fMRI Evidence for a Neural Asymmetry
Tom Gijssels1,2,4
(gijsselt@newschool.edu)
1

Roberto Bottini1,2,4

Shirley-Ann Rueschemeyer3,4

(bottinir@newschool.edu)

(sr852@york.ac.edu)

Daniel Casasanto1,2,4

(casasand@newschool.edu)

Department of Psychology, New School for Social Research, New York, USA
2
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, NL
3
University of York, York, UK
4
Donders Center for Brain, Cognition, and Behavior, Nijmegen, NL
Abstract

According to a second theoretical proposal, Metaphor
Theory (MT), space and time are asymmetrically related:
Temporal representations depend on spatial representations, more than vice versa. This asymmetry is fundamental to MT, which posits that representations of abstract
concepts depend, in part, on representations of more concrete, perceptible domains (Lakoff & Johnson, 1980;
1999). Since time is an abstract entity that we can never
see or touch, it is argued to rely on spatial representations
for conceptual scaffolding. Evidence for this asymmetric
relationship comes from psychophysical studies showing
asymmetric cross-dimensional interference between distance and duration: Task-irrelevant spatial magnitude influences temporal judgments more than task-irrelevant
temporal magnitude influences spatial judgments (Bottini
& Casasanto, 2010; Casasanto & Boroditsky, 2008;
Casasanto, Fotakopoulou, & Boroditsky, 2010; Merritt,
Casasanto, & Brannon, 2010; see also Boroditsky, 2000).
These cross-domain asymmetries were predicted by
MT but not by ATOM. Yet, the available data leave open
a possibility: Perhaps spatial and temporal magnitudes are
encoded symmetrically. The observed asymmetry could
arise subsequently, as magnitudes are re-represented during retrieval or response planning. If so, this finding
would help to reconcile ATOM and MT, suggesting that
initial stages of magnitude processing may be ATOMic
even if later stages are metaphoric.
To test this proposal, we used fMRI to measure neural
activity during spatial and temporal magnitude reproduction tasks. First, we compared activity during the encoding of spatial and temporal magnitudes to establish
whether space and time interact at this stage, and whether
they do so in the IPC. Second, by defining this area of
overlap as a Region of Interest (ROI) and by comparing
neural activity during the encoding of space and of time,
we contrasted predictions of MT and ATOM. Both theories predict that encoding space and time should activate
overlapping areas: On the basis of previous findings, we
assume areas within IPC. MT predicts that this common
area will be activated more by time than by space, because people involuntarily encode more irrelevant spatial
information during temporal encoding than vice versa.
ATOM does not predict any cross-domain asymmetry in
the region of overlap.

How are space and time related in the brain? This study contrasts two proposals that make different predictions about the interaction between spatial and temporal magnitudes. Whereas
ATOM implies that space and time are symmetrically related,
Metaphor Theory claims they are asymmetrically related. Here
we investigated whether space and time activate the same neural
structures in the inferior parietal cortex (IPC) and whether the
activation is symmetric or asymmetric across domains. We
measured participants’ neural activity while they made temporal
and spatial judgments on the same visual stimuli. The behavioral
results replicated earlier observations of a space-time asymmetry: Temporal judgments were more strongly influenced by
irrelevant spatial information than vice versa. The BOLD fMRI
data indicated that space and time activated overlapping clusters
in the IPC and that, consistent with Metaphor Theory, this activation was asymmetric: The shared region of IPC was activated
more strongly during temporal judgments than during spatial
judgments. We consider three possible interpretations of this
neural asymmetry, based on 3 possible functions of IPC.
Keywords: ATOM, Metaphor, Space, Time, fMRI, Parietal lobe

Introduction
It is clear that spatial and temporal magnitudes interact in
the brain and mind, but the exact nature of this interaction
is a matter of debate. According to one account, A Theory
Of Magnitude (ATOM; Walsh, 2003), space, time and
other prothetic domains (i.e. that can be experienced as
more or less in magnitude) interact because they are represented by a common metric, located in the inferior parietal cortex (IPC; Walsh 2003; Bueti & Walsh 2009). Support for this model comes from behavioral experiments
showing cross-dimensional interference between different
prothetic dimensions, as well as from neuroimaging studies showing that magnitude processing in various dimensions activates overlapping areas of IPC, mainly in the
right hemisphere (see Bueti & Walsh 2009 for review).
According to ATOM, these different magnitudes share a
representational substrate because they need to be integrated for successful execution of actions: Bueti and
Walsh (2009) note that, “There is no such thing as getting
to the right place at the wrong time” (pg. 1832). Like
Locke (1689/1995) before them, ATOM theorists imply
that space and time are symmetrically related. Indeed, if
different prothetic domains are represented by the same
metric, there is no a priori reason to assume that one domain should depend asymmetrically on another.

495

Methods

the icon, clicked once, waited for the amount of time the
line had been on the screen, and clicked a second time in
the same spot. The time between the two clicks represented the duration of the line (procedure adapted from
Casasanto & Boroditsky, 2008).
Finally, two color identification conditions were included as controls: the “color half” (CH) and “color-full”
(CF) conditions provided a low level visual control for the
target lines, and also allowed us to subtract out activity
due to motor preparation prior to responses. Each color
condition required the same motor response as one of the
target conditions. In the “color-half” condition (CH), participants saw two squares appear, each consisting of a red
and a blue half. The left square was presented in the same
corner in which the spatial response cue was presented for
that participant and the second square was presented 250
pixels to the right of the left one. Participants first moved
the cursor to the half of the left square that matched the
color of the line, clicked once, moved the cursor rightwards in a straight line to the half of the right square that
matched the color of the line and clicked again. Both
squares were identical within a given trial (e.g. 2 red-blue
squares), but the order of the colored halves was counterbalanced across trials (50% red-blue; 50% blue-red). In
the “color-full” condition (CF), participants saw a blue
and a red square appear in the upper- and lower-left corners of the screen (square position was counterbalanced
across trials) and clicked twice on the square that had the
color of the presented line.
Before entering the scanner, participants read the instructions and performed 3 practice trials of each condition. While in the scanner, participants performed each of
the four tasks for each of the 36 unique lines (4 x 36 =
144 trials in total). Lines were presented randomly within
condition, and the order of conditions varied pseudorandomly (maximum of 3 trials of the same condition in a
row).

Participants
18 healthy native English speakers (16 right-, 1 lefthanded, 1 ambidextrous, 9 male, mean age = 23.7, range:
20-31) took part in the current experiment. All participants provided informed consent and were compensated
for their participation.

Materials
Lines of varying lengths were presented for varying durations. Durations ranged from 1000 ms to 4000 ms in 600
ms increments. Displacements ranged from 100 to 400
pixels in 60 pixel increments. The six durations were fully
crossed with the six spatial displacements, producing 36
unique lines. Half of the lines were red and half were
blue. Color was randomly assigned and counter-balanced
across conditions and participants. Lines grew horizontally across the screen from left to right, along the vertical
midline. The starting position of the lines was, on average, at 337 pixels from the left border of the screen, with
the starting point randomly jittered (± 25 pixels) so the
monitor could not be used as a reliable reference frame
for spatial estimations. Participants responded with a joystick (Current Designs, Philadelphia, USA; model:
HHSC-JOY-1). Participants used their right hand to control the joystick for cursor movement and their left index
finger for button responses.

Procedure
Participants engaged in four different tasks: spatial reproduction, temporal reproduction and two color identification control tasks. Each trial started with a white cue that
was presented for 1 second and indicated which dimension participants would need to reproduce for this trial (an
“X” for space, an hourglass for time, and different colored
squares for the two control conditions). This cue was followed by a single growing line that stayed on the screen
until it reached its maximum spatial and temporal extent
and then disappeared. After a period of 5 sec. (+/- random
jitter; range = 0-1 sec.), a response cue and a cursor appeared until participants performed the required task or
until a time-out period of 12 seconds had elapsed.
In the space condition (S), the X-icon appeared in either the upper- or lower-left corner of the screen (location
counterbalanced across participants). To reproduce the
distance that the line had traveled, participants moved the
cursor from the center of the screen to the center of the
icon, clicked once, moved the cursor rightwards in a
straight line and then clicked a second time. The distance
between the clicks represented the estimated displacement
of the line. In the time condition (T), the hourglass-icon
appeared in the lower- or upper-left corner of the screen
(i.e. in the corner opposite the space cue). To reproduce
duration, participants moved the cursor to the center of

fMRI Data Acquisition
fMRI data were acquired on a Siemens Avanto 1.5 T MRI
system (Siemens, Erlangen, Germany) using a standard
birdcage head-coil for RF transmission and signal reception. T2*-weighted BOLD-sensitive images were acquired using a gradient EPI sequence (Echo Time (TE) =
40 ms; Repetition Time (TR) = 2.28 s; 32 axial slices in
ascending order; voxel size = 3.3x3.3x3.0 mm3). For each
subject we also acquired a T1-weighted high-resolution
anatomical scan (TE = 2.95 s, TR = 2.25 s, voxel size =
1.0x1.0x1.0 mm3, 176 sagittal slices, field of view = 256).

fMRI Data Analysis
Functional data were preprocessed and analyzed with
SPM8 (http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/). Preprocessing
involved the removal of the first 5 volumes to allow for
T1 equilibration effects. Images were spatially realigned

496

with rigid body registration, temporally realigned to the
middle slice (slice 17), co-registered to each participant’s
structural scan, normalized to a standard EPI template in
MNI space and resampled at an isotropic voxel size of 2
mm. To remove baseline-drifts and low frequency signal
changes, a 1/128 Hz temporal high-pass filter was applied. The normalized images were then smoothed with
an isotropic 8 mm FWHM Gaussian kernel.
The preprocessed data were analyzed on a subject-wise
basis using an event-related approach. The time series
were entered into a GLM with separate regressors for the
encoding and response phase for each condition (respectively modeled at one second before stimulus offset and
response onset for S, T, CH and CF), which were then
convolved with a canonical hemodynamic response function. Although response phase regressors were added to
the model for completeness, they were not analyzed further and will not be discussed. Finally, nuisance regressors were added to account for disturbances caused by
small head movements.
To examine neural activity specific to spatial and temporal encoding, we computed two contrast images for
each participant individually ([S-CH] and [T-CF]). These
were then entered into separate second level random effects analyses to compute the space- and time-specific activations on the group level. Each of these two analyses
consisted of a one-sample t-test to reveal activations significantly different from zero across the contrast images
from all participants. A double threshold was applied to
protect against Type I errors: only voxels with a p < .001
(uncorrected) and a volume exceeding 41 voxels (328
mm3) were considered (volume sizes were defined by
Monte Carlo Simulation, p < .001, Slotnick, 2011).
To reveal the neural overlap between spatial and temporal encoding, we performed a conjunction analysis on
the 2 second-level contrast images ([S-CH] ∩ [T-CF]).
Based on our a priori hypothesis, bilateral clusters of IPC
activity that emerged from the conjunction were extracted
and defined as our ROI’s. From these ROI’s, we extracted
separate contrast values for the [S-CH] and the [T-CF]
contrasts for each subject, using the MarsBaR package
(Brett, Anton, Valabregue, &
Poline, 2002;
http://marsbar.sourceforge.net, v.042).

slopes of the effect of irrelevant spatial information on
duration reproduction (ST) and the effect of irrelevant
temporal information on spatial distance reproduction
(TS) for each participant separately (Fig. 1). The results
showed significant cross-dimensional interference effects:
The spatial extent of stimuli predicted the variation in the
temporal responses (Wald X2(1) = 23.55, p = .001) and
the duration of stimuli predicted the variation in spatial
responses (Wald X2(1) = 12.21, p = .001). Importantly,
these effects were asymmetric: Spatial information affected duration reproduction more than temporal information
affected distance reproduction (Wald X2(1) = 8.00, p =
.01).

Figure 1: Cross-domain interference effects. TS (Blue):
Effect of line duration on spatial distance reproduction.
ST (Red): Effect of line displacement on duration reproduction. Error bars indicate SEM.
To investigate within-domain performance, we used
the normalized stimulus and response values to calculate
the normalized slopes of the effect of spatial variation on
spatial reproduction (SS) and temporal variation on temporal reproduction (TT), for each participant separately.
Although the results show strong effects both of actual
space on estimated space (SS: Normalized slope = 0.98;
Wald X2(1) = 10139, p = .001) and of actual time on estimated time (TT: Normalized slope = 0.88 Wald X2(1) =
1465, p = .001), they also show a significant difference
between within-dimension effects: participants were significantly better at spatial than at temporal reproduction
(Difference of normalized slopes = 0.10 Wald X2(1) =
20.41, p = .001).
This difference in within-domain performance between
space and time is potentially problematic for the interpretation of the between-domain asymmetry. If performance
in one domain is nearly perfect, estimates in this domain
may be less susceptible to interference than estimates in

Results
Behavioral Results
First we tested whether spatial and temporal reproduction
was affected by variation in the task-irrelevant stimulus
dimension. The spatial and temporal extents of the stimuli
and responses were normalized, so that slopes could be
compared across domains1. We calculated the normalized
1
The data from one participant were excluded due to excessively low within-dimension performance on both tasks (both
slopes were two standard deviations below group averages).

497

the other domain (Bottini & Casasanto, 2010). To rule out
this concern, we re-ran the regression model after equating for within-dimension performance. Following
Casasanto, et al. (2010), we excluded the data from participants with low TT-slopes until the within-dimension performance was the same for Space and Time (i.e. until SS
= TT; N = 7). Even after equating within-dimension performance, a strong space-time asymmetry persisted: the
spatial extent of stimuli predicted the variation in the
temporal responses more than vice versa (Wald X2(1) =
12.56, p = .001), as in previous experiments (e.g.,
Casasanto & Boroditsky, 2008; Merritt et al., 2010).

dition of interest. These contrast values were entered into
a regression model, with Condition (Space; Time), Hemisphere (Left; Right) and their interaction (Condition*Hemisphere) as within-subject factors and Subject as
a repeated random effect. The IPC was activated more
strongly by temporal encoding than by spatial encoding
(main effect of Condition: Wald X2(1) = 4.65, p = .03).
Furthermore, both domains activated the right IPC more
than the left IPC (main effect of Hemisphere: Wald X2(1)
= 6.79, p = .01), but the relationship between spatial and
temporal activation did not differ between hemispheres
(Condition*Hemisphere interaction: Wald X2(1) = .073, p
=.79). Since previous studies have tended to implicate the
right IPC in magnitude processing, we analyzed the ROI
in each hemisphere separately. The main effect of Condition was significant in the right hemisphere (T > S, Wald
X2(1) = 5.14, p = .02), and marginally significant in the
left-hemisphere (T > S, Wald X2(1) = 3.49, p = .06) (Fig.
2, right).

Imaging Results
Patterns of Activation As the ROI analysis was our main
point of focus, we provide only a cursory overview of the
whole-brain results. During spatial encoding ([S-CH]), we
observed bilateral activations in parietal areas (including
the IPC, intraparietal sulcus (IPS) & superior parietal gyrus), extrastriate visual cortex (extending into the inferior
temporal gyrus) and frontal areas (precentral gyri, IFG,
anterior insulae (AI), middle frontal gyri, SMA & medial
superior frontal gyri). During temporal encoding ([TCF]), we found activations in the parietal cortex (bilateral
IPC, IPS, & supramarginal gyri; right angular gyrus), left
dorsal extrastriate cortex and a range of bilateral frontal
activations (precentral gyri, AI, DLPFC, SMA, anterior
cingulate and medial superior frontal gyri). Additional activity was observed in bilateral superior temporal gyri,
right inferior temporal gyrus and subcortical areas (thalamus and basal ganglia).
To reveal neural activations common to spatial and
temporal encoding, we performed a conjunction analysis
on both aforementioned contrasts ([S-CH] ∩ [T-CF]; Fig.
2, left). Overlapping activations were found in bilateral
parietal cortex, ranging from lateral IPC into the IPS and
including part of the supramarginal gyrus in the right
hemisphere. Additional clusters of activity included the
left extrastriate cortex, just anterior to the cuneus, and a
posterior part of the right inferior temporal gyrus. Frontal
activations included bilateral DLPFC and parts of both
precentral gyri (extending ventrally into the IFG and AI).
Furthermore, we observed right-lateralized dorsal activation of the posterior middle and superior frontal gyri, extending into the superior frontal sulcus. Finally, the conjunction revealed medial frontal activations comprising
the SMA, the medial superior frontal gyri and the middle
and anterior cingulate.

Figure 2: Left: IPC activated by both space and time.
Yellow: areas activated by spatial encoding ([S-CH]);
Red: areas activated by temporal encoding ([T-CF]); Orange: areas activated by both ([S-CH] ∩ [T-CF]).
Right: Contrast values for space and time for the left and
right IPC clusters.
Although these findings demonstrate that the IPC was
differentially activated by spatial and temporal encoding,
we must consider a skeptical account of this neural
asymmetry. Our behavioral results indicated that, for
some participants, temporal encoding was less accurate
than spatial encoding, and may therefore have been more
effortful. In principle, a difference in cognitive effort
could be responsible for the observed cross-domain
asymmetry in the IPC. If the observed asymmetry were
due to more effort during temporal vs. spatial encoding,
then adding a measure that reflects this difference in effort to the regression model as a covariate should reduce
or eliminate the main effect of Condition.
To address this possibility, we calculated the difference
between the normalized slopes of within-dimension performance in the space and the time condition (SS-TT) for
each participant and included this difference score in the
model. Even when cognitive effort was controlled for, we
observed the same robust cross-domain asymmetry effects. Both IPC clusters were still activated more by tem-

ROI Analysis To investigate whether space and time encoding activated the bilateral IPC clusters revealed by the
conjunction analysis symmetrically or asymmetrically, we
defined the left and right IPC clusters as our two ROI’s
and extracted the contrast values per subject for each con-

498

poral than by spatial encoding (main effect of Condition:
Wald X2(1) = 4.19, p = .04), with stronger overall right
hemisphere activation (main effect of Hemisphere: Wald
X2(1) = 4.24, p = .04). The main effect of this behavioral
measure of cognitive effort, however, was not significant
(Wald X2(1)= 2.42, p = .12), nor was its three-way interaction with Dimension and Hemisphere (Wald X2(1) =
1.60, p = .66). These analyses show that the cross-domain
asymmetry in BOLD activity in the IPC ROIs cannot be
attributed to the observed differences in within-domain
performance (i.e., to the finding that temporal estimates
were less accurate, and potentially more effortful, than
spatial estimates).

A second possibility is that magnitudes from different
domains are represented independently in different parts
of the brain (Cohen Kadosh et al. 2008), and that the IPC
hosts a mechanism by which cross-domain magnitude
representations are selected and integrated according to
contextual demands.
A range of empirical data supports this interpretation.
Several studies have shown that, during magnitude judgments, the activation of parietal areas around the IPS is
modulated by the degree of interference from irrelevant
dimensions (Ansari, Fugelsang, Dhital, & Venkatraman,
2006; Cohen Kadosh, Cohen Kadosh & Henik, 2008; Pinel, Piazza, Le Bihan, & Dehaene, 2004; Cohen Kadosh,
Cohen Kadosh, Linden, et al., 2007; Kaufmann et al.,
2005). Moreover, studies of magnitude-irrelevant visual
processing find that the IPC is activated by the need to
suppress task-irrelevant distractors (Friedman-Hill, Robertson, Desimone, & Ungerleider, 2003; Marois, Chun, &
Gore, 2000; Wojciulik & Kanwisher, 1999). These processes are mostly right-lateralized (Chun & Marois, 2002;
Marois, Chun, & Gore, 2000; 2004) and they are independent from task difficulty (Marois et al., 2000;
Wojciulik & Kanwisher, 1999).
Our task required participants to selectively attend to
the relevant dimension of the stimuli and filter out the irrelevant dimension (i.e., space or time), which varied orthogonally. The greater IPC activation we observed during temporal encoding could reflect the increased demands posed on the ‘magnitude selector/integrator’ to filter out the task-irrelevant spatial information. Whereas
this interpretation is consistent with MT, it contradicts
one of the core claims of ATOM by positing that spatial
and temporal magnitude representations are distinct: What
is in common is the process of selecting and integrating
relevant magnitude information.
Finally, on a third possibility, encoding space and time
activated nearby but separate neural populations in the
IPC, but the low spatial resolution of fMRI does not allow
us to separate them (see Shuman & Kanwisher 2004 for
similar arguments). On this view, spatial encoding would
have mainly activated the spatial representations, whereas
temporal encoding would have activated both temporal
and spatial representations. Not only could this account
for the BOLD asymmetry (the combined activation of the
two separate neural populations in same voxels during
time processing leads to a higher BOLD signal), it could
also explain the behavioral pattern. If temporal encoding
activates neural populations that code for space more than
vice versa, due to the “source domain-target domain” link
posited by metaphor theorists, there should be more opportunity for crosstalk during time encoding than during
space encoding. This notion of separate but closely interacting neural representations of space and time is consistent with MT, but argues against ATOM’s claim of a
shared representational basis of all prothetic magnitudes.

Discussion
This study investigated whether representations of space
and time interact at encoding and, if so, whether their relationship is symmetric or asymmetric. Consistent with
both ATOM and MT, we observed that encoding spatial
and temporal magnitudes activated overlapping clusters of
a widespread neural network, most notably in the bilateral
IPC. Of primary interest, our behavioral and ROI data
provide converging support for an asymmetric relationship between these two domains, as predicted by MT. The
behavioral findings indicated that when people reproduced duration they incorporated task-irrelevant spatial
information, more so than they incorporated taskirrelevant temporal information when reproducing spatial
extent. Our fMRI results showed that this behavioral
asymmetry corresponded to a neural asymmetry: the IPC
was more active during temporal encoding than during
spatial encoding. The asymmetry between space and time
is already present during encoding of spatial and temporal
stimuli.
Further interpretation of the asymmetric IPC activation
requires addressing the question of what exactly is being
represented in the IPC. On one possibility, the IPC is the
locus of a domain-general magnitude metric that accumulates undifferentiated bits of information (Bueti & Walsh,
2009, Walsh, 2003), in any prothetic domain. In our task,
the activation of the IPC might reflect the degree to which
this metric accumulates bits from both domains simultaneously. Our behavioral results indicated that taskirrelevant spatial information was being encoded during
time trials, more than task-irrelevant temporal information
was being encoded during space trials. Hence, the IPC
metric would have accumulated more task-irrelevant
magnitude information (along with the task-relevant magnitude information) during time trials than during space
trials, resulting in the increased BOLD signal. This account can potentially reconcile ATOM with MT: It is
compatible with ATOM’s claim of an IPC-based general
magnitude representation, and is also consistent with MT,
as the asymmetric IPC activation indicates an asymmetric
interaction between space and time.

499

interaction between number and size: a combined
functional magnetic resonance imaging and event-related
potential study. J. Cog. Neurosci., 19(6), 957–70.
Cohen Kadosh, R., Cohen Kadosh, K., Schuhmann, T., Kaas,
A., Goebel, R., Henik, A., & Sack, A. (2007). Virtual
dyscalculia induced by parietal-lobe TMS impairs
automatic magnitude processing. Current Biology, 17(8),
689–93.
Cohen Kadosh, R., Henik, A., Rubinsten, O., Mohr, H., Dori,
H., Van de Ven, V., Zorzi, M., et al. (2005). Are numbers
special? The comparison systems of the human brain
investigated by fMRI. Neuropsychologia, 43(9), 1238–48.
Cohen Kadosh, R., Lammertyn, J., & Izard, V. (2008). Are
numbers special? An overview of chronometric,
neuroimaging, developmental and comparative studies of
magnitude representation. Progress in neurobiology,
84(2), 132–47.
Dormal, V., Andres, M., & Pesenti, M. (2008). Dissociation
of numerosity and duration processing in the left
intraparietal sulcus: a transcranial magnetic stimulation
study. Cortex, 44(4), 462–9.
Fias, W., Lammertyn, J., Reynvoet, B., Dupont, P., & Orban,
G. A. (2003). Parietal representation of symbolic and
nonsymbolic magnitude. J. Cog. Neurosci., 15(1), 47-56.
Friedman-Hill, S., Robertson, L., Desimone, R., & L.
Ungerleider (2003). Posterior parietal cortex and the
filtering of distractors. PNAS, 100(7), 4263–8.
Kaufmann, L., Koppelstaetter, F., Delazer, M., Siedentopf,
C., Rhomberg, P., Golaszewski, S., Felber, S., et al.
(2005). Neural correlates of distance and congruity effects
in a numerical Stroop task: an event-related fMRI study.
NeuroImage, 25(3), 888–98.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Conceptual Metaphor in
Everyday Language. Journal of Philosophy, 77 (8), 453486.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the Flesh:
The Embodied Mind and Its Challenge to Western Tought.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Locke, J. (1689/1995). An essay concerning human understanding. Amherst: Promethius Books.
Marois, R, Chun, M., & Gore, J. (2000). Neural correlates of
the attentional blink. Neuron, 28(1), 299–308.
Marois, R., Chun, M., & Gore, J. (2004). A common parietofrontal network is recruited under both low visibility and
high perceptual interference conditions. Journal of
Neurophysiology, 92(5), 2985–92.
Merritt, D.J., Casasanto, D., & Brannon, E.M. (2010). Do
Monkeys Think in Metaphors? Representations of Space
and Time in Monkeys and Humans. Cognition, 117, 191202.
Shuman, M., & Kanwisher, N. (2004). Numerical magnitude
in the human parietal lobe; tests of representational
generality and domain specificity. Neuron, 44(3), 557–69.
Slotnick, S. (2011). Cluster_threshold (beta) [Software].
Available from http://www2.bc.edu/sd-slotnick
Walsh, V. (2003). A theory of magnitude: common cortical
metrics of time, space and quantity. TiCS, 7(11), 483–488.
Wojciulik, E. & Kanwisher, N. (1999). The generality of
parietal involvement in visual attention. Neuron, 23(4),
747–64.

In summary, here we show a neural asymmetry between space and time that underlies the behavioral asymmetry found here and in multiple previous studies of distance and duration estimation. We consider three possible
interpretations of these behavioral and neural asymmetries, all of which are consistent with MT, but only the
first of which is compatible with ATOM. If the first account is correct and the IPC is the locus of a domaingeneral magnitude metric, ATOM and MT can be reconciled and the apparent contradiction in behavioral data resolved. The two other proposals are only consistent with
MT and argue directly against ATOM’s main claim of a
shared IPC-based magnitude metric. Rather, they suggest
that space and time are represented by distinct but closely
interacting neural structures, either in the IPC, or in the
form of a broadly distributed network. Further studies are
needed to decide among these possibilities and clarify the
role of the IPC in representing or integrating magnitudes.

Acknowledgements
This research supported in part by a James S. McDonnell
Foundation Scholar Award (#220020236) to DC.

References
Ansari, D., Fugelsang, J., Dhital, B., & Venkatraman, V.
(2006). Dissociating response conflict from numerical
magnitude processing in the brain: an event-related fMRI
study. NeuroImage, 32(2), 799–805.
Boroditsky, L. (2000). Metaphoric structuring:
Understanding time through spatial metaphors. Cognition,
75(1), 1–28.
Bottini, R. & Casasanto, D. (2010). Implicit spatial length
modulates time estimates, but not vice versa. In S. Ohlsson
& R. Catrambone (Eds.), Proceedings of the 32nd Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 13481353). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Brett, M., Anton, J., Valabregue, R., & Poline, J. (2002).
Region of interest analysis using an SPM toolbox. 8th
International Conference on Functional Mapping of the
Human Brain. Sendai, Japan.
Bueti, D., & Walsh, V.(2009). The parietal cortex and the
representation of time, space, number and other
magnitudes. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B.,364(1525),1831–40.
Casasanto, D., & Boroditsky, L. (2008). Time in the mind:
using space to think about time. Cognition, 106(2), 579–
93.
Casasanto, D., Fotakopoulou, O., & Boroditsky, L. (2010).
Space and Time in the Child’s Mind: Evidence for a
Cross-Dimensional Asymmetry. Cognitive Science, 34(3),
387–405.
Chun, M. M., & Marois, R. (2002). The dark side of visual
attention. Curr. Opinion in Neurobiology, 12, 184 – 189.
Cohen Kadosh, R., Cohen Kadosh, K., & Henik, A. (2008).
When brightness counts: the neuronal correlate of
numerical-luminance interference. Cerebral Cortex, 18(2),
337–43.
Cohen Kadosh, R., Cohen Kadosh, K., Linden, D., Gevers,
W., Berger, A., & Henik, A. (2007). The brain locus of

500

