UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Space and Time are Mutually Contagious in Sound

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5j42m8gm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Kranjec, Alexander
Lehet, Matthew
Chatterjee, Anjan

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Space and Time are Mutually Contagious in Sound
Alexander Kranjec (kranjeca@duq.edu)
Psychology Department, Duquesne University
Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition, Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Matthew Lehet (mil@andrew.cmu.edu)
Psychology Department, Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Anjan Chatterjee (anjan@mail.med.upenn.edu)
Neurology Department and Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA, USA

Abstract

because as we walk forward, objects we pass begin to
occupy the unseen space behind our bodies becoming
accessible only to memory as part of a temporal past.
Experimental studies support the idea that the ways in
which we experience space play a role in structuring the
semantics of time (Boroditsky, 2000, 2001; Boroditsky &
Ramscar, 2002; Casasanto & Boroditsky, 2008; Kranjec,
Cardillo, Schmidt, & Chatterjee, 2010; Kranjec &
McDonough, 2011; Matlock, Ramscar, & Boroditsky, 2005;
Miles, Nind, & Macrae, 2010; Nunez, Motz, & Teuschner,
2006; Nunez & Sweetser, 2006; Torralbo, Santiago, &
Lupianez, 2006).

Time is talked about in terms of space more frequently than
the opposite is true. Past experimental evidence suggests that
this asymmetry runs deep, with results suggesting that
temporal concepts and percepts find structure in spatial
representations but not vice versa. However, these studies
frequently involve verbal and/or visual stimuli. Because
vision makes a privileged contribution to spatial processing it
is unclear whether these results speak to a deep asymmetry
between time and space, or a modality specific one. The
present study was motivated by this ambiguity and a
complementary correspondence between audition and
temporal processing. In an auditory perceptual task, duration
and spatial displacement judgments were shown to be
mutually contagious.
Irrelevant temporal information
influenced spatial judgments and vice versa with a larger
effect of time on space. The results suggest that the perceptual
asymmetry between domains does not generalize across
modalities and that time is not fundamentally more abstract
than space.

In language, time−space relations are relatively
asymmetrical. Not only is time talked about in spatial terms
much more frequently than space is talked about in terms of
time, but in many ways time must be talked about using the
language of space, whereas the opposite is not true. These
linguistic patterns have been interpreted to suggest a deeper
conceptual organization.
According to conceptual
metaphor theory (Lakoff & Johnson, 1999) we think about
relatively abstract target domains (like time) in terms of
more concrete source domains (like space). This basic
organizational principle is purported to serve the functional
role of making more abstract concepts easier to talk and
think about. It is argued that we depend on such a hierarchy
because, for example, we can directly see and touch things
“in space” in a way that we cannot “in time.” This suggests
that thinking about time in terms of space runs cognitively
deep, and reflects a mental organization more fundamental
than that observed at the relatively superficial level of
words.

Keywords: space and time; language and thought;
metaphor; embodiment

Introduction
Time is frequently talked about using the language of space
(Clark, 1973; Hasplemath, 1997; Tenbrink, 2007). Events
can be long or short, and can occupy a place that is either
behind or in front of us in time. Space is used to talk about
time not only frequently but also meaningfully. We talk
about temporal extent or duration in terms of distance, and
the past and future in egocentric locational terms. These
ways of talking and thinking about space and time are
thought to reflect something about how we experience these
domains together. We may talk about duration in terms of
length because it takes more time to visually scan or travel
through more extended space, and the past as behind

In a widely cited paper, Casasanto and Boroditsky (2008)
sought strong experimental evidence for this theoretical
organizational principle. Specifically, they wanted to know
if the asymmetry of space-time metaphors in language
predicted a similar asymmetry in perception. They reasoned

829

that low-level perceptual biases demonstrating concordant
asymmetry with patterns found in language would provide
strong evidence that temporal representations are grounded
on more concrete spatial representations.

part of our auditory experience. [But see (Shamma, 2001)
for a dissenting view.] For example, whereas spatial
relations and visual objects tend to be persistent, sound, like
time, is relatively transient (Galton, 2011). While the retina
preserves analog spatial relations in early representations,
the cochlea does not (Moore, 1977; Ratliff & Hartline,
1974). Sound localization is less precise than object
localization in vision (Kubovy, 1988). And generally,
temporal information is more critical and/or salient in
common forms of experience grounded in sound perception
(e.g., music and speech). In the context of music, “when” a
sound occurs matters much more than “where” it does. In
speech, the ability to perceive differences in voice onset
time is critical for discriminating between phonological
categories (Blumstein, Cooper, Zurif, & Caramazza, 1977).
Thus, one might argue that in many critical contexts,
relations between sound and time are relatively more
concrete than relations between sound and space. The
present research directly addresses these issues with a task
closely following Casasanto and Boroditsky (2008) but
using auditory instead of visual stimuli.

In their study, participants viewed growing or static lines
one at a time on a computer screen. Lines could be of nine
durations crossed with nine displacement sizes to produce
81 unique stimuli. After the presentation of each line,
participants were randomly prompted to either reproduce a
line’s spatial extent (by dragging a mouse) or a line’s
duration (by clicking a mouse). Each line was presented
twice: once in each kind of reproduction trial (i.e.,
displacement or duration estimation).
They found that the remembered size of a line in space
concordantly modulated recall for its duration, but not vice
versa. That is, (spatially) longer lines were remembered as
being presented for longer times, but lines of greater
durations were not remembered as having greater spatial
extent. The results were consistent with the idea that
asymmetrical patterns of space-time mappings in language
are preserved further down at the level of perception. They
concluded, “these findings provide evidence that the
metaphorical relationship between space and time observed
in language also exists in our more basic representations of
distance and duration” (p. 592).

Methods
Twenty members of the University of Pennsylvania
community participated for payment. All participants were
right-handed, native English speakers, and between 18-26
years of age.
The participants were equiped with
headphones and seated at a computer for a self-paced
experiment. Participants initiated the beginning of each
new trial and the start of each within-trial component. Each
trial consisted of two sounds, a target sound followed by a
playback sound. In the first part of each trial, the target
sound was presented, and participants were instructed to
attend to both spatial and temporal aspects of the stimulus.
Target sounds consisted of bursts of white noise that
changed in location relative to a participant’s head position
across time. White noise bursts were of nine durations
(lasting between 1000 and 5000ms with 500ms increments)
and 9 distances (moving between .5 and 4.5m in increments
of .5m). All durations and distances were crossed to create
81 distinct target sounds. The initial location of the target
sound was an average of 2.75m to the left or right of the
listener with a jitter of between .1 and .5m. Starting
locations on the right indicated leftward moving trials and
starting locations on the left indicated rightward moving
trials. Starting locations were randomly assigned to stimuli
with an even number of right and leftward moving trials.
The plane of movement was 1 meter in front of the listener.
Stimuli were created using Matlab and played using the
OpenAL library provided with Psychophysics Toolbox
extensions (Brainard, 1997). The OpenAL library is
designed to model sounds moving in virtual metric space.

That we use space to think about time is now widely
acknowledged. The idea that time is fundamentally (i.e.,
ontologically) more abstract than space is regarded as a
prerequisite for this relation. However, there are still
reasons to question this general view. First, neural data
supporting the idea that our temporal concepts are grounded
in embodied spatial representations is scarce, partly because
it is not entirely clear what an embodied spatial
representation is in the first place (Kranjec & Chatterjee,
2010). Furthermore, recent fMRI evidence suggests that
temporal and spatial concepts do not necessarily have
privileged relations in the brain (Kranjec, Cardillo, Lehet, &
Chatterjee, 2012). By focusing on space, embodied theories
have neglected to investigate temporal conceptual
grounding in neural systems that instantiate time perception
in the body. Importantly, studies in this area of research
tend to rely on visual tasks. This in particular makes it
unclear whether observed behavioral asymmetries between
time and space reflect (1) general ontological (or even
metaphysical) relations dependent on each domain’s relative
level of “abstractness” or (2) a less general, modalityspecific contribution of visual representations in humans.
To distinguish between these two alternatives, the present
study directly probes time−space relations in the auditory
domain. Audition was selected because there are intuitive
reasons to think that those time−space asymmetries
observed in vision might actually be reversed in sound. This
is because time, more than space, seems to be an intimate

After attending to the target sound, participants were
prompted to reproduce either the sound’s duration or
distance and then instructed to press the spacebar to begin

830

the playback sound. In this second part of each trial, the
playback sound provided the medium for the participant’s
response. The playback sound began in the final location of
the preceding target sound and moved in the reverse
direction. So, if a target sound moved rightward, the
playback sound moved leftward, and vice versa. On
distance trials, participants were instructed to respond when
the playback sound reached the start location of the target
sound, thereby reproducing the distance from head to start
point. In this manner, the participant’s head provided a
fixed reference point for judging distance. On duration
trials, participants were instructed to respond when the
playback sound duration was equal to the target sound
duration. The playback sound lasted for a fixed 8500ms and
moved 3.5m past the starting location of the target sound or
until the participant responded. The playback sounds were
designed in such a manner as to allow participants the
possibility to both overshoot and undershoot their estimates.
Participants heard each target sound in both duration and
distance conditions for a total of 162 trials.

Results
The results (Fig. 1) demonstrate that actual durations
affected estimates of spatial displacement (Fig. 1A: y =
0.0002x + 1.4208, r2 = .98, df = 7, p < .01) and that actual
spatial displacement affected estimates of duration (Fig. 1B:
y = 128.97x + 2532.8, r2 = .88, df = 7, p < .01). On distance
trials, for stimuli of the same average duration (3000ms),
sounds shorter in length were judged to be of shorter
duration, and sounds longer in length were judged to be of
longer duration. On duration trials, for stimuli of the same
average displacement (2.5m) sounds of shorter durations
were judged to be shorter in length, and sounds of longer
durations were judged to be longer in length. Time and
space were mutually contagious in that irrelevant
information in the task-irrelevant domain affected
participants’ estimates of both duration and spatial
displacement.
Compatible effects were found using
multiple regression analyses. Duration was significantly
correlated with distance judgments even when variance
associated with each trial’s actual distance was removed
[ρr(81) = .81; p < .01]. Distance was significantly
correlated with duration judgments when variance
associated with actual duration was removed [ρr(81) = .64;
p < .01]. There was no effect of direction (left-moving vs.
right moving trials).
Figure 1A-D: (Opposite column) Averaged duration and spatial
displacement estimates. The top scatterplots depict between domain
effects. The dotted lines represent the line predicted by perfect
performance. All space and time intervals were fully crossed. The average
of all 9 displacement intervals is 2.5m at each duration (1A) and the
average of the all duration intervals is 3000ms at each displacement length
(1B). The bottom scatterplots (1C and 1D) depict within domain effects.
Error bars refer to standard error of the mean.

831

Participants’ overall estimates of duration and displacement
were very accurate. The effects of actual duration on
estimated duration (Fig. 1C: y = 0.6805x + 813.64, r2 = .99,
df = 7, p < .001) and actual displacement on estimated
displacement (Fig. 1D: y = 0.6374x + 0.4115, r2 = .99, df =
7, p < .001) were also very similar to each other and to
analogous analyses of accuracy in Casasanto & Boroditsky
(2008). This suggests that participants were approximately
equal in accuracy when making duration and distance
judgments within the present experiment and between
comparable experiments using auditory and visual stimuli.

that the remembered size of a stimulus in space modulated
recall for its duration, but not vice versa (Casasanto &
Boroditsky, 2008). In contrast, the present study having an
analogous design but using auditory stimuli found that space
and time are mutually contagious.
Furthermore, as
predicted by the privileged relation between auditory and
temporal processing, the perceived duration of a stimulus
had a larger effect on perceived displacement than the
reverse. While this is suggestive of a perceptual asymmetry
running opposite to that observed in the visual domain,
broader claims regarding a deep ontological asymmetry
between time and space in the auditory domain are currently
unwarranted.
Although “in sound,” time appears to
influence judgments of spatial displacement more than vice
versa, these results may not generalize to other scales,
intervals, and ranges of time-space relations.
And
importantly, the effect of spatial displacement on duration
estimates was still strong in the auditory domain (r2 = .88).
In Casasanto and Boroditsky’s 2008 study, actual duration
had no effect on spatial displacement judgments.

The effect of duration on displacement was significantly
greater than the effect of displacement on duration (Fig. 2)
(2A vs. 2B: difference of correlations = 0.10; z = 1.7 onetailed, p < .05). However, some caution should be taken
when interpreting this result. It is unclear to us whether
differences in perceptual judgments between domains can
be directly compared at such a fine grain when arbitrarily
defined scales, intervals, and ranges (e.g., in seconds and
meters) are used to define temporal and spatial aspects of
the stimuli. This is a concern even though spatial and
temporal judgments focused on identical stimuli. It is
possible that other scaled relations could yield different
patterns of results.

These results demonstrate that time is not necessarily or
fundamentally more abstract than space, and suggest that
previously observed verbal and mental asymmetries of
representing time in terms of space may at least be partially
dependent on the human disposition to think visually. The
general idea that visuospatial representations are central to
how we think and reason in a more general sense about the
world is well established (Johnson-Laird, 1986; Tversky,
2005) as is the more specific idea that spatial, visual, and
verbal representations are deeply intertwined in giving rise
to abstract semantics (Chatterjee, 2001, 2008; Jackendoff,
1996; Talmy, 2000). In the context of previous research
demonstrating a strong asymmetry for time-space relations,
the results of the present study suggest something very
important about the nature of those “embodied spatial
representations” that appear to structure patterns in language
and thought. That is, such representations are likely
visuospatial in nature.

,$/5+6,78$

)"!$

9$

!"($
!"'$
!"&$
!"%$
!"#$
*+,-*./$012$

*./-*+,032$

*+,-*+,$042$

*./-*./$0*2$

Figure 2: Comparing differences between effects. Effects of: Duration
on Displacement (Dur|Dis); Displacement on Duration (Dis|Dur); Duration
on Duration (Dur|Dur); Displacement on Displacement (Dis|Dis). A-D
refer to corresponding scatterplots in Figure 1.

It should be noted that the present results do not refute those
reported in Casasanto and Boroditsky’s analogous (2008)
study. Rather, our results suggest that the hypothesis that
time is more abstract than space at the level of a deep
ontology and/or basic cognitive architecture may need to be
revised. This should not come as a total surprise because
“space” is itself a very abstract concept and, like “time,”
cannot be directly seen, touched, or heard. The present data
suggest that what makes certain spatial or temporal relations
more or less abstract is the sensory modality in which those
relations are processed or experienced. As such, the present
results support a refined but intuitive view of embodied
cognition that takes into account contributions of a
particular sensory modality in processing the abstract
qualities of a stimulus. While space and time may be
equally abstract, relations between objects immersed in
either substrate (whether seen or heard) may be more or less

Discussion
While strong claims about asymmetrical ontological
relations between space and time in the auditory domain are
premature, we can report a significant pattern of time-space
asymmetry in the auditory domain. This asymmetry is
predicted by the temporal nature of auditory processing and
runs in the opposite direction of the asymmetry found in the
visual domain as predicted by patterns of language use
(Casasanto & Boroditsky, 2008) and the relatively spatial
nature of vision.
A prior study using visual stimuli found strong evidence for
an asymmetrical relationship between space and time, such

832

so depending on a range of species-specific and contextual
variables.

Kranjec, A., & McDonough, L. (2011). The implicit and
explicit embodiment of time Journal of
Pragmatics, 43(3), 735-748.
Kubovy, M. (1988). Should we resist the seductiveness of
the space: time:: vision: audition analogy?
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the Flesh.
New York, NY: Basic Books.
Matlock, T., Ramscar, M., & Boroditsky, L. (2005). On the
experiential link between spatial and temporal
language. Cognitive Science, 29(4), 655-664.
Miles, L. K., Nind, L. K., & Macrae, C. N. (2010). Moving
through time. Psychological Science, 21(2), 222223.
Moore, B. C. (1977). Introduction to the psychology of
hearing. Baltimore: University Park Press.
Nunez, R., Motz, B., & Teuschner, U. (2006). Time after
Time: The psychological reality of the Ego-and
Time-Reference-Point distinction in metaphorical
construals of time. . Metaphor and Symbol., 21,
133-146.
Nunez, R., & Sweetser, E. (2006). With the Future Behind
Them : Convergent Evidence From Aymara
Language and Gesture in the Crosslinguistic
Comparison of Spatial Construals of Time.
Cognitive Science, 30(3), 133-146.
Ratliff, F., & Hartline, H. K. (1974). Studies on Excitation
and Inhibition in the Retina: A collection of Papers
from the Laboratories of H. Keffer Hartline:
Rockefeller Univ. Press.
Shamma, S. (2001). On the role of space and time in
auditory processing. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
5(8), 340-348.
Talmy, L. (2000). Towards a cognitive semantics: Concept
structuring systems. Cambridge, MA: The MIT
Press.
Tenbrink, T. (2007). Space, time, and the use of language:
An investigation of relationships. Berlin: Mouton
de Gruyter.
Torralbo, A., Santiago, J., & Lupianez, J. (2006). Flexible
conceptual projection of time onto spatial frames of
reference. Cognitive Science, 30(4), 745-757.
Tversky, B. (2005). Visuospatial reasoning. The Cambridge
handbook of thinking and reasoning, 209-249.

References
Blumstein, S. E., Cooper, W. E., Zurif, E. B., & Caramazza,
A. (1977). The perception and production of voiceonset time in aphasia. Neuropsychologia, 15(3),
371-372.
Boroditsky,
L.
(2000).
Metaphoric
structuring:
understanding time through spatial metaphors.
Cognition, 75(1), 1-28.
Boroditsky, L. (2001). Does language shape thought?:
Mandarin and English speakers' conceptions of
time. Cognitive Psychology, 43(1), 1-22.
Boroditsky, L., & Ramscar, M. (2002). The roles of body
and mind in abstract thought. Psychological
Science, 13(2), 185-189.
Brainard, D. H. (1997). The psychophysics toolbox. Spatial
vision, 10(4), 433-436.
Casasanto, D., & Boroditsky, L. (2008). Time in the mind:
Using space to think about time. Cognition, 106(2),
579-593.
Chatterjee, A. (2001). Language and space: some
interactions. Trends in Cognitive Science, 5, 55-61.
Chatterjee, A. (2008). The neural organization of spatial
thought and language. Seminars in Speech and
Language, 29, 226-238.
Clark, H. H. (1973). Space, time, semantics and the child. In
T. Moore (Ed.), Cognitive development and the
acquisition of language. New York: Academic
Press.
Galton, A. (2011). Time flies but space does not: Limits to
the spatialisation of time. Journal of Pragmatics,
43(3), 695-703.
Hasplemath, M. (1997). From space to time: Temporal
adverbials in the world’s languages. Munich &
Newcastle: Lincom Europa.
Jackendoff, R. (1996). The architecture of the linguisticspatial interface. In P. Bloom, M. A. Peterson, L.
Nadel & M. F. Garrett (Eds.), Language and Space
(pp. 1-30). Cambridge, MA.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1986). Mental models: Towards a
cognitive science of language, inference, and
consciousness: Harvard Univ Pr.
Kranjec, A., Cardillo, E. R., Lehet, M., & Chatterjee, A.
(2012). Deconstructing events: The neural bases
for space, time, and causality. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 24(1), 1-16.
Kranjec, A., Cardillo, E. R., Schmidt, G. L., & Chatterjee,
A. (2010). Prescribed spatial prepositions influence
how we think about time. Cognition, 114(1), 111116.
Kranjec, A., & Chatterjee, A. (2010). Are temporal concepts
embodied? A challenge for cognitive neuroscience.
Frontiers
in
Psychology,
1(240),
doi:
10.3389/fpsyg.2010.00240.

833

