UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Space is Special: A domain-specific mapping between time and nontemporal magnitude

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0401z6d8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Bottini, Roberto
Guarino, Christopher
Casasanto, Daniel

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Space is Special:
A domain-specific mapping between time and nontemporal magnitude
Roberto Bottini (bottinir@newschool.edu)
Christopher Guarino (guarc637@newschool.edu)
Daniel Casasanto (casasand@newschool.edu)

Department of Psychology, 80 5th Avenue, New York, NY 10011 USA
Abstract

In spite of a large body of supporting evidence, the
hypothesis that stimulus magnitude and its perceived
duration are positively correlated has been challenged. It has
been suggested (Matthews, Stewart, & Wearden, 2011) that
it is the relative difference between the stimuli and a
common background, rather than the absolute magnitude of
the stimuli, that modulates the subjective experience of
duration. In one experiment (Matthews et al., 2011)
participants judged the duration of two successive stimuli
that varied both in duration and brightness. When the
stimuli were presented on a dark background, brighter
stimuli were judged to last longer than dimmer ones, on
average. Yet, when the same stimuli were presented on a
white (brighter) background, the opposite effect was found:
dimmer (less intense) stimuli were judged to last longer than
brighter ones. The same results were obtained when louder
and softer sounds were presented against quiet or noisy
backgrounds. Further experiments also support the
hypothesis that duration judgments are proportional to the
difference between the stimulus and its background. When
an “oddball” stimulus is presented within a sequence of
repeated presentations of a standard stimulus, the perceived
duration of the oddball is exaggerated compared to the
standards (Tse, Intriligator, Rivest, & Cavanagh, 2004;
Ulrich, Nitschke, & Rammsayer, 2006). In the Oddball
Effect the relative difference between the stimulus (the
oddball) and the background (the repeated standard
stimulus) has been found to predict subjective temporal
dilation: The larger the difference between oddball and
standard, the larger the temporal dilation (Schindel,
Rowlands, & Arnold, 2011).
Moreover, the absolute magnitude of the oddball appears
to be irrelevant for duration judgments. Schindel and
colleagues (Schindel et al. 2011, Exp. 2) presented their
participants with a series of gray disks (the standard
stimulus) that was unpredictably interrupted by an odd disk
that was either brighter (more intense) or dimmer (less
intense). If the subjective duration of events is positively
correlated with the absolute magnitude of these events, then
dimmer oddballs should be judged to last less time
compared to the brighter standard. At minimum, the
absolute brightness of the oddballs should modulate their
effect: Even if both brighter and dimmer oddballs were
judged to last longer than the standard, the temporal dilation
should be more pronounced for the brighter, more intense
oddballs. Contrary to these predictions, however, stimulus
magnitude had no effect whatsoever on duration judgments:
Dimmer and brighter oddballs led to equivalent temporal
expansion. Once again, it was the relative difference

Across different domains the magnitude of a stimulus is
positively correlated with its perceived duration: bigger,
brighter or louder stimuli are usually perceived to last longer
than smaller, dimmer or softer ones. According to A Theory
of Magnitude (ATOM), temporal and nontemporal
magnitudes are linked in the human mind by virtue of sharing
a common metric. This claim has been challenged by studies
in the domains of brightness and loudness suggesting that it is
not the difference in magnitude between stimuli, but rather
their degree of change from background that modulates
duration judgments. But do the same relationships hold
between perceived duration and all prothetic dimensions? We
tested the influence of stimulus magnitude and relative
change on temporal judgment in the domain of space. We
found that, unlike brightness and loudness, spatial length can
influence duration judgments independently of the degree of
change from a common background, and that this effect is
context dependent. Thus, an approach based exclusively on
the degree of change between stimulus and background is not
sufficient to account for the effect of magnitude on temporal
judgments. Our results suggest that space has a privileged link
with temporal representations compared to other prothetic
domains, challenging the hypothesis that space-time
relationships are the product of a domain-general magnitude
system.
Keywords: ATOM; Metaphor; Space; Time; ATOC

Introduction
Judgments of duration can be influenced by non-temporal
aspects of events such as stimulus magnitude (Walsh, 2003;
Xuan, Zhang, He, & Chen, 2007). Bigger stimuli are judged
to last longer than smaller ones (Xuan et al., 2007), brighter
stimuli longer than dimmer ones (Xuan et al., 2007;
Goldstone et al., 1978), and louder sounds longer than softer
ones (Goldstone et al., 1978). Magnitude Effects have often
been interpreted as the effect of absolute magnitude on
stimulus duration: more intense stimuli seem to last longer
(Xuan et al. 2007; Bueti & Walsh, 2009). It has been
suggested that temporal and non-temporal magnitudes are
positively correlated in the human mind by virtue of sharing
a common metric (Xuan et al. 2007; Walsh, 2003). On this
view, magnitudes across different prothetic domains (i.e.
domains that can be experienced as ‘more than’ or ‘less
than’; Walsh, 2003) are represented in the brain by a
generalized magnitude system. Duration and other prothetic
domains are linked by a monotonic “more A – more B”
mapping (Bueti & Walsh, 2009) such that “bigger, faster,
brighter, further in one domain should correlate with bigger,
faster, brighter, further in another” (Bueti & Walsh, 2009,
p.1832).

233

between the stimuli and the background that determined
changes in subjective duration, and not the absolute
magnitude of the stimuli (Shindel et al., 2011).
Altogether, these studies suggest a reinterpretation of
“more A - more B” Magnitude Effects (Bueti & Walsh,
2009). We propose that these effects may be a special case
of Stimulus-Background Effects. The subjective duration of
a stimulus is proportional to the difference between the
stimulus and its background. Magnitude Effects, then, are
simply Stimulus-Background Effects for which the relative
change happens to be in magnitude. The relative variation
does not need to occur in prothetic domains: Similar effects
have been found for variation in shape (Tse et al. 2004),
complexity (Schiffman, H. R., & Bobko, 1974), color (Tse
et al. 2004) and orientation (Schindel et al. 2011), which are
qualitative (metathetic) domains of experience. If indeed
Magnitude Effects are a species of Stimulus-Background
Effects, they need not depend on any neurocognitive
mechanisms that are specific for magnitude representations,
but rather on mechanisms that support comparison of values
along prothetic and metathetic continuums, alike (see
Eagleman & Pariyadath, 2009 for a similar proposal).
To summarize, we can distinguish two theoretical
approaches that seek to explain the effect of non-temporal
magnitudes on temporal judgments. A Theory of Magnitude
(ATOM; Walsh, 2003) posits that duration is positively
correlated with other prothetic domains in the mind and
brain by virtue of sharing the same magnitude-specific
representational basis (Bueti & Walsh, 2011; Xuan et al.
2007; Walsh, 2003). Under this assumption, temporal
distortions induced by variation in metathetic (qualitative)
domains such as color or shape exploit different cognitive
and neural mechanisms compared to similar effects induced
by variation in prothetic (quantitative) domains. The
alternative approach, which we will call A Theory of
Change (ATOC), suggests instead that Magnitude Effects
are particular cases of Stimulus-Background effects.
The experimental evidence reviewed above favors ATOC
over ATOM. There is no special representational link
between duration and prothetic dimensions, and no positive
correlation between the magnitude of a stimulus and its
duration: Temporal illusions attributed to the absolute
magnitude of the stimuli can be explained by the relative
difference between stimulus and background (Matthews et
al., 2011; Shindel et al., 2011).
In this study we seek to investigate whether ATOC can
fully explain the relationship between perceived duration
and non-temporal magnitudes. Both ATOM and ATOC
have in common the assumption that all prothetic domains
influence temporal judgments in the same way. On the basis
of metaphor theory (Lakoff & Johnson, 1999; Casasanto &
Boroditsky, 2008), however, we predict that different
nontemporal domains will influence temporal judgments
differentially, depending on the relationships between these
domains in our experience. Specifically, the relationship
between perceived duration and non-temporal magnitude
should be different for spatial magnitude than it is for other

prothetic domains. That is, the relationship between space
and time is special.

Space and time: an experiential link
Compared to other prothetic domains, space and time seem
to be linked in the human mind by a special relationship.
Across languages and cultures, spatial expressions are
widely recruited to talk metaphorically about time (Lakoff
& Johsnon 1999). These patterns in language have
motivated non-linguistic experiments supporting the
hypothesis that people use spatial conceptual structures to
think about time. Across studies, stimuli that extend farther
in space are judged to last longer in time (e.g., Casasanto &
Boroditsky, 2008). This relationship between duration (i.e.,
temporal magnitude) and length (i.e., a kind of spatial
magnitude) has been found in the judgments of children
(Casasanto, Fotakopoulou, & Boroditsky, 2010) and infants
(Srinivasan & Carey, 2010), as well as adults.
Why do many of the world’s languages metaphorize
duration in terms of length (e.g., a long time), instead of
some other prothetic domain such as brightness or loudness
(e.g., a bright time; a loud time)? Perhaps this is because
space and time are correlated in our experience of the world
in a way that brightness and time and loudness and time are
not. As a moving object travels farther though space, more
time passes. This positive correlation between magnitudes
in space and time does not seem to exist between duration
and other prothetic domains. Brighter things do not
necessarily last a longer time than dimmer things (in fact the
opposite may be true), and louder events do not necessarily
last longer than softer ones.
Implicitly linking space and time in our minds may be
useful because these domains are linked in the world.
Knowing that “more space” is generally correlated with
“more time” can provide a useful heuristic, facilitating
interactions with our physical environment. By contrast,
there does not appear to be any analogous link between
duration and other prothetic domains in the world. As such,
a representational link between temporal and spatial
magnitudes in the human brain/mind is functionally
motivated, and reflects regularities in our physical
experience. But an analogous link between temporal
magnitude and brightness or temporal magnitude and
loudness would not have the same functional motivation,
since these links would not have any clear basis in
experiential regularities.

Testing for a special link between time and space
In this study, we compared the effect of spatial magnitude
(specifically spatial length) and relative degree of change on
duration judgments. In previous studies (Casasanto &
Boroditsky, 2008; Xuan et al., 2007) the relative degree of
change was positively correlated with magnitude (e.g. line
length). This correlation made it impossible to tell which of
the two factors were driving the effect. We designed the
current experiments so that absolute magnitude of the
stimuli
and
relative
difference
from
the

234

standard/background were orthogonal to each other. If the
effect of spatial magnitude on time is due to the relative
amount of change, we should expect that when the
difference from the background is the same, stimuli with
different spatial magnitudes will be perceived as having the
same duration. This outcome would support ATOC, and
indicate that space stands in the same relation to time as
other prothetic domains (e.g., Shindel et al., 2011).
Alternatively, if spatial and temporal magnitudes, per se, are
linked in the mind, we should observe a magnitude effect
yielding longer duration judgments for spatially longer
stimuli than for spatially shorter ones. This outcome would
suggest the relationship between space and time differs from
the relationship between time and other prothetic domains.

experiment in three blocks of 42, 42 and 56 trials.
Participants responded by pressing a key with the left index
finger for “less time” and a key with the right index finger
for “more time” or vice versa, with key position
counterbalanced between subjects.
Proportions of “more time” responses to each oddball
duration were fitted using a Weibull function for individual
data sets. The point of subjective equality (PSE), which is
the point at which the duration of the oddball is on average
judged equal to the duration of the standard, was calculated
graphically as the duration corresponding to 50% of ‘‘more
time’’ responses.

Results
Long oddballs led to significant temporal expansion: PSE:
480, t(11)= 2.66, p= .02; while short oddballs led to nonsignificant temporal contraction, PSE: 521, t(11)= 1.39, p=
.19 (Fig.1, left panel).
To examine the effects of spatial length on duration
judgment, we fitted a generalized linear model with
binomial distribution for time judgments using the seven
oddball durations and the two oddball lengths as predictors
of ‘‘more time” and ‘‘less time” responses. We found that
oddball spatial length influenced the oddball effect, with
longer oddballs leading to a greater temporal expansion than
shorter oddballs, Wald χ2(1)= 14.53, p< .001.

Experiment 1. Long and short oddballs
In this first experiment we used a classic oddball paradigm
to test the influence of stimulus magnitude on perceived
duration. The standard stimulus was a 5 cm gray line, while
the oddballs were lines of either shorter or longer length. If
perceived duration is affected by the relative difference
between the standard and the oddball (Schindel et al. 2011;
Matthews et al. 2011) rather than spatial magnitude per se,
both large and small oddballs should lead to the same effect
of temporal expansion (i.e. a classic Oddball Effect). On the
other hand, if stimulus spatial magnitude influences
perceived duration (Casasanto & Boroditsky, 2008), we
should expect that large oddballs should lead to a greater
temporal expansion compared to smaller ones.

Methods
Participants 12 participants were recruited in the NYC
area. All had normal or corrected-to-normal vision.
Stimuli. Stimuli consisted of lines of different sizes
centered on a black background. The standard stimulus was
a 5 cm gray (RGB 128, 128, 128) line. The oddballs were a
2.5 and 10 cm line of the same color. The width of all lines
was fixed at 2 mm.

Fig1. Effect of Long and Short oddballs in Experiment 1 and 2.
Error bars depict SEM (corrected for within subjects comparisons).

Procedure. Participants were seated in a darkened room and
viewed stimuli from a distance of approximately 60 cm. For
each trial 9 lines appeared sequentially in the middle of the
computer screen. The standard lines (5 cm) were presented
eight times in each trial with the remaining stimulus being
the odd line (either 2.5 or 10 cm). Each oddball appeared
unpredictably between the 5th and 8th stimuli. Oddball
position was determined randomly on a trial-by-trial basis.
Each stimulus was followed by a blank screen during a 300
ms ISI. Standard stimuli were presented for 500 ms,
whereas oddballs were presented for 300, 400, 450, 500,
550, 600 or 700 ms. At the end of each trial, a fixation cross
appeared in the middle of the screen and participants had to
indicate whether the oddball had remained on the screen for
more or less time than the standards. Each of the seven
oddball durations was presented 10 times for each of the 2
oddballs, for a total of 140 trials. Participants completed the

Discussion
In Experiment 1 the repetitive presentation of a gray line
was unpredictably interrupted by the presentation of either a
spatially longer or shorter line of different duration. Even
though the two oddball lines had the same relative
difference from the standard, spatially longer lines induced a
greater oddball effect than spatially shorter ones. Moreover,
while longer oddballs led to a significant temporal
expansion (compared to the Point of Objective Equality
(POE)), shorter oddballs led to a non-significant temporal
contraction. These results suggest that the magnitude of the
stimulus does influence the subjective experience of
duration independently of the relative difference between
stimulus and background.
Nevertheless, a different interpretation of the data is
possible. Perhaps the difference between the long oddball

235

and the standards was perceived to be greater than the
difference between the short oddball and the standards.
Since magnitude judgments for prothetic dimensions,
including space, follow Weber’s Law, we selected the three
values of spatial length according to a logarithmic scale in
which the central value was the geometric mean of the two
extreme values. Thus, the long and short oddballs should be
psychologically
equidistant
from
the
standards.
Nevertheless, participants may have noticed that the
difference between the long line and the standard was
numerically greater than the difference between the short
line and the standard. This “difference of differences” might
have lead to the asymmetric results reported above.

not sufficient to account for the temporal modulation
observed.
Experiments 1 and 2 provided an interesting additional
piece of evidence. Long oddballs always led to significant
temporal expansion, whereas short oddballs led to nonsignificant contraction (Exp.1) or expansion (Exp.2). In the
case of the shorter line, the effect of relative change would
lead to temporal expansion (the shorter line is different from
the standard), while the effect of magnitude would lead to
temporal contraction (the shorter line is indeed shorter than
the standard). We can hypothesize that when the two factors
are in opposition they cancel each other out, leading to
neither temporal expansion nor temporal contraction. That
is, both the degree of change and the absolute magnitude of
the stimuli contribute to the judgment of duration, and their
relative weight seems to be roughly equal. However, the
answer may not be so simple.
Seifried and Urlich (Seifried & Ulrich, 2010) report an
experiment in which a smaller stationary disk was presented
as an oddball among repetitive presentations of a bigger
disk. Even though the oddball had a smaller size compared
to the standard it led to a significant effect of temporal
expansion (Seifried and Urlich, 2010, Exp. 3, footnote on
page 97). This result is inconsistent with the hypothesis of
an equal and opposite influence of magnitude and relative
change, and with the effect of magnitude reported here. But
in Seifried and Urlich’s experiment there was only one
oddball type, the smaller size-disk, instead of both a larger
and smaller one. It is possible that the pattern of interaction
between stimulus magnitude and degree of change is
context dependent. The weight of each factor in influencing
duration judgments depends on the salience of each factor in
a given context. In a classic oddball paradigm, with only
one kind of oddball, the direction of change (more/less) may
be overshadowed by the fact that the oddball is simply
different from the standard. The oddness of the oddball is a
more salient feature of the event compared to its absolute
magnitude. In this context the relative change is a more
weighted factor than stimulus magnitude, and even small
oddballs would lead to temporal expansion. Conversely,
when two oddballs with different sizes are included in the
design, absolute magnitude may become more salient: both
oddballs are different from the standard but they differ in
different ways. The oddballs aren’t just odd, but either
longer or shorter. The polarity of the magnitude continuum
becomes more salient, leading to an increased effect of
stimulus magnitude over relative change in influencing
duration judgments. We designed Experiment 3 to test this
hypothesis.

Experiment 2. Linear scaling
Experiment 2 was designed to rule out the possibility that
the difference between the longer oddball and the standard
was perceived as greater than the difference between shorter
oddball and standard. In this test the differences between the
standard line and the longer oddball and the standard line
and the shorter oddball were numerically the same.

Methods
Participants 20 participants were recruited in the NYC
area. All had normal or corrected-to-normal vision.
Stimuli and Procedure Stimuli and procedure for
Experiment 2 were the same as those in Experiment 1 with
the following exception: Long oddballs were 7.5 cm long.

Result
Longer oddballs led to significant temporal expansion, PSE:
471, t(19)= 2.73, p= .01, while shorter oddballs led to a
small, non-significant temporal expansion, PSE: 491, t(19)=
0.82, p= .42 (Fig.1, right panel).
To examine the effects of spatial length on duration
judgments, we fitted a generalized linear model with
binomial distribution for time judgments using the seven
oddball durations and the two oddball lengths as predictors
of ‘‘more time” and ‘‘less time” responses.
We found that oddball length influenced the oddball
effect, with longer oddballs leading to greater temporal
expansion than shorter oddballs, Wald χ2(1)= 6.00, p= .01.

Discussion
In this experiment the relative difference between oddballs
and standards was the same numerically for both longer and
shorter oddballs. Yet, long oddballs led to a greater temporal
expansion than did smaller ones. The Magnitude Effect
observed in both experiments one and two seems to be
proportional to the magnitude of the stimuli, independent of
the degree of change (relative difference) between the
oddball and the standards. These findings again suggest that
the spatial magnitude of a stimulus modulates its perceived
duration independently from the difference between
stimulus and background. An approach based exclusively on
the degree of change between stimulus and background is

Experiment 3: Short oddballs only
In Experiment 3 the only oddball presented was the shorter
line. If the interaction between stimulus magnitude and
relative difference is context dependent, modulated by the
relative salience of each factor, we should expect to see a
significant oddball effect (i.e., subjective temporal
expansion).

236

asymmetry may have inflated the oddball effect produced
by the short-oddball. For this reason Experiment 1, in which
geometric scaling was used and the relative difference
between oddballs and the standard was equated, constitutes
a better basis for comparison.

Methods
Participants. 20 participants were recruited in the NYC
area. All had normal or corrected-to-normal vision.
Stimuli and procedure. In this experiment there was only
one type of oddball, a gray line (same color as the standard)
2.5 cm long. Each of the seven oddball durations was
presented 12 times, for a total of 84 trials. Participants
completed the experiment in two blocks of 42 trials each.
Otherwise, the stimuli and procedure were the same as those
in experiments 1 and 2.

General Discussion
The main finding of the current research is that the absolute
spatial magnitude of stimuli can influence duration
judgments independently from the relative amount of
change between stimuli and background. When the
difference from the standard (background) was the same,
oddballs that were spatially longer than the standard led to a
greater subjective temporal expansion than oddballs that
were spatially shorter than the standard. Space and time
seem to be linked in the human mind by a positive
correlation according to which objects that extend farther in
space are judged to last longer (Casasanto & Boroditsky,
2008). Such a positive correlation between absolute
magnitude and duration does not hold for other prothetic
domains like brightness or loudness: The apparent
correlation between duration and brightness and duration
and loudness has been explained in terms of the relative
difference from stimuli and background that modulates
duration judgments, independent of stimulus magnitude
(Matthews et al. 2011, Schindel et al. 2011).
Our results support the hypothesis that space and time
share a special link in the human mind (Casasanto &
Boroditsky, 2008; Lakoff & Johnson, 1999). This link is
experientially motivated, since space and time are correlated
in our everyday experience, in a way that brightness and
time and loudness and time are not. The domain specificity
of the link we observe between space and time is
inconsistent with a domain-general magnitude metric as
hypothesized by ATOM: Not all prothetic domains are
represented the same way in the human mind.
Moreover, our results cannot be explained entirely as
effects of the degree of change between stimuli and
background. Therefore, ATOC cannot completely account
for the pattern of temporal distortions observed in our
experiments, either. Rather, both the spatial magnitude of
the stimuli and the relative difference between stimuli and
background play a role in shaping duration judgments.
The relative weight of these two factors is context
dependent. When there was only one kind of oddball (Exp.
3), which was shorter than the standard, the oddball led to a
classic temporal expansion. Yet, when a longer oddball was
added to the design (Exp. 1 and 2), shorter oddballs were
judged, on average, to have the same duration as the
standard. That is, the same oddball embedded in the same
sequence of standard stimuli produced different patterns of
temporal distortion depending on the context in which it
was presented. Such contextual variability is consistent with
the hypothesis that the Oddball Effect is not mediated by
low level perceptual processes like visual adaptation, but
rather depends on higher-level comparison (Schindel et al.
2011) and on the contextual salience of the oddballs (Van

Results
The subjective duration of the oddballs was exaggerated
compared to the standard, PSE: 480, t(19)= 2.10, p= .05. To
examine the effects of context on duration judgments, we
conducted a generalized linear model with binomial
distribution to compare the effect of short oddballs across
Experiment 1 and Experiment 3. We found that short
oddballs led to a greater temporal expansion in Experiment
3 than in Experiment 1, Wald χ2(1)= 6.34, p = .01 (Fig.2).
The same comparison between Experiment 2 and
Experiment 3 didn’t produce a significant result (Wald
χ2(1)= 1.76, p = .28).

Fig2. Effect of the short oddball in Experiment 1 and 3. Error bars
depict (uncorrected) SEM

Discussion
Shorter oddballs unpredictably appearing among longer
standard stimuli led to a classic expansion of subjective
duration, as reported by a previous study (Seifried & Urlich,
2010). These results support the hypothesis that the effect of
stimulus magnitude and degree of change on duration
judgment is context dependent. The more relevant one
factor is made by contextual features, the more it will
contribute to shaping the subjective experience of duration
of a given event.
The oddball effect elicited by the short oddball in
experiment 3 was significantly greater than the effect
produced by the same stimulus in experiment 1, but not in
experiment 2. This outcome can be explained by the fact
that, in experiment 2, the difference between the standard
and the shorter oddball was probably perceived as bigger
compared to the difference between the standard and the
longer oddball, due to linear scaling. This perceptual

237

Wassenhove, Buonomano, Shimojo, & Shams, 2008). When
oddness is the salient feature (Exp. 3) a “more change –
more time” mapping is evident, whereas when the polarity
of the magnitude continuum becomes salient (Exp. 1 & 2), a
“more space – more time” mapping is also evident.
There is now considerable evidence that humans’
representations of time are grounded in their nontemporal
experience as well as in their temporal experience. Why
should people systematically incorporate certain kinds of
non-temporal information into their temporal thinking?
Some non-temporal aspects of events are often good proxies
for time, and they may be easier to perceive or remember
than time, per se. For instance, the domain general “more
change – more time” mapping, which is at the basis of
ATOC, is consistent with our experience that greater
changes occur over greater durations (see Fraisse, 1984).
Often, amount of change may provide a perceptible basis for
duration judgments: We cannot see time passing, but we can
see physical objects changing (e.g., containers filling, leaves
changing color, children growing). Likewise, people may
rely on the domain-specific mapping between spatial extent
and time because spatial aspects of our experience are
generally more perceptible than the associated temporal
aspects (e.g., it is possible to see how far a ball rolls
(distance) but not to see how long it takes (duration);
Casasanto & Boroditsky, 2008; Casasanto et al. 2010;
Lakoff & Johnson, 1999).

this functional-experiential perspective, it
that our data support ATOC and metaphor
ATOM. ATOC and metaphor theory
functionally and experientially motivated
ATOM is not.

is unsurprising
theory, but not
appear to be
in a way that

References
Bueti, D., & Walsh, V. (2009). The parietal cortex and the
representation of time, space, number and other
magnitudes. Phil. Trans. of the Royal Society of London.
364(1525), 1831–40.
Casasanto, D., Fotakopoulou, O., & Boroditsky, L. (2010).
Space and Time in the Child’s Mind: Evidence for a
Cross-Dimensional Asymmetry. Cognitive science, 34(3),
387–405.
Eagleman, D. M., & Pariyadath, V. (2009). Is subjective
duration a signature of coding efficiency? Phil. Trans. of
the Royal Society of London. 364(1525), 1841–51.
Fraisse, P. (1984). Perception and estimation of time.
Annual review of psychology, 35(1), 1-37.
Goldstone, S., Lhamon, W. T., & Sechzer, J. (1978). Light
intensity and judged duration. Bulletin of the
Psychonomic Society, 12, 83–84.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the flesh:
The embodied mind and its challenge to Western thought.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Matthews, W. J., Stewart, N., & Wearden, J. H. (2011).
Stimulus intensity and the perception of duration.
JEP:HPP, 37(1), 303–13.
Ornstein, R. (1969). On the experience of time.
Hammondsworth: Penguin.
Schiffman, H. R., & Bobko, D. J. (1974). Effects of
stimulus complexity on the perception of brief temporal
intervals. JEP:G, 103, 156–159.
Schindel, R., Rowlands, J., & Arnold, D. (2011). The
oddball effect: Perceived duration and predictive coding.
Journal of Vision, 11, 1–9.
Seifried, T., & Ulrich, R. (2010). Does the asymmetry effect
inflate the temporal expansion of odd stimuli?
Psychological research, 74(1), 90–8.
Srinivasan, M. and Carey, S. (2010). The long and the short
of it: On the nature and origin of functional overlap
between representations of space and time. Cognition,
116, 217– 241.
Tse, P. U., Intriligator, J., Rivest, J., & Cavanagh, P. (2004).
Attention and the subjective expansion of time.
Perception & psychophysics, 66(7), 1171–89.
Ulrich, R., Nitschke, J., & Rammsayer, T. (2006). Perceived
duration of expected and unexpected stimuli.
Psychological research, 70(2), 77–87.
Van Wassenhove, V., Buonomano, D. V, Shimojo, S., &
Shams, L. (2008). Distortions of subjective time
perception within and across senses. PloS one, 3(1).
Walsh, V. (2003). A theory of magnitude: common cortical
metrics of time, space and quantity. TiCS, 7(11),483–488.
Xuan, B., Zhang, D., He, S., & Chen, X. (2007). Larger
stimuli are judged to last longer. Journal of Vision, 7, 1–5.

Conclusions
Spatial magnitude and duration share a representational link
that does not extend to other prothetic domains such as
brightness and loudness. This domain specificity is
inconsistent with a domain-general magnitude metric as
hypothesized by ATOM. Our results are also only partly
explained by ATOC as effects of a change in the magnitude
of a nontemporal aspect of the stimulus. Results are best
understood as supporting both ATOC and metaphor theory,
in combination.
The pattern of subjective temporal expansion predicted by
ATOC was observed most clearly when only one type of
oddball stimulus was included, which highlighted the simple
fact of a difference (i.e., change) between the oddball and
the standard. The pattern predicted by metaphor theory was
found most clearly when two oddballs that varied in spatial
length were included, which highlighted their magnitudes.
Grounding representations of temporal magnitude in our
experiences of relative amount of change (ATOC) and in
spatial magnitude (metaphor theory) are both functionally
motivated: As objects change, or as they travel farther
through space, more time passes. As such, nontemporal
aspects of events that correlate reliably with time can serve
as perceptible indices of temporal change, which is
imperceptible. Grounding representations of temporal
magnitude in other prothetic magnitudes, however, would
not be functionally motivated: The absolute magnitudes of
brightness and loudness, for example, do not appear to be
correlated with duration in our everyday experience. From

238

