UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Spatial correspondence parameters at the basis of transfer of learning in social contexts

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8nc1h98d

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Lugli, Luisa
Iani, Cristina
Milanese, Nadia
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Spatial Correspondence Parameters at the Basis of Transfer of Learning in Social
Contexts
Luisa Lugli (l.lugli@unibo.it)
Department of Communication and Economics, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, via Allegri 9
42121 Reggio Emilia, Italy

Cristina Iani (cristina.iani@unimore.it)
Department of Communication and Economics, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, via Allegri 9
42121 Reggio Emilia, Italy

Nadia Milanese (nadia.milanese@gmail.com)
Department of Communication and Economics, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, via Allegri 9
42121 Reggio Emilia, Italy

Sandro Rubichi (sandro.rubichi@unimore.it)
Department of Communication and Economics, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, via Allegri 9
42121 Reggio Emilia, Italy

Abstract
Recent works indicated that performing a joint spatial
compatibility task with an incompatible stimulus-response
mapping affects subsequent joint Simon task performance,
eliminating the social Simon effect (social transfer of learning
effect or SToL effect). Crucially, the SToL effect was not
tuned to the specific identity of the co-actor, and depended on
the overlap between the spatial relations of the practice and
transfer tasks. Starting from these findings, this study aimed
at investigating which spatial relations between stimulus (S),
response (R) or participant (P) positions are relevant for the
SToL effect to occur. Two experiments were run in which the
participant-response
associations
were
incompatible
(participants were required to respond with crossed arms),
whereas the
stimulus-response and stimulus-participant
associations were manipulated. We found that learning
derived from the practice task did not transfer to the
subsequent task when stimulus-response associations were
spatially incompatible and stimulus-participant associations
were compatible (Experiment 1). However, a SToL effect was
evident when stimulus-participant associations were spatially
incompatible and stimulus-response associations were
compatible (Experiment 2), hence suggesting that the spatial
relation between stimulus and participant positions is crucial
for the SToL effect to occur.
Keywords: social cognition; joint performance;
compatibility; social transfer-of-learning

spatial

Introduction
Learning involves the acquisition and modification of new
or existing knowledge through the application of which
humans may be able to perform new tasks. This knowledge
is shaped by the experience humans could acquire alone or
in a social context (e.g., Vygotsky, 1978).

As regards individual performance, there is evidence that
knowledge acquired in a task (i.e., practice task) can be
transferred to and affects the way a subsequent task (i.e.,
transfer task) is performed. In the transfer-of-learning (ToL)
paradigm, developed by Proctor e Lu (1999, see also Iani,
Rubichi, Gherri, & Nicoletti, 2009) participants are required
to perform a spatial compatibility task with an incompatible
stimulus-response (S-R) mapping (i.e., they are instructed to
press a right key when a left stimulus is presented and a left
key when a right stimulus is presented), followed by a
Simon task in which stimulus location is irrelevant and
responses have to be emitted on the basis of a non spatial
stimulus feature (e.g., color). When the Simon task is
performed alone, performance is more efficient when
stimuli and responses spatially correspond (corresponding
trials) than when they do not correspond (non-corresponding
trials). Thus, if participants are instructed to press a right
key to a red stimulus and a left key to a green stimulus, their
reaction times (RTs) will be shorter and accuracy higher if a
red stimulus appears on the left compared to when it appears
on the right. The influence of the irrelevant spatial stimulus
feature on performance is known as the Simon effect
(Simon & Rudell, 1967; Rubichi & Nicoletti, 2006;
Rubichi, et al., 1997; Rubichi, et al., 2004; for reviews, see
Proctor & Vu, 2006; Rubichi, et al., 2006).
It has been demonstrated that performance on the Simon
task could be modulated, that is the Simon effect is reduced,
eliminated or reversed, after practicing with a spatially
incompatible mapping (e.g., Iani et al., 2009; Proctor & Lu,
1999; Tagliabue, et al., 2000). This is thought to occur
because
the
non-corresponding
stimulus-response
associations acquired during the transfer task remain active
and influence performance in the subsequent Simon task.
Hence, the fact that after an incompatible practice the Simon

2938

effect is modulated indicates that performance depends not
only on the goals of the task that is currently being
performed, but also on immediate prior experience.
Sebanz and colleagues (Sebanz, Bekkering, & Knoblich,
2006; Sebanz, Knoblich, & Prinz, 2003) have shown that
the Simon effect occurs even when the Simon task is shared
between two agents with each one responding only to one
stimulus color (from now on, social Simon effect). In the
social variant of the Simon task, one participant has to press
the left key in response to green stimuli and the other
participant has to press the right key in response to red
stimuli, so that each participant is performing a go/no-go
task. The observation of a social Simon effect provides
evidence that, although each participant is responsible for
only half of the task and hence for only one response
alternative, they tend to represent the co-actor’s task and to
integrate self and other’s task into a common representation
(see also Ferraro et al., 2012). Starting from these evidences,
two studies (Milanese, Iani, & Rubichi, 2010; Milanese,
Iani, Sebanz, & Rubichi, 2011) investigated, by means of
the social transfer of learning (SToL) paradigm, whether
and to what extend specific contextual determinants
influence the way knowledge acquired in a given task could
be transferred to a subsequent one. Milanese et al. (2010)
modified the transfer of learning paradigm used in
individual context. In their modified paradigm (from now
on, the SToL paradigm), two participants performed
together the spatial compatibility task (practice task) and the
Simon task (transfer task) one after the other. They found
that individually and jointly acquired stimulus-response
associations acquired in the practice task remained active
and transferred to the joint Simon task leading to an
elimination of the joint Simon effect, whereas jointly
acquired stimulus-response associations did not transfer to
individual task performance. In other words, transfer-oflearning effects were maximal only when both practice and
transfer tasks took place in a social setting, suggesting that
what was transferred was not only what was specifically
practiced, but also aspects of the interactive context in
which learning took place.
Milanese et al. (2011) further investigated the elements of
the contexts that needed to remain constant for transfer
between a jointly performed practice task and a subsequent
joint transfer task to occur, that is the identity of the co-actor
and the spatial relation between the two co-actors. Results
showed that a spatially incompatible practice performed
jointly with another person influenced performance on a
subsequent joint Simon task even if the co-actor’s identity
changed (Experiment 1), whereas when participant’s
position changed from the practice to the transfer task (that
is, participant sitting on the left in the practice session sat on
the right in the transfer session, the opposite was true for the
other participant), the social-transfer-of-learning effect did
not occur (Experiment 2). To sum up: the SToL effect was
not tuned to the specific identity of the co-actor, and
depended on the overlap between the spatial relations of the
practice and transfer tasks.

Starting from these results, one might wonder which
specific spatial relations are really necessary in order to
obtain the modulation of performance on the subsequent
joint Simon task. We know that in the solo condition, the
non-corresponding link between stimulus and response
positions is crucial. What does it happen when the joint task
requires a further spatial determinant that is the participant’s
position? In other words, what does it happen if participants
are required to take into consideration both the position of
the response-key and the position of their body? To this
aim, we performed two experiments, using the SToL
paradigm, in which we manipulated the spatial relation
between the stimulus, the response and the participant. For
sake of clarity, the position of the response-key referred to
the right/left button location on the keyboard, and the
participant’s position referred to the left/right displacement
of the participant’s body with respect to the center of the
table. In both experiments the participant-response
associations were incompatible (participants were required
to respond with crossed arms), whereas the stimulusresponse
and stimulus-participant associations were
manipulated. In the practice session of Experiment 1,
stimulus-response associations were spatially incompatible,
while stimulus-participant ones were spatially compatible.
We achieved this by requiring participants to respond with
their arms crossed to the stimulus which was contralateral
with respect to the position of the response-key (i.e., for
instance, participants sitting on the left responded by
pressing the right key to the left stimulus). In the practice
session of Experiment 2, stimulus-participant associations
were spatially incompatible, while stimulus-response ones
were spatially compatible. In this experiment, participants
were required to respond with their arms crossed to the
stimulus that was contralateral with respect to their sitting
position (i.e., for instance, participants sitting on the left
responded by pressing the right key in response to the right
stimulus). These manipulations will allow us to define
which incompatible association is crucial for the SToL
effect to occur.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants Sixteen students (1 male; 4 left-handed; age
range: 19-26 years) of the University of Modena and Reggio
Emilia took part in Experiment 1 for partial fulfillment of
course credit. They reported normal or corrected-to-normal
vision and were naïve as to purpose of the study. Once
selected, they were randomly paired.
Apparatus and stimuli As in Milanese et al. (2010, 2011),
stimuli in the spatial compatibility task were white solid
squares (4.5 X 4.5 cm), whereas stimuli in the Simon task
were red or green solid squares (4.5 X 4.5 cm). All stimuli
were presented on a black screen, 9.5 cm to the left or to the
right of a central fixation cross (1 X 1 cm). Stimulus
presentation was controlled by an IBM computer. In both
tasks, responses were executed by pressing the “z” or “-“
keys of a standard Italian keyboard with the left or right

2939

index finger, respectively. In the spatial compatibility task
participants’ hands were crossed (the participant sitting on
the left pressed the right key with his/her left hand; the
participant sitting on the right pressed the left key with
his/her right hand).Viewing distance was about 60 cm.
Procedure The experiment consisted of two consecutive
sessions: a practice session and a transfer session.
Participants first performed a joint spatial compatibility task
(practice session) with an incompatible mapping (stimulus
positions were mapped incompatibly to response-key
positions, that is participants were required to respond to the
controlateral stimulus with respect to the response-key
position). Each participant was instructed to respond to only
one of the two stimulus locations by pressing the
contralateral key (by crossing their arms) and refraining
from responding when a stimulus appeared in the alternative
position. Hence, half of the participants responded to left
stimuli by pressing a right key, whereas the other half
responded to right stimuli by pressing a left key (see Fig. 1).
After a 5-min rest, participants were administered a joint
Simon task (transfer session), in which the red and green
stimuli were always location-irrelevant trials. Participants
were instructed to respond to only one stimulus color by
pressing the key at their disposal. For half of the
participants, instructions required to press the right key in
response to red stimuli and the left key in response to green
stimuli, whereas for the other half instructions required to
respond with the opposite stimulus-response mapping. Each
participant kept the same position in both practice and
transfer tasks, but changed the response position from the
practice to the transfer task. That is, for instance, the
participant sitting on the left and responding with the right
key in the practice session sat on the left and responded with
the left key in the transfer session (see Fig. 1).
In both tasks, a trial began with the presentation of the
fixation cross at the center of a black background. After
1000 ms the stimulus appeared to the left or to the right of
the fixation. In the spatial compatibility task, the stimulus
remained visible for 600 ms, and the maximum time
allowed for a response was 1200 ms. In the Simon task, the
stimulus remained visible for 800 ms and the maximum
time allowed for a response was 1000 ms. The inter-trialinterval was 1 s, and it was initiated immediately after the
response was made.
The spatial compatibility task was composed of 12 training
trials and 300 experimental trials divided into 3 blocks. The
Simon task consisted of 12 training trials and 160
experimental trials divided into two blocks of 80 trials each.
For both tasks, instructions stressed both speed and
accuracy of performance.

Figure 1: Schematic representation of the experimental
conditions used in the two experiments. In the practice
session the participant sitting on the left (A) was required to
press the right key in response to the left stimulus
(participant-response and stimulus-response associations
were spatially incompatible and the stimulus-participant
association was compatible, Experiment 1) or to the right
stimulus (participant-response and stimulus-participant
associations were spatially incompatible and the stimulusresponse association was compatible, Experiment 2). In both
experiments, each participant kept the same sitting position
in both practice and transfer tasks, while the position of the
response-key changed.

Results and discussions
Since our predictions concern performance in the joint
Simon task, for the current and the following experiment we
report only the data for the Simon task (transfer session).
Correct reaction times (RTs) were submitted to a repeatedmeasures Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) with
Correspondence (corresponding vs. non-corresponding) as
within-subject factor.
Responses in corresponding trials (328 ms) were faster
than responses in non-corresponding trials (350 ms),
F(1,15) = 48.18, p<.001, see Fig. 2. The significant 22-ms
Simon effect indicates that the joint Simon task was not
influenced by prior joint performance on the spatial
compatibility task1. Thus, practice on a spatial compatibility
1

In order to understand whether the 22-ms social Simon effect
found in Experiment 1 was influenced by prior practice, we
compared the data of this experiment with the data of the baseline
condition of Milanese et al. (2010)’s Experiment 1 in which a 14ms social Simon effect was evident. Correct RTs for the two
conditions were submitted to an ANOVA with Correspondence
(corresponding vs. non-corresponding trials) as within-subject
factor and Condition (baseline vs. Experiment 1) as between-

2940

task with an incompatible association between the
participant and the location of the response-key is not
sufficient to produce SToL. These results suggested that
stimulus-participant associations may play a crucial role in
the occurrence of the STol effect.

Figure 2: Means reaction times (ms) for the transfer session
of Experiments1 and 2 as a function of stimulus-response
correspondence.

Experiment 2
Method
Participants Sixteen new right-handed students of the
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia (all female; age
range 19-20 years), selected as in the previous experiment,
took part in Experiment 2.
Apparatus and stimuli and procedure Apparatus and
stimuli were the same as in Experiment 1, whereas the
procedure varied as follows. Participants performed the joint
spatial compatibility task with a different incompatible
mapping: stimulus positions were mapped incompatibly to
participants seating position, that is participants were
required to respond to controlateral stimuli with respect to
their seating position. Each participant was instructed to
respond to only one of the two stimulus locations by
pressing the contralateral key (by crossing their arms) and
refraining from responding when a stimulus appeared in the
alternative position. Each participants kept the same
position in both practice and transfer tasks, while the
position of the response-key changed. That is, for instance,
the participant sitting on the left and responding with the
right key in the practice session sat on the left and
responded with the left key in the transfer session (see Fig.
1).

Results and discussion
Correct RTs were submitted to an ANOVA with
Correspondence as within-subject factor. RTs did not differ
between corresponding (316 ms) and non-corresponding
trials (319ms), F< 1 (see Fig. 2). The lack of a significant
Simon effect is indicative of SToL. This result can be taken
as an indication that it is the spatial association between the
stimulus and the participant acquired during the practice
task that is crucial for the occurrence of the SToL effect,
while stimulus-response associations are irrelevant.

Additional analysis

subjects factor. The Correspondence x Condition interaction did
not reach significance, F(1,30)=2.91, p=.10, indicating that the
effects found in the two experiments did not differ. Based on this
result, we can safely conclude that in our Experiment 1 there was
no evidence of SToL.

In order to compare the Simon effect found in the two
experiments, we ran an ANOVA with Correspondence
(corresponding vs. non-corresponding trials) as withinsubject factor and Experiment (Experiment 1 vs.
Experiment 2) as between-subjects factor. Responses in
corresponding trials (322 ms) were faster than responses in
non-corresponding trials (334 ms), F(1,30)=25.64, p<.001.
The main effect of Experiment was nearly significant,
F(1,30)=3.64, p=.07, showing that responses were slower in
Experiment 1 (339 ms) than in Experiment 2 (317 ms). The
Correspondence x Experiment interaction was significant,
F(1,30)=15.23, p<.001, indicating that the 22-ms found in
Experiment 1 differed from the 3-ms (non-significant) effect
found in Experiment 2.

2941

Discussion
It is well known that in the ToL paradigm, when the practice
task is performed in a solo condition, what is acquired and
transferred to the subsequent Simon task is an association
between stimulus and response-key positions (Proctor & Lu,
1999; see also see also Iani, et al., 2009).
The results of previous studies (e.g., Milanese et al., 2010,
2011) seem to suggest that in social settings a crucial factor
for the occurrence of transfer-of-leaning effects may be the
type of relation between the participant and the stimulus
positions acquired during practice rather than the relation
between stimulus and response-key positions. The present
study was aimed at assessing the relative contribution of the
spatial relations between stimulus
and response-key,
between stimulus
and participant or rather between
participant and response-key positions in the occurrence of
the SToL effect. More specifically, the participant-response
associations were always incompatible (participants were
required to respond with crossed arms), whereas stimulusresponse and stimulus-participant associations were
manipulated. In this way we were able to investigate
independently whether crucial for the SToL effect to occur
is the incompatible association between stimulus-response
positions (Experiment 1) or between stimulus-participant
positions (Experiment 2).
We found a SToL effect when participant-response and
stimulus-participant
associations
were
spatially
incompatible and stimulus-response associations were
compatible (Experiment 2). No evidence of SToL was found
when
participant-response
and
stimulus-response
associations were spatially incompatible and stimulusparticipant association were compatible (Experiment 1).
The present findings suggest that the incompatible
association between the positions of the stimulus and of the
participant may be crucial for the emergence of the SToL
effect. It would seem, thus, that in a joint setting, where
participants are (implicitly) required to take into account the
presence of another person, the participant’s position
acquires greater relevance than in a solo setting. These
results point to an intriguing and debated issue remained
open so far: do correspondence effects emerging in joint
setting depend on the relationship not only between stimuli
and responses but also between stimuli and responding
agents?
Recently, Philipp and Prinz (2010; see also Liepelt, et al.,
2010) proposed that the joint compatibility effect may rely
not only on the stimulus-response spatial correspondence
(as is known to be crucial for the standard Simon effect to
occur), but also on social correspondence, that is the one
between stimulus and responding agents. According to these
authors, when the Simon task is shared between two acting
individuals, space may be used as an indication of whose
turn it is. This would mean that a stimulus appearing on the
left does not bring to the automatic activation of the left
response, but rather is perceived as a stimulus signaling that
the person sitting on the left is in charge of responding.

Starting from this account, our study investigated whether
social correspondence may play a crucial role also in the
SToL effect. It should, however, be noted that in Philipp
and Prinz’s study, the positions of the participant and of the
response-key always corresponded and hence the
correspondence between stimulus and response-key position
could not be distinguished from the correspondence between
the stimulus and the responding agent. In the current study,
we separated the positions of the response-key and of the
participant, as in the practice task participants were required
to respond with crossed arms. In this way we were able to
investigate independently whether crucial for the SToL
effect to occur is the incompatible association between
stimulus and response-key positions (Experiment 1) or
between stimulus and participant positions (Experiment 2).
Based on the findings of the current study, the observation
of a null joint Simon effect in the transfer task could be the
result of the acquisition and subsequent transfer of the
incompatible link between the stimulus and participant
positions. In other words, as the present results suggest, the
SToL effect in these studies may rely not only on the spatial
association correspondence between stimulus and response,
differently from the individual condition (ToL effect), but
also, and crucially, on the incompatible link between the
stimulus and participant positions. These results underline
the importance of both spatial and social features. Indeed, it
seems that acting in a social context increases the
importance of the participants’ position with respect to the
stimulus.
To conclude, in this study, we used the social transfer of
learning paradigm to identify which elements of the context
need to remain constant for social transfer-of-learning
effects to occur. This issue is not trivial, because sometimes
the practice context (i.e., the context in which we implicitly
acquire new knowledge) and the transfer context (i.e., the
subsequent context in which we utilize the acquired
knowledge) are not identical and may differ in several
aspects. The results of this study are particularly relevant
since they provide insights on the way we represent
another’s task (and how we integrate the other agent
information about action with our information, see Knoblich
& Jordan, 2003) in particular joint action situations.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by MIUR PRIN (project
2008ZN5J5S).

References
Ferraro, L., Iani, C., Mariani, M., Nicoletti, R., Gallese, V.,
Rubichi, S. (2012). Look What I Am Doing: Does
Observational Learning Take Place in Evocative TaskSharing Situations? PLoS ONE, 7(8): e43311.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0043311.
Iani, C., Rubichi, S., Gherri, E., & Nicoletti, R. (2009). Cooccurrence of sequential and practice effects in the Simon

2942

task: Evidence for two independent mechanisms affecting
response selection. Memory & Cognition, 37, 358–367.
Knoblich, G., & Jordan, J.S. (2003). Action Coordination in
Groups and Individuals: Learning Anticipatory Control.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory
and Cognition, 29(5), 1006-1016.
Liepelt, R., Wenke, D., Fischer, R., & Prinz, W. (2010).
Trial-to-trialsequential dependencies in a social and nonsocial Simon task. Psychological Research, 75, 366-375.
Milanese, N., Iani, C., & Rubichi, S. (2010) Shared learning
shapes human performance: transfer effects in task
sharing. Cognition, 116(1), 15–22.
Milanese, N., Iani, C, Sebanz, N., & Rubichi, S. (2011)
Contextual determinants of the social-transfer-of-learning
effect. Experimental Brain Research, 211, 415–422.
Philipp, A.M., & Prinz, W. (2010).Evidence for the role of
the responding agent in the joint compatibility effect.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 63, 2159–
2171.
Proctor, R. W., & Lu, C.-H. (1999). Processing irrelevant
information: Practice and transfer effects in choicereaction tasks. Memory & Cognition, 27, 63–77.
Proctor, R. W., & Vu, K.-P. L. (2006). Stimulus-response
compatibility principles: Data, theory, and application.
Boca Raton, FL: Taylor & Francis.
Rubichi, S., & Nicoletti, R. (2006).Simon effect and
handedness: Evidence for a dominant-hand attentional
bias in spatial coding. Perception & Psychophysics, 68(7),
1059-1069.
Rubichi, S., Nicoletti, R., Iani, C., & Umiltà, C.A. (1997).
The Simon effect occurs relative to the direction of an
attention shift. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 23, 1353-1364.
Rubichi, S., Nicoletti, R., Pelosi, A., & Umiltà, C. A.
(2004). Right-left prevalence effect with horizontal and
vertical effectors. Perception & Psychophysics, 2, 255263.
Rubichi, S., Vu, K., Nicoletti, R., & Proctor, R. (2006).
Two-dimensional spatial coding. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 13, 201-216.
Sebanz, N., Bekkering, H., & Knoblich, G. (2006). Joint
action: Bodies and minds moving together. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 10, 70-76.
Sebanz, N., Knoblich, G., & Prinz, W. (2003). Representing
others’ actions: just like one’s own? Cognition, 88, 11-21.
Simon, J. R., & Rudell, A. P. (1967). Auditory S-R
compatibility: The effect of an irrelevant cue on
information processing. Journal of Applied Psychology,
51, 300–304.
Tagliabue, M., Zorzi, M., Umiltà, C., & Bassignani, C.
(2000). The role of LTM links and STM links in the
Simon effect. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 26, 648–670.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind and society: The development
of higher mental processes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.

2943

