UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Spatial Distance, Availability of Means, and Moral Obligation Judgments

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/99f8j08x

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Nagel, Jonas
Waldmann, Michael R.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Spatial Distance, Availability of Means, and Moral Obligation Judgments
Jonas Nagel (jnagel1@uni-goettingen.de)
Michael R. Waldmann (michael.waldmann@bio.uni-goettingen.de)
Department of Psychology, University of Göttingen, Germany

Abstract
In the present research we analyze the interrelations of spatial
distance and efficaciousness in helping needy others, and we
investigate how these factors affect our judgments of moral
helping obligations. The main question is under which
conditions the location of an agent’s means of helping relative
to a victim is regarded as morally relevant. We develop a new
experimental design that allows us to test our hypotheses
concurrently in both separate and joint evaluation modes
using a constant procedure across groups. We find that spatial
proximity of an agent’s means to a victim increases people’s
sense of obligation only to the extent to which it is indicative
of increased efficaciousness or personal involvement.
Keywords: moral judgment; spatial distance; means;
obligation to help; joint vs. separate evaluation

Introduction
The present work explores the relationship between two
pervasive moral intuitions. First, we tend to feel more
strongly obligated to take care of what is going on near us
rather than far from us (see Kamm, 2007). We are more
affected by information about harmful incidents occurring in
our vicinity than at larger distances and tend to be more
inclined to help in near cases. Second, we think that we need
to be at least minimally efficacious if we are to be obligated
to help others (ought-implies-can principle, OIC; see
Vranas, 2007). We usually think we cannot be obligated to
do what we cannot achieve. Both intuitions are potentially
interrelated: Being near often causes agents to become
efficacious in helping a suffering victim. This raises the
possibility that the intuition that nearness matters can be
reduced to a concrete manifestation of the OIC principle.
Near agents may feel more strongly obligated to help not
because they are near, but because they perceive themselves
to be more efficacious as a consequence of being near.
Alternatively, spatial distance might make a difference even
at constant levels of efficaciousness (Kamm, 2007).
Nagel and Waldmann (2013) tested this question
experimentally. In their Experiment 4, they presented
subjects with a case vignette in which a victim was about to
be robbed by a thief in a public place. Two agents were
standing on the same place, one right next to the victim and
the other on the opposite side of the place. Both realized the
threat to the victim, and both could do something to prevent
the robbery. In one condition, they could walk over to the
victim and warn him. Here, the near agent was more
efficacious than the far one as the agents needed to traverse
the distance in order to be helpful. Spatial proximity caused
increased efficaciousness. In the other condition, both
agents could send a text message via cell phone in order to

warn the victim. This made both agents equally efficacious,
regardless of their distance. It was shown that people judged
the near agent to be more obligated than the far one only in
the first but not in the second condition. This finding
indicates that the effect of the first condition is mediated via
efficaciousness considerations. At constant levels of
efficaciousness, distance ceases to affect moral judgments.
This conclusion seems to suggest that distance effects can
be explained away by efficaciousness. However, the matter
is more complicated. Kamm (2007) pointed out that
focusing on the distance between agent and victim covers
only one way in which distance could matter morally. In
addition, agents might be more obligated to victims that are
located close to the agent’s means, even if they are
personally far from both. We conceptualize means as
objects with the disposition to bring about an effect intended
by an agent in a particular situation.1 Both artifacts (e.g.,
spoons having the disposition to stir liquids) and natural
kinds (e.g., tree trunks having the disposition to support
ceilings) can serve as means if an agent intends to make
them manifest their relevant dispositions. In a typical
helping event, an agent intends to bring about a change of
state in the victim (from threatened to safe), and he might
make certain objects manifest some of their dispositions to
achieve this goal. Kamm’s (2007) claim is that spatial
proximity between such objects and the victim could cause
agents to be morally obligated to let these means be used,
even if the agent is personally far from both.
This interesting suggestion raises some conceptual
problems that have not yet been analyzed. The concept of
means is intricately related to both efficaciousness and
spatial distance. First, means seem to imply at least a
minimal chance of efficaciousness. Second, it seems that
most objects have to be (brought) close to the victim at
some point during the helping event in order to serve as
means. Given these intimate interrelations, how can we
separate the claim that nearness of means matters morally
from the claim that efficaciousness matters? In what
follows, we will offer an analysis of the interplay between
distance, efficaciousness, and means. Based on this analysis,
we present two experiments testing whether distance
between means and victims affects laypeople’s moral
judgments even at constant levels of efficaciousness.

Distance, Means, and Moral Obligation
If you conceive of helping events as causal chains starting at
the location of the agent and ending at the location of the
1
We are not concerned with the special case of using people as
means here (see Waldmann, Nagel, & Wiegmann, 2012).

3127

victim, it becomes clear that means can serve two different
functions in this process. On the one hand, logistic means
enable swift and efficient transport of the causal quantity
from agent to victim, making the agent increasingly
efficacious across large distances. The cell phones (plus
mediating satellite system) from the public place scenario
serve this function. Other examples include railroads,
electronic media, remote-controls, etc. In order to fulfill this
function, such means are often extended in space which
makes it difficult to determine their exact location (and thus
their distance to the victim). On the other hand, proximate
means serve the function to bring about the intended change
of state at the victim end of the causal chain. Such objects
usually have to be (brought) close in order to become
efficacious. Examples for proximate means are headache
pills, dollar bills, clothes, organs, etc., depending very much
on the specific effect intended by the agent (corresponding
to the specific need of the victim). In the above cell phone
example, there is no physical object serving this function.
Instead, the proximate means would be the text message
displayed on the victim’s cell phone (changing his state
from careless to alert). This exemplifies that logistic vs.
proximate means do not correspond to specific kinds of
objects. They are differentiated by their function in a
specific teleological context. One and the same physical
object can serve both functions simultaneously, as when you
pick an apple from a high-hanging branch using a rake. You
make use of both the logistic disposition of the rake (being
long) and of its proximate disposition (having hooks).
Based on this analysis, we can now sensibly ask whether
the location of means matters morally independently of
efficaciousness considerations. This question refers to
proximate means because the location of logistic means
often cannot be precisely specified. Proximate means, in
turn, need to be (brought) close to the victim in order to be
helpful—therefore, they are usually more efficacious when
they are near the victim rather than far. However, the
presence of efficient logistic means can prevent the
detrimental effects of spatial distance on the efficaciousness
of proximate means. If the presence of efficient logistic
means allows a quick transport of far proximate means to
the location of the victim, far proximate means can be as
efficacious as near proximate means. Kamm’s (2007) claim
that means-victim distance matters morally would imply
that the location of the proximate means would still make a
difference for helping obligations under these conditions. If,
by contrast, the location of means mattered only via
efficaciousness considerations, the presence of sufficiently
efficient logistic means should prevent the location of the
proximate means from affecting moral judgments.

Experiment 1
In this experiment, we tested whether means-victim distance
affects obligation judgments even if the availability of
efficient logistic means makes far proximate means equally
efficacious to near ones. In the real world, the
efficaciousness of proximate means is almost always

reduced if they have to be brought close from a distance. To
resolve this confound, we manipulated distance of means
(the location of a stick that can be used to rescue a drowning
victim) and their efficaciousness (the success probability of
the potential rescue action involving the sticks)
orthogonally.

Method
Participants We obtained data from 183 British subjects
(110 female, mean age 38 years) who completed our
vignette-based online survey.
Design Our design is based on a classic 2 (Means-Victim
Distance: near vs. far) by 2 (Efficaciousness: high vs. low)
structure (see the four cells in Figure 1). The scenarios
described agents standing in some distance from a canal in
which a victim was drowning. They could attempt to rescue
the person by running to the canal and reaching out for her
with a stick. Our distance manipulation varied whether the
stick was located close to the shore and thus near to the
victim (near) or next to the agent and thus far from the
victim (far). Agents in the far versions had to transport the
stick to the shore in order to become efficacious. Our
efficaciousness manipulation varied how likely the agent
would succeed in his helping attempt. If the stick was
located close to the victim (near), it was described as sturdy
in the high efficaciousness version (cell a in Figure 1),
making it likely that it would carry the victim’s weight, and
as brittle in the low efficaciousness version (cell b), making
it unlikely. If the stick was located far from the victim (far),
it was described as light in the high efficaciousness version
(cell c), making it likely that it could be brought close in due
time, and as very heavy in the low efficaciousness version
(cell d), making it unlikely.
We did not simply allocate subjects randomly to one of
the four cells. The reason is that we did not want to rely
exclusively on a between-subjects variation of the
independent variables, as it is well known that between- and
within-subjects variations have profoundly different impact
on the judgment process (e.g., Hsee & Zhang, 2010). In the
moral domain, we think the most important difference is
that the subjects’ attention is artificially steered at factors
that are varied within-subjects (joint evaluation mode, JE),
while the same factor acts as a potentially unattended
background condition if it is varied between-subjects
(separate evaluation mode, SE; see Nagel & Waldmann,
2013). As moral judgments in both modes seem interesting,
we investigate both concurrently in the present study with a
new experimental design that is superimposed on the twoby-two structure described above.
Each scenario contained two agents (instead of only one),
Dave and John, standing on opposite sides of the canal.
Each agent represented one of two different cells from
Figure 1. The agent from each cell was paired with the agent
from each of the other three cells, resulting in six conditions
(see arrows 1 to 6 in Figure 1). The order in which both
agents were described in the scenario was counterbalanced
in each of the six conditions, resulting in a total of twelve

3128

For the between-subjects effect of efficaciousness, we
proceed analogously with the efficaciousness contrast
between conditions 1 and 2, that is, we test whether

Efficaciousness
Design
High

Low

(Near/High + Far/High) – (Near/Low + Far/Low) ≠ 0. [4]

3
MeansVictim
Distance

Near 1 .....a
Far

5

6

.....c

b..... 2
d.....

4

Figure 1: Illustration of the experimental design. Numbered
arrows correspond to six between-subjects conditions.
scenarios to which our subjects were randomly assigned (ns
in the six conditions ranging from 29 to 32). Below the
scenario description, subjects were presented with two 6point rating scales with which they were to indicate how
much they felt both agents were obligated to help. The
wording of the two questions was “How strongly do you
believe Dave [John] should risk his own life in order to try
to save the drowning person?” Each scale was labeled “not
at all” at the left hand end (1) and “very strongly” at the
right hand end (6). The order of both questions always
corresponded to the order in which both agents were
introduced in the scenario description.
Analysis The advantage of this procedure is that both
within- and between-subjects effects of both factors
(distance and efficaciousness) can be concurrently estimated
from data that are elicited with a consistent procedure across
groups. Each subject judges two agents from different cells,
allowing for an estimation of the within-subjects effect of
the factor(s) varied between these cells. For example, to
estimate the within-subjects effect of distance, we can look
at conditions 1 and 2 (see Figure 1) and compare the mean
ratings for the near agent with those for the far agent within
these groups. This can be formalized as in Equation 1:
(Near/High – Far/High) + (Near/Low – Far/Low) ≠ 0. [1]
For the within-subjects effect of efficaciousness, we
proceed analogously with the efficaciousness contrasts
within conditions 3 and 4, that is, we test whether
(Near/High – Near/Low) + (Far/High – Far/Low) ≠ 0. [2]
At the same time, in conditions 1 to 4, one of the two
factors, distance or efficaciousness, is kept constant at one
of its levels within participants. For example, both agents’
means (high and low efficaciousness) in condition 3 are
near, whereas both are far in condition 4. Distance is thus a
constant background condition within these groups, but is
varied between-subjects across the groups. Between-subjects
effects of distance can thus be estimated by averaging across
both ratings (high and low efficaciousness) for each subject
in conditions 3 and 4 and by comparing the means of these
averages between these conditions as in Equation 3:
(Near/High + Near/Low) – (Far/High + Far/Low) ≠ 0. [3]

Finally, conditions 5 and 6 yield additional information as
to how both factors interact when they are concurrently
varied in within-subjects comparisons. Condition 5 tests
whether subjects make a difference between near/highly
efficacious and far/lowly efficacious means, while condition
6 tests whether they make a difference between near/lowly
efficacious and far/highly efficacious means. In this last
condition, it can be seen if efficaciousness considerations
trump distance considerations if both are in conflict.

Results
The results are summarized in Figure 2. A three-way mixed
6 (condition 1-6, between-subjects) × 2 (stimulus i vs. ii,
within-subjects) × 2 (order: i-ii vs. ii-i, between-subjects)
ANOVA revealed no main effect of condition, F(5,
171) < 1, but a main effect of stimulus, F(1, 171) = 25.61,
p < .01,
= .13, and a significant Condition × Stimulus
interaction term, F(5, 171) = 6.67, p < .01,
= .16. Order
did not affect sense of obligation, F(1, 171) = 1.01, p = .32,
and did not interact with condition, stimulus, or the
Condition × Stimulus interaction term, all Fs < 1. We
therefore collapsed the ratings from both order versions for
each condition to calculate the specific contrasts from
Equations 1 to 4.
The within-subjects contrasts reveal no effect of distance
(Equation 1), t(171) = -.92, p = .36, but a significant effect
of efficaciousness (Equation 2), t(171) = 5.08, p < .01,
d = .64. When attending to the content of the varied factors,
subjects declare that higher probability of success increases
the obligation of an agent to endanger himself in order to
help a victim, but that the location of his proximate means is
irrelevant given constant efficaciousness. The betweensubjects contrasts reveal no effect of either distance
(Equation 3), t(171) = .03, or efficaciousness (Equation 4),
t(171) = 1.34, p = .18. The results support the conclusion
that the location of proximate means relative to a victim
does not matter under either evaluation mode. The degree of
efficaciousness seems to matter when people compare the
obligations of several agents but does not have a measurable
influence when varied as a background condition.
When both distance and efficaciousness were varied in a
co-acting fashion in the within-subjects contrast (condition
5), people held agents from the near/high efficaciousness
cell to be more obligated than agents from the far/low
efficaciousness cell, t(171) = 2.08, p < .05, d = .38. When
both factors were varied in a counteracting fashion
(condition 6), people judged agents from the far/high
efficaciousness cell to be more obligated than agents from
the near/low efficaciousness cell, t(171) = 4.36, p < .01,
d = .81. Regardless of the location of the means, subjects’
moral obligation judgments are tracked by efficaciousness.

3129

Discussion
The findings of Experiment 1 suggest that means-victim
proximity does not matter morally at constant levels of
efficaciousness. Near proximate means only obligate if their
nearness implies increased efficaciousness. The fact that
efficaciousness exhibited no significant between-subjects
effect seems somewhat surprising. Previous research has
shown that variations in scope (rather than in quality) are
hard to evaluate in SE mode (Hsee & Zhang, 2010).
Accordingly, at constant levels of high or low
efficaciousness, our subjects might have merely encoded
that both agents can do something to help which is required
by the OIC principle. Lacking knowledge about a relevant
range of success probabilities in SE mode, subjects might
have become insensitive towards variations in degree of
efficaciousness beyond this categorical precondition.

Experiment 2
In this experiment, we wanted to replicate the basic finding
that means-victim distance is irrelevant at constant levels of
efficaciousness with a more realistic cover story. At the
same time, we wanted to demonstrate that not all effects of
the nearness of means are mediated via efficaciousness.
Nagel and Waldmann (2013) have argued that spatial
proximity between agents and victims is not only indicative
of increased efficaciousness, but usually also of increased
experiential directness and shared group membership.
Similarly, near means do usually not only indicate increased
efficaciousness, but also increased personal involvement
with the victim. For example, if an agent owns money on a
bank account in a faraway country, he is usually more
personally involved with this country than if his money was
stored elsewhere. Maybe he has visited the country before

and will do so again in the future, or at least he profits from
the financial system in the foreign country. If the agent feels
obligated to donate this money to sick children suffering in
the same foreign country (that is, near his means), this could
be due to his increased personal involvement rather than due
to means-victim proximity per se.

Method
We gathered data from 212 subjects from Great Britain (127
female, mean age 37 years). The experimental design was as
in Experiment 1, but instead of efficaciousness we varied
personal involvement (high vs. low) orthogonally to meansvictim distance (near vs. far). Efficaciousness was explicitly
kept constantly high across all conditions. In this way, it
was assured that potential distance effects could not be
mediated via efficaciousness considerations. This time, we
assigned roughly twice the number of subjects to conditions
5 (n = 50) and 6 (n = 52) than to the remaining conditions
(ns ranging from 26 to 31) to have roughly equal numbers
of observations in the cell combinations that are compared
with each other in the planned contrasts.
The subjects were again assigned randomly to one of the
twelve scenario versions resulting from our design (Figure
1). Each scenario contained two British agents having the
possibility to donate money (via online banking) to rescue
Haitian children who are threatened by a deadly disease.
Our distance manipulation varied the location of the agents’
money. It was located either at a bank in Haiti (near the sick
children), or at a bank in Great Britain (far from the sick
children). Our involvement manipulation varied the process
by which the agents’ means had ended up in their locations.
In the high involvement conditions, the agent had personally
decided to open an account at the Bank of Haiti and that his
money was to be constantly located in a branch of this bank

Figure 2: Results of Experiment 1. Categories on the abscissa represent between-subjects variations, while line graphs
correspond to within-subjects variations (cf. Figure 1). C. = condition. Error bars indicate 95% CIs.

3130

either in Haiti (cell a in Figure 1) or in Great Britain (cell c).
In the low involvement conditions, the agent had opened a
bank account at an international bank. Employees of this
bank regularly transferred the money to the most profitable
location, which momentarily happened to be in Haiti (cell b)
or in Great Britain (cell d). Note that this is an utterly
minimal variation of personal involvement. Neither agent
had ever been to Haiti or has had any other personal
connection to the country. The only difference was whether
a personal decision had caused the money to end up on an
account of a bank from the same state as the children.
The wording of the sense of obligation measure was as
follows: “How strongly do you believe Dave [John] should
transfer £ 10 from his [bank account] in [location] to the
donation account?” In the different conditions, the
specifications of the bank accounts and their locations were
adapted according to the scenario. The scales and the rest of
the procedure were identical to those in Experiment 1.

Results
The results are summarized in Figure 3. A three-way mixed
6 (condition 1-6, between-subjects) × 2 (stimulus i vs. ii,
within-subjects) × 2 (order: i-ii vs. ii-i, between-subjects)
ANOVA revealed a main effect of condition, F(5,
200) = 2.29, p < .05,
= .05, and of order, F(1,
200) = 4.65, p < .05,
= .02, while the within-subjects
factor (stimulus) was not significant (F < 1). None of the
interaction terms approached statistical significance. The
order effect resulted from ratings being somewhat higher
when stimulus ii was presented before stimulus i. However,
since there is no systematic relationship between the
underlying factors and the assignment of cells to Stimuli i
and ii, and since order did not interact with condition,
stimulus, or their interaction (all Fs < 1), we collapsed the
ratings from both order versions for each condition to
calculate the specific contrasts outlined in Equations 1 to 4.

The within-subjects contrasts reveal neither effects of
distance (Equation 1), t(200) = .00, nor of personal
involvement (Equation 2), t(200) = -.16. When attending to
the content of the varied factors, subjects declared that it
does not make a difference where the agents’ money is
located, or how the money ended up in its location. The
between-subjects contrasts reveal no effect of distance
(Equation 3), t(200) = -.16, but a significant effect of
personal involvement (Equation 4), t(200) = 2.16, p < .05,
d = .58. This shows that our minimalistic variation of
personal involvement mattered as a background condition,
but was discounted when attention was directed to this
factor. Distance, by contrast, did not make a difference in
either evaluation mode.
Subjects differentiated between the agents in condition 5,
t(200) = 3.29, p < .01, d = .46. When proximity and
involvement coincided, as in most natural situations,
subjects judged the near/highly involved agent to be more
obligated than the far/lowly involved agent. However, the
null effects of distance in conditions 1 to 4 indicate that this
effect cannot be attributed to distance per se. The effect also
vanished when both factors were varied in a counteracting
fashion (condition 6, t[200] = -.02).

Discussion
Our findings indicate that spatial distance between an
agent’s proximate means (his money) and the needy victims
does not affect people’s sense of obligation if efficient
logistic means (online banking) are available, contrary to
Kamm’s (2007) intuitions which stated that spatial
proximity between the agent’s means and the victim may
increase the agent’s obligations to let these means be used,
even if the agent is personally far and even at constant levels
of efficaciousness. At the same time, people are sensitive to
the process by which an agent’s proximate means ended up
in its location. If nearness between means and victim is at

Figure 3: Results of Experiment 2. Categories on the abscissa represent between-subjects variations, while line graphs
correspond to within-subjects variations (cf. Figure 1). C. = condition. Error bars indicate 95% CIs.

3131

least minimally indicative of an increased personal
involvement with the victims (in virtue of having decided to
place one’s assets in a bank based in their home country),
obligation judgments are increased. However, if the
nearness between means and victims results from pure
coincidence (they are temporally transferred to the near
location by a third party), it loses its moral impact.
The effect of personal involvement is limited to SE
judgments and disappears in attentive JE mode. Our
operationalization of involvement apparently was so minor
that people judged it to be irrelevant when attending to it,
and yet, it was sufficient to affect their judgments as a
background condition. Stronger variations in involvement
(e.g., previous visits to Haiti) can of course be expected to
be honored in JE mode as well.

General Discussion
Previous research suggests that distance between agent and
victim is irrelevant for laypeople’s judgments of helping
obligations (Nagel & Waldmann, 2013). The present
findings extend this conclusion to the more complicated
spatial relation between an agent’s means and a needy
victim, contrary to Kamm (2007) who argued that means of
helping that are located spatially close to the victim might
increase the agent’s obligation to let these means be used at
personal costs. In the presence of sufficiently efficient
logistic means (making far proximate means efficacious by
allowing them to be brought close swiftly), the distance
between an agent’s proximate means and the victim
becomes morally irrelevant, both in separate (SE) and joint
evaluation (JE) modes. Means-victim proximity matters
morally only when it implies other obligation-inducing
factors, such as increased efficaciousness. To the extent that
proximity causes efficaciousness, the intuition that we have
a strong obligation to help victims near our means can be
seen as a manifestation of the ought-implies-can (OIC)
principle.
However, we have also seen that not all effects of meansvictim proximity can be explained by the OIC principle.
This is because proximity of means is usually not only
indicative of increased efficaciousness, but also of increased
personal involvement with the victim. In such cases, other
cognitive
mediators
apart
from
efficaciousness
considerations seem to do the moral work (probably
emotional engagement and reasons referring to social
responsibilities).
The impact of the factors associated with distance was
strongly influenced by evaluation mode. Incremental
differences in efficaciousness were highly important in the
comparison of several agents within a single scenario (JE
mode), but they did not affect obligation judgments as a
constant background condition (SE mode). Minimal
personal involvement, by contrast, was sufficient to increase
obligation judgments in SE, but this difference was
discounted in JE. These fine-grained observations underline
the value of our new experimental design. It allows for a

detailed picture of judgments under different evaluation
modes at constant procedural conditions.
The conceptual distinction between logistic and proximate
means (which is grounded in their functionally different
relationship to spatial distance) does not seem to correspond
to a psychologically meaningful distinction. In Experiment
1, subjects did not differentiate between means that were
inefficacious due to deficits affecting their potential role as
proximate means (i.e., the sticks’ brittleness) vs. those that
could not be brought close in time with the available logistic
means (i.e., because of the sticks’ heaviness). What matters
morally seems to be the means’ reduced efficaciousness in
the given context, regardless of the causes for different
degrees of efficaciousness and of whether or not these
causes are related to distance.
Although the empirical findings are clear-cut, there are
some limitations. Our analysis of means seems to be
restricted to cases of generative causation, that is, to cases in
which a causal chain involving the transmission of a causal
quantity is elicited by the agent. It is left unanalyzed what
role (if any) means and their location might play in cases of
causation by omission (Wolff, Barbey, & Hausknecht,
2010). A related concern is that our account is mainly
tailored to handle cases in which an impending physical
harm threatens a victim. It is less clear how the account
could deal with moral obligations related to other moral
domains (see Haidt & Graham, 2007). Another special case
arises when humans are being used as means. The moral
implications of such cases are too far-reaching to be
discussed here (see Waldmann, Nagel, & Wiegmann, 2012,
for an overview). As far as obligation judgments in harmbased rescue cases are concerned, however, our findings
seem to be clear: Not distance per se but features that are
normally associated with distance drive our moral intuitions.

References
Haidt, J., & Graham, J. (2007). When morality opposes
justice: Conservatives have moral intuitions that liberals
may not recognize. Social Justice Research, 20, 98–116.
Hsee, C. K., & Zhang, J. (2010). General evaluability
theory. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 5, 343355.
Kamm, F. M. (2007). Intricate ethics. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Nagel, J., & Waldmann, M. R. (2013). Deconfounding
distance effects in judgments of moral obligation. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, &
Cognition, 39, 237-252.
Vranas, P. B. M. (2007). I ought, therefore I can.
Philosophical Studies, 136, 167–216.
Waldmann, M. R., Nagel, J., & Wiegmann, A. (2012).
Moral judgment. In K. J. Holyoak, & R. G. Morrison
(eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Thinking and Reasoning
(pp. 364-389). New York: Oxford University Press.
Wolff, P., Barbey, A. K., & Hausknecht, M. (2010). For
want of a nail: How absences cause events. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 139, 191–221.

3132

