UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Spatial congruity effects reveal metaphors, not markedness

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9556q7sv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Dolscheid, Sarah
Graver, Cleve
Casasanto, Daniel

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Spatial congruity effects reveal metaphors, not markedness
Sarah Dolscheid 1,2
(sarah.dolscheid@mpi.nl)

Cleve Graver 4
(gravc243@newschool.edu)

Daniel Casasanto 3,4
(casasand@newschool.edu)

1Max

Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, NL
Max Planck Research School for Language Sciences, Nijmegen, NL
3Donders Center for Brain, Cognition, and Behaviour, Radboud University, Nijmegen, NL
4Department of Psychology, The New School for Social Research, New York, USA
2International

Abstract
Spatial congruity effects have often been interpreted as evidence
for metaphorical thinking, but an alternative markedness-based
account challenges this view. In two experiments, we directly
compared metaphor and markedness explanations for spatial
congruity effects, using musical pitch as a testbed. English
speakers who talk about pitch in terms of spatial height were tested
in speeded space-pitch compatibility tasks. To determine whether
space-pitch congruency effects could be elicited by any marked
spatial continuum, participants were asked to classify high- and
low-frequency pitches as 'high' and 'low' or as 'front' and 'back'
(both pairs of terms constitute cases of marked continuums). We
found congruency effects in high/low conditions but not in
front/back conditions, indicating that markedness is not sufficient
to account for congruity effects (Experiment 1). A second
experiment showed that congruency effects were specific to spatial
words that cued a vertical schema (tall/short), and that congruity
effects were not an artifact of polysemy (e.g., 'high' referring both
to space and pitch). Together, these results suggest that congruency
effects reveal metaphorical uses of spatial schemas, not
markedness effects.
Keywords: metaphor, polarity correspondence, markedness,
musical pitch, space

Introduction
Are high hopes somewhere in the air? Or what about rising
prices? And where exactly are you when you are feeling
down? Spatial metaphors like these are very common in
language. Moreover, according to conceptual metaphor
theory, people not only talk in terms of space but they also
think metaphorically (i.e. spatially) (Lakoff & Johnson,
1980). Whereas arguments in favor of this claim were
initially based on linguistic data (and thus circular in
nature), psychological experiments have now shown that
spatial representations importantly contribute to people’s
understanding of domains like time (Casasanto &
Boroditsky, 2008), social dominance (Schubert, 2005), or
valence (Meier & Robinson, 2004).
Many of these psychological studies base their findings
on binary compatibility tasks. In one experiment, for
instance, participants were asked to classify dimensions in a
metaphoric target domain (i.e., valence: judge the positive
or negative valence of a word), while, at the same time
aspects of the spatial source domain (i.e, location; up and
down) were varied. In line with "GOOD is UP" metaphors,
people were faster to evaluate positive words when they

appeared in a high spatial location compared to a low
location (and vice versa for negatively valenced words)
(Meier & Robinson, 2004). Similarly, participants made
faster judgments about social power when words for
powerful people are at the top of a display and powerless
people at the bottom (e.g., ‘king’ above ‘slave’, rather than
vice versa; Schubert, 2005). These "metaphoric congruency
effects" (Lakens, 2012), with faster performance for
congruent compared to incongruent trials, have been taken
as evidence that metaphoric target domains automatically
activate congruent spatial information, supporting claims of
conceptual metaphor theory (e.g. Meier & Robinson, 2004;
Schubert, 2005).
On an alternative account, however, it has been argued
that congruency effects may be better explained as polarity
alignment effects, also called markedness effects1 (Lakens,
2012). Like many other continuums in language and mind,
metaphoric source and target domains (e.g. height or
happiness) are considered to be bipolar. That is, they consist
of an unmarked or +polar endpoint (e.g. high, happy), and
an opposing marked or ‒polar endpoint (low, sad).
Unmarked endpoints (+polar) are commonly defined as the
default, evaluatively positive or broader dimension as
opposed to the marked (‒polar) ones (see e.g., Lehrer, 1985;
Proctor & Cho, 2006; for a critical approach see
Haspelmath, 2006). Moreover, there is evidence that
polarity differences affect cognitive processing. Participants
show faster reaction times for unmarked (+polar)
dimensions as compared to marked (‒polar) ones (Clark,
1969; Seymour, 1974). Reaction time benefits for congruent
metaphoric dimensions (like happy and up) could thus
alternatively be explained by an additive processing
advantage for +polar endpoints (e.g. happy +polar, up
+polar): Across many studies, perceptual and linguistic
judgments are faster when the poles of marked continuums
are aligned (e.g., ‘good’ matched with ‘up’) than when they
are misaligned (e.g., ‘good’ matched with ‘down’; Clark,
1969; Lakens, 2012; Proctor & Cho, 2006). The existence of
markedness effects in binary response compatibility tasks
raises a question: Does polarity alignment offer an
alternative, non-metaphorical explanation for “metaphor
congruency effects” like those reported by Meier &
Robinson (2004) and Schubert (2005), which rely on
1
Here, the terms "markedness" and "polarity" will be used
interchangeably.

2213

dimensional compatibility in binary speeded response tasks?
And if so, what would this mean for theories of
metaphorical mental representation?
Crucially, not all of the evidence for metaphoric thinking
comes from (binary) congruency effects. Rather, it has been
shown that people's metaphoric representations of domains
like time or musical pitch map onto space in a continuous
analog fashion (Casasanto, 2010; Dolscheid, Shayan, Majid,
& Casasanto, 2013). English speakers, for instance, who
talk about musical pitch in terms of spatial height (high vs.
low pitch; see e.g. Stumpf, 2006) also associate higher
pitches with higher positions in space in nonlinguistic
psychophysical tasks. In one study, participants were asked
to reproduce musical pitches while watching lines varying
in spatial height. Since lines were presented at multiple
positions (i.e., 9 levels of height) in a random order, effects
of space on pitch could not be attributed to (binary) polarity.
Rather, participants' pitch reproductions were affected by
the spatial information in a continuous way; tones
accompanied by higher lines were reproduced at a higher
frequency on average than the same tones accompanied by
lower lines, resulting in a linear influence of height on pitch
(Dolscheid et al., 2013). In this study, responses were not
speeded, and the metaphor-congruity effects did not rely on
the kind of binary stimulus-response compatibility that is
believed to give rise to polarity alignment effects (Proctor &
Cho, 2006).
Furthermore, some mappings between space and musical
pitch go against markedness. Whereas speakers of many
languages (including English) refer to pitch in terms of
spatial height, other languages like Farsi or Turkish encode
pitch in terms of spatial thickness (Shayan, Ozturk, &
Sicoli, 2011). These thickness-pitch metaphors follow a
reversed polarity alignment. Thick (+polar) refers to a low
frequency pitch (‒polar), whereas thin (‒polar) refers to a
high frequency pitch (+polar). Since Farsi speakers
implicitly represent pitch in terms of thickness (Dolscheid et
al., 2013), spatial schemas appear to be more important than
polarity alignment.
Although experiments like Dolscheid et al.’s (2013)
provide evidence for metaphorical mental representation
that cannot be explained by markedness, the role of
markedness in binary compatibility tasks remains
controversial. Do source-target congruity effects merely
show polarity alignment? Or do they reveal metaphoric
associations? While metaphors and polarity are often
indistinguishable in compatibility tasks (see also Lakens,
2012), we predict that when markedness and metaphor are
juxtaposed, congruity effects will support metaphoric
thinking, not markedness. What should matter is whether
the words that participants have to classify in binary
compatibility tasks activate the appropriate spatial schema
(e.g., in the case of space-pitch mappings for English
speakers, it should be a vertical spatial schema). That is,
schema-appropriateness should be necessary, and
markedness may not be sufficient to produce congruity
effects.

In Experiment 1, we tested compatibility in height-pitch
metaphors for 2 pairs of spatial terms, both paradigm cases
of marked continuums (Clark, 1973). One pair corresponds
to the poles of the correct spatial continuum (high-low), the
other to the poles of an incorrect spatial continuum (frontback). High and front both constitute the unmarked or
+polar endpoint, whereas low and back represent the
marked or ‒polar endpoint (see e.g., Clark, 1973;
Landsberg, 1995). Participants were asked to make binary
speeded judgments on high-frequency and low-frequency
pitches, classifying pitches either in a polarity-congruent
way (e.g. high pitches as high or front), or in a polarityincongruent way (e.g. high pitches as low or back). If
polarity alignment drives space-pitch congruity effects, then
similar effects should be found when pitch is mapped to any
marked linear spatial continuum, regardless of its
orientation: High/low and front/back should both produce
pitch-congruity effects. Alternatively, if activating a
particular spatial schema for pitch is critical (i.e., the
schema that is encoded in the participants' language), then
high/low should result in a congruency effect, but front/back
should not.

Experiment 1
Methods
Participants Twenty-four English speakers with no
reported hearing problems participated for payment (5$ per
30 minutes). Four participants were excluded from analyses
for not following instructions (i.e. they responded according
to the wrong response mapping throughout at least one
condition). They were replaced by a new sample of 4
participants who had not previously participated in the task.
Materials and Procedure Participants were asked to
classify tones (one high and one low pitch) as quickly and
accurately as possible by pressing buttons on the QWERTY
keyboard (Q and P-keys). Stimuli were presented on an
Apple iMac using Vision Egg 2.6 (Straw, 2008). Sounds
were
generated
by
Audacity
software
(http://audacity.sourceforge.net/) and comprised two pure
tones (frequency: 262 and 440 hertz). Each tone lasted 400
ms. Participants listened to one tone at a time, via sealed
headphones. Immediately following the offset of each tone,
two response options (e.g., high, low) appeared, one on the
bottom left and the other on the bottom right of the screen.
Participants were instructed to classify the sound by
pressing the button located under the corresponding word
(e.g., high or low) as fast and accurately as possible. The
left-right locations of the spatial terms varied randomly
from trial to trial so that participants could not predict the
location of the correct word in advance.
Spatial terms (high-low vs. front-back) were presented in
2 blocks, a high-low block and a front-back block. Within
each block, spatial terms were crossed with 2 mappings
(congruent, incongruent). The order of blocks was
counterbalanced across participants. The order of congruity
was counterbalanced within each block. Across blocks,

2214

incongruent and congruuent conditions were always
a
Before each coondition, participants
presented in alternation.
received 6 prractice trials with feedbackk. Participantts were
also given ann example illuustrating the respective mapping
m
before the praactice trials.
Each condiition consistedd of 24 trials, 96 trials in to
otal. In
half of the triaals a high pitcch was presennted, in the othher half
a low pitch. In the high-loow congruentt condition, thhe high
b classified as
a high and thhe low pitch as
a low.
pitch had to be
In the high-loow incongruennt condition, the
t high pitchh had to
be categorizedd as low and the
t low pitch as
a high. In thee frontback congruuent conditioon the high pitch had to be
categorized as front and thhe low pitch as back (according to
patterns of polarity/maarkedness). In
I
the fronnt-back
c
the low
l pitch had to be categorrized as
incongruent condition
f
front
and the high pitch as back.
Results
w
analyzeed using R (version 2.14.2;
All data were
http://www.r--project.org/) and the R paackages lme4 (Bates
& Maechler,, 2009) and languageR (Baayen, 20009; cf.
Baayen, 20008). We caarried out liinear mixed--effects
regression models
m
of Spaace (high-low
w versus frontt-back)
and Congruen
ncy (congruennt, incongruennt) on accuraacy and
RTs. Using thhe principle oof backward selection,
s
we started
out with a full (conservvative) modeel which toook into
considerationn not only the random inttercept but allso the
random slopees of subject whenever
w
it was
w appropriatte (i.e.,
when the faactor was a within-subjecct factor). Random
R
intercepts annd slopes of items were not
n included in the
analysis due to the smaall number of
o items (4 words:
high/low, froont/back). Too interpret thhe significancce, we
adopted the criterion
c
that a given cosinne was signifiicant if
the absolute value
v
of the t-statistic (or z--statistic) exceeeded 2
(Baayen, 2008).
Accuracy Thhe mean accurracy for all tarrget trials was 92.4%
(SD = 8.1). For
F high/low conditions, accuracy
a
was 92.4%
(SD = 9.7), and for fronnt/back condittions, accuraccy was
92.5% (SD = 11.3). For coongruent condditions, accuraacy was
=
and for incongruent conditions it was
95.9% (SD =4.5)
88.9% (SD = 15.5). Analyyzing accuracyy by using a logistic
l
b
accuraacy data yieldded no
mixed effectss model on binary
main effects or interactionn of Space (hhigh/low, fronnt/back)
z
and Congruenncy (congruent, incongrueent), (Space: z=|1.3|;
Congruency: z=|0.2|; Spacee by Congruenncy: z=|1.2|).
mes Reaction times of the button pressees were
Reaction tim
analyzed by linear
l
mixed eeffects modelss. Only correcct trials
were consideered which resulted in the exclusion of 7% of
the data. Respponses greateer or less thann ±2 SDs awaay from
each participaant’s average RTs were allso excluded, which
resulted in thee removal of 66% of the accu
urate trials.
There was no significannt main effect of Space (tt=|0.3|).
The model yiielded a significant main effect of Conggruency
(t=|3.5|) and a significantt interaction of Congruenncy by
mixed effect model
m
of Conggruency
Space (t=|3.3|). A linear m

onn reaction tim
mes restricted tto the level off high/low, yieelded
a significant eff
ffect of Congruuency (t=|4.5|), demonstratting a
coongruity effecct of high/loow conditionss. Restricting
g the
m
model
to the levvel of front-baack yielded no
o significant effect
e
off Congruency (t=|0.2|) (see F
Figure 1).

Fiigure 1: The innfluence of Sppace (high-low
w; front-back)) and
Coongruency
(congruent;
incongruen
nt)
on
pitch
caategorization (plotted
(
in millliseconds).
Diiscussion
Inn Experiment 1 we find coongruency eff
ffects for highh/low
buut not for fronnt/back condittions, suggestting that activvating
thhe appropriate spatial schem
ma (i.e., spatiall height) is wh
hat is
relevant in suchh binary respoonse compatibbility tasks. Words
W
thhat activate a different (irrrelevant) spatiial schema (ffrontbaack), howeverr, do not resuult in a conggruity effect. This
finnding indicatees that congruuity effects caannot be attribbuted
to markedness (polarity aliggnment), sincee 'front' and 'bback'
also name the unmarked annd marked ends of a (sagitttally
orriented) linearr spatial continnuum.

Experriment 2
Whereas high/llow terminoloogy is convenntional for pitcch in
W
Ennglish, front/bback is not. Maybe we only find a congru
uency
efffect in the casse that is lexiccalized, but noot in the otherr case
(fr
front/back)? Thhis skeptical interpretation
i
would not chhange
thhe fact that markedness is not su
ufficient to elicit
coongruency effe
fects, but it woould call into question
q
our claim
c
abbout activatin
ng the right spatial schema. Do we find
coongruency effe
fects only becaause participaants were usinng the
poolysemous woords high/low,, which can reefer to “heighht” in
booth space and pitch?
T rule out thhis alternativee explanation,, in Experimeent 2,
To
wee compared congruity effeccts in two pairrs of spatial teerms:
talll/short and big/small.
b
Neiither pair of spatial
s
expressions
caan be used in conventionall English to describe
d
the height
h
off musical piitches (i.e., ttheir frequen
ncy). If highh/low
coongruency effeects were drivven by polysem
my, then neith
her of
thhese pairs of spatial term
ms should pro
oduce a cong
gruity
efffect. However, if space-pittch congruity effects result from
ussing words thhat activate a vertical spaatial schema, then
“taall” and “shorrt” should prooduce a congru
uity effect beccause
thhey are schem
matically apprropriate (even
n though theyy are

2215

lexically inapppropriate). B
By contrast, “big” and “small”
“
should not produce anyy space-pitch
h congruity effect,
because thesee terms refer to
t 3-dimensio
onal size, and should
not activate the
t appropriaate 1-dimensio
onal vertical spatial
schema (Dirv
ven & Taylor, 1988; Taylor,, 2002).
In addition to testing wh
hether the heeight-pitch con
ngruity
effect in Expeeriment 1 deppended on the polysemy of “high”
and “low,” Experiment 2 also
a
provides a second testt of the
pace-pitch con
ngruity
sufficiency off markedness to produce sp
effects. “Big”” is the unmaarked (positiv
ve) end and “small”
“
the marked (negative) ennd of the biig-small conttinuum.
m
prredicts that ju
udgments sho
ould be
Therefore, markedness
faster when “b
big” is matcheed with “high
h” than when “small”
“
is matched wiith “high.”
Methods
Participants Twenty-fou
ur English speakers wiith no
( per
reported hearring problems participated for payment (5$
30 minutes). One particippant was exclluded from an
nalyses
wing instructioons (i.e. the participant resp
ponded
for not follow
according to the wrong reesponse mapp
ping througho
out one
H was replaceed by a new participant who had
condition). He
not previously
y participated in the task.
Materials an
nd Procedurre The sam
me procedure as in
Experiment 1 was used, with the following exceeptions.
c
piitches as high
h-low or fron
nt-back,
Rather than classifying
participants classified
c
them
m as tall-shorrt for one block and
big-small for the other.
t high pitch had to
In the tall-sshort congruennt condition the
be categorized as tall and the
t low pitch as short. In th
he tallgruent condittion the low
w pitch had to be
short incong
categorized as
a tall and thee high pitch as
a short. In th
he bigsmall congru
uent conditioon the high pitch had to be
categorized as
a big and the low pitch as small (accord
ding to
patterns of markedness). In the big
g-small incon
ngruent
d to be catego
orized as big and
a the
condition the low pitch had
high pitch as small.
Results
All data were
w
analyzeed using R (version 2.14.2;
http://www.r--project.org/) and the R paackages lme4 (Bates
& Maechler,, 2009) and languageR (Baayen, 200
09; cf.
Baayen, 200
08). We caarried out liinear mixed--effects
regression mo
odels of Spacee (tall-short versus big-smaall) and
Congruency (congruent,
(
inncongruent) on
n accuracy an
nd RTs.
Using the principle of back
kward selectio
on, we again started
ok into
out with a full (conservvative) modeel which too
n not only the random inttercept but allso the
consideration
random slopees of subject whenever
w
it was
w appropriatte (i.e.,
when the faactor was a within-subjecct factor). Random
R
intercepts an
nd slopes of items were not
n included in the
analysis due to the smaall number of
o items (4 words:
tall/short, big
g/small). To interpret th
he significancce, we
adopted the criterion
c
that a given cosin
ne was signifiicant if
the absolute value
v
of the t-statistic (or z--statistic) exceeeded 2
(Baayen, 2008).

Acccuracy The mean accuraccy for all targeet trials was 94
4.8%
(SSD = 11.4). Fo
or tall/short cconditions, acccuracy was 94
4.6%
(SSD = 13.1), and
a for big/sm
mall conditio
ons, accuracy was
944.9% (SD = 10
0.1). For conggruent conditiions, accuracy
y was
966.2% (SD = 6.7) and for incongruent conditions itt was
933.3% (SD = 17.1). Analyzing accuracy by
b using a log
gistic
m
mixed
effects model on binnary accuracy
y data yieldeed no
m
main
effects orr interaction of Space (talll/short, big/sm
mall)
an
nd Congruenccy (congruentt, incongruentt), (Space: z=
=|1.0|;
Co
ongruency: z=
=|1.0|; Space bby Congruency
y: z=|1.0|).
Reeaction timess Reaction tim
mes of the bu
utton presses were
an
nalyzed by lin
near mixed efffects models. Only correct trials
weere considereed which resuulted in the ex
xclusion of 4% of
th
he data. Respo
onses greater oor less than ±2
± SDs away from
eaach participan
nt’s average R
RTs were also
o excluded, which
w
resulted in the removal
r
of 4%
% of the accuraate trials.
There was no
n significannt main effecct of Congru
uency
=|0.9|). The model
m
yielded
d a significan
nt main effecct of
(t=
Sppace (t=|2.3|) and a significant interactio
on of Congru
uency
byy Space (t=
=|3.2|). A linnear mixed effect modeel of
Co
ongruency on
n reaction tim
mes restricted
d to the leveel of
talll/short, yielded a signiificant effectt of Congru
uency
(t=
=|3.0|), demo
onstrating a congruity efffect of tall//short
co
onditions. Resstricting the m
model to the level of big-ssmall
yiielded no sign
nificant effecct of Congrueency (t=|1.5|) (see
Fiigure 2).

Fiigure 2: The influence
i
of S
Space (tall-sho
ort; big-small)) and
Co
ongruency
(congruent;
incongruen
nt)
on
pitch
caategorization (plotted
(
in millliseconds).
Diiscussion
Inn Experiment 2 we find a coongruency effeect in tall/shorrt but
noot in big/smaall conditionss. Therefore, congruity efffects
caannot be attriibuted to polyysemy or maarkedness. Raather,
sp
pace-pitch co
ompatibility is based on
n activating the
ap
ppropriate spaatial schema,, which serv
ves as the so
ource
doomain for En
nglish speakeers' mental representation
r
ns of
m
musical
pitch.

2216

General Discussion
In two experiments, we show binary response-time
congruity effects attributable to metaphorical thinking, but
not to markedness. Classifying pitches with vertical spatial
terms elicited space-pitch congruity effects, but no
comparable effects are found when people were asked to
classify pitches with terms that name the poles of other
marked spatial continuums (front vs. back; big vs. small).
Polarity alignment (a.k.a. markedness), therefore, is not
sufficient to produce space-pitch congruency effects.
Rather, schema-appropriateness is necessary, supporting
theories of metaphorical mental representation.
Moreover, congruity effects are not restricted to
polysemous words like “high” and “low,” which can be
used for both space and pitch. Rather, congruity effects can
also be found for words like “tall” and “short,” which have
no musical senses, but which activate a vertical spatial
schema: the “active ingredient” in the observed space-pitch
congruity effects.
In most cases, the polarities of metaphorical source and
target domains are aligned (e.g. Lakens, 2012; Lakoff &
Johnson, 1980). For instance, happy, powerful, good, and
high in pitch are all UP (the positive end of this spatial
continuum), whereas their antonyms are DOWN (the
negative end of the continuum). This relationship between
metaphor and markedness makes it hard to determine the
cause of many response compatibility effects. However, the
polarities of metaphorical source and target domains are not
always aligned. Musical pitch provides one domain, in
which the marked end of the source domain (space) can be
matched to the unmarked end of the target domain (pitch).
Farsi speakers, for instance, represent pitch in terms of
thickness. In Farsi speakers’ language and thought, the
unmarked pole of the spatial continuum (thick) is aligned
with the marked pole of the pitch continuum (low
frequency). Thus, metaphors and markedness can dissociate
in Farsi – at least to the extent that markedness can be
established in a principled way.
Making psychological predictions on the basis of
markedness is problematic because researchers may
disagree on how markedness is defined, and even on which
end of a given continuum is marked. Whereas Schubert
(2005) describes “powerful” as the marked and “powerless”
as the unmarked endpoint of the “power” continuum, others
have suggested the reverse (e.g. Lakens, 2012). In addition
to these inconsistencies, it is not always clear what
markedness actually means. By definition, quite a number
of attributes like frequency, familiarity, or fluency, seem to
be subsumed under the umbrella term markedness (see
Haspelmath, 2006). In one experiment, for instance, Lakens
(2012) manipulated polarity by adjusting the frequency of
the 'marked' endpoint. While usually marked attributes like
bad or down (‒polar) occur less frequently, this was no
longer the case for a group of Laken's participants.
Critically, these participants also no longer showed a
congruency effect, which was taken as evidence for a
polarity account. However, in line with Haspelmath (2006),

it is questionable why one should talk about polarity when
actually frequency is driving the effects. Unlike markedness,
which is a notoriously ambiguous construct (e.g.,
Haspelmath, 2006, enumerates 12 distinct usages of this
term in cognitive science), metaphors in language are more
widely agreed upon. Expressions like “a high soprano” and
“a low bass” make clear predictions about the spatial
mappings that people should be activating for pitch, and
therefore what congruity effects should be found: Linguistic
metaphors tell us which end is “up.”
Here we find an impact of spatial schemas on sourcetarget congruity as predicted by metaphors in language. Our
results suggest an automatic, Stroop-like interference effect
of metaphorical associations, converging with other findings
of height-pitch congruity effects. In one task, for instance,
participants made judgments about musical timbre while
spatial height information was varied on a computer screen.
Although pitch was irrelevant to the task, people's
judgments were affected by the alignment of tonal and
spatial height (Evans & Treisman, 2010), suggesting a
highly automatic source-target mapping (see also Rusconi,
Kwan, Giordano, Umiltà, & Butterworth, 2006; for limits of
automaticity see Brookshire, Ivry, & Casasanto, 2010).
Unlike previous experiments, here the spatial source
domain was not manipulated physically but rather via
linguistic stimuli (i.e., we presented words like high/low;
tall/short etc.). This allowed us to directly assess effects of
polysemy. In Experiment 2, height-pitch congruity effects
could not simply be attributed to lexical overlap (high/low
for space and pitch). Rather, we found that words activating
a similar vertical schema (tall/short) were sufficient to
trigger space-pitch congruity effects even if the words were
lexically inappropriate. One could argue, however, that
congruity effects in tall/short conditions were still indirectly
driven by polysemy. Participants may have activated
high/low terminology when classifying pitches, which then
in turn led to semantic priming from high to tall, and low to
short. However, although we cannot entirely rule out such
priming effects, this explanation is unlikely to account for
our results, for several reasons. According to Latent
Semantic Analysis (LSA; http://lsa.colorado.edu/), 'tall' is
more strongly related to 'short' (LSA cosine: .48) than to
'high' (LSA cosine: .31). Moreover, 'short' is about equally
strongly related to 'high' (LSA cosine: .30) as to 'low' (LSA
cosine: .31). Since activation is expected to spread between
the most strongly related items (Collins & Loftus, 1975),
simple spreading activation would have wiped out a
tall‐short congruity effect rather than producing it.
Moreover, although big is more closely related to high than
to low (LSA cosine: .18 versus .12) congruity effects remain
absent in big/small conditions. The non-significant
big/small effect even points into the opposite direction (see
Figure 2), suggesting that semantic priming is unlikely to
drive the observed patterns of results.2 Thus, while spatial
2

The trend toward a big-low congruity effect could be driven by
underlying associations between size and pitch (e.g., see Evans &
Treisman, 2009) – but not by markendess or semantic priming.

2217

terms like high/tall/big may be semantically related and
overlap in markedness, we find that activating the
appropriate vertical spatial schema is critical for producing
space-pitch congruity effects.

Conclusions
Metaphor congruency effects have been challenged by a
polarity account, claiming that binary response
compatibility effects may be better explained by markedness
than by metaphorical thinking (Lakens, 2012). Indeed,
metaphor and polarity are often hard to distinguish.
However, here we show that when polarity and metaphor
are juxtaposed, congruity effects support metaphorical
thinking, not polarity.
Furthermore, these results show that it is not necessary to
use polysemous words to produce source-target congruity
effects (i.e., words that can refer to both the metaphorical
source and target domains). Words that activate a vertical
schema (e.g., tall/short) produce a space-pitch congruity
effect despite being lexically inappropriate. Words that
activate a different spatial schema (e.g., front/back,
big/small) do not produce any space-pitch congruity effect,
despite naming the poles of other marked spatial
continuums.
Together, these results indicate that activating the
appropriate spatial schema is the “active ingredient” in
space-pitch congruity effects – not polysemy or markedness
– supporting theories of metaphorical mental representation.

Acknowledgments
We thank Tom Gijssels for assistance in programming and
for help with the experimental set-up, and Geoff Brookshire
for help with R-analyses. This research was supported by a
Travel Grant of Radboud University Nijmegen and an
IMPRS fellowship to SD and by a James S. McDonnell
Foundation Scholar Award (#220020236) to DC.

References
Baayen, H. R. (2009). LanguageR. R package.
Baayen, R. H. (2008). Analyzing linguistic data: A practical
introduction to statistics using R. Cambridge University
Press.
Bates, D., & Maechler, M. (2009). Package “lme4”(Version
0.999375-32): linear mixed-effects models using S4 classes.
Available (April 2011) at http://cran. r-project.
org/web/packages/lme4/lme4. pdf.
Brookshire, G., Ivry, R., & Casasanto, D. (2010). Modulation
of motor-meaning congruity effects for valenced words. In S.
Ohlsson & R. Catrambone (Eds.), Proceedings of the 32nd
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
1940–1945). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Casasanto, D. (2010). Space for thinking. In V. Evans & P.
Chilton (Eds.), Language, cognition and space: The state of
the art and new directions (pp. 453–478). London: Equinox
Publishing.
Casasanto, D., & Boroditsky, L. (2008). Time in the mind:
Using space to think about time. Cognition, 106(2), 579–593.

Clark, H. H. (1969). Linguistic processes in deductive
reasoning. Psychological Review, 76(4), 387–404.
Clark, H. H., Carpenter, P. A., & Just, M. A. (1973). On the
meeting of semantics and perception. In W. G. Chase (Ed.),
Visual information processing (pp. 311–382). Chicago:
Academic Press.
Collins, A. M., & Loftus, E. F. (1975). A spreading‐activation
theory of semantic processing. Psychological review, 82(6),
407–428.
Dirven, R., & Taylor, J. (1988). The Conceptualization of
Vertical Space in English: The Case of Tall. In B. RudzkaOstyn (Ed.), Topics in Cognitive Linguistics (pp. 207–229).
Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Dolscheid, S., Shayan, S., Majid, A., & Casasanto, D. (2013).
The Thickness of Musical Pitch: Psychophysical evidence
for linguistic relativity. Psychological Science, Advance
online publication. doi:10.1177/0956797612457374.
Evans, K. K., & Treisman, A. (2010). Natural cross-modal
mappings between visual and auditory features. Journal of
vision, 10(1), 6–12.
Haspelmath, M. (2006). Against markedness (and what to
replace it with). Journal of Linguistics, 42(1), 25–70.
Lakens, D. (2012). Polarity correspondence in metaphor
congruency
effects:
Structural
overlap
predicts
categorization times for bipolar concepts presented in
vertical space. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 38(3), 726–736.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by (Vol.
111). Chicago London: The University of Chicago Press.
Landsberg, M. E. (1995). Syntactic iconicity and linguistic
freezes: the human dimension (Vol. 9). De Gruyter Mouton.
Lehrer, A. (1985). Markedness and antonymy. Journal of
Linguistics, 21(2), 397–429.
Meier, B. P., & Robinson, M. D. (2004). Why the Sunny Side
Is Up. Associations Between Affect and Vertical Position.
Psychological Science, 15(4), 243–247.
Proctor, R. W., & Cho, Y. S. (2006). Polarity correspondence:
A general principle for performance of speeded binary
classification tasks. Psychological Bulletin; Psychological
Bulletin, 132(3), 416–442.
Rusconi, E., Kwan, B., Giordano, B. L., Umilta, C., &
Butterworth, B. (2006). Spatial representation of pitch
height: the SMARC effect. Cognition, 99(2), 113–129.
Schubert, T. W. (2005). Your highness: vertical positions as
perceptual symbols of power. Journal of personality and
social psychology, 89(1), 1–21.
Seymour, P. H. (1974). Asymmetries in judgments of
verticality. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 102(3),
447–455.
Shayan, S., Ozturk, O., & Sicoli, M. A. (2011). The thickness
of pitch: Crossmodal metaphors in Farsi, Turkish, and
Zapotec. The Senses and Society, 6(1), 96–105.
Stumpf, C. (2006). Tonpsychologie (Vol. 1). Leipzig: Hirzel.
Taylor, J. R. (2002). Near synonyms as co-extensive
categories: “high” and “tall” revisited. Language Sciences,
25(3), 263–284.

2218

