UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Subjective Awareness during Cross-Language Speech Perception Attending Unattended
Regions of an Acoustic Continuum

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/786638mq

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Schoenherr, Jordan Richard
Logan, John

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Subjective Awareness during Cross-Language Speech Perception
Attending Unattended Regions of an Acoustic Continuum
Jordan Schoenherr (psychophysics.lab@gmail.com)
John Logan (john_logan@carleton.ca)
Department of Psychology, Carleton University
1125 Colonel By Drive, Ottawa, ON K1S5B6 Canada
study, we examined whether feedback could be used to
allocate attention to a previously unattended region of an
acoustic continuum that corresponded to a non-native
phoneme category and whether attention was accompanied
by awareness.

Abstract
Linguistic experience attenuates adult listeners’ attention to
acoustic differences that are not phonemic in the listener’s
language. In the present study we found that acoustic information
is available to listeners after acoustic cues have been processed to
identify phonemic categories. Moreover, we also found that
listeners maintained an awareness of these differences by
comparing the identification function to typicality ratings and
confidence reports.
Keywords: speech perception,
confidence processing

category

Categorical Perception of Speech Sounds
A variety of acoustic cues are used by listeners to define
phoneme categories. Voice-onset time (VOT), the interval
between aspiration and the vibration of the vocal cords is
one such cue. Lisker and Abramson (1967) presented
English and Thai listeners with synthetic speech sounds
ranging from -150 VOT (prevoiced) to +150 VOT (voiced).
The Thai listeners’ identification performance resulted in
two category boundaries corresponding to /p/, /b/, and /ph/
whereas English listeners’ identification performance
yielded only one category boundary corresponding to the
phonemes /b/ and /p/. These findings illustrate how nonnative speech sounds are assimilated into existing phonemic
categorical structure.

boundaries,

Introduction
When adult listeners are presented a continuum of
speech stimuli varying along an acoustic dimension, they
divide the continuum into distinct categories defined by
sharp boundaries (Liberman, Harris, Hoffman, & Griffith,
1957), a phenomenon known as categorical perception
(Liberman, Cooper, Shankweiler, & Studdert-Kennedy,
1967). Categorical perception was originally taken as
evidence that adult listeners are no longer capable of
detecting stimulus differences in within-category regions of
a speech continuum (Eimas, 1975). A developmental
account of categorical perception assumes that when infants
acquire phonemes they learn to segment acoustic
information into discrete categories. Consistent with this
view, research indicates that by the end of their first year,
infants develop a reduced sensitivity to differences between
stimuli within a given phoneme category (Werker, 1989),
with category boundaries becoming more distinct as they
become older (e.g., Hazan & Barrett, 2000). Rather than
processing all stimulus dimensions, infants learn to attend to
specific acoustic cues that determine category membership
(Jusczyk, 2000). The question that the present study
attempts to answer is whether dults are subjectively aware
of attended and unattended acoustic properties.
Extending the concept of categorical perception to the
perception of non-native phonemes implies that adult
listeners might experience difficulties in perceiving these
speech sounds due to a desensitization to acoustic
information. In effect, non-native speech sounds are thought
to be perceptually assimilated into existing native phonemic
categorical representations (cf. Best, 1995, Flege, 1995).
Although previous research indicates that listeners can learn
to perceive non-native phoneme categories (e.g., Pisoni,
Aslin, Perey, & Hennessy, 1982), limited work has been
done to examine the metacognitive awareness associated
with learning a non-native phoneme category. In the present

Learning to perceive non-native speech sounds
When categorizing stimuli, participants must attend to
stimulus properties along the physical continuum that
defines the stimuli (Nosofsky, 1986). With training,
participants become sensitized to specific regions along the
continuum that can affect performance in other tasks (e.g.,
discrimination tasks; Goldstone, 1994). Thus, once a
phonemic category has been acquired listeners will limit
their attention to only those psychophysical characteristics
where attention has been directed (Jusczyk, 1992).
In order to promote attention to previously unattended
acoustic characteristics, listeners typically require some
form of training. For example, in order to examine the
effectiveness of feedback, Pisoni et al. (1982) provided
English listeners with three exemplars of speech sounds
from the three regions of the VOT continuum corresponding
to voiceless unaspirated, voiced aspirated, and voiceless
aspirated stops (i.e, /p/, /b/, and /ph/, respectively).
Following a short period of laboratory training, listeners
were capable of identifying and discriminating speech
sounds from the non-native /ph/ category.
Pisoni et al.’s (1982) results have several implications.
First, acoustic information must be accessible to listeners in
order to classify stimuli into a non-native phoneme
category. Further support for the availability of acoustic
information also comes from studies using typicality ratings
wherein gradedness is exhibited in response functions (e.g.,
Miller & Volaitis, 1989). Second, when compared to

1
1283

previous studies (e.g., Mackain et al., 1981) the amount of
exposure to non-native phonemes is less important than the
method used to present the non-native phonemes. Finally,
methods that allocate selective attention to previously
unattended regions can facilitate acquisition of these
phonemic categories. Although attention is drawn to these
stimulus features, it remains unclear whether participants
have a subjective awareness of these acoustic properties.

participants have an awareness of acoustic information
when identifying phonemes.
Present Study
In the present study, English listeners were asked to
classify stimuli from a VOT continuum into phoneme
categories corresponding to either two categories, /p/ and /b/
(both found in English), or three categories, /p/, b/, plus the
prevoiced category /ph/ (found in Thai). If listeners are
aware of acoustic differences, their subjective confidence
should differ across regions of the VOT continuum as
evidenced by miscalibration. If underconfidence is
evidenced, it suggests that listeners did not have subjective
awareness of a well-defined phonemic category whereas if
overconfidence is evidenced, it suggests that listeners
believed that they had a better understanding of the
phonemic category then they in fact did.

Confidence reports and subjective awareness
One method frequently used to quantify subjective
awareness in a perceptual discrimination task is to have
participants provide a subjective probability that they have
provided a correct answer. The use of numeric response
scales is particularly useful given that a direct comparison
can be made with the proportion of correct responses
obtained from the primary task. In this case, 50% represents
a response associated with a guess whereas 100% represents
absolute certainty in a response. Thus, listeners are well
calibrated when they assign a level of confidence (e.g.,
60%) that corresponds to their obtained accuracy (e.g.,
p(cor) = 0.6). Listeners frequently demonstrate failures in
assigned appropriate subjective probabilities, evidencing
miscalibration.
Rather then miscalibration being random, systematic
deviations have been observed which some argue represent
a differential ability to assess the performance of specific
cognitive operations (Dawes, 1980), with still others
arguing that these measures represent contributions of
implicit and explicit knowledge (e.g., Dienes & Berry,
1997; cf. Lichtenstein & Fischhoff, 1977). For instance,
underconfidence has been observed in perceptual tasks (e.g.,
Bjorkman, Juslin, & Winman, 1993) whereas
overconfidence is typically observed in tasks requiring
assess to general knowledge (e.g., Gigerenzer, Hoffrage, &
Kleinbolting, 1991). Dawes (1980) has argued that these
findings are the result of participants’ uncertainty in their
perceptual processes and certainty about information stored
in long-term memory. This suggests that confidence
processing uses a second set of operations to assess the
content and output of the primary decision process (e.g.,
stimulus classification).
An alternative class of confidence models assumes an
additional set of operations wherein primary decision
information is rescaled (e.g., for a review see, Baranski &
Petrusic, 1998). These accounts are supported by the
observation that the requirement of confidence reports
increase primary decision response time (Baranski &
Petrusic, 1998) and the dissociable effects of nondiagnostic
information on the primary decision response selection and
confidence reports (e.g., Schoenherr, Leth-Steensen, &
Petrusic, 2010). In the present study, we assume that both
acoustic and phonemic information will affect confidence
reports and that the correspondence of identification
accuracy and mean confidence will demonstrate whether

Experiment 1
Previously, Schoenherr, Logan, and Winchester (2012)
observed slight overconfidence for responses made for /b/
stimuli located at the category boundary on the VOT
continuum. In Experiment 1, we sought to see whether we
could increase uncertainty in this region by presenting
stimuli from the prevoiced region. The addition of stimuli
with these novel acoustic properties should increase
uncertainty for stimuli from the /ph-b/ portion of the
continuum if acoustic properties are being used to identify
stimuli whereas the participants should remain certain in
their judgments of stimuli associated with the /p/ category.
Method
Participants
Nine Carleton University students participated in the study
for course credit; all were native speakers of English or had
extensive experience with English and reported normal
hearing and no speech pathologies.
Materials
Fifteen synthetic speech stimuli were used, obtained from
the Haskins Laboratories website (HL, 2011; Lisker &
Abramson, 1967). These stimuli varied along the VOT
continuum from -70 to 70 ms VOT. As per the method used
by Pisoni et al. (1982), listeners were presented with stimuli
which corresponded to the voiceless unaspirated, voiced
aspirated, and voiceless aspirated stops. The latter categories
are present in English while the former is not. The sounds
were originally recorded on reel-to-reel tape and later
converted into AIFF format at Haskins Laboratories. Stimuli
were pre-processed using a DC offset correction to
eliminate clicks present in the AIFF versions and then
converted into WAV files.

2
1284

Figure 1b. Identification Function with the Requirement of Confidence

1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5

/B/
/P/
/Ph/

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
-70 -60 -50 -40 -30 -20 -10

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

1.0

Proportion Response ./ Subjective Confidence

Proportion Response ./ Subjective Confidence

Figure 1a. ID Function without the Requirement of Confidence

0.9
0.8
0.7
/B/
/P/
/Ph/

0.6
0.5

CONF

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

70

-70 -60 -50 -40 -30 -20 -10

Voice-Onset Time

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

Voice-Onset Time

Procedure
Modelled after the procedure used by Pisoni et al.
(1982), listeners were presented with a brief training block
in which they heard three stimuli prior to the identification
tasks, one from each region of the VOT continuum (-70, 0,
and 70 ms VOT, corresponding to the /ph/, /b/, and /p/
categories). Ten replications of these stimuli were presented
in the order /ph/, /b/, and /p/. Following this initial training,
listeners also were trained using an identification (ID) task
with feedback. They were presented with a stimulus and
then reported whether it was a /ph/, /b/, or /p/ using the ‘V’,
‘B’, or ‘N’ keys, labeled as ‘_B’, ‘B’, and ‘P’, respectively.
After they had indicated their response, ‘Correct’ or
‘Incorrect’ was presented visually on the screen. Listeners
completed a total of 80 trials in the training task.
Following training, listeners again identified the
stimulus presented as a /ph/, /b/, or /p/ using the keyboard
but no feedback was provided. In the first block, after they
completed each ID trial they also indicated their level of
confidence in their response using the ‘E’ through ‘I’ keys,
on a 6-point scale with 50% representing a guess and 100%
representing certainty. In the second block, confidence was
not reported. Each block was composed of a total of 150
trials.
The duration of the experiment was approximately 30
minutes. Replicating the procedure of Pisoni et al. (1982),
stimuli were presented randomly except for the sequential
presentation of the training stimuli. Listeners were presented
with the stimuli over headphones at a comfortable listening
level using PsychoPy software (Peirce, 2007).

obtain a main effect or interaction of confidence reports, it
suggests that confidence reports did not significantly affect
ID performance thereby permitting a straightforward
interpretation of the remaining results.
(In an alternate version of Experiment 1 the order of
confidence and no confidence blocks was reversed [see
Schoenherr and Logan, in preparation]. Under these
conditions, participants’ (n = 12) identification performance
for the non-native phoneme category was reduced in the
first block when confidence was required. Participants
generally paired neighbouring stimuli together in alternating
clusters of 2-4 speech sounds [e.g., VOTs 10 and 0 ms were
identified as /b/, VOTs -10 and -20 ms identified as /ph/, and
VOTs -30 to -60 ms identified as /b/]. Such a finding
suggests that the requirement of producing confidence
reports can interfere with the primary task.)
Table 1. Mean identification RTs (ms) along the critical
regions of the VOT continuum with standard error reported
in parentheses.
Condition /ph/
/ph-b/
/b/
/b-p/
/p/
No Conf.
888
910
893
933
796
(45)
(51)
(54)
(75)
(43)
Conf.
1,009
1,137
1,072
992
855
(47)
(124)
(113)
(83)
(41)
Identification Response Time. Prior to conducting an
analysis of the response time (RT) data, we collapsed
stimuli into regions five regions along the VOT continuum
corresponding to two category boundaries (CBs) /ph-b/ and
/b-p/ corresponding to CB1 (-30, -20) and CB2 (20, 30),
respectively, and equivalent within-category pairs
corresponding to /ph/ (-70, -60), /b/ (0,10), and /p/ (60, 70),
respectively. Using the criterion of 3 standard deviations,
4.3% of the responses were identified as outliers and
removed from the final analysis.
An analysis of the remaining responses times revealed a
main effect of VOT region, F(4,32) = 4.45, MSE = .041, p =
.025, η2 = .357. Table 1 indicates that response latencies
were longer at category boundaries as well as for the nonnative (/ph/) and modified native (/b/) categories relative to
the native /p/ category. A main effect of the requirement of
confidence report was also obtained, F(1,18) = 14.55, MSE

Results
Proportion Identification. Unlike studies that have
examined two-category identification performance using
confidence reports (e.g., Schoenherr et al., 2012), only the
/p/ phoneme category showed a sharp identification function
(Figures 1a and 1b). In general, however, listeners could
consistently identify stimuli associated with the /ph/ and /b/
category with greater than chance accuracy (i.e., stimuli
with VOTs of -70, -60, -50, 0, and 10), indicating that even
with a brief period of training, listeners can begin to acquire
a non-native speech category. Supporting this, we obtained
a significant effect for VOT stimulus, F(14,112) = 7.389,
MSE = .435, p = .001, η2 = .480. Given that we did not

3
1285

= .026, p = .005, η2 = .645. Again, Table 1 demonstrates
longer latencies with the requirement of confidence relative
to the no confidence condition. Given that the confidence
block always followed the no confidence block, this finding
cannot be attributed to automaticity. The interaction of
confidence condition and VOT region was only marginally
significant, F(4,32) = 2.724, MSE = .019, p = .099, η2 =
.254.

while participants confidence reports are influenced by their
two native phoneme categories, they might have some
awareness of the acoustic properties of stimuli within the
/ph-b/ region which cause uncertainty in their responses. To
assess the extent to which acoustic and phonemic properties
are available to subjective awareness, Experiment 2 required
participants to additionally provide typicality ratings that
have previously been shown to reflect acoustic properties
(Miller & Volaitis, 1989).

Confidence Reports. Figure 1a and 1b also demonstrate the
effect of confidence measures. Listeners expressed less
confidence in their responses to stimuli located within the
/ph/ and /b/ categories. As was the case with ID accuracy,
we observed a main effect of the stimulus location along the
VOT continuum on mean confidence, F(14,112) = 6.931,
MSE = 1011.371, p = .018, η2 = .464. Our comparison of
over/underconfidence bias did not reveal any significant
effects, F(14,112) = 2.146, MSE = .0354, p = .133, η2 =
.212. Unlike previous studies that have observed graded
responses indicative of perception of acoustic properties
(e.g., McMurray, Tanenhaus, & Aslin, 2002), our findings
suggest that listeners are not fully aware of the processes
allowing them to identify stimuli.

Method
Participants, Materials, and Procedure
Fifteen Carleton University students participated in the
study. Other participant and stimulus characteristics were
the same as in Experiment 1.
We replicated the methods of identification block in
Experiment 1 and required post-decisional confidence
reports. In a subsequent another block, listeners rated the
typicality of each stimuli on a scale of 1 through 9 where ‘9’
represented highly typical of a category and ‘1’ represented
a highly atypical member of a category. Listeners were
presented with the same number of trials as the
identification block.
Results

Discussion
An instructive comparison can also be made between the
results of the present study and conditions in which
participants identify two native phonemes. Schoenherr et al.
(2012) observed a small decrease in confidence around the
/b-p/ category boundary when only the voiced and voiceless
portions of the continuum were presented to listeners. When
the prevoiced portion of the continuum was additionally
presented, Schoenherr et al. (2012) observed lower
confidence in the /ph-b/ portion of the continuum. When
compared to identification accuracy, this pattern of
responses leads to underconfidence in comparison to the
overconfidence observed in the present study. Taken
together with our results, this suggests that training does
result in the allocation of attention to newly relevant
acoustic properties of the stimuli in this region of the VOT
continuum, thereby reducing certainty. Although listeners
are somewhat more conservative in their confidence reports,
they are still overconfident suggesting that the phonemic
representations that they are subjectively aware of are less
accurate than the acoustic information necessary to identify
the stimuli.

Confidence Reports. Figure 2 also demonstrates the effect
of confidence measures. Like ID accuracy, we found that
subjective confidence varied along the VOT continuum,
F(1,14) = 6.55, MSE = 44.11, p = .008, η2 = .319. Relative
to Experiment 1, we did observe greater underconfidence in
the negative portion of the VOT continuum.

Experiment 2
The pattern of overconfidence observed in Experiment 1
suggests two features of a listener’s awareness of acoustic
properties. First, the observation that mean confidence
exceeded identification accuracy in the /ph-b/ region of the
VOT continuum indicates that listeners did not have
complete access to acoustic properties on a trial-to-trial
basis. Second, mean confidence in identification responses
to stimuli within the /ph-b/ region was lower relative to
stimuli from the /p/ region. These findings suggest that

Typicality Task. Typicality ratings also varied significantly
as a function of stimulus location along the VOT
continuum, F(14,112) = 5.820, MSE = .3.295, p = .009, η2 =
.421. Unlike accuracy, but like mean confidence, typicality
ratings appeared to be more responsive to the acoustic
properties of the stimuli. Participants considered stimuli in
the /b/ and /ph/ range as less typical then stimuli in the /p/
range even though they exhibited equal accuracy. Moreover,
within-category ratings exhibited more graded responses.

Proportion Identification. Replicating the general
results of Experiment 1, the location of the stimuli along the
VOT continuum significantly affected identification
performance, F(14,112) = 9.149, MSE = .124, p = .005, η2 =
.533. Figure 1b demonstrates, participants had a sharp
category boundary between stimuli for the /b/ and /p/
categories. A noticeable difference was evident in the
location of the boundary. Whereas in Experiment 1 the
boundary was located between VOT 20 ms and 30 ms, a
shift such that the boundary was now located at VOT 20 ms
with a resulting decrement in performance for VOT 10 ms
stimuli. We assume that these results are due to range
effects. In general, these findings permit a straightforward
interpretation of the remaining results.

4
1286

Volatis, 1989). A similar pattern was again observed in
confidence ratings. More importantly, when typicality and
identification functions were interpolated, a near perfect fit
was obtained with the confidence function. This finding is
of particular interest as it suggests that confidence is
affected by both phonemic representations stored in longterm memory and acoustic properties available in short-term
memory.
Conclusion
The findings of the present study have several
implications. First, we replicated results from early studies
(e.g., Pisoni et al., 1982) showing that participants can learn
a non-native speech category using only three exemplars
selected from the VOT continuum. Second, our results
indicate that the acquisition of non-native phonemes likely
resulted from the allocation of attention to regions along the
VOT continuum that were previously unattended (e.g.,
Jusczyk, 1992). In comparison to tasks where participants
must identify two categories, such as in Experiment 2 and
Schoenherr et al. (2012), participants exhibited well-defined
/b/ and /p/ phonemic categories. The induction of a novel
category boundary requires attention to acoustic properties.
In the present study, support for the detection of acoustic
properties of stimuli from the same phonemic category
comes from both confidence reports and typicality ratings.
Both subjective confidence and typicality decreased in the
/ph-b/ region of the VOT continuum relative to ratings
within the /b-p/ region.
As briefly noted above in reference to Experiment 1, this
pattern appears to hold provided that participants do not
need to concurrently monitor their performance (i.e.,
provide confidence reports). Thus, although feedback
directs attention toward previously unattended regions of the
VOT continuum, additional top-down monitoring might
emphasize differences between exemplars to the detriment
of the formation of novel phonemic categories. Similar
findings of top-down interference have been observed in
visual search tasks wherein activation of object-level
representations in long-term memory creates interference in
detection of stimuli based on visual features (e.g., Zhaoping
& Firth, 2011).
Finally, our study also has implications for models of
confidence. The identification function and typicality ratings
are believed to reflect the detection of phonemic and
acoustic information, respectively. When interpolating
between these two functions, we obtained a function that
approximated that obtained from confidence reports. This
suggests that additional processing is required to create a
confidence report and that such a process can integrate
information from short- and long-term memory.

Figure 2. ID, Subjective Ratings, and Interpolated Function
1.0

P(Identification Responses)

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6

/B/
/P/
Typicality Rating
(ID+Typ)
Confidence

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
-70

-60

-50

-40

-30

-20

-10

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

Voice-Onset Time

Interpolated Function. The similarities in patterns
observed in confidence and typicality suggested a potential
relationship between these two functions. As Figure 2
indicates, mean confidence ratings are situated between
accuracy in the identification task and typicality ratings in
the typicality task. Pearson’s correlations revealed the
strongest relationship between confidence and typicality
ratings, r2 = .960, p < .001. The correlation between
identification responses and mean confidence was also
significant, r2 = .446, p = .007, although the correlation
between identification and typicality was only marginally
significant, r2 = .261, p = .051. These findings suggest that
confidence is associated with both identification accuracy
and typicality ratings but that identification accuracy and
typicality ratings are only weakly related.
In order to examine the relationship between accuracy,
typicality, and confidence ratings we converted typicality to
a proportion, summed it with proportion correct, and
produced an interpolated function. A paired-samples t-test
revealed that the mean confidence function and the
interpolated function did not significantly differ from one
another, t(14) = .309, p = .762. This suggests that
confidence reports were closely associated with information
from both identification accuracy (associated with phonemic
representations) and typicality ratings (associated with
acoustic information). All other paired-sample t-tests were
significant (all ts > 3.283, ps < .005) indicating that different
sources of information contributed to response selection for
each dependent measure.
Discussion
The typicality results provide strong support for the
accessibility of acoustic information during speech
perception. When normalized along a common scale,
typicality ratings were lower in the /ph-b/ region of the VOT
continuum relative to identification responses, suggesting
that participants had an awareness of acoustic properties.
This finding replicates previous studies (e.g., Miller &

References
Abramson, A., & Lisker, L. (1965). Voice onset time in stop
consonants: Acoustic analysis and synthesis. Proceedings

5
1287

of the Fifth International Congress on Acoustics, Liege,
A51.
Baranski, J. V., & Petrusic, W. M. (1994). The calibration
and resolution of confidence in perceptual judgements.
Perception & Psychophysics, 55, 412-428.
Baranski, J. V., & Petrusic, W. M. (1998). Probing the locus
of confidence judgments: Experiments on the time to
determine confidence. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 24,
929-945.
Best, C. T. (1995). A direct realist view of cross-language
speech perception: New Directions in Research and
Theory. In W. Strange (Ed.) Speech perception and
linguistic experience: Theoretical and methodological
issues (pp. 171–204). Baltimore: York Press.
Dawes, R. M (1980). Confidence in intellectual vs.
confidence in perceptual judgments. In E. D. Lantermann
& H. Feger (Eds.) Similarity and Choice: Papers in
Honor of Clyde Coombs (pp. 327-345). Bern Hans Huber.
Eimas, P. D. (1975). Auditory and phonetic coding of the
cues for speech: Discrimination of the [r-1] distinction by
young infants. Perception & Psychophysics, 18, 341-347.
Flege, J., (1995). Second language speech learning: Theory,
findings and problems. In W. Strange (Ed.). Speech
Perception and Linguistic Experience: Theoretical and
Methodological Issues (pp. 233–277). Baltimore: York
Press.
Gigerenzer, G., Hoffrage, U., & Kleinbölting, H. (1991).
Probabilistic mental models: A Brunswikian theory of
confidence. Psychological Review, 98, 506-528.
Goldstone, R. (1994). Influences of categorization on
perceptual discrimination. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 123, 178-200.
Haskins Laboratories (2011). Abramson/Lisker VOT
Stimuli.
Retrieved
01/12/2011.
From
http://www.haskins.yale.edu/featured/demoliskabram/index.html /.
Hazan, V. & Barrett, S. (2000). The development of
phonemic categorization in children aged 6-12. Journal of
Phonetics, 28, 377-396.
Jusczyk, P. (1989). Developing phonological categories
from the speech signal. In C. A. Ferguson, L. Menn, & C.
Stoel-Gammon (Eds.), Phonological Development:
Models, Research, Implications. Monkton, MD: York.
Jusczyk, P.W. (2000). The Discovery of Spoken Language.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Kvidera, S., & Koustaal, W. (2008). Confidence and
decision type under matched stimulus conditions:
overconfidence in perceptual but not conceptual
Decisions. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 21,
253–281.
Liberman, A.M., Cooper, F.S., Shankweiler, D.P., &
Studdert-Kennedy, M. (1967). Perception of the speech
code. Psychological Review, 74, 431-461.

Liberman, A. M., Harris, K. S., Hoffman, H. S., & Griffith,
B. C. (1957). The discrimination of speech sounds within
and across phoneme boundaries. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 54, 358-368.
Lichtenstein, S., & Fischhoff, B. (1977). Do those who
know more also know more about how, much they know?
Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 20,
159-183.
Lisker, L, & Abramson, A. S. (1967). The voicing
dimension: Some experiments in comparative phonetics.
Proceedings of the 6th International Congress of
Phonetic Sciences. Prague: Academia.
Mackain, K. S., Best, C. T., & Strange, W. (1981).
Categorical perception of English /r/ and /l/ by Japanese
bilinguals. Applied Psycholinguistics, 2, 369-390.
McMurray, B., Tanenhaus, M., & Aslin, R. (2002). Gradient
effects of within-category phonetic variation on lexical
access. Cognition, 86, B33-B42.
Miller, J. L., & Volaitis, L. E. (1989). Effect of speaking
rate on the perceptual structure of a phonetic category.
Perception & Psychophysics, 46, 505-512.
Nosofsky. R. (1986). Attention, similarity, and the
identification-categorization relationship. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 115, 39-57.
Pisoni, D. B., Aslin, R. N., Percy, A. J., & Hennessy, B. L.
(1982). Some effects of laboratory training on
identification and discrimination of voicing contrasts in
stop consonants. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 8, 297-314.
Pisoni, D. B., & Tash, J. B. (1974) Reaction times to
comparisons within and across phonetic categories.
Perception & Psychophysics, 15, 285-290.
Schoenherr, J. R., Leth-Steensen, C., & Petrusic, W. M.
(2010). Selective attention and subjective confidence
calibration. Attention, Perception & Psychophysics, 72,
353-368.
Schoenherr, J. R. & Logan, J. (in preparation). Attending
Unattended Regions of an Acoustic Continuum: Evidence
for Acoustic and Phonemic Representations in Speech
Perception.
Schoenherr, J. R., Logan, J. & Winchester, A. (2012).
Subjective confidence of acoustic and phonemic
representations during speech perception. Proceedings
of the 34th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society, Sapporo, Japan.
Vickers, D., & Packer, J. S. (1982). Effects of alternating set
for speed or accuracy on response time, accuracy, and
confidence in a unidimensional discrimination task. Acta
Psychologica, 50, 179-197.
Zhaoping, L. & Firth, U. (2011). A clash of bottom-up and
top-down processing visual search: The reversed letter
effect revisited. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception & Performance, 37, 997-1006.

6
1288

