UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Systems from Sequences: an Iterated Learning Account of the Emergence of Systematic
Structure in a Non-Linguistic Task

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/005080vf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Cornish, Hannah
Smith, Kenny
Kirby, Simon

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Systems from Sequences: an Iterated Learning Account of the Emergence of
Systematic Structure in a Non-Linguistic Task
Hannah Cornish (hannah@ling.ed.ac.uk)
Kenny Smith (kenny@ling.ed.ac.uk)
Simon Kirby (simon@ling.ed.ac.uk

University of Edinburgh, School of Philosophy, Psychology and Language Sciences,
Language Evolution and Computation Research Unit, 3 Charles Street
Edinburgh, EH8 9AD, UK
Abstract

that learning one will increase the ease with which others will
be learned. In other words, we should expect cultural evolution to create systems of dependence between previously
independent learned behaviours.
In this paper we present an experimental paradigm in
which we can observe the cultural evolution of such systematicity in a task which involves many initially independent learning trials. Our task is purposefully non-linguistic,
but designed to have relevant similarities with language.
Specifically, it is a simple immediate sequence-recall task
based around the Simon Game. This was a children’s electronic game developed by Milton-Bradely in 1978 with four
coloured illuminated buttons arranged on its surface in a circle. These buttons lit up to display a random sequence and the
player’s goal was to repeat this sequence back immediately.
This task has a number of useful properties for our purposes.
Firstly, although it is clearly non-linguistic, thereby making it
unlikely that participants will bring any language-specific biases to it, the task nevertheless involves sequence learning,
which is highly relevant to the linguistic domain (Misyak,
Christiansen, & Tomblin, 2010; Christiansen, Conway, & Onnis, 2012). Secondly, the task is overtly one in which each sequence acts as an independent task. The player can be scored
on their learning of each sequence immediately after recall.
This is in contrast to a typical artificial language learning task
(e.g., Gomez & Gerken, 2000) which might involve learning
a set of sequences for recall at a later stage.
Our question is the following: given this kind of simple
independent sequence recall task, will cultural transmission
nevertheless lead to the evolution of systematicity in the set
of sequences? In effect, can an implicit system-wide learning
effect exert influence on the evolution of the set of sequences?
To test this, we create an iterated version of the Simon Game
in which the sequences produced by one participant in the
task become the sequences that the next participant in the experiment is exposed to. We start with a set of 60 random sequences, and observe whether these sets evolve in such a way
to make learning easier, and whether they do so by becoming
more systematically structured.

Systematicity is a basic property of language and other culturally transmitted behaviours. Utilising a novel experimental
task consisting of initially independent sequence learning trials, we demonstrate that systematicity can unfold gradually via
the process of cultural transmission.
Keywords: Iterated Learning; Cultural Evolution; Sequence
Learning

Introduction
Language, like many other culturally-transmitted aspects of
human behaviour, works as a system: individual words or
phrases do not behave independently of one another but instead form part of a mutually reinforcing system of conventions. This is at the heart of what we mean when we talk about
the grammar of language - grammar exists only to the extent
that individual utterances are non-independent, and related to
one another in systematic ways. This is so obviously true of
language, and other cultural systems such as music, that it
hardly seems to stand in need of explanation. But where does
this basic fundamental property come from? Why are individual utterances not independent? After all, they arguably are
for all other systems of communication in nature. Even when
we discount the fact that non-human animals can only convey
a finite set of meanings, many animal communication signals
are gradable and related to one another only as much as they
are produced by the same vocal apparatus (Fitch, 2010). This
stands in stark contrast to human language, resting as it does
on a system of infinitely reusable discrete signals1 .
We propose that the answer lies in the nature of cultural
transmission. In systems like language which are transmitted by iterated learning2 , the most transmissible behaviours
are those that are most learnable (Smith, Kirby, & Brighton,
2003). Cultural evolution tends therefore to maximise learnability (Christiansen & Chater, 2008; Kirby, Cornish, &
Smith, 2008). One way to increase learnability of a set of behaviours is for those behaviours to behave systematically, so
1 An obvious exception to this are species capable of vocal learning - particularly song-birds and cetaceans. We suspect it is no coincidence that these species (a) have combinatorial signalling systems,
and (b) make use of cultural transmission. See Feher et al. (2009)
for an example of the important role culture has in bird-song.
2 This refers to a particular type of learning where a behaviour is
acquired by observing another who also acquired that behaviour the
same way (Kirby & Hurford, 2002).

Methods
The experiment utilises a diffusion chain paradigm, a technique used widely amongst researchers investigating cultural

340

Results

transmission (e.g., Mesoudi & Whiten, 2008), whereby all
learners (apart from those in the initial generation) are trained
on the output of previous learners.

The sequences were analysed in order to determine (1)
whether the individual sequences would adapt to become easier to learn over time, and (2) whether individual sequences
would co-evolve together to form a collective system. In order to assess these effects, we look at quantitative measures
of learnability and structure, along with an additional measure
examining the degree of divergence between the four chains
into specific lineages. We also qualitiatively examine some
of the evolved sequences at the ends of the chains, and note
some striking structural regularities.

Participants
In total, 40 participants (mean age 21y, 11m; females = 25)
were recruited from the University of Edinburgh’s graduate
employment service, to take part in a visual memory experiment involving sequences of flashing coloured lights. Each
participant was allocated at random into one of four different
chains (A, B, C, D), consisting of ten generations each. All
learners received £7 remuneration for taking part.

Learnability

Procedure

To determine the learnability of a sequence set at a given
moment in time, we first need a measure of how accurately
each sequence is reproduced. For this we calculated the intergenerational error using the Levenshtein (1966) edit-distance
between each target sequence and response from the participant, normalised for length of sequence (Kirby et al., 2008)3 :
we count the minimum number of insertions, deletions and
substitutions required to turn one sequence (input) into another (output), dividing this by the length of the longer sequence. From the normalised edit distance of each individual
sequence, we then calculate the average error of the sequence
set. For consistency with our later analysis we converted this
into mean similarity (1-error), shown in Figure 2 below.

The task itself was simple: participants were shown a light
sequence on a touch-screen tablet device, and then asked to
immediately reproduce it by tapping the sequence back. The
layout of the Simon Game is shown in Figure 1. Once a complete sequence has been input (Figure 1.a), immediate accuracy feedback is given (Figure 1.b). Participants could then
request another sequence.

(a)

(b)
press to
enter

Friday, 1 February 2013

83%
correct!

Friday, 1 February 2013

0.9

Figure 1: A diagram showing the layout of the Simon Game:
(a) participants see a sequence on the screen, and are asked to
immediately reproduce it; (b) feedback is then given on the
task.

Similarity

0.8

In all, participants were trained and tested on 60 different
sequences, seeing each sequence once in each of two rounds
in random order, making 120 exposures in total. In order to
catch obvious mistakes in sequence entry, if any participant
submitted a sequence of length 6 or shorter, this was rejected
by our software, and the target sequence would reappear at
a random point later in the player’s round for them to reattempt. The 60 sequences produced in the second round
were collected to be used as training stimuli for the next
learner in the chain.

0.7

0.6

0.5
0

2

4

Generations

6

8

10

Figure 2: Graph showing the average mean similarity score of
sequences in each set over generations. Error-bars represent
the 95% confidence intervals across the four chains, here and
throughout.

Initial Sequences
Although subsequent learners were trained on the output of
the previous learner, the four initial participants were trained
on a set of sequences that adhered to the following properties:
(i) the length of each sequence was 12; (ii) each sequence
consisted of 3 flashes of each colour (red, blue, green, yellow); (iii) these colours appeared in random order. This resulted in a set of 60 sequences which had no structure.

3 The same metric was used to give feedback to participants, but
was first recast into a similarity score by computing 1-error, and then
given as accuracy by percentage. An error score of 0.17 translates
to a similarity score of 0.83, and appeared to participants as 83%
correct.

341

As Figure 2 indicates, the sequence sets become easier to
learn over time: reproduced sequences become more similar
to their targets. In order to determine whether this cumulative
increase in similarity was significant, we ran Page’s (1963)
L trend test. This reveals a significant increase in similarity
over generations, both when including (L=1469, m=4, n=10,
p<.0001) and excluding (L=1074, m=4, n=9, p<.0001) the
initial set of sequences, which had not been produced by participants.

that generation, rather than across generations between target
and reproduction. This figure, when averaged over all pairs
of sequences, returns the amount of dispersion within the set
at a given generation. Figure 4 shows that over time, individual sequence sets lose variation as the sequences within
them begin to resemble one another (L=1980, m=4, n=11,
p<.0001). This could happen if, for instance, smaller subsequences come to be shared across whole sequences within
the set.

Structure
One possible explanation for the increase we see in learnability could simply be that early participants are forgetting
parts of each sequence, leading to the sequences eventually
becoming short enough to be more easily reproduced by later
learners. In order to assess this claim, we examined the average length of sequences across each chain for any signs of
change. Figure 3 confirms that that there was no significant
reduction in sequence length over the course of the experiment. Given that length is in fact highly stable across each
generation, some other feature of the sequences must be responsible for their increase in learnability.

0.62

0.60

Dispersion

0.58

0.56

0.54

0.52

20

0.50

18

0.48

0

Average Sequence Length

16

2

4

Generations

6

8

10

Figure 4: Graph showing the mean of the normalised dispersion score of the four sequence sets over generations. Dispersion decreases cumulatively over generations, indicating that
sequence sets are becoming more self-similar over time.

14

12

10

In order to explore this idea further, the second measure
looks at compression. This is related to the notion of Kolmogorov complexity (Kolmogorov, 1963), and is essentially
a measure of how easy it is to compress data into a smaller
representation. If a dataset contains repetitions (redundancy),
then the algorithm can exploit that by creating a shorter representation to substitute for the larger one, and thus the size of
the file can be reduced. We tested this directly by computing
the compression ratio (size of the file after compression/size
of the file before compression)4 in order to assess how much
structure was present in each sequence set (Fig. 5).

8

6

0

2

4

Generations

6

8

10

Figure 3: Graph showing the average length of each sequence
by generation. Sequence length remains stable throughout
the experiment, ruling out a simplistic explanation for the improvements to performance in Fig. 2.

Figure 5 demonstrates that there is a decrease in the compression ratio over time (L=1964.5, m=4, n=11, p<.0001).
This shows that the sequences are becoming structured, and
further supports the idea that those sequences produced later
on in the chains have become fractionated into smaller higherfrequency units which repeat within sequence sets.

The other possibility is that the sequences have become
structured in some way. In order to determine whether this
is the case or not, we examined the composition of the sequences in each set, using two different metrics. The first is
a measure of dispersion, which looks at how similar each sequence is to other sequences within that set. This is calculated
using the same distance metric as before, this time comparing
the distance of each sequence from all other sequences within

4 To

342

do this, we used tools from the Zlib library: www.zlib.net

0.525

0.40

0.520
0.38

Identifiability

Compression Ratio

0.515

0.36

0.34

0.510

0.505

0.500

0.495
0.32

0
0

2

4

Generations

6

8

2

4

Generations

6

8

10

10

Figure 6: Graph showing how the average identifiability of
each sequence increases over time. The dashed line represents chance levels.

Figure 5: A graph showing the mean compression ratio over
generations. Sequence sets become more compressible over
time, indicating that there is more structure in later sequences
than in earlier sequences.

expected chance level of 0.5 (Z=-5.86, N=40, p<.0001). Furthermore, our trend analysis reveals that this effect is cumulatively increasing over time (L=1901, m=4, n=11, p<.0001),
such that sequences drawn from later generations are significantly more likely to resemble sequences from within their
own lineage, than from those of any other lineage.

Identifiability
The decrease in dispersion scores and compression ratios
across our four chains could be due to a universal bias pulling
all of the sequences towards a similar (structured) attractor.
If this were the case, we would expect to find that a given
sample of sequences drawn from within a chain, at a certain generation, would look fairly similar to any other sample of sequences drawn from any other chain at that same
generation. In order to to determine whether there are in
fact different types of structural patternings in our data, organised across the different lineages, or just one kind of
structural patterning shared amongst all chains, we used a
measure of lineage divergence (referred to as identifiability)
taken from Matthews, Roberts, and Caldwell (2012). This
determines (for each sequence) the within-group similarity
and the across-group similarity, and then calculates a proportion: [within-group similarity/(within-group similarity +
across-group similarity)]. This returns a value between 0
and 1, where values above 0.5 indicate higher overall withingroup similarity, and values below 0.5 indicate higher acrossgroup similarity.
Figure 6 shows, the initial sequences (generation 0) are
not identifiable as coming from their particular chain. This
is to be expected due to the fact that they were all randomly
constructed according to the same procedure. However, sequences do begin to diverge into separate lineages. A onesample Wilcoxen test confirms that the within-group identifiability of sequences from all chains produced by participants (generations 1-10) were significantly higher than our

Qualitiative analysis
The quantitative results all point towards the fact that our independent sequences are gradually becoming structured as a
collective, and that they do so in ways which are specific to
different lineages. What then might some examples of these
systematic structures look like? Figure 7 shows a sample of
sequences that came from chain A.
As Figure 7.a shows, the initial set of sequences contain
very little obvious structure. By generation 10 however (Figure 7.b), a common pattern has emerged. In fact, of the 60
sequences in this set, just over half of them begin with an initial alternation pattern of red-yellow-red-yellow, or red-redyellow-yellow. This is frequently followed by a cyclical pattern - moving around the Simon board in either a clock-wise
or anti-clockwise direction from a given starting point (usually red in this case) - which can itself be repeated to extend
the sequence. This kind of structure lends itself easily to being analysed into hierarchically arranged sub-parts, containing non-adjacent dependencies. Figure 7.c shows one such
possible analysis of this kind5 .
5 This analysis is intended to be illustrative rather than definitive,
and is based on the sample of 6 sequences shown here, not the whole
set. As we can see in Figure 2 the sequence sets are not fully stable
and are still undergoing change, making a more detailed structural
analysis difficult.

343

(a)

(c)

strategy of repeated alternation of two colours was present
in all chains. However, (i) the frequency with which a
given strategy was employed, (ii) where it was employed
(sequence-initially, sequence-medially, or sequence-finally),
and (iii) with what particular colour combinations it was
employed, all varied, contributing to the development of a
unique ‘profile’ for each lineage.

(b)

i

[[[ry][ry]][rgyb]rgb]

ii

[[[ry][ry][rgyb]r]

iii

[[[ry][ry][ry]]g[[rbyg][rbyg]]]

visualiser
iv [[[ry][ry][ry]]g[rbyg]]

Discussion

[[[ry][ry]][[rbyg][rbyg]]]

We have presented an experiment in which participants attempt to immediately recall visually presented sequences.
The sequences that participants produce become the sequences which subsequent participants try to recall. In this
way, we create lineages of sequences in an experimental simulation of cultural evolution. These lineages are potentially
independent of each other, since the initial set of sequences
are generated at random and participant responses are gathered immediately after each sequence.
The effect of cultural evolution in the experiment is that the
sequences become easier to recall correctly. In other words,
errors introduced by participants are in the direction of easier sequences. How is this achieved? We see that the set of
sequences at each generation becomes self-similar, suggesting that the sequences are not operating independently any
more. This conclusion is confirmed if we look across separate chains in the experiment: the sequences are more similar
within a chain, and less similar across chains. Additionally,
the set of sequences at each generation in the experiment becomes more compressible, as system-wide structure starts to
emerge.
The systematic structure in sequences shows tantalising evidence of hierarchy, although a deeper analysis will have to
await further analytic tools being applied. For example, in
some chains we see the emergence of pairs of pairs of colours.
We also see a pattern in which some sequences are “doubled”
versions of others in the set. So, for example, the sequence
prefix “rryyrryy” in chain A matches the prefix “ryry”. It is
tempting to suggest that this provides evidence of a grammar
with centre embedding of the form (An Bn )m , although such
an analysis is premature without further probing of the way
in which these sequences are processed. Building on work
such as Christiansen and Ellefson (2002), recent attempts
have been made to tease apart the different cognitive mechanisms at work when processing non-adjacent dependencies
resembling these sequences in language (Vries et al., 2012;
Christiansen et al., 2012). This may provide further clues as
to why these particular structures emerge in this study. Likewise, studying the process of emergence itself, using iterated
sequence learning tasks in the laboratory as we have done,
may help us better understand the way these learning and processing biases shape behaviour at the population level.

[[[ry][ry]][[rbyg][rbyg]]]
Source code:vvisualiser

liser
d Processing.js
ng and Processing.js

er

liserProcessing.js
and

vi

[[[r[ry]y][r[ry]y]][[rgyb][rgyb]]]

Built with Processing and Processing.js

Figure 7: Some examples of sequences from chain A: (a) a
sample of six random sequences at generation 0; (b) those
same sequences at generation 10; (c) sequences at generation 10 again, bracketed to highlight their nested hierarchical structure. This bracketing can be used to generate
tree-structures
visualiser (as shown in example v) which more clearly
demonstrate the nature of the system.
Source code: visualiser

ng and Processing.js

Built with Processing and Processing.js

As to be expected from the identifiability results however,
the way in which the other chains are organised is noticeably
different, both to the statistical measures employed earlier,
and to the human eye. These different styles can be easily
contrasted visually in Figure 8, again by drawing a sample of
visualiser
visualiser
six strings from the set to illustrate
general structural regularSource code: visualiser
ities in the final generations. Source code: visualiser
Built with Processing and Processing.js

Chain C

Chain B

r

Built with Processing and Processing.js

Chain D

and Processing.js

visualiser
Source code: visualiser

visualiser

Built with Processing and Processing.js

Figure 8: Some examples of sequences from the final generations of chains B, C and D. There are clear qualitative difBuilt with Processing and Processing.js
visualiser
ferences betweenvisualiser
the sequences across these different chains,
Processing.js
and
from
chain
A
in Figure
7 above.
Source code: visualiser
Source
code: visualiser
Source code: visualiser

Built with Processing and Processing.js

Built with Processing and Processing.js

In contrast tovisualiser
the distinctive alternation found in chain A,
chain B favoursSource
thecode:more
cyclical patterns, and shows a very
visualiser
visualiser dominant tendency to begin all sequences with a red (92%).
Built with Processing and Processing.js
Source code: visualiser
Chain C also places restrictions on the identity of the first
Built with Processing and Processing.js
colour: green is most common (48%), followed by yellow
(30%) and red (22%),
but never blue. It also contained the
visualiser
highest proportionSource
of code:
sequences
with two or more of the same
visualiser
colour adjacent toBuiltone
another
(58%:
as compared to A 28%,
with Processing and Processing.js
B
35%
and
D
23%).
Finally,
Chain
D
seems to prefer triplets
Processing.js
visualiser
and alternations as reusable sub-sequences.
Source code: visualiser
In summary, the qualitative analysis of the chains reveals
visualiser
Built with Processing and Processing.js
visualiser
visualiser
visualiser
visualiser
js
that
sequence-sets
can become systematic
in multiple ways.
Source
code:
visualiser
visualiser
Source code: visualiser
Source
code:
visualiser
Source
code: visualiser
Source
code:
visualiser
Some
commonalities
do exist across lineages
-visualiser
for and
instance,
a
Built
with Processing
and Processing.js
Source
code:
Built with
Processing
Processing.js
Built with Processing
andProcessing
Processing.js
Built with
and Processing.js
Built with Processing
and Processing.js

Conclusion
A hallmark of complex culturally transmitted behaviours in
humans, such as language and music, is their systematic

Built with Processing and Processing.js

Processing.js

344

structure. Instances of behaviour do not behave independently, but form part of a system of mutually reinforcing conventions. Here we show that such systematic structure can
emerge in an experimental task through the process of cultural transmission even when the task is designed to minimise
the influence of domain specific biases and with no explicit
reward for treating behaviours as co-dependent. We propose
that this result is suggestive of a similar process operating in
the origins of behaviours like language in humans. Cultural
evolution favours transmissible behaviours. A solution to the
challenge of becoming more transmissible is for behaviours
to form part of a system, thus increasing their learnability.
Language, our most systematic suite of behaviours, bears the
hallmark of just such a process of cultural optimisation.

Matthews, C., Roberts, G., & Caldwell, C. A. (2012). Opportunity to assimilate and pressure to discriminate can generate cultural divergence in the laboratory. Evolution and
Human Behavior, 33, 759-770.
Mesoudi, A., & Whiten, A. (2008). The multiple roles of
cultural transmission experiments in understanding human
cultural evolution. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society B, 363, 3477-3488.
Misyak, J. B., Christiansen, M. H., & Tomblin, J. B. (2010).
Sequential expectations: The role of prediction-based
learning in language. Topics in Cognitive Science, 2(138153).
Page, E. B. (1963). Ordered hypotheses for multiple treatments: A significance test for linear ranks. Journal of the
American Statistical Association, 58(301), 216-230.
Smith, K., Kirby, S., & Brighton, H. (2003). Iterated learning:
a framework for the emergence of language. Artificial Life,
9(4), 371-386.
Vries, M. H. de, Petersson, K., Guekes, S., Zwitserlood, P.,
& Christiansen, M. H. (2012). Processing multiple nonadjacent dependencies: evidence from sequence learning.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 367,
2065-2076.

Acknowledgments
Hannah Cornish is supported by a British Academy PostDoctoral Fellowship.

References
Christiansen, M. H., & Chater, N. (2008). Language as
shaped by the brain. Behavioral and Brain Science, 31(5),
489-509.
Christiansen, M. H., Conway, C. M., & Onnis, L. (2012).
Similar neural correlates for language and sequential learning: Evidence from event-related brain potentials. Language and Cognitive Processes, 27, 231-256.
Christiansen, M. H., & Ellefson, M. (2002). Linguistic adaptation without linguistic constraints: the role of sequential
learning in language evolution. In A. Wray (Ed.), Transitions to language (p. 335-358). Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Feher, O., Wang, H., Saar, S., Mitra, P., & Tchernichovski, O.
(2009). De novo establishment of wild-type song culture in
the zebra finch. Nature, 459, 564-568.
Fitch, W. T. (2010). The evolution of language. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Gomez, R. L., & Gerken, L. A. (2000). Infant artificial language learning and language acquisition. Trends in Cognitive Science, 4(5), 178-186.
Kirby, S., Cornish, H., & Smith, K. (2008). Cumulative cultural evolution in the laboratory: An experimental approach
to the origins of structure in human language. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, 105, 10681-10686.
Kirby, S., & Hurford, J. (2002). The emergence of linguistic
structure: An overview of the iterated learning model. In
A. Cangelosi & D. Parisi (Eds.), Simulating the evolution of
language (p. 121-148). Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Kolmogorov, A. N. (1963). On tables of random numbers.
Sankhyā Series A., 25, 369-375.
Levenshtein, V. I. (1966). Binary codes capable of correcting
deletions, insertions and reversals. Soviet Physics-Doklady,
10, 707-710.

345

