UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The influence of perceptual and structural salience

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1520p5dc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Roser, Florian
Krumnack, Antje
Hamburger, Kai

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The influence of perceptual and structural salience
Florian Röser (florian.roeser@psychol.uni-giessen.de)
Antje Krumnack (antje.krumnack@psychol.uni-giessen.de)
Kai Hamburger (kai.hamburger@psychol.uni-giessen.de)
Justus Liebig University Giessen, Department of Psychology,
Experimental Psychology and Cognitive Science
Otto-Behaghel-Strasse 10 F
35394 Giessen, Germany

The present paper is concerned with the salience of
landmarks. The term “salience” is mostly referred to
perceptual psychology (e.g., Treisman & Gelade, 1980) and
means that a salient object needs to stand out compared to
other objects (e.g., different color or orientation). We here
distinguish two kinds of landmark salience: structural
salience and perceptual salience.

Abstract
Spatial cognition research has recently made much progress
in understanding the cognitive representations and processes
underlying human wayfinding. Many theoretical assumptions
about the concept of landmark salience have been established.
In this context it is important to define perceptual (or visual)
and structural landmark salience. Structural salience is
defined as the position of a landmark at an intersection.
Perceptual salience is defined as the visual characteristic of a
landmark. It must “stand out” from its surrounding to be
perceptually salient. We investigated the influence of
perceptual salience and the combination of perceptual and
structural salience in landmark selection. We show for a
spatial arrangement of four objects that the different object is
preferred almost always. If the same spatial arrangement is
interpreted as an intersection with a directional information,
the participants’ preference is influenced by structural as well
as perceptual salience. Findings are discussed within the
context of landmark salience.

Structural salience

Keywords: landmark; perceptual salience; structural salience

Introduction
Human wayfinding is a particularly active field of spatial
cognition research. People often have to navigate through
new or familiar environments and that they, of course, do
not want to get lost. Another reason is that wayfinding
research is important for many basic and applied research
fields, for instance, the study of spatial long-term memory
and the development of user-friendly navigation systems.
One of the central concepts in spatial cognition research is
the landmark and the question how it can be defined.
Consequently, several definitions and theories about the
nature of landmarks and their characteristics exist. The most
common assumption is that the potential landmark must
have a high contrast to its immediate or wider surrounding
(e.g., Presson & Montello, 1988; Janzen & van Turennout,
2004; Caduff & Timpf, 2008). Anything can serve as a
landmark; natural, artificial, or man-made objects along a
route that help us to find the way. Landmarks are helpful in
wayfinding because they “stand out” of the environment,
can serve as anchors (Couclelis, Golledge, & Tobler, 1987),
are better remembered if a change of direction is required
(Lee, Tappe & Klippel, 2002; Lee, Klippel & Tappe, 2003),
and increase the quality of a route description (Denis,
Pazzaglia, Cornoldi, & Bertolo, 1999).

Structural aspects of landmarks refer to the contexts of
landmarks in navigational tasks and may be divided into
different aspects or gradations. It is generally accepted that
landmarks must have a “prominent location in the
environment” (Sorrows & Hirtle, 1999; p. 46). Furthermore,
they can be separated into global and local landmarks (Steck
& Mallot, 2000). Local landmarks are situated directly
along the path and intersections (Klippel & Winter, 2005).
Those at an intersection may again be divided, based on the
route in the navigational task, into landmarks at a decision
point or non-decision point, where a direction change is
necessary/possible (Michon & Denis, 2001).
Here we concentrate on landmarks directly located at an
intersection were a decision is required (Lee et al., 2002;
Peters, Wu, & Winter, 2010). In this context we define
structural salience as a preference of a wayfinder for a
landmark to be located at a specific position at an
intersection. Strictly speaking structural salience is thereby
not a property of a landmark itself but of its position at an
intersection. Therefore we have to address the question how
an intersection can be defined. A typical or even
prototypical intersection is a cross intersection. At such
intersections four possible positions for landmarks are
available (figure 1).
The true (physical) position of a landmark, on the right or
on the left of the observer, is less important than the position
in dependence to the direction of the turn to be made at the
intersection. So the four positions can be defined as the
positions before and behind the intersection and in direction
or opposite to the direction of turn (see also Hamburger,
Dienelt, Strickrodt, & Röser, 2013) and will be abbreviated
as “turn based” in the following. The preferred positions for
a landmark at such a prototypical intersection from an
allocentric perspective are in direction of the turn with the
main focus before the intersection (figure 2). These results

3315

serve as our reference for the influence of structural salience
at the positions of a four-way-intersection.

Cognitive salience
The focus of this study is not on cognitive (also defined as
semantic) salience but it should not be neglected. It can be
defined as the meaning or prototypically of an object
(Sorrows & Hirtle, 1999). Again the contrast is important or
the degree of recognizability and the idiosyncratic relevance
(Caduff & Timpf, 2008). We assume that these factors do
not play any role if the material is simple enough and is
related to a single perceptual/cognitive category, like colors
or simple geometrical shapes (by the same argument as for
the perceptual salience, see above).

Figure 1: Schematic visualization of a prototypical
intersection with two orthogonal streets.

Experiments

Figure 2: Results (landmark position preference over
all intersections) for the structural salience (optimal
landmark position) from two previous experiments
(only position preference without landmarks: Röser,
Hamburger, Krumnack, & Knauff, 2012 [left];
shape-color-combinations as landmarks: Röser,
Krumnack, Hamburger, & Knauff, 2012 [right]).
Here the turn based positions are depicted.

Perceptual salience
Sorrows and Hirtle (1999) defined visual (perceptual)
salience as the inherent visual object characteristics and
stated that “[…] these may include the features of contrast
with surroundings […].” (p. 45). Caduff and Timpf (2008)
provided a different definition and they understood
perceptual salience as a bottom-up salience with the
components location-based and attention-based attention,
and the scene context. Other authors demonstrated that, for
example, different colors, orientations, and shapes deploy
attention (Raubal & Winter, 2002; Wolfe & Horowitz,
2004) what implies that these features could have a high
visual salience. Also Treisman and Gelade (1980) showed
that objects that stand out from their environment quickly
reach the focus of attention.
Based on these concepts our definition of perceptual
salience is a contrast-based approach where the observerbased contrast to the surrounding of the object is central.
Strictly speaking an object is perceptually salient if it is an
outlier, meaning that it is sufficiently different in
comparison to the other objects available.
In our prior experiments (Röser, Hamburger, et al., 2012;
Röser, Krumnack, et al., 2012) all landmark material was
created to have the same perceptual salience and therefore
the perceptual salience of a landmark should not have had
an effect on landmark choices. In such a setting the
perceptual contrast between the objects should be equal, no
object should stand out.

The main aim of the present paper is to explore which object
in an environment people prefer to use as a landmark in
wayfinding. In particular we want to answer the following
questions: How important is a high perceptual contrast for
the choice of a landmark at a decision point? And, what is
the influence of the position of an object on landmark
choices in a setting where one object clearly stands out? We
investigated two independent factors: To vary the
perceptual salience of potential landmarks we used objects
in different colors, shapes, and different orientations. To
vary the structural salience of potential landmarks the
objects were located at different positions at an intersection.
In a pilot study we examined how visual aspects of objects
influence their perceptual salience in an arrangement similar
to figure 1 but without any navigational context. In the main
experiment we combine perceptual and structural salience
by adding a navigational context to the arrangement.

Pilot Study – Perceptual salience
We investigated the distribution of perceptual salience of an
array of objects. Therefore, we presented groups of different
stimuli and asked the participants which of them stands out
most in contrast to the other ones (which one is the outlier?).
This is based on our definition of perceptual salience as the
contrast of an object to its surrounding. The goal was to
establish a baseline of perceptual salience to use as a
reference for further experiments.

Methods
Participants
A total of 20 students (16 females) with a mean age of 24
years (range: 20-41) participated. All participants provided
informed written consent. All had normal or corrected-tonormal visual acuity and color vision. They received course
credit or money for participation.

Material
For this study we used a basic setting with four objects
placed in a square with the same distance between each
other (see figure 3). This setting resembles an intersection,
but participants were not explicitly made aware of the
resemblance and were not given any navigational context.

3316

To vary the perceptual salience of potential landmarks we
used objects in different colors, different shapes, and
different orientations. The colors were always presented
using the same shape, a simple cross (figure 3). In 24 items
three identical colors and one outlier color (green and red;
blue and yellow; red and yellow) were shown. Each color
combination was presented eight times; half of them with
three crosses of the first color and one cross of the second
color and vice versa. The position of the outlier was
counter-balanced over the four positions.
For the different shapes we used the same logic: 24 items
with three identical shapes (e.g., a square; always in black,
see figure 3) and one outlier shape (e.g., a triangle), again
balanced over the four positions. For the different
orientations of shapes four identical forms were used (see
figure 3). Here the difference lies in the orientation: Either
three shapes are orientated vertically and the outlier is
rotated 15 deg to the right or the three identically oriented
objects are rotated 15 deg to the right and the outlier is
orientated vertically. Again, the outliers are shown once at
each of the four positions.
Distractors were presented in addition. Twelve identical
colors or shapes and twelve different ones served as
distractors. For the different orientations twelve items with
identical forms in different orientations (+/- 15 deg, +/- 30
deg) and twelve with different shapes in different
orientations served as distractors.
In sum this resulted in 144 images of different stimulus
material, 72 as experimental material and 72 distractors. All
images were presented in succession in a random order on a
custom computer screen (22´´). Superlab 4.0 (Cedrus
Corporation 1991-2006) was used for running the study and
for data recording.

Figure 3: Example for the color material (left),
different shapes (center), and shapes with different
orientations (right).

Procedure
Participants received instructions on the computer screen. It
was explained that four objects will be shown at a time and
in a fixed arrangement. Participants were instructed to
indicate the outlier which stands out most to them. To select
any object they should press the according response key on
the keyboard.

Results
Distributions
The analysis of the distribution, preference of the objects
over all variations, showed no significant variation from an
equal distribution ( 2(3)=0.281, p=.963; each is preferred in

25% of the cases; we here used not a per 100 system, due to
the fact, that the chi-square test is highly sensitive to the
sample size, but rather a per 20 system, based on the sample
size [N=20]; that means that each participant is weighted
with one and the individual distribution is correspondingly
adjusted).
Outliers
The follow-up data analysis is based on the preference of
the outlier compared to the other three objects (equal). For
this we merged the preferences of all participants over all
images with three equal and one different stimulus and for
all positions of the outliers (table 1).
Table 1: Results of the statistical analyses. Chance
level (25%) would mean that every position is
preferred equally often, or one position is chosen all
the time.
Preference of
single one
86%
92.5%
91%
75%

t-test (df=19), against
chance level
t=14.551
p<.001
t=14.312
p<.001
t=13.578
p<.001
t=11.446
p<.001

Over all
Colors
Different shapes
Different
orientations*
* Sum of outlier preferences differ significantly for colors
(t(19)=4.186, p<.001) and shapes (t(19)=3.964, p<.001)

Discussion
With the present study we investigated whether participants
prefer to indicate objects that differ perceptually from the
surrounding in the display similar to an intersection. As our
results indicate, participants prefer to indicate the object
with different perceptual properties, the outliers. Based on
our definition of perceptual salience as a contrast to the
surrounding, the results may be considered as a
measurement of perceptual salience. Colors and shapes had
the highest perceptual salience in this study in contrast to
the different orientations. This could be due to the fact that
the contrast to the surrounding is for the different
orientations not as high as for the colors and shapes.
In the main experiment we examine the effect of
perceptual differences in a wayfinding context.

Main experiment – Perceptual and structural
salience
With the main experiment we aim to examine how
perceptual and structural saliences affect each other.
Based on the pilot study we now used the objects with the
highest perceptual salience: colors in combination with
different positions at an intersection in a navigational
context. In this way we intend to investigate whether
perceptual differences of landmarks influence the position
preference or structural salience as determined by earlier
experiments (see Figure 2).

3317

Methods
Participants

Procedure

A total of 20 students (14 females) with a mean age of 22.5
years (range: 18-31) participated. All participants provided
informed written consent. They had normal or corrected-tonormal visual acuity and normal color vision. They received
course credit or money for participation.

Material
The navigational task used for this experiment was based on
the virtual environment SQUARELAND (Hamburger &
Knauff, 2011). We used a 5×6 square setting from an
allocentric (bird-eye) perspective (figure 4).

The instruction explained that the participants would see a
path through a maze where at each intersection four
different objects are presented. They should imagine that
they have to give a route description based on the
information they see. They were instructed to decide/
indicate at each intersection which object they are going to
use for the route description. To select one object they had
to press the corresponding key on the keyboard. The
response keys were presented next to each slide at an
exemplary intersection (figure 4). Subsequently, the
instruction was repeated and supplemented with a pictorial
explanation. After this example the experimental phase
started with the path being presented from the start to the
first intersection, including the route direction for this
intersection and four colored crosses placed at the four
positions. After each decision participants saw the next
intersection and again the path from the start to this
intersection and direction of turn and the four colors became
visible and so on.

Results

Figure 4: Maze including the path from the start to
the sixth intersection. At the intersection four
landmarks are depicted. On the right the answer
instruction (which key to press) is given.
The route through the maze consisted of sixteen
intersections: with equal numbers of left and right turns.
This represented a route length people can imagine and
remember in a virtual setting (e.g., Hamburger, Röser,
Bukow, & Knauff, 2011). The arrangement of the four
objects was equivalent to the pilot study (equal distance
between them and in the corners of the four squares).
As before, at each intersection (array) four colored objects
were used including one outlier. In order to ensure that each
combination of colors was presented only once, we needed a
total of sixteen color combinations with sufficiently
different hues. So we used the color circle and chose each
color 22.5 deg away from the next one. The respective
complementary color was used as the outlier. Color
combinations were distributed randomly over the path. The
positions of the outlier objects were systematically varied
based on the turn direction. A second version of the maze
with inversed colors (identical and outlier) was created.
Additionally, for both versions the direction of turn was
switched for each intersection, resulting in overall four
different mazes. Each participant was randomly assigned to
one of them. The participants performed the experiment on
a custom computer screen (22´´). Superlab 4.0 (Cedrus
Corporation 1991-2006) was used for running the
experiment and for data recording.

Outliers
To find whether outliers were selected more often as
landmarks compared to the other objects, participants´
responses were analyzed. The outliers were selected with a
mean of 66% and therefore significantly more often,
compared to the remaining objects (t(19)=2.281, p=.034).
This result is also statistically different from chance level
(25%; t(19)=5.589, p<.001).
Distributions
In figure 5 (center) the turn based positions are presented.
The distribution over all positions and intersections in the
maze revealed a marginally significant variation from an
equal (each is preferred in 25% of the cases) distribution
( 2(3)=7.016, p=.071; again we used a per 20 system, based
on the sample size [N=20], see above).
For each of the four positions the outlier is chosen in at
least 50% of the cases if the outlier is located at that position
(figure 5 left). If the outlier is not to be found at that
position, the position without the outlier is chosen in at least
2% of the cases (figure 5 right).
In a last step the distributions for the four variations of
outlier positions were analyzed separately. Here, for all four
variations a significant difference from chance level was
obtained (see figure 5 bottom; position: top, opposite to the
direction of the turn: 2(3)=10.175, p=.017; position: top, in
the direction of the turn: 2(3)=12.100, p<.001; position:
bottom, opposite to the direction of the turn: 2(3)=13.575,
p<.001; position: bottom, in the direction of the turn:
2
(3)=56.075, p<.001). In summary, for the single positions
it could be emphasized that for each position the outliers
were chosen in a minimum of 50% of the cases and
furthermore the ideal position, before the intersection in the
direction of the turn, is minimally preferred in 1/3 of the

3318

cases. If the outliers were placed on this ideal position it was
almost always chosen.

prefer the outliers. The preference for the outliers decreased
from 92.5% in the pilot study to 66% in the main
experiment. Therefore it seems that navigational context, in
particular the turn based position of a landmark, also
influenced the participants’ preferences. In other words, not
only the differentiation between objects plays an important
role in landmark selection but also the position of the object.

Figure 6: Object preferences of the pilot study with
colors (left); data of the main experiment (center);
data of the previous experiments (Röser, Hamburger
et al., 2012; Röser, Krumnack et al., 2012) for
position preference (right).

Figure 5: Results for the different analyses. On the
left and the right side (top section) each position
could reach a value of 100%. The four positions in
the middle add up to 100%.

Discussion
The results could be interpreted from two different
perspectives. On the one hand they revealed a clear
preference of the perceptually salient object. The single
outliers are preferred in 66% of the cases, which is much
higher than chance (25%). This represents the importance of
the perceptual salience for landmarks. On the other hand,
the preference over all positions and intersections (merged
for all single positions) are not distributed equally (see
figure 5, middle). There is a preference for the position
before the intersection and in the direction of the turn. Thus,
the perceptual salience as well as the structural salience
influence the preference of the positions. How they interact
will be analyzed in the following section.

General Discussion
Our previous findings revealed a position preference which
we presented as the structural salience. The position before
the intersection and in the direction of the turn was
preferred. The pilot study revealed an object preference
depending on the perceptual salience. There, the outlier
colors were preferred in 92.5% which is more or less
equally distributed over the four positions. Here the objects
differ from each other and the positions are unimportant. In
the main experiment the combination of the perceptual
(object preference) and the structural salience (position
preference) influenced the participants´ selections. In figure
6 these results are contrasted.
It is very interesting that the results do not reveal the same
distribution as in the pilot study (figure 6, left), because it is
–from a perceptual point of view– inconsequential not to

In this work we used one fixed factor of perceptual
salience, outliers consisting of complementary colors (the
contrast to the surrounding could not be higher) to observe
its interaction with structural aspects of wayfinding. In
further experiments we will address the possibility to vary
the perceptual salience and take a look at the effects on the
resulting distributions. Two possibilities remain: on the one
hand the perceptual salience of a landmark has a simple yes
or no (existing or non-existing) character. Then the results
should be similar. Or, on the other hand the perceptual
salience of a landmark is gradual. Then the results should
change continuously. Whatever the case may be, it seems
clear that the influence of the perceptual salience could
hardly be increased by using other colors, because the
contrast used here with the complementary colors, is the
strongest color contrast possible. Additionally, the pilot
study showed that the contrasting color is preferred in
almost all cases. We may therefore conclude that the
perceptual salience of the outlier object was as high as
possible and any variation probably leads to a lower impact
(at least its influence may not be higher). But even if an
object is extremely “eye-catching” in a non-navigational
setting, once we enter a navigational task it seems that the
structural salience provides a strong and almost permanent
influence on the choice of landmarks at an intersection. The
position of an object at an intersection might therefore be as
important for it being chosen as landmark as the contrast to
its surrounding.
The comparison of the results of the two experiments
clearly shows that the question which object is the most
appropriate landmark cannot be reduced to the question
which object is the most noticeable. The fact that an object
has a high contrast to its surrounding does not guarantee its

3319

choice as a landmark. This supports Sorrows and Hirtle's
(1999) concept of “prominence of spatial location” (p. 45)
as a factor of visual salience and Caduff and Timpf's (2008)
scene context of visual salience and/or contextual salience.

Obstacles in wayfinding research
Because of the abstract and artificial setting of our
experiments, transfers to other wayfinding research is
difficult. Nothegger, Winter, and Raubal (2004) for example
used real environments for their wayfinding experiments.
But, the experimental control in such experiments is
difficult or even impossible (e.g., which information did
participants pay attention to?). Particularly the structural
aspects of intersections in real environments are determined
by a lot of factors (visibility; view direction; occlusion, etc).
This is why we chose to limit ourselves to such an abstract
setting. Our study serves as a basic research approach,
examining the underlying aspects and will serve as a basis
for further and more realistic (but controlled) experiments.

Acknowledgement
This study was supported by the German Research
Foundation (DFG HA5954/1-1). We thank Jelica Nejasmic
and Markus Knauff for valuable comments.

References
Caduff, D., & Timpf, S. (2008). On the assessment of
landmark salience for human navigation. Cognitive
Processing, 9, 249-267.
Couclelis, H., Golledge, R. G., & Tobler, W. (1987).
Exploring the anchorpoint hypothesis of spatial
cognition. Journal of Environmental Psychology, 7, 99122.
Denis, M., Pazzaglia, F., Cornoldi, C., & Bertolo, L. (1999).
Spatial discorse and navigation: an analysis of route
directions in the City of Venice. Applied Cognitive
Psychology, 13, 145-174.
Hamburger, K., Dienelt, L. E., Strickrotd, M., & Röser, F.
(2013). Spatial cognition: The return path. In M. Knauff,
M. Pauen, N. Sebanz, & I. Wachsmuth (Eds.),
Proceedings oft he 35th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Austin, TX: Cognitive
Science Society.
Hamburger, K. & Knauff, M. (2011). SQUARELAND: A
virtual environment for investigating cognitive processes
in human wayfinding. PsychNology Journal, 9, 137-163.
Hamburger, K., Röser, F., Bukow, G. C., & Knauff, M.
(2012). Der Weg als Ziel: Virtuelle Umgebungen und
räumlicher Wissenserwerb. In: G. C. Bukow, J. Fromme
& B. Jörissen (Hrsg.), Raum, Zeit, Medienbildung:
Untersuchungen zu medialen Veränderungen unseres
Verhältnisses zu Raum und Zeit (Medienbildung und
Gesellschaft). VS Verlag.
Janzen, G., & van Turennout, M. (2004). Selective neural
representation of objects relevant for navigation. Nature
Neuroscience, 7, 673-677.

Klippel, A., & Winter, S. (2005). Structural salience of
landmarks for route directions. In A. G. Cohn & D. M.
Mark (Eds.), Spatial Information Theory. International
Conference COSIT (pp. 347-362). Berlin: Springer.
Lee, P. U., Tappe H., & Klippel, A. (2002). Acquisition of
landmark knowledge from static and dynamic
presentation of route maps. KI Special Issue Spatial
Cognition, 2, 32-34.
Lee, P., Klippel, A., & Tappe, H. (2003). The effect of
motion in graphical user interfaces. In: A. Butz, A.
Krüger & P. Oliver (Eds.), Smart Graphics (pp. 12-21).
Berlin: Springer.
Michon, P. E., & Denis, M. (2001). When and why are
visual landmarks used in giving directions? In D. R.
Montello (Ed.), Spatial Information Theory. Volume
2205 Lecture Notes in Computer Science (pp. 292-305).
Berlin: Springer.
Nothegger, C., Winter, S. & Raubal, M. (2004) Selection of
salient features for route directions. Spatial cognition
and computation, 2, 113-136.
Peters, D., Wu, Y., & Winter, S. (2010). Testing Landmark
Selection Theories in Virtual Environment. In C.
Hölscher et al. (Eds.), Spatial Cognition VII. Lecture
Notes in Artificial Intelligence (pp. 54-69). Berlin:
Springer.
Presson, C. C., & Montello, D. R. (1988). Points of
reference in spatial cognition: Stalking the elusive
landmark. British Journal of Developmental Psychology,
6, 378-381.
Raubal, M., & Winter, S. (2002). Enriching wayfinding
instructions with local landmarks. In M. J. Egenhofer &
D. M. Mark (Eds). Geographic information science (pp
243-259). Berlin: Springer.
Röser, F., Hamburger, K., Krumnack, A., & Knauff, M.
(2012). The structural salience of landmarks: Results
from an online study and a virtual environment
experiment. Journal of Spatial Science, 57, 37-50.
Röser, F., Krumnack, A., Hamburger, K. & Knauff, M.
(2012). A four factor model of landmark salience –A
new approach. In N. Rußwinkerl, U. Drewitz, H. van
Rijn (eds). Proceedings of ICCM 2012. 11th
international Conference of Cognitive Modeling (pp. 8287). Berlin: Universitaetsverlag der TU Berlin.
Sorrows, M. E., & Hirtle, S. C. (1999). The nature of
landmarks for real and electronic spaces. In C. Freksa &
D. M. Mark (Eds). Spatial information theory: cognitive
and computational foundations of geographic
information science, international conference COSIT
(pp. 37-50). Stade: Springer.
Steck, S. D., & Mallot, H. A. (2000). The Role of Global
and Local Landmarks in Virtual Environment
Navigation. Presence, 9, 69-83.
Treisman, A. M., & Gelade, G. (1980). A feature-integration
theory of attention. Cognitive Psychology, 12, 97-136.
Wolfe, J. M., & Horowitz, T. D. (2004). What attributes
guide deployment of visual attention and how do they do
it? Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 5, 495-501.

3320

