UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Influence of the Attention Set on Exogenous Orienting

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/13c8w8nf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Lim, Ahnate
Sinnett, Scott

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Influence of the Attention Set on Exogenous Orienting
Ahnate Lim (ahnate@hawaii.edu)

Department of Psychology, University of Hawaii at Manoa
2530 Dole Street, Honolulu, HI 96822 USA
Scott Sinnett (ssinnett@hawaii.edu)

Department of Psychology, University of Hawaii at Manoa
2530 Dole Street, Honolulu, HI 96822 USA
Abstract
The processing of incoming sensory information relies on
interacting mechanisms of sustained attention (the ability to
focus attention and ignore irrelevant stimuli) and attentional
capture (the ability of certain stimuli to reflexively attract
one’s attention). Being able to precisely predict what can
capture attention when it is engaged in a demanding task is
important both for understanding the nature of attention as a
cognitive system and also for practical applications. While
evidence indicates that exogenous capture, a mechanism
previously understood to be automatic, can be eliminated
while concurrently performing a demanding task, we reframe
this phenomena within the theoretical framework of the
‘attention set’ (Most et al., 2005). Consequently, the specific
prediction that cuing effects should reappear when
dimensions of the cue overlap with those in the attention set
(i.e., elements of the demanding task) was empirically tested
and confirmed. Suggestions for further theoretical refinement
and empirical testing are discussed.
Keywords: Theories of attention; attention set; exogenous
cuing; orienting; attentional capture; perceptual load

Introduction
As an information processing mechanism, one of the
characteristic dichotomies of attention is how it must have
the capacity to be both focused and distractible at the same
time. The ability to ignore irrelevant stimuli and closely
attend to a specific task at hand is fundamental to goal
directed behavior. Conversely, the ability to be distracted by
potentially dangerous events or to be drawn towards
relevant information outside the current task or area of focus
can be crucial for avoiding harm and responding effectively
to the environment. In fact, neurological evidence has
demonstrated that these dissociable mechanisms are
underpinned by distinct and interactive neural networks
(Corbetta, Patel, & Shulman, 2008; Corbetta & Shulman,
2002).
Many of the attentional mechanisms that we use on a
daily basis can be characterized by the way in which they
enable goal-directed and top-down control of behavior.
Indeed, top-down attentional control has been observed to
play a role in visual search (Wolfe, 2007), endogenous
(participant directed) orienting of attention to spatial
locations (Posner, 1980), and even feature integration
(Treisman & Gelade, 1980), to name but a few. Although

the environment may contain stimuli that actively compete
for and capture attention, what ultimately becomes selected
for subsequent processing can be influenced by “top-down
signals” that filter for behaviorally relevant objects
(Desimone & Duncan, 1995).
Considering the importance of responding effectively to
changes in the environment, the attentional system allows
for stimuli to ‘reflexively’ capture attention, in a ‘bottomup’ environmentally triggered fashion. It has been shown
that this aspect of attention can be dependent on the
particular nature of the stimuli and environmental
circumstances at hand. Such factors may include the role of
stimulus saliency (Jonides & Yantis, 1988) and relevancy to
behavioral goals (Yantis & Egeth, 1999), for example.
Of direct interest to the current study, recent research has
suggested that the reflexive orienting of attention can, at
times, be interrupted when an observer is undergoing a
difficult and demanding task (Santangelo, Belardinelli, &
Spence, 2007). In other words, where such exogenous, or
stimulus-driven, mechanisms were previously thought to be
automatic (Müller & Rabbitt, 1989), more recent evidence
has suggested that these effects may be eliminated in a state
of focused attention. For example, several recent studies
have demonstrated that requiring participants to perform a
concurrent demanding task can effectively eliminate the
ability of exogenous cues to capture attention (Santangelo et
al., 2007; Santangelo, Finoia, Raffone, Olivetti Belardinelli,
& Spence, 2008; Santangelo & Spence, 2008; Theeuwes,
1991; Yantis & Jonides, 1990). Two of these studies, for
instance, employed central-arrows as 100% predictive cues
in a target detection task, while also deploying abrupt visual
onsets as exogenous cues (Theeuwes, 1991; Yantis &
Jonides, 1990), and found that the abrupt visual onsets had
no effect on performance. Yet a different study by Van der
Lubbe and Postma (2005) used more eccentric (peripheral)
exogenous cues and obtained evidence to the contrary,
where effects of the abrupt visual onsets were observed even
when attention was engaged.
Thus, there appears to be evidence indicating that under
some circumstances exogenous cuing effects remain, while
under others these effects are eliminated. While these
experiments often employ a demanding central task, the
question remains as to why opposing findings have been
observed. Importantly, the answer to this question should

2896

provide insight as to how the sustained attentional system
interacts with the attentional capture system.
Although it is inherently difficult to formulate theories of
attention that are both broad in scope (encompassing several
classes of phenomena) while concurrently possessing
predictive power for detailed behavioral outcomes, there are
frameworks that could provide initial scaffolding towards
such comprehensive theories. One such general framework
for combining aspects of both inattentional blindness (i.e.,
an indirect measure of sustained focus) and attentional
capture has been proposed by Most, Scholl, Clifford, and
Simons (2005). Central to their theoretical framework, is the
idea of an ‘attention set’ that is synonymous with the current
task at hand or state of mind. The authors postulate that this
‘attention set’ should be the most influential factor in
determining what captures attention. Incidentally, the idea
that the current frame of mind determines how attention is
allocated has also been proposed by Neisser’s construct of
the perceptual cycle (1976). While Most and colleagues’
formulation provides an explanatory construct for both
sustained attention and attentional capture, their emphasis
on the attention set can be used to infer precise predictions.
Specifically, Most et al. (2005, p. 218) proposed that:
“Although some stimulus properties (e.g., uniqueness)
can affect noticing, to a larger extent the unexpected objects
that people consciously see depend on the ways in which
they ‘tune’ their attention for processing of specific types of
stimuli—that is, on the attentional set that they adopt.”
Consequently, this leads to the prediction that irrelevant
events that are within the same attentional set should be
capable of capturing attention (i.e., irrelevant events that are
similar to the targets used in a separate and attended to
task), whereas events that fall outside of the attention set
should go unnoticed (e.g., a gorilla walking amidst a group
of people passing a basketball while counting passes, see for
example Simons & Chabris, 1999).
Most and colleagues’ (2005; 2001) predictions regarding
the influence of the attention set were supported by a series
of empirical studies centered around a paradigm in which
participants counted the number of bounces of a subset of
items moving within a display. Crucially, an unexpected
object entered the display after several trials and detection
rates for these objects were used as a measure of attentional
capture. In this way, Most et al. were able to manipulate the
composition of the attention set (the items moving and
bouncing within the display), and observe the subsequent
effects on attentional capture. Of critical importance to their
theory, the findings suggest that the capture of awareness is
influenced both by top-down and bottom-up interactions,
where the most influential factor is ultimately the attention
set adopted (although certain bottom-up factors such as
stimulus salience can increase the chance that objects will
be noticed). In general, when unexpected items possessed
features that overlapped with those in the attentional set,
participants consistently noticed them, whereas when the
items were outside the attention set, participants rarely

noticed them. Bearing in mind that Most and colleagues’
(2005; 2001) experiments were adaptations of an
inattentional blindness paradigm where participants were
tested on their awareness and processing of an unexpected
event, the question remains as to whether the same
predictions would generalize to a different task setting
where attention is focused on a central area (rather than
across the experimental display), and attentional capture is
measured through exogenous cuing rather than conscious
detection.
To recall a related example that was mentioned earlier in
more detail, Santangelo and colleagues devised a paradigm
involving both a demanding central task and an exogenously
cued target detection task, and found that exogenous
orienting does not capture attention in a mandatory fashion
when undergoing a demanding central task (see Santangelo
et al., 2007; Santangelo & Spence, 2007, 2008). That is,
when one’s attention is engaged in performing a
perceptually or attentionally demanding task, the automatic
effects of exogenous cues seemingly disappear. This finding
is especially important considering that previous accounts of
exogenous cuing suggest that peripheral cues automatically
capture attention (Jonides, 1981; Müller & Rabbitt, 1989;
Van der Lubbe & Postma, 2005).
While it is possible that the elimination of the cuing effect
could be related to an increase in perceptual load and a
concomitant reduction in available attentional resources, as
suggested by Santangelo et al. (2007), Most et al.’s (2005)
theoretical framework could equally predict the same result.
That is, Most et al. would predict that the elimination of the
cuing effect would be related to the fact that the peripheral
cues were not contained in the ‘attention set’ (i.e., the cue
was not a part of, nor was it related to, anything in the
central task). This was precisely the case in the paradigm
used by Santagelo and colleagues (2007; 2008).
Specifically, participants were required to detect a number
amongst a rapid serial presentation of letters and numbers,
while the peripheral cue was a geometric shape (i.e., not a
letter or number). Adopting Most et al.’s logic, the
peripheral cue was task irrelevant and not related to
anything in the attention set (letters or numbers), therefore it
is not surprising that it failed to capture attention.
Accordingly, one can predict that if the irrelevant peripheral
cues were to be manipulated such that they overlapped with
the current attention set (i.e., the peripheral cues and central
targets come from the same category or share the same
features), they should successfully capture attention despite
being completely irrelevant to the task at hand. In the
present study, our goal was to investigate the relationship
between central processing and the peripheral capture of
attention (exogenous orienting), and how this relationship is
mediated by the attention set.
Using a within subjects design, participants performed a
difficult central task requiring them to detect numbers that
were presented within a stream of rapidly presented letters.
On a subset of trials participants responded to the location
of a peripherally presented target (above or below) that was

2897

orthogonally cued. Critically, we presented different types
of peripheral cues to each participant, such that the cue was
either of the same content as the central task or different.
Note that the cue itself was completely irrelevant to the task
and in theory would be outside of the attention set if it did
not share any stimulus characteristics with items in the
attention set (i.e., the central task in this case). If Most et
al.’s (2005) prediction holds, exogenous cuing effects
should be eliminated when peripheral cues are different
from stimuli in the central stream. However, if peripheral
cues are related to (or were even subsets of) the central task,
then an exogenous cuing effect (i.e., attentional capture)
should emerge.

trials (33%) the digit was not presented and instead,
participants responded to the location of a spatial target that
could have occurred in one of the four corners of the screen.
A peripheral cue was presented on all trials, but was
irrelevant to either task. The cue could have validly
predicted the side of the spatial target or not (note, a spatial
target was not present on digit trials). Responses were made
using one of three keys following detection of either 1) a
number, 2) an upward spatial target, or 3) a downward
spatial target.
30 cm

Methods

21 cm

Legend

Participants
Twenty-three participants (mean age = 22 ± 4; 13 females)
were recruited from undergraduate courses at the University
of Hawaii at Manoa, and offered course credit for their
participation. All participants were naïve as to the purpose
of the experiment and had normal or corrected to normal
vision. Ethical approval was obtained from the University’s
Committee on Human Subjects.

P

= Visual target location
= Visual cue location

K

R
M

F
D
K

T
P
K

Stimuli

B
K
R

9

All stimuli were presented on a 20”, iMac using Bootcamp
and DMDX software (Forster & Forster, 2003). Observers
sat approximately 60 cm from the display. Stimuli in the
central rapid serial visual presentation (RSVP) stream was
constructed from randomly chosen non-repeated letters (11
selected from set of 17: B, C, D, E, F, J, K, L, M, N, P, R, S,
T, Y, X, Z), each presented for 100 ms with a 16.7 ms interstimulus interval (ISI). For digit detection trials, numbers
were selected from a set of six: 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9. Visual targets
were black circles (subtending 2°) and cues were either
black rectangles (2.5° x 1.7°) or numbers of comparable size
(i.e., outside or in the attention set of the primary task,
respectively; see Figures 1 and 2). Aside from the use of
number cues on half of the trials, all stimuli, presentation
times, and counterbalancing were constructed to be similar
to the unimodal visual condition used in Santangelo et al.’s
experiment (2007).

...

...

Digit detection
(67% of trials)

Target discrimination
(33% of trials)

Figure 1: Schematic representation of the task. See text for
details.

F

9

T

F
T

K

K

Rectangle cue
(50% of trials)

Number cue
(50% of trials)

Procedure
All participants were presented with written instructions for
the task on the computer screen. Next they were presented
with practice trials and given accuracy and reaction time
feedback after the end of each trial. The participants had the
option of repeating the instructions, repeating the practice
trials, or continuing with the experiment. The experimenter
also monitored participants during the practice trials to
ensure their understanding of the task.
For the actual task, participants were required to monitor
the RSVP stream presented in the center of the display, and
to respond to the occurrence of a numerical digit. A digit
occurred on the majority of trials (67%). On the remaining

Figure 2: The two different cue types used in the task.
Each trial began with a fixation cross (1000 ms) followed
by the RSVP stream of 11 items. On digit detection trials,
the numbers randomly occurred in either the third, sixth, or
ninth position in the stream (see also, Santangelo et al.,
2007). A spatial cue was also presented on each trial (for
100 ms, identical to item duration), occurring in the third or
sixth position on either the right or left side of the display
equiprobably. When spatial targets occurred a number was
not presented in the stream, and the spatial target appeared
two positions after the cue (5th or 8th position). The two

2898

types of cues, rectangles or numbers, also occurred
equiprobably (see Figure 2). Each experimental session
consisted of 196 randomized trials, 132 of which were the
digit detection task, and 64 of which were target detection
(Santangelo et al., 2007). Cue combinations and trial
repetitions were counterbalanced. Participants were
instructed to respond as soon as targets were detected.

than rectangle cues (18% vs 13%, respectively) during
spatial target detection, but not during digit detection (3% vs
2%, see Figure 3).
A second three way ANOVA performed on the digit
detection condition with factors of digit position (3), cue
position (2), and cue type (2) revealed that participants
detected the digits significantly faster when they were
presented in the ninth (M = 455 ms) position than when
presented in the sixth (M = 584 ms) or third (M = 736 ms)
positions respectively, F(2, 44) = 25.6, p < .001. Reaction
times were also faster when cues were presented in the third
position (M = 574 ms) than in the sixth position (M = 613
ms), F(1, 22) = 13.0, p < .01. There was also a significant
interaction between digit position and cue position, F(2, 44)
= 5.4, p = .008, suggesting that performance was worse
when the cue occurred at the same time as the digit.
Although there was no main effect in mean RTs between
trials with number cues compared to trials with rectangle
cues F(1, 22) < 1, ns, there was a significant three-way
interaction, F(2, 44) = 4.1, p = .04, indicating a different
pattern of RTs between rectangle and number cues.
Specifically, when the target and cue both occur in the third
position the number cue adversely affected performance
whereas the rectangle cue did not (see Figure 4). No
significant differences were found in the error rate data.

Results
Mean reaction times (RTs) and error rates were analyzed
using three repeated measures ANOVAs (analysis of
variance): one for the overall experiment and two separate
ANOVAs for the digit and spatial target detection
conditions. Assumptions of sphericity were tested on all
analyses, with Huyn-Feldt corrections being applied to p
values where appropriate.
1.00

Accuracy (%)

0.95
Task
digit

0.90

spatial

A. Rectangle Cues

0.85

0.80

Cue Type

700

num

RT (ms)

rec

Figure 3: Mean error rates across tasks and cue types. Error
bars indicate standard error values.

Cue Position
3

600

6
500
400
3

6

Target

9

B. Number Cues
800
700

RT (ms)

The first ANOVA was performed on the RT data with
factors of task type (digit or target) and cue type (rectangle
or number). There was no main effect of task type, F(1, 22)
= 1.2, p = .3, indicating that there were no overall
differences in RTs across digit (M = 594 ms) and target (M
= 556 ms) detection tasks. There was, however, a main
effect of cue type, F(1, 22) = 8.4, p = .008, indicating that,
overall, RTs were slower when number cues (M = 589 ms)
occurred compared to rectangle cues (M = 563 ms). There
was no interaction between task and cue types, F(1, 22) < 1,
ns, indicating no differences in RT patterns across the two
tasks. In examining the error data, there was a main effect of
task type, F(1, 22) = 36.2, p < .001, with lower error rates
for the digit task (2%) compared to the target task (15%).
Error rates were also higher on trials with number cues
(10%) than on those with rectangle cues (7%), F(1, 22) =
4.5, p = .045, indicating that on average the task was more
difficult when number cues were present. Notably, the
analysis revealed a marginally significant interaction
between task and cue types, F(1, 22) = 3.5, p = .07,
indicating that number cues tended to be more distracting

Cue Position
3

600

6

500
400
3

6

Target

9

Figure 4: Interaction between target position, cue position in
temporal stream, and cue type. Graph A shows trials with
rectangle cues, whereas Graph B shows those with number
cues.

2899

The third, and most important, two way ANOVA was
performed on the spatial target detection condition with
factors of cue validity (2) and cue type (2). While there were
no main effects of cue validity on reaction times, F(1, 22) =
3.0, p = .1, there was a main effect of cue type, F(1, 22) =
11.0, p = .003, where reaction times were slower when the
target preceding cues were numbers (M = 570 ms)
compared to when they were rectangles (M = 543 ms).
Paramount to this study, the interaction between cue validity
and cue type was also significant, F(1, 22) = 4.7, p = .04,
indicating the presence of cuing effects for number cues on
the one hand (554 ms for valid cues, and 587 ms for invalid
cues), and the lack of cuing effects for rectangle cues on the
other hand (539 ms for valid cues, and 547 ms for invalid
cues, see Figure 5). No significant differences were found in
the error rates across cue type or validity.

RT (ms)

580
Cue Type
rec
560

num

540

0

Cue Validity

1

Figure 5: Interaction of cuing effects within the spatial
target detection condition. Cue validity: 0 = invalid cue, and
1 = valid cue.

Discussion
The main purpose of this experiment was to test Most et
al.’s (2005) theoretical framework on attention. To this end,
our findings unequivocally support the prediction that
irrelevant items that fall within the attentional set are
capable of capturing attention while irrelevant items that fall
outside of the attention set do not. That is, as was predicted,
peripheral cues that were in the same category, or had
overlapping features with the central task (numbers) had a
cuing effect (33 ms) on spatial target detection, while items
outside the category (rectangles) did not (i.e., the cuing
effect was eliminated). Not only was a cueing effect
observed for peripheral number distractors, but this type of
cue also led to a general increase in RTs for spatial trials.
This indicates that despite being irrelevant to the task, the
number cues were nevertheless processed, and served as
more effective distractors when compared with the
rectangles.
Although valid number cues effectively captured
attention, they did not facilitate overall faster reaction times.
That is, the mean reaction time for trials with rectangle cues
was in fact faster than for number cues, despite the lack of a

cuing effect within this condition. This may possibly be due
to the interaction of the number cues with the requirements
of the central task. That is, any potential facilitating effects
on performance of the valid number cues were probably
offset by the overlap and interference with the digit
detection task. The effects of this interference were also
observed in the higher error rates for trials with number cues
when compared to rectangle cues for spatial target detection
(Figure 3).
Reaction times on the digit detection trials also point
towards greater interference from the number cues. The
interaction indicates that performance was worse on trials
when the cue occurred at the same time as the digit, with
more interference occurring from number cues when
presented in the third frame. It is worth noting here that the
lack of clearly distinguished differences between the effects
of the rectangle and number cues on digit detection may be
due to a more general distracting effect of the number cues.
That is, the number cue may induce a distracting effect that
generalizes beyond those particular trials to even cause the
rectangle cues to become more distracting than they
naturally would be. An effective way to test this theory
would be to have participants also perform a task that
consisted only of rectangle cues, and to then compare the
pattern of results.
Aside from providing support for the theoretical position
that the most influential factor for attentional capture is the
‘attention set’—or the current items in focus—our findings
also lend support to the notion that attention focuses on
objects and features in addition to spatial location (e.g.,
Duncan, 1984; Egly, Driver, & Rafal, 1994; for a review,
see Scholl, 2001). In refining our understanding of the
attention set, it becomes imperative to more precisely define
the attention set itself, for the reason that when one is
engaged in a task, there are usually multiple objects or
different classes of events to attend to. For example, in this
experiment, we defined the attention set as being the digit
detection task, due to the fact this occurred the majority
(67%) of the time. The most important object in the central
stream was the number, and accordingly the identity of
peripheral cues was manipulated to be numbers on half of
the trials.1 The question remains however, as to what role
the letters in the letter stream do play in the attention set.
Despite the fact that the letters within the RSVP stream
are of a different category than the number targets, they are
nevertheless processed by virtue of proximity to the number
targets (both temporally and spatially) and the fact that the
participants must monitor the stream in order to accurately
detect the number amongst letters. We speculate that the
letters should also be in the attention set, but is this
assumption warranted? It is possible that the letters
themselves may undergo some form on inhibition, and
therefore a cue that is a letter might not capture attention.
Even if this assumption were to be warranted, what would
1

Note that on each trial the number cues were different than the
numbers presented in the central RSVP task, thereby avoiding any
potential confounds.

2900

be the precise role of letters in the attention set? Would the
letters be afforded equal roles to the numbers, or would their
roles be lesser, perhaps even of an inhibitory nature?
Thus it is clear that although Most and colleagues’ (2005)
framework provides a constructive foundation to build
upon, further theoretical refinement and specification
through experimentation is needed. Given that many aspects
of attention appear to operate in context dependent manners,
exploring these contexts within the unifying framework of
the attention set may prove to be an informative approach
for understanding the mechanisms of attention.

References
Corbetta, M., Patel, G., & Shulman, G. L. (2008). The
reorienting system of the human brain: from environment
to theory of mind. Neuron, 58(3), 306-324.
Corbetta, M., & Shulman, G. L. (2002). Control of goaldirected and stimulus-driven attention in the brain. Nature
Reviews Neuroscience, 3(3), 201-215.
Desimone, R., & Duncan, J. (1995). Neural mechanisms of
selective visual attention. Annual review of neuroscience,
18(1), 193-222.
Duncan, J. (1984). Selective attention and the organization
of visual information. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 113(4), 501-517.
Egly, R., Driver, J., & Rafal, R. D. (1994). Shifting visual
attention between objects and locations: evidence from
normal and parietal lesion subjects. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 123(2), 161.
Forster, K., & Forster, J. (2003). DMDX: A Windows
display program with millisecond accuracy. Behavior
Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 35(1),
116.
Jonides, J. (1981). Voluntary versus automatic control over
the mind's eye's movement. In J. Long & A. Baddeley
(Eds.), Attention and Performance IX (pp. 187-203).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Inc.
Jonides, J., & Yantis, S. (1988). Uniqueness of abrupt visual
onset in capturing attention. Attention, Perception, &
Psychophysics, 43(4), 346-354.
Most, S. B., Scholl, B. J., Clifford, E. R., & Simons, D. J.
(2005). What you see is what you set: sustained
inattentional blindness and the capture of awareness.
Psychological Review, 112(1), 217.
Most, S. B., Simons, D. J., Scholl, B. J., Jimenez, R.,
Clifford, E., & Chabris, C. F. (2001). How not to be seen:
The contribution of similarity and selective ignoring to
sustained inattentional blindness. Psychological Science,
12(1), 9-17.
Müller, H. J., & Rabbitt, P. M. (1989). Reflexive and
voluntary orienting of visual attention: time course of
activation and resistance to interruption. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 15(2), 315.
Neisser, U. (1976). Cognition and reality: Principles and
implications of cognitive psychology. San Francisco: W.
H. Freeman.

Posner, M. I. (1980). Orienting of attention. Q J Exp
Psychol, 32(1), 3-25.
Santangelo, V., Belardinelli, M., & Spence, C. (2007). The
suppression of reflexive visual and auditory orienting
when attention is otherwise engaged. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 33(1), 137-148.
Santangelo, V., Finoia, P., Raffone, A., Olivetti Belardinelli,
M., & Spence, C. (2008). Perceptual load affects
exogenous spatial orienting while working memory load
does not. Experimental brain research, 184(3), 371-382.
Santangelo, V., & Spence, C. (2007). Multisensory cues
capture spatial attention regardless of perceptual load.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 33(6), 1311-1321.
Santangelo, V., & Spence, C. (2008). Is the exogenous
orienting of spatial attention truly automatic? Evidence
from unimodal and multisensory studies. Consciousness
and cognition, 17(3), 989-1015.
Scholl, B. J. (2001). Objects and attention: The state of the
art. Cognition, 80(1-2), 1-46.
Simons, D. J., & Chabris, C. F. (1999). Gorillas in our
midst: Sustained inattentional blindness for dynamic
events. Perception-London, 28(9), 1059-1074.
Theeuwes, J. (1991). Exogenous and endogenous control of
attention: The effect of visual onsets and offsets.
Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics, 49(1), 83-90.
Treisman, A. M., & Gelade, G. (1980). A feature-integration
theory of attention. Cognitive psychology, 12(1), 97-136.
Van der Lubbe, R. H. J., & Postma, A. (2005). Interruption
from irrelevant auditory and visual onsets even when
attention is in a focused state. Experimental brain
research, 164(4), 464-471.
Wolfe, J. M. (2007). Guided Search 4.0: Current progress
with a model of visual search. In W. Gray (Ed.),
Integrated Models of Cognitive Systems. NY: Oxford.
Yantis, S., & Egeth, H. E. (1999). On the distinction
between visual salience and stimulus-driven attentional
capture. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 25(3), 661.
Yantis, S., & Jonides, J. (1990). Abrupt visual onsets and
selective attention: voluntary versus automatic allocation.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 16(1), 121.

2901

