UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The spatial representation of grammatical number

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/64s912w4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Rottger, Timo
Domhas, Frank

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The spatial representation of grammatical number
Timo B. Röttger (timo.roettger@uni-koeln.de)
IfL Phonetik, University of Cologne, Herbert-Levin-Str. 6, D-50931 Köln, Germany

Frank Domahs (domahs@uni-marburg.de)
Department of Germanic Linguistics, University of Marburg, Wilhelm-Röpke-Str. 6a, D-35032 Marburg, Germany

Abstract
Research on numerical cognition suggests a strong link between
mental representations of space and quantity. The SNARC effect
(Spatial-Numerical Association of Response Codes effect) is
characterized by the association of small quantities with left space
and large quantities with right space. While the majority of
research on the spatial representation of number has been on
number words or Arabic numerals, this study investigates quantity
representations that are involved in the processing of grammatical
number. We found that German words that were inflected for
singular had a relative left hand advantage, and conversely, plurals
had a relative right-hand advantage. However, this pattern was
only found in relatively late responses. Moreover, it appeared to
interfere with the opposite pattern caused by the MARC effect
(Markedness Association of Response Codes effect) leading to a
relative right-hand advantage for singulars. This interference
appeared to depend mainly on response latency with MARC
effects being more pronounced in early responses and SNARC-like
effects being more pronounced in late responses. This work sheds
light on the interaction of different stimulus-to-response mappings
operating on the same stimulus dimension – grammatical number.
Moreover, it suggests that spatial numerical associations go
beyond explicit numerical information, as in number words or
Arabic numerals.
Keywords: grammatical number, MARC effect; numerical
representation; SNARC effect.

Introduction
Many researchers have argued that the mental representation
of quantity is intimately connected to space. This
connection is often described using the metaphor of a
mental number line, which (in Western cultures) is oriented
from left to right. In line with this assumption, it has been
shown that spatial response dimensions are associated to
numerical magnitude: the SNARC effect is characterized by
the association of small quantities to the left hand and large
quantities to the right hand. In their seminal work, Dehaene,
Bossini, and Giraux (1993) found that in a parity judgment
task (“is the number even or odd?”), responses to larger
numbers were consistently faster with the right hand than
with the left hand, whereas responses to smaller numbers
showed the opposite pattern. As the task was not explicitly
focused on quantity information but on parity, the
interaction between quantity and spatial orientation was
taken to suggest automatic access to quantity
representations which are organized horizontally. Several
studies have found similar effects without hand movements,
suggesting that the SNARC effect is not genuinely due to a

mapping to hands but to perceptual space (e.g., Fischer,
Castel, Dodd, & Praat, 2003; Loetscher, Schwarz,
Schubiger, & Brugger, 2008). The SNARC effect has been
shown for both Arabic numbers and for spoken or written
number words (cf., Landy, Jones, & Hummel, 2008; Nuerk,
Iverson, & Willmes, 2004; Nuerk, Wood, & Willmes,
2005).
In an alternative account, the SNARC effect could be
attributed to polarity alignment (Landy et al., 2008; Proctor
& Cho, 2006; Santens & Gevers, 2008). This account posits
that in binary representations of dimensions, across both
stimulus and response properties, one value of the
dimension is “generally more available than the other”
(Landy et al., 2008: 358). To account for the SNARC effect,
e.g. the polarity correspondence principle (Proctor & Cho,
2006) assumes that small numbers are coded as [–] polarity
and large numbers as [+] polarity. The response location is
coded in a similar way: [–] polarity for a left response and
[+] polarity for a right response. Congruent polarities (small
numbers/left space, large numbers/right space) cause faster
response selection than incongruent polarities.
This model also accounts for the MARC effect
(Markedness Association of Response Codes effect, cf.,
Nuerk et al., 2004; Reynvoet & Brysbaert, 1999; Willmes &
Iversen, 1995). An example of the MARC effect are faster
right hand responses to even numbers and faster left hand
responses to odd numbers (see e.g., Nuerk et al., 2004). It is
assumed that this effect is closely related to the concept of
linguistic markedness (see Haspelmath, 2006, for an
overview) which refers to the formal and conceptual
asymmetry between linguistic categories: in a parity
judgment task, in which the hand-to-response relation is
manipulated within participants, the adjectives “right” and
“even” are assumed to be linguistically unmarked (Zimmer,
1964). On the contrary, “left” and “odd” are assumed to be
linguistically marked. Interference is observed if the
markedness association between stimulus and response is
incongruent, while facilitation is observed if the markedness
association is congruent.
At least for numerals, SNARC and MARC effects may cooccur (e.g., Nuerk et al., 2004). However, they do not
interfere with each other since they are linked to
independent stimulus properties (SNARC is linked to
relative magnitude, MARC is linked to parity).

1247

Grammatical number, quantity, and markedness
In addition to symbolic and lexical number representations,
many languages encode quantity grammatically. In
particular, languages such as English and German employ
morphological markers that decode the distinction between
one entity (“singular”) and more than one entity (“plural”).
Most commonly, nouns are grammatically marked for
number by inflection, e.g., by adding an affix such as –s to
English nouns. The most frequent grammatical number
systems restrict the number of available categories to
singular (one entity) and plural (more than one entity)
(Corbett, 2000). For a German example, compare (1), where
the suffix –n adds plural meaning to the noun lion.
(1) Löwe ‘lion’ vs. Löwen ‘lions’
While, most research on mental quantity representation
has focused on Arabic numerals or number words; much
less is known about the semantic interpretation of
grammatical number. Several developmental and behavioral
studies demonstrated a tight connection between
grammatical and conceptual number (Barner, Thalwitz,
Wood, Yang, & Carey, 2007; Berent, Pinker, Tzelgov, Bibi,
& Goldfarb, 2005; Sarnecka, Kamenskaya, Yamana, Ogura,
& Yudovina, 2007). For example, in a Stroop-like task,
Berent et al. (2005) asked their participants to judge the
quantity (one or two) of visually presented words while
ignoring their contents. Letter strings consisted of both
singular and plural nouns (Exp. 1), and of pseudowords with
or without regular plural inflection (Exp. 3). Response
latencies were higher when there was a mismatch between
grammatical number and the quantity of words presented
(e.g., dog dog vs. dogs dogs). The authors concluded that
the extraction of semantic number from grammatical
number is automatic and represented in a way that is
comparable to the conceptual number that they extract from
visual perception.
The present study follows up on those findings and links
it to numerical cognition research. Grammatical number is
an excellent testing ground for the interaction of
contradicting stimulus-to-response mappings because it
allows us to pit SNARC-based and MARC-based accounts
against each other.
The present study
The present study applies a binary classification task to
German nouns inflected for singular or plural. Conceptual
quantity is involved in the process of specifying the
grammatical number of nouns because, typically, singular
nouns refer to one entity and plural nouns refer to multiple
entities. Although the plural does not represent a specific
quantity, we assumed it to represent a quantity which is – on
a (Western) mental number line – localized more towards
the right relative to a singular quantity (= 1), thus leading to
a SNARC-like effect. In other words, singular forms should

be responded to faster with the left hand whereas plurals
should be responded to faster with the right hand.
This prediction goes against the predictions based on the
MARC effect: In linguistic theory, singular is thought to be
unmarked, and plural is thought to be marked (cf.,
Greenberg, 1966). For example, within a language,
singulars are used more frequently than plurals. And, if a
language has a morphological coding of number (such as an
affix), then the plural is typically overtly coded, thus
formally more complex, whereas singulars often lack an
overt coding, as in the German example (1) above. The
MARC effect predicts that if markedness of a stimulus
(singular vs. plural) is congruent with the markedness of a
response side (right vs. left), there should be facilitation.
Hence, singular forms should be responded to faster with
the right hand (unmarked) whereas plurals should be
responded to faster with the left hand (marked).
Apparently, grammatical number poses a problem to
polarity accounts. Two conflicting polarity alignments are
potentially at work operating on the same stimulus
dimension: one alignment coding singulars as [+] polarity
due to its linguistically unmarked status, and one coding
singulars as [–] polarity due to the conceptual quantity
representations. Typically, however, polarity alignment
accounts do not deal with conflicting polarity associations
and therefore they make no prediction about which polarity
association should occur in a given setting. Moreover, if
competing associations interfere with each other the model
does not predict how interference affects behavior.
One level of dissociation of those effects might operate on
processing depth: the SNARC effect may become stronger
when magnitude processing is activated more intensively
(Gevers, Verguts, Reynvoet, Caessens, & Fias, 2006), i.e.
the size of the SNARC effect depends on response latencies
and the amount of semantic number processing required. In
their meta-analysis, Wood, Willmes, Nuerk, & Fischer
(2008) found a positive correlation of the SNARC effect
size and response latencies across studies. Moreover, they
found SNARC effects to be more pronounced in studies in
which the task required the active processing of numerical
magnitude (see also De Brauwer & Duyck, 2008; Fias,
2001). Because the SNARC effect requires a certain amount
of semantic magnitude processing, we expect it to occur
only in semantic tasks. The MARC effect on the other hand,
could already occur in an asemantic task, since no semantic
information is necessarily required to encode a plural
inflection, which is a surface characteristic of a word. Thus,
one might hypothesize that those two effects are potentially
dissociated in respect to task requirements. To explore this
possibility and to investigate a potential dissociation of
SNARC and MARC, we introduced tasks requiring different
processing depths.

Method
We designed four different tasks corresponding to different
stages of processing depth. In the first task, participants had

1248

to decide whether the presented words were written in italics
or not (surface processing, SURF). The second task was a
lexical decision task: participants had to decide whether the
presented letter strings were existing German words or not
(lexical processing, LEX). In the third task, participants had
to make animacy judgments, where they had to decide
whether the nouns denoted creatures (animate) or objects
(inanimate) (nonspecific semantic processing, SEM). In a
fourth task, participants had to decide whether the nouns
denoted one entity or more than one (specific semantic
quantity processing, QUANT).
Because quantity information is assumed to be
represented at a conceptual level of processing and the SURF
and LEX conditions do not require conceptual access, we
expected no SNARC effect to occur at SURF and LEX. On
the other hand, both decisions in SEM and QUANT required
access to conceptual representations, thus a SNARC effect
is expected to occur at SEM and QUANT. A MARC effect,
however, could already occur in asemantic tasks, thus we do
not predict any task dependency of a potential MARC
effect. In their interaction, with increasing processing depth
the impact of the MARC effect should be increasingly
attenuated by the impact of the SNARC effect.
Participants
Fifty-two native speakers of German (33 female, 19 male),
with an average age of 26.9 years (SD = 7.0) volunteered to
participate for payment. All of them had normal or
corrected-to-normal vision.
Stimuli
The stimuli consisted of four German nouns in both their
singular and plural form, respectively (Kuh/Kühe 'cow(s)',
Löwe/Löwen 'lion(s)', Münze/Münzen 'coin(s)', and
Stuhl/Stühle 'chair(s)'). We applied the following selection
criteria to fit the stimuli to the experimental design: two
items were animate beings (Kuh, Löwe); the other two were
inanimate entities (Stuhl, Münze). There were two
grammatically masculine (Stuhl, Löwe) and two
grammatically feminine nouns (Münze, Kuh). Plural forms
of all nouns contained an umlaut. Because both singular and
plural forms can have an -e suffix and an umlaut, neither of
these cues was valid for unambiguously detecting plural
inflection. This was done to ensure that participants access
lexical knowledge rather than focus their attention just to
one particular orthographic cue.
Procedure
All subjects participated in eight blocks of trials, i.e. two
blocks per processing depth (SURF, LEX, SEM, and QUANT).
After the first block of each processing depth, there was a
short break, in which participants were instructed to reverse
the assignment of response buttons. The order of response
assignments to the right hand and the left hand, respectively,
was counter-balanced across participants. Each block started
with a training session in which all words were presented

once. In the test blocks, each word was presented ten times
in randomized order.
The experiment was controlled using Superlab 2.04
software (Abboud, 1991) and a RB-830 response box (both
Cedrus Corporation, San Pedro, CA, USA). Stimuli were
displayed on a 16”-monitor screen using black symbols
against a white background. Stimuli were presented in
Times New Roman, font size 90, resulting in a maximum
height of 15 mm and a maximum width of 50 mm.
Responses were recorded by two response keys placed at a
distance of 30 cm in front of the participants, centered in
egocentric space and separated 10 cm from each other. At
the beginning of each trial, a fixation stimulus consisting of
five asterisks (*****) was presented in the center of the
screen for 300 ms. Then, the target appeared and remained
for 1300 ms, during which response time was measured.
The inter-trial-interval was 1500 ms (blank screen). The
instructions given to participants stressed both speed and
accuracy.
Analysis
Six participants were excluded from analyses because they
showed difficulties in changing the response assignment in
at least one task. In the remaining data set, 5.8% of the trials
had to be excluded due to wrong responses (3.45%),
anticipations (RT faster than 200 ms) (0.05%), or RTs
outside ±3 standard deviations from the individual mean of
each task per hand association per speaker (2.31%). There
was no trade-off between mean RT and error rate (r =-.182;
p>.05).
Reaction times were analyzed using a series of
generalized linear mixed effects models implemented in the
R software (R Core Team, 2012) and the package lme4
(Bates, Maechler, & Bolker, 2012). We used a Gaussian
error distribution and identity link function. Both subjects
and items were used as crossed random intercept effects.
Since we are interested in the interaction of stimulus and
response, we included the factor Number (singular, plural)
interacting with the factor responding Hand (right, left) as a
fixed effect in the models.
In a first step, we tested if this interaction is dependent on
task requirements, thus we included a three-way interaction
of Hand × Number × Task (SURF, LEX, SEM, QUANT) as a
fixed effect. In subsequent analyses we tested the Hand ×
Number interaction for each task separately.
We computed p-values comparing the models with the
interactions in question to the models with only the noninteracting fixed effects via Likelihood ratio tests (LRTs).

Results
Overall, responses to tasks differed substantially in terms of
response latency, such that SURF was responded to fastest
(513 ms) followed by SEM (548 ms), LEX (579 ms), and
QUANT (631 ms). Crucially, the Hand × Number × Task
interaction was significant (χ(9)=81.514, p<0.0001),
indicating that there was a stimulus-response interaction
modulated by task specific effects (cf. Figure 1).

1249

QUANT

bin1

bin2

bin3

bin4

(548ms)

(631ms)

(426ms)

(479ms)

(526ms)

(621ms)

(483ms)

(542ms)

(594ms)

(697ms)

(454ms)

(515ms)

(564ms)

(662ms)

(499ms)

(577ms)

(653ms)

(795ms)

Table 1: Overview of stimulus-to-response mappings
as a function of task and RT bin.

QUANT

SEM

LEX

SURF

Task

Bin

dRT SG

dRT PL

Slope

SE

1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4

-3,71
-1,28
-0,23
-0,53
-2,04
-0,33
1,69
-4,52
-1,56
-1,83
1,37
7,39
-3,33
2,09
1,96
3,65

-1,31
0,09
-1,16
-3,21
2,46
-1,59
1,21
-7,16
3,42
0,47
1,48
-0,99
-3,40
1,73
-3,14
-16,95

-2,40
-1,37
0,94
2,68
-4,50
1,26
0,47
2,64
-4,99
-2,30
-0,11
8,38
0,07
0,36
5,10
20,60

2,18
1,22
1,67
6,12
2,59
1,34
1,80
6,04
2,55
1,41
1,53
6,22
3,19
1,97
2,56
8,57

10
0
-10
20 -20
10
0
-10

20 -20
10
0
-10

20 -20
10

Subset analyses of each processing depth separately
revealed that SURF showed a significant Hand × Number
interaction (χ(1)= 4.096, p=0.043), such that the model
estimated a greater right hand advantage for singular forms
(9 ms) than for plural forms (1 ms) (SE=3.88 ms), as
predicted by a MARC-based account. The two-way
interaction Hand × Number did not reach significance in the
LEX or SEM condition (χ(1)=1.226, p=0.27 and χ(1)= 0.303,
p=0.58, respectively). For the QUANT processing depth,
there was a significant interaction of Hand × Number
(χ(1)=35.11, p<0.0001) such that the model estimated a left
hand advantage for singular forms (6 ms) and a right hand
advantage for plural forms (26 ms) (SE=5.36ms), as
predicted by a SNARC-based account.

0

Figure 1: Estimated RT differences (dRT) and standard errors
between right hand and left hand responses as a function of
grammatical number (SG = singular; PL = plural). Negative
slopes indicate SNARC-like effects; positive slopes indicate
MARC-like effects. Mean RT of each depth is given in
brackets.

-10

PL

-20

SURF
SG

LEX

PL

centered dRT in ms

SG

SEM

PL

centered dRT in ms

SG

QUANT

PL

centered dRT in ms

-5
-20

dRT in ms

-35

SG

20

SEM

(579ms)

centered dRT in ms

LEX

(513ms)

10

SURF

SG

PL

SG

PL

SG

PL

SG

PL

Figure 2: Estimated RT differences (dRT) and standard errors
between right hand and left hand responses as a function of
grammatical number for RT bins (centered around zero).
Negative slopes indicate SNARC-like effects; positive slopes
indicate MARC-like effects. Mean RT of each bin is given in
brackets.

Since the mean response latencies of the tasks differed
substantially, the observed dissociation between SNARC
and MARC might be due to overall processing time rather
than required magnitude processing. To obtain a view of the
time course, we rank ordered RTs for each subject and
processing depth and divided them into four equal bins
(Ratcliff, 1979). We tested if the Hand × Number
interaction was dependent on the factor RT bin (bin 1-4) for
each task separately. This was not the case for SURF, LEX or
SEM (χ(9)≤12.75, p≥0.17). It was, however, for QUANT as
indicated by a significant interaction of Hand × Number ×
RT bin (χ(9)=20.77, p=0.014). In this condition, there was a
significant SNARC-like effect in late responses (bin 3 and
4) (χ(1)≥3.94, p≤0.047), but not for early responses in bin 1
and 2 (χ(1)≤0.035, p≥0.85) (cf. Table 1, Figure 2).
Numerical trends further indicate that SNARC-like effects
are found in all tasks depending on overall processing time.
This pattern of evidence suggests that these SNARC effects

1250

could be accounted for by processing time only rather than
processing depth. Visual inspection of the slopes over time
yielded a similar pattern: Early responses exhibit positive or
flat slopes indicating MARC-like patterns and/or the
absence of SNARC-like effects, while late responses exhibit
negative slopes indicating SNARC-like patterns. Moreover,
the change of slope over the time course appears to be
roughly linear.

Discussion
The present study investigated stimulus-to-response
mappings when processing grammatical number in binary
tasks. We demonstrated that grammatical number markers
elicit a SNARC-like effect, i.e. German words inflected for
singular had a relative left hand advantage; plurals had a
relative right hand advantage. At the same time, we
demonstrated a MARC effect that showed the opposite
pattern. There was a reliable MARC effect in a font
classification task (SURF) and a reliable SNARC effect in a
magnitude classification task (QUANT). In the light of our
task dependent pattern of results, this evidence suggests that
the SNARC effect is elicited in relatively late processing
stages. A look at the overall RTs obtained reveals that
QUANT indeed required the longest processing time. A
significant interaction of reaction times and stimulus-toresponse mapping in the magnitude classification task as
well as numerical trends in all tasks (cf. Table 1, Figure 2)
underpin this interpretation. So, one may conclude that a
simple explanation based on processing time is sufficient to
account for the present pattern of results (“A MARC effect
already appears in early responses while a SNARC effect
only appears in late responses”). The appearance of SNARC
in relatively late responses is in line with earlier findings on
Arabic numerals and number words (e.g., Wood et al.,
2008).
Polarity alignment accounts (Landy et al., 2008; Proctor
& Cho, 2006; Santens & Gevers, 2008) explain both the
SNARC and the MARC effect within the same framework.
According to this account, congruent polarities lead to faster
response selection than incongruent polarities. However,
this account makes contradicting predictions regarding the
response association for grammatical number: Based on the
linguistic markedness dimension, singulars should be coded
as [+] polarity and plurals as [–] polarity, thus leading to a
facilation of right hand responses for singular forms. A
quantity-based account makes the opposite prediction,
which assumes that singulars are coded as [–] polarity and
plurals as [+] polarity (in analogy to numerals).
Interestingly, the present study found both patterns, thus two
conflicting polarity alignments have been shown to operate
on the same stimulus dimension. Polarity alignment
accounts in their present state, however, do not predict
which polarity associations occur in a given setting and – if
competing associations interfere with each other – how their
interaction affects behavior. The present data indicate a
temporal dissociation of these stimulus-to-response

associations with MARC effects being more dominant in
early responses and SNARC-like effects being more
dominant in late responses. Given the apparent linear
change of slopes as a function of processing time, we might
speculate that both effects co-occur, interfering with each
other. Over time, the relative strength of one stimulus-toresponse mapping (MARC) decreases (or remains constant)
while the alternative mapping (SNARC) increases. Due to
the lack of statistically significant results for some
conditions, this remains, however, speculative.
Generally, the presence of a SNARC effect in the quantity
task demonstrates that a mental quantity representation may
– in principle – be accessed from grammatical number in a
similar way as during the processing of Arabic numbers and
number words. One might argue, that the present data are
ambivalent with respect to the question whether this
quantity representation of grammatical number can be
conceived as organised in a left-to-right oriented mental
number line or not. One could, of course, doubt the
relevance of the quantity-to-space nature of the response-tostimulus mapping and stick with a more neutral polarity
account arguing that there is a coding of singular as [–]
polarity and a coding of plural as [+] polarity. This
interpretation does not require any reference to spatial
quantity representation, and consequently our data would
say nothing about the association between conceptual
number and grammatical number. However, one would have
to explain why singular is associated with [–] polarity and
plural with a [+] polarity. To us, one possible interpretation
is grounded in the spatial nature of the conceptual quantity
representation.
Future research might shed light on these issues. An
excellent testing ground are languages which have more
complex morphological number systems: In addition to
singular and plural, some number systems also have an
additional grammatical category that is called “dual”, which
serves to refer to two distinct real-world entities (cf.,
Corbett, 2000). Other, more rarely occurring grammatical
systems also contain a so-called “trial”, in which nouns are
marked for groups of exactly three distinct entities, or even
a “paucal”, in which a separate grammatical marker is used
to refer to a small number of distinct entities. Grammatical
systems in which more than two morphological categories
are used to refer to quantity might further our understanding
of the interaction of different stimulus-to-response
associations in general and the interrelationship of linguistic
and conceptual number in particular.

Conclusion
To conclude, grammatical number elicits two
contradicting stimulus-to-response mappings. A MARC
effect based on the linguistic markedness of the grammatical
categories singular and plural; and a SNARC-like effect
based on its semantic reference to magnitudes. Similar to
Arabic numbers and number words, this quantity
representation seems to be organised in a rightward
direction for increasing quantities. This SNARC-like effect,

1251

however, only appears in relatively late responses, while the
MARC effect appears to be restricted to relatively early
responses. Linear trends in slope changes over time indicate
that both effects interfere with each other.
In general, the use of linguistic categories beyond number
words appears to be an interesting and promising avenue to
investigate the relationship of different stimulus-to-response
mappings.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Bodo Winter, Martine Grice, and
two anonymous reviewers for helpful comments and
suggestions. Any remaining errors are our own.

References
Abboud, H. (1991). SuperLab. Wheaton, MD: Cedrus.
Barner, D., Thalwitz, D., Wood, J., Yang, S., & Carey, S.
(2007). On the relation between the acquisition of
singular-plural morpho-syntax and the conceptual
distinction between one and more than one.
Developmental Science, 10, 365–373.
Bates, D., Maechler, M., & Bolker, B. (2012). lme4: Linear
mixed-effects models using S4 classes. R package version
0.999999-0. http://CRAN.R-project.org/package=lme4
Berent, I., Pinker, S., Tzelgov, J., Bibi, J., & Goldfarb, L.
(2005). Computation of semantic number from
morphological information. Journal of Memory and
Language, 53, 342–358.
Corbett, G. (2000). Number. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
De Brauwer & Duyck, W. (2008). The SNARC effect in the
processing of second-language number words: Further
evidence for strong lexico-semantic connections. The
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 61, 444–
458.
Dehaene, S., Bossini, S., & Giraux, P. (1993). The mental
representation of parity and number quantity. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 122, 371–396.
Fias, W. (2001). Two routes for the processing of verbal
numbers: evidence from the SNARC effect.
Psychological Research, 65(4), 250–259.
Fischer, M. H., Castel, A. D., Dodd, M. D., & Pratt, J.
(2003). Perceiving numbers causes spatial shifts of
attention. Nature Neuroscience, 6(6), 555–556.
Gevers, W., Verguts, T., Reynvoet, B., Caessens, B., &
Fias, W. (2006). Numbers and space: a computational
model of the SNARC effect. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 32(1),
32–44.
Greenberg, J. (1966). Language universals, with special
reference to feature hierarchies. The Hague: Mouton.
Haspelmath, M. (2006). Against markedness (and what to
replace it with). Journal of Linguistics, 42(1), 25–70.
Landy, D. H., Jones, E. L., & Hummel, J. E. (2008). Why
spatial-numeric associations aren’t evidence for a mental

number line. Proc. 30th Ann. Conf. Cogn. Sci. Soc., 357–
362.
Loetscher, T., Schwarz, U., Schubiger, M., & Brugger, P.
(2008). Head turns bias the brain's internal random
generator. Current Biology, 18(2), 60–62.
Nuerk, H. C., Iversen, W., & Willmes, K. (2004).
Notational modulation of the SNARC and the MARC
(linguistic markedness of response codes) effect.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 57A,
835–863.
Nuerk, H. C., Wood, G., & Willmes, K. (2005). The
universal SNARC effect - The association between
number quantity and space is amodal. Experimental
Psychology, 52, 187–194.
Proctor, R. W., & Cho, Y. S. (2006). Polarity
correspondence: A general principle for performance of
speeded binary classification tasks. Psychological
Bulletin, 132, 416–442.
R Core Team (2012). R: A language and environment for
statistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical
Computing, Vienna, Austria.ISBN 3-900051-07-0, URL
http://www.R-project.org/.
Reynvoet, B., & Brysbaert, M. (1999). Single-digit and twodigit Arabic numbers address the same semantic number
line. Cognition, 72, 191–201.
Santens, S., & Gevers, W. (2008). The SNARC effect does
not imply a mental number line. Cognition, 108, 263–270.
Willmes, K., & Iversen, W. (1995 April). On the Internal
Representation of Number Parity. Paper presented at the
Spring Annual Meeting of the British Neuropsychological
Society, London.
Wood, G., Willmes, K., Nuerk, H.-C., & Fischer, M. (2008).
On the cognitive link between space and number: a metaanalysis of the SNARC effect. Psychology Science
Quarterly, 50(4), 489-525.
Zimmer, K. (1964). Affixed negation in English and other
languages: An investigation of restricted productivity.
Word, 20(2), Monograph No. 5.

1252

