UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Individuation and Recognition of Emotion

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/30q6q9h1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Newen, Albert
Welpinghus, Anna

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Individuation and Recognition of Emotion
Albert Newen (albert.newen@rub.de)
Institute for Philosophy II, Universitätsstraße 150
44780 Bochum, Germany

Anna Welpinghus (anna.welpinghus@rub.de)
Institute for Philosophy II, Universitätsstraße 150
44780 Bochum, Germany

Abstract
First, we argue for the metaphysical claim that emotions are
individuated as patterns of characteristic features. Our second
claim concerns the epistemology of emotion recognition: We
demonstrate that emotion recognition is a process pattern
recognition that relies on the same type of pattern recognition
typical for object recognition. The analogy allows us to
defend a variant of a direct perception account of emotion
recognition. We distinguish two forms of directly perceiving
emotions: 1. perceiving an emotion (almost) without any topdown-processes, 2. perceiving an emotion involving some
significant top-down-processes (including expectations and
background knowledge), and in addition 3. an inferencebased evaluation of an emotion.
Keywords: Emotion, Philosophical Theory, Nature of
Emotion, Recognition of Emotion

Introduction
What is the nature of emotions and how can we recognize
them in other human beings? In this short paper, we cannot
do justice to the complex discussions concerning both
questions. Nevertheless, we develop our own view with the
core claim that emotions are individuated as pattern and that
emotion recognition is a process of pattern recognition that
has much in common with the recognition of objects by
perception. This paper's focus lies on an outline of our
account and its advantages, while we only briefly mention
the criticism of alternative views.

The metaphysical debate: An overview
In the metaphysical debate we have two extreme positions:
emotions are individuated as social constructs (Lutz, 1986;
Harré, 1986), on the one hand, or they are individuated as
evolutionary anchored affect programs (Ekman, 1972;
Griffith, 1997), on the other. Both accounts have severe
deficits (Welpinghus & Newen, 2012). Let us mention only
the two main deficits: psychoevolutionary accounts state
that shared evolutionary history is the only criteria to
identify types of emotions. They do not provide any
classificatory schemes which do not refer to each category's
evolutionary history but for many emotion categories
referred to not only in everyday speech but also in
psychological theories, it is far from clear whether their
members share the same evolutionary history. Thus, the
psychoevolutionary account has difficulties providing
adequate classificatory schemes, for example for studying

emotions in a social context. In principle, psychoevolutionary accounts of emotions can easily account for basic
emotions but have problems to account for the role of
cognitive contents in so-called cognitive emotions (Zinck &
Newen, 2008). On the other hand, the social constructionist
can easily account for the latter including the cultural
variety of emotion phenomena but they underestimate the
strong overlap of the emotion repertoire despite the cultural
variation. Here Ekman (1972) has shown that basic
emotions like joy, fear, anger, sadness etc. are accompanied
with the same facial expression. There is an open debate
which phenomena are basic emotions but a strong part of
the community presupposes that there are basic emotions
which are evolutionary old, shared with animals and
develop early in ontogeny (Ekman, 1999; Griffiths, 1997;
Zinck & Newen, 2008). The evolutionary anchor of basic
emotions constraints our emotion repertoire and undermines
the social constructivist view that emotions are entirely
created by cultural factors. What could be an alternative?
We need to do justice to both features, the evolutionary
anchor of basic emotions and the cultural dependence of
some emotions. We suggest that the claim that emotions are
individuated as pattern is the best alternative: 1. pattern can
easily involve both, evolutionary anchored as well as
culturally shaped features and thus account for both
observations; 2. this view especially helps to distinguish
emotion concepts in a society and their natural basis, i.e.
some emotions concepts are categorizing only conventional
constructs while others are actually anchored in natural
kinds (which empirical science has to discover). 2. The
account of emotion as pattern is nicely connecting with our
folk psychological way of thinking about emotions (noticing
the many faces of emotions), 3. the best reductive scientific
accounts of emotions have (at least so far) not succeeded in
reducing emotions to a very few necessary features which
are constituting a type of emotion, 4. furthermore, we
observe a great variety of realizations of one type of
emotion (e.g. types of fear; types of phobia which are
classified according to the intentional object but also
according to other features) which indicates that the analysis
as a pattern consisting of characteristic features is the best
we can gain because it makes it easy to account for the
variety of emotion types without loosing the evolutionary
anchor. Let us illustrate some of these points while
enfolding the view that emotions are individuated as pattern.
One important aspect of pattern is that in principle all

1079

features are dispensable: there only has to remain a minimal
package of features constituting the phenomenon but none
of them is necessarily instantiated. Even this radical feature
of pattern is true for several emotions but not for all.1

Emotions as patterns
The idea that emotions are organized in patterns and that
thus the recognition of emotion is basically a process of
pattern recognition is not new (e.g. it is used in Izard, 1972
and Izard et al., 2000). But we aim to develop a detailed
own account of it that enables us to analyze emotion
recognition in more detail. We will now list and shortly
characterize all types of features relevant for the
individuation of emotions before focusing on the
recognition part:
(1) Autonomic physiological responses: William James
(1884) famously claimed that an emotion is the perception
of bodily changes, especially changes in autonomic nervous
system (ANS) activity. Physiological parameters controlled
by ANS activity are crucial for Jamesian emotion theories.
However, since not every emotion has a clearly distinct
ANS pattern, especially when it comes to more fine-grained
distinctions, even clearly Jamesian accounts of emotion
such as the account of Prinz (2004) have to provide an
account of emotion which grants that two different emotions
need not have different patterns of ANS activity. They can
be distinguished by other features. 2
(2) Expressive actions and action tendencies: The
psychologist Nico Frijda has coined the term ‘action
tendency’ (which stems from Arnold, 1960) for a felt urge
to perform a certain kind of action. This urge is also
manifest in bodily changes which are suitable preparations
for these actions. He largely equates emotions and felt
action tendencies (Frijda, 1986, 71), a move we do not
share. Specific actions or action tendencies as the only
features are neither constitutive for every type of emotion
nor can they alone constitute any emotion: Emotions like
happiness are not accompanied by a specific action
tendency. An action tendency may become manifest in
actual expressive actions or not. Although actions out of
emotions are rather flexible, there are typical behaviors for
some emotions, such as freezing or fleeing in fearful
situations. We routinely rely on expressive actions as well
as signs for mere action tendencies for emotion recognition.
(3) Bodily expression: Bodily expression can be divided
into (a) facial expression, (b) posture (c) gesture, (d) vocal
1
However, for some emotion concepts, some features are indeed
necessary (e.g. test anxiety involves thinking that an exam is going
to take place) while others are merely characteristic.
2
Prinz (2004) argues that some emotions are individuated by a
calibration file, i.e. a mental file which includes different
judgments that are unified because they all bear on the person’s
well-being in the same way. Prinz’ strategy is to officially claim
that the calibration file is part of the cause of the emotion but not
constitutive for it. Since he at the same time describes the
calibration file as being the essential feature for individuating an
emotion, this is finally not a consistent position to hold.

expression such as screams, roars or laughter and (e) tone of
voice. We subsume these under the heading ‘bodily
expression’ because all of these depend on muscle
contractions and because these components are usually
perceived together. We see a proud person talking: We see
her smile, her erect posture; we hear her self-satisfied tone
of voice. This leads to an overall impression of her as proud;
under normal conditions, we do not pay attention to any of
these components separately. Laboratory studies point
towards an early integration of these visual and auditory
cues (Campanella & Belin, 2007). On the other hand,
experiments show that face (Ekman, Friesen & Ellsworth,
1972), but also posture and gesture alone is sufficient to
recognize some coarse-grained distinctions (Atkinson et al.,
2004).
(4) Phenomenal experience: Emotions are normally
accompanied by a particular phenomenal quality or feeling.
We do not consider phenomenal experience as necessary
because there may be rare cases of emotions in the absence
of such feelings, when typical physiological, expressive and
cognitive aspects are present (the paradigmatic case is a
person with a strong disposition to repress her fear [Sparks
et al., 1999; Weinberger, 1990; Weinberger & Davidson,
1994]).
(5) Cognitive features comprise (a) attitudes and (b) shifts
of attention and perception. Emotions are often
accompanied by cognitive attitudes. Belittling thoughts
about the rival are characteristic for jealousy and a judgment
that one has been treated unfairly is characteristic (though
neither necessary nor sufficient) for anger, to give two
examples. Furthermore, sometimes such attitudes are
manifest in behavior or are verbally reported. Cognitive
components that are less demanding than attitudes are e.g, a
shift of attention, for example being alert to dangers in a
state of fear. Through such shifts, emotions can make us
perceive things we otherwise would not have perceived.
They also make us perceive things in a certain light. Some
theorists put characteristic ways of perceiving the world at
the center of their theory of emotion (Döring, 2003). We
will not equate emotion with ways of perceiving a world,
but we do acknowledge the role of changes in perceiving the
world due to having an emotion connected with a special
phenomenology and its role in guiding behavior.
(6) The intentional object: ‘Intentional object’ is a
technical term for the object the emotion is about. ‘This can
be a particular thing or person (that pudding, this man), an
event or an action (the earthquake, your hitting me), or a
state of affairs (my being in an aeroplane)’ (Goldie, 2000,
16-17). It is not always real. The intentional object (or the
type of object) is crucial for the more fine-grained
classification of emotions, for example for distinguishing
envy from jealousy.3
3

Although the intentional object is crucial for distinguishing
emotions from each other, it does not follow that the object is the
bearer of the emotion (as an extended mind theorist might want to
claim). While we remain neutral about the extended mind
hypothesis in general, it is worth noting that our account does not

1080

The features can be thought of as variables, which can
take different values (the variable facial expression can take
the values ‘fearful expression’, ‘sad expression’, etc.) Some
values are likely to occur together, others are very unlikely
to occur together. This is due to a range of causal
mechanisms and constraints, but probably also constitutive
and conceptual links. Illuminating these links further is a
task for the empirical sciences as well as philosophy.
Because some values are likely to occur together, we can
learn to distinguish typical patterns of values and form a
concept of the overall phenomenon. To illustrate, figure 1
shows a fear pattern.

Figure 1: Fear pattern.

Our understanding of
‘being constitutive of an emotion’
Are these features constitutive of an emotion? This depends
on the underlying conception of ‘constitution’. According to
an essentialist conception of constitution, a constitutive part
of something is also an essential part, a necessary part in all
possible worlds. If the part was taken away, the leftovers
could not form the same type of phenomenon as before
anymore. According to our view of emotions as patterns,
emotional features are not constitutive in the essentialist
sense, because we do not rule out the possibility to have a
token of the same type of an emotion lacking some
characteristic features. We think that if there are only a few
characteristic features they can be sufficient for an
emotional episode to constitute it to be a token of the type
anger. Those features of an emotional episode which
contribute to it being a token of a specific emotion type are
the constitutive parts of an emotion pattern4. The fact that a
entail the claim that the object is partly the bearer of the mental
state in this case.
4
We are presupposing a realism about patterns such that in
principle for each combination of features it is possible to clarify
whether this is an instantiation of the relevant pattern or not. We
can of course grant that there are borderline cases and there exists a
bundle of transfer cases.

person is sitting in a car during her angry episode may be
part of a token of anger but it is not constitutive of her
anger. We suggest a notion of being constitutive for X that
accounts for X being a pattern. A feature f is constitutive for
a pattern X if it is part of at least one set of features which is
minimally sufficient for a token to belong to a type X.
‘Minimally sufficient’ means that these features are jointly
sufficient for the episode to be of type X, but if one of them
would be taken away the episode would not count as a
instance of X anymore. According to our view, emotions
usually include overt bodily features (expression or
characteristic actions) – if characteristic expressive aspects
occur during an emotion episode, they are constitutive and
not just an effect of the proper emotion, or a cause for it –
but emotions do not always involve expressive
components.5
One might wonder whether our list of features is
exhaustive.6 Should we include neural correlates, for
example? Features like ANS response, behavior, cognitive
attitudes, perceptual shifts, and expression all have neural
correlates. Neural correlates are insofar not an extra
component in addition to the others – we could mention
them as part of the individuation features of emotion but we
do not have to.7 They may be used in a clinical or scientific
context to infer whether a person is having emotions but are
not used in ordinary contexts, since we cannot access them
in an everyday context. Also, it is crucial to distinguish the
factors relevant for individuating emotions from those
which facilitate (or impair) the recognition of emotions.
Contextual factors for the recognition of emotions include
most prominently (a) the pragmatic context in which it
occurs and (b) the personality, goals, beliefs, etc. of the
person having the emotion. These features do not belong to
the emotion pattern but are only relevant for the recognition

5

If someone is trained to inhibit any expressive sign of his
emotion, we may still be able to recognize the emotion by
inference, e.g. by noticing the force that someone uses to inhibit
the expressions in the given context.
6
We want to clarify the relation of our pattern account of
emotion to earlier philosophical component theories of emotions
by excluding a main deficit we do not inherit. Some component
theories have analyzed emotions as beliefs plus desires plus (often)
feelings (e.g. Lyons, 1980; Robinson, 1983). Whatever the relevant
components are, Döring (2009) presents the following principle
criticism: component accounts cannot explain why an emotion is
(usually) experienced as a unitary conscious state. We fully
acknowledge that an emotion is experienced as a unitary conscious
state, but we will not provide an explanation of why and how this
experience came about. Providing such an explanation is not
necessary for a plausible philosophical account of emotions.
Otherwise the problem would also affect Döring’s account – she
merely emphasize the unity of emotional experience but do not
provide an explanation for it, either.
7
This is at least true if we presuppose an identity theory of
mental and physical states. We tend to do so but at the same time
presuppose that the relevant physical state involves more than just
a neural state, i.e. the whole body and maybe part of the
environment.

1081

of other people’s emotions.8 One may also wonder whether
the list of features includes too many features and whether
some can be reduced to others: This may be possible – and
desirable – in principle but given the state of art in cognitive
sciences we have no convincing candidate for a theory
which reduces emotions to fewer features and would
nonetheless allow us to describe the great variety of emotion
phenomena.

Both types of perceiving emotions can be distinguished
from 3. an inference-based evaluation of an emotion pattern.
The latter presupposes a stable evaluation of an emotion as
being F, which then may be modified or reevaluated by
reflecting on the information (Newen & Welpinghus, under
review).

Emotion recognition as pattern recognition

We have argued that emotions are individuated on the basis
of a number of features that constitute an emotion pattern.
Our aim now is to characterize the relevant process of
pattern recognition in the case of emotions in more detail.
To reach that aim, we analyze the process of recognizing
emotions in parallel to the process of perceiving objects. We
take the relevant model of object perception from Ernst and
Bülthoff (2004): It describes how a stable percept is
developed by merging the senses in a process of cue
combination and cue integration. This model of object
recognition can be directly transferred into a model of
emotion recognition including four aspects: (i) The bottomup processes that start with sensory cues of an emotion,
which lead to a first estimate of an emotion. A detailed
analysis of emotion recognition would have to distinguish at
least the following cues: facial expression (F), the gestures
(G), the whole body posture (B), the tone of voice (T),
autonomic features like sweating (A), the movement/action
of the person (M) and the event whose registration triggers
the emotion (C). Registering these features also leads to an
internal activation of my own, the perceiver’s bodily state,
e.g. mirror neuron activation, which has been shown at least
in the case of seeing disgust in the face of the other person
(Calder et al., 2000), and (at least) sometimes also of a
visceral activation. (ii) The relevant sensory cues are used
for cue combination (combining nonredundant features) and
cue integration (selecting one dominant out of a group of
redundant features); it is plausible that the process of
registering an emotion starts with cue combination of
complementary features like F and M producing an
intermediate (normally unconscious) estimate E1 of an
emotion state, as well as a combination of G, B, A and M,
which may constitute a different (normally unconscious)
estimate E2 of an emotion state. In a second step, we are in
need of integration of redundant cues like E1, E2 and E3
while the latter may be triggered by the auditory cue (T)
together with registering the cause (C). (iii) Cue
combination and integration leads to an activation of the
most likely emotion pattern (on the basis of Bayesian
principles) which is connected with a (normally conscious)
stable percept. Thus, there is a plausible sense in which we
can say that we see an emotion while seeing a person having
the features mentioned above. The percept we have is
directly associated with the activation of an emotion pattern
which we are able to distinguish from others. (iv)
Furthermore, the development of an emotion percept may be
influenced by top-down processes. Thus, the percept of an
emotion is a product of sensory cue combination and

Cue combination and cue integration in recognition
of emotions

Pattern recognition is a general method of classifying world
phenomena. We aim to analyze the recognition of emotion
as a process of pattern recognition on the basis of perceiving
characteristic features and integrating them into a unity by
recognizing an emotion and ascribing it to the other.9 The
latter presupposes observers possessing normal conceptual 10
competences. In providing a new version of explicating
emotion recognition as pattern recognition we propose a
new variant of a perceptual theory of recognizing emotions.
We will characterize the process of pattern recognition as
one of cue combination and cue integration that culminates
in an activation of the most plausible representation of an
emotion pattern. This pattern recognition involves a
multifactorial weighting process organizing sensory cues
from different sense modalities, on the one hand, and
accounting for other cues, like social and personal
background information, on the other. It is fruitful to
distinguish between two types of emotion recognition: The
process of pattern recognition by activating the most likely
representation of an emotion pattern can take place either
without almost any top-down processes or strongly
constrained by those. We understand top-down processes as
specific processes involving prefrontal activation of the
brain; this presupposes as a minimal consensus that
prefrontal activation of the brain is necessarily involved in
the activation of complex cognitive processes which can be
loosely understood as conceptual. We can rely on studies
which show that such prefrontal activation is at least
sometimes involved in standard perceptual processes.11
Thus, we distinguish 1. (a basic form of) perceiving an
emotion (almost) without any top-down-processes, 2.
perceiving an emotion by strongly involving top-downprocesses (a strongly concept-modified form of perception).
8
Fear is fear no matter whether the observer knows that he deals
with an anxious person or a courageous person but it is much
easier to recognize knowing this and we can recognize it easier in
an obviously dangerous setting than in a (seemingly) save setting.
9
We allow for the case of emotion recognition without ascribing
it to the other, i.e. without conceptualization but this case will not
be the focus of this paper.
10
For the sake of argument we can identify conceptual and
linguistic abilities. For a fine-grained distinction between linguistic
and non-linguistic concepts in the context of animal cognition, see
Newen and Bartels, 2007.
11
We are not discussing here what it means to possess concepts
since it is sufficient to account for top-down influences to establish
a general picture of perceiving emotions.

1082

integration influenced by top-down processes: In the case of
emotions, situational and person-specific background
knowledge can modify the basic bottom-up processes that
predicted the emotional state of the other.

Concluding remarks
Describing emotions as patterns of characteristic features
has a number of advantages: First, in the debate between
evolutionary theorists and social constructionists, it offers
an account that allows to integrate evolutionary anchored as
well as culturally shaped features. This especially helps to
distinguish emotion concepts in a society and their natural
basis, i.e. some emotions concepts are categorizing only
conventional constructs while others are actually anchored
in natural kinds. The pattern theory accounts for a
significant degree of conceptual flexibility in the realm of
emotions – based on formal objects and on similarity
relations among the various emotion features; given the
nature of our affect programs we can actually form a
number of coherent classificatory schemata for emotions.
Social constructionists often concentrate on emotion
categorization in different culture which may be different
even if the behavioral dispositions of the people from
different cultures would be very similar. We can account for
this by characterizing emotions concepts by the significant
pattern including behavioral as well as cognitive features.
Evolutionary theorists claim that despite cultural variation
that any real emotion is constituted by an underlying
common core of a few evolutionary anchored features, e.g.
fear involves the disposition to freeze or to initiate flight
behavior, it has its typical phenomenology. These
observations are accounted for by distinguishing rather
inflexible and more flexible features of an emotion type. On
the basis of the metaphysical view that emotions are
individuated as pattern, we argued for a theory of emotion
recognition such that it is a process of pattern recognition
which is furthermore parallel to object recognition: the same
processes of cue combination and cue integration are
relevant to develop a percept of an emotion when observing
the affective state of another human being. We indicated
that we can characterize the perceptual access to emotions
as direct, i.e. unmediated by any inferences but we could not
develop this view in detail here: we only outlined that the
direct perception thesis needs qualification by working out
the role of top-down processes in emotion recognition (see
Newen/Welpinghus under review). But despite the
difference in the relevant features of recognition, both
recognition of emotions as well as of objects are analyzed as
relying on the same functional processes constituting
perception of entities (of any kind). Thus, our model has the
advantage of being very parsimonious.

References
Arnold, M. B. (1960). Emotion and personality. New York:
Columbia University Press.
Atkinson, A., Dittrich, W., Gemmell, A., & Young, A.
(2004). Emotion perception from dynamic and static body

expressions in point-light and full-light displays.
Perception, 33, 717-46.
Döring, S. (2003). Explaining Action by Emotion. The
Philosophical Quarterly, 53, 214-30.
Döring, S. (2009). Philosophie der Gefühle heute. In S.
Döring (Ed.), Philosophie der Gefühle (pp. 12-65).
Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.
Durand, K., Gallay, M., Seigneuric, A., Robichon, F., &
Baudouin, J. Y. (2007). The development of facial
emotion recognition: the role of configural information. J
Exp Child Psychol, 97(1), 14-27.
Ekman, P., Friesen, W. V., & Ellsworth P. (1972). Emotion
in the human face. Oxford: Pergamon Press.
Ekman, P. (1999). Basic emotions. In T. Dalgleish &
M. Power (Ed.), Handbook of cognition and emotion
(pp. 45-60). Chichester: Wiley.
Ernst, M. O., & Bülthoff, H. (2004). Merging the senses
into a robust percept. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8(4),
162-168.
Frijda, N. H. (1986). The Emotions. Studies in Emotions and
Social Interactions. New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press.
Goldie, P. (2000). The Emotions. A Philosophical
Exploration. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Gopnik, A. and Meltzoff, A. N. (1997): Words, thoughts,
and theories. Cambridge, MA.: MIT Press.
Griffiths, P. E. (1997). What emotions really are. The
problem of psychological categories. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
Harré, R. (1986). An outline of the social constructionist
viewpoint. In R. Harré (Ed.), The social construction of
the emotions (pp. 2-14). Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Izard, C. E. (1972). Patterns of emotions. A new analysis of
anxiety and depression. With chapters coauthored by
Edmund S. Bartlett and Alan G. Marshall. New York,
NY: Academic Press.
Izard, C. E., Ackerman, B. P., Schoff, K. M., & Fine, S. E.
(2000). Self-organization of discrete emotions, emotion
patterns, and emotion-cognition relations. In S. E. Lewis
& I. Granic (Eds.), Emotion, development, and selforganization: Dynamic systems approaches to emotional
development (pp. 15-36). New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press.
James, W. (1884). What is an emotion? Mind, 9(34), 188205.
LeDoux, J. E. (1996). The emotional brain: The mysterious
underpinnings of emotional life. New York, NY: Simon &
Schuster.
Lutz, C. (1986). Emotion words on Ifaluk. In R. Harré (Ed.),
The social construction of the emotions (pp.267-288).
Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Lyons, W. (1980). Emotion. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge
University Press.
Marks, J. (1982). A Theory of Emotion. Philosophical
Studies, 42, 217-242.

1083

Newen, A., & Bartels, A. (2007). Animal Minds and the
Possession of Concepts. Philosophical Psychology, 20,
283-308.
Newen, A., & Welpinghus, A. (under review): Emotion
recognition as pattern recognition: the relevance of
perception.
Norton, D., McBain, R., Holt, D. J., Ongur, D., & Chen, Y.
(2009). Association of impaired facial affect recognition
with basic facial and visual processing deficits in
schizophrenia. Biol Psychiatry, 65, 1094-8.
Parkinson, B., Fischer, A., & Manstead, A. (2005).
Emotions in social relations. New York: Psychology
Press.
Prinz, J. (2004). Gut Reactions. A Perceptual Theory of
Emotion. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Robinson, J. (1983). Emotion, Judgment, and Desire. The
Journal of Philosophy, 80, 731-41.
Scherer, K. R. (2009). The dynamic architecture of emotion:
Evidence for the component process model. Cognition
and Emotion, 23, 1307-51.
Sparks, G. G., Pellechia, M., & Irvine, C. (1999). The
repressive coping style and fright reactions to mass
media. Communication Research, 26, 176-192.
Vuilleumier P., & Pourtois, G. (2007). Distributed and
interactive brain mechanisms during emotion face
perception: evidence from functional neuroimaging.
Neuropsychologia, 45, 174-94.
Weinberger, D. A. (1990). The construct validity of the
repressive coping style. In J. L. Singer (Ed.), Repression
and dissociation (pp. 337-85). Chicago, Ill: University of
Chicago Press.
Weinberger, D. A., & Davidson, M. N. (1994). Styles of
inhibiting emotional expression: Distinguishing repressive
coping from impression management. Journal of
personality, 62, 587-613.
Welpinghus, A., & Newen, A. (2012). Emotion und Kultur:
Wie individuieren wir Emotionen und welche Rolle
spielen kulturelle Faktoren dabei? Zeitschrift für
philosophische Forschung, 66, 367-392.
Zinck, A., & Newen, A. (2008). Classifying emotion: A
developmental account. Synthese, 161, 1-25.

1084

