UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Role of Cognitive Niches in Mediating Knowledge, Entropy &amp; Violence

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6591z17q

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Magnani, Lorenzo
Bertolotti, Tommaso

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Role of Cognitive Niches in Mediating Knowledge, Entropy & Violence
Lorenzo Magnani (lmagnani@unipv.it)
Department of Humanities, Philosophy Section
University of Pavia, ITALY

Tommaso Bertolotti (bertolotti@unipv.it)
Department of Humanities, Philosophy Section
University of Pavia, ITALY
Abstract

settings in order to get more valuable information (Magnani,
2009). Most of this work is completely tacit and embodied
in practice. The role of various laboratory artifacts is a clear
example, but also in everyday life people face complex situations which require knowledge and manipulative expertise
of various kinds – no matter who they are, whether teachers,
policy makers, politicians, judges, workers, students, or simply wives, husbands, friends, sons, daughters, and so on. In
this sense, human beings can be considered chance seekers,
because they are continuously engaged in a process of building up and then extracting latent possibilities to uncover new
valuable information and knowledge (Magnani & Bardone,
2008).
Furthermore, as chance seekers, humans are also ecological engineers. Not only technologies and other artifacts are
part of this ecology but also morality and, of course, violent modes of problem-solving. That is to say, humans (like
other creatures) do not simply live in their environment, but
they actively shape and change it while looking for suitable
chances. In doing so, they construct cognitive niches through
which the offerings provided by the environment in terms of
cognitive possibilities are appropriately selected and/or manufactured to enhance their fitness as chance seekers (Tooby
& DeVore, 1987; Pinker, 1997, 2003). Hence, this ecological
approach aims at understanding cognitive systems in terms of
their environmental situatedness (Clancey, 1997; Magnani,
2005). Within this framework, “chances” are that kind of
“information” which is not internally stored in memory or
already available in an external resource, but that has to be
“extracted” and then picked up upon occasion.
It is well-known that one of the main forces that shapes the
process of adaptation is natural selection. That is, the evolution of organisms can be viewed as the result of a selective
pressure that renders them well-suited to their environments.
Adaptation is therefore considered as a sort of top-down process that goes from the environment to the living creature
(Godfrey-Smith, 1998). In contrast to that, a small fraction
of evolutionary biologists have recently tried to provide an
alternative theoretical framework by emphasizing the role of
niche construction (Laland, Odling-Smee, & Feldman, 2000,
2001; Odling-Smee, Laland, & Feldman, 2003).
According to this view, the environment is a sort of “global
market” that provides living creatures with unlimited possibilities. Actually, not all the possibilities offered by the environment can be exploited by the human and non-human an-

The aim of this paper is to briefly illustrate how the theoretical
framework of cognitive niches can prove useful to frame not
only the cultural development of human beings, but the naturalization of morality as well.
Keywords: Cognitive niches; Coalition enforcement hypothesis; Violence; Morality; Naturalization.

Human Beings as Eco-Cognitive Engineers
Human beings usually make decisions and solve problems
relying on incomplete information (Simon, 1955). Having
incomplete information means that 1) our deliberations and
decisions are never the best possible answer, but they are at
least satisfying; 2) our conclusions are always withdrawable
(i.e. questionable, or never final). That is, once we get more
information about a certain situation we can always revise our
previous decisions and think of alternative pathways that we
could not “see” before; 3) a great part of our job is devoted to
elaborating conjectures or hypotheses in order to obtain more
adequate information. Making conjectures is essentially an
act that in most cases consists in manipulating our problem,
and the representation we have of it, so that we may eventually acquire/create more “valuable” knowledge. It is obvious
that a great part of human conjectural activity is devoted to
guessing hypotheses (that can be moral as well) about situations and events able to help subsequent decisions and actions. Conjectures (and thus “moral” conjectures) can be either the fruit of an abductive selection in a set of pre-stored
hypotheses or the creation of new ones: in this sense, abduction – a term from the Peircean tradition – must be understood
in an eco-cognitive perspective, which has been fruitfully applied in studies concerning Distributed and Embodied Cognition (Hutchins, 1995; Magnani, 2009). In order to make
conjectures, human beings often need more evidence/data: in
many cases this further cognitive action is the only way to
simply make possible (or at least enhance) a way of reasoning that relies on “hypotheses” that are often hard to produce
successfully.
Consider, for instance, diagnostic settings: often the information available does not allow a physician to make a precise
diagnosis. Therefore, she has to perform additional tests, or
even try some different treatments to uncover otherwise hidden symptoms. In doing so she simply aims at increasing her
chances of making the appropriate decision. There are plenty
of situations of that kind: for example, scientists are continuously engaged in a process of manipulating their research

954

imals populating a peculiar environment. For instance, the
environment provides organisms with water to swim in, air to
fly in, flat surfaces to walk on, and so on. However, there are
no creatures able to take full advantage of all of those possibilities.1 Moreover, all organisms try to modify their surroundings in order to better exploit those elements that suit
them and eliminate or mitigate the effect of the negative ones.
This process of environmental selection (Odling-Smee,
1988) allows living creatures to rebuild and shape “ecological
niches”. An ecological niche can be defined, following Gibson, as a “setting of environmental features that are suitable
for an animal” (Gibson, 1979). It differs from the notion of
habitat in the sense that the niche describes how an organism
lives its environment, whereas the habitat simply describes
where an organism lives.
In any ecological niche, the selective pressure of the local environment is drastically modified by organisms in order
to lessen the negative impacts of all those elements toward
which they are not suited. Indeed, this does not mean that
natural selection is somehow halted, rather, this means that
an adaptation cannot be considered only by referring to the
agency of the environment, but also to that of the organism
acting on it. In this sense, animals are ecological engineers,
because they do not simply live their environment, but they
actively shape and change it (Day, Laland, & Odling-Smee,
2003).
It is well-known that, from the point of view of physics,
organisms are far-from-equilibrium systems relative to their
physical or abiotic surroundings. 2 Apparently they violate the
second law of thermodynamics because they stay alive, the
law stating that net entropy always increases and that complex
and concentrated stores of energy necessarily break down. It
is said that they are open, dissipative systems (Prigogine &
Stengers, 1984), which maintain their status far from equilibrium by constantly exchanging energy and matter with their
local environments. Odling-Smee, Laland and Feldman quote
Schrödinger, contending that an organism has to “feed upon
negative entropy [. . . ] continually sucking orderliness from
its environment” (Schrödinger, 1992, p. 73). To create cognitive niches is a way that an organism (which is always smartly
and plastically “active”, looking for profitable resources, and
aiming at enhancing fitness) has to stay alive without violating the second law: indeed it “cannot” violate it. In this sense

cognitive niches can be considered obligatory: “To gain the
resources they need and to dispose their detritus, organisms
cannot just respond to their environments [. . . ] to convert energy in dissipated energy” (p. 168).
Evolution is strictly intertwined with this process and so
it has consequences not only for organisms but also for environments. Sometimes the thermodynamic costs are negligible (like in the heat loss caused by photosynthesis that is
returned to the universe, “which is in effect infinite”– p. 169),
sometimes they are not, in this case abiota of the environment
have no capacity to contrast the niche-constructing activities
of organisms (like for example, the atmosphere, which is in a
new physical state of extreme disequilibrium in relation to exploitation of the Earth’s limited resources). The only no-costs
exception is when organisms die – and lose their far-fromequilibrium status). In this case the dead bodies are returned
to the local environment in the form of dead organic matter (DOM), still a kind of niche construction, so to say, also
called “ghost niche construction” (Odling-Smee et al., 2003,
p. 170). Of course biota can resist most thermodynamic costs
imposed on them by other niche-constructing organisms, often performing counteractive niche-constructing activities.

Cognitive Niche Construction and the
Mediation of Aggressivity
It is important to clarify the concept of cognitive niche that
is at the basis of the possibility to grasp human moral and
axiological systems in a naturalistic way, and the intertwined
violence, which in this perspective still appears in all of its
“banality”. A recent book by Odling-Smee, Laland and Feldman (Odling-Smee et al., 2003) offers a full analysis of the
concept of cognitive niche from a biological and evolutionary perspective. “Niche construction should be regarded, after natural selection, as a second major participant in evolution. [. . . ] Niche construction is a potent evolutionary agent
because it introduces feedback into the evolutionary dynamics” (Odling-Smee et al., 2003, p. 2). 3 By modifying their
environment and by their affecting, and partly controlling,
some of the energy and matter flows in their ecosystems, organisms (not only humans) are able to modify some of the
natural selection pressure present in their local selective environments, as well as in the selective environments of other
organisms. This happens particularly when the same environmental changes are sufficiently recurrent throughout generations and selective change: “Even though spiders’ webs
are transitory objects [. . . ] the spiders’ genes ‘instruct’ the
spider to make a new one” (Odling-Smee et al., 2003, p. 9).
The fact that spiders on a web are exposed to avian predators
suggests that webs can be a source of selection that produces
further phenotype changes in some species, such as the marking of their webs to enhance crypsis or the creation of dummy

1 In a way, it can be argued that, thanks to material culture, human
beings have managed somehow to take advantage of most environments on Earth (and outside of it), but it is a partial success which
requires a continuous implementation of resources and knowledge
in order to maintain those achievements as persistent.
2 It is important to note recent research based on Schrödinger’s
focusing on energy, matter and thermodynamic imbalances provided
by the environment, draws the attention to the fact that all organisms, including bacteria, are able to perform elementary cognitive
functions because they “sense” the environment and process internal information for “thriving on latent information embedded in the
complexity of their environment” (Ben Jacob, Shapira, and Tauber
(Ben Jacob, Shapira, & Tauber, 2006, p. 496)). Indeed Schrödinger
maintained that life requires the consumption of negative entropy,
i.e. the use of thermodynamic imbalances in the environment.

3 Attention is drawn for the first time to the idea of niche construction by important researchers like Schrödinger, Mayr, Lewontin, Dawkins, and Waddington. Firstly in the field of physics and
subsequently in the field of the theory of evolution itself. Waddington particularly stressed the influence of organism development.

955

spiders probably to divert the attention of the birds that prey
on them. Hence, also spiders adopt what humans call cheating and cognitively alter their cognitive niches to this aim.
Cheating is part and parcel of aggressive predatory behavior
(Bertolotti, Magnani, & Bardone, 2013). It is of course not
appropriate and clearly anthropomorphic to call these kinds
of non human animal behavior “violent”, but it remains clear
that both in human and non human – especially gregarious
– animals the construction of cognitive niches is related to
the importance of triggering cooperation and of attacking,
more or less violently, other living beings. So the cognitive
niches also play, constitutively, the role of carriers of aggressiveness, and in humans, who intentionally build them, they
can be legitimately called “moral” and “violent”. This general description of cognitive niches is extremely interesting
if matched with Gibson’s definition of a niche as a “set of
affordances” (Gibson, 1977). Relying on his concept of affordance, Gibson stresses how the niches characterizes how
a peculiar individual acts within the niche itself and can be
summed up in that individual’s possibilities for action: one’s
cognitive niche is indeed made up of a series of possibilities
extending between the agent and her environment.
While general inheritance (natural selection among organisms influences which individuals will survive to pass their
genes on to the next generation) is usually regarded as the
only inheritance system to play a fundamental role in biological evolution,niche construction may play a role over various
generations, thus introducing a second general inheritance
system (also called ecological inheritance by Odling-Smee).
In the life of organisms, the first system occurs as a one-time,
unique endowment through the process of reproduction (sexual for example); on the contrary, the second system can in
principle be performed by any organism towards any other organism (“ecological” but not necessarily “genetic” relatives),
at any stage of their lifetime. Organisms adapt to their environments but also adapt to environments as reconstructed
by themselves or other organisms. 4 From this perspective,
acquired characteristics can play a role in the evolutionary
process, even if in a non-Lamarckian way, through their influence on selective environments via cognitive niche construction. Phenotypes construct niches, which then can become new sources of natural selection, possibly responsible
for modifying their own genes through ecological inheritance
feedback (in this sense phenotypes are not merely the “vehicles” of their genes). Of course we have to remember that
humans are not unique in their capacity to modify their environment, as we have already seen when referring to the case
of the spiders that build “dummy spiders” (Wilcox & Jackson, 2002): other species are informed by a kind of proto-

cultural and learning process that is very often intrinsically
social, even if we have to say that animals seem to lack the
ability to accumulate information as seen in the human cultural/technological case: Andy Clark ranks human language
as one of the most powerful cognitive niches ever developed
(Clark, 2006).
Indeed, it has to be noted that cultural niche construction
alters selection not only at the genetic level, but also at the
ontogenetic and cultural levels as well. For example the construction of various artifacts challenges the health of human
beings:
Humans may respond to this novel selection pressure
either through cultural evolution, for instance, by constructing hospitals, medicine, and vaccines, or at the
ontogenetic level, by developing antibodies that confer
some immunity, or through biological evolution, with
the selection of resistant genotypes. As cultural niche
construction typically offers a more immediate solution
to new challenges, we anticipate that cultural niche construction will usually favor further counteractive cultural
niche construction, rather than genetic change (OdlingSmee et al., 2003, p. 261).
With a broader explanatory reach than sociobiology and
evolutionary psychology, the theory of niche construction simultaneously explains the role of cultural (and so moral) aspects (transmitted ideas), behavior (and so moral behavior,
which directly orients the construction of niche construction
itself), and ecological inheritance (artifacts, to be intended
also as moral/violent mediators). Of course niche construction may also depend on learning. It is interesting to note that
several species, many vertebrates for example, have evolved
a capacity to learn from other individuals and to transmit this
knowledge, thereby activating a kind of proto-cultural process which also affects niche construction skills: it seems
that in hominids this kind of cultural transmission of acquired
niche-constructing traits was ubiquitous, and this explains
their success in building, maintaining, and transmitting the
various cognitive niches in terms of moral systems of coalition enforcement. “This demonstrates how cultural processes
are not just a product of human genetic evolution, but also a
cause of human genetic evolution” (Odling-Smee et al., 2003,
p. 27). From this viewpoint the notion of docility (Simon,
1993) acquires an explanatory role in describing the way human beings manage ecological and social resources to make
their own decisions.
(Lahti & Weinstein, 2005) and (Magnani, 2011, chap. 6)
refer to the concept of viscosity to provide an explanation of
the gap between the absolutism of morality and the empirical evidence that moral regulations are often infringed with
no major consequences either for the whole moral system, or
for the very individual who performs the infraction – alas,
generating conflicts and violence. Viscosity is certainly constrained by docility, which favors the formation of “the state
of being thick, sticky” but also of the state of being “semifluid in consistency, due to internal friction”. We said that

4 This perspective has generated some controversies, since the extent to which modifications count as niche-construction is not clear,
thus entering the evolutionary scene. The main objection regards
how far individual or even collective actions can really have ecological effects, whether they are integrated or merely aggregated
changes. On this point, see (Sterelny, 2005) and the more critical
view held by (Dawkins, 2004). For a reply to these objections, see
(Laland, Odling-Smee, & Feldman, 2005).

956

Cognitive Niches as Moral Niches

the fact that morality is viscous hints at its thickness and
being glue-like, thus meaning its capability to be deformed,
stressed, pulled apart and reassembled without showing decisive harm to its own stability and reproducibility: this aspect
also relates to docility. Viscosity and docility explain how
our objectified moral cognitive niches are stable, and at the
same time also vulnerable and modifiable. Thus it is easy
to see in, a human individual, the stability of moral convictions depending on his stable moral niches, together with the
spontaneous attitude to “disengage” them – for example resorting to a “re-engagement” in other moral conducts which
are not dominant in his present moral cognitive niche, but still
present as vestigial traces of previous – no longer dominant –
moral cognitive niches (Bandura, 1999; Magnani, 2011).

In the previous section we have tried to show that the concept of cognitive niche is an extremely appropriate intellectual instrument to grasp human cultural and moral systems,
and their violent punishment counterparts, in a naturalistic
way. It is important to present the moral and potentially violent dimension of cognitive niches. We have said that the
activity of niche construction may enter evolution insofar as
it modifies the selective pressures humans and other animals
have to cope with. From this we can draw two major consequences.
First of all, the activity of cognitive niche construction potentially affects all those who participate and live in the same
local environment in terms of cognitive chances made available (or not). That is, eco-cognitive modifications – brought
about collectively (like herd-like behaviors) or by certain
groups – may affect our shared cognitive repertoire amplifying it but also constraining or even impoverishing it. On
certain occasions, eco-cognitive modifications may be considered by some individual (or particular groups of individuals) as threatening, impoverishing, or detrimental for their
possibility to solve problems. Basically, they can perceive
their cognitive system as if it is externally hacked so that they
have to partly re-engineer their relationship with the environment, for instance, by modifying their previous habits or simply forcing them to cope with habits perceived as maladaptive
or threatening for them or their group.
The second point deals with the role of the coalition enforcement hypothesis in cognitive niche maintenance. In
fact, the construction of cognitive niches and the preservation and their maintenance through coalition enforcement has
indeed a moral (and thus violent) dimension: that is, punishment, control and persecution of in-group free riders, and
regulation of out-of-group conflicts (Magnani, 2011). The
coalition enforcement hypothesis, put forward by Bingham
(Bingham, 1999), aims at providing an explanation of the
“human uniqueness” that is at the origin of human communication and language, in a strict relationship with the spectacular ecological dominance achieved by H. Sapiens, and
of the role of cultural heritage. From this perspective, and
due to the related constant moral and policing dimension of
Homo’s coalition enforcement history (which has an approximately two-million-year evolutionary history), human beings
can be fundamentally seen as self-domesticated animals. In
hominids, cooperation in groups (which, contrary to the case
of non-human animals, is largely independent from kinship)
fundamentally derived from the need to detect, control, and
punish social parasites, who for example did not share the
meat they hunted or partook of the food without joining the
hunting party (also variously referred to as free riders, defectors, and cheaters) (Boehm, 1999). These social parasites
were variously dealt with by killing or injuring them (and
also by killing cooperators who refused to punish them) from
a distance using projectile and clubbing weapons. In this
case injuring and killing are cooperative and remote (and at

(Woods, 2013) touches a similar problem, related to docility, when, analyzing fallacious reasoning, he stresses the fact
that “Whether full or partial, belief states are not chosen.
They befall us like measles”, in other words, “say so” induces belief (doxastic irresistibility). Similarly moral cognitive niches too “befall us like measles”. The problem is
related to the effect of what Gabbay and Woods call ad ignorantiam rule: “Human agents tend to accept without challenge the utterances and arguments of others except where
they know or think they know or suspect that something is
amiss” (Gabbay & Woods, 2005, p. 27). The individual agent
also economizes by unreflective acceptance of anything an interlocutor says or argues for, short of particular reasons to do
otherwise, by applying the ad verecundiam fallacy. Accordingly, the reasoner accepts her sources’ assurances because
she is justified in thinking that the source has good reasons for
them (the fallacy would be the failure to note that the source
does not have good reasons for his assurances). Peirce contended, in a similar way, that it is not true that thoughts are
in us because we are in them; “beings like us have a drive to
accept the say so of others” (Woods, 2013).
It is noteworthy that all these information resources do not
only come from other human beings. This would clearly be
an oversimplification. Indeed, the information and resources
that we continuously exploit are – so to speak – humanreadable. Both information production and transfer are dependent on various mediating structures, which are the result
of more or less powerful cognitive delegations, namely, niche
construction activities. Of course, it is hard to develop and articulate a rich culture as humans did, and still do, without effective mediating systems (writing, artifacts, material culture,
etc.). Hence, we can say that, first of all, docility is more generally concerned with the tendency to lean on various ecological resources, which are released through cognitive niches.
Secondly, social/moral learning cannot be seriously considered without referring to the agency of those mediating structures, whose efficiency in storing and transmitting information far exceeds, from many perspectives, that – direct and
non-mediated method – of human beings.

957

the same time they are “cognitive” activities). According to
the coalition enforcement hypothesis, the avoidance of proximal conflict reduces risks for the individuals (hence the importance of remote killing). Of course, cooperative morality
that generates “violence” against unusually “violent” and aggressive free riders and parasites can be performed in other
weaker ways, such as denying a future access to the resource,
injuring a juvenile relative, gossiping to persecute dishonest
communication and manipulative in-group behaviors or waging war against less cooperative groups, etc.
From this perspective, the role played by morality (and,
thus, violent punishment) is manifold: any activity that involves and signals a commitment toward cognitive niche construction and maintenance is potentially perceivable as violent against concurrent niches. To develop and to maintain
some eco-cognitive modifications typical of a certain community implies that those modifications are indeed worth being preserved because they are perceived as good and useful,
which immediately clashes with other possible ways of organizing an homologue cognitive niche. If a cognitive niche displays a univocal relationship with the group who developed it
and cares for its maintenance, participating in the niche also
involves a more or less public endorsement of the group that
supports it. Of course one can partake of several niches (and
hence of several groups) as long as they do not compete (or
are perceived as not competing) in the same area, since no
matter how polite the context may be, any conflict is ultimately about violence.
Morality can be considered as part of the niche’s distributed knowledge, and it precisely concerns violence insofar
as it regulates (also violent) relationships between individuals
in the niche and with those that are confronted with it without
actually partaking of it. Such a regulating activity is permitted
by the dimension of violence embodied in rules and regulations and related punishments but also tacitly conveyed by the
cognitive as we just observed: the most patent case of such
in-niche morals are deontological codes typical of highly specific cognitive niches, but to different degrees they are traceable in every cognitive niche. Of course, the explicit dimension of normativity is concerned in this characterization of the
cognitive niche as moral knowledge expressed in the different registers of rules and regulations is one of the pillars of
niche maintenance. Even if a niche is not primarily involved
in prescribing certain behaviors to its members, a contextual
decency is required in order to obtain a state of homeostasis
in intersubjective relationships. Should a niche seem to be totally devoid of general normativity, it would thrive insofar as
it was laid upon a wider cognitive niche that is in turn heavily
concerned with morals and norms, namely, religions, political
and legal institutions and so on.

2011, chap. 1). Structural violence is seen as morally legitimate insofar as it plays a crucial role in the activities of niche
maintenance. Immediately we have to note that when parents,
policemen, teachers and other agents inflict physical or invisible violence for legal and/or moral reasons, those reasons
do not cancel the violence perpetrated and violence does not
have to be condoned in so far as it is not always perceived as
such. On the other hand it must be analyzed how in the case
of structural violence those perpetrating agents do not seem
to act only on their own behalf but on that of larger institutions that can be political, industrial, economic or religious.
Such institutions populate structural violence not with actors
but rather with what we call “violent mediators” (or in the extreme case of human beings that have turned themselves into
violence mediating socio-cultural “artifacts”, as in the role of
the policeman in the framework of structural violence). 5
Structural violence may acquire its most subtle and omnipresent form as the symbolic violence perpetrated by language. As a device of social mediation language is necessarily a cognitive niche mediator (and hence distributor) of
violence as well. The violent nature of language is a fact too
easily admitted to allow serious reflection, as if every speaker
were aware of this horrible truth and wanted to get rid of it as
soon as possible, even by simply acknowledging it and leaving it at that. As we have already pointed out, a gentle cluster
of speech forms innocently distributes harmful, abusive, destructive, and damaging roles, commitments, inclinations and
habits. Language, which is the very moral medium of cooperation and non-violence, also involves unconditional violence even against the speaker herself, insofar as by language
one acquires and imposes dominion not only over fellow human beings but also over one’s conscious and less conscious
self, framing thoughts and emotions in the rigid crystallization brought about by words. The importance of symbolic
violence should not be disregarded for one very simple reason: the only requirement to become a perpetrator is easy to
meet as it consists in a basic knowledge of the niche language,
and the very fact of speaking a language makes the speaker
both potentially and actually violent in the symbolic dimension. Culture, knowledge and more highly developed speech
abilities may not necessarily help, but conversely they positively turn an agent into an even more subtle perpetrator of violence: we already mentioned Gibson’s definition of a niche
as a set of affordances: such definition could perfectly fit the
case of a moral, violent niche. Knowledge externalizations
may constitute moral affordances, becoming possibilities for
an individual’s moral acting. Yet, should an individual not
develop, or acquire, the correct moral affordances, she might
be perceived as violent by the rest of the obliging community
populating and maintaining the niche – and hence be violently
5 The

Concluding Remarks

regulatory dimension of structural violence is often diluted
in the pervasive form of narratives conveying “moral templates”: the
fairytales that are told to children from early youth, novels, plays,
dramas and – more recently – motion pictures are all involved in the
dissemination of some moral, economic or spiritual teaching, but
they also circulate via gossip (Baumeister, Zhang, & Vohs, 2004).

It is easy to see that the violent potential constitutively embedded in any cognitive niche actually displays the underlying dimension of structural and symbolic violence (Magnani,

958

punished: what should be further studied is whether defining
a moral niche as a set of moral affordances leads us to label
it, as the other side of the coin, a set of violent affordances, of
chances for violence.

Cultural niche construction and human evolution. Journal
of Evolutionary Biology, 14, 22–33.
Laland, K. N., Odling-Smee, F. J., & Feldman, M. W. (2005).
On the breath and significance of niche construction: a reply to Grittiths, Okasha and Sterelny. Biology and Philosophy, 20, 37–55.
Magnani, L. (2005). Creativity and the disembodiment of
mind. In P. Gervás, A. Pease, & T. Veale (Eds.), Proceedings of CC05, Computational Creativity Workshop, IJCAI2005, Edinburgh (pp. 60–67).
Magnani, L. (2009). Abductive Cognition. The Eco-Cognitive
Dimensions of Hypothetical Reasoning. Heidelberg/Berlin:
Springer.
Magnani, L. (2011). Understanding Violence. Morality, Religion, and Violence Intertwined: a Philosophical Stance.
Berlin/Heidelberg: Springer.
Magnani, L., & Bardone, E. (2008). Sharing representations
and creating chances through cognitive niche construction.
The role of affordances and abduction. In S. Iwata, Y. Oshawa, S. Tsumoto, N. Zhong, Y. Shi, & L. Magnani (Eds.),
Communications and Discoveries from Multidisciplinary
Data (pp. 3–40). Berlin: Springer.
Odling-Smee, F. J. (1988). The Role of Behavior in Evolution. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Odling-Smee, F. J., Laland, K. N., & Feldman, M. W. (2003).
Niche Construction. The Neglected Process in Evolution.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Pinker, S. (1997). How the Mind Works. New York: W. W.
Norton.
Pinker, S. (2003). Language as an adaptation to the cognitive
niche. In M. H. Christiansen & S. Kirby (Eds.), Language
Evolution (pp. 16–37). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Prigogine, I., & Stengers, I. (1984). Order out of Chaos.
Man’s New Dialogue with Nature. London: Bantam.
Schrödinger, E. (1992). What is life? with mind and matter and autobiographical sketches. Cambridge University
Press: Cambridge. (Originally published in 1944)
Simon, H. A. (1955). A behavioral model of rational choice.
The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 69, 99–118.
Simon, H. A. (1993). Altruism and economics. American
Economic Review, 83(2), 157–161.
Sterelny, K. (2005). Made by each other: organisms and their
environment. Biology and Philosophy, 20, 21–36.
Tooby, J., & DeVore, I. (1987). The reconstruction of hominid behavioral evolution through strategic modeling. In
W. G. Kinzey (Ed.), Primate Models of Hominid Behavior
(pp. 183–237). Albany: Suny Press.
Wilcox, S., & Jackson, R. (2002). Jumping spider tricksters:
deceit, predation, and cognition. In M. Bekoff, C. Allen, &
M. Burghardt (Eds.), The Cognitive Animal. Empirical and
Theoretical Perspectives on Animal Cognition (pp. 27–34).
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Woods, J. (2013). Errors of Reasoning. Naturalizing the
Logic of Inference. London: College Publications. (Forthcoming.)

References
Bandura, A. (1999). Moral disengagement in the perpetration of inhumanities. Personality and Social Psychology
Review, 3, 193–209.
Baumeister, R. F., Zhang, L., & Vohs, K. D. (2004). Gossip
as cultural learning. Review of General Psychology, 8(2),
111–121.
Ben Jacob, E., Shapira, Y., & Tauber, A. I. (2006). Seeking
the foundation of cognition in bacteria. From Schrödinger’s
negative entropy to latent information. Physica A, 359,
495–524.
Bertolotti, T., Magnani, L., & Bardone, E. (2013). Camouflaging truth: A biological, argumentative and epistemological outlook from biological to linguistic camouflage.
Journal of Cognition and Culture. (Forthcoming)
Bingham, P. M. (1999). Human uniqueness: a general theory.
The Quarterly Review of Biology, 74(2), 133–169.
Boehm, C. (1999). Hierarchy in the Forest. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Clancey, W. J. (1997). Situated Cognition: On Human
Knowledge and Computer Representations. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Clark, A. (2006). Language, embodiment, and the cognitive
niche. Trends in Cognitive Science, 10(8), 370–374.
Dawkins, R. (2004). Extended phenotype – but not extended.
A reply to Laland, Turner and Jablonka. Biology and Philosophy, 19, 377–397.
Day, R. L., Laland, K., & Odling-Smee, F. J. (2003). Rethinking adaptation. The niche-construction perspective. Perspectives in Biology and Medicine, 46(1), 80–95.
Gabbay, D. M., & Woods, J. (2005). The Reach of Abduction. Amsterdam: North-Holland. (Volume 2 of A Practical
Logic of Cognitive Systems)
Gibson, J. J. (1977). The theory of affordances. In R. E. Shaw
& J. Bransford (Eds.), Perceiving, acting and knowing.
Hillsdale, JN: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Gibson, J. J. (1979). The Ecological Approach to Visual
Perception. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
Godfrey-Smith, P. (1998). Complexity and the Function of
Mind in Nature. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the Wild. Cambridge, MA:
The MIT Press.
Lahti, D. C., & Weinstein, B. S. (2005). The better angels
of our nature: group stability and the evolution of moral
tension. Evolution and Human Behavior, 2, 47–63.
Laland, K. N., Odling-Smee, F. J., & Feldman, M. W.
(2000). Niche construction, biological evolution and cultural change. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 23(1), 131–
175.
Laland, K. N., Odling-Smee, F. J., & Feldman, M. W. (2001).

959

