UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Effect of Discourse Context on Online Sentence Processing

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6zf4d2gc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Burmester, Juliane
Wartenburger, Isabell
Spalek, Katharina

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Effect of Discourse Context on Online Sentence Processing
Juliane Burmester (juliane.burmester@uni-potsdam.de)
Isabell Wartenburger (isabell.wartenburger@uni-potsdam.de)
University of Potsdam, Department of Linguistics, Center of Excellence Cognitive Science,
Karl-Liebknecht-Str. 24-25, 14476 Potsdam, Germany

Katharina Spalek (katharina.spalek@staff.hu-berlin.de)
Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Department of German Language and Linguistics,
Dorotheenstr. 24, 10117 Berlin, Germany

initial (i.e., prefield) for German main clauses (Büring,
1999; Rosengren, 1993).
German is a language with relatively flexible word order
because morphological features such as case marking allow
the reordering of constituents without changing the
grammatical function of the constituents. 1 Therefore,
German is ideal to study the effect of information structure
on word order. In German, subject-before-object (SO) is the
canonical word order which is preferred to object-beforesubject (OS) sentences (e.g., Gorrell, 2000). If presented
without a felicitous discourse context, OS sentences lead to
lower acceptability ratings and longer latencies in reading
(e.g., Meng, Bader & Bayer, 1999) compared to SO
sentences. It has been pointed out that the processing of OS
sentences might require contextual licensing (e.g.,
Bornkessel & Schlesewsky, 2006; Höhle, 1982; Hörnig,
Weskott, Kliegl & Fanselow, 2006). Specific contextual
information (e.g., object given in prior discourse or object in
contrastive whole-part relation to a referent in the context)
has been found to improve acceptability ratings and shorten
reading times of OS sentences (Meng et al., 1999; Weskott,
Hörnig & Fanselow, 2009).
However, acceptability ratings and reading times do not
tell us which underlying mechanisms of information
structure help to optimize information transfer. Eventrelated potentials (ERPs) are a promising tool to shed more
light on the effect of context on sentence processing (e.g.,
Van Berkum, 2008). For instance, a context-induced N400
effect for inferable vs. given referential expressions across
different sentence positions was attributed to discourselinking processes (Schumacher & Hung, 2012). A late
positivity was associated with processing costs induced by
updating the current discourse model and the integration of
a new referent into discourse (e.g., Burkhart, 2007;
Schumacher & Hung, 2012).
Although many studies tested the online processing of OS
sentences in isolation and indicated higher processing
difficulty compared to SO (Matzke, Mai, Nager, Rüsseler &

Abstract
Information structure describes how the information is packaged
within a discourse to optimize information transfer. We addressed
the question if and how a discourse context modulates the online
processing of German declaratives. Native speakers of German
read fictitious stories that depicted a simple action scene of two
characters while we recorded event-related brain potentials (ERPs).
Two types of discourse contexts (topic vs. neutral) were compared
with regard to the processing of declarative canonical subjectbefore-object (SO) and non-canonical object-before-subject (OS)
sentences. The preceding topic context only modulated the
processing of OS sentences. This was indicated by a less
pronounced positivity around 500 to 900 ms for the topic
compared to the neutral context. As supported by previous research
we argue that this context-induced effect in the processing of noncanonical sentences reflects reduced processing costs for the
integration of the discourse relevant topic information into the
current discourse model.
Keywords: information structure; discourse context
integration; topic; sentence processing; word order variation;
ERP; P600

Introduction
In our everyday-life communicative utterances are typically
linked to the discourse environment of the interlocutors.
Previous evidence suggests that contextual information
(e.g., from prior discourse) plays a crucial role in sentence
comprehension. Information structure is concerned with the
question how the information is structured and packaged
within a discourse to optimize information transfer (e.g.,
Chafe, 1976). If and to which degree information structure
interacts with syntax and other linguistic domains is still
under debate (e.g., Büring, 2007; Fanselow & Lenertová,
2011)
Information structure research in the domain of syntax
(and in particular word order) addressed the question how
word order variation might be affected by information
structural concepts such as topic-comment, focusbackground, or the given-new distinction (Lambrecht, 1994;
Rizzi, 1997). Topic (also aboutness topic) refers to the entity
the sentence is about (Gundel, 1988; Reinhart, 1981).
Mostly topics are introduced by the previous discourse (e.g.,
Skopeteas et al., 2006). It has been proposed that topics,
independent of their grammatical function, are preferably
placed in a specific syntactic position which is sentence-

1
The subject is marked by nominative case whereas the object is
marked by accusative case at the determiner and noun,
respectively. For masculine but not for feminine nouns, the subject
and object status can be unambiguously differentiated via case
marking (e.g., der Uhu/the[NOM] owl[NOM] (subject) vs. den
Uhu/the[ACC] owl[ACC] (object)).

251

Münte, 2002; Rösler, Pechmann, Streb, Röder &
Hennighausen,
1998),
previous
behavioral
and
neurophysiological research has shown that contextual
information (e.g., focus, givenness) is of central relevance
for the processing of canonical and non-canonical sentences
(e.g., Bornkessel, Schlesewsky & Friederici, 2003;
Schumacher & Hung, 2012). However, it remains unclear if
a topic introduced by the discourse context reveals an
immediate processing advantage at the sentence-initial
position of OS sentences.
The present ERP experiment aims to characterize the
differential effect of a preceding topic context on the
processing of German declaratives. We compare if and how
a preceding topic context which assigns topic status to one
of two characters of a scene modulates the processing of the
following topic-first OS or SO sentence. The effect of the
topic context is compared to a neutral context which induces
a wide scope on the scene and serves as a baseline. Based on
previous research we expect that the processing of the
canonical SO sentences is not modulated by the preceding
context information. Instead, for the non-canonical OS
sentences we predict a processing advantage if they are
preceded by a topic context as compared to a neutral context
such that the topic status of the sentence-initial object leads
to a less effortful linking and integration of information into
the current discourse model. This type of processing
advantage might be reflected in a reduced P600 component
(e.g., Burkhart, 2007).

(`What about the owl?`). The context question was followed
by the target sentence (3) in SO or OS order revealing the
answer to the context question.
Participants were presented with 80 SO and 80 OS target
sentences that were either preceded by a neutral context or a
topic context (i.e., 40 trials per condition). The different
scenes for the 160 trials were created by combining two of
the 40 nouns (animals, monomorphemic, masculine,
1-syllabic (n = 18) to 2-syllabic (n = 22)) with one of 10
action verbs (monomorphemic, transitive, 2-syllabic) with
its corresponding instrument. The nouns and verbs were
controlled for written lemma frequency, type frequency and
normalized log10 familiarity values (dlex database: Heister
et al., 2011). To avoid lexical-semantic effects of certain
nouns in the first and second noun phrase position of the
target sentence, each noun occurred once in each of the four
conditions at both sentence positions, respectively. Thus
each animal served four times as the agent and four times as
the patient of the target sentence, respectively, always with a
different action. For the lead-in context the first and second
mention of the potential agent and patient of the action was
counterbalanced across conditions. All animal pairs in the
trials always differed in the initial phonemes. The 160 trials
were pseudo-randomized such that maximal two
consecutive trials were of the same condition or had the
same word order in the target sentence to minimize possible
effects of structural priming (e.g., Scheepers & Crocker,
2004). To avoid any preferences of thematic role or topic
assignment due to the previous trial at least five trials
separated the repetition of an animal and at least two trials
the repetition of an action.

Methods and Material
Participants
Twenty-one native speakers of German participated in the
present ERP experiment. All participants were right-handed
according to the Edinburgh Handedness Inventory (Oldfield,
1971). None of them reported any neurological disorder. All
had normal or corrected-to-normal vision. The participants
were reimbursed or received course credits for participation.
Due to a low behavioral accuracy (< 60 % correct) in the
sentence-picture-verification task (see Procedure) the data
of two participants were excluded from further analysis.
Thus the ERP analysis is based on 19 participants (11
female, mean age 25 years, age range 19-30 years).

Procedure
Each participant was seated in a sound-attenuated cabin
90 cm in front of a computer screen and a button box
(Cedrus response pad model RB-830). The trials were
presented visually in the center of the screen by means of
the software Presentation (www.neurobs.com). Each trial
began with the presentation of a red asterisk for 1000 ms to
indicate the beginning of a new scene. Before and after the
lead-in context a blank screen was displayed for 200 ms.
Lead-in-context and context question were presented as a
whole in a self-paced reading manner with a minimum
reading time of 3350 ms and 1400 ms, respectively. The
participant had to press a button with the left thumb for
further reading. The context question was followed by a
fixation cross for 500 ms in the center of the screen. Then
the target sentence was presented phrase-wise with 500 ms
for each determiner phrase (DP) and prepositional phrase
(PP) and 450 ms for the verb with an ISI of 100 ms (as used
in previous studies, e.g., Bornkessel et al., 2003).
In 20 % of the trials a sentence-picture-verification task
followed the target sentence. The pictures depicted the scene
of the preceding target sentence with correct or exchanged
thematic roles (the owl painting the hedgehog vs. the
hedgehog painting the owl). For each of the four conditions
there was the same number of matching/mismatching

Material
Each trial consisted of a description of a fictitious scene
with two animals. Each animal was both a plausible agent
and a plausible patient of the depicted action. Each trial
comprised three parts starting with a lead-in context (1) in
which both animals were introduced plus the instrument of
the action that is going to be performed (see (1) in Table 1
for an example). Thus both referents were discourse-given
in terms of information structure (Prince, 1981). The action
was inferable from the instrument mentioned. The lead-in
context was followed by one of two context types presented
in form of a context question (2) that was either neutral
indicating a wide scope on the scene (`What exactly is going
on?`) or assigned topic status to one of the two animals

252

Table 1: Example of experimental trial for each condition (vertical bars in target sentence indicate phrase-wise presentation,
Abb.: NOM = nominative case, ACC = accusative case, S = subject, V = verb, O = object, PP = prepositional phrase, SO =
subject-before-object, OS = object-before-subject).
(1) Lead-in context
Der Uhu und der
Igel haben eine
Staffelei im Park
aufgebaut.
`The owl and the
hedgehog have set
up an easel in the
park.`

(2) Context question
Was ist denn genau los?
`What exactly is going on?
Was ist mit dem Uhu?
`What about the owl?`
Was ist denn genau los?
`What exactly is going on?`
Was ist mit dem Uhu?
`What about the owl?`

(3) Target sentence
Der Uhu | malt | den Igel | im Park.
[the[NOM] owl[NOM]]S [paints]V [the[ACC]
hedgehog[ACC]]O [in the park]PP.
`The owl paints the hedgehog in the
park.`
Den Uhu | malt | der Igel | im Park.
[the[ACC] owl[ACC]]O [paints]V [the[NOM]
hedgehog[NOM]]S [in the park]PP.
`In the park the owl is painted by the
hedgehog.`

probes. The picture was presented for two seconds before
the participant had to press the corresponding button for
match (yes) or mismatch (no) within a time window of two
seconds.
Participants were instructed to read each scene attentively
and silently and to answer the sentence-picture-verification
task after some of the scenes as accurately and fast as
possible. The assignment of the response buttons to the right
fore and middle finger was counterbalanced across
participants. Participants were asked to avoid any
movements during the time of sentence reading. To become
familiar with the procedure participants performed three
practice trials. The whole experiment included pauses after
each 40 trials and lasted approximately 30 minutes.

Condition
NEUTRAL-SO
TOPIC-SO
NEUTRAL-OS
TOPIC-OS

& Donchin (1983) was used. Baseline correction was
applied for 200 ms before the onset of the target sentence.
Time locked to the onset of the target sentence, mean
amplitude values of the ERPs per condition were analyzed
within three time windows (100-300 ms, 300-500 ms and
500-900 ms) based on visual inspection and according to the
current literature on language related ERP components (i.e.,
N400, P600). The following regions of interest (ROIs) were
analyzed via mean amplitudes of the three appropriate
electrodes: left anterior (F5, F3, FC3), left central (C5, C3,
CP5), left posterior (P3, P7, PO3), right anterior (F6, F4,
FC4), right central (C6, C4, CP6), right posterior (P4, P8,
PO4), anterior midline (FPz, AFz, Fz), central midline (FCz,
Cz, CPz), posterior midline (Pz, POz, Oz). For statistical
ERP analysis a repeated measures ANOVA was applied for
the three within-subject factors WORD ORDER (SO, OS),
CONTEXT TYPE (TOPIC, NEUTRAL) and ROI (nine
levels) using SPSS Statistics (version 21). The correction
according to Greenhouse and Geisser (1959) was applied.
We report the corrected F- and p-values but the original
degrees of freedom. Only significant main effects and
interactions (p < .05) including the factors CONTEXT
TYPE and/or WORD ORDER are reported and resolved by
using paired T-Tests. Note that we only compare context
effects on the very same sentence structures, that is, we
compare SO with SO sentences and OS with OS sentences,
depending on their preceding CONTEXT TYPE (TOPIC vs.
NEUTRAL).

EEG Recording
EEG was recorded by means of a 32 channel active
electrode system (Brain Products, Gilching) with a sampling
rate of 1000 Hz. The electrode configuration included the
following 29 scalp sites according to the international 10-20
system: F7/8, F5/6, F3/4, FC3/4, C5/6, C3/4, CP5/6, P3/4,
P7/8, PO3/4, FPz, AFz, Fz, FCz, Cz, CPz, Pz, POz, Oz. To
detect blinks and vertical eye movements an electrooculogram was monitored by one electrode under and one
electrode above the right eye. The left mastoid served as the
reference electrode but the recording was re-referenced to
bilateral mastoids offline. The ground electrode was placed
at FP1. Impedance was kept below 5 kOhm.

Results

ERP data analysis
The raw data were filtered by applying the Butterworth zero
phase filter with a 0.3 Hz low cutoff and 70 Hz high cutoff
(slope: 12 dB/oct) and a Notch Filter of 50 Hz. An
automatic artifact rejection was applied to reject blinks and
drifts in the time window of -200 to 1700 ms before and
after the onset of the target sentence (rejection criteria: max.
voltage step of 30 µV/ms, max. 200 µV difference of values
in interval). On average 5.43 % of the trials per condition
had to be excluded from the analysis. The rejections were
equally distributed across the conditions. For the correction
of vertical eye movements the algorithm by Gratton, Coles

Figure 1 displays the grand average ERPs for the factor
CONTEXT TYPE (TOPIC vs. NEUTRAL) at the onset of
the SO and OS target sentences. The statistical analysis of
the ERPs in three different time windows revealed the
following results:

Time window 100-300 ms
Statistical analysis in the time window 100 to 300 ms after
onset of the target sentence revealed a statistically
significant
main
effect
of
CONTEXT
TYPE

253

[F(1, 18) = 5.29, p < .05] reflected by less positive going
ERP amplitudes following the topic context relative to the
neutral context (see Figure 1, panel A and B).

pronounced positivity in case of the preceding TOPIC
context compared to the NEUTRAL context. SO sentences
did not reveal a statistically significant difference depending
on the CONTEXT TYPE in any of the nine ROIs.

Time window 300-500 ms
Summary of ERP results

The ANOVA in the time window of 300 to 500 ms after the
onset of the target sentence neither revealed statistically
significant main effects nor interactions.

The statistical analysis showed that the factor CONTEXT
TYPE significantly interacted with WORD ORDER. In the
late time window (500 to 900 ms) the preceding context
affected the processing of otherwise identical OS sentences:
The topic context lead to a less pronounced positivity as
compared to the neutral context. For SO sentences no such
difference was induced by the preceding context. Besides,
the analysis revealed a main effect of the preceding
CONTEXT TYPE in the early time window (100 to 300 ms
after target sentence onset) such that the topic context
induced a reduced positivity compared to the neutral
context.

Discussion
The present ERP experiment addressed the question if and
how a preceding topic context modulates the online
processing of German declaratives. In line with previous
research the preceding topic context did not affect the
processing of SO sentences because SO is the canonical
word order in German sentences. Importantly, for the
processing of OS sentences we found an impact of the topic
context reflected in a reduced late positivity (500 to 900 ms)
in comparison to a neutral context.
Besides the late positivity, the early positivity (100 to
300 ms) was modulated by the context type independent of
the word order of the target sentence: Sentences following
the topic context showed a reduced positivity compared to
the neutral context. Note that in the topic context condition
the sentence-final noun of the context sentence is repeated in
the sentence-initial position of the target sentence, whereas
no such repetition occurred in the neutral context condition.
As rather early ERP components have commonly been
linked to basic visual processes (e.g., Dunn, Dunn, Languis
& Andrews, 1998), the reduced P2-like response in our study
might be attributable to a pure word repetition effect (e.g.,
Van Petten, Kutas, Kluender, Mitchiner & McIsaac, 1991).
Although recent findings report modulations of an early
positivity by contextual information in terms of the
integration of semantic information (e.g., Federmeier &
Kutas, 2001; Lee, Liu & Tsai, 2012) or the integration of
discourse relevant information comparing a focus vs. neutral
context (Bornkessel et al., 2003) such an interpretation of
the early positivity in our study is not eligible due to the
chosen experimental design.
As expected, the late positivity in the time window of 500
to 900 ms (P600) was reduced only for OS sentences
following the topic context relative to the neutral context. In
line with recent data this reduced P600 might indicate lower
processing efforts for updating the current discourse model
(e.g., Burkhart, 2007; Schumacher & Hung, 2012) or
structural re-analysis (as suggested for instance by the

Figure 1: Grand average ERPs of electrode FC4 as an
example from the right anterior ROI time-locked to the
onset of the target sentences showing the effect of
CONTEXT TYPE (TOPIC vs. NEUTRAL) for SO and OS
sentences. For presentation purposes the displayed
ERP-plots are 7 Hz low-pass filtered. Negativity is plotted
upwards.

Time window 500-900 ms
In the late time window of 500 to 900 ms after the onset of
the target sentence the ANOVA revealed a statistically
significant interaction of WORD ORDER x ROI
[F(8, 144) = 4.09, p ≤ .01], WORD ORDER x CONTEXT
TYPE [F(1, 18) = 4.84, p < .05] as well as of WORD
ORDER x CONTEXT TYPE x ROI [F(8, 144) = 4.29,
p ≤ .01]. Follow-up analysis of the three-way interaction
reached significance for OS sentences in the right anterior
ROI [t(18) = -2.20, p = < .05]: OS sentences revealed a less

254

neurocognitive model of sentence processing by Friederici
(2002)). Thus, the chosen topic context elicited a processing
advantage for the non-canonical OS sentences such that the
integration of the sentence-initial object was facilitated
compared to the neutral context in which a wide scope on
the scene with the discourse-given referents and action was
induced.
Our interpretation of the reduced P600 in OS sentences as
reflecting lower processing efforts for the sentence-initial
topic compared to a preceding neutral context is in line with
the results of a follow-up study using the same experimental
material and design as in the ERP experiment combined
with a categorical judgment task on the comprehensibility of
each story instead of the sentence-picture-verification task.
Across 28 participants the mean percentage of stories judged
as easily comprehensible was 90.71 % for the condition
NEUTRAL-SO, 88.93 % for TOPIC-SO, 34.82 % for
NEUTRAL-OS and 51.79 % for TOPIC-OS. Statistical
analysis using a linear mixed effects model revealed a
significant main effect of CONTEXT TYPE (z = 3.13,
p < .01) and WORD ORDER (z = -7.41, p <. 001) and a
significant CONTEXT TYPE x WORD ORDER interaction
(z = -2.53, p < .01). Post-hoc comparisons showed that
stories containing OS target sentences were significantly
more likely to be judged as easily comprehensible if
presented together with the topic context (z = 3.22, p < .01),
whereas the context type did not affect the
comprehensibility of the canonical SO sentences (z = 0.40,
p > .05).
Notably, other than expected we did not see a modulation
of the N400 component in our data, neither in SO nor in OS
sentences (see e.g., Schumacher & Hung, 2012). Moreover,
the effect of canonicity which was reported in form of a
negativity at around 400 ms for OS vs. SO sentences in
some (e.g., Matzke et al., 2002) but not in other studies (e.g.,
Frisch, Schlesewsky, Saddy & Alpermann, 2002) was not
present in our experiment. This might be due to the rather
simple sentences used or due to the fact that 50 % of the
presented sentences were OS sentences, so the initial
preference for SO might have been “overwritten” by our
experimental design.
In summary, our findings suggest that the topic assigning
contextual information used in the present experiment
seemed to play a crucial role just in the processing of noncanonical OS sentences. The processing of OS sentences
was modulated in terms of lower processing costs for the
integration of discourse relevant information induced by the
preceding topic context relative to a preceding neutral
context. For the processing of canonical SO sentences that
have been known to be felicitous in the absence of a
supportive context no impact of the preceding discourse
context was found. Hence our data indicate that the online
processing of a sentence-initial object is enhanced by a topic
assigning contextual discourse through an easier integration
of discourse relevant information into the current discourse
model.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the German Research
Foundation (DFG) as part of the Collaborative Research
Center SFB 632 “Information structure”. IW is supported by
the Stifterverband für die Deutsche Wissenschaft (ClaussenSimon-Stiftung). We thank Jan Ries and Franziska Machens
for assistance in data acquisition and analysis.

References
Bornkessel, I., & Schlesewsky, M. (2006). The role of
contrast on local licensing of scrambling in German:
Evidence from online comprehension. Journal of
Germanic Linguistics, 18(1), 1-43.
Bornkessel, I., Schlesewsky, M., & Friederici, A. D. (2003).
Contextual information modulates initial processes of
syntactic integration: The role of inter- vs. intra-sentential
predictions. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 29, 871-882.
Burkhart, P. (2007). The P600 reflects cost of new
information in discourse memory. Neuroreport, 18, 18511854.
Büring, D. (1999). Topic. In P. Bosch & R. van der Sandt
(Eds.), Focus: Linguistic, cognitive and computational
perspectives. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Büring, D. (2007). Semantics, intonation and information
structure. In G. Ramchand & C. Reiss (Eds.), The Oxford
Handbook of Linguistic Interfaces, Oxford: University
Press.
Chafe, W. L. (1976). Givenness, contrastiveness,
definiteness, subjects, topics and point of view. In
Charles, N. L. (Eds.), Subject and topic. Academic Press,
New York.
Dunn, B. R., Dunn, D. A., Languis, M., & Andrews, D.
(1998). The relation of ERP components to complex
memory processing. Brain and Cognition, 36(3), 355-376.
Fanselow, G., & Lenertová, D. (2011). Left peripheral
focus: Mismatch between syntax and information
structure. Natural Language & Linguistic Theory, 29(1),
169-209.
Federmeier, K. D., & Kutas, M. (2001). Meaning and
modality: Influences of context, semantic memory
prganization, and perceptual predictability on picture
processing. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 27(1), 202-224.
Friederici, A. D. (2002). Towards a neural basis of auditory
sentence processing. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 6(2),
78-84.
Frisch, S., Schlesewsky, M., Saddy, D., & Alpermann, A.
(2002). The P600 as an indicator of syntactic ambiguity.
Cognition, 85(3), B83-92.
Gorrell., P. (2000). The subject-before-object-preference in
German clauses. In B. Hemforth & L. Konieczny (Eds.),
German sentence processing. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Gratton, G., Coles, M. G. H., & Donchin, E. (1983). A new
method for the off-line removal of ocular artefact.
Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology,
55(4), 468–484.

255

Greenhouse, S. W., & Geisser, S. (1959). On methods in the
analysis of profile data. Psychometrika, 24(2), 95-112.
Gundel, J. K. (1988). Universals of topic-comment
structure. In M. Hammond, E. Moravczik & J. R. Wirth
(Eds.), Studies in Syntactic Typology. Amsterdam:
Benjamins.
Heister, J., Würzner, K.-M., Bubenzer, J., Pohl, E.,
Hanneforth, T., Geyken, A., & Kliegl, R. (2011). dlexDB
– eine lexikalische Datenbank für die psychologische und
linguistische Forschung. Psychologische Rundschau,
62(1), 10-20.
Höhle, T. (1982). Explikation für 'normale Betonung' und
'normale Wortstellung'. In W. Abraham (Ed.), Satzglieder
im Deutschen. Tübingen: Gunter Narr.
Hörnig, R., Weskott, T., Kliegl, R., & Fanselow, G. (2006).
Word order variation in spatial descriptions with adverbs.
Memory & Cognition, 34(5), 1183-1192.
Lambrecht, K. (1994). Information structure and sentence
form. Topic, focus, and the mental representation of
discourse referents. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Lee, C.-Y., Liu, Y.-N., & Tsai, J.-L. (2012). The time course
of contextual effects on visual word recognition. Frontiers
in Psychology, 3, 1-13.
Matzke, M., Mai, H., Nager, W., Rüsseler, J., & Münte, T.
(2002). The costs of freedom: An ERP – study of noncanonical sentences. Clinical Neuophysiology, 113(6),
844-852.
Meng, M., Bader, M., & Bayer, J. (1999). Die Verarbeitung
von Subjekt-Objekt Ambiguitäten im Kontext. In I.
Wachsmuth & B. Jung (Eds.), Proceedings der 4.
Fachtagung der Gesellschaft für Kognitionswissenschaft,
(pp. 244–249). St. Augustin, Germany: Infix Verlag.
Prince, E. F. (1981). Toward a taxonomy of given/new
information. In P. Cole (Ed.), Radical Pragmatics. New
York: Academic Press.
Reinhart, T. (1981). Pragmatics and linguistics. An analysis
of sentence topics. Philosophica, 27, 53–94.
Rizzi, L. (1997). The fine structure of the left periphery. In
L. Haegeman (Ed.), Elements of Grammar: Handbook in
Generative Syntax. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic
Publishers.
Rosengren, I. (1993). Wahlfreiheit mit Konsequenzen –
Scrambling, Topikalisierung und FHG im Dienste der
Informationsstrukturierung.
In
M.
Reis
(Ed.),
Wortstellung und Informationsstruktur. Tübingen:
Niemeyer.
Rösler, F., Pechmann, T., Streb, J., Röder, B., &
Henninghausen, E. (1998). Parsing of sentences in a
language with varying word order: Word-by-word
variations of processing demands are revealed by eventrelated brain potentials. Journal of Memory and
Language, 38(2), 150-176.
Scheepers, C., & Crocker, M. W. (2004). Constituent order
priming from reading to listening: A visual-world study.
In M. Carreiras & C. Clifton (Eds.), The on-line study of

sentence comprehension: Eyetracking, ERP, and beyond.
New York: Psychology Press.
Schumacher, P. B., & Hung, Y.-C. (2012). Positional
influences on information packaging: Insights from
topological fields in German. Journal of Memory and
Language, 67(2), 295-310.
Skopeteas, S., Fiedler, I., Hellmuth, S., Schwarz, A., Stoel,
R., Fanselow, G., Féry, C., & Krifka, M. (2006).
Questionnaire on Information Structure (QUIS).
Interdisciplinary Studies on Information Structure 4.
Working Papers of the SFB 632. Potsdam: University of
Potsdam.
Van Berkum, J. J. A. (2008). The electrophysiology of
discourse and conversation. In M. Spivey, M. Joanisse &
K. McRae (Eds.), The Cambridge Handbook of
Psycholinguistics. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Van Petten, C., Kutas, M., Kluender, R., Mitchiner, M., &
McIsaac, H. (1991). Fractioning the word repetition effect
with event-related potentials. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 3(2), 131-150.
Weskott, T., Hörnig, R., & Fanselow, G. (2009). Strong
contextual licensing of German marked OVS word order.
In Proceedings of AMLaP, Barcelona, Spain, 2009.
University of Barcelona.

256

