UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The effect of expertise on encoding of movements and bodily indexes: a study on volleyball
players

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5pr109vk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Tessari, Alessia
Ottoboni, Giovanni
Nicoletti, Roberto

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The effect of expertise on encoding of movements and bodily indexes: a study on
volleyball players
Alessia Tessari (alessia.tessari@unibo.it)
Department of Psychology, University of Bologna,
viale Berti Pichat 5 – Bologna , Italy

Giovanni Ottoboni (giovanni.ottoboni@unibo.it)
Department of Psychology, University of Bologna,
viale Berti Pichat 5 – Bologna , Italy

Roberto Nicoletti (roberto. nicoletti@unibo.it)
Department of Communication Sciences, University of Bologna,
Via Azzo Gardino, 23 – Bologna , Italy

visual perception, as well as for the resulting motor
execution. These skills seem to be supported also by
differences in the activation of premotor and parietal
cortical areas (Calvo-Merino, Glaser, Grezes, Passingham &
Haggard, 2005; Calvo-Merino, Ehrenberg, Leung &
Haggard, 2010) and processes of mental simulation
involving the activation of the motor areas (e.g. the shot at
the basket in basketball players; Aglioti, Cesari, Romani &
Urgesi, 2008).

Abstract
The use of a particular attentional paradigm, the paradigm of
Sidedness (Ottoboni, Tessari, Cubelli & Umiltà, 2005) has
highlighted as professional volleyball players differ from nonplayers in the ability to encode specific spatial indexes. The
presentation of images of hands of potential adversaries
incorporates meanings related to sport that make volleyball
athletes sensitive to directional spatial characteristics
previously unobserved. What appears to be crucial in the
generation of such effect is the ability to predict the direction
of an action.
Keywords: action prediction, action directionality, body,
Sidedness, expertise, sport.

Introduction
The ability to anticipate events and actions is essential to
interact with the environment in a profitable way. For
example, anticipating the movement of the opponent is
required to prepare the most appropriate response to counter
it during many sport actions. Some behavioral studies have
revealed significant differences between athletes and nonexperts, in terms of processing capabilities for both visuolperceptual and motor skills. In ball games, for example,
experienced athletes are able to anticipate "where" and
"when" the ball will be thrown by the ability to extract the
essential information expressed by the movements of the
opponent before the ball begins its trajectory (Williams &
Grant, 1999; Aglioti, Cesari, Romani & Urgesi, 2008). It
was also shown that expert athletes are better than nonexperts or non-athletes in recognition and storage of
complex patterns of actions (Abernethy, 1990; Allard et al.,
1980; Starkes & Allard, 1983; Starkes, 1987). This
increased ability seems to be based on reading the observed
gesture’s kinematics: experienced athletes are able to
anticipate perceptual strategies because they have a wider
and consolidated visuo-motor repertoire (Savelsbergh et al.,
2002; Williams et al., 2002) acting as the basis for their

In general, expert athletes do not possess different structural
cognitive characteristics from those of non-experts: they are
only more skilled in selecting the most effective signal for
detecting a change in the position of the opponents among
those available (e.g. the trajectory of the ball or an attack
action). For example, it has been found that volleyball
players orient attention along the horizontal and vertical
axes in significantly different manners (Rizzolatti, Riggio,
Dascola & Umiltà, 1987). In the present study we
investigated whether professional volleyball players were
able to extract relevant information from the vision of
individual parts of the body. In particular, we tried to isolate
what directional indices athletes were able to process
automatically in response to the presentation of hands that
imply motion. We wanted to investigate if volleyball players
were able to process the intention to act transmitted by the
posture of the presented hands, given that it is an essential
information for the game (for example to predict the
direction of a possible spike action). Such processing
capabilities allow athletes to predict the actions of
opponents and to anticipate the motor behavior in order to
oppose them. The hypothesis is based on results from
studies on the perception of photographs of the body or
body-parts giving the impression of movement (eg. Kourtzi
& Kanwisher, 2000; Urgesi, Moro, Candidi, & Aglioti,
2006) . This processing ability would anticipate what the
final position is based on information we already have about
“already seen and experienced” movements (Freyd, 1983).

3522

Therefore, the posture of opponent’s hand might allow
volleyball athletes to predict the direction of the ball.
In the present work we used the paradigm of Sidedness,
commonly used to define precisely the spatial coding based
on the side of the body which the hand or foot is "connected
to" (Ottoboni et al., 2005; Tessari et al., 2012a). For
example, a left hand presented from the palm view with the
fingers oriented upward activates a right spatial code
because it is perceived and represented as the right hand of a
human body facing the observer. The same hand, but seen
from the back (Figure 1A left panel), actives instead a left
spatial code because it is represented to the left of a body
that turns its back to the observer (Figure 1B right panel).

A

B

C

Figure 1: Figure 1A illustrates the concept of Sidedness, that
is, the mode in which each hand is spatially coded in
relation to a body as a function of the posture. Figure 1B
shows the stimuli used in Experiment 1 and Figure 1C those
of Experiment 2.

Experiment 1
Using photographs of oriented hands, we aimed at testing if
volleyball players were able to process information on a
potential attack action by encoding the direction imprinted

to the ball. As anticipated, we suggested that every hand
presentation generates different spatial codes: one linked to
the Sidedness and one related to the direction of the action.
For example, a right palm hand, since it appears to act from
left to right (i.e. the ball would be crushed to the right),
should direct the attention of the observer to the right, thus
the spatial code of Sidedness would be the opposite one,
activating a left Sidedness code, in turn. In this way, if
players were able to process both codes, we could observe a
mutual cancellation. However, our prediction takes into
account also the posture of the hand (i.e. palm vs. back).
Back hands, that are not salient in the context of the game,
are not expected to induce processing of action direction,
but only an encoding of Sidedness. On the contrary, the
palm hands are assumed to be coded according to both
Sidedness and direction, with a consequent annulment of the
two opposite spatial codes.
Method
Participants Sixteen right-handed volleyball players
belonging to elite teams were tested (mean age= 22 years).
Apparatus and procedures The stimuli were photographs
of right and left hands in back and palm views with the
forearm (23° X 9° visible angle), rotated of 30° along their
ulnar axis as in Tessari et al. (2010a; 2012b). See Figure 1b.
A red or blue circle was superimposed in the middle of the
hand. The experiment was run using a Pentium III, 512 Mb,
connected to a 15” screen. The experiment was controlled
by E-Prime 1.1 (SP3) software (Psychology Software Tools
Inc.). The stimuli were 120 for both the back and palm
conditions and lasted on the screen for 100 ms, each. The
next stimulus appeared after participant’s response and no
longer than 1000 ms after. Participants were required to
respond according to the colour of the circle by pressing one
of two keyboard keys (”X” and ”.”), respectively on the left
and the right side. Feedbacks about reaction times (RT),
errors and omissions were given after each response (it lasts
for 1500 ms). The response conditions were
counterbalanced between subjects.
Results Participants whose error threshold was above 10%
and RTS 2 standard deviations higher or lower than the
overall participants’ mean for corresponding and noncorresponding pairings in each block were excluded from
the analyses. Data were submitted to a 2 x 2 ANOVA for
repeated measures with View (Back vs. Palm) and
Correspondence (Corresponding pairings vs. Noncorresponding pairings between hand laterality and response
hand) as the within-subjects factors. The two factors (View:
F(1,16)=60.03,
p<.001,
and
Correspondence:
F(1,16)=42.65,
p<.001)
and
their
interaction
(F(1,16)=33.48, p<.001) were significant. RTs for the palm
hands were faster than those for back hands (M=312 ms,
SE=4.22 vs. M=340 ms, SE=6.07), and corresponding
pairings were responded faster than the non-corresponding
ones (M=318ms, SE=4.61 ms vs. M=333 ms, SE=6.51).
When stimuli were presented from the back view, RTs were
faster for corresponding (M=325, SE=6.40) than for non-

3523

corresponding pairings (M=355, SE=9.01): two-tailed
t(15)= -8.34, p<.001. For the palm view no difference
emerged (t(15)=0.04, p>.05; non-corresponding pairings
M=312, SE=5.69, and corresponding pairings M=312,
SE=6.43). See figure 2a.
A

B

Experiment 2
It is known that a hand or a foot can be referred to an
appropriate body of reference only in the presence of
physiological link such as the forearm or the ankle, that
comply with the biomechanics laws of the human body
(Ottoboni et al., 2005; Tessari et al., 2010b). In the absence
of such links the Sidedness effect does not emerge.
Following this logic, we presented the same hands of
Experiment 1 without forearm to clarify whether the null
effect obtained with palm hands was given by the sum of
two opposite spatial codes (that generated by action
direction and the one of Sidedness). In this condition the
Sidedness effect should be deleted while the direction effect
should remain.
Participants Eight right-handed volleyball players
belonging to new elite team were tested (mean age = 25
years).
Apparatus and procedures Apparatus and procedure were
those of Experiment 1 but hands were presented without the
forearm (see Figure 1c).
Results The two factors (View: F (1,7)=0.06, p > .5, and
Correspondence: F (1,7) = 0.11, p > .5) were not significant
but their interaction was (F (1,7) = 13.04, p < 0.01). When
stimuli were presented from the back view, RTs did not
differ for corresponding (M=309 ms) and noncorresponding pairings (M=305 ms): t(7) = 1.24, p = .25.
For the palm view corresponding pairings were in trend
faster than the non-corresponding ones (M=304 ms vs.
M=311 ms): t(7) = -1.55, p = .08. See Figure 2.

Discussion
Using as stimuli photographs of hands without forearm
we got a pure effect of compatibility based on the direction
of the attack action for the palm hands. For example, a right
palm hand that directs attack action to the right induced a
faster response with the right hand. Any effect emerged for
the back hands without the forearm neither for Sidedness (as
in non-athletes; Ottoboni et al., 2005) nor for direction.
Therefore it seems that professional volleyball players are
able to encode the palm hands as hands potentially
performing a directed action while the back hands does not
allow (even to experienced athletes) to extract any relevant
information for the game.

Figure 2: The graph shows the values of the reaction
times in Experiment 1 (upper part) and Experiment 2 (lower
part).

Discussion
Compared to a previous study on non-athletes, where an
Sidedness effect emerged for both back and palm hands
(Tessari et al. 2010a; Tessari et al., 2012b), the effect
emerged only for the back hands in volleyball players. As
hypothesized, the palm hands were more informative and
relevant as confirmed by the significant effect of Posture
(faster responses to the palm), but also by the absence of
effect for the palm hands which seem to have been encoded
for both Sidedness and the direction of the potential action.
This way, the spatial codes were opposites and Summing
themselves resulted in a null effect. To confirm this
interpretation we conducted a second experiment where we
tried to rule out the Sidedness effect by hiding the forearm
in the stimuli.

Conclusion
The purpose of this research was to investigate the type of
information that the high-level volleyball players
extrapolate at the presentation of hands. These athletes were
chosen because the volleyball game requires an excellent
visual analysis of the spatial information transmitted from
the hands of the opponents: they must be able to recognize
in the shortest time potential attack actions, so as to
implement the best response behavior. We hypothesized that
hands slightly rotated were coded as hands in the process of
acting and that they would have activated at least two spatial
codes: one generated by the Sidedness (the spatial code

3524

referred to a body) and the other conveyed by the direction
of a potential spike action. Hands presented by palm and
with the forearm allowed a complete activation of the
opposite spatial codes (e.g. a right palm hand was coded as
on the left of a body following the Sidedness, but the attack
action drove attention to the right). However, back hands
have only activated a spatial code based on Sidedness. To
ensure that what was encoded was the direction of the
potential attack action, we decided to rule out the Sidedness
effect by presenting the same hands without the forearm.
Indeed, the forearm is necessary to link the hand to a
reference body and to generate the Sidedness effect
(Ottoboni et al., 2005). In this condition, we only found an
effect of directionality for the palm hands. Considering the
results that emerge from studies of athletes (eg Kourtessis,
Michalapoulou and Derrida, 1998; Nicoletti and Borghi,
2007, for a review) it seems that the athletics tasks requiring
motor anticipation and quick response are highly dependent
on the level of expertise. The extensive motor experience
seems to develop a resonance system specific for the actions
of a specific sport discipline, which allows to enhance both
the predictive and the anticipatory abilities on the basis of a
shared representation between the perceived actions and the
actions performed in the sensorimotor repertoire (Aglioti et
al., 2008). We can therefore assume that also the highly
experienced volleyball players are able not only to
effectively process bodily indexes but also the direction of a
potential expressed action in contrast with non-athletes that
are mainly focused on the normal relations between hand
and body (Tessari et al. 2010a). It will be interesting to
determine whether the described behavior was developed by
the athletes during their career or if, alternatively, this
capacity is a precondition that led the professional
volleyball players to success.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Adriano Estrerman for the data
collection, Carlo Calgaro for the networking and all the
sport coaches, Michele Zanin (Sysley - Treviso), Stefano
Pascucci (CMC Ravenna), Manuel Armaroli (Villadoro
Volley Modena). The authors also thanks CARISBO
foundation for the financial support (grant n. 2005/2445)

References
Abernethy, B. (1990). Expertise, visual search, and
information pick-up in squash. Perception, 19, 63–77.
Aglioti, S. M., Cesari, P., Romani, M., & Urgesi, C. (2008).
Action anticipation and motor resonance in elite
basketball players. Nature Neuroscience, 11, 1109–1116.
Allard, F., Graham, S. & Paarsalu, M.E. (1980). Perception
in sport: basketball. Journal of Sport and Exercise
Psychology, 2, 14–21.
Calvo-Merino, B., Ehrenberg, S., Leung, D. & Haggard, P.
(2010). Experts see it all: configural effects in action
observation. Psychological Research, 74, 400-406.

Calvo-Merino, B., Glaser, D. E., Grèzes, J., Passingham, R.
E., & Haggard, P. (2005). Action observation and
acquired motor skills: an FMRI study with expert dancers.
Cerebral cortex (New York, N.Y.: 1991), 15(8), 1243–
1249.
Freyd, J. J. (1983). The mental representation of movement
when static stimuli are viewed. Perception &
Psychophysics, 33, 575–581.
Kourtzi, Z., & Kanwisher, N. (2000). Activation in human
MT/MST by static images with implied motion. Journal
of Cognitive Neuroscience, 12, 48–55.
Nicoletti, R., & Borghi, A., (2007). Movimento e attività
sportive. Il controllo motorio, 10, 220-235.
Ottoboni, G., Tessari, A., Cubelli, R., & Umiltà, C. (2005).
Is Handedness Recognition Automatic? A Study Using a
Simon-Like Paradigm. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 31,
778–789.
Rizzolatti, G., Riggio, L., Dascola, I., & Umiltá, C. (1987).
Reorienting attention across the horizontal and vertical
meridians: evidence in favor of a premotor theory of
attention. Neuropsychologia, 25, 31–40.
Savelsbergh, G. J. P., Williams, A. M., Van der Kamp, J., &
Ward, P. (2002). Visual search, anticipation and expertise
in soccer goalkeepers. Journal of Sports Sciences, 20,
279–287.
Starkes, J.L. & Allard, F. Perception in volleyball: the
effects of competitive stress. Journal of Sport and
Exercise Psychology, 5, 189–196 (1983).
Starkes, J.L. Skill in field hockey: the nature of the
cognitive advantage. Journal of Sport and Exercise
Psychology, 9, 146–160 (1987).
Tessari, A., Ottoboni, G., Bazzarin, V., & Nicoletti, R.,
(2010a). L’effetto Sidednes e la codifica del movimento
implicito delle mani. Giornale Italiano di Psicologia, 37,
697-706.
Tessari, A., Ottoboni, G., Symes, E., & Cubelli, R. (2010b).
Hand processing depends on the implicit access to a
spatially and bio-mechanically organized structural
description of the body. Neuropsychologia, 48, 681–688.
Tessari A., Ottoboni G., Baroni G., Symes E., Nicoletti R.
(2012a). Is access to the body structural description
sensitive to a body part’s significance for action and
cognition? A study of the sidedness effect using feet.
Experimental Brain Reserach, 218, 515 – 525.
Tessari, A., Ottoboni, G., Mazzatenta, A., Merla, A., &
Nicoletti, R. (2012b). Please Don’t! The Automatic
Extrapolation of Dangerous Intentions. PLoS ONE, 7,
e49011. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0049011
Urgesi, C., Moro, V., Candidi, M., & Aglioti, S. M. (2006).
Mapping implied body actions in the human motor
system. The Journal of Neuroscience, 26, 7942–7949.
Williams, A.M. & Grant, A. (1999). Training perceptual
skill in sport. International Journal of Sport and Exercise
Psychology, 30, 194-220
Williams, A. M., Ward, P., Knowles, J. M., & Smeeton, N.
J. (2002). Anticipation skill in a real-world task:

3525

measurement, training, and transfer in tennis. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Applied, 8, 259–270.

3526

