UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The time-course of processing discourse connectives

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3ng7w640

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Köhne, Judith
Demberg, Vera

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The time-course of processing discourse connectives
Judith Köhne (judith.koehne@uni-bamberg.de)
Otto-Friedrich-Universität Bamberg
Markusplatz 3, 96045 Bamberg

Vera Demberg (vera@coli.uni-saarland.de)
Cluster of Excellence, Saarland University,
Campus C7.4, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany
Abstract

particular, our experiments aim to answer the following questions:

While there is some evidence that causal discourse relations are processed incrementally, the time-course of comprehending concessive discourse markers (e.g., nevertheless) has
hardly been investigated. Given that concessives are often defined as negative causals, there may be similarities between the
processing of concessives and negations (e.g., a delay).
This paper investigates the time-course of processing causal
versus concessive discourse markers in German within both
a visual-world experiment and a reading experiment. We
find that while concessive discourse markers can be processed
rapidly if the context is constraining enough, there is a delay
compared to causal contexts.
Keywords: Discourse connectives; prediction; concessives;
incrementality; eye-tracking; visual world

• Are causal and concessive connectives processed incrementally (possibly eliciting predictions), or with a delay?
• Do concessives elicit an active search for alternatives (as
has been shown for negation, Kaup et al., 2006)?
• Regarding global interpretation, are concessive discourse
relations integrated as smoothly as causal discourse relations or do they cause processing difficulties (resembling
negation; Carpenter & Just, 1975; Kaup et al., 2006)?

Background
The Time-Course of Processing Connectors

Processing Discourse Relations
A large number of experiments reveals that language comprehension is generally incremental and even predictive
(Marslen-Wilson, 1973; Tanenhaus & Trueswell, 1995).
However, there is also evidence that incoming information
across the sentence level does not always immediately update local predictions and affect global interpretation (Sanford & Garrod, 1998). It is therefore an interesting question
which information from the discourse the comprehender considers, and how strongly and fast it affects comprehension
and active predictions . One way to investigate this issue is
to focus on the time-course of discourse connectors. Experimental evidence suggests that discourse connectors such as
because, therefore, and however facilitate coherence building
and hence comprehension: Millis & Just (1994) found that
when sentences were connected by discourse markers (because and although), people were able to more successfully
answer comprehension questions and to more quickly read
the second sentence.
We however know much less about the time-course of processing discourse connectors. While some have argued that
people only integrate them at the end of a sentence (Millis
& Just, 1994), other experiments indicate that this integration
happens much earlier (Traxler et al., 1997).
The experiments described in this paper examine the timecourse of integrating causal connectors (e.g., therefore) versus concessive connectors (e.g., however). These are particularly interesting to compare, because concessives have sometimes be referred to as “negative causals” (König & Siemund,
2000). That means that the processing of concessives (compared to causals) may resemble the processing negation. In

Few studies have investigated the time-course of processing
causals and concessives. In short discourses of two clauses,
Millis & Just (1994) observed longer wrap-up times at the end
of the second clause when a (causal or concessive) discourse
connector was present, as compared to the same sentences
without a discourse connector. Millis and Just hypothesized
that a representation of the second clause was constructed
without taking into account the first clause, and only later integrated with the first clause.
Millis and Just’s “Connective Integration Model” of late
integration of discourse connectors and earlier parts of the
discourse was however refuted, at least for causal connectors.
Traxler, Bybee, & Pickering (1997), for instance, found evidence for an early integration of because and the preceding
discourse: When comparing processing of causal and diagnostic sentences, the greater difficulty in diagnostics occurred
well before the end of the second clause. This indicates that
processing of the second clause was affected early on by its
relation to the preceding context. Further evidence for incremental processing of causal discourse relations comes from
an ERP study without explicit connectives: Kuperberg et al.
(2011) found that causally-related sentences were easier to
process than sentences which were not standing in a causal
relationship, revealing that causal coherence can influence the
earliest stages of semantically processing incoming words.
These findings bring up a number of questions with respect
to the exact time-course of processing connectives. Specifically, it is an open question in how far, and how quickly, people generate predictions taking into account discourse connectives, and how concessive connectives might differ from
causals in this respect.

2760

An interesting theory regarding predictions elicited by
causal and concessive connectors comes from Murray (1995):
In a series of studies, he found a greater beneficiary effect
of the presence of contrastive and concessive (i.e., adversative) discourse connectors as opposed to causal and additive
connectors. Murray concludes that adversative connectives
create stronger expectations for the upcoming sentence than
causal or additive connectors (Murray, 1995, p. 120). Murray
does however not control for the ambiguity of discourse connectors, which means that his hypotheses may be taken with
a grain of salt. Moreover, his findings could alternatively be
accounted for by a causality-by-default account (Kuperberg
et al., 2011; Sanders, 2005): The cause for the low facilitation for causal connectors may be that similar expectations
are generated in the absence of any connector.

as the kind of negated information and the discourse context.
It is an interesting question how processing negative causals
may enrich this picture.

Experiment 1: Visual World Study
Methods
Participants We tested 36 participants, 4 of which had to
be excluded due to eye-tracking problems. Data of 32 participants (8 male, average age 26) was analyzed.
Design, Materials & Procedure We constructed 20 items,
each consisting of three spoken sentences in German, and a
static scene (see Example (1) and Figure 1).
(1)

Concessives as Negative Causals
To date, there is very little research on the time-course of processing concessives. An early study by Townsend (1983) reveals that concessives are processed more slowly than causals
and that recall is worse for concessives than for causals.
These findings may suggest an interesting relationship between causals and concessives. In fact, concessives are sometimes referred to as “negative causals” (König & Siemund,
2000). Experimental studies support that causals and concessives establish the same type of relation, but are different in
polarity (Louwerse, 2001; Sanders et al., 1992).
A delay of processing concessives on the one hand and
defining concessives as negative causals on the other hand
seems to be in line with a frequently supported theory of
negation processing: Many experiments point to an account
where there is a general delay in processing negation (e.g.,
Carpenter & Just, 1975).
Kaup et al. (2006), for instance, found in a self-paced reading study combined with a picture naming task that when processing contradictory predicates (e.g., The door is not open /
closed), ,
people are first mentally simulating the positive state (open
door) and only later the positive state is negated. That
means people only later searched for alternatives and mentally closed the door (see also Lüdtke et al., 2008). Ferguson
et al. (2008) examined the time-course of processing negation
in discourse using eye-tracking in reading and ERP. Interestingly, they also found that counterfactual negated discourse
information was not used incrementally but had a delayed effect on comprehension.
Other studies, on the contrary, reveal that a delay can be
attenuated or completely removed when the negation is expected or pragmatically licensed (Nieuwland & Kuperberg,
2008; Dale & Duran, 2011). Staab (2007), for instance, found
in a series of ERP studies that negation in discourse context
was processed fast. More than that, if readers were forced
to process slowly and deeply, negation was even used as a
cue to rapidly anticipate how the sentence continues. These
very different results suggest that the time-course of processing negation may be influenced by a number of factors such

Marc denkt über einen kleinen [Snack nach. Er
hat gerade Lust, etwas]topic [Süßes / Salziges zu
essen]category . [Daher / Dennoch holt er sich]connector
[aus der Küche]extended [die appetitliche / den
appetitlichen] pretarget [Waffel / Kuchen / Brezel /
Käse]target .
Marc fancies a [snack.
He feels like having
something]topic [sweet]category . [Therefore / Nevertheless, he gets]connector [from the kitchen]extended
[the[ f em]/[masc] delicious[ f em]/[masc] ] pretarget [waffle /
cake / pretzel / cheese]target .

Figure 1: Stimulus for visual world experiment.
The first sentence introduces a situation or topic, such as
food in Marc denkt über einen Snack nach. (“Marc fancies
a Snack”). The second sentence always identifies a category (e.g., sweet things), matching two of the depicted objects
(waffle and cake). Two other objects in the scene belong to
another category (the counter category, salty things: cheese
and pretzel). The third sentence begins either with a causal
(Daher/Dennoch) or a concessive (Deswegen/Trotzdem) connector (2-level within-participant factor), followed by subject
and verb (holt er sich, “he gets”; connector region). This
region precedes another phrase (aus der Küche, “from the
kitchen”; extended connector region), the gender-marked pretarget noun region (e.g., die appetitliche), and the target noun
(causal: Waffel, concessive: Brezel). Target nouns are always congruent with the preceding discourse. Visuals worlds
include the four objects belonging to the category and the
counter category and two distractor objects (here, cup and
wire whisk), embedded in a simple scene (here, kitchen ) .

2761

Category given in Sentence 2, gender of target noun, and condition (i.e., causal/concessive) were fully counterbalanced,
resulting in 8 lists. Every participant was assigned to one
of the lists and saw each of the 20 items in one version only.
40 filler discourse-scene pairs were included, following the
same general pattern but using a range of discourse relations
and markers (e.g., später, “later”), making the target noun
unpredictable. All items and half of the fillers were followed
by a comprehension question about the target noun but referring to it by its category rather than its name (Holt Marc sich
etwas Süßes?, “Does Marc get something sweet?”), which
participants answered by button press (YES/NO). Half of the
questions’ correct answer was “yes”, the other half “no”. Order of presentation was pseudo-randomized with at least one
filler in between two items. Participants were tested individually and their eye-movements were tracked. Their task was to
look and listen carefully enough to reply to the comprehension questions. The experiment lasted about 30 minutes.
Predictions When the category (e.g., sweet) is mentioned,
fast and incremental processing predicts participants to look
more often at the two objects matching this category (waffle
and cake) in both conditions.
For the third sentence, predictions for causal and concessive sentences differ: In the causal condition, people are predicted to keep looking at the category objects until the casemarked pretarget region. During the pretarget region then,
fast and incremental processing predicts more looks towards
the gender-congruent object, and finally, when the target is
mentioned, more looks to the target. In the concessive condition, however, hypothesizing that the concessive connector is
processed eagerly and incrementally predicts participants to
change from looking to the category objects to looking to the
two counter-category (salty) objects (pretzel and cheese), as
soon as the scope of the concessive connector is clear.
In particular, the scope could be inferred and a search for
alternatives could be initiated after the subject and verb following the connector (connector region). The hypothesis that
the concessive connector is processed fast and incrementally,
also predicts participants to start looking more frequently at
the final target object during the gender-marked pretarget region. A late integration account, or a simple lexical priming
account would not predict this pattern but that participants
keep looking at the category objects (sweet things) until they
hear the target word.

Data Analyses & Results
For eye-movement analyses, we compared inspections to the
four areas of interest (AOIs): target (e.g., waffle), category
competitor (sharing category with target, e.g., cake), gender
competitor (sharing gender with target, e.g. pretzel), and unrelated competitor (sharing neither category nor gender with
target, e.g., cheese). Four time regions were of interest: category region, connector region, extended connector region,
and pretarget region. Eye-movements were analyzed using
logistic regressions, entering the data into linear mixed effect

models with logit-link function (from the lme4 package in R;
Bates, 2005). AOI and Condition (causal/concessive) were
used as a Fixed Factors and Participant and Item as random
factors. Main effects were tested based on model comparison
using a χ test (Baayen et al., 2008). Random slopes for Participant and Item were evaluated based on model comparison
as well and included when they improved the model fit. For
contrasts between levels (AOIs), we report Wald-z values and
p-values as well as coefficients (β) and standard errors (SE).
Analyses reveal that in the category region, participants inspected the two objects matching this category (causal: target + category competitor; concessive: gender competitor
+ unrelated competitor) significantly more frequently than
the counter-category objects, independent of condition (effect
AOI: χ(1) = 49.26, p < .001; no effect condition: χ(1) = 1.99,
p = .16; no interaction: χ(1) = 1.88, p = .17). In the connector region, there was an effect of AOI (χ(1) = 7.78, p < .01),
no effect of condition (χ(1) = 0.26, p = .61), but, importantly, an interaction (χ(1) = 4.17, p < .05): In the causal
condition, the category objects were still looked at significantly more often than the counter-category objects (χ(1) =
11.38, p < .001); in the concessive condition, however, participants inspected the two counter-category objects just as
much as the category objects (χ(1) = 0.30, p = .58). As illustrated in Figure 2, this is due to them first looking more
at the category objects, but gradually starting to look more
at the counter category objects, as the scope of the concessive becomes clear. In the extended connector region then,
we find significantly more looks to the objects of the countercategory objects in the concessive condition (χ(1) = 15.19,
p < .001) as well as still significantly more looks to the category objects in the causal condition (χ(1) = 18.64, p < .001).
That means that looking at the target category (i.e., category
in causal and counter-category in concessives) was independent of condition in this region (effect of AOI: χ(1) = 33.65,
p < .001, no effect of condition: χ(1) = 0.76, p = .38, and no
interaction: χ(1) = 0.11, p = .74). This reveals that the concessive marker was immediately interpreted, and that people
engaged in an active search for alternatives. In the pretarget region (when shifted 200ms)1 , the target was looked at
more frequently than all other objects in both conditions (effect AOI: χ(3) = 20.42, p < .001, no effect condition: χ(1)
= 0.01, p = .92, no interaction: χ(3) = 0.87, p = .87; effect
AOI causal: χ(1) = 63.16, p < .001; effect AOI concessive:
χ(3) = 12.62, p < .01). In the causal condition, the differences to gender competitor (β = -1.11, SE = 0.19, z = −5.92,
p < .001) and unrelated competitor (β = -1.26, SE = 0.19,
z = −6.53, p < .001) are significant and the difference between target and category competitor is marginally significant
(β = -0.32, SE = 0.17, z = −1.87, p = .06).
In the concessive condition, the difference between target
and category competitor, on the contrary, fails to reach signif1 This is frequently done for short eye-tracking regions in visual
world studies because 200ms is known as the amount of time needed
to program an eye-movement.

2762

icance (β = -0.20, SE = 0.17, z = −1.18, p = .24), whereas
the target was looked at significantly more often than gender competitor (β = -10.89, SE = 0.18, z = −4.88, p < .001)
and unrelated competitor (β = -1.07, SE = 0.19, z = −5.65,
p < .001).
Accuracies and Reaction Times for comprehension questions were analyzed the same way as eye-movements, except
that we used linear regressions rather than logistic regressions
for response times. While response times did not differ across
conditions (χ(1) = 0.44, p = .51), accuracy was significantly
lower in the concessive condition (78%) than in the causal
condition (84%; χ(5) = 11.17, p < .05). More detailed analyses reveal that this difference was driven by the lower answer
accuracy for those questions in the concessive condition in
for which the correct answer was “yes”.

may mean that processing concessives is more difficult and
does not allow people to rapidly take gender marking into
account. The result that looks to the target category exceed
looks to the other objects later in the concessive condition
than the causal condition may reflect slower processing in the
concessive condition. However, since, in the causal condition, the objects belonging to the target category were already
looked at most before the connector region, the finding cannot
be clearly interpreted.
The finding that accuracy of question answering was worse
in the concessive than the causal condition (when the correct answer was “yes’) might suggest that processing in the
concessive condition was shallower, causing a late cognitive
burden for global interpretation. An alternative possibility is
that suppressing the category directly mentioned in the second sentence (e.g., sweet) in combination with having to categorize the target (e.g., pretzel - salty) might be difficult (as
in sweet... however... pretzel - ... something salty?)
Experiment 2 evaluates whether our finding that discourse
markers can be integrated rapidly, shaping predictions about
upcoming words, can be replicated in a reading experiment.

Experiment 2: Reading Study
Methods
Participants We tested 30 participants, 6 of which had to
be excluded due to eye-tracking problems. Data of 24 participants (5 male, average age 24) was analyzed.

Figure 2: Results for causal (top) and concessive (bottom)
conditions.

Design, Materials & Procedure Items for Experiment 2
consist of 24 three-sentences discourses, following a similar logic as the ones of Experiment 1. However, rather than
reducing the set of possible predictions by providing a picture, a more strongly constraining first sentence introducing
two scenarios is employed. The second sentence makes one
of these two options more salient. The third sentence begins with either a causal or a concessive marker, followed
by a region which determines the focus of the concessive,
a pretarget region which contains case-marking, and the target noun region (see Example 2). The target noun is not
used in the preceding context. Half of the sentences are
congruent (e.g., head and ears cold - therefore - hat), and
half incongruent (e.g., neck cold - however - scarf), resulting
in a 2(causal/concessive)x2(congruent/incongruent) withinparticipant design. All sentences are grammatically correct.
(2)

Discussion
These results clearly reveal that both causal and concessive
discourse markers were integrated rapidly into on-line comprehension and that processing the concessive led to a search
for alternatives.
In the causal condition, processing was rapid and stable
enough to combine with grammar information to predictively
identify the target referent. In the concessive condition, there
is a similar tendency but it did not reach significance. This

2763

Lotte braucht für den Winter noch Kleidungsstücke
um Kopf und Hals zu wärmen. An Kopf und Ohren
friert sie besonders. Daher / Dennoch guckt sie als
allererstes nach [einer schön warmen / einem schön
warmen] pretarget [Mütze/Schal, die/der nicht zu bunt
aussieht]target .
Lotte needs clothes to keep her head and neck warm
for the winter. Her head and ears feel particularly
cold. Therefore / However, she first of all looks for
[a nicely warm]gender−marked pretarget [hat / scarf that
does not look too colorful]target .

The 24 items were intermixed with 48 filler discourses,
which followed the same pattern as the items but using a
range of non-causal/concessive discourse markers (e.g., later,
in particular). All items and half of the fillers were followed by yes/no-comprehension questions, asking about the
target noun without referring to it by name (Schaut Lotte
als erstes nach einem Kleidungsstück für den Kopf?, “Does
Lotte first of all look for clothing for the head?”), answerable by button press. Half of the questions’ correct answer
was “yes”, the other half’s “no”. We created 8 lists, according to the numbers of versions per item: 2(salience second
sentence)x2(causal/concessive)x2(match/mismatch). Participants saw only one version of each item.
Discourses were presented on the center of the screen, divided into two parts: The first screen showed the first and
second sentence and the second screen contained the target
sentence. The question, if present, followed the discourse on
a third screen. Reading was self-paced, controlled by button
press. The order of presentation was pseudo-randomized with
at least one filler in between two items. Participants were
tested individually and their eyes were tracked. They were
asked to read carefully to be able to correctly answer comprehension questions. The experiment lasted approximately
30 minutes.
Predictions Given our results from the first experiment, we
hypothesized that people would be able to eagerly integrate
discourse context and the the discourse connector to predict
the target noun. This predicts a mismatch effect (as expressed
in longer reading times: first pass durations, regressions, and
total reading time) in the pretarget region when the grammatical gender of determiner and adjective does not match the
grammatical gender of the predicted target noun. This mismatch effect is moreover predicted to continue in the target
region.

Data Analyses, Results & Discussion
First pass durations, regression durations, and total reading
times in the pretarget (determiner and adjective) and target
(noun and final phrase) region were analyzed using linear regressions (see Experiment 1). Trials with track loss in more
than one of all regions (Sentence 1, Sentence 2, discourse
maker region, pretarget region, target region, question) and
with reading times smaller than 50 ms were excluded from
analyses.
For the causal condition, we found a consistent tendency
for people to read more slowly in mismatching than matching sentences in both the pretarget and the target regions in
all measures; none of these trends, however, reached significance. In the concessive condition, similar but weaker tendencies were found, but only for first pass reading times.
While this could mean that discourse information cannot be
integrated fast enough to give rise to prediction neither in
causals nor in concessives, we considered the possibility that
some of our items were not clear or constraining enough to
enable readers to anticipate the target noun.

To still get an idea about the indicated difference between
causal and non-causal contexts (i.e., using the causal condition as a baseline), we excluded those items for which no
mismatch effect was observable in total reading times in the
causal condition in the target region (i.e., when reading times
were not higher for mismatches than matches, not even any
time after the target noun was encountered). Based on the
remaining 19 items, we found significantly longer reading
times for mismatches in the pretarget region of causal sentences for all measurements (first pass χ(1) = 5.38, p < .05;
total time: χ(1) = 7.27, p < .01; regression: χ(1) = 4.99, p <
.05).
However, even for these 19 predictable discourses, when
the discourse relation was concessive, there was only a
marginal effect of mismatch for first pass durations in the pretarget region (χ(1) = 3.43, p = .06) but no further effects for
the pretarget region (total time: χ(1) = .02, p = .89; regression: χ(1) = 0.07, p = .80) and not even in the target region
(first pass χ(1) = 1.12, p = .29; total time: χ(1) = 0.02, p =
.88; regression: χ(1) = 0.15, p = .70).
For comprehension-question accuracy, there was no effect of condition (causal: 80%, concessive: 82%; χ(1) =
1.40, p = .24), a marginal effect of mismatch (χ(1) =
3.57, p = .06) and a significant interaction (χ(1) = 4.01, p <
.05): Accuracy was significantly higher for match than mismatch only for causals (χ(1) = 5.81, p < .05) but not for
concessives (χ(1) = 1.17, p = .68). For Reaction Times,
there was no effect of match (χ(1) = 0, p = 1) nor condition
(χ(1) = 0, p = 1), and no interaction (χ(1) = 0.38, p = .54).
Experiment 2 therefore indicates that, given that the discourse is really clear and constraining, in causally related sentences, readers are generally able to make predictions based
on quickly integrating discourse context. In other words, if
the target noun was predictable, then it was predicted rapidly
(i.e., in the pretarget region). Global interpretation, as well,
was influenced by the congruency of the discourse, as indicated by results from question answering accuracy. For concessives, on the contrary, there is no consistent evidence, that
either of this was the case.

General Discussion
While results from Experiments 1 and 2 are not fully in line
with one another, it is likely that prediction is easier with a
constraining visual scene which is co-present during the entire discourse than with a linguistic context which is only read
once and needs to be remembered and re-accessed. Moreover, while there was a prediction effect for concessives in the
extended connector region in Experiment 1, prediction was
also slower (or more slowly stable) in the concessive than the
causal condition (no significant effect in the concessive case
in the pretarget region). Possibly, processing concessives was
simply more slowly than processing causals in both experiments.
Another possible explanation however is that the scope of
the concessive is more ambiguous than the scope of causals

2764

References

in experimental items of Experiment 2:
causal Timmy wants to do A and B. A is more important.
Therefore .
concessive Timmy wants to do A and B. A is more important.
However .
In the causal case, the causal connector can only refer to the
previous sentence “A is important”, hence only A is a sensible
continuation. In the concessive case, the concessive marker
might take scope either over the second sentence, in which
case the prediction would be, as anticipated, However B. But,
it is also possible for the concessive to take scope over both
initial sentences, leading to a prediction However C, that is,
Tommy goes on to do something entirely different. In that
case, the space of possible predictions is wide open and cannot be expected to cause a gender mismatch effect.
For the visual world experiment, this difference in scope
between causals and concessives is not an issue as the visual scene is very explicit. An interesting aspect about the
hypothesis that concessive markers give rise to less specific
predictions than causal markers is that it stands in apparent
contrast to the hypothesis by Murray (1995) discussed earlier : Murray suggests that concessives are highly constraining while causal connectives are moderately constraining and
leave more open hypotheses. We believe that Murray’s and
our hypotheses are not necessarily contradictory, however:
While concessive markers may be less ambiguous with respect to the discourse relation they are marking (see also Asr
& Demberg, 2012a,b), they may at the same time be more
ambiguous with respect to the scope of their argument.
Results from Experiments 1 and 2 are generally in line with
studies revealing immediate interpretation of discourse markers (e.g., Traxler et al., 1997). However, our data also supports that negating a discourse relation (i.e., via adversative
markers) may cause a delay in processing, at least when a directly mentioned state of affairs needs to be rejected and its
opposite needs to be both mentally accessed and found (on a
scene or in memory). That means that concessive discourse
markers are a type of negation that can cause processing difficulties. Moreover, Experiment 1 supports that negation can
give rise to a search for alternatives (Kaup et al., 2006).

Conclusions
We investigated the time-course of processing marked causal
and concessive discourse relations within two experiments.
Results from a visual world experiment (Exp. 1) provide clear
evidence that, at least in this highly constraining scenario,
both causals and concessives can be processed incrementally
and give rise to predictions. Concessives, specifically, elicit
an active search for alternatives. A reading experiment (Exp.
2) confirms this finding for causals but not for concessives.
Results of both experiments indicate that concessives may be
more difficult to process than causals, causing a delay. In Experiment 2, difficulties with concessives may also be due to
ambiguity in scope.

Asr, F. T., & Demberg, V. (2012a). Implicitness of discourse relations. In Proceedings of coling. Mumbai, India.
Asr, F. T., & Demberg, V. (2012b). Measuring the strength of linguistic cues for discourse relations. In Proceedings of the workshop on advances in discourse analysis and its computational aspects (adaca). Mumbai, India.
Baayen, R., Davidson, D., & Bates, D. (2008). Mixed-effects modeling with crossed random effects for subjects and items. Journal
of Memory and Language, 59, 390–412.
Bates, D. (2005). Fitting linear mixed models in r. R News, 5,
27–30.
Carpenter, P., & Just, M. (1975). Sentence comprehension: A psycholinguistic processing model of verification. Psychological review, 82(1), 45.
Dale, R., & Duran, N. (2011). The cognitive dynamics of negated
sentence verification. Cognitive science, 35(5), 983–996.
Ferguson, H., Sanford, A., & Leuthold, H. (2008). Eye-movements
and erps reveal the time course of processing negation and remitting counterfactual worlds. Brain research, 1236, 113–125.
Kaup, B., Lüdtke, J., & Zwaan, R. (2006). Processing negated
sentences with contradictory predicates: Is a door that is not open
mentally closed? Journal of Pragmatics, 38(7), 1033–1050.
König, E., & Siemund, P. (2000). Causal and concessive clauses:
Formal and semantic relations. TOPICS IN ENGLISH LINGUISTICS, 33, 341–360.
Kuperberg, G., Paczynski, M., & Ditman, T. (2011). Establishing
causal coherence across sentences: An ERP study. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 23(5), 1230–1246.
Louwerse, M. (2001). An analytic and cognitive parametrization of
coherence relations. Cognitive Linguistics, 12(3), 291–316.
Lüdtke, J., Friedrich, C., De Filippis, M., & Kaup, B. (2008). Eventrelated potential correlates of negation in a sentence-picture verification paradigm. Journal of cognitive neuroscience, 20(8),
1355–1370.
Marslen-Wilson, W. (1973). Linguistic structure and speech shadowing at very short latencies. Nature, 244, 522–523.
Millis, K., & Just, M. (1994). The influence of connectives on sentence comprehension. Journal of Memory and Language; Journal
of Memory and Language.
Murray, J. (1995). Logical connectives and local coherence. Sources
of Coherence in Reading, 107–125.
Nieuwland, M., & Kuperberg, G. (2008). When the truth is not too
hard to handle an event-related potential study on the pragmatics
of negation. Psychological Science, 19(12), 1213–1218.
Sanders, T. (2005). Coherence, causality and cognitive complexity in discourse. In Proceedings/actes sem-05, first international
symposium on the exploration and modelling of meaning.
Sanders, T., Spooren, W., & Noordman, L. (1992). Toward a taxonomy of coherence relations. Discourse processes, 15(1), 1–35.
Sanford, A., & Garrod, S. (1998). Incrementality in discourse understanding. The construction of mental representations during
reading, 1.
Staab, J. (2007). Negation in context: Electrophysiological and behavioral investigations of negation effects in discourse processing. ProQuest.
Tanenhaus, M. K., & Trueswell, J. (1995). Sentence comprehension. In J. Miller & P. Eimas (Eds.), Handbook of perception and
cognition, vol 11: Speech, language, and communication (2nd
ed., pp. 217–262). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Townsend, D. (1983). Thematic processing in sentences and texts.
Cognition, 13(2), 223–261.
Traxler, M., Bybee, M., & Pickering, M. (1997). Influence of connectives on language comprehension: eye tracking evidence for
incremental interpretation. The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology: Section A, 50(3), 481–497.
Traxler, M., Sanford, A., Aked, J., & Moxey, L. (1997). Processing
causal and diagnostic statements in discourse. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 23(1).

2765

