UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The ‘universal’ structure of name grammars and the impact of social engineering on the
evolution of natural information systems

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0z899937

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Ramscar, Michael
Smith, Asha Halima
Dye, Melody
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The ‘universal’ structure of name grammars
And the impact of social engineering on the evolution of natural information systems
Michael Ramscar Asha Halima Smith Melody Dye Richard Futrell Peter Hendrix Harald Baayen Rebecca Starr
University of Tubingen, Stanford University, Indiana University, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Carnegie Mellon

Abstract

retrieval than for other knowledge (Yasuda, Nakamura &
Beckman, 2010); and the recall of names appears to be
disproportionately impaired in old age. Indeed, many older
adults consider deteriorating name memory to be the most
disturbing cognitive problem they face (Lovelace &
Twohig, 1990).
Here, we identify a common information structure in the
name grammars of the world’s languages, and reveal the
impact that regulating names for legal and political purposes
has had on their memorability as populations have grown in
the wake of industrialization: while some name systems
survive intact, legislation has had a detrimental effect on
many name grammars, dramatically undermining their
communicative efficiency.

Proper name systems provide individuals with personal
identifiers, and convey social and hereditary information. We
identify a common information structure in the name
grammars of the world’s languages, which makes this
complex information processing task manageable, and
evaluate the impact that the re-engineering of naming
practices for legal and political purposes has had on the
communicative and psychological properties of these socially
evolved systems. While East-Asian naming systems have
been largely unaffected by state legislation, legal interference
has transformed Western naming practices, making individual
names harder to process and remember. Further, the structural
collapse of Western naming systems has not affected all parts
of society equally: In the US, it has had a disproportionate
impact on those sections of society that are least successful in
economic and social terms. We consider the implications of
these changes for name memory across the lifespan, and for
future naming practices.

Why names are different—and difficult

Keywords: Names; Learning; Memory; Information Theory

What’s in a name?
Naming is unique to our species and central to our lives.
Names are the primary linguistic means by which we
discriminate individuals from their peers, and they are an
integral part of our identities. Names also play an important
social role: they carry hereditary information that helps
regulate marriage between relatives and the transference and
distribution of property, as well as fostering group identities
that bring cohesion to the conduct of social enterprises such
as agriculture, industry, statecraft, and war.
While names for individuals appear to be as old as
civilization itself, some functions of names are recent
developments (Scott, 1998). Henry VIII decreed that
English marital births be recorded under the surname of the
father in the 14th Century, but children could, and regularly
did adopt different surnames. Hereditary family names only
became universal in the UK with the establishment of Her
Majesty’s Register Office in 1836 (Matthews, 1967).
Naming conventions in the Netherlands were formalized by
statute in 1811 (Van Poppel, Bloothooft, Gerritzen &
Verduin, 1999); in Korea, naming practices were regulated
in 1812 (Nahm, 1988), the same year that a Prussian edict
granted citizenship to Jews in return for the adoption of
fixed patronyms (Scott, Tehranian & Mathias, 2002).
Despite their personal and social importance, names are
uniquely difficult to learn and remember (Cohen, & Burke,
1993; Valentine, Brennen & Bredart, 1996). Names produce
most naturally occurring tip of the tongue states (TOTs—
where one cannot produce a word one is sure one knows)
(Rastle & Burke, 1996; Griffin, 2010); patients with
cognitive impairments show greater decrements in name

While most nouns are generic—spoon, dog, idea—
personal names are sui generis: ideally, they uniquely
discriminate individuals from their peers. While this could
easily be achieved by giving each individual a unique label,
this approach would massively increase linguistic
complexity. By now, it would have generated a billion extra
English words. At points in speech where a name could
occur in this kind of a system, entropy—a formal,
information theoretic measure of uncertainty (Shannon,
1948)—would vastly exceed anything heretofore
encountered. Because entropy peaks accurately predict
difficulties in the production and comprehension of speech
(McDonald & Shillcock, 2001; Clark & Wasow, 1998), this
would cause far more processing problems than actual
English names, which are already far more taxing than other
vocabulary items.
Thus, while ‘one-name-per-person’ would eliminate
residual uncertainty about the identity of named individuals,
it would maximize processing demands in doing so.
Realistically, the psychological cost of such a system is too
high: Given the highly social, interconnected nature of
human life, and our finite information processing capacities,
one-name-per-person would prove unworkable as societies
developed beyond small groups. Unsurprisingly, no major
language has a naming system remotely close to it (Alford,
1987).

A “Universal” Grammar for Names
Although some fine-grained details differ, all the world’s
major languages have evolved the same solution to the
challenges names pose: instead of using unique labels,
individual identifiers are formed from hierarchically
structured naming tokens. Name grammars enable large sets
of identifiers to be constructed out of much smaller sets of

3245

naming words, assigning individuals relatively unique
identifiers, while avoiding the outrageous peaks in entropy
that would result from a one-name-per-person system.
Family Name
Least Uncertain
Baek

Clan / Generation Name
More Uncertain
Seung

Given Name
Most Uncertain
Ki

For example, in the traditional Sinosphere (Matisoff,
1990) naming system used in Chinese-speaking countries
and Korea (Kwang-Sook, 2003), names comprise 3
elements: 1) a small number of family names, 2) a clan or
generation name (Martin, 2006), and 3) a given name, fairly
specific to the individual. (Here, the first parts of physicist
Seung Baek Ki’s name mean, “a Baek from Suwon.” (Kiet,
Baek, Jeong & Kim, 2003)). Elements are distributed in
these sets in a highly efficient, Zipfian manner (Baek, Kiet
& Kim, 2007)2: there are only around 250 Korean family
names, three of which are common to around 50% of the
population (20% of all Koreans are called Kim). Because of
this, names act as efficient hierarchical decision trees: each
name element increases the degree to which an individual is
identified, while minimizing the entropy at the point each
element is encountered (Figure 1).
These distributions have been stable for centuries. As
Korea’s population grew post-industrialization (Zipf, 1965),
the peak entropy of Korean names barely changed. Name
grammars in Chinese-speaking countries have developed
along similar trajectories.
Baek

Figure 2. The hierarchical organization of modern English names.
The proportion of surnames to given names reflects the fact that
given names—which occur before surnames in English—
contribute less to individual identities than surnames. The
surnames depicted here represent over 95% of the US population
in the 2000 census, and the given names over 95% of social
security applications in the US in 2000.

(Small set of family names)

✘
Seung

Jeung

(Large set of generational names)

✘
Ki

Jun

Li

Wu

(Even larger set of given names)

Figure 1. Hierarchical branching minimizes entropy (which
quantifies the uncertainty produced when a number alternatives
that need to be processed at any point) as a Korean name unfolds
in time.

This efficient information structure is not unique to
Sinosphere names: it is common to the native name
grammars of all the world’s major languages. For instance,
traditionally, English names comprised a given name drawn
from a relatively small set, optional middle name(s), and an
identifier (in Modern English, a family name), drawn from a
large set of personal characteristics, topographic and
toponomic features, occupations and patronyms: e.g., John
the Farmer, or John White Head. English names rarely
contained a specific, unique identifier. Instead, individual
identities were the sum of a name’s parts: the 11th Century
English name in (3) means, “Adam, a farmer from
Ramscar” (Ramskir, 1973).
Given Name
Least Uncertain
Adam

Other Name
More Uncertain
Hegger

Identifier
Most Uncertain
de Romeskerre

What may be surprising from a modern perspective is that
the distributional pattern of names in modern Korea would
have been familiar to pre-industrial Europeans: In every 50year period from 1550 to 1799, around 50% of boys born in
England were named William, John or Thomas, and 50% of
girls Elizabeth, Mary or Anne (Smith-Bannister, 1997),
mirroring the distribution of Korean family names. Given
names in other Western and Northern European languages
were also distributed this way (Galbi, 2002; Lieberson &
Lynn, 2003; Bourin, 1994) even when patronymic
conventions were employed (Williams, 1961). Historically,
compact, stable Zipfian first name distributions were the
norm: prior to industrialization, one-in-five English girls
had the first name Mary, just as around one-in-five Korean
girls today has the first name Kim. What caused some
distributions to change, while others have remained as they
were?

The rise of nation states, and their impact on
Western name grammars
Ordinarily, nobody knows everybody. However, the
development of centralized states created entities that
actually did want to know everyone: for the purpose of
taxation, conscription, etc. To facilitate this, states regulated
names. In the Sinosphere, the burden of coding heredity fell
on the first (least diverse) name element. However, in other
parts of the world, the final, most diverse element was
targeted. In English, idiosyncratic features specific to
individuals – such as John the farmer, John with the white
head – became fixed hereditary markers, such that bakers
might be called Farmer, or redheads Whitehead. English
name grammar retained its hierarchical structure (Figure 2).
Consequently, as population growth accelerated in the 19th
and 20th centuries (Figure 3), two changes occurred:
1. A larger, more diverse set of first names began to be
used, increasing the peak signal entropy of names, making
them harder to process and recall.
2. More people shared last names, increasing the
likelihood of two people having the same name, increasing
residual entropy about the individual identified by a name.

3246

Both these changes had an impact on the efficiency of
English names.
In the UK in 1801, 3 male names accounted for 52% of
male births and 3 female names 53% of female births (the
traditional distribution). By 1994, this had dropped to 11%
and 9%, respectively. In both instances, the relationship to
population growth is strong: r2=.99 & .97. Similarly, while
in 1801, 85% of males and 82% of females received 1 of 10
names, by 1994, this had dropped to 28% and 24%; related
to population growth, r2=.99 and .97. In 1801, 22% of
males and 24% of females in the UK received the most
common first name for their sex; in 1994, it was 4% and 3%
(both r2=.98). Social Security card applications in the US
between 1900-1999 show the same patterns of change in
naming: a big decline in the number of babies being given
the most frequent names, and an increase in the diversity of
given names. (For all reported correlations, p<0.001)
*The sample for this survey was taken from the U.S. Social
Security Administration (http://www.ssa.gov/oact/babynames/).

American and British given names changed dramatically as
populations grew.

Measuring the Effects of Change: A Tale of Two
Congresses
Mainland China has experienced massive population
growth in the past two centuries, but its traditional
Sinosphere naming system has changed little as a result
(Yuan, 2002; Mountain, Wang, Du, Yuan, 1992). To
illustrate how the changes to the distribution of American
names have affected name efficiency, we compared two
similarly-sized, naturally-occurring samples of names from
each of these two countries: the Senators and
Representatives of the 112th United States Congress
(n=440), and the members of several subcommittees of the
National Committee of the Chinese People's Political
Consultative Conference (n=431).
*The samples for this survey were taken from the website of the
United States Congress (http://www.house.gov/representatives/)
and the website of the Chinese People's Political Consultative
Conference (http://www.cppcc.gov.cn/)

Figure 4. The information challenge posed by names as their
numbers grow. The y-axis plots perplexity, which describes the
entropy (x-axis) in a complex distribution in terms of a number of
equally likely alternatives. The perplexity of US names is more
than twice that of Chinese names in this sample.

Figure 3. The top panel illustrates the distribution by rank
frequency of Korean family names in 2000. The bottom panel
shows the change in the written frequencies of the 500 most
common US male names as the United States population grew in
the 19th and 20th Centuries (1810-1990). The greater similarity in
the distribution of Korean family names and American male names
at the beginning of the 19th Century is apparent, as is the change
thereafter.

An analysis of the 500 most common male names from
1810-1990 in the Corpus of Historical American English
(400,000,000 words) indicates that at the beginning of the
19th century, US given name distributions were similar to
Korean family names (Figure 3). While the distribution of
Korean family names remained stable, the distribution of

The total entropy of both samples is almost identical (US
Congress=8.78 bits; CPPCC=8.75 bits), because in each
case, no members share names; accordingly, there is no
residual entropy in either sample. There is, however, a
marked disparity in the way information is distributed in the
samples: the first elements in the CPPCC names contain
only 5.84 bits of information (in information processing
terms, this is equivalent to differentiating between around
60 equally likely name labels; Figure 4). By contrast, the
given (first) names of US Congress members contain 7.39
bits (equivalent to processing around 170 equally likely
labels). Both sets of names convey the same amount of
overall information, but this information is more evenly
distributed in Chinese names: US first name elements
impose far greater information processing demands than
their Chinese equivalents, and later US name elements are
far more redundant (full form analysis–treating Mike / Mick
as forms of Michael–reduced US name perplexity to 120,

3247

suggesting that Congressional names
memorable if nicknames were avoided).

would

more

Winners and Losers in the Decline of the US
Naming System
Although the efficiency of English names has declined in
the past 200 years, the effect of these changes has not been
felt in the same way across society. Traditionally, the
perplexity of US female names was slightly greater than
male names (Figure 5A), but the difference in perplexity
between male and female names was relatively constant.
However after 1950 this difference began to rise sharply
(Figure 5B), increasing the difference in the amount of
information that had to be processed in recalling, producing
and comprehending female names as compared to male
names.

constraints that have been imposed on Western naming
practices are distorting the intended effect of name choices.
Figure 6. Top: The proportion of men and women over age 16 in
the US workforce (male - female percentage) plotted against the
different perplexity of female and male names (female perplexity male perplexity) in the period 1950-1998 (data from the US
Bureau of Labor Statistics & US Social Security Administration).
Bottom: The increase in the US population at five-year intervals
from 1880-2010 and the increase in the number of male and female
names with a count ≥ 5 in US social security applications.

Nobody Knows My Name
Figure 5. Top: The perplexity of male and female names with a
count ≥ 5 in US social security applications at 5 year intervals from
1880 to 2010. Bottom: The difference in the perplexity of female
names as compared to male names (female perplexity - male
perplexity) across this period.

Given that the period since 1950 saw an increase in
economic and social equality between males and females in
the US (Fullerton, 1999), the close relationship (Figure 6A)
between the growth in the perplexity difference between
male and female names and the increasing percentage of
females in the workforce is surprising, as is the fact that
increases in the number of women working outside the
home have coincided with an exponential increase in the
degree to which female names are harder to process than
male names. Figure 6B offers one possible explanation for
this: the strong correlation between population size and
female name diversity may indicate that parents actually
take great care in naming their daughters, but that the

Women are not the only group in the US to have
experienced a disproportionate decline in name efficiency.
As has often been noted, African American parents
systematically choose distinctive given names for their
children (Lieberson & Mikelson, 1995). The pattern of this
trend is puzzling: although Black parents living in
predominantly White communities choose distinctive names
for their children, Black parents living in predominantly
Black communities choose even more distinctive names. (If
it were simply the case that parents choose distinctive names
to signal affinity with the wider Black community, the
opposite pattern might be expected; Fryer & Levitt, 2004).
The question is: why? As we noted earlier, when
surnames are fixed and a population expands, the residual
entropy of names invariably rises. In such circumstances,
parents may be more likely select diverse first names for
their children to increase their name’s overall uniqueness.
Given the legacy of slavery (Dunaway, 2003), residual
entropy is a particular problem for the Black community,
where a smaller (less diverse) pool of surnames places more
of the burden of providing uniquely identifying information

3248

on first name elements. The residual entropy of Black
surnames is considerably higher than for White surnames:
the most frequent 500 US surnames convey just 2.5 bits of
information about the White community, but over 4 bits of
information about the Black community (t(499)=8.00,
p<0.001; Figure 7), meaning that surnames convey far less
information about individuals within Black communities.
Residual perplexity—which increases when more people
share a surname—is twice as high for these names in Black
communities than in White communities. Since people
called Smith will be likely to give their children distinctive
first names (because the surname Smith has high residual
entropy), and since this likelihood will increase if a high
proportion of their neighbors are also called Smith, the
tendency of Black parents to choose more distinctive names
for their children when their neighbors are Black than when
they are White is not really puzzling at all: it simply reflects
the desire of parents to provide each child with a unique
identifier.

Figure 7. Top: The residual entropy of the 500 most common
American surnames in the White- and African-American
communities (2000 US Census). Bottom: The 500 most common
White surnames and 500 most common Black surnames (high
residual entropy = less information about individuals).

changing name distributions in a model that simulates
human performance in lexical decision tasks.
The naive discriminative reading model (NDR; Baayen,
Milin, Durdevic, Hendrix & Marelli, 2011) is a two-layer
network that takes letter unigrams and bigrams as cues, and
learns to discriminate lexical targets as outcomes (e.g.,
‘hand’, ‘John’) using the equilibrium equations (Danks,
2003) of the Rescorla-Wagner (Rescorla & Wagner, 1972)
learning rule. The model’s output is entirely determined by
its training corpus—it has no free parameters—and it
captures a wide variety of empirical effects in reading
(Baayen, 2010; Baayen, Hendrix & Ramscar, in press), and
successfully predicts patterns of age-related reading time
differences (Ramscar, Hendrix & Baayen, 2012).
To simulate the cross-generational effects of changing
name distributions, three versions of the NDR were trained
on an identical set of naturalistic linguistic training data
(1,500,000 tokens from the Google Unigrams Corpus were
used to simulate the experience of reading to age 20).
Names from the distribution of US social security
applications for a given year (1910, 1960 and 2010) were
interpolated into this sample, based on the frequency with
which names appear in the corpus, and the distribution
givens name in each year. Recognition latencies were
calculated for the set of names common to the 1910, 1960
and 2010 name distributions, and for the total set of names
learned by each model: Figure 8A shows the cost the
distribution of names imposes at each point in time, and
Figure 8B shows the average effect this had on precisely the
same set of names. The simulations suggest that the simple
task of recognizing a name grew harder in the 20th Century,
especially in its latter half: the change in simulated reaction
time from 1960 to 2010 is three times greater than 1910 to
1960.
Not only did the number of names increase dramatically
(the 1960 model learned 60% more names than the 1910
model, and the 2010 model 83% more), but the number of
non-name words that were learned declined over time, by
2.5% in 1960, and 5% in 2010. Given that the models were
trained on exactly the same number of name tokens, this
reflects the degree to which the boundary between English
names and non-names has become blurred over time,
increasing the memory problem that names pose.

Names, age and memory
Problems with remembering names represent the most
disturbing aspect of aging for many people. The analyses
reported here raise a question: does memory for names
really decline, or are older adults confusing social change
with personal change? After all, the changes to the
distribution of Western names guarantees that name
processing must have grown increasingly difficult over the
last century. To provide an estimate of the effect this could
have had on name memory, we examined the effect of

A

B

Figure 8. A plots the average simulated recognition times for the
set of names learned by a “20 year old” model trained on 1.5
million unigrams when sampling from the name distribution in
1910 (left bars), 1960 (center bars) and 2010 (right bars). B plots
the average simulated reading times in each model for the set of
names that are common to the 1910, 1960 and 2010 US social

3249

security applications: i.e., each model’s predictions for the same
set of names.

Finally, to simulate the effect of these changes within a
single lifespan, we compared the predictions of a “20 year
old” reading model, trained on 1,500,000 unigram tokens,
with names sampled from the summed distribution of social
security applications from 1950-1960 (the age at which
current septuagenarians were 20), to a model trained on
9,000,000 unigram tokens, sampling from the summed
name distribution from 1950-2010 (extending the
“experience” of the younger model to age 70).

A

B

Figure 9. A plots the average simulated recognition times for the
set of names learned by a “20 year old” model (trained on 1.5
million unigrams, including names from the 1950-1960
distributions; left bars), and a “70 year old” model (trained on 9
million unigrams, including names from the 1950-2010
distributions; right bars). B plots the average simulated reading
times in each model for the set of names that are common to 1960
and 2010 US social security applications. The area below the
dashed line represents a 320 ms response constant (button
pressing) added to both models in simulating reaction times.

Names and other proper nouns comprise a very large
proportion of natural language: whereas the younger model
learned 34,480 word types and 4,540 names, the older
model learned 61,839 word types and 19,976 names.
Although total vocabulary doubled, name lexicon grew
fourfold. Figure 9A shows the predicted impact of
experience on average name recognition for someone aged
70 in 2010 as compared to fifty years earlier. Figure 9B
shows the projected effect of these processing costs on the
same set of names in the same individual. After a response
constant is removed from the simulated latencies, the model
predicts that on average, simply recognizing a name will
take today’s septuagenarian nearly half a second longer than
when she was 20. Although older adults have hard time
remembering names in comparison to their younger selves,
a large part of this difference is likely due to the increasing
complexity of social name distributions, and the increasing
number of names that individuals encounter over the course
of their lives.

The Name Game
We identified a common information structure in the
world’s name grammars that helps satisfy the complex
demands of communicating about individuals, and
described some of the consequences of recent changes in
Western naming practices. Two things are worth noting

about these findings: First, the data we report are not
inferred from samples of populations, but are instead
calculated from records representing the actual populations
themselves; and second, the information theoretic methods
we used to analyze this data describe and govern all of the
physical devices that have come to define our information
age. Accordingly, our finding that American female names
have twice the perplexity of male names is a statistical fact
about the population, which entails that female names in this
country must exert considerably higher information
processing costs than male names.
These findings may help shed light on many social issues
that are far less clear-cut: for example, an often cited reason
for the under-representation of women in many professional
bodies is that when appointments are made, women’s names
often don’t “come up” (Donald, 2012). It is highly likely
that the different processing costs associated with male and
female names contribute to this. In a similar vein, these
findings offer food for thought for parents choosing names
for children in the West, as well as for people with names
formed using different grammars as they traverse our
increasingly multicultural world. In particular, these
findings suggest that the tendency to simply reverse the
order of Asian names in Western languages should be
viewed with caution.
Finally, these results have implications for our
understanding of memory and aging. The belief that
memory processes decline as we age rests, in large part, on
apparent selective deficits for names in the elderly (Shafto et
al., 2007). However, the problem of remembering a name
has been getting exponentially harder since before anyone
now alive was born (Figure 7). Because current measures of
name memory ‘deficits’ fail to take into account changes to
name distributions, it is unclear whether name memory
really does decline, or whether these measures simply
reflect the overwhelming increases in name information we
have documented (see also Dahlgren, 1998; JuncosRabadán, Facal, Soledad Rodríguez & Pereiro, 2010). It
may be that older adults troubled by their “declining” name
memories are presently falling into the trap of taking
personal responsibility for a broader social problem.
At the height of the information age, in a world where
population growth is inexorably increasing the amount of
name information societies must shoulder, the social
practices that evolved to maximize the efficiency of name
processing are, in many cases, in a state of collapse.
Although names are the hardest vocabulary items people
have to learn and remember, the problems they pose are
currently far harder than they should be. Understanding the
information structure of names, as well as how name
efficiency can vary and be quantified, can help individuals
and societies make more informed choices about names and
naming practices. It may even make the names of future
generations easier to recall.
For a complete list of references and supplementary materials,
please consult the article copy hosted at www.sfs.uni-tuebingen.de/

3250

