UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Effects of Overt Head Movements on Valenced Image Recognition and Recall in
Bulgarians

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5cr6v0b7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Varadinov, Meryl
Laskin, Lyuben

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Effects of Overt Head Movements on Valenced Image Recognition and Recall
in Bulgarians *
Meryl Varadinov (meryl.varadinov@gmail.com)
Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology,
New Bulgarian University, 21 Montevideo Street
Sofia 1618, Bulgaria

Lyuben D. Laskin (lyubenlaskin@gmail.com)
Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology,
New Bulgarian University, 21 Montevideo Street
Sofia 1618, Bulgaria

Abstract
Vertical and horizontal head movements (universally
associated with nodding and shaking, respectively) have
frequently been demonstrated to affect cognitive processes.
Two experiments were conducted to test the hypothesis that
overt head movements can influence memory for valenced
images. In the first experiment, participants were instructed to
perform either vertical or horizontal head movements while
viewing a slideshow of 76 randomized positive and negative
images, which they later had to recognize from a set
containing 50% of the same target images and 50% distractor
images. No interaction between head movement type and
image valence was obtained. In the second experiment,
participants were told to remember as many images as
possible from a slideshow of 60 randomized valenced images,
which they were later asked to freely recall. A significant
interaction was obtained, with a higher rate of recall for
positive images when vertical head movements (VHM) were
performed and a higher rate of recall for negative images
when horizontal head movements (HHM) were performed.
Keywords: overt head movements; image recall and
recognition; embodiment.

Introduction
Previous work has demonstrated that inducing overt head
movements can influence certain cognitive processes due to
their positive or negative association with a given cognitive
activity. For example, Wells & Petty (1980) showed that the
manipulation can have an effect on persuasion. Participants
in their study performed either vertical or horizontal head
movements while listening to a simulated radio broadcast,
containing either a message in agreement or disagreement
with
participants’
attitudes
(proattitudinal
or
counterattitudinal messages). Those participants who
performed VHM agreed with the content of the broadcast
more than those who performed HHM, regardless of the
content of the message. Participants also found it more
difficult to perform head movements that were incompatible
with the message (VHH during a counterattitudinal
broadcast vs. HHM during a proattitudinal broadcast).
Consistent results were obtained by Briñol & Petty (2003).
This manipulation has produced similar effects in various
other domains. Tom et. al. (1991) showed that VHM led to
an increased preference for neutral objects, while HHM led

to a decline in preference for the same. In another study, it
was demonstrated that overt head movements can affect
product choice and price perception (Tom et. al., 2006).
Eppley & Gilovich (2002) examined the effects of the same
manipulation on the anchoring and adjustment heuristic,
demonstrating that participants induced to accept values by
nodding adjusted to self-generated anchors less than those
induced to deny values by shaking their heads.
Apart from attitudinal effects, overt head movements
have also been demonstrated to influence memory. Förster
& Strack (1996) induced overt head movements in
participants while they listened to valenced adjectives and
found that VHM led to better recognition for positive
adjective and HHM led to better recognition for negative
adjectives in a surprise recognition task. They refer to this as
a motor-compatibility effect, suggesting that the process of
learning valenced words was more effective when
accompanied by compatible head movements during the
encoding phase, which led to better recognition during the
test phase. They point to natural and socially-learned cooccurrences of overt and covert responses as a possible
explanation of this effect. An example of the former is the
co-occurrence of basic emotions with specific facial
expressions, while learned nonverbal responses like nodding
and shaking our heads to indicate agreement and
disagreement, respectively, are an example of a sociallylearned co-occurrence of overt and covert responses.
Following Förster & Strack’s methodology, in this study
we explore the influence of overt head movements on the
recognition and free recall of valenced images. We
performed two experiments in order to investigate whether a
similar motor-compatibility effect would be obtained, by
inducing either HHM or VHM while participants viewed
positive and negative images, which they later had to
recognize among distractor images (Experiment 1) or freely
recall (Experiment 2).
There were two main motivations behind this study. First
and foremost, we wanted to see if the manipulation extends
to memory for images. It is well known that people’s
memory capacity for images is far superior to that for words
(Shepard, 1967; for an old but good review of the literature,
see Landauer, 1986). Hence, observing the same effect

_______________
* This paper was accepted for CogSci 2012 in Sapporo but not included in those proceedings by accident.

1670

would be a non-trivial finding, further confirming the
validity of the effect. Second, Bulgaria is a unique place to
test this manipulation, given that nodding and shaking mean
the exact opposite to what they mean in the rest of the world
– shaking denotes agreement, whereas nodding indicates
disagreement. If the mechanism of this effect is social in
nature, as Förster & Strack suggest, we should expect the
exact opposite results: facilitation for encoding negative
images while performing VHM and facilitation for encoding
positive images while performing HHM. Thus, the results
would give insight into the extent to which culture mediates
this effect.

(1024760) in Microsoft PowerPoint© and then in EPrime® 2.0 during the recognition task.
Encoding Phase
(Slideshow)

Retrieval Phase
(Recognition Task)

Experiment 1
Method
Participants
Nineteen New Bulgarian University students (11 men and 8
women) were given course credit for participation in what
they were told was a marketing study to test the comfort and
quality of a headphone set.
Stimulus Material and Apparatus
Seventy six target images (38 positive and 38 negative)
were selected from The International Affective Picture
System (IAPS; Lang, Bradley, & Cuthbert, 2008) for the
encoding part of the procedure, along with half as many
positive and negative distractor images (closely resembling
half of the target images thematically) for the recognition
part of the procedure. The reason why such distractor
images were used for the retrieval procedure is that people
have a naturally high memory capacity for images (Brady,
2008; Schacter, Israel, & Racine, 1999; Shepard, 1967),
which can lead to ceiling effects. One of the most
impressive demonstrations of this is a study by Standing
(1973), who, using a single-trial learning task with a delayed
recognition test, tested subjects’ memory capacity for
groups of pictures ranging from 20 to 10,000 and found that,
even though percentage of retention gradually declined, the
absolute number of stimuli retained increased as the set of
learning material increased. In an attempt to avoid losing the
effect of the head movement manipulation because of such a
ceiling effect, we increased the difficulty of the recognition
task by introducing interference with distractor images
thematically related to half of the target images (the
presentation of similar distractor images has been shown to
reduce accuracy in image recognition; Goldstein & Chance,
1970). These distractor images were presented in the
recognition task instead of the target images that they
resembled in order to confused participants and prevent
them from getting perfect accuracy scores. For samples of
positive and negative target-distractor pairs, see Figure 2.
Images were selected for similar levels of arousal
(approx. 5 on a 1-9 scale). The average valences of the
negative and positive stimuli were approximately 3 and 7,
respectively, also on a 1-9 scale. For the first part of the
procedure, images were presented on a 17” monitor

Figure 1. A visualization of the procedure in Experiment 1.
On the left: Encoding phase, consisting of 76 positive (+)
and negative (–) target images (top left and bottom left
blocks). On the right: Recognition task, in which half (38)
of the original (=) targets (top right block) are presented
with 38 distractor images (bottom right block),
corresponding (≘) to 38 of the original targets excluded
from the retrieval phase.
Design and Procedure
The experimental design was a 2×2 mixed-model factorial
comparing head movement type (horizontal vs. vertical)
between subjects and image valence (positive vs. negative)
within subjects. The dependent measure was the accuracy of
recognition during the test phase.
Participants were introduced to the experiment by signing
a consent form and being told that they were participating in
a marketing study to test the comfort and quality of a
headphone set (this is the same cover story as the one used
by Wells & Petty, 1980). The entire session consisted of an
encoding phase, a distractor task, and a recognition task (see
Fig. 1 for a visualization of the procedure). Each of the 76
positive and negative images appeared on screen for 3
seconds as Astor Piazolla’s tango “Adios Nonino” played in
the background (the same type of music used by Förster &
Strack, 1996). Stimulus order was pseudo-randomized
(same order for each participant). The set of images was
preceded and followed by a 6 second long blank slide and
the entire slideshow lasted for 4 minutes. Ten of the
participants were instructed to perform HHM while listening
to the music and viewing the images (presumably to test the
sound quality of the headphones under more realistic
conditions, namely, during movement), while the remaining
nine performed VHM. The experimenters would
demonstrate the movement and instruct participants to

1671

F(1,18) = 0.59, p = 0.812. Contrary to what was
hypothesized, there was no significant interaction between
head movement type and image valence: F(1, 17) = 0.001, p
= 0.975. Average accuracy for participants performing
HHM was Pr = 0.4 for positive images and Pr = 0.5 for
negative ones, while participants performing VHM had an
average accuracy score of Pr = 0.46 and Pr = 0.56 for
positive and negative images, respectively (see Fig. 3).

Average discriminability
of images (Pr)

maintain one head movement per second for the entire
duration of the slideshow.
After the encoding procedure was over, participants were
asked to fill out a feedback form regarding comfort of the
headphones, sound quality, difficulty of the head
movements, and likability of the music as part of the cover
story. They were then given a distractor task for 15 minutes,
during which they had to assemble two different wooden
puzzle cubes (similar to the classic Soma puzzle cube).
Once those 15 minutes were up, the experiment
proceeded to a surprise recognition task. Participants were
presented with only half (38) of the target images from the
original slideshow mixed with 38 distractor images. For
each image that appeared on the screen, participants had to
press an “old” button to indicate that they had seen the
image before or a “new” button if they hadn’t seen it. The
images remained on the screen until both responses were
given. Once done, participants were thanked for their
participation and dismissed. All were debriefed via e-mail
once the study was over.

Image Valence

Figure 3. The average discriminability of images as a
function of head movement type and image valence.

(a) Positive target image

(b) Positive distractor image

(c) Negative target image

(d) Negative distractor image

Figure 2. Sample target and distractor images. Target
images (top and bottom left) were presented during the
encoding procedure and replaced by their matching
distractors (top and bottom right) in the recognition
procedure.

Results and Discussion
We performed a repeated measures ANOVA with valence
as a within-subject and head movement as a betweensubject factor. There was a main effect of valence, F(1, 17)
= 8.253, p < 0.05, with better discrimination for negative
images, Pr = 0.53, as opposed to positive images, Pr =
0.43.1 There was no main effect of head movement type,
1

Due to the fact that several participants made no false alarms
during the recognition task, our first preference, d’, could not be
calculated and Pr was used instead. Pr is a coefficient that
describes participants’ discrimination performance; the higher its
value, the better participants’ discrimination between targets and

Due to the fact that accuracy scores are generally high on
image recognition tasks because participants rely on their
implicit memory, we tried to deliberately deteriorate their
performance by presenting them with distractor images
closely resembling half of target images from the encoding
procedure, which explains why they made errors in the first
place. However, even though it prevented a ceiling effect,
this manipulation could have caused other problems. By
increasing the difficulty of the task with thematically similar
distractor images, we may have suppressed an existing HMimage valence interaction due to the strong interference
between the similar target-distractor pairs. A reason for this
suspicion is that some studies have demonstrated
constructive memory effects in image recognition (e.g.,
Foley & Foy, 2008 and Miller & Gazzaniga, 1998
demonstrated this using the DRM paradigm).2
We decided to conduct a second experiment, but instead
of increasing the memory task’s difficulty by introducing
interference, we replaced the recognition task with a free
recall task, which requires participants to rely on their
explicit memory. We expected this manipulation to prevent
a ceiling effect without introducing additional strong
memory effects, as in Experiment 1.

distractors, and vice versa. It is calculated using the following
formula: Pr = H – FA, where H (hits) is the proportion of correct
identifications of targets, and FA (false alarms) is the proportion of
incorrect identifications of distractors (Snodgrass & Corwin,
1988).
2
For more on the DRM paradigm, see Roediger & McDermott
(1995).

1672

Experiment 2
Method
Participants
Twenty-six volunteers and New Bulgarian University
students (6 men and 20 women), took part in Experiment 2,
the latter of whom were given course credit for
participation. The cover story from Experiment 1 was
maintained.

valence, but according to Ochsner (2000), this may have
been a result of using memory measures that lack sensitivity
to differences in the experience of past events. Using the
remember/know paradigm, the author obtained more
remember responses for negative images compared to
positive ones, whereas positive images evoked more know
responses (i.e. they were just familiar, rather than
remembered). Kensinger et. al. (2007) have similarly shown
a general recognition advantage for negative stimuli.

Average number of correctly
recalled images

Stimulus Material and Apparatus
Thirty positive and 30 negative images were selected from
IAPS (Lang et. al., 2008). They were selected according to
the same criteria used in Experiment 1.
Design and Procedure
The experimental design and stimulus presentation were the
same as in Experiment 1. The changes made in this
experiment’s procedure were as follows: Participants were
explicitly told to try to remember as many of the images
from the slideshow as possible, as they would be asked to
recall them later, after filling out the feedback form.
Following the learning phase, participants were asked to
write down all the images they could remember, listing each
one on paper (free recall test phase) and using the minimum
number of words to accurately describe them. They were
given 20 minutes to describe as many images as they could
remember. Upon completion of this task, they were thanked
for participating and dismissed.
Results and Discussion
Two independent experts were used to evaluate the
correspondence between the descriptions of recalled images
given by participants and the images used in the slideshow.
Only answers which gained unanimous consent by the
experts were counted as correctly recalled images. Overall
agreement between them was 98%.
The average number of correctly recalled images was
20.04. Similar to Experiment 1, on average, more negative
(10.73) than positive (9.31) images were recalled for a main
effect of valence, F(1, 24) = 5.03, p < 0.05. There was no
significant main effect of head movement type, F(1, 24) =
0.207, p = 0.653. Contrary to Experiment 1, the crucial
interaction between head movement type and valence was
significant, F(1, 24) = 4.5, p < 0.05. That is, more positive
images were recalled by participants who performed VHM
(9.69), compared to participants who performed HHM
(8.92). In contrast, more negative images were recalled by
participants who performed HHM (11.7), compared to those
performing vertical ones (9.77; see Fig. 4). It is evident that
the difference between vertical and horizontal head
movements is greater for negative (d = 1.14) than for
positive (d = 0.4) images. It is curious to note that this is the
opposite of what Förster & Strack (1996) observed for
valenced adjectives and may be due to some type of
negativity bias. Many previous studies have failed to
demonstrate memory effects for images as a function of

Image Valence

Figure 4. The average number of recalled images as a
function of head movement type and image valence.

General Discussion
Despite the positive results obtained in Experiment 2, the
findings of Experiment 1 did not show a significant
interaction between head movement type and image
valence. We hypothesized that our attempt to prevent a
ceiling effect during the recognition task by introducing
strong interference between target and distractor images
may have concealed an otherwise existing effect of the head
movement manipulation. In Experiment 2, we employed a
different method for eliminating the possible ceiling effect
by changing the recognition task to a free recall task, which
proved successful in finding the significant interaction.
A finding consistent across both experiments was that
more negative images were remembered than positive
images, even though they were specifically selected for
equal arousal ratings. One possible explanation for this is
that negative events leave stronger memory traces compared
to positive events. Studies on memory have tended to focus
more on arousal levels of stimuli than on valence, but recent
research has shown it to be an important factor in encoding
and retrieval processes. Multiple studies show that negative
information is remembered more vividly than positive
information, that it is remembered in more detail, and that
people are better at remembering whether they saw or only
imagined negative stimuli, whereas with positive stimuli,
they are more likely to be confused (for a review, see
Kensinger, 2009). This body of research and the results of
our experiments are in line with the general trend observed
in various domains in psychology (e.g. impression

1673

formation, learning, judgments, information processing,
memory, etc.) that bad is stronger than good (for an
extensive review of the converging evidence across research
domains, see Baumeister, 2001).
Our study extends the overt head movement paradigm to
the domain of memory for images. The significant
interaction found between head movement type and image
valence in Experiment 2 is consistent with the results of
Förster & Strack (1996), who found the same interaction
between head movement type and adjective valence.
Obtaining a significant interaction between head movement
type and image valence despite people’s exceptional
memory capacity for images offers further support for the
motor-compatibility effect. The main idea that information
is better encoded while compatible head movements are
performed, as opposed to when incompatible head
movements are performed, is in line with the findings of
other researchers in many other domains (see the
Introduction of this paper for a brief review) and is also
consistent with findings of other research on stimulusresponse compatibility (Romaiguere et. al., 1993; Solarz,
1960).
Interestingly, the reversed meaning of head movements in
Bulgarian culture seems to have no influence on the effect
observed in previous studies. We found that upon asking
how they gave nonverbal responses for “yes” and “no”,
oftentimes participants demonstrated nodding and shaking,
respectively, whereas when implicitly tested about this right
after the explicit test (the experimenter would informally
ask the participant a yes/no question, the answer to which
was known in advance), they would often respond in the
traditional Bulgarian way (shaking for “yes” and nodding
for “no”). Our findings may suggest that the motorcompatibility effect is independent of culture, but it may
also be due to the strong influence of Western culture (e.g.,
through media, mass communication, globalization, etc.).
The discrepancy suggests that the issue of which nonverbal
head
gestures
Bulgarians
perform
to
denote
agreement/disagreement is not clear cut and is an interesting
empirical question on its own.

Summary
We conducted two experiments to test the effect of overt
head movements on the encoding of positive and negative
images. The main findings of our study are the following:
1) Negative images were remembered more than positive
images, despite equal levels of arousal;
2) Head movement type interacted significantly with
image valence during the free recall task, but not during
the recognition task;
3) Contrary to what was expected, the direction of the
interaction was the same with Bulgarian participants as
has been reported in previous studies with nonBulgarians, despite the cultural difference in meaning
of vertical and horizontal head movements.

Although interesting, these
investigation in future studies.

results

require

further

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the people who volunteered to
participate in our experiment and Oksana Itkes for her
assistance in finding some of the references.

References
Baumeister, R., Bratslavsky, E., Finkenauer, C., & Vohs, K.
(2001). "Bad is Stronger than Good". Review of General
Psychology, 5, 323–370.
Brady, T. F., Konkle, T., Alvarez, G. A., Oliva, A. (2008).
Visual Long-term Memory Has a Massive Storage
Capacity for Object Details. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 105, 14325-4329.
Briñol, P. & Petty, R. E (2003). Overt head movements and
persuasion: A self-validation analysis. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 84, 1123-1139.
Epley, N., & Gilovich, T. (2001). Putting adjustment back
in the anchoring and adjustment heuristic: Differential
processing of self-generated and experimenter-provided
anchors. Psychological Science, 12, 391–396.
Foley, M., & Foy, J. (2008). Pictorial encoding effects and
memory confusions in the Deese-Roediger-McDermott
paradigm: Evidence for the activation of spontaneous
imagery. Memory, 16, 712-727.
Förster, J, & Strack, F. (1996). Influence of overt head
movements on memory for valenced words: a case of
conceptual-motor compatibility. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 71, 421-30.
Goldstein, A. G., & Chance, J. E. (1970). Visual recognition
memoryfor complex configurations. Perception &
Psychophysics, 9, 237-241.
Kensinger, E. A. (2009). Remembering the details: Effects
of emotion. Emotion Review, 1, 99–113.
Kensinger, E. A., Garoff-Eaton, R. J., & Schacter, D. L.
(2007). Effects of emotion on memory specificity in
young and older adults. Journal of Gerontology:
Psychological Sciences, 62, 208-215.
Landauer, T. K. (1986). How much do people remember?
Some estimates of the quantity of learned information in
long-term memory. Cognitive Science, 10, 477-493.
Lang, P. J., Bradley, M. M., Cuthbert, B.N. (2008).
International affective picture system (IAPS): Affective
ratings of pictures and instruction manual. Technical
Report A-8. University of Florida, Gainesville, FL.
Ochsner, K. N. (2000). Are affective events richly
recollected or simply familiar? The experience and
process of recognizing feelings past. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 129, 242–261.
Roediger, H. L., III, & McDermott, K. B. (1995). Creating
false memories: Remembering words not presented in
lists. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, & Cognition, 21, 803–814.
Romaiguere, P., Hasbroucq, T., Possamai, C, A., & Seal, J.
(1993). Intensity to force translation: A new effect of

1674

stimulus-response activity revealed by analysis of
response time and electromyographic activity of a prime
mover. Cognitive Brain Research, 1, 197-201.
Schacter, D. (1999). Suppressing False Recognition in
Younger and Older Adults: The Distinctiveness
Heuristic. Journal of Memory and Language, 40, 1-24.
Shepard, R. N. (1967). Recognition memory for words,
sentences, and pictures. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 6, 156- 163.
Snodgrass, J. G., & Corwin, J. (1988). Pragmatics of
measuring recognition memory: Applications to
dementia and amnesia. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 117, 34-50.
Solarz, Andrew K. (1960). Latency of Instrumental
Responses as a Function of Compatibility with the
Meaning of Eliciting Verbal Signs. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 59, 239-45.
Standing, L. (1973). Learning 10000 pictures. Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 25, 207-222.
Tom, G., Ramil, E., Zapanta, I., Demir, K., Lopez, S.
(2006). The Role of Overt Head Movement and
Attention in Persuasion. The Journal of Psychology,
140, 247–253.
Tom, G., Pettersen, P., Lau, T., Burton, T., Cook, J. (1991).
The Role of Overt Head Movement in the Formation of
Affect. Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 12, 28189.
Wells, G. L., & Petty, R. E. (1980). The effects of overt
head movements on persuasion: Compatibility and
incompatibility of responses. Basic and Applied Social
Psychology, 1, 219–230.
Wolfe, J. M. (1998). Visual Memory: What Do You Know
about What You Saw? Current Biology, 8, 303-304.

1675

