UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The role of verbal labels in attention to dimensional similarity

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3qr2q3rb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Perry, Lynn
Samuelson, Larissa

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The role of verbal labels in attention to dimensional similarity
Lynn K. Perry (lkperry@wisc.edu)
Department of Psychology, 1202 W. Johnson Street
Madison, WI 53706 USA

Larissa K. Samuelson (larissa-samuelson@uiowa.edu)
Department of Psychology, E11 Seashore Hall
Iowa City, IA, 52242 USA
Abstract

participant were using holistic similarity, she would classify
A and C together. If a participant were using dimensional
similarity, she would classify A and B together. Smith and
Kemler (1977) found that 5-6 year-olds made mostly AC
matches and 10-11 year-olds made mostly AB matches.

In general, young children focus on holistic similarity and
older children focus on dimensional similarity (selectively
attending to one property, such as brightness, to the
exclusion of others, such as size). Research on early word
learning, however, suggests the process of learning words
trains attention to category-relevant dimensions. We ask:
does word learning scaffold dimensional attention more
generally? By showing labels support dimensional attention,
these results clarify the processes involved in similarity
perception and unify our understanding of attentional
processes in word learning with those in a broader context.

Keywords: Labels; categorization; selective attention.
Over the course of development, we become increasingly
skilled at attending to one thing to the exclusion of others
(see Hanania & Smith, 2010 for review). For example,
adults can easily focus on the color of a lime, rather than its
exact shape or size, in order to distinguish it from a lemon.
Evidence that older children and adults are generally much
better than younger children at selectively attending to one
dimension to the exclusion of others comes from a variety
of domains, but we still do not know the process by which
such changes occur. The goal of this paper is to explore the
processes driving changes in selective attention with respect
to their effects on similarity perception.
Of particular relevance to the current study is the
holistic-to-dimensional shift, or the tendency for young
children to focus on holistic similarity and older children
and adults to focus on dimensional similarity relationships
(Smith & Kemler, 1977). Imagine you are presented with an
orange, a yellowish-orange ball, and a yellowish-orange toy
car. If you are an adult, you would be more likely to group
the ball with the car because they match exactly along one
dimension (i.e. identical in color). A young child, however,
would group the orange with the ball because they are
similar along multiple dimensions (i.e. shape and color)—
they are holistically similar. This shift in similarity
perception occurs during the early school-age years, such
that younger children (<8-years-old) tend to be holistic
classifiers and older children dimensional classifiers. Free
classification, such as the triad classification task pictured in
Figure 1, is the standard task used to examine this shift. As
can be seen, two stimuli (A and B) match on one dimension
(e.g. size) but vary greatly along another dimension (e.g.
brightness). The third stimulus, C, is highly similar to A
along both dimensions, but not identical to it on either. If a

Figure 1: Schematic representation of stimuli used in Smith
and Kemler’s 1977 triad classification task.
One explanation for this change comes from what we
know about the role of word learning in the development of
dimensional attention and categorization. For example,
Landau & Shipley (2001) demonstrated that when two
objects are given the same label, participants generalize it to
all intermediate morphs between the objects. If the two
objects are given different names, participants divide the
intermediates into two distinct categories. Lupyan and
colleagues (2007) demonstrated that labels facilitated
adults’ category learning. Importantly, in this example, the
labels were task irrelevant, providing information redundant
with category structure. Other researchers have argued that
redundant associations between cues strengthen the
associations between other perceptual cues and category
structure and that the facilitative effect of labels is
fundamentally developmental (Yoshida & Smith, 2005). By
this view, over the course of word learning, the frequent
redundancy between labels and other cues such as solidity,
syntax, and category organization helps children use labels
to facilitate learning. The more experience children have
learning regularities in these overlapping cues, the better
they can attend to relevant dimensions of similarity, at least
in the context of further word learning.
This is most clearly seen in the development of wordlearning biases. For example, children acquire a shape bias,
or the tendency to generalize names of novel objects by
similarity in shape (Landau et al., 1988). This bias emerges
from regularities present in the linguistic environment: a
majority of the early words children learn name categories
of solid objects organized by similarity in shape, e.g., ball.

3217

As children learn more words, their attention is trained such
that they automatically attend shape when learning names
for solid objects. Smith and colleagues (2002) therefore
describe word learning as
“on-the-job training for
attention,” and have shown teaching children names of
categories organized by similarity in shape leads them to
precociously attend to shape when learning new words. As
they learn words that name categories organized in other
ways, e.g., names for nonsolids in categories organized by
similarity in material or adjectives that name properties of
objects, they acquire other biases and learn to flexibly attend
to context-appropriate dimensions.
Over development, learning words directs children’s
attention to dimensional similarity in future word learning
Thus, the critical unanswered question, however, is whether
learning words also directs children’s attention in nonlinguistic contexts. We propose word learning provides onthe-job training for attention more globally: in particular
that labels scaffold dimensional attention in similarity
perception. The regularity between words and attending to
dimensional similarity leads to a higher-order association
between labels and attending to dimensional similarity.
According to our hypothesis, then, the tight links between
labels, categorization, and dimensional similarity should
gradually lead to a bias for dimensional similarity even
outside of a labeling/word learning context.
In 2
experiments we asked: 1) if there are developmental
differences in category learning related to dimensional
attention in similarity classification, and 2) if labels can
support dimensional attention and facilitate categorization.

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 examines if developmental differences in
attention to dimensional similarity affect category learning.

Methods
Participants 33 5- to 8-year-old children participated. One
child did not complete the experiment, thus there were 32
children in the final group.
Stimuli The stimuli were squares varying metrically in size
and brightness (see Goldstone, 1994) and were presented on
a pc with a touch screen monitor using Eprime 2.0.
Procedure Children completed a triad pretest and were
divided into classifier groups based on performance on this
task (Smith & Kemler, 1977). There were 16 holistic
classifiers (chose primarily holistic matches) and 16
dimensional classifiers (primarily dimensional matches).
Children next completed the category-learning task and
category test. In the category-learning task children were
presented with a square (a “rock”) and asked to decide to
which of two categories it came from (the ocean or jungle)
by touching a picture on the computer screen. During the
learning task, children received auditory feedback regarding
accuracy of each decision (bell or buzzer sound). Learning
blocks were made up of 8 trials, 4 trials for each category.
Half of the children in each classification group were trained
with categories organized by similarity in size (size

learners), half with brightness (brightness learners). The
learning criterion was getting 7 out of 8 trials per block
correct, 2 blocks in a row. If a child did not reach criterion
after 30 blocks, the learning phase ended. The learning task
was followed by the category test, where no feedback was
given after each trial. Stimuli used at test included
exemplars from training and 6 novel exemplars from each
category. The test consisted of 4 blocks of 20 trials.
It was expected that dimensional classifiers would be able
to learn the categories and generalize to novel category
exemplars, but that holistic children should have more
difficulty. For both groups, correct categorization of novel
exemplars should require learning something about category
organization rather than something about specific stimuli.
Next, children completed the discrimination task that
measured their ability to distinguish between close values
on test dimensions. Children were presented with a target
and two test stimuli and asked to indicate which of the test
stimuli matched the target by touching it. All three stimuli
were present until the children responded. The target
matched one of the test stimuli on every trial.
Discrimination was tested both within and across category
boundaries. All pairs were presented four times—each
stimulus within a pair was presented twice as target and
matching test item, and twice as foil—for a total of 96 trials.
All children were presented with the same pairs, such that
any given trial forced children to discriminate along a
dimension that was only relevant for one group’s learned
category: e.g., a pair that differed only in size would test
discrimination along the relevant dimension for the sizelearners and the irrelevant for brightness-learners. This
allowed examination of changes in children’s ability to
make discriminations along category-relevant and irrelevant
dimensions and within and between categories.
Finally, children completed a posttest triad task that
was identical to the pretest version. Children who were
dimensional classifiers on the triad pretest should still
classify dimensionally as learning categories should not
decrease their ability to selectively attend to dimensional
similarity. Similarly, children who were holistic classifiers
on the triad pretest should still classify holistically.

Results and Discussion
Category learning It was expected that dimensional
classifiers would be able to learn the categories but that
holistic children would have more difficulty. To examine
this, we measured the number of blocks to criterion for each
child in the category-learning task (see Figure 2). A linear
mixed regression model of the interaction between classifier
type (holistic v. dimensional) and category structure
(brightness v. size organization) on the number of blocks it
took children to reach criterion, revealed a significant effect
of classifier type such that dimensional classifiers were
faster to reach criterion than holistic classifiers, t=21.88,
p<.0001. (Because of the difficulty in determining degrees
of freedom in linear mixed models, we conducted MCMC
sampling to find p-values). This model also showed an

3218

effect of category structure such that children were faster to
reach criterion when learning categories organized by
brightness, t =-23.00, p<.0001. This brightness advantage
replicates Goldstone’s (1994b) finding with adults. There
was also an interaction between classifier type and category
structure such that holistic classifiers showed less of a
difference in speed of learning brightness and size
categories than dimensional classifiers, t=2.66, p<.01. Thus,
children who were able to selectively attend to a single
dimension learned a novel category distinction based on one
dimension faster than children who were holistic attenders.
However, because dimensional classifiers were generally
older than holistic classifiers, it is possible age could be the
basis for these results. However, a model with both
classifier type and age was significantly better than one with
only age, X2(1) =12659, p<.0001, but no different from one
with only classifier type. Thus classifier type, but not age,
was necessary to account for findings.
We next examined performance in the other tasks using
logistic mixed regression. These analyses included only data
from children who reached learning criterion. We report
results of classification groups separately because we are
interested in whether dimensional and holistic classifiers
both show, for example, enhanced between-category
discrimination, than whether dimensional classifiers are
more accurate than holistic classifiers. Because other
researchers have found differences in learning brightness
and size categories (e.g. Goldstone 1994), we examined
performance of these groups separately. Results of
regression models (z and p values) are reported in Table 1.

Figure 2: Number of blocks to criterion in category learning.
Category test We expected dimensional classifiers to
generalize to new exemplars but that this should require
learning something about category organization rather than
about specific stimuli. Overall, children were very accurate
in the categorization test. Dimensional classifiers who
learned brightness categories, M=.87, t(7)=41.61, p<.0001,
dimensional classifiers who learned size categories, M=.77,
t(6)=4.98, p<.01, holistic classifiers who learned brightness
categories, M=.83, t(6)=6.33, p<.001, and holistic classifiers
who learned size categories, M=.70, t(4)=3.01, p<.05, were
all significantly better than chance.

Logistic mixed regression reveals that both dimensional
classifiers who learned brightness and who learned size
categories categorized familiar and novel stimuli equally
well. Similarly, both holistic classifiers who learned
brightness and who learned size categories categorized
familiar and novel stimuli equally well. These results
suggest both groups might have learned about the categoryrelevant dimension rather than specific stimuli.
Discrimination Goldstone (1994) found an advantage for
relevant discriminations over irrelevant discriminations only
for adults who learned brightness categories. Thus, while we
expected dimensional classifiers would show worse withincategory discrimination along the irrelevant dimension and
enhanced between-category discrimination, overall, we
expected these results to be strongest for the brightness
learners. Because it was predicted holistic classifiers would
not be selectively attending to category-relevant
dimensions, they should not demonstrate differences in
discrimination on relevant versus irrelevant dimensions.
To examine changes in selective attention to categoryrelevant and irrelevant dimensions, we measured accuracy
for each type of discrimination: between-category, withincategory along the relevant dimension and within-category
along the irrelevant dimension. Overall, children were quite
accurate in discriminating stimuli: dimensional classifiers
who learned brightness categories, M=.82, t(7)=15.71,
p<.0001, dimensional classifiers who learned size
categories, M=.81, t(6)=6.27, p<.001, holistic classifiers
who learned brightness categories, M=.74, t(6)=5.96,
p<.001, and holistic classifiers who learned size categories,
M=.73, t(4)=5.04, p<.01, were all significantly better than
chance (.50) at discriminating stimuli.
A logistic mixed regression model of effect of
discrimination comparison type (between, within relevant,
within irrelevant) on accuracy revealed dimensional
classifiers in the brightness learning group had significantly
increased accuracy for between category compared to within
category discriminations on either irrelevant, or relevant
dimension. They were also more accurate at within-category
discriminations along relevant than irrelevant dimensions,
demonstrating, overall, they were more accurate at relevant
than irrelevant discriminations. However, dimensional
classifiers who learned size categories were no more
accurate at between-category than within-category
discriminations on either irrelevant, or relevant dimensions.
Holistic classifiers are thought not to selectively attend
to category relevant dimensions. Therefore, they should not
show the same pattern as dimensional classifiers. However,
a logistic mixed regression model showed that holistic
classifiers who learned brightness categories were more
accurate at between category than within category
discriminations along both the irrelevant, and relevant
dimension. Additionally, these children were significantly
more accurate at within-category discriminations along the
relevant than the irrelevant dimension, demonstrating that
overall, they were more accurate at discriminating across the
relevant than the irrelevant dimension. Holistic classifiers

3219

Table 1: Results of logistic mixed regression for Category Test, Discrimination (comparing between versus withincategory discriminations on the irrelevant and relevant dimensions and within-category discriminations on the relevant
versus the irrelevant dimensions) and Triad Classification. z and p values/significance are reported for each model.
Experiment 1: No Label
Classification
Task

Dimensional

Experiment 2: Label

Holistic

Dimensional

Comparison

Holistic

Holistic

Bright

Size

Bright

Size

Bright

Size

Bright

Size

Bright

Size

Cat. Test:
Fam v Novel

.61
ns

.54
ns

1.26
ns

-.17
ns

.63
ns

.53
ns

.56
ns

.49
ns

.29
ns

-.12
ns

Discrim: b/t
v w/in irrel

-3.91
p<.01

.25
ns

-2.33,
p<.05

-.68
ns

-4.50
p<.01

1.49
ns

-5.29
p<.01

1.28
ns

2.25
p<.05

1.24
ns

Discrim: b/t
v w/in rel

-3.84
p<.01

.98
ns

-1.93,
p<.05

-.39
ns

-3.93
p<.01

-.42
ns

-4.66
p<.01

-.43
ns

2.28
p<.05

1.57
ns

Discrim: w/in
rel v irrel

-3.70
p<.01

.70
ns

-2.11,
p<.05

.01
ns

-4.50
p<.01

1.49
ns

-5.29
p<.01

1.49
ns

.79
ns

-.95
ns

-.81
ns

-.15
ns

.78
ns

1.94
p<.10

-.65
ns

2.43
p<.05

2.43
p<.05

3.81
p<.01

3.34
p<.01

3.55
p<.01

Triad: pre
v post

learning size categories had no accuracy differences. Thus,
both groups’ category learning affected their discrimination
abilities—but only if they learned brightness categories.
Posttest triad We next examined results of the posttest triad
task. The primary question of interest is whether there was a
change in the number of dimensional matches children
choose from pre- to posttest. Such a change indicates
learning dimensional categories—which require the learner
to selectively attend to one dimension to the exclusion of
another—increased children’s selective dimensional
attention in similarity classification. It was predicted that the
dimensional classifiers would not show an increase in
dimensional responding from pre to post test because they
were already attending dimensionally. A logistic mixed
regression model showed neither dimensional classifiers
who learned brightness nor size categories were more likely
to choose dimensional matches during posttest than pretest.
Holistic classifiers were also predicted to not show an
increase in dimensional responding, because they were not
expected to be attending dimensionally in the categorylearning task. A logistic mixed regression model showed
holistic classifiers who learned brightness categories had no
increase in dimensional responding. However, those who
learned size categories were marginally more likely to select
dimensional matches during posttest. This suggests that
perhaps these children did learn to selectively attend to size.
Conclusions Learning to categorize stimuli along a
dimension increases attention to that dimension and leads to
changes in discrimination. We predicted that for this to
happen, the learner has to be able to attend to the relevant
dimension in the first place—which holistic classifiers were
not expected to do. The results of the category-learning task
support this idea, demonstrating holistic classifiers were
slower to learn categories organized by a single dimension.

However the results of the discrimination and posttest triad
tasks paint a more complicated picture. For example,
holistic classifiers who learned brightness categories
showed similar changes in their discrimination as the
dimensional classifiers did, and holistic classifiers showed
increases in dimensional responding in the posttest triad
task. These results suggest that category learning on its own
can facilitate dimensional attention. The critical question,
then, is do labels work with category learning to boost it
even more?

Experiment 2
Results of E1 suggest holistic classifiers are slower to learn
categories than dimensional classifiers, but they show some
increases in dimensional attention following category
learning. Research shows that young children can do this in
the context of novel noun generalization (Smith et al.,
2002). Furthermore, we know labels facilitate category
learning in adults (Lupyan et al., 2007). If labels support the
development of dimensional attention more generally, then
we should see a facilitative effect of labels on holistic
classifiers’ category learning and perhaps an even greater
facilitation of their dimensional attention. In E2, we
examined category learning in the context of redundant
labels and assess subsequent changes in attention.

Methods
Participants 35 5-8-year-olds participated. 3 children did
not complete the experiment (2 quit and 1 for equipment
error), thus there were 32 children in the final group.
Procedure Methods were identical to E1, except during
category learning, novel auditory category labels (leebish
and grecious) were presented after feedback (the bell or
buzzer) on each trial. These labels were redundant with
category structure such that, for example, after each trial

3220

where a rock belonging from the ocean was presented
(regardless of correct categorization) the child would hear
the “leebish” Results were analyzed as in E1.

Results and discussion
Category learning As can be seen in Figure 2, a linear
mixed regression model of the interaction between classifier
type (holistic v. dimensional) and category structure
(brightness v. size organization) on the number of blocks it
took children to reach criterion revealed no effect of
classifier type, t=.04, NS, nor of category structure, t=-.30,
NS. Thus, labels facilitate learning of dimensional
categories, such that holistic classifiers were now as quick
to reach criterion as dimensional classifiers.
Category test Both groups were very accurate: dimensional
classifiers who learned brightness categories, M=.84,
t(6)=11.11, p<.0001, dimensional classifiers who learned
size categories, M=.86, t(6)=15.16, p<.0001, holistic
classifiers who learned brightness categories, M=.85,
t(6)=13.32, p<.0001, and holistic classifiers who learned
size categories, M=.69, t(7)=4.30, p<.01, were all
significantly better than chance at categorization.
A logistic mixed regression model of trial type on
categorization accuracy showed neither dimensional
classifiers who learned brightness nor size categories were
different in accuracy for familiar and novel stimuli.
Similarly, neither holistic classifiers who learned brightness
nor size categories were different in accuracy for familiar
and novel stimuli. This suggests that all children may have
learned something about category organization rather than
about specific stimuli.
Discrimination Children were accurate in discriminating
stimuli: dimensional classifiers who learned brightness
categories, M=.83, t(6)=16.40, p<.0001, dimensional
classifiers who learned size categories, M=.80, t(6)=10.90,
p<.0001, holistic classifiers who learned brightness
categories, M=.76, t(6)=7.42, p<.001, and holistic
classifiers who learned size categories, M=.77, t(7)=6.27,
p<.001, were all significantly better than chance.
A logistic mixed regression model of effect of
discrimination type (between, within relevant, within
irrelevant) on accuracy showed that dimensional classifiers
in the brightness-learning group were more accurate at
between category than within category discriminations for
both irrelevant, and relevant dimensions. These children
were also significantly more accurate at within-category
discriminations along relevant than irrelevant dimensions.
Dimensional classifiers who learned size categories were no
more accurate at between category discriminations than at
within category discriminations on either the irrelevant, or
relevant dimension, nor were they more accurate at withincategory discriminations along either dimension.
A logistic mixed regression model showed that holistic
classifiers who learned brightness categories were more
accurate at between category, compared to within category,
discriminations along both the irrelevant, and relevant
dimensions. However, those in size learners did not show
any differences in discrimination. Thus, all children showed

an effect of category learning on discrimination—but only if
they learned brightness.
Posttest triad It was predicted that dimensional classifiers
would not increase in dimensional responding from pre- to
posttest. A logistic mixed regression model showed
dimensional classifiers who learned brightness were no
more likely to choose dimensional matches during the post
test than on pretest. Interestingly, however, dimensional
classifiers who learned size were more likely to choose
dimensional matches during post test.
If labels drive attention to dimensions, holistic
classifiers should show an increase in attention dimensional
similarity. In fact, a logistic mixed regression model showed
both holistic classifiers who learned brightness and size
categories increased in dimensional responding.
Conclusions Incidental labels in a category-learning task
scaffolded selective attention to dimensional similarity.
Unlike in E1, holistic and dimensional classifiers are
equally quick to learn the categories. Holistic classifiers
have relatively weak selective attention and take longer to
learn dimensional categories. Once they learn the categories,
however, they show slight increases in dimensional
attention—as evidenced by discrimination accuracy and
increases in dimensional classification. Labels support even
weak selective attention, thus when holistic classifiers learn
dimensional categories in the context of labels, they learn
the categories more quickly. This increase in selective
attention cascades forward to both their discrimination
abilities and classification biases. So, as Lupyan suggested
in his 2008 study of category grouping on visual processing,
“categories matter; named categories matter more.” A direct
comparison of holistic classifiers from the two experiments
should clarify the extent to which performance of those in
E2 is, in fact, significantly better than those in E1.

Between-experiment comparison
Category learning A linear mixed regression model of the
interaction between experiment (label v. no label) and
category structure (size v. brightness) on the number of
blocks to reach learning criterion revealed holistic classifiers
were significantly faster to reach criterion in the label than
in the no label experiment, t=-26.57, p<.0001. There was an
overall effect of category structure, such that children were
faster to learn brightness than size categories, t=-23.66,
p<.0001, however, there was also an interaction such that
children in the label experiment showed less difference in
speed of learning the two category types than those in the no
label experiment, t=7.47, p<.0001. This is direct evidence
that labels facilitate category learning in children who have
difficulty attending to dimensional similarity.
Category test A mixed logistic regression model of the
interaction between experiment (label versus no label) and
trial type (familiar or novel) on children’s categorization
revealed that neither holistic classifiers who learned
brightness nor size categories showed an effect of
experiment. Thus, children were equally accurate at
categorizing familiar and novel stimuli.

3221

Discrimination If labels facilitate category learning because
they increase children’s selective attention to categoryrelevant dimensions, then children in the label experiment
should show the biggest enhancement in accuracy for
relevant over irrelevant discriminations. A logistic mixed
regression model of the interaction between experiment
(label v. no label) and discrimination type (between, withinrelevant, or within-irrelevant) revealed that children in the
label experiment showed a larger difference in accuracy in
between-category discriminations relative to withincategory discriminations on the relevant dimension, and
relative to within-category discriminations on the irrelevant
dimension. However, size learners did not show an effects
of experiment. This demonstrates (for brightness learners)
the presence of a label made effects of categorization on
discrimination stronger. Labels increase selective attention
to dimensions above and beyond category learning.
Posttest triad If word learning drives the emergence of
selective attention to dimensions over development, then
when labels are presented during category learning we may
also see indices of these changes in attention over the course
of an experiment. Therefore holistic classifiers in the label
experiment should show the largest increases in dimensional
responding from pre- to posttest triad task. This was
supported by logistic mixed regression models of the effect
of experiment (label v. no label) on change in dimensional
responses from pre- to posttest triad revealing that both
holistic classifiers who learned brightness and size
categories had a larger increase in dimensional responding
from pre- to posttest in the label experiment. The presence
of a label not only immediately facilitated category learning,
but also led to cascading changes in similarity classification.

Conclusions
Results of the comparison analyses demonstrate the extent
to which labels support selective attention above and
beyond category learning by demonstrating that holistic
classifiers were significantly faster to learn in the presence
of labels. Similarly, while the qualitative assessment of E1
and 2 demonstrated both groups of holistic classifiers who
learned brightness categories showed the “adult” pattern
found by Goldstone (1994), the comparison analysis shows
that those in the label experiment demonstrate a more
extreme pattern. This suggests category learning affects
attention to dimensions, but labeled category learning
affects it more. Finally, comparison of changes in
dimensional responding in the triad task offers additional
evidence that labels scaffold attention to dimensional
similarity above and beyond category learning. The only
difference between the two experiments was the presence of
incidental, redundant, labels during category learning. Yet
this was enough to change children’s pattern of responding
in an unrelated similarity classification task.
Overall, these analyses generally demonstrate that
while category learning supports selective dimensional
attention even in children who preferentially attend to
holistic similarity, labeled category learning exaggerates

this process, facilitating both category learning and attention
to dimensional similarity. However, one important
remaining question that needs to be addressed by future
research is why category learning and labeled category
learning only have these effects when the categories are
organized by brightness and not size. While our results
replicate Goldstone’s 1994 findings with adults, it is still
unclear why brightness is easier to learn and why learning
brightness, but not size, should lead to differences in
discrimination abilities.
Our results clearly demonstrate that labels can scaffold
this attention in similarity classification, suggesting that, as
in the case of early word learning biases, regularities
between labels, categories, and similarity lead to selective
attention to dimensions. Future research will be needed to
further explore how children can eventually do this without
any external linguistic support. Nevertheless, these
experiments are an important first step in unifying our
understanding of the attentional processes involved in early
word with those in a broader context.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a Ballard Seashore dissertation
year fellowship awarded to LKP and by R01 HD045713
awarded to LKS by the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National
Institute Of Child Health & Human Development.

References
Goldstone, R. L. (1994). Influences of categorization on
perceptual discrimination. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 123(2), 178-200.
Hanania, R., & Smith, L. B. (2010). Selective attention and
attention switching: Towards a unified developmental
approach. Developmental Science, 13(4), 622-635.
Landau, B., & Shipley, E. (2001). Labelling patterns and
object naming. Developmental Science, 4(1), 109-118.
Landau, B., Smith, L. B., & Jones, S. S. (1988). The
importance of shape in early lexical learning.
Cognitive Development, 3(3), 299-321.
Lupyan, G. (2008). The conceptual grouping effect:
Categories matter (and named categories matter more).
Cognition, 108(2), 566-577.
Lupyan, G., Rakison, D. H., & McClelland, J. L. (2007).
Language is not just for talking: Redundant labels
facilitate learning of novel categories. Psychological
Science, 18(12), 1077-1083.
Smith, L. B., Jones, S. S., Landau, B., Gershkoff-Stowe, L.,
& Samuelson, L. K. (2002). Object name learning
provides on-the-job training for attention.
Psychological Science, 13(1), 13-19.
Smith, L. B., & Kemler, D. G. (1977). Developmental
trends in free classification: Evidence for a new
conceptualization of perceptual development. Journal
of Experimental Child Psychology, 24, 279-298.
Yoshida, H., & Smith, L. B. (2005). Linguistic cues enhance
the learning of perceptual cues. Psychological Science,
16(2), 90.

3222

