UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Co-Existence of Naïve and Scientific Concepts in Learning and Development

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9vp8g2g8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Schneider, Michael
Vosniadou, Stella
Shtulman, Andrew
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Co-Existence of Naïve and Scientific Concepts in Learning and Development
Moderator: Michael Schneider (University of Trier, Germany, m.schneider@uni-trier.de)
Discussant: Stella Vosniadou (University of Athens, Greece)
Participants:
Andrew Shtulman & Kelsey Harrington (Occidental College, USA)
Michael Schneider (University of Trier, Germany) & Ilonca Hardy (University of Frankfurt, Germany)
Lindsey J. Powell & Susan Carey (Harvard University, USA)
Stellan Ohlsson (University of Illinois at Chicago, USA)

Keywords: Conceptual change; conceptual development; naïve
concepts; misconceptions; knowledge fragmentation.

from 5-year olds over adults to the elderly and investigate
scientific concepts as well we learners’ theories of mind.

Motivation

Assessing the Resilience of Naïve Theories
Across the Lifespan

Conceptual learning is sometimes described as replacement
of incorrect knowledge by correct knowledge. However, a
number of recent studies show that the storage of correct
concepts in memory does not automatically erase related
incorrect concepts from memory. As a result, naïve and
scientific concepts in the same domain can coexist in a
learner. The symposium aims at discussing these findings
and their implications for definitions, models and empirical
studies of conceptual learning and development.
From an empirical point of view, the coexistence of naïve
and scientific concepts in learners raise the questions how
common this phenomenon is, whether it differs between
content domains and whether it changes in response to
educational interventions, over the course of conceptual
change, or over the life span. Intervention studies, crosssectional studies, and longitudinal studies are needed to
investigate these aspects.
If learners simultaneously agree with naïve concepts and
scientific
concepts
with various
degrees,
new
operationalizations of conceptual knowledge are needed that
adequately reflect this multidimensionality of knowledge.
Researchers need to know when and how one-dimensional
assessments of conceptual knowledge can bias empirical
findings and what alternative methods yield more valid and
reliable results.
Formal logic shows that from a contradiction one can
derive any conclusion (ex falso quodlibet). According to
coherence theories of truth, logical coherence is the defining
characteristic of scientific theories. Thus, the coexistence of
correct and incorrect conceptual knowledge in learners
raises the questions whether a learners’ conceptual
knowledge in a domain can still be characterized as a
theory, how incoherent knowledge influences learners’
reasoning, and how learners evaluate the adequacy of their
concepts.
The contributions to this symposium approach these
problems from different theoretical and empirical angles.
They use newly developed assessment tasks along with
theoretical analyses, reaction time analyses and latent
variable modeling. The studies compare age groups ranging

Andrew Shtulman & Kelsey Harrington
Three decades of research in cognitive development and
science education have shown that students enter the science
classroom with rich theories of everyday phenomena that
often interfere with learning. Science educators are thus
charged with two tasks: not only must they help students
learn the correct, scientific theory at hand, but they must
also help students unlearn their earlier, less accurate
theories. This process has typically been characterized as a
kind of radical restructuring, with scientific knowledge
coming to overwrite earlier intuitions, but recent research
suggests that those intuitions may never be fully
overwritten. In this talk, I will present a method for
assessing the resilience of early intuitions in potentially any
domain of knowledge. This method entails asking
participants to verify two types of statements as quickly as
possible: “consistent” statements, whose truth value is
consistent across both naïve and scientific theories of a
particular domain (e.g., “The moon revolves around the
Earth,” which is true on both naïve and scientific theories of
astronomy), and “inconsistent” statements, which involve
the same conceptual relations but whose truth value differs
across those theories (e.g., “The Earth revolves around the
sun,” which is true on a scientific theory but not a naïve
theory).
If naïve theories continue to be represented in some form,
then the latter should cause greater cognitive conflict than
the former. Consistent with this hypothesis, adults have
been shown to verify inconsistent statements more slowly
and less accurately than consistent ones, and this effect has
been documented in domains as diverse as astronomy,
evolution, fractions, genetics, and mechanics. Naïve theories
thus seem to survive the acquisition of a mutually
incompatible scientific theory, coexisting with that theory
for many years to follow. Indeed, preliminary research with
an elderly population suggest that pre-scientific intuitions
may persist across the lifespan.

105

we asked whether EF depletion would impair 5-year-olds’
performance on a standard false belief task. While the
performance of a control group suggested that children at
this age have successfully acquired an explicit
understanding of how beliefs impact actions, the EF
depletion manipulation significantly impaired children’s
ability to use this understanding to guide their predictions of
others’ actions. A follow-up study asking children to
explain rather than predict actions based on false beliefs
suggests the role of EF in belief reasoning is not limited to
suppressing an egocentric point of view. Even when
presented with an outcome only consistent with their mature
understanding of beliefs, children subjected to EF depletion
were impaired in their ability to use that knowledge to
generate an explanation of others’ actions. Although
applied here to theory of mind development, I will also
discuss how this EF depletion method could be used to look
at the role that EF plays in adjudicating between coexisting
naïve and scientific theories in other domains.

A Latent Transition Model of Naïve and
Scientific Knowledge in Conceptual Change
Michael Schneider & Ilonca Hardy
Conceptual change requires learners to restructure parts of
their knowledge base. Prior research has raised the questions
to what extent misconceptions, everyday conceptions, and
scientific concepts can co-exist during the course of
conceptual change, whether this extent is stable over time,
and how it changes in response to educational interventions.
To address these questions we assessed 161 third-graders’
knowledge about floating and sinking of objects in liquids at
three measurement points by means of multiple-choice tests.
The tests assessed how strongly the children agreed with
commonly
found
but
mutually
incompatible
misconceptions, everyday conceptions, and scientific
concepts about floating and sinking.
A latent profile transition analysis of the test scores
revealed five profiles, some of which indicated the coexistence of inconsistent pieces of knowledge in learners.
The majority of students (63%) were on one of seven
developmental pathways between these profiles. Children’s
knowledge profiles at a point in time were useful predictors
of their further knowledge development. The extent of
co-existence of misconceptions, everyday conceptions, and
scientific concepts decreased on some individual
developmental paths, increased on others, and remained
stable on still others. The study demonstrates the usefulness
of explicit quantitative models of conceptual change. The
results support a constructivist perspective on conceptual
development, in which developmental changes of a learner’s
knowledge base result from idiosyncratic, yet systematic
knowledge construction processes.

Cognitive Utility as the Arbiter Among CoExisting Knowledge Structures
Stellan Ohlsson
There is little doubt that several different views of a topic
can co-exist in a person’s memory. For example, a science
historian might be able to reason about a chemical reaction
both from the perspective of the phlogiston theory and the
perspective of the oxygen theory of combustion. Laboratory
data from a re-categorization study in support of coexistence will be summarized briefly. If the individual
components of knowledge structures are conceived as
beliefs that are true or false, co-existence becomes
problematic: What does the person ‘really’ believe? The
belief-centered view also requires a theory of how people
evaluate the relative strength of the evidence for alternative
beliefs, a notoriously difficult problem.
Neither the history of science, nor social psychology, nor
cognitive psychology has produced a widely accepted
theory of how people decide on the strength of the evidence
for or against a particular belief. For example, in both
philosophical and political discourse, adherents of opposing
views sometimes exchange arguments and other types of
evidence for decades, even centuries, without resolving their
disagreements, casting doubt on the idea that the evaluation
of evidence is a real cognitive process. In this talk, I will
develop the alternative idea that the quantity that people
estimate is not the strength of evidence but the cognitive
utility of a knowledge structure. The utility-based view
dissolves some of the difficulties generated by the beliefcentered view, while raising some question of its own. An
explanation will be offered why it seems as if (some) people
are engaged in the evaluation of evidence. The utility-based
view supports the notion of hands-on science instruction,
but also explains why such instruction might fail under
certain circumstances. The utility-centered view was
anticipated by William James, Charles Sanders Peirce, and
other pragmatist philosophers.

Using Executive Function Depletion to Assess
Conflict between Advanced and Naïve Theories
Lindsey J. Powell & Susan Carey
Demonstrations that children’s executive function abilities
(EF) correlate with conceptual development in diverse
domains, including theory of mind, math, biology, and
physical reasoning, have lead researchers to propose that EF
plays a role in acquiring new concepts and theories.
However, it may also be the case that this relationship partly
reflects a critical role for EF in deploying new knowledge
after its acquisition, especially if people persist in
representing naïve theories that compete with their more
sophisticated or scientific understanding of a given domain.
We will discuss research that develops and deploys a
methodological tool that can help disentangle questions of
acquisition and expression by asking whether EF resources
are necessary for children to use newer theories in place of
older, naïve ones.
Adult research on executive function (or “ego”) depletion
has shown that deploying EF resources in one context
decreases the ability to draw upon further EF resources
immediately thereafter. An initial experiment demonstrated
that the same is true for 5-year-old children. Subsequently,

106

