UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Time Course of Language Use in Multiparty Negotiations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6zs6f2jj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Sagi, Eyal
Diermeier, Daniel

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Time Course of Language Use in Multiparty Negotiations
Eyal Sagi (eyal@u.northwestern.edu)
Kellogg School of Management, Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208 USA

Daniel Diermeier (d-diermeier@kellogg.northwestern.edu)
Kellogg School of Management, Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208 USA
Abstract
Language use is an important part of a negotiation. Prior
research has shown that similarity in language use is
conducive to reaching agreements. This paper uses Latent
Semantic Analysis to explore how the similarity of language
use develops and changes over the time course of a threeparty negotiation. Results support theories that suggest that a
gradual alignment of semantic representation increases the
likelihood that parties will form a coalition.
Keywords: Negotiation, Coalition Formation, Linguistic
Entrainment, Psycholinguistics, Latent Semantic Analysis.

Introduction
The language used by parties in a negotiation is a crucial
aspect of their negotiation strategy and can greatly affect the
outcome of the negotiation. Research over the past few
decades has demonstrated that an agreement in a negotiation
is often preceded by convergence in language use among the
negotiating parties (cf. Miller, 2005). In the context of
multi-party negotiation, such convergence is evident
between the parties that reach an agreement, but not the
excluded parties (Huffaker, Swaab, and Diermeier, 2011).
In this paper we extend the results of Huffaker et al. by
analyzing the similarity of adjacent conversation moves.
This type of analysis enables us to look at the time course of
coalition formation and not just at the overall similarity of
language use between participants.
Multi-party negotiation is naturally more complex than
that a two-party negotiation (Bazerman et al., 2000). This is
especially true since an agreement can be reached among a
subset of the negotiating parties. Therefore being excluded
from an agreement is a real possibility. Nevertheless, partial
coalition agreements are often less desirable than
agreements that involve the group as a whole because they
are less efficient or do not use all of the available resources.
However, even being part of a partial agreement is more
preferable than no agreement at all or of being excluded
from an agreement reached by others.
The added complexity of multi-party negotiation has been
shown to affect the patterns of language use in such
negotiations. Following the framework of Communication
Accommodation Theory (CAT; cf. Giles et al., 2007),
Huffaker et al. (2011) demonstrates how the formation of
coalition is affected by specific aspects of language use by
the negotiating parties. Specifically, they find that partners
to a coalition show more similarity in language use than

participants who were not part of a coalition. The use of
assents was also found to correlate positively with being a
part of the coalition agreement. In contrast, the use of
negative emotion words was a detrimental predictor to being
a part of a coalition.
These results are congruent with empirical findings in
psycholinguistics that show that in successful dialogues the
representations and language used by dialogue partners tend
to converge over time (e.g., Brennan and Clark, 1996).
However, while Huffaker et al. show that similarity in
language use is a factor in the outcome of the negotiation,
they use the entire negotiation as the unit of analysis.
Consequently, their results do not explore the time course of
this similarity. This paper aims to extend their results by
looking at whether the language used by the participants
changes over time.
On the one hand, theories of entrainment and alignment in
language use by dialogue participants, such as that put forth
by Pickering and Garrod (2004), argue that language
similarity is the result of gradual alignment of language use
by the participants in the negotiation. The better the
alignment the more likely the aligned parties would be to
form a coalition. Such theories would lead to the prediction
that language similarity should increase over the course of
the negotiation and ultimately result in the parties forming a
coalition.
In contrast, Swaab et al. (2011) shows that language
mimicry during a negotiation is a factor in the outcome of
the negotiation, but only when it occurred early in the
negotiation. Therefore, we might expect that early similarity
in language use might lead to the forming of a coalition later
on.
It is also possible that both of these factors contribute to
the effect that similarity in language use has on the resulting
coalition. If that is the case we would expect to find not only
that eventual coalition partners show more similar language
early on than non-coalition partners, but that this difference
increases over time.

Measuring similarity in language use
Convergence of language use in a dialogue or negotiation
has traditionally been measured by hand coding the
transcripts of negotiation dialogue. Such hand coding is
time consuming and, to a certain degree, requires the coders
to interpret the language used by the negotiators. In contrast,
the metric we use in this paper is automatically derived by

3343

using the Latent Semantic Analysis cosine similarity of a
pair of utterances. Such a measure has been used in the past
as a measure of textual coherence (Foltz, Kintsch, and
Landauer, 1998) and as a measure of linguistic entrainment
(Huffaker et al., 2006).
LSA vectors for individual words are generated based on
the co-occurrence patterns of words in large corpora. These
vectors identify points in a high-dimensional space (100
dimensions in this case). The more likely two words are to
co-occur with similar words the closer they will be in the
space. For example, the vectors for sun and moon are fairly
close together and show a cosine similarity of .53 whereas
man and moon are not very similar and show a cosine
similarity of .03. Moreover, when several word vectors from
a single utterance are combined together, as was done in this
study, the result identifies a point in space that represents
the overall topic of the utterance.
It is important to note that this kind of automatic measure
ignores certain linguistic elements that a coder might use.
For instance, the use of negation is generally ignored, while
sarcasm and metaphors are often misrepresented. However,
since we are interested in the convergence of language use –
that is, whether participants are using similar language to
convey their (sometimes opposing) ideas, this type of
analysis seems appropriate.

Method
Huffaker et al. (2011)
The data used in this paper comes from a study reported by
Huffaker et al. (2011). They patterned their study after a
pure coalition game outlined by Raiffa (1982). In that study,
180 MBA students were divided into 60 three-person
groups. Within each group, participants were assigned to
one of three roles (A, B, C) and instructed that they were to
use an online chat room to negotiate a split of that payoff
amongst themselves. Participants were unaware of the
identities of the other participants in the negotiation.
Table 1: Payoff Table in the Negotiation Game from
Huffaker et al. (2011)
Possible Agreements
Total Payoff
$0
A alone
$0
B alone
$0
C alone
$118,000
A and B
$84,000
A and C
$50,000
B and C
$121,000
A, B, and C
Note: A, B, and C represent the participants in the
negotiation. The payoff is split between the parties that
reach the described final agreement.
All participants were provided with the payoff table in
advance of the negotiation (see Table 1). As is evident from
the table, different coalition formations receive different

payoffs, and if no coalition is formed no participant receives
any payoff. The participants were allowed to negotiate how
the payoff is distributed between them. These payoff options
provide incentives for the participants to join up with
another participant so that they can take advantage of the
resulting weak bargaining position of the third participant.
However, the payoff table is designed so that the third
player can always make an attractive offer to one of the
members of the initial coalition to induce a defection from
the preliminary agreement. Consequently, participants are
incentivized not only to be a part of a forming coalition, but
also to ensure that it is a stable coalition and that their
partner(s) will not defect.
Participants in the experiment were placed at computers
in different rooms so that their only means of
communication with each other was through the provided
chat software. They logged into a public chat room to begin
the negotiation process.
The software also allowed participants to move from the
public chat room to three private chat rooms. That is,
participant A could move into one of the private chat rooms
together with participant B so that they could negotiate
without participant C being privy to the content of the
negotiation. However, all participants were alerted
whenever a participant entered or exited a chat room so that
the excluded participant was always aware that the two
other participants might be negotiating in private. This
mimics some of the real-world aspects of a negotiation,
where parties are often able to communicate in private, but
the fact that they communicated in private is common
knowledge. A private exchange of information can also
provide an indication that the two parties are forming a
coalition.

Semantic Analysis
The analysis in this paper is based on the transcripts of
these negotiations. An LSA vector was computed for each
individual utterance by using vector addition to combine the
vectors of all of the content-bearing words in the utterance.
When an utterance did not include any content-bearing
words, a null vector was used to represent it. The vector
space used for this analysis was generated by Infomap
(http://infomap-nlp.sourceforge.net/ ; Schütze, 1997) using
the written part of the British National Corpus.
Next, the correlation of the vectors representing
temporally adjacent utterances was computed1. These
correlations were not computed when one of the utterances
had a null vector or when the two utterances did not occur in
the same chat context (i.e., when they occurred in different
chat rooms).
In some cases identical vectors represented adjacent
entries. These were generally the result of statements such
as “I agree” or “X is present” and were found either at the
1

Because the first dimension of LSA vector spaces tends to
correlate with the frequency and length of the text it was dropped
from the analysis (cf. Hu et al., 2007)

3344

2.

To test these hypotheses we conducted a 2x2 ANOVA.
The type of utterance (successful vs. unsuccessful) and its
position in the negotiation (early utterance vs. late
utterance) were the independent variables. The dependent
measure was the average utterance-to-utterance correlation
for utterance pairs conforming to the condition within a
particular session. The means for each of the conditions can
be seen in Figure 1.
There was no significant difference in similarity of
language use between early utterances (M=0.15, SD=0.08)
and late utterances (M=0.14, SD=0.09) (F(1, 186)<1, n.s.).
There was a slight trend where successful utterances
(M=0.15, SD=0.08) showed more similar language use than
unsuccessful utterances (M=0.13, SD=0.09) (F(1,
186)=2.86, MSE=0.01, p=0.093).

Successful

Results
As mentioned above, we derived two distinct hypotheses:
1. Following accounts of linguistic entrainment (e.g.,
Pickering and Garrod, 2004), we hypothesized that
coalition formation will be accompanied by the
alignment of language use. Consequently, if
linguistic entrainment occurs as part of the formation
of a coalition, successful utterances should become
more similar to their responses than unsuccessful
2

utterances would be to their responses late in the
negotiation. This will result in a significant
interaction between the type of utterance and its
position in the negotiation.
Following the literature on the effectiveness of
mimicry in negotiations (e.g., Swaab, et al. 2011), we
hypothesized that early mimicry would result in a
higher likelihood of eventual success in the
negotiation. Therefore, if mimicry is an effective tool
in these negotiations, successful utterances should be
more similar to their responses than unsuccessful
ones early in the negotiation.

Mean Similarity of Use

very beginning or the very end of the negotiation. They
were dropped from the analysis because they did not appear
to represent a meaningful part of the negotiation. That is,
they did not represent linguistic convergence between
participants but rather formulaic utterances that occurred
mostly before the negotiation started or after it has
concluded. Regardless, the results presented here are
quantitatively and qualitatively similar whether these data
points are included or excluded.
In order to test for convergence in language use we
categorized the utterance pairs based on the two participants
that contributed to them. We predicted that participants who
were included in the resulting agreement would have more
similar language use than those who included a participant
who were excluded from the agreement. For example, if an
AB agreement was reached, utterance pairs between A and
B would be predicted to have more similar language use
(i.e., utterance-to-utterance correlation) than those between
A and C or B and C. Consequently, we divided the utterance
pairs to those in which both participants were included in
the final coalition (successful utterances) and those in which
at one of the participants was excluded from the coalition
(unsuccessful utterances). Importantly, when the final
agreement included all parties, all of the utterance pairs
were considered to be successful. In contrast, when no
agreement was reached all of the utterances were considered
to be unsuccessful.
Because the parties are unfamiliar to each other when
they enter the negotiation we also expected that this
difference would emerge over the course of the negotiation
and become apparent only once a coalition begins to form.
Therefore, we divided the utterance pairs based on their
position in the negotiation2 – If the first utterance of the pair
occurred in the initial half of the negotiation it was
classified as an early utterance whereas utterances that
occurred in the second half of the negotiation were
considered late utterances.

Unsuccessful

0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
Early

Late

Time in Negotiation

For the purposes of this analysis we use a coarse grain division
of time (halves) because some of the discussions consist of
relatively few utterances (under 50). This is adequate for the
purpose of our basic hypotheses, but does not provide a good sense
of how the utterance-to-utterance similarity changes over time. It is
possible to utilize smaller time units in an analysis of this type to
gain further insight into the temporal progression of the negotiation
(e.g. Figure 2). Essentially, the choice of temporal units for
analysis represents a tradeoff between precision and statistical
power.

Figure 1: Similarity of Language use by utterance pair type
and position in the negotiation. Error bars represent standard
error.
More importantly, the interaction between utterance pair
type and position was significant – The difference in
language use between successful and unsuccessful
utterances was greater for late utterances than early
utterances
(F(1,
186)=7.15,
MSE=0.01,
p<.01).
Furthermore, Tukey HSD tests identified a significant

3345

Successful

Unsuccessful

Mean Similarity of Use

0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

% of the negotiation
Figure 2: Mean similarity of language use by utterance pair type over the course of the negotiations. Each time
period corresponds to 10% of the negotiation (calculated individually for each negotiation). Error bars represent
standard error.
difference between late successful utterances (M=0.16,
SD=0.08) and late unsuccessful utterances (M=0.11,
SD=0.09) (D=0.051, p<.01) but not between early
successful utterances (M=0.14, SD=0.07) and early
unsuccessful utterances (M=0.15, SD=0.10) (D=-0.01, n.s.).
This result provides support for accounts in which a gradual
alignment in language use and semantic representation leads
to a likelihood of forming a coalition (Hypothesis 1).
However, we found no support for accounts in which early
similarity in language use (e.g., mimicry) leads to the
formation of a coalition (Hypothesis 2).
Interestingly, while there appears to be a slight increase in
the utterance-to-utterance similarity of successful utterance
pairs from the first half to the second half of the negotiation,
the observed interaction seems to be driven more by an
unexpected decrease in the utterance-to-utterance similarity
of unsuccessful utterances.
It might be possible to shed some light on this unexpected
result be examining how the similarity of language use
unfolds (Figure 2). A qualitative examination of the trends
shows some evidence for early alignments of language use
between the first 20% of the negotiation and the next 20%
among all parties. However, the striking difference between
the successful and unsuccessful utterance pairs is most
evident starting around the 60% point of the negotiation, on
average. At this point there is a sharp drop in the similarity
in language use of unsuccessful utterances. It appears that at
that time period in the negotiation the coalitions are starting
to form or have already formed (see Table 2 for sample of
successful and unsuccessful utterances from that time
period).

Table 2: Sample utterances from the 60% slice of the
negotiation (each utterance is from a different session)
Successful Utterances
1 Do you still agree on our terms?
2 So lets talk about the split.
3 We can partner 3 ways and give them 3k
4 I presume you would rather do 72/28, right?
5 Can we say 69 to A, 48 to B and 4 to C to get a deal
Unsuccessful Utterances
1 Too late, we already agreed, its over, take it like a man
2 50/50 I lose out. John will give me 58/26
3 Though you have all the power, you need either one of us
4 27/3 doesn't sound reasonable
5 Just don't steal my shoes.

3346

Discussion

References

The analysis presented here, based on data collected by
Huffaker et al. (2010), supports the hypothesis that the
gradual alignment in language use is a contributing factor in
reaching an agreement over the course of a negotiation.
Participants in the study that were part of the final coalition
showed more similar language use in the second half of the
experiment than participants that were not part of the final
coalition.
Interestingly, while the predicted interaction was found,
the observed effect was somewhat different than expected. It
appears that the major shift in language use leading to, or
immediately following, the formation of a coalition is more
likely to be a reduction in the utterance-to-utterance
similarity for the excluded parties rather than an increase
among the included parties. The causes for this require
further study, but it seems possible that this is due to a
change in the pattern of language use that the excluded party
is not a part of. For instance, after agreeing to form a
coalition, the parties might shift to discussing how to split
the payoff while the excluded party might still attempt to
convince one of the other participants to join a coalition.
The results of this paper seem to suggest that multi-party
negotiations, while more complex than two-party
negotiations and dialogues, follow many of the same
patterns as their simpler counterparts. However, the added
dynamics of such a negotiation also allows researchers to
examine topics that are often difficult to explore when only
two parties are involved in a linguistic exchange. In this
case, it appears that when a party to the conversation or
negotiation is “left behind”, it might also fall out of
linguistic alignment with the other participants.
Nevertheless, there is much room left for further analysis.
While the initial analysis reported here provides some
promising results, it is not conclusive. Furthermore, it opens
the door for additional questions. For instance, it is possible
that a 2-party coalition would be more likely to form during
a private exchange rather than a public one. However,
because of the relatively short length of some of the
negotiations (under 50 utterances divided among the three
parties), we elected not to separate the discussions based on
whether they were part of a public exchange or a private
one.
Another possible avenue for future investigation is to
explore whether the patterns of linguistic entrainment differ
based on the emerging final coalition. For instance, would a
final 3-party coalition show a pattern consistent with a
particular 2-party coalition up to some point at which the
final participant in the negotiation also joins in? This is an
interesting, if complicated, question that we leave open for
future research.

Bazerman, M. H., Curhan, J. R., Moore, D. A., & Valley K.
L. (2000). Negotiation. Annual Review of Psychology, 51,
279-314.
Brennan, S. E., & Clark, H. H. (1996) Conceptual pacts and
lexical choice in conversation. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 22, 14821493.
Foltz, P. W., Kintsch, W., & Landauer, T. K. (1998). The
measurement of textual coherence with Latent Semantic
Analysis. Discourse Processes, 25, 285-307.
Giles, H., Willemyns, M., Gallois C., & Anderson, M. C.
(2007) Accommodating a new frontier: The context of
law enforcement. In K. Feidler (Ed.), Social
Communication. New York, NY: Psychology Press.
Hu, X., Cai, Z., Wiemer-Hastings, P., Graesser, A., &
McNamara, D. (2007) Strength, Limitations, and
Extensions of LSA. In McNamara D, Landauer TK,
Dennis S, Kintsch W (Eds.) LSA: A Road to Meaning.
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Huffaker, D. A., Jorgensen, J., Iacobelli, F., Tepper, P., &
Cassell, J. (2006, June). Computational measures for
language similarity across time in online communities.
Paper presented at the Analyzing Conversation in Text
and Speech (ACTS) Workshop at Human Language
Technologies – North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (HLTNAACL), New York, NY.
Huffaker, D. A., Swaab, R. I., & Diermeier D. (2011) The
Language of Coalition Formation in Online Multiparty
Negotiations. Journal of Language and Psychology, 30,
66-81.
Miller, K. (2005) Communication Theories: Perspectives,
Processes, and Contexts. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Pickering, M. J., & Garrod, S. (2004) Towards a
mechanistic Psychology of dialogue. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 27, 169-266.
Raiffa, H. (1982) The art and science of negotiation.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Schütze, H. (1997) Ambiguity in language learning:
computational and cognitive models. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.
Swaab, R. I., Maddux, W., & Sinaceur, M. (2011) Virtual
linguistic mimicry: When and how online mimicry
increases negotiation outcomes. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 47, 616-621.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank David Huffaker and Roderick
Swaab for sharing the data from their study.

3347

