UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Role of Achievement Goal Motivation in Self-Explanation and Knowledge Transfer

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7sf9c39x

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Belenky, Daniel
Nokes-Malach, Timothy

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Role of Achievement Goal Motivation in Self-Explanation and Knowledge
Transfer
Daniel M. Belenky (dbelenky@andrew.cmu.edu)
Human-Computer Interaction Institute, 2602H Newell Simon Hall, 5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Timothy J. Nokes-Malach (nokes@pitt.edu)
Department of Psychology, 818 Learning Research and Development Center, 3939 O’Hara St.
Pittsburgh, PA 15260 USA
Abstract
Self-explanation is an important constructive cognitive
process that helps students learn in such a way that they can
flexibly transfer their knowledge to solve novel problems
(Chi, Bassok, Lewis, Reimann, & Glaser, 1989). However,
research has not addressed what leads students to
spontaneously self-explain, in the absence of prompting. The
present study experimentally manipulates student motivation
(in terms of achievement goals) and measures what influence
this has on self-explanation and transfer. Participants (N =
140) received goal framings that reflected either a masteryapproach goal (striving to develop one’s understanding), a
performance-approach goal (an aim to outperform others), a
performance-avoidance goal (avoid doing worse than others)
or a no-goal control. This framing was applied to a set of
learning and test tasks on basic statistics, which participants
completed while thinking aloud. Results showed a benefit for
a performance-avoidance condition in terms of both higher
levels of self-explanation and transfer. This unexpected result
is discussed in terms of theories of motivation and learning,
and their potential impact on educational practice.
Keywords: Knowledge Transfer, Motivation, Achievement
Goals, Self-Explanation, Education

Introduction
A fundamental goal of instruction is to foster learning which
leads to successful, flexible, and useful knowledge transfer.
Research and theoretical development which elucidates how
knowledge transfers has a long history in psychology and
cognitive science, and continues to be important for
educational psychologists and learning scientists.
Continuing to advance our understanding of what sorts of
learning activities lead to transfer allows for
recommendations on how to improve educational practices.
Evidence has accumulated that a promising method for
promoting flexible knowledge transfer is to increase the
conceptual quality of the original learning (Pashler et al.,
2007). As such, constructive learning processes which
promote the acquisition of more abstracted knowledge (e.g.,
schemas) are likely to promote successful knowledge
transfer. A representative example of such a process is selfexplanation (Chi, Bassok, Lewis, Reimann, & Glaser,
1989), which is the process by which students generate, for
themselves, explanations which go beyond the text,
inferring underlying principles and highlighting important
interrelations. Chi et al. (1989) documented a large

difference in the amount and quality of self-explanations
between those students who ultimately go on to flexibly
transfer their knowledge and those who do not. A number of
studies since have documented that students can be
prompted to engage in self-explanation (e.g. Aleven &
Koedinger, 2002) with beneficial effects for learning and
knowledge transfer. However, a fundamental question about
self-explanation has been left unaddressed; what leads
students to engage in self-explanation, in the absence of
prompting? It is clear that some students do so, to their
benefit, while others do not. It is also likely that whether
students are capable of self-explaining profitably is not the
sole limitation, given the experimental literature which
shows a benefit for self-explanation prompts. In the present
research, we address the possibility that student motivation
leads to the spontaneous use of self-explanation during
learning, and that this can influence the likelihood of
successfully transferring. While Chi et al. (1989)
conjectured that higher levels of self-explanation are “a
natural consequence of wanting to understand the solution
example better” (pg. 160), no research has systematically
tested this claim. As we will review in the subsequent
section, this sort of motivation has been studied extensively
by researchers of “achievement goal theory,” which has
documented just such a desire, labeling it a “masteryapproach” goal. The present study leverages achievement
goals as a tool for experimentally investigating how
motivation influences self-explanation and transfer.

Achievement Goal Motivation
Achievement goals are the reasons people have for engaging
in achievement settings, such as school or work. An
achievement setting is one that is organized around one’s
competence in a domain, and an achievement goal describes
a goal a person has in relation to this competence, such as
wanting to use it demonstrate how good they are in this
domain, or wanting to develop their competence so that they
can complete more challenging work. A large body of
research and theory development has led to a generallyaccepted framework which proposes three main classes of
goals (Elliot, McGregor, & Gable, 1999); mastery-approach,
performance-approach, and performance-avoidance. A
mastery-approach goal is an aim to improve or develop
one’s competence or understanding. A performance-

1881

approach goal reflects striving to demonstrate one’s
competence by doing better than one’s peers, while a
performance-avoidance goal occurs when one strives not to
demonstrate one’s incompetence, compared to peers1.
Research has shown that these goals produce a
characteristic pattern of effects on various learning
behaviors, affective states, and measures of performance.
Specifically, performance-avoidance goals tend to be
associated with negative outcomes, such as lower
performance and worse study strategies (e.g., Elliot, Shell,
Henry & Maier, 2005, Elliot, McGregor, & Gable, 1999).
Performance-approach goals have been associated with a
mixed pattern of results, such that they are sometimes
associated with positive effects on grades, but also with
more shallow learning strategies (e.g., Elliot, McGregor, &
Gable 2001). Mastery-approach goals tend to be associated
with positive affective outcomes, such as increased interest
(Harackiewicz, Barron, Pintrich, Elliot, & Thrash, 2002).
Results relating to grades are inconsistent, with the majority
of studies finding no relationship between grades and
transfer (Linnenbrink-Garcia, Tyson, & Patall, 2008).
Critically for understanding the present study, masteryapproach goals have been linked to better performance on
more difficult tasks (Utman, 1997), as well as self-reported
constructive learning processes (e.g., Elliot, McGregor, &
Gable, 1999). Additionally, a small number of studies have
documented a link between mastery-approach goals and
knowledge transfer (e.g., Belenky & Nokes-Malach, 2012).
It is important to note that the prevailing method for
measuring achievement goals in this research literature is
through self-report questionnaires and assessed at the level
of academic courses. That is, goals for a particular course
are assessed at the beginning of a semester and then are
correlated to self-reports of learning behaviors collected
during the semester, as well as achievement measures such
as grades on a final exam. However, this “course-based”
style of measurement may inadvertently measure more than
goal motivation. That is, it may reflect other personality
characteristics (e.g., Need for Cognition; Cacioppo & Petty,
1982), beliefs (e.g., Naïve theories of intelligence, Dweck,
1999) and other variables that are not motivation, per se.
Developing a strong theory of how motivation influences
behavior requires a narrower focus on a task-by-task basis.
As such, in the current study, we focus on “task-based”
achievement goals, and draw upon the literature that
experimentally manipulates these goals for a given task. In
studies of this nature experimenters provide some
information to frame the task for participants in such a way
that leads to the adoption of a particular achievement goal.
The question addressed in the present research is whether
one can produce a change in self-explanation behaviors by
manipulating motivation for the task, such that a benefit is
1

Readers familiar with achievement goal research may note the
exclusion of mastery-avoidance goals in this discussion. As these
goals are a newer addition to the field, and have less empirical
studies to establish their effect on learning and transfer, they are
not a focus of the current work.

observed for knowledge transfer. Specifically, we test the
hypothesis that manipulated mastery-approach goals predict
increased self-explanation, compared to performanceapproach or performance-avoidance goals. Additionally, we
expect that the mastery-approach condition will produce
higher levels of transfer, as observed for course-based goals
in prior research using similar materials (Belenky & NokesMalach, 2012).

Method
Participants
The participants were 140 undergraduates from the
University of Pittsburgh, who participated in exchange for
course credit. The first 105 participants were randomly
assigned to the mastery-approach, performance-approach, or
performance-avoidance conditions (35 each). The no-goal
control was collected the following academic semester.

Materials
The materials were presented to participants in binders.
Within each packet was a pre-test, a set of learning
activities, activity questionnaires, a post-test, and a final set
of questionnaires.
Learning Activities. The learning materials were adapted
from the “Tell-and-Practice” materials used in prior research
(Belenky & Nokes-Malach, 2012; Schwartz & Martin,
2004). These materials comprise worked examples and
problems that introduce, model, and give practice problems
on two basic statistical concepts; mean deviation and
standardized scores.
Specifically, participants first received a worked example
on how to calculate mean deviation, which demonstrates the
standard procedure. This was followed by a learning activity
problem that presented data from four pitching machines
and asked the participant to decide which of the four is the
most reliable. The datasets are designed in such a way that
contrasting between them should help focus participants’
attention to the critical features of the mean deviation
formula (and their conceptual underpinnings), such as the
number of data points, the spread, etc. However, with the
tell-and-practice nature of the activity, these aspects could
be ignored in favor of a “plug-and-chug” method.
After completing this problem, participants moved on to
the next worked example, which described a scenario where
two students in different classes want to know who did
better on a test, given that their teachers may grade
differently. The worked example showed the participant
how to draw a histogram for each of the classes, and then
how to map the given information about means, mean
deviations, and the particular students’ scores onto the
histogram. Finally, it explains how the participant can use
this information to decide which is better. This procedure is
roughly equivalent to graphically estimating a standardized
score. Immediately following this worked example was
another learning activity problem; this one asked students to
decide which of two world records, from two different track
and field events, was “more shattered.” Students were given

1882

a set of scores from two different events and two
exceptional values for each, and told to use the procedure
they had just learned to help them decide which had a more
impressive performance, given the rest of the competitors.
Test Materials. The pre-test consisted of a procedural
fluency measure, a transfer problem, and a graphical
representation problem. The post-test included, in order,
three procedural fluency items, a worked example on
standardization, a mean deviation word problem, an openended explanation problem, and a transfer problem. This
manuscript will focus exclusively on the transfer measures,
which dealt with the target concept of using standardized
scores to compare values from two different distributions.
These problems presented an exceptional value from each of
two different distributions, along with their means and
standard deviations, and asked the participant to decide
which of the two values was more impressive. One problem
dealt with the distance of homeruns, and the other with
scores on a driving test. Correctly solving these problems
requires calculating a standardized score, so that the degree
to which each value is exceptional, compared to the
distribution it comes from, can be determined.
In accordance with research on transfer as Preparation for
Future Learning, a worked example was embedded in the
post-test, a few problems before the transfer. This worked
example describes a scenario (with data) in which a
standardized score is needed to help determine which of two
performances in different athletic events was better,
demonstrates the formula for a calculating a standardized
score, and uses that formula to solve the problem. This is
followed by another very simple problem and a prompt to
use the formula to solve it, which all participants solved
correctly. Correctly solving the subsequent transfer problem
indicates that participants learned this procedure well, and
understood that it could help them solve problems where
they need to compare across two different distributions.
Activity Questionnaires. Following the learning activities,
participants completed two pages of questionnaires. The
first page contained a manipulation check modeled on prior
research (e.g., Elliot et al., 2005). The second measured
their task-based goal adoption during the learning activity,
which serves as another measure to ensure that the goal
manipulations produced the anticipated effects. The
manipulation check asked students “At the beginning of the
learning phase, you were asked to focus on just one goal for
this study. What was it?” (the manipulation will be
described in the next section). It asked participants to check
only one of the possible responses, which corresponded to
performance-avoidance,
performance-approach,
and
mastery-approach.
The second page was a measure of their achievement goal
adoption during the just-completed learning phase.
Specifically, this questionnaire had six Likert-scale (1-7)
items that each started with the stem, “While completing
these activities,” which was followed by descriptions of
either a mastery-approach (skill development and improved
understanding), performance-approach (doing better than

others), and performance-avoidance (not doing worse than
others) goal. Two items of each of these goal types was
included, and, after ensuring that they had adequate
reliability (Cronbach’s α = .65 for mastery-approach, .84 for
performance-approach, .88 for performance-avoidance) a
construct score was created for each by averaging across the
two items.
Final Questionnaires. The questionnaires administered at
the end of the experiment assessed participants’ task-based
goal and strategy adoption during the experiment, their
course-based achievement goals for mathematics, selfreported strategy usage during the experiment, and
demographic information. These will not be addressed in
the current manuscript, but the general pattern of results on
the goal-related measures was similar to that on the activity
questionnaire and manipulation check, which will be
presented in the results section.

Procedure
The procedure followed the order of the packet, with
additional instructions provided by the experimenter on the
talk-aloud protocol and the goal manipulation, which both
occurred after the pre-test. Specifically, the procedure
consisted of: pre-test (5 minutes), talk-aloud training (2
minutes), goal manipulations (5 minutes), learning activities
and activity questionnaires (20 minutes), post-test (20
minutes), final set of questionnaires, and a short debriefing
(~8 minutes). Important aspects of the procedure carried out
by the experimenter will be described next.
Talk-Aloud Training. After the pre-test, the experimenter
informed the participants that they would be recorded as
they talked aloud during parts of the experiment. To practice
doing so, participants were given a sheet with simple
arithmetic problems and asked to talk aloud as they solved
them. The experimenter listened and gave corrective
feedback if participants were not talking aloud properly
(i.e., without reflection, but simply saying what was in their
working memory at the time; see Ericsson & Simon, 1993).
Goal Manipulations. After the talk-aloud training,
participants in the experimental conditions received the goal
manipulation. The manipulations focused on the reasons
that the study was being conducted, and how that should
influence the goals participants should adopt as they went
through the study. These were constructed based on
reported studies (e.g., Elliot et al., 2005) and were delivered
verbally by the experimenter in a conversational manner, as
additional information about the study. Specifically, all
participants first heard a general statement about how
people can have different goals in different situations before
receiving the manipulation specific to their condition.
Among other aspects of the manipulation (see Table 1), the
mastery-approach condition was told that their goal should
be “to develop your understanding of these materials and
your skill in solving these types of problems.” The
performance-approach condition was told to focus on the

1883

Table 1: Representative Excerpts from the Goal Manipulations
Mastery-Approach

Performance-Approach

Performance-Avoidance

…we are interested in developing a set
of materials that help students learn
this material well.
… I really want you to … try to
develop your understanding of these
materials
….At the end of the study, I will … give
you feedback on how you much you
improved from the beginning of the
study to the end

… we are trying to find those
(students)
that
produce
better
performance than most of the other
participants.
. focus on trying to perform better than
the majority of other participants
throughout the study...
…. At the end of the study, I … give
you feedback on how you performed
relative to other participants…

…we will examine each person’s
performance and compare it to other
students to find instances when people
do particularly poorly
… try and not perform any worse than
the majority of other participants
throughout the study
… At the end of the study, I will … give
you feedback on how you performed
relative to other participants…

goal “to perform well compared to other participants.” The
performance-avoidance condition was told their goal should
be “to not perform poorly compared to other participants.”

Protocol Coding
Transcriptions were made of the verbalizations participants
produced during the learning phase, the worked example in
the test, and the transfer problem. These were then broken
down into utterances (defined as one classifiable thought,
usually at the level of a sentence). Each utterance was then
coded according to a rubric which was developed based on
prior research on self-explanation, and refined to reflect the
statements made by participants through a process of
iterated revisions. Although the full rubric covered a
number of categories, this manuscript will focus on a small
set that were a priori considered the most theoretically
interesting. In particular, we focus on those statements
coded as self-explanations and as comparisons between the
transfer problem and the earlier worked example, as these
are considered strong evidence of constructive learning
processes (Renkl, 1997).

Results
The first set of analyses deal with the question of how
successful the manipulations were in influencing goal
adoption. The two measures of goal adoption reported here
are the manipulation check – which asked participants in the
three experimental conditions to recall the goal they had
been asked to focus on – and the activity questionnaire.
The
forced-choice
manipulation
check
clearly
demonstrated that participants knew which goal they were
asked to focus on, χ2 (4, N = 105) = 176.35, p <.001, with
94% of the participants in the experimental conditions
correctly choosing their condition. Each of the activity
questionnaire goal adoption scores (calculated as described
in the methods section) were also analyzed in separate oneway ANOVAs. There were significant differences between
the three conditions for each of the mastery-approach,
performance-approach, and performance-avoidance goal
adoption scores, Fs (2, 102) > 9.35, ps < .001.
Additionally, a series of planned comparisons was
conducted between each pair of conditions on each goal
adoption score. On the measure of mastery-approach goal
adoption, the mastery-approach condition was significantly
higher than the performance-approach, t (68) = 2.59, p =

.012, and performance-avoidance, t (68) = 4.13, p < .001,
conditions on mastery-approach goal adoption, but not
significantly different from the control condition, t(68) =
1.53, p = .130, (see Table 2). For performance-approach
goal adoption, the performance-approach condition was
significantly higher than the mastery-approach, t (67) =
9.17, p < .001, or control condition, t (68) = 6.36, p < .001
but not significantly higher than the performance-avoidance
condition, t(67) = 1.90, p = .062. Finally, performanceavoidance goals were adopted the least by the masteryapproach condition, ts (68) > 4.42, ps < .001. All other
conditions did not differ statistically in their performancevoidance goal adoption, ts (68) < .86, ps > .39.
All told, the manipulations clearly created a different
pattern of results across the mastery, control, and
performance conditions. However, the performanceapproach and performance-avoidance conditions did not
differentiate as cleanly.
Table 2: Activity Questionnaire Means (and Standard
Deviations).
Activity
Activity
Activity
MasteryPerformance- PerformanceApproach
Approach
Avoidance
Mastery11.31 (2.19)
5.24 (3.20)
5.51 (3.37)
Approach
Performance9.94 (2.24)
11.63 (2.57)
9.89 (3.05)
Approach
Performance8.74 (2.96)
10.44 (2.63)
9.83 (3.62)
Avoidance
Control
10.43 (2.63)
7.17 (3.26)
9.20 (3.58)

Goals and Transfer
Given that the manipulations seemed to produce the desired
goal adoption, we turn to the first hypothesis; namely, that
mastery-approach goals would lead to better transfer. As the
transfer problem was coded dichotomously, correct or
incorrect, logistic regression was used to assess differences
between the conditions in the likelihood of correctly solving
the transfer problem. The logistic regression model
predicting the likelihood of transfer based on the categorical
variable of condition was significant, χ2 (3, N = 140) =
11.24, p = .011. This analysis revealed that both the control
(54%) and mastery-approach (49%) conditions were
significantly less likely to transfer than the performance-

1884

avoidance condition (83%). There was no significant
difference between the performance-approach (69%) and
the other three conditions.
While the mastery-approach condition did not increase
the likelihood of transfer, it is possible that the degree to
which a student adopts a mastery-approach goal would
benefit transfer. To analyze this prediction, goal adoption
(as measured by the construct scores from the activity
questionnaire) was entered as a predictor of a transfer in a
logistic regression model. This model was significantly
better than a constant-only model, χ2 (3, N = 140) = 11.92, p
= .008. Within this model, the only variable which is
significantly different from zero is the performanceapproach construct score, Wald’s χ2 (1, N = 140) = 9.36, p =
.002, Exp (B) = 1.19. For every unit increase in adopted
performance-approach goals, the likelihood of transfer
increased by 19%.
To summarize, it appears that mastery-approach goals did
not lead to an increased likelihood of transfer2. Instead, the
performance-avoidance condition had the highest levels of
transfer, and, in terms of goal adoption, only the degree to
which performance-approach goals were endorsed predicted
transfer.

Goals and Self-Explanation
The second hypothesis being investigated was that masteryapproach goals would lead to more self-explanation. Results
for the three experimental conditions are reported here, as
coding for the control condition remains ongoing. One
participant from the mastery-approach condition is not
included in these analyses, as her think aloud data was lost
due to a technical error.
There were no significant differences between the
experimental conditions in the number of self-explanations
made overall, F (2, 101) = .01, p = .995, or on time spent
making self-explanation statements, F (2, 101) = .93, p =
.40. Subsequent analyses examined self-explanations made
during each of the particular components of the study that
were coded (the learning phase, worked example, and
transfer problem). There were no differences between the
conditions on self-explanations made during the learning
phase, F (2, 101) = .37, p = .689. For the worked example
on standardization, there was a significant difference
between conditions, F (2, 101) = 4.00, p = .021, η2 = .073.
Post-hoc analysis revealed a higher degree of explanation
statements for the performance-avoidance condition (M =
.94, SD = 1.49) compared to the performance-approach
condition (M = .37, SD = .54) and the mastery-approach
condition (M = .38, SD = .49). Finally, for the transfer
problem, there was no difference between conditions on
self-explanation, F (2, 101) = 2.39, p = .097.
The other type of constructive learning behavior that was
analyzed was comparisons back to the worked example
during the transfer problem. For example, statements like
2

The same pattern of results is observed when controlling for
pre-test transfer performance.

“So we'll just, um do that procedure we were doing
before… like the standardized number” were coded as
referencing back to the worked example. There were
significant differences in this type of elaboration, F (2, 101)
= 3.15, p = .047, η2 = .059. Post-hoc analysis revealed that
the performance-avoidance condition (M = .37, SD = .60)
produced significantly more of these statements than the
performance-approach condition (M = .06, SD = .24), but
there were no differences between the mastery-approach
condition (M = .26, SD = .67) and either of the other two.
In summary, the performance-avoidance condition
generated the most self-explanation statements during the
worked example. Additionally, this condition referenced the
worked example more during the transfer problem than the
performance-approach condition.

Discussion
The current study experimentally manipulated achievement
goals for a learning and transfer task, and found that a
performance-avoidance goal manipulation had a positive
effect on transfer. This condition produced the most selfexplanations during the worked example, and made the most
references back to the worked example during the transfer
problem. This is a different pattern of results than was
expected, as course-based performance-avoidance goals are
usually associated with negative outcomes, and almost
never associated with positive ones. We will discuss
possible reasons for these results, and describe how future
research can confront the issues this research presents.
One obvious possibility is that task-based and coursebased goals do not reflect the same constructs, and produce
different effects. As discussed earlier, measures of coursebased achievement goals may reflect other individual
differences, like personality traits and beliefs. These
(typically unmeasured) individual differences may in fact be
responsible for the observed pattern of results found in prior
research, rather than achievement goals themselves.
Benefits that have been associated with course-based
mastery-approach goals (e.g., interest, better study
strategies, transfer) may actually be due to individual
differences like need for cognition (Cacioppo & Petty,
1982) or incremental theories of intelligence (Dweck, 1999),
which may lead to both a higher level of mastery-approach
goal endorsement, as well as self-reports of positive
learning behaviors and grades. If this were so,
manipulations that only target task-based goals would be
unlikely to aid learning. However, this is somewhat
contradicted by the present results, which do find a benefit
for performance-avoidance goals. It will be important for
researchers to consider in what ways course-based and taskbased goals are similar and in what ways they are different.
While the performance-avoidance condition did seem to
perform the best, other measures indicate that it may be
premature to tout the utility of this type of goal. Students in
both performance goal conditions reported similar goal
adoption, and only performance-approach goal adoption
was predictive of transfer. The current results indicate that

1885

performance goals may help guide students towards
generating explanations and knowledge transfer, but
research on the relative impact of each type of goal is
needed. This is especially important giving the general
consensus in the literature that performance-avoidance goals
do not aid learning.
An interesting avenue for future research will be to
explore how different types of learning activities can
influence motivational effects. It is possible that
performance-avoidance goals are particularly beneficial for
learning simply material and for nearer transfer, compared
to more challenging materials. Participants may have
perceived the learning materials in this study as quite
straightforward. For example, correctly solving the transfer
problem required a direct application of the procedure in the
worked example to the transfer problem. The performanceavoidance condition produced more self-explanation during
the worked example, and referenced the worked example
during the transfer problem more frequently than the other
conditions, indicating a relatively direct transfer of
knowledge. Mastery-approach goals may benefit “further”
transfer than what was required for this task. Using goal
manipulations across a variety of learning and performance
tasks will allow for a richer picture to emerge. Research on
regulatory fit (e.g. Higgins, 2000), for example, has shown
that prevention goals (similar to avoidance goals) improve
performance in tasks organized around minimizing losses,
while promotion goals (similar to approach goals) help with
tasks based on maximizing gains. Similar interactions may
occur between achievement goals and different task
structures encountered while learning.
While the results did not support the hypothesis that
mastery-approach goals promote self-explanation and
transfer, the study did achieve one of its aims. Specifically,
a short motivational intervention produced a change in taskbased goals, which led to different levels of self-explanation
and transfer. While important questions were raised as to
which goal may be most beneficial in which settings, the
fundamental premise (that goals influence learning
behaviors and transfer) was supported. This research can
provide a basic paradigm for further inquiry.
The study of motivation in academic settings is a fruitful
enterprise, as it can inform both cognitive psychology
theories of how people learn, as well as educational practice
to improve learning outcomes. Future research should
continue to address what influence adopted goals have on
behavior, as theories of motivation are useful inasmuch as
they can be used to predict behaviors. Measures of coursebased goals seem quite predictive of long-term success, and
of certain self-reported attitudes, behaviors, and affective
experiences, but it is less clear what effect they have on
moment-to-moment behaviors. More broadly, incorporating
motivation into theories of learning and knowledge transfer
(see Nokes & Belenky, 2011) remains an important goal for
cognitive scientists who wish to have an impact on
educational practice, while also furthering our
understanding of the human cognitive architecture.

References
Aleven, V.A.W.M.M., & Koedinger, K.R. (2002). An
effective metacognitive strategy: Learning by doing and
explaining with a computer-based Cognitive Tutor.
Cognitive Science, 26, 147-179.
Belenky, D.M., & Nokes-Malach, T.J. (2012). Motivation
and transfer: The role of mastery-approach goals in
preparation for future learning. Journal of the Learning
Sciences, 21, 399-432.
Cacioppo, J.T., & Petty, R.E. (1982). The need for
cognition. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
42, 116–131
Chi, M.T.H., Bassok, M., Lewis, M.W., Reimann, P., &
Glaser, R. (1989). Self-explanations: How students study
and use examples in learning to solve problems. Cognitive
Science, 13, 145-182.
Dweck, C. S. (1999). Self-theories: Their role in motivation,
personality, and development. Philadelphia: Psychology
Press.
Elliot, A.J., McGregor, H.A., & Gable, S. (1999).
Achievement goals, study strategies, and exam
performance: A mediational analysis. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 91, 549-563.
Elliot, A.J., Shell, M.M, Henry, K.B., & Maier, M.A.
(2005). Achievement goals, performance contingencies,
and performance attainment: An experimental test.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 97, 630-640.
Ericsson, K. A., & Simon, H. A. (1993). Protocol analysis:
Verbal reports as data. Boston: MIT Press.
Harackiewicz, J.M., Barron, K.E., Pintrich, P.R., Elliot,
A.J., & Thrash, T.M. (2002). Revision of achievement
goal theory: Necessary and illuminating. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 94 (3), 638-645.
Higgins, E. T. (2000). Making a good decision: Value from
fit. American Psychologist, 55, 1217-1230.
Linnenbrink-Garcia, L., Tyson, D.F., & Patall, E.A. (2008).
When are achievement goal orientations beneficial for
academic achievement? A closer look at main effects and
moderation factors. International Review of Social
Psychology, 21, 19-70.
Pashler, H., Bain, P., Bottge, B., Graesser, A., Koedinger,
K., McDaniel, M., & Metcalfe, J. (2007). Organizing
instruction and study to improve student learning (NCER
2007-2004). Washington, DC: National Center for
Education Research, Institute of Education Sciences, U.S.
Department of Education.
Renkl, A. (1997). Learning from worked-out examples: A
study on individual differences. Cognitive Science,21,129.
Schwartz, D. L., & Martin, T. (2004). Inventing to prepare
for future learning: The hidden efficiency of encouraging
original student production in statistics instruction.
Cognition and Instruction, 22, 129-184.
Utman, C.H. (1997). Performance effects of motivational
state: A meta-analysis. Personality and Social
Psychological Review, 1 (2), 170-182.

1886

