UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Language of Everyday Verbal Analogies

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0587v0r8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Richland, Lindsey
Richland, Justin

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Language of Everyday Verbal Analogies
Lindsey E. Richland (lrichland@uchicago.edu)
University of Chicago, Department of Comparative Human Development
Chicago, IL 60637

Justin B. Richland (jrichland@uchicago.edu)
University of Chicago, Department of Anthropology
Chicago, IL 60637
Abstract
Verbal analogies produced during naturally occurring
instructional discourse in mathematics were explored
using techniques borrowed from studies of language in
use (see Wortham & Rymes, 2003). Close examination
of two eighth-grade instructional analogies reveals that
the language practices of analogy are instrumental in
shaping recipients’ relational re-representation of objects
being compared, in particular through markers of
indexicality and poetic parallel structure. At the same
time, close examination of the communicative
interactions reveals that these devices may reduce the
burden on recipients’ reasoning to the point that they
may appear successful at solving the verbal analogy, but
their responses can be explained by facility in verbal
interaction rather than in mathematical reasoning. These
data provide thereby new insights into the “analogical
paradox,” the finding that analogies are commonly
successful as vehicles for interactionally producing and
displaying understanding of new information in
everyday contexts but generally problematic when
measured for their effects on reasoning in controlled
laboratory settings (Dunbar, 1998). We identify a tension
between interactional and cognitive success of everyday
communicative analogies, meaning that those that are
most likely to be interactionally successful may lead to
less cognitive engagement for analogy recipients.
Keywords: analogy; analogical reasoning; language,
linguistic anthropology

Introduction
Analogy is the process of identifying shared relational
similarities across contexts or representations, and has
been theorized as integral to humans’ everyday
flexibility and higher order adaptive thinking (Doumas
& Hummel, 2012). Analogy has also been empirically
identified as a regular practice within everyday
communication in contexts including scientific biology
laboratories (Dunbar, 1995, 1999), political discourse
(Blanchette & Dunbar, 1997, 2001) and classrooms
(English, 2004; Richland, Holyoak & Stigler, 2004;
Richland, Zur & Holyoak, 2007).
At the same time, basic analogical problem solving
and transfer in the laboratory is notoriously unreliable
and often unsuccessful (e.g., Gick & Holyoak, 1980,
1983). These differences between analogy production

in the lab and in everyday interaction led Dunbar
(1998) to speculate about the “analogical paradox,“ the
insight that analogy is often rare and difficult to
produce in the laboratory, but frequent and effective in
everyday talk.
The current paper draws on
linguistic
anthropological methods for studying the empirical
details of everyday interactions to better understand this
paradox. The analysis uses techniques borrowed from
the linguistic anthropology of education (Wortham &
Rymes, 2003), applying studies of language-in-use to
educational discourse. Following this, language is
conceptualized here as a performative activity that
carries pragmatic as well as referentio-semantic
meaning (Austin, 1962; Hymes, 1972,). In using
analogies, teachers in mathematics instruction provide
not only information regarding the denotational and
other forms of semantic content of the lexical and
grammatical structures of the talk they use. They also,
simultaneously, signal to their student-audiences how,
in the specific and actual moments of their use, their
talk is to be understood as a move in the turn-by-turn
exchange that is constituting the particular instructional
discourse of which it is a part, and to which they will be
expected to respond “appropriately.” Most often, in
instructional discourses using analogies, the
“appropriate” student response will also be a response
that is treated by the instructor as proof of the student’s
effective “correct” (referentio-semantic) understanding
and reasoning based on the analogy’s denotational
content. But sometimes the pragmatically appropriate
response is not the same as referentio-semantically
“correct” one, revealing how the student in such
exchanges is orienting and responding to two orders of
meaning at once.
For example, consider an instructional analogy that
is initially expressed as: “Lets say that I loaned you
twenty five dollars and then I loaned you twenty five
more dollars, what would you owe me?” Such an
analogy source pragmatically indicates that the learner
should not encode the analogs as a truthful
representation of the facts as they exist in the context of
use but rather as a proposed hypothetical situation
shared between the teacher and student. In a classroom
context involving an elementary school teacher
instructing his student about negative numbers, a
student might respond in a pragmatically adequate and

3293

semantically “correct” manner with the same answer,
“I’d be down fifty dollars.” But in an ethics classroom
in high school, in which the teacher was instructing
about coercion, a semantically “correct” answer “I’d be
down fifty dollars,” may not be pragmatically adequate.
Linguistic anthropology of education builds from
this notion of language in use to demonstrate that many
instructional activities rely upon not only the linguistic
production of educational content but also the form and
participatory patterns of the construction. Lexical form,
grammatico-syntactical structures, and the phenomenal
features of speech and text as produced in real time can
simultaneously signal social, political, discursive,
participatory and other kinds of meaning to participants
in a social interaction (e.g. Duranti, 1997). The use of
such linguistic devices enables the speaker to provide
pragmatic
and
metapragmatic
cues,
which
simultaneously constitute the speech, while at the same
time informing recipients how they should be
interpreting that speech and preparing to respond to it
(Goffman, 1974; 1981, Hymes 1972, Silverstein 1979,
1993). In educational contexts this is particularly
important because classroom interaction not only
affects the relationships between classroom actors, but
it also impacts the cognitive activity performed by
students during learning situations.
The current manuscript describes analyses of two
classroom analogies that were identified from a larger
corpus as illustrative of the verbal analogies produced
in instruction. They are transcribed using conventions
borrowed from conversation analysis (Sacks, Scheglof
& Jefferson, 1974). Within those transcripts, two
linguistic resources were identified as both common to
and particularly meaningful of the production of the
verbal structure-mapping: indexicality and parallel
structure.
Indexicality. All linguistic features, when used, have
the capacity to index, or point to, aspects of their
contexts of use as ways of shaping their conceptual
meaning to competent members of a speech community
(Ochs, 1992). Deictic indexes are those such as, “you,”
that have minimal semantic meaning aside from the
precise context of the talk (Hanks, 1992, see also
Silverstein 1976; Horn, 1988). As phrased by Hanks:
“their basic communicative function is to individuate or
single out objects of reference or address in terms of
their relation to the current interactive context in which
the utterance occurs” (1992: 47).
Thus the use of deictics makes the semantic
meaning of an utterance inexplicable without the
immediate context, which imposes a further burden on
interaction participants to comprehend the multiple
levels of meaning intended by the speaker. For
instance, the use of the word “you” in the following
phrase, “If you are having trouble, raise your hand”
carries 1) semantic meaning – that the speech in
question is intended to be directed to someone else
(second person, not marked as singular or plural in

English) who is proposed as its addressee, and 2) a
contextually specific, interactional meaning – the
teacher is inviting those in the presumed range of
hearing – here perhaps a group or subgroup of
classroom students – to take up the position of
addressee, and to respond, provided they interpret the
qualification “having trouble” as applicable to them.
This study will examine the role of indexicality in
teachers’ discursive work to help students produce
certain constrained representations of information in
order to create comparable analogs. This carefully
crafted relational re-representation is essential, because
the major identified problem in doing analogy is
noticing the relevance of mapping the relational
structure from one analog to another (see Gick &
Holyoak, 1980, 1983). Thus if one’s mental
representation of a particular object in the world does
not align with another system, the reasoner will likely
fail to notice the relevant higher order structure
mapping between them. Indexes that mark the irreal, or
hypothetical nature of the source representation are
illustrated in the first analogy described below. In so
doing, and much as in the “Let’s say…” example used
above, the interacting students in the first analogy
described are invited by the teacher to construct a
particular source analog that does not have to reflect all
the perceptual and relational characteristics of reality,
but rather to isolate and highlight the key relationship
depicted in the discourse.
Competent members of a speech community are
highly skilled at interpreting indexical talk, though
participants who are not fully members of that speech
community (e.g., English Language Learner students),
or students under high processing load to hold
mathematical representations in mind, may find this a
challenge that reduces their available resources to
interpret a conceptually demanding analogy.
Poetic Structure. Second, this analysis takes up the
reflexive capacity of language to serve, simultaneously
as both the content of communication and commentary
upon that content, particularly in the ways in which
aesthetic forms such as rhyming, prosody, and even
tempo can shape how semantico-referential content is
to be interpreted and responded to by recipients and
addressees (Lucy, 1993, 1999). One such example is
discerned in the parallel structuring of discursive
clauses in sequences of moments of actual speech and
textual production, deploying what some have called
the poetic dimension of meaning-making in language.
(Jakobson, 1960; Silverstein, 1985) The notion of
poetic structure and its regular and repeated occurrence
in verbal analogy is particularly relevant to the current
analysis, insofar as it offers yet another discursive
channel for conveying the intended comparison
between two systems of similarly structured
relationships. In this sense, the poetic dimension of
parallel structuring in verbal analogy becomes iconic of
the semantic content of the speech, and the proposed

3294

relationship between source and target that the
instructor endeavors to produce by it. Parallel structure
of speech serves as a pragmatic index for the analogical
structure mapping itself.
The forthcoming analysis more closely examines the
affordances and routines of indexicality and parallel
structure within the discourse structures of analogy
speech events. The paper will attempt to show that
language mediates the activity of analogy in classroom
mathematics instruction. In particular, it shows how the
resources of indexicality and parallel structure are
frequently instrumental in the outcomes of students’
learning experiences during instructional analogies.
The analysis will explore how teachers use indexicality
and parallel structure to draw students into creating
mental re-representations of the source and target
objects as distinct relational systems by situating them
in hypothetical, temporally defined, and/or spatial
worlds that are then systematically aligned and mapped
together. These can produce the dual, conflicting
functions of drawing recipients’ attention to relational
similarity and increasing the likelihood that they will
notice and successfully complete analogical structure
mapping. At the same time, the high levels of structure
provided by the language can reduce the mathematical,
semantic learning potential for students.

patterns but included more extended discussion, making
their length prohibitive for a paper-length analysis of
several examples. The first analogy demonstrates how
parallel structure can provide a poetic representation of
the analogical structure mapping itself. The second
analogy also invokes parallel structure, but further
reveals the role of indexicality in constructing source
representations
and
structure-mapping
during
production of analogies by drawing on irrealis, space,
and time, and the second

Analogy Segment 1: Poetic Structure

Methods
Sample
The analogies analyzed in this paper are a subset of
verbal analogies identified and coded in larger studies
of classroom teachers’ use of relational comparisons in
videotaped U.S., Japanese, and Hong Kong Chinese
eighth-grade mathematics lessons (Richland, Holyoak
& Stigler, 2004; Richland, Zur & Holyoak, 2007). A
randomized probability sample of all 8th grade
mathematics lessons taught in the United States was
videotaped as part of the Third International
Mathematics and Science Study (Stigler et al, 1999). In
a secondary analyses of these data, a random subset of
the U.S. lessons were further analyzed by trained and
reliable coders to identify and categorize analogy usage
using frequency coding. Key representative analogies
within these units of analysis were transcribed using
conventions of conversation analysis (Sacks, Schegloff
& Jefferson, 1974).
Indexicality and parallel structure are analyzed in
two analogies selected from this corpus of data. These
analogies were selected because they are typical of the
298 U.S. analogies identified and coded, and for their
clarity in revealing common and potentially
consequential discursive constructions. They were not
selected for their mathematical sophistication or
efficacy, and should not be construed as ideal examples
of the potential for analogy to support classroom
mathematics
learning.
Many of the
more
mathematically sophisticated analogies follow similar

Analogy 1 demonstrates how the linguistic form of
an analogy can generate participation and model
conceptual mapping. This teacher aligns the
mathematical concepts of generating equivalence across
the equal sign with converting fractions to like
denominators. These are different concept areas within
algebra, though procedures used for manipulating these
structures are similar. The analogy arises while the
teacher is at the chalkboard instructing students about
how to make fractions equivalent. She is teaching the
rule that when one multiplies the bottom number of a
fraction times a number, one must multiply the top
number times the same number to retain the same
fraction. She depicts this on the board in an example,
where she multiplies both the numerator and the
denominator times four to determine that 2/4 is
equivalent to 8/16. The analogy the teacher makes
between these concept areas is fairly procedural and
does not engage in the relationship between the deep
mathematical structure of these concepts, however it is
interactionally successful and students are able to
complete the teachers’ designedly incomplete
utterances throughout the analogy (Koshik, 2001).
The organizational structure of language, beyond its
denotational and indexical meaning, can play an
important role in the interactional and conceptual
consequences of language in use (e.g. Jakobson, 1960;
1971[1966]). One constitutive factor of Jakobson’s
(1960) model of a speech event, is the poetic feature of
language. He uses this category to foreground the
aesthetic or perceptual features of talk, arguing that
these carry their own functionality. The role of parallel
structure is particularly relevant to analogy in use, since
the conceptual basis for analogy is the development of
relevant parallels between the conceptual structure of
source and target objects. Teachers regularly invoked
parallel structure in the lexical and grammatical
construction of the analogical mappings, thus creating
grammatical metaphors for the conceptual mapping
being constructed.
Parallel structure within the
discursive form in this way may thus serve as reflexive
language cues to listeners, such that the form of the
structural parallelism within the utterance serve a
guiding function, leading talk recipients to infer that the

3295

ensuing talk should be mentally represented as a set of
parallel structures (Lucy, 1999).

Figure 1. Analogy between operating on equations and
fractions.
The teacher begins this analogy following a procedural
explanation of how to multiply the same number to the
denominator and the numerator in order to produce an
equivalent fraction with a new denominator. The
teacher begins with the token “okay,” marking a
transition between the prior expository talk and the
ensuing discourse. This indicates that this is a distinct
unit of talk. She then indexes that she is designing a
comparison with the comparative marker “just like,”
followed by the referent “equations” to signal the
source of the comparison.
The teacher then constructs parallel structure
between the utterances in lines 2-4 and lines 8-10.
Analogies are frequently formalized as A:B::C:D (“A”
is to “B” as “C” is to “D”), and this teacher implements
that formal relationship in the following pattern of talk:
“whatever you do to (A) you have to do to (B)” and
“whatever you do to (C) you have to do to (D).” The
statements are lexically identical around the arguments
(A, B, C, D), which are conceptually similar objects.
“Whatever you do to one side, you have to do to the
other, whatever you do to the numerator, you have to do
to the denominator.”
The parallel structure is further supported by the
teacher’s gesture that builds on culturally standard
spatial representations of fractions and equations. For
equations, “one side,” “and the other” are typically
depicted as horizontal objects to the left or right of the
other. For fractions, “denominator” and “numerator”
are vertical objects, one below and above the other.
These symbolic representations are reiterated by the
teacher’s gestures. In accordance with her verbalization
of the source “whatever you do to one side you have to
do to the other” she moves her hands to her left and
then her right. In construction of the target she mirrors
the opposing movements to signal the numerator and
the denominator, and moves her hands from towards
herself to away from herself. The teacher first designs

the relationship between the A and B components of the
source (one side of an equation and the other) and then
the relationship between the C and D components of the
target (the numerator and the denominator). The
overarching lesson has been focusing on equivalence,
so it is clear from the setting of this talk that “have to”
implies ‘have to in order to maintain equivalence
between the two sides.’
The parallel structure is compelling to the analogy
recipients and they demonstrate uptake of the parallel
structure and appropriate inferences based on
acquisition of the relational structure of the talk. The
teacher leaves a micro-pause as invitation to
participation for students in lines 4 and 10, requesting
their participation in generating the B and D terms of
the parallel structure. In both cases multiple students
within the classroom enter the discourse, and in both
cases the audible set of students respond appropriately
with the correct lexical item to complete the conceptual
relationship signaled by the parallel structure. In line
six students also demonstrated acquisition of the
parallel structure, and overlapped with the teacher in
production of the completion of the phrase using the
modifier “to” preceding “the other”.
These utterances provide evidence that these
students are participating actively in the parallel
structure, as well as the corresponding mathematically
relevant relational mapping designed by the teacher.
Their answers are not necessarily based on problem
solving, though, but rather they may be mapping the
structure highlighted by the teacher’s gesture and
parallel discursive structure from a known source object
to a corresponding target.

Analogy Segment 2: Indexicality
The following transcript, shown in Figure 2,
provides a second example of the role of hypothetical
contexts in construction of analogy. Of particular
interest in this analogy is the teacher’s persistence in
indexing an alternative context that is familiar to her
student recipients.
The teacher initiates this analogy to help a student
determine whether the summation of two negative
numbers results in a negative or a positive sign in front
of the solution number. Answering this question is the
target of this analogy, and the teacher invokes the
familiar schema of losing money as a source.
This is a one-on-one interaction between one student
and the teacher during the seatwork portion of this
lesson. The student has raised her hand and indicated
difficulty to the teacher, who then comes to her
assistance.
Approximately half of the analogies
identified in the coding study were constructed
following students’ demonstration of difficulty with the
mathematics. Many of these looked similar to this
analogy.

3296

Figure 2. Analogy between losing money and
subtracting negative numbers.
In lines 1 through 8 the student is voicing her
confusion, though the details of the language are
difficult to capture in the recording. In line 10 this
teacher begins to signal that she is going to re-represent
the question entered by the student. She begins with
“you’re – you’re saying” which suggests a
reformulation of the students’ question, but then after a
brief pause she begins again with: “what’s a, negative
eighty eight if you lose…” The lexical item “lose”
indexes possession and change of that status, and is not
a mathematical term. This choice of term signals that
she is representing the students’ mathematical question
in an alternative domain. Next she pauses briefly and
begins again. This time the teacher uses a plural
pronoun “let’s” indexing that both she and the student
will participate in the reformulation of the student’s
mathematical question and uses the frame “lets say you
have um.” The teacher indexes the hypothetical
(irrealis) frame through the lexical item “say,”
indicating that this is a reformulation in a world not
exactly the same as the one inhabited by the student’s
initial question. Again, however, she aborts this
reconstruction and after a brief pause reformulates with
the frame “you’re playing marb-.”
Once again the teacher decides to discontinue this
representation and the setting of marbles because, as
she states, “people don’t play marbles anymore.” This
statement reveals that it is important to her that the
context she indexes as a frame for her reformulation of
the students’ question is one that the student regularly
inhabits or is familiar with. After several attempts to
initiate this representation of the student’s original
question, the teacher signals an alternative context
through a shift in semantic as well as indexical word
use, and settles on a hypothetical reformulation.
In lines 15 through 17 the teacher completes her
representation of the irrealis source analog. She says
“let's say you're (..) you got money,” and indexes the
student’s nonverbal concurrence with the phrase “all
right.” Once again the teacher uses the plural “lets say”
construction to signal that this is a reformulation of the
original math problem, and that this is instead of the
marble-playing context referenced immediately prior.
The teacher continues by embedding the student’s

original mathematical question in the context she is
building in which the student’s possession of money is
the relevant feature “you lose eighty eight cents and
then you lose five cents.” She develops the source
context as a hypothetical world in which the important
point is that the student has money. The construction
“lets say you’re, you got money” suggests that
regardless of whether this student actually has money,
the teacher is indexing this possible world in which this
student has 88 cents and loses 5 cents. These are the
same numerical amounts as in the original target
problem, yet they are situated within this hypothetical
frame.
The question “what have you lost altogether” in line
18 is a reformulation of the target and requires the same
mathematical computation, but the contextualization
and the lexical item “lost” indexes that this problem is
distinct from the mathematical problem and is located
within the domain of money.
In line 19 the student answers appropriately to the
hypothetical context of the source analog using the
monetary unit, “cents” to describe the numerical
solution. She indicates that she is embodying the “you”
from inside the hypothetical possible world represented
by the teacher, as she answers the questions “what have
you lost altogether” without hesitation and with the
correct number.
Finally, the teacher guides the student in
transitioning from her facility with the hypothetical
world of her monetary loss to the veridical world of the
math problem. Still using the student as a reference
point, in line 21 she says “so you wouldn’t want to say
plus ninety-three.” The teacher’s use of the term “plus”
and the transitional item “so” index the mathematical
world, and appropriately the student responds with:
“want to subtract ninety-three.” This correct answer is
stated without markers of money, and specifically the
term “subtract” is used for the same computational
meaning as “lost” was in the earlier line 18. Thus the
student has made the relevant conceptual inference –
that adding negatives results in a negative number, and
she has made the interactional inference that she is now
in the realm of the math problem, where she had
previously inferred the context of her monetary loss.
Thus in this analogy, like in the prior example, the
teacher’s language denotationally constructs an analogy
between a familiar and an unknown context, but her
discourse also indexes both interactional and semantic
mappings. Thus the student must exercise conceptual
mapping and inferences at multiple levels. She must
interpret her role in the analogy, as well as multiple
levels of the mathematical comparison. The teacher
indexes levels of comparison between the numbers as
well as hypothetical to veridical worlds, and between a
world where the student is within the context to where
she external to the math and writes a mathematical

3297

answer. The teacher’s work to find a source context
that is familiar and a realistic hypothetical situation may
facilitate these levels of inference, enabling the student
to draw inferences from the more familiar space to the
more novel space.
The source analog of losing money thus provides a
meaningful structure for this student to interpret the
nature of addition between negative numbers, a concept
that is currently unfamiliar to her. Her success within a
few seconds demonstrates that this is a striking resource
for meaning-making. The conceptual structure of
negative numbers is typically challenging for learners,
and this teacher has led to an extremely rapid successful
completion of a target problem following confusion.
At the same time, this rapid transformation is
somewhat troubling from a learning standpoint. The
mathematical nature of this analogy is not deeply
conceptual, nor is it clear that the student will be able to
generalize this understanding to a new problem in
which the teacher has not highly designed a source
analog for the student. The student herself will have to
relationally re-represent the current problem as a source
for a subsequent problem, and her ability to do so
remains to be seen.
This reveals a powerful tension between the
interactional success of an analogy produced in
conversation, and the goal to produce deep thinking and
conceptual abstraction from an analogy. The teachers’
highly constrained representations of the source analogs
improve the likelihood that recipients will use the
alignment they have been provided. At the same time,
this may limit the need for effortful relational
integration and structure mapping on the part of
students, potentially limiting future ability for transfer
and generalization.
Overall, these examples are both successful
interactions in which students reason analogically to
respond as pragmatically and mathematically intended
by their instructor. Regarding learning, however, the
pragmatic and referentio-semantical efficacy of the
interaction are impossible to disentangle.
The
interactions may have prompted minimally effortful
relational integration because the source objects were
highly relationally re-represented by the teacher. That
relational re-representation in the first example created
a parallel poetic structure between the source and target
representations, which required structure-mapping but
could be accomplished through attention to the
pragmatics, rather than only referentio-semantic/
mathematical content as one might suppose if solely
examining the source and target representations being
compared. This suggests that the analogical paradox
may be at least partly explained by the grammatical,
interactional pragmatics of everyday verbal analogies.

References
Doumas, L. A. A., & Hummel, J. E. (2012).
Computational models of higher-cognition. The
Oxford Handbook of Thinking and Reasoning, 52-66
Hanks, W. F. (1992). The Indexical Ground of Deictic
Reference. In C. G. Allesandro Duranti (Ed.),
Rethinking Context; Language as an Interactive
Phenomenon (pp. 43-76). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Horn, L. R. (1988). Pragmatic Theory. In F. J.
Newmeyer (Ed.), Linguistics: The Cambridge Survey
(Vol. 1, pp. 113-145). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Hymes, D. (1972). Models of the Interaction of
Language and Social Life. In J. J.
Gumperz & D. Hymes (Eds.), Directions in
Sociolinguistics: The Ethnography ofCommunication.
New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Jakobson, R. (1960). Closing Statement: Linguistics
and Poetics. In T. Seboek (Ed.), Style in Language
(pp. 398-429). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Lucy, J. A. (1999). Reflexivity. Journal of Linguistic
Anthropology 9(1-2): 212-215.
Ochs, E. (1992). Indexing Gender. In A. Duranti & C.
Goodwin (Eds). Rethinking Context: Language as an
interactive phenomenon. (pp. 335-358. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Richland, L.E.; Holyoak K.J. & Stigler, J.W. (2004).
Analogy generation in eighth-grade mathematics
classrooms. Cognition and Instruction 22(1), p.37-60.
Richland, L.E., Zur, O., & Holyoak, K. (2007).
Cognitive supports for Analogies in the mathematics
classroom. Science, 316, 1128-1129.
Sacks, H., Schegloff, E.A., & Jefferson, G. (1974). A
simplest systematics for the organization of turn
taking for conversation. Language, 50: 4, 969-735.
Silverstein, M. (1976). Shifters, Linguistic Categories
and Cultural Description. In K. H. Basso & H. A.
Selby (Eds.), Meaning in Anthropology (pp. 11-56).
Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.
Silverstein, M. (1985). On the pragmatic "poetry" of
prose. In D. Schiffrin (Ed.), Meaning, form and use
in context (pp. 181-199). Washington, DC:
Georgetown University.
Wortham, S. & Rymes, B. (Eds.). (2003). Linguistic
anthropology of education Westport, CT:
Rattermann, M. J., & Gentner, D. (1998). More
evidence for a relational shift in the development of
analogy: Children's performance on a causal-mapping
task. Cognitive Development, 13, 453-478.
Richland, L.E., Morrison, R.G., & Holyoak, K.J.
(2006). Children’s development of analogical
reasoning: Insights from scene analogy problems.
Journal of Exp Child Psychology, 94, 249–273.
Viskontas, I.V., Morrison, R.G., Holyoak, K.J.,
Hummel, J.E., & Knowlton, B.J., (2004) Relational
integration, inhibition and analogical reasoning in
older adults. Psychology and Aging, 19, 581-591.

3298

