UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The interaction of different working memory mechanisms and sentence processing: A study
of the P600

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/974155ww

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Author
O'Rourke, Polly

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The interaction of different working memory mechanisms and sentence
processing: A study of the P600
Polly O’Rourke (porourke@casl.umd.edu)
Center for the Advanced Study of Language
University of Maryland, 7005 52nd Avenue
College Park, MD 20742 USA

Abstract
While previous research has shown that working memory
capacity (WMC) predicts sentence processing ability, the
understanding of the relationship is limited as almost all
studies have used the reading span task as their sole measure
of WMC. The current study examined how the effects of
garden-path sentences and filler-gap dependencies (as indexed
by the P600) related to four measures of working memory
(reading span, operation span, anti-saccade and n-back). P600
effects for garden-path sentences correlated positively with
operation span score while effects for object relatives
correlated negatively with n-back accuracy. These results
indicate that, though both sentence types are associated with
increased working memory demands, the resolution of
temporary syntactic ambiguity and filler-gap dependencies
recruit distinct working memory mechanisms.
Keywords: Garden-Path; Object Relative, Reading Span, Nback, P600.

Introduction
Two major sources of difficulty in sentence processing are
temporary syntactic ambiguity and syntactic complexity
(see sentences 1 and 2, respectively). Sentences containing
temporary ambiguities (i.e. garden-path sentences) usually
lead to an initial incorrect parse of the syntactic structure
which must be reanalyzed when the temporary ambiguity is
resolved in order for the sentence to be correctly interpreted.
In sentence 1 below, the initial interpretation may be that the
patient met the doctor and the nurse but upon arriving at the
word “showed” (the disambiguating verb), it is apparent that
that interpretation is incorrect and must be revised. A prime
example of syntactic complexity is an object relative which
represents a filler-gap dependency in which direct or
indirect object is displaced from the verb from which it gets
its thematic role. In order to resolve the filler-gap
dependency, the object (“to whom” in sentence 2 below)
must be maintained active until it can be mapped onto the
thematic grid of the relevant verb (“showed”).
1. The patient met the doctor and the nurse with the
white dress showed the chart during the meeting.
2. The patient met the doctor to whom the nurse with the
white dress showed the chart during the meeting.1
1
It must be acknowledged that this sentence contains an
ambiguity with respect to the attachment of the adjunct during the
meeting but as it occurs after the resolution of the filler gap
dependency it should not have any affect on the results.

Behavioral research has shown longer reading times and
reduced comprehension accuracy for sentences with gardenpath sentences (Frazier & Rayner, 1982; Ferreira, Bailey &
Ferraro, 2002) and object relatives (Frazier, 1987; King &
Just, 1991) compared to simple controls. Research using the
noninvasive event-related potential (ERP) technique of
recording brain activity has also provided evidence for the
increased difficulty of these sentence types. The key
potential of interest is the P600, a positive shift which
emerges 500 to 800 ms post-stimulus, typically largest over
posterior sites. The P600 is generally considered to be an
index of syntactic integration difficulty (Kaan et al., 2000).
It is elicited by syntactic violations of all types but is also
sensitive to syntactic ambiguity and syntactic complexity in
well-formed sentences. Garden-path sentences elicit P600
effects relative to non-garden-path sentences (Osterhout,
Holcomb & Swinney, 1994; Kaan & Swab, 2003; Gouvea,
Phillips, Kazanina & Poeppel, 2010). In addition, several
studies have found P600 effects when comparing sentences
containing object relative clauses to simple declarative
sentences (Kaan, Harris, Gibson & Holcomb, 2000; Gouvea
et al. 2010). Gouvea et al. (2010) found that the P600 effect
for garden-path sentences is more robust and of longer
duration than that of unambiguous object relative structures.
One potential source of the increased difficulty is the
increased demand these sentences place on working
memory resources. Working memory (WM) is “a
multicomponent system responsible for active maintenance
of information in the face of ongoing processing and/or
distraction” (Conway, Kane, Bunting, Hambrick, Wilhelm
& Engle, 2005, p. 770) which facilitates goal directed
behavior. Individual differences in working memory
capacity (WMC) impact sentence processing ability. A
number of studies have found that individuals with high
WMC have faster reading times and improved
comprehension performance for garden-path sentences (Just
& Carpenter, 1992; Friederici, Steinhauer, Mecklinger &
Meyer, 1998) and object relative dependencies (Just &
Carpenter, 1992; King & Just, 1991) than low WMC
participants. The P600 is modulated by WMC as well. ERP
studies have shown that individuals with high WMC have
greater P600 effects at the disambiguation point of
sentences containing temporary ambiguities (Friederici et
al., 1998; Vos, Gunter, Schriefers & Friederici et al., 2001;
Vos & Friederici, 2003; Bornkessel et al., 2004), indicating
increased reanalysis in the high WMC participants. Neither

1097

Bornkessel et al. (2004) nor Friederici et al. (1998) found
group differences in the P600 effects for syntactically
complex sentences which did not contain temporary
ambiguities. This suggests that the resolution of syntactic
ambiguity and of filler-gap dependencies differ in terms of
working memory demands.
Understanding of the relationship between WMC and
different types of syntactic processing is limited by the fact
that the vast majority of studies that have examined the
connection have used the reading span task (Danemann &
Carpenter, 1980) as the sole index of WMC, while many
different assessments, which tap different working memory
mechanisms, exist (Conway, Kane, Bunting, Hambrick,
Wilhelm & Engle, 2005). This makes it impossible to
determine if the difference between the working memory
demands of two syntactic processes are quantitative or
qualitative. Parsing complex but unambiguous syntax may
be less costly than reanalysis of garden-path structures, or it
could recruit working memory mechanisms not indexed by
the reading span task.
The goal of the current study was to determine if working
memory mechanisms other than those indexed by reading
span are relevant to the online sentence processing as
indexed by P600 effect size. To this end, WMC was
assessed using four different measures: reading span,
operation span, n-back and anti-saccade. The reading span is
a complex span task which assesses an individual’s ability
to maintain and process information (i.e. read sentences)
under divided attention. Operation span, another complex
span task, is very similar except that the processing
component is the performance of mathematical operations.
These two tasks correlate with each other (Conway et al.
2005) and both have been shown to predict sentence
comprehension performance (Turner & Engle, 1989). Also,
as mentioned before, reading span has been found to predict
P600 effect size for garden-paths (Friederici et al., 1998;
Vos et al., 2001, Vos & Friederici, 2003; Bornkessel et al.,
2004). N-back performance reflects the ability to maintain,
monitor and regularly update information. The relationship
between n-back and sentence processing is unclear and
largely untested. Sprouse, Wagers and Phillips (2012) found
no evidence of a relationship between n-back performance
and island effects (i.e. effects of syntactic complexity) on
acceptability judgments. Novick and colleagues, however,
found that individuals who improve their n-back
performance via training show reduced garden-path effects
in their comprehension accuracy relative to those who do
not respond to training (Novick, Hussey, Teubner-Rhodes,
Dougherty, Harbison & Bunting, in press). The anti-saccade
task tests the ability to suppress a prepotent response.
Bilinguals are known to out-perform monolinguals in tasks
tapping this skill (Bialystok, 2006, Bialystok, Craik, & Luk,
2008), suggesting a possible connection with language
processing. By including a wider range of working memory
assessments, the current study aimed to enrich
understanding of the cognitive underpinnings of sentence
processing.

Methods
Participants
Data was collected from 65 right handed participants. Data
from two participants was excluded because it was revealed
that they didn’t meet the participation criteria. Six
participants were excluded due to technical issues with data
collection. An additional 6 were excluded due to excessive
EEG artifacts. Data from the remaining 51 participants (29
female) between the ages of 18 and 40 (mean age = 21.5,
S.D. = 2.33) were included in the analysis. All participants
were neurologically normal, native speakers of English.
None had had started learning a second language before age
12.

Sentence Stimuli
The sentence stimuli consisted of garden-path, object
relative and control sentences (see 3-5 above, respectively.
The critical word in each condition was a ditransitive verb
(“showed” below). A total of 108 triplets were prepared
using 108 different critical verbs such that each sentence in
a triplet is identical except for the region at the beginning of
the second clause (bolded below). Ninety of the 108 came
from Gouvea et al. (2010)’s stimuli set. In the garden-path
sentences, the critical verb indicated the need for reanalysis.
In the object relative sentences, the critical verb indicated
the thematic position of the wh-phrase (“to whom”) and,
thus, allowed the resolution of the filler-gap dependency.
Each list contained 36 sentences in each condition. The
presentation of sentences was counterbalanced such that
each sentence appeared in one condition per list. In addition,
72 filler sentences (matched for length and complexity)
were included. Fifty percent of all sentences were followed
by a comprehension question. Questions came either from
Gouvea et al. (2010)’s stimuli or were created for the new
sentences. The comprehension questions did not specifically
target the resolution of the garden-path structure. In total,
six lists were created such that each sentence appeared in
each condition, with or without a comprehension question,
across lists.
3. The patient met the doctor and the nurse with the
white dress showed the chart during the meeting.
(Garden-Path)
4. The patient met the doctor to whom the nurse with the
white dress showed the chart during the meeting.
(Object Relative)
5. The patient met the doctor while the nurse with the
white dress showed the chart during the meeting.
(Control)

Working Memory Tasks
Reading Span Automated Reading-Span (Unsworth, Heitz,
Schrock & Engle, 2005) was used in this experiment.
Participants were presented with a series of sentences and
asked to indicate, via button press, if the sentences make

1098

sense. After each sentence they were then presented with a
letter that they must remember. At the end of the sequence,
they had to recall the letters in the order of presentation.
Their score reflects the total number of letters recalled in the
correct order.
Operation Span Automated Operation-Span (Unsworth et
al., 2005) was used in this experiment. Operation span is
identical to reading span as described above except instead
of making sense judgments on sentences, participants had to
solve math problems involving multiple operations.
N-Back In the n-back task, participants were presented with
a sequence of single letters and asked to judge if the current
letter is the same as the one that occurred n places back in
the sequence. For example, in a 4-back task, the third “X” in
the following sequence would be a target: X U P X X U U.
Lures, which appeared one space before a target (n-1; the
second “X”) or one space after a target (n+1; the third “U”)
were also included. Participants in the current experiment
performed 2-back and 4-back. Accuracy for four item types
(target, non-target, n-1 lure and n+1 lure) were averaged
across n level (2-back and 4-back).
Anti-Saccade In the anti-saccade task, participants
performed a letter monitoring task. They were first
presented with a flashing cue that appears on either the left
or right side of the computer screen. The cue was followed
by a letter. The letter was either on the same side of the
screen as the cue (pro-saccade) or on the opposite side (antisaccade). Participants had to suppress the impulse to shift
their gaze to the cue in order to maximize performance.
Accuracy for anti-saccade trials was included in the
analysis.

EEG Recording
Electroencephalographic (EEG) data was acquired using the
Electrical Geodesics Inc. (EGI) NetStation 128-channel
system. The HyrdoCel Geodesic Sensor Net is an elastic
structure containing Ag/AgCl electrodes, individually
housed underneath a sponge pedestal, which is soaked in a
saline solution (KCl) and placed carefully over the
participant’s head. The signal was high-pass filtered online
at 0.1 Hz, low-pass filtered at 100 Hz, and notch filtered at
60 Hz. The EEG signal was sampled at 250 Hz. Impedances
were kept below 50 KΩ where possible and otherwise under
100 KΩ. Prior to averaging, drift, eye blinks and other
movement artifacts were corrected via either the EP Toolkit
for MatLab (Dien, 2010). EEG were recorded using CZ as a
reference and later re-referenced to the global mean.

Procedure
After signing a consent form and background questionnaire,
the experimenter applied the sensor net. Participants were
seated in a sound attenuated booth using a chin rest in order
to reduce movement artifacts. EEG data was collected
during the sentence processing task. Sentences appeared

word-by-word in a rectangular box in the center of a high
resolution computer screen. The rectangular box appeared
continuously on the monitor. Each word was presented for
300 ms, followed by a blank of 200 ms. The final word of
the sentence was presented with a period sign and was
followed by a 5.5 second rest period. 50% of the test
sentences were followed by comprehension questions. The
questions were presented in their entirety above the
rectangular frame for 2500 ms, followed by a rest period of
3500 ms. Key presses with the right and left index fingers
(counterbalanced across subjects) were used to for yes and
no responses to the questions. Within the session, the
stimuli were broken into 6 runs consisting of 27 sentences
and lasting approximately 8 minutes each. The EEG session,
including electrode application and removal, lasted
approximately 1.5 hours. After electrode removal,
participants performed the four working memory
assessments (also in a sound attenuated booth). The order of
the four working memory tasks was counterbalanced across
participants. Completion of the working memory tasks took
no more than one hour and, thus, the entire session lasted
approximately 2.5 hours.

Data Analysis
Upon completion of pre-processing, ERPs were computed
for each individual in each experimental condition for a
1500 ms interval time-locked to the presentation of the
critical verb (“showed” above) relative to a 200 ms prestimulus baseline. The following time windows were
considered in the analysis: 500-700 and 700-900. The
analyses were performed on midline, dorsal and ventral
electrodes. The midline electrodes were divided into
anterior (FPZ, FZ, FCZ, CZ) and posterior (CPZ, PZ, POZ,
OZ) sections. The dorsal electrodes were grouped by
anterior-posterior (AP) location and hemisphere: Left
anterior (FP1, AF3, F3, 20, FC3, C3), right anterior (FP2,
AF4, F4, 118, FC4, C3), left posterior (CP3, 53, P3, P1, 59,
PO7) and right posterior (CP4, 86, P4, P2, 91, PO8). The
ventral electrodes were similarly grouped: Left anterior (F7,
FT7, FC5, T10, 40), right anterior (F8, FT8, FC6, T11,
109), left posterior (T3, TP7, CP5, 50, P5, T5, P9) and right
posterior (T4, TP8, CP6, 101, P6, T6, P10).
The effects of the garden-path/object relatives compared
to controls on brain activity were assessed in the dorsal and
ventral regions with three way ANOVAs (sentence type x
AP x hemisphere) and in the midline electrodes with a twoway ANOVA (sentence type x AP). In addition, the mean
amplitude in posterior midline electrodes in the 700-900 ms
time window was used in the correlational analyses of the
working memory assessment and behavioral data.
Scores and accuracy data from the four working memory
assessments were used in the correlational analysis. First,
the correlations between the working memory measures
were assessed. Second, the correlations between the WM
measures and garden-path/object relative effects in the
comprehension accuracy and P600 data were assessed. The
sentence type effects were calculated for the comprehension

1099

data by subtracting accuracy for control sentences from that
of garden-path/object relatives. Likewise, for the ERP data,
the mean amplitude at over posterior midline electrodes
during the 700-900 ms time window for the control
sentences was subtracted from that of garden-path/object
relative sentences.

Results
Behavioral Data
Accuracy was lower for garden-path (79.2%, S.D. 17.1) and
object relative (80.6%, S.D. 19.0) sentences than for
controls (84.3%, 15.3). There was an effect of sentence type
for the garden-path/control comparison (F(1,50) = 4.03, p =
.050) but not for the analysis of object relatives (p > .2).

ERP Data
In the 700-900 ms time window, garden-path sentences
elicited increased positivity compared to controls. At
midline regions, there was a significant interaction of type
and AP (F(1,50) = 6.08, p < .05) such that garden-paths are
more positive than controls at posterior sites. Simple
comparisons showed a marginal effect in posterior sites
(F(1,50) = 3.61, p = .06). Over dorsal regions, there was a
main effect of sentence type (F(1,50) = 5.39, p < .05) and an
interaction of sentence type and AP (F(1,50) = 5.24, p < .05.
Simple comparisons showed a significant effect of type at
posterior electrodes (F(1,50) = 10.4, p < .005) such that
garden-paths elicited greater positivity. There was also an
interaction of sentence type and AP over ventral sites
(F(1,50) = 4.28, p < .05). Simple comparisons revealed no
significant effects. For the object relatives, there was a
main effect of sentence type (F(1,50) = 4.12, p < .05) such
that object relatives were more positive.

Correlations
The correlational analysis of the working memory
assessments showed significant correlations between
operation span and reading span (r = .353, p < .05),
operation span and anti-saccade accuracy (r = .334. p < .05),
and anti-saccade and n-back target accuracy (r = .349, p <
.05).
Analysis of the accuracy effects showed a correlation
between garden-path effects and reading span (r = -.294, p <
.05). There was also a significant correlation between object
relative effects and accuracy for n+1 lures in the n-back task
(r = .317, p < .05). A similar pattern was seen in the P600
data. The P600 effect for garden-path sentences correlated
positively with operation span score (r = .381, p < .01) and
marginally with reading span score (r = .266, p = .06). The
P600 effect for object relatives correlated negatively with nback accuracy for n-1 lures (r = -.352, p < .05) and n+l lures
(r = -.332, p < .05).

Discussion
The effects of sentence type (both P600 and accuracy) are
consistent with previous findings. The effects for gardenpath sentences were significant and typical in terms of
distribution and time course. With respect to object
relatives, Gouvea et al. (2010) got no significant effects for
object relatives versus controls while the current study
found a main effect of sentence type (with no interactions
with topographical factors). This difference is likely due to
power as the current study had 50 participants while Gouvea
et al. (2010) had twenty. Accuracy for garden-path
sentences was significantly lower than controls, as in
previous studies (Frazier & Rayner, 1982; Ferreira, Bailey
& Ferraro 2002) but there was no effect for object relatives.
Gouvea et al. (2010) with almost the same materials got no
effects of sentence type whatsoever in the accuracy data.
Though the garden-path effects differ from Gouvea et al.
(2010) in this respect, they are consistent with previous
studies. The cross-correlations between the working
memory measures (specifically the lack of correlation
between the complex span tasks and n-back) were also
consistent with established findings (Kane, Conway, Miura
& Colflesh, 2007; Unsworth, Schrock & Engle, 2004). The
two complex span tasks (reading span and operation span)
did correlate significantly with each other which was also
expected based on previous findings (Conway et al. 2005).
The correlational analyses between the WM and sentence
processing effects were, therefore, run on data showing
standard effects and not anomalous in any way.
The key finding of the correlational analysis is that, while
performance on the complex span tasks (reading span and
operation span) does predict garden-path effects, it is n-back
accuracy that predicts the effect for object relatives. This is
seen in both P600 data and accuracy. Though this is a novel
finding, both assessments are intuitively related to their
respective sentence types.
In garden-path sentences, individuals must maintain the
linear sequence of words active in memory while
reanalyzing the syntactic structure. The resolution of a
garden-path does, therefore, require dividing attention
between storage and sentence processing as does the reading
span task. The correlation with operation span was positive
for the P600 effect, indicating greater effects for individuals
with higher operation span. The marginal correlation with
reading span was also positive. These findings are consistent
with the Early Commitment Model (Friederici et al., 1998)
which argues that high span individuals, when faced with a
syntactic ambiguity, commit early to one structure and
proceed accordingly rather than entertaining multiple
possibilities. The consequence, in the case of a garden-path,
is that they then must execute the costly reanalysis process
(Friederici et al., 1998). Reading span score correlated with
the garden-path effect on comprehension accuracy, similarly
predicting greater effects for high span participants. Taken
together, these results affirm complex span performance as a
predictor online and offline garden-path effects.

1100

In the object relative sentences, the relative pronoun must
be maintained active and eventually matched to the
appropriate thematic position. This involves assessing each
new word in the sentence sequence to determine if it is the
relevant predicate. In this way, the process resembles n-back
in which each new letter must be checked against the letter
that is n places back in the sequence. The correlation was
negative for the P600 effect suggesting that increased nback accuracy is associated with either (1) reduced
sensitivity to structural relationships or (2) increased
efficiency in that processing such that complex syntactic
structure is less disruptive. The positive correlation between
the comprehension accuracy effects accuracy for n+1
(indicating reduced effects of syntactic complexity among
individuals with high n+1 lure accuracy) does not enable a
distinction between the two accounts, as both would predict
reduced differences between object relative and control
sentences. While this is a question for future research, the
finding remains that working memory mechanisms reflected
in n-back are recruited during the resolution of filler-gap
dependencies.
The lack of a relationship between n-back accuracy and
garden-path effects is somewhat surprising given the
findings of Novick et al. (in press). This could be due to
methodological differences (for example, Novick et al. used
self-paced reading). It could also indicate, in addition to
increasing n-back accuracy as a result of training,
participants gained some strategic skills that facilitated task
performance.
In contrast to the n-back and complex span tasks, antisaccade also showed no relationship with the online and
offline sentence type effects. Mendelsohn (2002) also failed
to find a relationship between anti-saccade and garden-path
effects but he did succeed in with a verbal sorting task that
also measured the ability to inhibit automatic responses. It
is possible that anti-saccade is a poor predictor of language
performance.
The finding that separate working memory measures
correlate with P600 effects for the two sentence types leads
to the speculation that the late positive components elicited
by these two processes may be categorically distinct. The
notion of distinct late positive components is not new (see
Kutas, van Petten, & Kluender 2006 for review) but
findings have been mixed. Friederici, Hahne and Saddy
(2002) found differences in time course and topographical
distribution in the P600s effects of grammaticality and
syntactic complexity. Kaan and Swaab (2003), however,
found no difference in P600 effects of grammaticality and
dispreferred structure. The current results, that late
positivities elicited by the resolution of temporary syntactic
ambiguity and syntactic complexity are underpinned by
distinct working memory mechanisms provides a fresh
perspective on this question. In addition to the correlational
effects, the two effects did show topographical differences
such that the garden-path sentences elicited a late positivity
with a posterior distribution while that of the object relatives
was not limited to posterior sites. While this difference is

slight, due to the relatively coarse topographical analyses it
is not possible “to rule out the possibility that the P600 is
the consequence of a disparate set of processes that happen
to elicit topographically similar responses” (Gouvea et al.
2010, p. 177). While the proposal is speculative at this
time, consideration of the relationship of working memory
mechanisms to these components in future research will
likely provide valuable insights.
In conclusion, the results of the current study suggest a
more complex relationship between working memory
mechanisms and online sentence processing than has
previously been considered, such that different working
memory mechanisms support the resolution of different
types of difficult structures. Furthermore, the findings
provide evidence for functionally distinct late positive ERP
components. Future research on the interaction of working
memory and language must include a variety of working
memory assessments in order to increase understanding of
the cognitive underpinnings of sentence processing.

References
Bialystok, E. (2006). Effect of bilingualism and computer
video game experience on the Simon task. Canadian
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 60, 68–79.
Bialystok, E., Craik, F. I. M. & Luk, G. (2008). Cognitive
control and lexical access in younger and older bilinguals.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory
and Cognition, 34, 859–873.
Bornkessel, I.D., Fiebach, C.J. & Friederici, A.D. (2004).
On the cost of syntactic ambiguity in human language
comprehension: an individual differences approach.
Cognitive Brain Research, 21, 11-21.
Conway, A.R., Kane, M.J., Bunting, M.F., Hambrick, D.Z.,
Wilhelm, O. & Engle, R.W. (2005). Working memory
span tasks: A methodological review and user’s guide.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 12(5), 769-786.
Daneman, M., & Carpenter, P.A. (1980). Individual
differences in working memory and reading. Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 19, 450–466.
Dien, J. (2010). The ERP PCA Toolkit: an open source
program for advanced statistical analysis of event-related
potential data. Journal of Neuroscience Methods, 187(1),
138-145.
Ferreira, F., Bailey, K.G.D., Ferraro, V., 2002. Goodenough representations in language comprehension.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 11, 11–15.
Frazier, L. (1987). Syntactic processing: Evidence from
Dutch. Natural Language and Linguistic Theory, 5, 519–
559.
Frazier, L. & Rayner, K. (1982). Making and correcting
errors during sentence comprehension: eye movements in
the analysis of structurally ambiguous sentences.
Cognitive Psychology, 14, 178-210.
Friederici, A. D., Hahne, A., & Saddy, D. (2002). Distinct
neurophysiological patterns reflecting aspects of syntactic
complexity and syntactic repair. Journal of
Psycholinguistic Research, 31, 45-63.

1101

Friederici, A. D., Steinhauer, K., Mecklinger, A., & Meyer,
M. (1998). Working memory constraints on syntactic
ambiguity resolution as revealed by electrical brain
responses. Biological Psychology, 47, 193–221.
Gouvea, A.C., Phillips, C., Kazanina, N. & Poeppel, D.
(2010). The linguistic processes underlying the P600.
Language and Cognitive Processes, 25(2), 149-188.
Just, M.A., & Carpenter, P.A. (1992). A capacity theory of
comprehension: Individual differences in working
memory. Psychological Review, 99, 122–149.
Kaan, E., Harris, T., Gibson, E., Holcomb, P.J., 2000. The
P600 as an index of syntactic integration difficulty.
Language and Cognitive Processes. 15, 159–201.
Kaan, E., Swaab, T.Y.Y., 2003. Repair, revision, and
complexity in syntactic analysis: an electrophysiological
differentiation. Journal Cognitive Neuroscience, 15, 98–
110.
Kane, M.J., Conway, A.R., Miura, T.K. & Colflesh, G.J.
(2007). Working memory, attention control, and the Nback task: A question of construct validity. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and
Cognition, 33(3), 615-622.
King, J.W., & Just, M.A. (1991). Individual differences in
syntactic processing: The role of working memory.
Journal of Memory and Language, 30, 580–602.
Kutas, M., Van Petten, C., & Kluender, R. (2006).
Psycholinguistics electrified II: 1994-2005. In M. Traxler
&
M.A.
Gernsbacher
(Eds.),
Handbook
of
Psycholinguistics, 2nd Edition. New York: Elsevier.
MacDonald, M. C., & Christiansen, M. (2002). Reassessing
working memory: Comment on Just and Carpenter (1992)
and Waters and Caplan (1996). Psychological Review,
109, 35-54.
Mendelsohn, A. (2002). Individual differences in ambiguity
resolution:Working memory and inhibition. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, Northeastern University.
Novick, J. M., Hussey, E., Teubner-Rhodes, S., Dougherty,
M. R., Harbison, J. I., & Bunting, M. F. (in press).
Clearing the garden-path: Improving sentence processing
through executive control training. Language and
Cognitive Processes.
Novick, J.M., Trueswell, J.C. & Thompson-Schill, S.L.
(2005). Cognitive control and parsing: Reexamining the
role of Broca’s area in sentence comprehension.
Cognitive, Affective & Behavioral Neuroscience, 5(3),
263-281.
Osterhout, L., Holcomb, P.J., Swinney, D.A., 1994. Brain
potentials elicited by garden-path sentences: evidence of
the application of verb information during parsing.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning Memory
and Cognition, 20, 786–803.
Sprouse, J., Wagers, M. & Philips, C. (2012). A test of the
relation between working-memory capacity and syntactic
island effects. Language, 88(1), 82-123.
Turner, M.L. & Engle, R.W. (1989). Is working memory
capacity task independent? Journal of Memory and
Language, 28, 127-154.

Unsworth, N., Schrock, J.C. & Engle, R.W. (2004).
Working memory capacity and the antisaccade task:
Individual differences in voluntary saccade control.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning Memory
and Cognition, 30, 1302-1321.
Unsworth, N., Heitz, R. P., Schrock, J. C., & Engle, R. W.
(2005). An automated version of the operation span task.
Behavior Research Methods, 37, 498-505.
Vos, S.H., Gunter, T., Schriefers, H. y Friederici, A.D.
(2001). Syntactic parsing and working memory: The
effects of syntactic complexity, reading span and
concurrent load. Language and Cognitive Processes, 16,
65-103.

Acknowledgements
This research is based upon work supported, in whole or in
part, with funding from the United States Government. Any
opinions, findings and conclusions, or recommendations
expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the University of
Maryland, College Park and/or any agency or entity of the
United States Government. Nothing in this article is
intended to be and shall not be treated or construed as an
endorsement or recommendation by the University of
Maryland, United States Government, or the author of the
product, process, or service that is the subject of this article.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed
to Polly O’Rourke, Center for Advanced Study of
Language, University of Maryland, 7005 52ndAvenue,
College Park, MD 20742 (e-mail: porourke@casl.umd.edu).
Special thanks to Colin Phillips, Mike Bunting and Joseph
Dien.

1102

