UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The neural computation of scalar implicature

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8631h2cm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Hartshorne, Joshua
Snedeker, Jesse
Kim, Albert

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Neural Computation of Scalar Implicature
Joshua K. Hartshorne (jkhartshorne@gmail.com)
Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, MIT, 77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA

Jesse Snedeker (snedeker@wjh.harvard.edu)
Department of Psychology, Harvard University, 33 Kirkland St.
Cambridge, MA 02138 USA

Albert Kim (albert.kim@colorado.edu)
Institute of Cognitive Science, University of Colorado-Boulder, 594 UCB
Boulder, CO 80309 USA
Abstract

Perhaps the most-researched
implicature, illustrated in (2):

What psychological and linguistic processes allow one to go
beyond the literal meaning of a sentence and infer what was
meant but not said (“reading between the lines”)? Theorists
have differed as to whether these phenomena are driven by
complex, online inference processes or by relatively rote
rules. The present study uses ERP to explore the cognitive
and neural mechanisms involved in scalar implicature (the
inference that, e.g., “some” indicates “some but not all”), a
test case that has been subject to considerable behavioral
research but limited neuropsychological research. Our results
challenge both rote-processing and rich-inference accounts.
We provide the first ERP results showing that scalar
implicature processing depends on context, challenging roteprocessing theories of implicature. However, we also fail to
find evidence of a processing cost associated with implicature
processing, as predicted by many rich-inference accounts.
These results point to a novel conceptualization of pragmatic
processing in scalar implicature.

test

case

is

scalar

(2) a. John ate some of the cookies.
b. John did not eat all of the cookies.
When we hear a sentence like (2a), we typically assume that
(2b) is true as well. Although this inference is robust, it can
be cancelled (3a), distinguishing it from semantic
entailments, which cannot be cancelled (3b) (Hirschberg,
1991; Horn, 1972).
(3) a. John ate some of the cookies. In fact, he ate all of
them.
b. *John ate some of the cookies. In fact, he ate none of
them.
On the classical view (Horn, 1972), scalar implicature
requires rich online counter-factual reasoning: Listeners
only infer (2b) from (2a) if they believe i) the speaker
knows whether John ate all the cookies, ii) it is relevant
whether John ate all the cookies, and iii) assuming (a-b)
hold, the speaker would tell them that John ate all the
cookies. This view has been questioned, originally by
Levinson (2000), who argued that scalar implicatures are
triggered automatically, prior even to compositional
processing (i.e., processing language at the level of phrases
or sentences).
Much of the work addressing this theoretical dispute has
been indirect, testing whether scalar implicatures are slow
and computationally costly as a proxy for being rich and
complex (Bott & Noveck, 2004; De Neys & Schaeken,
2007; Grodner, Klein, Carbary, & Tanenhaus, 2010; Huang
& Snedeker, 2009). Results have been inconsistent and
controversial. More problematically, the link between “slow
and costly” and “rich and complex” can be disputed:
Grodner and colleagues (2010) argue that scalar implicature
is rich, complex, and fast; similarly nothing in principle
forbids an automatic process from being slow.
A more direct route is as follows: If scalar implicature is
the result of a complex inference process, it should be
possible to create contexts in which scalar implicatures are
more or less likely to be calculated. If, on the other hand,
scalar implicature is an automatic process, it should be
relatively impervious to context. A handful of behavioral

Keywords: language; pragmatics; ERP; scalar implicature

Rich vs. Rote Pragmatics
Understanding language appears to involve two broad but
distinct kinds of processes: derivation of the semantic
meaning (those things entailed to be true) and pragmatic
inferences that go beyond this “literal” meaning (Bach,
1999; Grice, 1989; Morris, 1938). For example, given
sentence (1), the fact that Gabe is the agent of the drinking
event would typically be attributed to semantic decoding,
while the inference that he is an inconsiderate lout who has
annoyed the speaker would generally be construed as
pragmatic.
(1) Gabe drank all of the milk and put the carton back in
the fridge.
There is, however, considerable controversy about where
semantics ends and pragmatics begins and about how to
distinguish the representations and processes underlying
each, as well as their interaction. One particularly
contentious point is whether pragmatic inferences result
from complex, rich reasoning processes (Grice, 1989;
Sperber & Wilson, 1986) or from relatively rote, automatic,
almost grammatical rules (Chierchia, Fox, & Spector, 2012;
Levinson, 2000).

561

studies have reported contextual manipulations that affect
scalar implicature calculation (Bergen & Grodner, 2012;
Bonnefon, Feeney, & Villejoubert, 2009; Hartshorne &
Snedeker, submitted; Noveck, Chierchia, Chevaux,
Guelminger, & Sylvestre, 2002); we return to these in the
Discussion. Nothing is known on a neuropsychological level
about scalar implicature’s context sensitivity, as no such
studies have been reported.1 Thus, we conducted the present
study in order to confirm the behavioral results and extend
them to the neuropsychological level.

Note that the rest is only felicitous if Addison has not eaten
all of the cookies, which is exactly what the scalar
implicature implies; thus, by hypothesis the rest should be
more felicitous in (5a) than (5b). Thus, by testing whether
the ERPs to the rest are different in (5a) and (5b), we test
whether entailment context rapidly modulates scalar
implicature, affecting interpretation of content later in the
sentence. In addition, by comparing ERPs at some – the
word that triggers the scalar implicature – we will gain
valuable information about the neural processes supporting
scalar implicature calculation.
One methodological concern remains: Declarative and
conditional sentences differ in numerous ways, not just in
how they affect scalar implicature. Thus, any differences
observed may be due to implicature-irrelevant processes.
Thus, we included a control version of the experiment,
where some was everywhere replaced with only some, a
phrase that semantically forces the subset (“not all”)
reading. Thus, the crucial analyses are interactions –
differences seen between the critical declarative and
conditional sentences not seen between the control
declarative and conditional sentences.

Grammatical Context
We compare the ERPs elicited by carefully matched
sentences that do or do not evoke scalar implicatures. Our
method derives from previous findings that scalar
implicatures are more likely to be calculated in declarative
sentences (4a) than in the antecedent of a condition (4b).
(4) a. Addison ate some of the cookies before breakfast this
morning, and…
b. If Addison ate some of the cookies before breakfast
this morning, then…
This has been explained by Chierchia and colleagues
(2012) as an effect of entailment context. Scalar implicature
usually operates to deny the truth of a logically stronger
statement. Since Addison ate all of the cookies entails that
Addison ate some of the cookies, stating the latter implicates
that the former is not true. In contrast, If Addison ate all of
the cookies, then Q does not entail but rather is entailed by If
Addison ate some of the cookies, then Q; thus stating the
latter does not implicate that the former is not true.
While this entailment manipulation is linguistic in nature,
it is nonetheless difficult to account for on a strict automatic
processing account like Levinson’s (2000), on which scalar
implicature is triggered lexically prior to any compositional
processes – that is, before sentential context, which is by
definition compositional, can play a role.
While intuitions that conditional sentences suppress
implicature seem robust, experimental evidence consists of
a single published judgment study (Noveck et al., 2002).2
Thus at best we do not know whether the entailment
manipulation in (4) affects scalar implicature online.
The present study addresses this gap as follows:

Method
Subjects
49 monolingual native English-speaking right-handed
individuals participated. Two were excluded for equipment
failure and ten for excessive artifact, leaving 19 in the
experimental condition and 16 in the control condition.
Materials and Procedure
Each participant saw 30 critical declarative sentences and 30
critical conditional sentences. Filler sentences consisted of
60 matched in structure – but not content – to the critical
sentences but with continuations that did not mention “the
rest” and 35 which additionally swapped the word some for
all. These fillers prevented subjects from inferring that all
sentences would refer to “the rest” of a previouslymentioned collection. An additional 42 filler sentences
involved relative clauses and no quantifiers. Four lists were
created by converting the critical declarative sentences into
conditional sentences and vice versa and by reversing the
order of all stimuli (except the first four stimuli, which were
always the same fillers). The four experimental and four
control lists were identical except that in the latter, the word
some was always preceded by only.
Sentences were presented in eight blocks, with breaks in
between. 61 of the sentences were followed by
comprehension questions, which were not analyzed.
Sentences were presented roughly one word at a time.
Wherever two short words appeared consecutively, we
presented them together (e.g., Sally/saw/a cat/on the/table).
This allowed us to present the critical phrase the rest as a
single unit, rather than in two parts which would potentially
add noise to the ERP. Some was always presented singly.
Stimuli were presented in the center of the screen for 350

(5) a. Addison ate some of the cookies before breakfast this
morning, and the rest are on the counter.
b. If Addison ate some of the cookies before breakfast
this morning, then the rest are on the counter.
1

The two previous ERP studies investigated sentences of the
form some elephants have trunks – literally true but rendered
infelicitous by scalar implicature (Nieuwland, Ditman, &
Kuperberg, 2010; Noveck & Posada, 2003). The final word evokes
an N400 relative to the final word in felicitous sentences (some
dogs have spots), at least if the sentences are carefully matched.
2
Panizza, Chierchia, and Clifton Jr. (2009) report an
eyetracking-while-reading study with a similar manipulation, but
involving number. The relationship between number and scalar
implicature is complex, unclear, and controversial.

562

ms with a 250 ms blank interval between words. The intertrial interval ranged from 1600 to 2000 ms, not counting any
time spent on questions.

codes (declarative/conditional) for each subject’s average
ERPs. The clustering algorithm was re-run, and the scores
for the largest positive and negative clusters were recorded.
This process was repeated 100 times. P-values for a given
cluster in the actual data are estimated as the number of
larger clusters from the bootstrapped data (calculated
separately for positive and negative clusters).

Acquisition and Analysis
Ongoing EEG was recorded from 128 scalp locations using
a geodesic sensor net (Electrical Geodesics, Eugene, OR) as
subjects read the sentences silently. EEG was recorded
relative to a vertex channel and later re-referenced to the
average of the mastoid channels. Impedances were
maintained below 100 Ω. Signals were recorded at 250 Hz
and down-sampled to 200 Hz post-acquisition. A 0.1-30 Hz
bandpass filter was applied. Epochs of 1500 ms were
selected following the critical phrase (some or the rest) and
were corrected with a 200 ms pre-stimulus baseline. Bad
channels were replaced and epochs containing artifact (eye
blink, eye movement, etc.) removed, both by computer
algorithm. Only participants with at least 19 epochs per cell
were included in analyses.

Results
As can be seen in Figure 1, the interaction between context
and condition in the ERPs evoked by some were weak, and
none of the resulting clusters were significant (ps>.2).
In contrast, at the rest an interaction was observed,
frontally distributed and lasting from approximately 400 to
1300 ms post-stimulus (p=.04; see Figures 2 & 3).
Inspection of the four waveforms for the four conditions
revealed at this interaction was due to a positive deflection
for the conditional/experimental sentences relative to the
other three conditions. That the conditional/experimental
sentences should be the odd one out is expected: only in that
condition should the rest be difficult to process, and in fact
in our norming studies, the conditional/experimental
sentences were judged to be less felicitous than the other
three types; this effect disappeared if the sentences were
truncated prior to the rest.
Thus, we interpret the interaction at the rest to be due to a
positive deflection for the conditional/experimental
sentences, reflecting the infelicity of the rest, perhaps due to
the difficulty assigning its reference.

The Bootstrap Cluster Algorithm
The previous literature has focused on the role of the N400
in processing scalar implicature violations. Because no
previous study has looked for components indexing scalar
implicature generation, we needed a mechanism for
selecting and analyzing exactly those electrodes in those
time periods with the greatest differences between
conditions without allowing multiple comparisons to inflate
our Type I error rate (cf Vul, Harris, Winkielman, &
Pashler, 2009). We adapted the recently developed bootstrap
cluster analysis of Maris and Oostenveld (2007).
We calculated the context by condition interaction using a
mixed effects model with maximal random effects for each
electrode at each time point (to speed processing, we further
down-sampled the data to 50 Hz) and recorded the t-value.
We then identified all clusters of data points with t-values
greater than 1.96 or less than -1.96.3 Clustering crossed both
time (consecutive super-threshold data points on the same
electrode were placed in the same cluster) and space (superthreshold data points from the same time point and
belonging to neighboring electrodes were placed in the same
cluster). Although data points with positive effects (positive
t-values) may represent the same underlying dipole as data
points with negative effects (negative t-values), we adopted
the conservative approach of placing t-values of different
polarities in different clusters. Clusters are assigned scores,
which are the sum of their t-values; thus, clusters with larger
statistical effects and/or which are extended in time and
space are assigned larger scores.
Statistical
significance
was
assessed
through
bootstrapping. The condition labels for the subjects
(experimental/control) were shuffled, as were the context

Discussion
A previous judgment study (Noveck et al., 2002) found that
scalar implicatures were more likely in declarative than
conditional sentences. If this is the case, and if this
contextual manipulation affects processing rapidly, then the
rest should be more difficult to process in (5b) than (5a).
Indeed, we found that the contextual manipulation affected
the ERPs to the rest. Interestingly, we did not find an effect
of the manipulation on the ERPs to the scalar trigger some.
We address theoretical implications of these findings
momentarily. First, we consider their robustness. Given
recent concern about replicability in the cognitive sciences
(Hartshorne & Schachner, 2012), we conducted a replication
closely matched to the above experiment with the following
differences: EEG was recorded using Ag/AgCl electrodes
attached to an elastic cap following the extended 10-20
system (Newer et al., 1998), and blink artifact was corrected
through linear regression. We coded the stimuli so that the
ERPs to some in the filler sentences – which up through
some are indistinguishable from the critical sentences –
could be included in analysis, doubling the number of trials
for that analysis. Analyses were conducted in identical
fashion and with the same result, demonstrating their
robustness: no significant clusters were found at some
(ps>.15), but an extended, frontally-distributed cluster was
found after the rest (p<.01).

3
The choice of threshold (e.g., 1.96) affects the type of clusters
found – low thresholds are better at detecting broadly extended but
weak effects – but does not affect robustness to multiple
comparisons. Other threshold resulted in similar findings.

563

Figure 1: Bootstrap cluster analyses at some. In each panel, electrodes grouped into left-hemisphere, midline, and righthemisphere, with more anterior electrodes placed higher. Panel A: t-values. Panel B: clusters (distinct color for each cluster).

Figure 2: Bootstrap cluster analyses at the rest. In each panel, electrodes grouped into left-hemisphere, midline, and righthemisphere, with more anterior electrodes placed higher. Panel A: t-values. Panel B: clusters (distinct color for each cluster).

564

manipulation, an issue we return to shortly.4
There are at least three logically possible explanations of
the result. The first is that the scalar implicature
processing’s effect on ERP (and self-paced reading) is quite
small and thus we had insufficient statistical power to detect
it. This would raise an interesting question: Why is the
effect so small relative to typical language ERP effects
(such as the effect we observed on the rest) which are
observable with a study this size?
A second possibility is that scalar implicature is always
triggered by some, and thus the ERPs were identical across
conditions (Levinson, 2000). As already noted, this runs
afoul of our results at the rest; we would have to stipulate
that the entailment context acts to cancel the implicature in
the conditional sentences. What the mechanism would be is
unclear. Moreover, the effect of the cancellation should be
measurable, and though we explored ERPs to several words
subsequent to some, we saw no evidence of it.
A third possibility is that not computing the scalar
implicature is also a complex and lengthy inference,
sufficiently similar to actually computing the scalar
implicature that the two could not be distinguished in our
study. On the Grammatical Theory, the parser attempts to
insert scalar implicatures at any appropriate insertion site,
and they are retained if certain criteria are met, such as its
resulting in a more informative (i.e., logically stronger)
interpretation of the utterance. Presumably, the only way the
grammar can know that these criteria have been met is to
actually carry out the operations; thus, similar work is done
whether the scalar implicature is ultimately endorsed or not.
Similarly, on the Gricean account, scalar implicatures are
calculated only when certain conditions are met (e.g., the
speaker would make the stronger statement if it were true
and the speaker knows whether the stronger statement is
true). Whether these conditions are met affects whether the
implicature is endorsed, not whether the complex set of
conditions must be checked. In short, even if calculating a
scalar implicature is costly, that does not necessarily mean
that manipulations which affect whether the implicature is
ultimately endorsed affect the computational cost.
Why then did Bergen and Grodner find an effect on
some? While we manipulated whether the scalar implicature
was appropriate, they manipulated the salience of the
stronger alternative (e.g., all). Since scalar implicature
processing requires a stronger alternative to get off the
ground, their manipulation may have more directly affected
whether processing happened at all.

Figure 3: Difference waves (declarative – conditional) at the
rest. Topographical plots are shown at 600 ms poststimulus. Four representative electrodes are depicted for the
entire epoch. The relative negativity for the difference
waves in the experimental sentences is driven by a positive
deflection for the conditional sentences (see main text).
We consider first the positive results. As predicted, scalar
implicatures are less likely to be calculated in the
antecedents of conditionals (as evidenced by results at the
rest), confirming a strong prediction of Chierchia and
colleagues’ Grammatical Theory. Moreover, context’s effect
was sufficiently rapid to affect processing of content (the
rest) later in the sentence. This is difficult to reconcile with
a strong lexicalist position like Levinson’s (2000), on which
scalar implicatures are always triggered by words like some,
though they may be explicitly cancelled as in (3a). Note that
not only was the implicature not cancelled in our conditional
sentences, not calculating the implicature renders the
sentences infelicitous.
Perhaps the most intriguing finding was the lack of any
effect at the scalar implicature trigger some. This finding
matches those of five self-paced reading experiments
involving similar stimuli, for which Hartshorne and
Snedeker (submitted) similarly report no effect: some was
read no faster or slower whether a scalar implicature was
calculated or not. These finding are in apparent conflict with
a single experiment by Bergen and Grodner (2012), which
showed slower reading times for some in implicaturepromoting conditions, which they interpreted as indexing
the computational cost of scalar implicature calculation.
However, Bergen and Grodner used a different

Conclusion
We find the grammatical entailment context modulates
scalar implicature processing rapidly enough to affect
4
Breheny, Katsos, and Williams (2006) report longer reading
times for scalar triggers in contexts expected to promote scalar
implicature calculation. However, the contextual manipulations are
uncontrolled, making its results difficult to interpret. In the case of
Exp. 3, the manipulation is fully confounded with a repeated name
penalty, sufficient to explain their results.

565

processing of subsequent words in the sentence. At the same
time, this manipulation did not affect the EEG evoked by
the scalar implicature trigger (some). These findings present
a first step in uncovering the neural processes underlying the
factors driving scalar implicature and also present
challenges to existing theories.

Hartshorne, Joshua K., & Schachner, Adena. (2012).
Tracking replicability as a method of postpublication open evaluation. Frontiers in
Computational Neuroscience, 6(8).
Hartshorne, Joshua K., & Snedeker, Jesse. (submitted). The
speed of inference: Evidence against rapid use of
context in calculation of scalar implicature.
Hirschberg, Julia. (1991). A Theory of Scalar Implicature.
book, 1-220.
Horn, Laurence R. (1972). On the semantic properties of
logical operators in English. book, 1-309.
Huang, Yi Ting, & Snedeker, Jesse. (2009). Online
interpretation of scalar quantifiers: Insight into the
semantics--pragmatics
interface.
Cognitive
Psychology,
58,
376-415.
doi:
10.1016/j.cogpsych.2008.09.001
Levinson, Stephen C. (2000). Presumptive Meanings: The
Theory of Generalized Conversational Implicature,
Speech, and Communication. book, 1-480.
Maris, Eric, & Oostenveld, Robert. (2007). Nonparametric
statistical testing of EEG- and MEG-data. Journal
of Neuroscience Methods, 164, 177-190. doi:
10.1016/j.jneumeth.2007.03.024
Morris, Charles. (1938). Foundations of the theory of signs.
International Encyclopdia of Unified Science, 1(2).
Newer, M. R., Comi, G., Emerson, R., FuglsangFrederiksen, A., Guerit, J. M., Hinrichs, H., . . .
Rappelsburger, Peter. (1998). IFCN standards for
digital
recording
of
clinical
EEG.
Electroencephalography
and
Clinical
Neurophysiology, 106, 259-261.
Nieuwland, Mante S., Ditman, Tali, & Kuperberg, Gina R.
(2010). On the incrementality of pragmatic
processing:
An
ERP
investigation
of
informativeness and pragmatic abilities. Journal of
Memory and Langauge, 63, 324-346.
Noveck, Ira A, Chierchia, Gennaro, Chevaux, Florelle,
Guelminger, Raphaele, & Sylvestre, Emmanuel.
(2002). Linguistic-pragmatic factors in interpreting
disjunctions. Thinking and Reasoning, 8, 297-326.
Noveck, Ira A, & Posada, Andres. (2003). Characterizing
the time course of an implicature: an evoked
potentials study. Brain and language, 85, 203-210.
doi: 10.1016/S0093-934X(03)00053-1
Panizza, Daniele, Chierchia, Gennaro, & Clifton Jr.,
Charles. (2009). On the role of entailment patterns
and scalar implicatures in the processing of
numerals. Journal of Memory and Language, 61,
503-518.
Sperber, D., & Wilson, D. (1986). Relevance:
Communication and cognition. Oxford: Basil
Blackwell.
Vul, Edward, Harris, Christine, Winkielman, Piotr, &
Pashler, Harold. (2009). Puzzlingly High
Correlations in fMRI Studies of Emotion ,
Personality , and Social Cognition. Perspectives on
Psychological Science, 4, 274-290.

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Miki Uruwashi and especially Stephanie
Liem for help with data acquisition, and attendees at
AMLaP 2012 for comments and suggestions. This work was
supported by NDSEG and NSF GRFP fellowships to JKH
and NSF-BCS 0921012 to JS.

References
Bach, Kent. (1999). The semantics-pragmatics distinction:
What it is and why it matters. In K. Turner (Ed.),
The Semantics-Pragmatics Interface from Different
Points of View (pp. 65-84). Oxford, UK: Elsevier.
Bergen, Leon, & Grodner, Daniel J. (2012). Speaker
knowledge influences the comprehension of
pragmatic inferences. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
38(5), 1450-1460.
Bonnefon, Jean-Francois, Feeney, Aidan, & Villejoubert,
Gaelle. (2009). When some is actually all: Scalar
inferences in face-threatening contexts. Cognition,
112, 249-258.
Bott, Lewis, & Noveck, Ira A. (2004). Some utterances are
underinformative: The onset and time course of
scalar inferences. Journal of Memory and
Language, 51, 437-457.
Breheny, Richard, Katsos, Napoleon, & Williams, John.
(2006). Are generalised scalar implicatures
generated by default? An on-line investigation into
the role of context in generating pragmatic
inferences. Cognition, 100, 434-463. doi:
10.1016/j.cognition.2005.07.003
Chierchia, Gennaro, Fox, Danny, & Spector, Benjamin.
(2012). The grammatical view of scalar
implicatures and the relationship between
semantics and pragmatics. In C. Maienborn, K. v.
Heusinger & P. Portner (Eds.), Semantics: An
International Handbook of Natural Language
Meaning (Vol. 2, pp. 2297–2332). Boston, MA: De
Gruyter Mouton.
De Neys, Wim, & Schaeken, Walter. (2007). When people
are more logical under cognitive load: dual task
impact on scalar implicature. Experimental
Psychology, 54, 128-133.
Grice, P. (1989). Studies in the way of words. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Grodner, Daniel J., Klein, Natalie M., Carbary, Kathleen
M., & Tanenhaus, Michael K. (2010). "Some," and
possible all, scalar inferences are not delayed:
Evidence for immediate pragmatic enrichment.
Cognition, 116, 42-55.

566

