UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Impact of Communicative Constraints on the Emergence of a Graphical Communication
System

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/14m9w7s3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Bergmann, Till
Dale, Rick
Lupyan, Gary

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Impact of Communicative Constraints on
the Emergence of a Graphical Communication System
Till Bergmann (tbergmann@ucmerced.edu)

Rick Dale (rdale@ucmerced.edu)

Cognitive and Information Sciences, University of California, Merced, Merced, CA 95343

Gary Lupyan (lupyan@wisc.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706
Abstract
We investigated the behavior of participants tasked with communicating in a novel environment. Participants had to use
their mouse to draw graphical representations (termed squiggles in the game) of human faces in order to communicate with
fellow players. Experiment 1 investigated the effect of varying
features of the input images on the resulting drawings. Experiment 2 introduced varying comprehension conditions that
were predicted to produce differences in how features of faces
would be graphically represented. In experiment 1, the features of the different faces significantly shaped the structure
of the resulting squiggles. In experiment 2, the structure of
the squiggles was influenced by the environment in which they
were interpreted.
Keywords: social interaction; language evolution; evolution
of communication; social feedback; reference; games

Introduction
For an individual learner, language can be described as a
moving target (Christiansen & Chater, 2008; Chater, Reali,
& Christiansen, 2009). Languages are commonly assumed to
undergo changes at various levels. Recent studies have sought
to identify the extra-linguistic factors that may determine the
direction of these changes. These perspectives articulate an
adaptive approach to our communication system: Any existing variability in a population of language users may have
their language move in particular directions because some of
those variants are more useful or successful than others at
propagating. For example, recent studies have argued that the
social environment of languages is a very important factor
for these changes and developments (Lupyan & Dale, 2010;
Wray & Grace, 2007). In addition, humans are able to invent
new communication systems on the fly, with the emergence
of Nicaraguan Sign Language and Al-Sayyid Bedouin Sign
Language being two of the most impressive cases (Meir et
al., 2010).
In recent years, a number of studies have been conducted
with a focus on the structure of new communication systems
that emerge in a given environment. In these studies, participants have to use novel symbols to successfully communicate
with other participants. Over time, participants achieve more
efficiency in their communication by aligning their symbols
(Fay et al., 2010; Galantucci, 2005; Garrod et al., 2007).
In another line of research, the same question has been
tackled by the use of different “generations” of participants.
The first generation of participants learns simple word-object
patterns, and then passes this information on to a new generation of learners. After a couple of generations, struc-

ture emerges that was absent in the original language system
(Kirby, Cornish, & Smith, 2008).
This literature offers new insights, and importantly new
techniques, for exploring artificial communication systems
as a testbed for the forces that may drive communicative
change. The present paper aims to shed light on the ways
structure emerges in a new communication system by combining these two experimental frameworks in a large-scale
interactive communication game. Specifically, we look to
how the structure of a referential environment — the space of
things that a community is going to talk about, and how these
things are encountered — shapes the manner in which individuals in that community communicate. A first, exploratory
experiment investigated the different strategies participants
would employ to communicate a given image and how this
given image influences the structure of the produced symbol.
A further experiment introduced different environmental conditions that affected the way symbols were structured.

Previous Work
The current study expands on previous work by Dale and
Lupyan (2010), in which players connect via the Internet to a
gaming platform, where they had to create and comprehend
visual signs for objects in order to communicate with other
participants. Successful communication was achieved when
players where able to match a previously drawn sign to its
corresponding object.
The experiment consisted of two trial types: the production
(speaking) and comprehension (listening) trials. In a speaking trial, participants were shown an object, and after a short
delay, had three seconds to “squiggle” an image by clicking
and dragging their computer mouse on a provided canvas.
Such a method is akin to putting a temporal bandwidth on
the ability of the user to sketch the image. This was designed
to avoid their using English orthography or detailed sketches.
Participants had to focus on essential aspects of an image to
relay it. A different approach was used by Galantucci (2005),
who used a rotating tablet to keep subjects from using orthography. Because this game framework is used online, the
temporal bandwidth is a straightforward way of doing this,
while also moving the game along more quickly.
In a listening trial, players were shown a previously drawn
squiggle, along with two pictures of objects. The participant
then had to choose the matching picture by clicking on it.
Feedback is given whether they chose the correct picture. In
the original work, squiggles in the listening trial were cho-

1887

sen according to an evolutionary algorithm factoring in the
novelty of the squiggle and its previous comprehensibility.
Squiggles that performed badly in listening trials thus “die
out” and are no longer used.
Data from 60 users were collected, which resulted in
around 1,400 produced squiggles and around 4,100 listening
trials. Feedback by the players was generally very positive
and many found it to be entertaining and rather addictive.
Results from this study supported the findings from other
studies: a) Squiggles get simplified. The average size of a
squiggle shrinks over gameplay; b) The evolutionary algorithm produced stability for most squiggles, despite opportunities for novel squiggles to replace them during listen trials
and c) Squiggles were at first drawn highly iconically, but
gradually evolved towards more simplified symbols as participants continued playing.
In the current paper, we utilize this framework as a testbed
for exploring how environments shape the squiggles as participants play. The central hypothesis guiding the study was
that users’ squiggles are shaped by their “listening” environments (i.e., distribution over the foil-target pairs). In what follows, we first describe our redesign of the system, and an initial exploration (Experiment 1) of how aspects of objects can
predict aspects of squiggles. Following this, we describe a
comparison of two conditions (Experiment 2) meant to more
subtly explore the role of the distribution of listening trials in
determining squiggle composition.

Participants connected to the gaming platform via the Internet. Players were instructed to squiggle the displayed images so that other players are able to match a squiggle to the
correspoding image later.
In the speaking trial, one of the 120 pictures in the data set
was randomly shown to the participant along with a framed
“canvas” on which participants could draw (Fig. 1). Participants had five seconds (without delay) to draw on the canvas
before a listening trial appeared. The time limit was increased
from the earlier study as the delay until the countdown started
was removed. The remaining time for the speaking trial was
shown to the user below the canvas.
In the listening trial, a squiggle previously produced by a
fellow player is animated on a canvas using the original speed
and directions of the user who had drawn the squiggle. The
matching image was then placed either above or below this
squiggle, with a competitor image taking up the other position
(Fig. 2). Players had to click on the matching image in order
to successfully communicate, and received visual feedback
whether they had made the right choice. The ratio of speaking
to listening trials was 1:3.
An important constraint on communication was time – participants were given only 5 seconds to create the squiggle.

Experiment 1
Method
Game Design The approach in Dale and Lupyan (2010)
was replicated in the present study. However, the game was
re-written to take into account new technological developments to ensure maximal compatibility with current browsers.
We chose a specific domain of objects for squiggles to make
“reference” to: human faces. While the previous study used a
non-standardized set of pictures, all pictures were now taken
from the Face Database (Minear & Park, 2004). This had
the advantage that all picture used the same light conditions,
background, facial expressions and dimensions. Variability
on those parts was thus excluded. 120 pictures were chosen
with respect to their age and gender, using a 2x2 matrix, with
30 pictures in each set (cf. Table 1). In order to reduce the
number of salient features in these images, pictures with very
distinguishing features such as birthmarks and earrings were
not chosen.
Table 1: Summary statistics for the different picture sets
Group
Young Males
Young Females
Old Males
Old Females

M (Age)
21.35
21.53
73.37
73.80

SD (Age)
2.35
2.85
7.47
6.69

Range (Age)
18–28
18–28
61–91
61–85

Figure 1: An example of a speaking trial.
Expectations Experiment 1 mainly served as a first step in
testing the impact that different image dimensions have on
the behavior of participants. It also served as an exploratory
study of this behavior. We were interested in the different strategies employed by players to communicate. Which
salient features were chosen and which were the most efficient? The input images were believed to have an effect on
the way squiggles were structured by the participants; that is,
we expected dimensions such as age and gender to influence
squiggle strategies.
It was predicted that users would perform better in the listening trials with more practice, and hypothesized that the

1888

Results
Communication Strategies (Speaking) We performed a
linear mixed-effects model on the relationship between the
total length of a squiggle in pixels and the interaction of age,
gender and progression of gameplay. Random effects consisted of the subject and item. p-values were obtained by
calculating the likelihood of the corresponding t-values in a
normal distribution. We found main effects for gender and
age of the target, as well as for the progression of gameplay.
Additionally, there was an effect for the interaction between
age and gender. Squiggle length decreased for male input images (t = −9.47, p < 0.0001) by 129.6 pixels ± 13.68 (standard error). Squiggle length decreased for young input images (t = −3.19, p = 0.001) by 43.33 pixels ± 13.68. Length
increased slightly over time by 1.1 pixels± 0.39 (t = 2.71,
p < 0.0001). The interaction of age and gender meant that
squiggles for young males were 42.24 pixels ± 19.37 longer
than for old males (t = 3.91,p < 0.0001), negating the main
effect of age for males (Fig. 3).

450

Grouped Squiggle Length
Age

Figure 2: An example of a listening trial.

Data
On speaking trials, measurements of coordinates were taken
along the paths drawn by the players. Time stamps were collected at each sampled x, y coordinate. The length in pixels
of each squiggle was calculated using the stored coordinates.
The number of unique strokes was collected as well.
In the listening trial, unique identifiers for the player,
squiggle and corresponding image as well as the competitor image were stored. The comprehension of the result —
whether the correct picture was chosen — was stored in a binary fashion along with the time it took the player to decide.
Data by participants who produced fewer than thirty squiggles were excluded, leaving data from 96 participants.

400
350

Mean Length

Young

300

complexity of produced squiggles would shrink over time.
Players were expected to become more efficient with more
exposure to the communication system in both the listening
and speaking trials.
Participants 100 participants from the United States were
recruited via Amazon Mechanical Turk and compensated financially ($0.75) for taking part in the study. The use of
Amazon Mechanical Turk had the indispensable advantage
that players signed up almost instantaneously and simultaneously, which created a community of speakers playing at the
same time and communicating with each other. Participants
had to produce thirty squiggles and the respective number of
listening trials (90) in order to receive compensation.

Old

F

M
Gender

Figure 3: Average length of squiggles grouped by item age
and gender
To account for possible differences in compositionality,
we carried out a linear mixed-effects model on the relationship between the number of strokes and the interaction of
age, gender and progression of gameplay. p-values were obtained by calculating the likelihood of the corresponding tvalues in a normal distribution. We obtained main effects
for age, gender and progressing gameplay. Squiggles contained more features (+0.195 ± 0.08) if depicting a male (t =
−2.42, p = 0.015) or young person (+0.38 ± 0.08, t = 4.80,
p < 0.0001). The number of strokes also increased slightly by
0.008 ± 0.002 with more practice (t = 3.43, p < 0.001). An
effect of the interaction between age and gender (t = −3.55,
p = 0.0004) meant that the main effect of age was negated for
males, as old males elicited slightly more strokes (0.02) than
young males (Fig. 4).
Comprehension Performance (Listening) Overall, participants chose the correct image 71% of the time, demonstrating that successful communication in novel environments is

1889

Grouped Squiggle Strokes

2.6

Old

2.2

2.4

Young

2.0

Mean Number of Strokes

Age

F

M
Gender

Figure 4: Average number of strokes grouped by item age and
gender.
achievable even in a short period of time.
A linear-mixed effects model on the relationship of comprehension and the interaction of age, gender and progressing
gameplay was constructed. An additional fixed effect was the
time it took participants to make their decision. This variable
was log-transformed to reform skew. Random effects were
the users, items and the competitor images. The analysis revealed no significant effect for age, gender and progressing
gameplay. The model produced a main effect for decision
time (z = −3.56, p = 0.0004). Scores decreased by 0.18 ±
0.05 the longer users contemplated their decision.

tually exclusively. First, participants did not play the game
long enough to get an effect. Second, there is no explicit pressure on the participants to reduce complexity. The time limit
given in the speaking trial is sufficient enough to encode several features, and there is no motivation for users to change
their strategy.
The fact that players have ample time in the speaking trial
to produce detailed squiggles without much practice means
that squiggles are comprehended right away. This leads to
a ceiling effect and participants do not get better at comprehending squiggles over time. A decrease of the time limit in
the speaking trial will very likely produce a decrease of comprehensibility at the beginning of the game, as players will
not be able to produced detailed enough squiggles. Accuracy
of comprehension should, however, increase over time in this
scenario.
This initial study simply aimed at identifying basic strategies of players, observing the dynamics of gameplay (effect
of time on production/comprehension), and whether squiggles can be quantified as having particular properties associated with particular classes of stimuli.

(a) Hair

Discussion
As predicted, squiggles varied in structure and appearance
depending on the image drawn. For females, participants focused on the hair form and length, which resulted in longer
squiggles for females than males. Players tended to encode
several, short features for younger females and fewer, but
longer, features for old females. The increased number of
strokes for young females can be explained by a preference
for drawing hair which required several strokes (cf. Fig. 5a).
Both strategies performed with the same level of accuracy in
listening trials, which shows that each strategy chose the right
aspects to be encoded.
Salient features of young males were often hair or head
form, and on average, squiggles contained more features for
males than for females. Old males were typically depicted
by focusing on wrinkles and mouth form, which resulted in
very short squiggles containing several features. The number of strokes did not vary much across age for males, as in
both categories several features were encoded. A range of
strategies across ages and genders is shown in figure 5. These
were successful strategies, in that the squiggles were easy to
be recognized among those who “listened” to it.
Both the number of encoded features and the total length of
squiggles increased over time. This does not support our hypothesis that the complexity of squiggles would shrink over
time. There are two explanations for this which are not mu-

(b) Head Form

(c) Age/Wrinkles

(d) Mouth

Figure 5: Different strategies employed in successful squiggles

Experiment 2
Method
Game Design After the initial experiment, a second, more
refined experiment was carried out. We introduced a second
condition in the listening trial, in which the competitor of the

1890

displayed squiggle was always of the opposite age and gender. While age is normally a continuous variable, we chose
the pictures in such a way that made a binary distinction possible (see above). For example, if the squiggle depicted a
young male, the competitor would now always be an old female. The new condition provides additional contextual clues
to the players: In order to match a squiggle, only age and gender need to be discriminated against instead of focusing on
individual features. The other condition remained as in experiment 1, i.e. the competitor was randomly chosen with no
regard to age or gender. A simple encoding of age and gender
is not be sufficient in this condition.
The ratio of speaking trials to listening trials was changed
additionally in both conditions. The higher rate of language
comprehension in the early stages of language acquisition
was modeled by increasing the number of listening trials to
10 for the first three speaking trials, and then slowly decreasing the number back to 3. Participants had to go through 20
speaking trials and 110 listening trials in total. No further
changes were made to the game setup.

for participants, items and competitor images. The variable
time was log-transformed to remove skew. The model revealed no effects on comprehension.

Discussion
As predicted, the number of strokes increased after roughly
three speaking trials in the condition in which the competitor image was chosen randomly, but not in the condition in
which comprehension only required discriminating between
gender and age categories. (Fig. 6). Additionally, the number
of strokes continuously dropped in the latter condition as the
game progressed. This sudden change after a short acquisition time is in line with other studies, which have shown that
novel strategies are picked up rapidly by the majority of the
population after a short period of time (Steels, 2011). The
number of strokes should stabilize in each condition if players continue playing. Figure 7 shows examples of successful
squiggles with differing numbers of strokes and encoded features.
Both conditions performed equally well in the listening
trial, which shows that both conditions adapted to their given
environment successfully. Importantly, fewer details were
needed in the between-category condition to achieve the same
accuracy as squiggles with more complexity in the condition
in which the competitor was chosen completely arbitrarily.

Expectations We predicted that the a changed comprehension environment would result in subsequent changes in the
production of squiggles. In particular, we hypothesized that
squiggles in the new condition would require less detail and
complexity in order to achieve successful communication
than squiggles in the control condition. The difference should
be clearly visible after a short acquisition time. We expected a
difference to occur roughly after the third speaking trial after
which the number of listening trials was slowly decreased.
The expected differences in the structure of squiggles were
predicted to not impact the performance of players in listening trials. Experiment 1 has shown that players choose the
matching item with a high accuracy with little practice, and
this accuracy is believed to stay constant in this experiment.
Participants 25 participants were recruited through Amazon Mechanical Turk and compensated financially by receiving $0.75.

(a) One feature

(b) Two features

(c) Three features

(d) Four features

Figure 7: Different number of encoded features corresponding to the number of strokes a player drew.

Results
A linear mixed-effects model was conducted with the number
of strokes as the dependent variable, and the interaction of the
conditions with progressing gameplay as the fixed factor. Intercepts for subjects and items were used as random effects.
We found a main effect of condition (t = −3.31, p < 0.001),
showing that the number of strokes decreased by 1.06 ± 0.32
in the between condition. The interaction of between condition and the progressing gameplay proved to be significant
(t = −2.91, p = 0.0036), lowering the number of strokes by
-0.07 +± 0.02, despite an increase of 0.07 ± 0.01 generally
over time (t = 5.2, p < 0.0001).
We also performed a linear mixed-effects model to check
for possible effects on comprehension of the interaction of
conditions, progression of gameplay and the time it took the
participants to make their choice. Random effects controlled

General Discussion
Experiment 1 used a simple design in order to study the
impact that visual and conceptual properties of have on the
structure of squiggles drawn to communicate these objects.
Input images differed in age and gender, and the produced
squiggles varied in their structure according to these factors.
Participants were able to adapt quickly to the given environment and performed well in comprehending squiggles from
the start. The second experiment examined the impact of different comprehension conditions. An increase of listening
trials at the start of the game and the introduction of different
conditions led to varying squiggle structures across time and
conditions. The referential environment had a profound impact on squiggle production. Specifically, we observed a decrease in squiggle complexity in the environment where the

1891

Number of Strokes grouped by condition

2.0

2.5

3.0

3.5

Mixed
Between

1.5

Number of Strokes

4.0

Listening Condition

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

12

14

16

18

20

Speaking Trial

Figure 6: The evolution of the number of strokes over time across conditions
referents had to be distinguished categorically (although the
participants were never informed of this constraint).
This method developed here to explore the evolution of
communication in a simple graphical environment lends itself to numerous experimental manipulations. The impact of
several parameters can be explored in this context. For example, a decreased time limit in the speaking trial will increase
pressure on participants to draw more efficiently and to focus on fewer features. This may lead to a greater influence
of the referential environment: Conditions in which categorical information (age and gender) is sufficient for successful communication lead to squiggles with simpler surfacestructure, a likely starting place for the emergence of morphemes and compositional structure. The emergence of such
morphemes could be sped up by using a system of immediate feedback, in which players are repeatedly informed how
successful their squiggles perform in the listening trials, i.e.
whether other players recognize their squiggles. Immediate
feedback allows players to establish more common ground
and has been shown to drastically increase communication
performance (Garrod et al., 2007).
This study shows that humans rapidly create efficient communication systems in a novel shared environment by integrating contextual clues. Comprehension and production
were tightly interconnected in this communication game, and
the referential environment significantly affected the structure
of the produced squiggles. This lends further support to the
idea that communication systems adapt to the environment in
which they are learned and used.

References
Chater, N., Reali, F., & Christiansen, M. H. (2009). Restrictions on biological adaptation in language evolution. PNAS,
106(4), 1015–1020.
Christiansen, M. H., & Chater, N. (2008). Language as

shaped by the brain. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 31(5),
489–558.
Dale, R., & Lupyan, G. (2010). Squiggle: Large-Scale Social Emergence of Simple Symbols. In A. D. M. Smith,
M. Schouwstra, B. de Boer, & K. Smith (Eds.), The Evolution of Language: Proceedings of the 8th International
Conference (pp. 391–392). New Jersey: World Scientific.
Fay, N., Garrod, S., Roberts, L., & Swoboda, N. (2010).
The interactive evolution of human communication systems. Cognitive Science, 34(3), 351–386.
Galantucci, B. (2005). An experimental study of the emergence of human communication systems. Cognitive Science, 29(5), 737–767.
Garrod, S., Fay, N., Lee, J., Oberlander, J., & Macleod,
T. (2007). Foundations of representation: Where might
graphical symbol systems come from? Cognitive Science,
31(6), 961–987.
Kirby, S., Cornish, H., & Smith, K. (2008). Cumulative cultural evolution in the laboratory: An experimental approach
to the origins of structure in human language. PNAS,,
105(31), 10681–10686.
Lupyan, G., & Dale, R. (2010). Language structure is partly
determined by social structure. PloS one, 5(1), 1–10.
Meir, I., Sandler, W., Padden, C., & Aronoff, M.
(2010). Emerging sign languages. In M. Marschark &
P. E. Spencer (Eds.), Oxford Handbook of Deaf Studies,
Language, and Education, Volume 2 (pp. 267–280). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Minear, M., & Park, D. C. (2004). A lifespan database of
adult facial stimuli. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 36(4), 630–633.
Steels, L. (2011). Modeling the cultural evolution of language. Physics of Life Reviews, 8(4), 339–356.
Wray, A., & Grace, G. W. (2007). The consequences of talking to strangers: Evolutionary corollaries of socio-cultural
influences on linguistic form. Lingua, 117(3), 543–578.

1892

