UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Role of Circadian Variations and Socially Distributed Thinking in Belief Perseverance

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0x81074g

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Villejoubert, Gaelle
Khan, Madiha
Valle-Tourangeau, Frederic

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Role of Circadian Variations and Socially Distributed Thinking
in Belief Perseverance
Gaëlle Villejoubert (G.Villejoubert@kingston.ac.uk)
Madiha Khan (k0801532@kingston.ac.uk)
Frédéric Vallée-Tourangeau (F.Vallee-Tourangeau@kingston.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Penrhyn road
Kingston upon Thames, KT1 2EE United Kingdom
Abstract
From the moment they make up their mind, people are
reluctant to change it. We tested the hypothesis that people
disposing of more cognitive resources—through circadian
variations or socially distributed thinking—would engage in
deliberative thinking and would consequently be less likely to
exhibit belief perseverance. Perseverance was measured by
the change in judgments related to a suspect in a criminal
case, following the presentation of an offender profile that
was at odds with the suspect’s description. Individuals tested
at a compatible circadian time exhibited less perseverance in
the face of contradictory evidence compared to individuals
tested at an incongruent time. Individuals deliberating on their
own also tended to show more belief perseverance compared
to those who worked in groups. There was, however, no
interaction effect between circadian timing and condition of
deliberation on belief change. The implications for our
understanding of the mechanisms that underpin belief
perseverance are discussed.
Keywords: Belief perseverance; Dual-process accounts of
cognition; Circadian variations; Socially distributed
cognition.

Introduction
Despite the public release of his birth certificate, a 2011
Gallup poll published by USA Today revealed that only
38% of Americans definitely believed President Obama was
born in the US (Adams, 2011). Although the President was
reportedly “puzzled” by the persistence of these rumors, this
incident illustrates a well-established finding in
psychological science: it is easier to get people to believe
something new than to get them to abandon an existing
belief even in the face of indisputable evidence to the
contrary—a phenomenon known as belief perseverance
(Ross, Lepper & Hubbard, 1975).
Belief perseverance may concern beliefs about one’s own
skills and abilities, those of others, as well as naïve theories
about stereotypical traits and behaviors (Anderson, 2007). In
their seminal study of perseverance in social perception,
Ross et al. (1975) presented a series of cards containing a
real and a fictitious suicide note and asked participants to
decide which note was written by a patient with suicidal
ideation. Participants first received false feedback on their
performance and were later debriefed on the arbitrary nature
of the feedback they received. Yet, when participants were
asked to reassess their performance after the thorough
debriefing, those judgments remained strongly influenced
by the initial spurious test results they had received.

A combination of three types of cognitive processes have
been implicated in the perseverance of beliefs (Anderson &
Lindsay, 1998): the availability heuristic, its associated
illusory correlation effect, and the anchoring and adjustment
heuristic (Tversky & Kahneman, 1974). Events such as a
performance appraisal or the observation of a person’s
behavior are presumed to initiate the generation of a causal
explanation (e.g., “I am (un)skilled at this task”). This new
belief thereafter remains available in memory,
independently of the inceptive evidence such that when the
evidence is discredited, the belief remains intact (Anderson,
Lepper, & Ross, 1980).
Attempts to alleviate belief perseverance have been met
with mitigated success. The most effective approach has
been to encourage individuals to consider alternative causal
explanations—counterexplanations—in an effort to reduce
the influence of the inceptive belief (Anderson, 1982, 2007).
Yet, considering alternatives may sometimes backfire.
When individuals are given the opportunity to discount
negative evidence, for example by plausibly discrediting it,
the availability of counterexplanations no longer reduces
belief perseverance (Vallée-Tourangeau, Beynon, & James,
2000). Moreoever, perseverance is aggravated when
evidence for the alternative explanation is difficult to elicit
or when evidence for the target hypothesis is easily
accessible (Nestler, 2010).
The mitigated success of the counterexplanation account,
we wish to argue, can be best accounted for within a dualprocess framework. The dual-process view of cognition has
gained considerable influence in the past decade in research
examining judgment, decision-making or reasoning (e.g.,
see Darlow & Sloman, 2010 for a review) but has yet to be
applied to the study of belief perseverance. According to
this view, two families of cognitive processes may underpin
judgments and decisions: an intuitive mode of cognitive
functioning—where judgments originate from rapid and
automatic processes—and a second, more deliberate and
effortful mode of thinking engaging processes which can
either be at the origin of the judgment provided or simply
monitor its quality (Kahneman, 2003). The type of heuristic
processing that is taken to underpin belief perseverance is a
trademark of the intuitive heuristic mode of thinking. This
suggests that any situation either favoring deliberative
thinking or augmenting deliberative thinking capacity
should lead to a decrease in belief perseverance. We
examine this possibility by investigating the role of two

1534

variations in cognitive resources on belief perseverance:
circadian preferences and socially distributed thinking.
Several studies have demonstrated that the efficiency of
executive control—a key feature of deliberative thinking—
is contingent upon the synchronicity between people’s peak
period of circadian arousal and the time of testing (for a
review, see Schmidt, Collette, Cajochen, & Peigneux,
2010). For example, West, Murphy, Armilio, Craik and
Stuss (2002) used a choice reaction time task placing
variable demands upon working memory: individuals were
asked to identify and respond to the spatial location of a
target presented in a previous display either with or without
a distractor that they had to ignore. Time-of-day variations
had an effect on performance, but only when more
controlled processes were involved (e.g., when a distractor
had to be inhibited); performance on simpler trials requiring
automatic processes was unaffected by circadian variations.
Schmidt et al. (2010) reviewed this and other studies
pointing to similar results and concluded that cognitive
functioning at nonoptimal time of day was typically
associated with failure to clear or suppress irrelevant
information and difficulties to resist predominant responses
even if they are incorrect. For example, Bodenhausen
(1990) showed that people were less likely to rely on
stereotypic preconceptions when rendering judgments at a
time of day that was congruent with their circadian
preferences.
From a dual-process perspective, these results suggest that
circadian congruence fosters the optimal deployment of
cognitive resources, enabling people to engage in more
effortful deliberative thinking. In turn, circadian
incongruence encourages more heuristic and less effortful
thinking, and hence lead people to unquestionably rely on
established beliefs and stereotypic preconceptions. In light
of the importance of circadian congruence for effortful
deliberation, we hypothesized that belief change should be
greater in a task where people are asked to revise a prior
belief in light of new conflicting evidence at a time
congruent with their circadian preference.
If depleted cognitive resources lead to belief
perseverance, augmenting those resources may counteract
the effect of circadian variations. We tested this possibility
by examining the impact of socially distributed cognition on
belief perseverance. From a distributed cognition
perspective, cognitive functioning is conceived as taking
place in a system including resources and operations that are
distributed across time, material artefacts as well as people
(Hollan, Hutchins, & Kirsh, 2000; Villejoubert & ValléeTourangeau, 2011). From this perspective, interactivity acts
as a cognitive scaffold, resulting in improved performance.
For example, we showed that when participants could
interact with physical matchsticks in a matchstick algebra
problem, they were more likely to achieve insight compared
to those for whom matchsticks were drawn on paper
(Weller, Villejoubert, & Vallée-Tourangeau, 2011; see also
Vallée-Tourangeau, Euden, & Hearn, 2011).

Unlike material distribution, the contribution of socially
distributed resources for performing a cognitive task
remains debated, however; with wealth of evidence showing
that performance may be both weakened or strengthened
when cognition is shared in a group (Larson, 2010). Group
performance may vary depending on the fit between
members’ cognitive resources and the cognitive demands of
the task, how resources are distributed, and process costs
arising from group interactions (Steiner, 1972). On the one
hand, groups may benefit from the potential to generate a
more diverse range of interpretations and counterexplanations than would individuals (Hutchins, 1991). For
example, multiple-cue judgments were shown to be more
accurate when they originated from dyads rather than
individuals (Olsson, Juslin, & Olsson, 2006). Yet, it is not
clear that groups will always be in a better position to
engage in deliberative thinking as the superiority of groups
may also depend on the cognitive resources they have at
their disposal (Hutchins, 1991). This suggests, for example,
that groups composed of individuals with limited cognitive
resources may function worse than individuals, exhibiting
more heuristic thinking and “groupthink” (Janis, 1982)
whereas groups composed of members at the peak of their
cognitive functioning may outperform individuals.
Our study was therefore also designed to examine
whether the amount of cognitive resources available to
individuals in a group (manipulated through circadian
variations) would affect group performance. We expected
that groups would exhibit less belief perseverance than
individuals when they were made of individuals tested at
their best period of circadian arousal. Conversely, we
expected belief perseverance to be more pronounced in
groups than in individuals when groups were composed of
individuals tested at an incongruent circadian time.

The Present Study
The present study investigated the cognitive processes that
underpin belief perseverance by examining the moderating
role of circadian variations and socially distributed thinking.
It used a forensic scenario where participants were asked to
revise their initial judgment of the extent to which a
stereotypical suspect was guilty of an offense, after being
presented with counterevidence in the form of an atypical
offender profile written by an expert profiler. Guilt
judgments were produced either by small groups of three
participants or by individual participants. Half of the
individual participants and groups were tested at a time that
was congruent with their optimal circadian preference; the
rest were tested at an incongruent time. Building upon
previous research on the role of circadian variations on
thinking mode, we expected that people who were tested at
an incongruent time would exhibit greater belief
perseverance because their limited cognitive resources
should favor a heuristic mode of thinking. We also explored
the role of socially distributed thinking on belief
perseverance and hypothesized that the relative performance
of groups compared to individuals would depend on

1535

whether or not groups were composed of members
functioning at their optimal time of circadian arousal:
groups of individuals tested at a congruent time were
expected to revise their guilt judgment to a greater extent
than individuals while groups of individuals tested at an
incongruent time were expected to persevere more in their
belief of guilt compared to individuals.

Method
Participants
A total of 129 students and administrative staff were
recruited on the campus of Kingston University. They were
either tested individually (N = 32, Mean age = 29 years, SD
= 12.85, 22 women) or in one of 32 small groups made of
three to four individuals (see Table 1 for group
demographics).
Table 1: Group demographics.
Group type
Women only
Men only
Mixed (2W/1M)
Mixed (1W/2M)
Total

N
5
3
12
12
32

Mean age (SD)
25 (9.33)
22 (2.46)
23 (6.65)
23 (5.60)
23 (6.48)

description of a suspected child molester (e.g., a 44-year-old
white male, unemployed, lonely and morally deviant).
Lastly, they read an atypical offender profile by a forensic
expert, which listed characteristics informed by actual
statistics for this kind of offender although at odds with the
stereotypical suspect description (e.g., “In most crimes of
this nature the offender is employed in some form of skilled
or office job”; see Marshall and Alison, 2007, for the
complete descriptions). Participants tested in groups were
invited to read the case information on their own and
thereafter discuss the case between themselves before
reporting a unique group estimate for each of the variables
measured.

Measures
Participants were asked to consider the case and rate the
degree to which the suspect may be guilty and the degree to
which they felt confident that their judgment was correct
(1=not at all, 10=completely) both before and after the
presentation of the atypical profile. Finally, participants
were asked to rate their level of involvement in the case
(1=none, 10=greatly) and how difficult it was to make a
decision (1=not at all, 10=very) before they were debriefed
and thanked for their participation.

Results

Design

Manipulation Checks

The experiment used a 2 × 2 × 2 mixed design. The
between-subject independent variables were the time of
testing (circadian-congruent or circadian-incongruent) and
testing condition (individually or in small groups). The
within-subject independent variable was the time of
judgment (before or after the presentation of disconfirming
information). Participants were randomly allocated to one of
the resulting four conditions.

Participants tested at a congruent circadian time reported a
slightly higher level of involvement in the task,
Mcongruent = 6.55, SD = 2.36 vs. Mincongruent = 5.88, SD = 2.56,
as well as higher levels of difficulty, Mcongruent = 6.23,
SD = 2.35 vs. Mincongruent = 5.74, SD = 2.21. Possibly due to
lack of statistical power, however, neither difference
reached statistical significance; t(62) = 1.08, p = .14, onetailed, Cohen’s d = 0.27 for involvement, and t(62) = 0.87, p
= .19, one-tailed, Cohen’s d = 0.22 for difficulty.

Procedure
Participants were invited to take part in a study examining
how jurors make decisions in various circumstances.
Participants’ circadian type was assessed using the abridged
English Version of Morningness-Eveningness questionnaire
(rH&O, Chelminki et al., 2000). They were categorized as
either Morning (M) types or Evening (E) types on the basis
of a median split of their scores. M-types scored
significantly higher on the Morningness-Eveningness
dimension compared to E-types; MM-types = 17.00 (SD =
3.36), N = 34, ME-types = 11.57 (SD = 1.36), N = 30, t(64) =
7.31, p < .001. All participants were then reconvened to
complete a small questionnaire. Half of the participants
were tested at a time that was congruent with their circadian
preferences (M-types tested between 10am and 12noon and
E-types tested between 1pm and 5pm) while the remaining
half was tested at an incongruent time. Participants were
asked, on their own or in a small group, to read a brief
description of a criminal case involving a series of sexual
assaults against young girls, followed by a stereotypical

Guilt Judgments
The theoretically important patterns in these data are (i) the
effect of time of judgment (before or after the presentation
of the profile), which captured the degree to which
participants, regardless of circadian congruence or grouping,
changed their guilt ratings after seeing the atypical offender
profile; (ii) the interaction between circadian congruence
and time of ratings (see Fig. 1); (iii) the interaction between
group and time of ratings (see Fig. 2); and finally (iv) the
interaction between circadian congruence and group (see
Fig . 3).
Guilt judgment data were analyzed with a 2 (circadiancongruent vs. circadian-incongruent) × 2 (individual vs.
group) × 2 (before vs. after the atypical profile presentation)
mixed analysis of variance (ANOVA). The main effect of
time of testing (congruent or incongruent with circadian
preferences) was not significant, F < 1, nor was the main
effect of testing condition (individually or in small group),
F(1, 60) = 1.25. However, there was a significant main

1536

effect of the time of judgment, Mbefore = 7.26 (SD = 1.52) vs.
Mafter = 5.44 (SD = 2.07), F(1, 60) = 47.23, MSE = 2.35, p <
.001, η2p = .44. There was also a significant interaction
between circadian time of testing and the time of judgment,
as Figure 1 illustrates, F(1, 60) = 4.65, p = .04, η2p = .07.
Guilt judgments were significantly revised downwards both
at circadian-congruent times, t(29) = 6.02, p < .001, and at
circadian-incongruent times, t(33) = 3.46, p = .002.
However, as anticipated, the difference in pre- and postprofile judgments was significantly smaller, indicative of
more belief perseverance, under circadian-incongruent time
of testing, t(62) = -2.13, p = .02, one-tailed.
Before

After

9
7.42

8

7.13
5.85

7

10

6

Mean Judgment of Guilt

4.97

5
4
3
2
1

Congruent

Incongruent

Figure 1: Mean judgments of the extent to which the suspect
may be guilty before and after the presentation of the
atypical offender profile, as a function of time of testing
(circadian congruent or incongruent)

Mean Judgment of Guilt

10

Before

7

7.23

Group

8
7

6.02

6.37

7.06
5.93

6
5
4
3
2

Congruent

Incongruent

Figure 3: Mean overall judgments of the extent to
which the suspect may be guilty as a function of time of
testing and testing condition

After

9
8

Individual

9

1

7.30

Finally, the three-way interaction term was not significant,
F <1. As Figure 4 illustrates, the effect of circadian time
congruency on belief revision was the same for individuals
and for groups, albeit groups tended to revise their
judgments to a greater extent compared to individuals, in
line with the findings reported above.

5.91
4.97

6
5
4
3
2
1

Individual

Group

Figure 2: Mean judgments of the extent to which the suspect
may be guilty before and after the presentation of the
atypical offender profile, as a function of testing condition
(individual or group)
The interaction between time of judgment (before or after
the presentation of the profile) and testing condition was
also marginally significant, F(1, 60) = 3.44, p = .07, η2p =
.05. Both judgments made by individuals, t(31) = 3.20, p =
.003, and those made by groups, t(31) = 6.36, p < .001, were
significantly revised downwards after the presentation of the
atypical profile (see Fig. 2). However, the amount of belief
revision was larger in group judgments, t(62) = 1.81, p =
.04, one-tailed.

1537

Mean proportion of belief change

Mean Judgment of Guilt

10

Of less theoretical interest, the effect of testing condition
on guilt judgments collapsed across time of testing was also
moderated by circadian congruency, F(1, 60) = 4.50, MSE =
3.89, p = .04, η2p = .07 (see Fig. 3). Unplanned post-hoc
tests (with a Bonferroni-corrected α set at .0125) revealed
that testing condition did not affect overall guilt judgments
when participants were tested at a congruent time, t(28) = –
.61. However, guilt judgments made individually were
significantly higher than those made in groups when
participants were tested at an incongruent time, t(32) = 2.72.
These results show that individual and group guilt
judgments collapsed across time of testing were
indistinguishable when produced at circadian congruent
times whereas individual judgments of guilt were more
pronounced than group judgments at incongruent circadian
times.

75%
50%

Individual
Group

25%
0%
-25%
-50%
-75%

Incongruent

Congruent

Circadian
Figure 4: Mean proportion
of beliefCongruence
change as a function of
time of testing and testing condition

Discussion
This study aimed to shed new light on the mitigated success
of the counterexplanation approach to reduce belief
perseverance. We proposed that belief perseverance
originated from a heuristic mode of cognitive processing
whereas belief revision demanded an effortful, deliberative
processing of the task information, more taxing in cognitive
resources. This assumption led us to hypothesize that belief
perseverance would be less likely to occur in situations
where cognitive resources were unconstrained. We
examined two such situations: times when individuals’
period of circadian arousal was at its peak and situations
when individuals’ cognitive resources may be augmented by
socially distributed thinking.
Our findings confirmed that the degree of belief
persistence in the suspect’s guilt after the profile
presentation was moderated by circadian congruency: when
tested at a congruent time, participants exhibited less belief
persistence—that is, they revised their guilt judgment to a
greater extent—than when they were tested at an
incongruent time. Contrary to what one might expect from
the groupthink perspective, but in line with predictions from
the distributed cognition perspective, group judgments
tended to exhibit less belief perseverance in the suspect’s
guilt after presentation of the atypical profile—judgments
made in groups were revised more substantially than
individual judgments. There was, however, no interaction
between circadian time of testing and testing condition:
group judgments exhibited less belief perseverance than
individual judgments, both at congruent and incongruent
circadian times of testing.
These findings contribute to our understanding of the
cognitive mechanisms that may underpin belief
perseverance. They suggest that belief perseverance is not
only a consequence of the content of thought—for example,
the availability of reasons for or against a target belief or a
counterexplanation (Anderson, 1982, 2008)—but is also
influenced by the cognitive resources available to
individuals, which in turn determine the mode of thought
they can apply to the task. As such, this study provides
empirical support for the claim that belief perseverance
arises from a heuristic mode of thinking since perseverance
was more marked when cognitive resources were limited,
thus inhibiting a more effortful and deliberative processing
of the task. More importantly, simply increasing the pool of
cognitive resources available to process the task—either by
testing individuals at their peak circadian time or by
allowing them to distribute cognitive resources in a social
system—was sufficient to significantly reduce belief
perseverance.
The fact that we found no evidence of “groupthink” when
groups were tested at incongruent circadian times may
suggest that the increased pool of cognitive resources
offered by socially distributed thinking remained sufficient
to counteract heuristic thinking. Distributed thinking
enhances cognitive power by, notably, lowering the cost of
sense making. According to Kirsh (2010), distributed

thinking involves three cost structures: the cost of mental
operations, the cost of outer operations—in the present
research, most typically exemplified by the speech acts
(Austin, Urmson, & Sbisà 1975) performed by the group
members—and the coupling cost of coordinating these inner
and outer processes. This suggests in turn, that the superior
performance of groups tested at incongruent circadian times
occurred because the benefits of socially distributing
thinking continued to outweigh the cost of inner cognitive
processes and the coupling costs. Future research may shed
light on this possibility by increasing coupling costs. One
strategy to do so could be to distribute the information about
the suspect and the profile between group members as
opposed to present all information to all members, as was
the case in this study; this would require group members to
engage in the coordination of evidence, and this added cost
might eliminate the superior performance of groups in
incongruent circadian conditions.
Finally, our findings also have implications for past
accounts of belief perseverance. They suggest that
instructions to consider counterexplanations may succeed by
inviting deeper processing of the belief revision task and
may fail when the cognitive cost of this type of processing
is either too high or when individuals’ cognitive resources
are depleted. Alternative accounts (e.g., Nestler, 2010;
Sanna, Schwarz, & Stocker, 2002) have suggested that
judgments are mediated by metacognitive feelings of
difficulty. For instance, Nestler (2010) suggested that
individuals infer the likelihood of the truth of an outcome—
be it the target belief or the counterexplanation—from the
difficulty they experience in generating many reasons for
(or against) this outcome. This metacognitive explanation
does not seem to be supported by our present results: if
anything, individuals tended to perceive the task as more
difficult when they were tested at congruent circadian times
and yet, this was also when they exhibited less belief
perseverance.
Future research may thus benefit from disentangling the
respective impact of metacognitive feelings of difficulty and
mode of thinking. Specifically, an alternative account of
Nestler’s (2010) findings could be made in terms of the
cognitive demands of the task and their impact on the mode
of thinking elicited. Prompting for a few reasons in favor of
the target belief may be the least demanding and thus
unlikely to engage a deliberative mode of thinking.
Prompting for many reasons supporting the target belief or
prompting for a few reasons supporting the alternative
hypothesis might be sufficient to engage more deliberative
processes and, as a result, reduce belief perseverance. But
prompting for many reasons supporting the alternative
explanation may be too taxing in cognitive resources: it
entails holding both the target and alternative hypothesis in
working memory while also exerting efforts to find a large
amount of evidence for the alternative hypothesis. Unless
they are motivated to do so, people will more naturally
consider multiple evidence in support of one hypothesis
rather than establishing the diagnostic value of a single

1538

piece of information for two hypotheses (Villejoubert &
Vallée-Tourangeau, 2012). The increasing demand on
cognitive resources in this instance could thus have led to
cognitive overload, causing people to revert to a heuristic
mode of thinking and, as a result, exhibit more belief
perseverance.
To conclude, employing circadian congruence as a proxy
for the cognitive resources available to perform a judgment
task, this research suggests that belief perseverance results
from an intuitive mode of thinking. Contrary to what might
be anticipated by the groupthink perspective, however,
depleted cognitive resources in a group setting did not affect
belief perseverance. This suggests that socially distributed
thinking may help to counteract the detrimental effect of
cognitive depletion.

Acknowledgments
We thank Rupreet Gurm for her assistance in collecting
data.

References
Adams, R. (2011, April 27). Obama birth certificate
released to put end to 'carnival barkers': US president says
in TV statement he is puzzled at how questions over his
place of birth have persisted. The Guardian. Retrieved
from
http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2011/apr/27/barackobama-birth-certificate-released?intcmp=239
Anderson, C. A. (1982). Inoculation and Counterexplanation: Debiasing Techniques in the Perseverance of
Social Theories. Social Cognition, 1, 126–139.
Anderson, C. A. (2007). Belief Perseverance. In
Encyclopedia of Social Psychology (pp. 110–
111). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications.
Anderson, C. A., & Lindsay, J. J. (1998). The development,
perseverance, and change of naive theories. Social
Cognition, 16, 8–30.
Anderson, C. A., Lepper, M. R., & Ross, L. (1980).
Perseverance of social theories: The role of explanation in
the persistence of discredited information. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 39, 1037–1049.
Austin, J. L., Urmson, J. O., & Sbisà, M. (1975). How to do
things with words. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Bodenhausen, G. V. (1990). Stereotypes as judgmental
heuristics: Evidence of circadian variations in
discrimination. Psychological Science, 1, 319–322.
Darlow, A. L., & Sloman, S. A. (2010). Two systems of
reasoning: Architecture and relation to emotion. Wiley
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Cognitive Science, 1, 382–392.
Hollan, J., Hutchins, E., & Kirsh, D. (2000). Distributed
cognition: Toward a new foundation for human-computer
interaction research. ACM Transactions on ComputerHuman Interaction, 7, 174–196.
Hutchins, E. (1991). The social organization of distributed
cognition. In L. B. Resnick, J. M. Levine, & S. D. Teasley
(Eds.), Perspectives on Socially Shared Cognition (pp.

283–287). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.
Janis, I. L. (1982). Groupthink: Psychological studies of
policy decisions and fiascoes (2nd ed.). Boston: Houghton
Mifflin.
Kahneman, D. (2003). A perspective on judgment and
choice: Mapping bounded rationality. American
Psychologist, 58, 697–720.
Kirsh, D. (2010). Thinking with external representations. AI
& society, 25, 441–454.
Larson, J. R. (2010). In search of synergy in small group
performance. New York: Psychology Press.
Marshall, B. C., & Alison, L. J. (2007). Stereotyping,
congruence and presentation order: Interpretative biases
in utilizing offender profiles. Psychology, Crime & Law,
13, 285–303.
Nestler, S. (2010). Belief perseverance: The role of
accessible content and accessibility experiences. Social
Psychology, 41, 35–41.
Olsson, A.-C., Juslin, P., & Olsson, H. (2006). Individuals
and dyads in a multiple-cue judgment task: Cognitive
processes and performance. Journal of Experimental
Social Psychology, 42, 40–56.
Ross, L., Lepper, M. R., & Hubbard, M. (1975).
Perseverance in self-perception and social perception:
Biased attributional processes in the debriefing paradigm.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 32, 880–
892.
Schmidt, C., Collette, F., Cajochen, C., & Peigneux, P.
(2007). A time to think: circadian rhythms in human
cognition. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 24, 755–789.
Steiner, I. D. (1972). Group process and productivity. New
York: Academic Press.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1974). Judgment under
uncertainty: Heuristics and biases. Science, 185, 1124–
1131.
Vallée-Tourangeau, F., Beynon, D. M., & James, S. A.
(2000). The role of alternative hypotheses in the
integration of evidence that disconfirms an acquired
belief. European Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 12,
107–129.
Vallée-Tourangeau, F., Euden, G., & Hearn, V. (2011).
Einstellung defused: Interactivity and mental set. The
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 64, 1889–
1895.
Villejoubert, G., & Vallée-Tourangeau, F. (2012).
Relevance-driven
information
search
in
“pseudodiagnostic” reasoning. The Quarterly Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 65, 541–552.
Villejoubert, G., & Vallée-Tourangeau, F. (2011).
Constructing preferences in the physical world: a
distributed-cognition
perspective
on
preferences
and risky choices. Frontiers in Psychology, 2, 1–3.
Weller, A., Villejoubert, G., & Vallée-Tourangeau, F.
(2011).
Interactive
insight
problem
solving.
Thinking & Reasoning, 17, 424–439.

1539

