UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Evolution of Rhythmic Cognition: New Perspectives and Technologies in Comparative
Research

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6nf4832f

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Ravignani, Andrea
Gingras, Bruno
Asano, Rie
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Evolution of Rhythmic Cognition: New Perspectives and Technologies in
Comparative Research
Andrea Ravignani∗# (andrea.ravignani@univie.ac.at), Bruno Gingras∗ , Rie Asano† ,
Ruth Sonnweber∗ , Vicente Matellán & W. Tecumseh Fitch∗
∗ Department

of Cognitive Biology, University of Vienna, Austria
Evolution & Computation Research Unit, University of Edinburgh, UK
† Department of Musicology, University of Cologne, Germany
 Robotics Group, University of León, Spain

# Language

Abstract
Music is a pervasive phenomenon in human culture, and musical rhythm is virtually present in all musical traditions. Research on the evolution and cognitive underpinnings of rhythm
can benefit from a number of approaches. We outline key concepts and definitions, allowing fine-grained analysis of rhythmic cognition in experimental studies. We advocate comparative animal research as a useful approach to answer questions
about human music cognition and review experimental evidence from different species. Finally, we suggest future directions for research on the cognitive basis of rhythm. Apart from
research in semi-natural setups, possibly allowed by “drum set
for chimpanzees” prototypes presented here for the first time,
mathematical modeling and systematic use of circular statistics
may allow promising advances.
Keywords: The evolution of music; primate cognition;
animal-machine interaction; chimpanzee drum set; vocal
learning; rhythm; entrainment; beat; synchronization; social
cognition; comparative cognition.

Introduction
Evolution of Music and Origins of Rhythm
Music as a cognitive system is one of the most prominent
and distinctive human features. Since Darwin, the putative
role of selection in the emergence of human music has been a
topic of great debate. Numerous hypotheses, which attribute
an adaptive value to music, have been proposed, all featuring
some social component. While hypotheses on music origins
are difficult to test directly, the comparative method in cognitive biology enables us to investigate the purported human
uniqueness of particular musical abilities (Fitch, 2006). In
this paper we focus on one aspect of music cognition, namely
rhythm, and propose new perspectives and technologies for
investigating its evolution.

Rhythm and Cognition
Rhythm, characterized as a structured pattern of temporal
change, plays a central role in music. Beats, defined as points
in time occurring in a perceptually periodic way (Patel, 2008),
are a basic element of musical rhythm. Grouping and meter are subsystems of musical rhythmic organization and are
considered the basic structural components of rhythmic patterns (Lerdahl & Jackendoff, 1983). Grouping refers to the
organization of the musical stream into motives, phrases, and
sections. Meter corresponds to a regular pattern of strong and
weak beats. In metrical structures, beats are organized hierarchically according to their relative strength. Moreover, the
impression of the speed of the performed pattern, the tempo,

influences the interpretation and perception of rhythmic structures. According to the tempo, humans may assign different
organizations to grouping and metrical hierarchy. Hence, the
cognition of musical rhythm should not be investigated solely
holistically, but also in terms of beat, grouping, meter, and
tempo. These, together, yield the flexibility of human rhythmic cognition: humans are able to extract structural properties from music and interpret them in multiple contexts. What
are the basic capacities allowing this cognitive flexibility?
The metrical hierarchy mentioned above contains a particular hierarchical level called tactus, which listeners perceive
as ‘the (primary) beat’ (Lerdahl & Jackendoff, 1983), whose
perception is robust to moderate tempo fluctuations (Patel,
2008). It seems that our internal processes underlying rhythm
perception can be spontaneously synchronized, entrained, to
external regular, periodic sensory cues (Grahn, 2012). In this
entrainment model, the relative timing of events is processed
by expecting their periods or phase and adjusting the expectations to actual occurrences (Grahn, 2012). This flexible beat
processing mechanism is also the basis for synchronizing motor actions to musical stimuli, requiring (i) beat extraction, (ii)
synchronization of an internal motor pulse to the inferred auditory beat (beat entrainment), and (iii) a motor pattern generation on the basis of the internal pulse (Fitch, 2012). A
fundamental requirement of synchronization is hence the capacity to extract the beat, already present in newborns and
infants, though not conclusively innate because of possible
prenatal learning (Grahn, 2012). The capacity for beat perception and synchronization could be shared with other animals as an analogous or homologous evolutionary trait. In
order to understand the nature and evolution of human cognitive capabilities for rhythm, different species must be tested
on tasks requiring the three aforementioned skills.

Rhythm and Beat Evidence in Non-human
Animals
Vocal Learning and Dissociation Hypotheses
Some non-human animal species have a particularly good
control over their vocal tract. Among these, humans, elephants, many bird species and some marine mammals are capable of spontaneously imitating sounds which may or may
not belong to their natural communication system. A promising hypothesis has been put forward connecting vocal learning and beat-based rhythmic abilities across species (Patel,

1199

Chordata
Aves

Mammalia
Psittacoidea

Primates
Hominidae
Panini

Cockatoo

Grey parrot

Budgerigar

Asian elephant

Sea lion

Japanese macaque

Chimpanzee

Bonobo

Human

Figure 1: Phylogenetic tree of species showing: vocal learnering skills (underlined), ability to synchronize to a beat (bold) and
spontaneous drumming behavior (italics). Notice how, while showing no evidence of vocal mimicry, California sea lions are
capable of synchronization, and some apes exhibit natural percussive behavior.
2008): as both sorts of tasks are better performed with a tight
connection between motor and auditory brain areas, which is
found in some vocal learning species including humans, the
skill of vocal mimicry would be a necessary prerequisite for
beat perception and synchronization. Considerable experimental evidence supports this hypothesis.
As humans seem to be the only advanced vocal learners
among primates, a key question is whether the ability to perceive, produce and entrain to musical rhythm is unique to humans among primates. Recent evidence (Honing et al., 2012)
suggests that rhesus macaques (Macaca mulatta) can detect
rhythmic grouping but not the downbeat in music. The authors formulate an “auditory timing dissociation hypothesis”:
Some cognitive skills allowing grouping are expected to exist in several primates due to common ancestry, while some
others related to beat induction should be present in humans
and other vocal learners due to convergent evolution. In fact,
a generalized failure to produce beat-based rhythmic patterns
in non-human primates would support the hypothesis of convergent evolution of vocal learning and beat perception and
synchronization abilities.
Evidence from Vocal Learners Schachner et al. (2009)
searched videos of putative animal entrainment to music using the global database YouTube. 1019 videos of non-human
animals, half of which involved vocal mimicking species,
were analyzed both for frequency and phase synchronization.
Strikingly, all 33 videos showing convincing evidence of entrainment featured vocal learning species. Among species
considered unable to learn new vocalizations, there was no
evidence of synchronization ability. Within vocal mimics,
all animals examined belonged to bird species, except for
one Asian elephant (Elephas maximus). Schachner et al.
(2009) also analyzed videos of sea lions (subfamily: Otariinae) which showed no evidence of entrainment (but see below for a recent study reporting evidence of entrainment in a
sea lion).
This general result on synchronization abilities in vocal
learning species is backed up by experimental evidence in
three different avian species. Patel et al. (2009) analyzed
the head bob movements of a sulphur-crested cockatoo (Ca-

catua galerita eleonora) in response to a familiar song under unfamiliar tempo manipulations. In the absence of any
training, the animal showed periods of entrainment matching
phase and frequency of the musical beat. Schachner et al.
(2009) provided additional evidence for entrainment in the
same individual and a language-trained, African grey parrot
(Psittacus erithacus).
Hasegawa et al. (2011) trained budgerigars (Melopsittacus
undulates) to peck according to the beat of an audio-visual
metronome. This study is particularly relevant as (i) it extends the sample size of the previous studies to 8 birds; (ii)
it makes use of powerful analytical techniques from circular
statistics and (iii) it compares actual performances to those of
computer-simulated birds (simulating a range of neurophysiological constraints) in order to test the hypothesis that experimental subjects use “behavioral shortcuts” which could give
the illusion of beat synchronization. Overall, Hasegawa et al.
(2011) provide decisive evidence of trained synchronization
ability in a vocal-mimicking species.
A Crucial Outlier In a recent study, Cook et al. (2013),
investigated beat synchronization abilities in a pinniped, the
California Sea Lion (Zalophus californianus). Crucially, sea
lions, unlike seals and some other marine mammals, seem
to have a low degree of vocal flexibility (Schusterman, 2008)
and are usually grouped with non-vocal learners. Cook et
al. (2013) trained the animal to bob its head in synchrony
with different auditory stimuli at different tempi. This ability,
trained first with metronome-like stimuli at different tempi,
was easily transferred to novel tempi. Similarly, once trained
with actual songs, the Sea Lion was able to transfer the synchronous head bobbing to new tempi and songs with no additional training.
This exciting finding opens new lines of research (see Figure 1). On the one hand, conclusive evidence on vocal mimicking abilities in sea lions is indispensable to contrast this
finding with, and eventually update, the vocal learning hypothesis. On the other hand, Cook et al.’s (2013) discovery
increases the likelihood of finding beat and (rhythmic) synchronization abilities in some vocal non-mimics. In particular apes and marine mammals, heterogeneous in vocal learn-

1200

ing and advanced cognitive skills, offer a promising “testing
field”. Unfortunately, the evidence for apes and monkeys is
either observational or not conclusive enough to prove or disprove beat entrainment.

macaques in a laboratory setup. Interestingly, in each interaction, the ratios of BPM of the two subjects were small integers, suggesting periodical occurrence of synchronized taps.
However, it seems that visual, rather than auditory, information had a decisive role in the macaques’ synchronization accuracy when moving in response to a video of a conspecific.

Contrasting Evidence from Macaques
Interval Timing Abilities Zarco et al. (2009) compared the
ability of 20 human subjects and 3 rhesus macaques to synchronize to visual and auditory metronomes and to project
this interval timing ability once the metric cue has been removed. They concluded that these monkeys were “not able to
synchronize their tapping behavior to the sensory metronome
as human subjects do” (Zarco et al., 2009). It is essential
to notice that the authors based their conclusion on a linear
test of “phase matching” (Patel et al., 2009). Zarco et al.
calculated the average time difference between metronome
cues and tap onset and compared this between species using
a repeated measures ANOVA. As monkeys tapped, on average, 300 ms after the metronome and the ANOVA indicated
a significant difference only between species, Zarco et al.
(2009) interpreted this as evidence against synchronization.
Further analyses suggested that the monkeys have, however,
some form of timing prediction abilities, having shorter reaction times to stimuli with constant, rather than unpredictable,
inter-onset intervals. Zarco et al. (2009) is a crucial contribution to the field, providing the first experimental paradigm
for testing one component of rhythm in non-human primates.
However it is unclear whether more specific tests from circular statistics would have led to the same conclusions in terms
of phase or tempo synchronization.
Subsecond Beat Prediction Konoike, Mikami & Miyachi (2012) conducted a similar experiment with two
Japanese macaques (Macaca fuscata, closely related to rhesus macaques). The monkeys were reinforced for pushing
a button in response to an audiovisual metronome. Crucially
for our purposes, a synchronization threshold was set a priori:
if a metronome beat was not matched with a tap within 350400 ms, the entire trial would be aborted. Reaction times were
shorter with regularly-spaced beats when compared to an “unpredictable” inter-beat interval condition, as long as inter-beat
intervals did not exceed one second. However, comparing the
synchronization thresholds imposed by the authors to the reaction times, there could be a differential effect of the thresholds in shaping reaction times between subjects. As in the
previous case, this study contributes to our understanding of
what is unique about human rhythmic abilities. A suggestive hypothesis put forward by Konoike et al. (2012) is that
their subjects’ rhythmic control could depend on an automatic
timing system rather than higher cognitive mechanisms. The
a priori synchronization threshold and the lack of a statistical
test on tempo matching prevent us from drawing conclusions
about music-specific rhythmic abilities in these primates.
Synchronization of Arm Motion Nagasaka et al. (2013)
reported mutual synchronization between pairs of Japanese

The Social Convergence Hypothesis
Recent findings (Large, Velasco & Gray, 2008; Nagasaka
et al., 2013) point towards the importance of social context
in obtaining positive results when testing for rhythmic and
music-related abilities. Children can already entrain to a
pulse from 2.5 years of age onwards, being particularly accurate when drumming along with a human partner, rather
than an artificial one (Kirschner & Tomasello, 2009), suggesting that rhythmic abilities, coordination and cooperation
could be partially connected within hominid evolutionary history. The recent “Social Convergence hypothesis” puts forward the importance of human social instincts in the development of rhythmic abilities: isochrony would be an easy way
of achieving synchrony, which in turn is a form of coordinate,
cooperative auditory signal generation (Fitch, 2012). Hence,
evidence of entrainment in interactive contexts or from social
species is required to support or refute this hypothesis.
Human-Bonobo Musical Interactions In the context of
human-ape interaction, Large et al. (2008) reported an occurrence of entrainment. MIDI recordings from musical interactions between a human and three bonobos (Pan paniscus)
were analyzed for evidence of synchronization. The authors
claim that, after having identified “37 episodes of rhythmic
interaction, [...] in just under half of these episodes, statistical evidence of phase entrainment was found” (Large et al.,
2008). The interactive nature of this study and the little published information leaves unclear the relative contribution of
human and bonobo participants to rhythmic synchronization
(Patel et al., 2009). Considering that bonobos are capable of
synchronous hooting (de Waal, 1988), this result is, in principle, promising and worth further exploration.
Drumming by Wild Chimpanzees All three African Great
Ape species engage in spontaneous drumming (Fitch, 2006).
Chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes) can be observed hitting objects in order to produce loud sounds, especially during dominance displays. Arcadi, Robert & Boesch (1998), analyzed
chimpanzees’ spontaneous drumming behavior on tree buttresses. Among other measures, Arcadi et al. (1998) reported
an inter-beat interval distribution ranging up to 1.4 s, with a
mean of 0.3s and “most inter-beat intervals” less than 0.4s.
Transposing this into musical terms, the drumming behavior
had a mean of 200 BPM (beats per minute) and was above
43 BPM, with most recorded patterns exceeding 150 BPM.1
1 These purported tempi only partially overlap with those commonly used in human music. The slowest recorded value would
correspond to a Lento, while the majority of chimpanzee inter-beat
intervals would translate to tempi such as Allegrissimo or Prestissimo.

1201

Arcadi et al. (1998) found a number of individual differences
in drumming behavior, notably in the inter-beat interval duration, the number of beats per “drumming session” and the
length of sessions. Finally, the authors tested for statistical
dependence between contiguous, non-adjacent beat patterns.
One of the chimpanzees produced series of four beats, where
a short interval between two beats statistically predicted another short interval between two following beats. This can
be interpreted as showing a weak form of regularity in natural beat production and a sporadic, local steadiness in tempo.
Percussive behaviors are hence naturally present in primates
not capable of vocal mimicry. Together with Honing et al.’s
(2012) findings on rhythmic grouping recognition, this suggests that rhythmic abilities across species might be graded,
rather than dichotomous, suggesting that the evolution of musical rhythm be better investigated in a fine-grained manner.

experiments. Analytical models and agent-based simulations
can help sharpen hypotheses about which cultural, social and
biological evolutionary processes endowed different species
with different cognitive skills in terms of rhythm and music.

Chimpanzee Drum-Set Prototypes

Spontaneous Tapping in a Chimpanzee The languagetrained chimpanzee “Ai” has recently been shown capable of
synchronizing her movements to an isochronous beat (Hattori, Tomonaga & Matsuzawa, 2013). Three chimpanzees
were trained to alternatively tap two keys of a keyboard at
any preferred rate. The task was subsequently accompanied
by steady auditory sequences of notes at three different tempos. One of the chimpanzees, Ai, spontaneously synchronized her tapping rate to one of the tempos. This is a remarkable result, presenting the first experimental evidence of behavioral synchronization in non-human primates. However,
the authors point out that Ai’s lack of tempo flexibility and
low phase accuracy would call for additional studies in order to clarify possible differences with normal human performance. Finally, Hattori et al. (2013) suggest that this study
does not necessarily falsify the vocal learning hypothesis: the
keyboard produced sounds, hence it is not conclusive proof
of entrainment.

Future Directions
If research on rhythmic cognition aims to advance and break
new ground, there are some directions we propose it should
take. First, a broader range of animal species should be
tested: apes, marine mammals and non-avian vocal learners are key groups whose success or failure in beat and other
rhythmic production tasks will arbitrate between a number
of proposed hypotheses. We stress that such testing should
happen as much as possible in an experimentally-controlled,
though ecologically valid environment. Below we propose a
viable approach for chimpanzees, using musical instruments
explicitly built with those constraints in mind. Second, statistical techniques used to analyze entrainment data should
be adequate to the purpose. If we think about statistics as a
tool for getting closer to scientific facts, statistical techniques
whose assumptions better fit the object under investigation
will lead us closer to solid conclusions. Inference drawn from
a statistical test resting on inadequate assumptions will lead to
less robust conclusions. Third, mathematical modeling of the
emergence of beat and rhythm is an important complement to

Towards Understanding Rhythmic Production in Chimpanzees Above we hinted at a viable methodological approach for testing beat and rhythm production abilities in
higher primates. Chimpanzees already exhibit drumming behavior in the wild. A first step towards testing rhythm hypotheses in a semi-natural context could be to provide chimpanzees with a device they can use to produce sounds when
manipulated. At the same time, such a “music-making device” should be particularly well adapted to the rigor of
scientific experiments. No musical instrument or device,
specifically designed for chimpanzees, sensing movements
and feed-backing sounds, is currently available for purchase.
Such a device should: (i) be resistant to chimpanzees’ great
strength, (ii) enable them to produce sound through object
manipulation, (iii) systematically record data sensed from
these movements, (iv) allow scientists to experimentally vary
the sound properties of the object, without having to physically modify or replace it. We describe two prototypes specifically adapted to chimpanzees, which allow mapping sounds
to physical movements and satisfy the requirements above.
These prototypes constitute, to our knowledge, the first attempt at animal-computer rhythmic interaction. Here we outline their general features. For a thorough technical description and calibration data, see Ravignani et al. (in preparation).
Desiderata and General Features The prototypes were
built with a main idea in mind: spurring the chimpanzee to
spontaneous interaction and play. To maximize the chances
of interaction, they were constructed and calibrated after scrutinizing videos of chimpanzees playing with objects, including the gum toy used in one of the prototypes. Each prototype consists of a sensing and a feedback unit. Sensing units
feature acceleration and strain sensors embedded into manipulable objects. These units send acceleration or strain data
to a computer, which converts them into sound and plays it
in real time. The drum sets satisfy a number of logistic and
technical desiderata. The sensing part is resistant, modular,
low-voltage, inexpensive, interesting for the primate and easy
to connect and configure. The software allows fast elaboration of data by performing few, simple operations, so as to
limit the computational load.2
Prototype A: Wired The wired prototype is a parallelepiped containing piezoelectric sensors and connected to
2 The software processing part has four key tasks: data filtering,
data transformation to extract meaningful parameters, logging specific variations of these parameters and play particular sounds in
correspondence of these variations. Parameters and settings can be
changed in order to vary the sensitivity of the device. The mapping
between raw data, parameters and sound output can be altered depending on the experiment.

1202

a Mac computer via an Arduino3 board. A dedicated Python4
script is in charge of the auditory feedback. It can be mounted
vertically on a wall or on the wire-mesh of chimpanzees’ enclosures. This prototype has several advantages: (i) it is built
with cheap and easy to find components, (ii) it entails no risk
of electrocution and (iii) its ricochet property naturally suits
the animal’s tendency to hit and push objects.
Prototype B: Wireless The wireless prototype consists in
a hollow dog toy enclosing a Wii Remote5 . A computer receives data (via Bluetooth), which is processed and sonified
using patches written in Max6 . This device has several advantageous features: (i) chimpanzees generally enjoy manipulating objects, and chimpanzees have been both reported (Pruetz
& Bloomsmith, 1992) and observed by us to manipulate the
model of toy used here (ii) its construction requires less work
than the wired prototype and its components can be easily
purchased, (iii) it has a wireless communication system, particularly advantageous in some applications.

Circular Statistics
Most data coming from beat and rhythm experiments involve
a periodic time component. Before applying a statistical test,
it is essential to think about the nature and dimensionality of
the data. As a parallel, if we wanted to compare the amount
of rain falling on Britain over time, we should conceptualize
rain as falling onto a 2-dimensional space, rather than on a
real number line, R. As the classical t-test for paired samples
is defined on R, it may be inappropriate to use it on geographical data. The fact that rhythmic data are originally associated
with time makes time series analysis a possible approach to
test a range of hypotheses.
The best option to use for periodic data, when possible, is
circular statistics (Fisher, 1995). Its key feature consists in assuming that data is distributed on a circle, rather than on the
usual real number line. This grants ideal analytical tools for
data sets with a periodic time component, such as those deriving from beat and rhythm experiments. Several researchers
in the field have successfully used these techniques on human
(Kirschner & Tomasello, 2009) and animal data (Hasegawa
et al., 2011).

The Importance of Modeling
Above we hinted at the importance of developing mathematical models of the emergence of rhythm. The last century has
seen a radical increase in the quantitative approaches used
in most areas of human knowledge. In particular, mathematical models and computer simulations have proven themselves particularly useful in testing the internal consistency
of hypotheses, sharpening scientific assumptions and providing new viable directions for experimental testing. Scholars interested in the evolution and emergence of structure in
3 www.arduino.cc
4 www.python.org
5 www.nintendo.com
6 cycling74.com/products/max/

language, for instance, have provided quantitative accounts
(Kirby, 2001), which have been later validated through cognitive experiments (Kirby, Cornish & Smith, 2008).
Similarly, recent experiments (Honing et al., 2012) have
shed some light on what can be accounted for by human
culture or biology in rhythmic abilities. However, thorough explanations are still missing about the evolutionary
forces, whether biological or cultural, that have shaped musical rhythm and the underlying human cognitive abilities.
Quantitative evolutionary thinking can be used to study the
emergence of music and rhythm, and models linking biology
to culture could be an exciting second step.
While investigating what is unique about musical rhythm
and which species possess the cognitive abilities to process
it, human and animal experimental work should be complemented by models aimed at explaining the ultimate mechanisms of what is observed in everyday musical behavior. The
lack of quantitative work trying to explain the emergence, cultural dynamics and biological evolution of music is surprising
when we consider its pervasiveness in human lives.

Conclusions
We suggested directions and methodologies for investigating
the evolution of musical rhythm in a comparative, interdisciplinary perspective. Usage of a variety of statistical techniques on the same data set and replication are essential before conclusive claims of lack of synchronization can be made
about a species or taxon. Moreover, experiments should be
designed keeping in mind the critical theoretical distinctions
introduced above.
Recent evidence provided by Honing et al. (2012) and
Cook et al. (2013) may lead to newly redefined hypotheses, which in turn make the experimental testing of apes and
marine mammals a fundamental prerequisite for a theory of
human uniqueness of rhythmic abilities. The drum sets we
presented are intended for apes to perform acoustic non-vocal
rhytmhic production in a captive, though not restrained context. In general, as technological tools for human-machine
interaction become available, new methodological paradigms
for animal-machine interaction can be developed and used to
test critical species in musical tasks. Mathematical modeling
and agent-based simulations can be an important complement
to empirical data, hopefully generating the same productive
theory-experiments interplay seen in other disciplines.
Similarly to the broad variety of reaction time distributions
across species and tasks, evolution has shaped animal brains
and motor skills so that different species may require different statistical null hypotheses with respect to attempted synchronized motor behavior (for instance, due to perceptual or
motor lower bounds on reaction times). Circular statistics,
with its variety of theoretical distributions (von Mises, cardioid, wrapped normal, etc) and time-periodic tests, are ideal
for testing hypotheses about rhythmic synchronization with
different underlying assumptions.
The Vocal Learning and Social Convergence hypotheses
make different predictions on which species should have

1203

rhythmic abilities (Fitch, 2012). Both of them, however,
are related to another uniquely human trait: language. Further development of experimental paradigms allowing social
interactions under experimentally-controlled conditions will
enable scientists to contrast these hypotheses and produce evidence relevant to the evolution and cognition of both music
and language.

Acknowledgments
A.R, B.G. and R.S. are supported by ERC Advanced Grant
230604 SOMACCA awarded to W.T.F. The development of
the prototypes was additionally supported by an Exchange
Grant ESF RNP “CompCog” (www.compcog.org) (06-RNP020) to A.R. We thank S. Kirby, U. Seifert, K. Smith, R.
Hofer, C. Rodriguez, S. Pearson, A. Seed, K. Slocombe and
A. Whiten. A.R. thanks the Gesellschaft für Kognitionswissenschaft for the travel support.

References
Arcadi, A. C., Robert, D., & Boesch, C. (1998). Buttress
drumming by wild chimpanzees: Temporal patterning,
phrase integration into loud calls, and preliminary evidence for individual distinctiveness. Primates, 39(4),
505-518.
Fisher, N. I. (1995). Statistical analysis of circular data.
Cambridge University Press.
Cook, P., Rouse, A., Wilson, M., & Reichmuth, C. (2013) A
California Sea Lion (Zalophus californianus) Can Keep
the Beat: Motor Entrainment to Rhythmic Auditory
Stimuli in a Non Vocal Mimic. Journal of Comparative
Psychology.
de Waal, F. B. (1988). The communicative repertoire of captive bonobos (Pan paniscus), compared to that of chimpanzees. Behaviour, 183-251.
Fitch, W. T. (2006). The biology and evolution of music: A
comparative perspective. Cognition, 100(1), 173-215.
Fitch, W. T. (2012). The biology and evolution of rhythm:
unraveling a paradox. In P. Rebuschat, M. Rohrmeier, J.
A. Hawkins, & I. Cross (Eds.), Language and Music as
Cognitive Systems (73-95), New York: Oxford University Press.
Grahn, J. A. (2012). Neural Mechanisms of Rhythm Perception: Current Findings and Future Perspectives. Topics
in Cognitive Science, 4(4), 508-606.
Hasegawa, A., Okanoya, K., Hasegawa, T., & Seki, Y. (2011).
Rhythmic synchronization tapping to an audio-visual
metronome in budgerigars. Scientific reports, 1.
Hattori, Y., Tomonaga, M., & Matsuzawa, T. (2013). Spontaneous synchronized tapping to an auditory rhythm in a
chimpanzee. Scientific reports, 3.
Honing, H., Merchant, H., Háden, G. P., Prado, L., & Bartolo, R. (2012). Rhesus Monkeys (Macaca mulatta) Detect Rhythmic Groups in Music, but Not the Beat. PloS
one, 7(12).
Kirby, S. (2001). Spontaneous evolution of linguistic
structure-an iterated learning model of the emergence of

regularity and irregularity. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, 5(2), 102-110.
Kirby, S., Cornish, H., & Smith, K. (2008). Cumulative cultural evolution in the laboratory: An experimental approach to the origins of structure in human language. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 105(31), 10681-10686.
Kirschner, S., & Tomasello, M. (2009). Joint drumming: Social context facilitates synchronization in preschool children. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 102(3),
299-314.
Konoike, N., Mikami, A., & Miyachi, S. (2012). The influence of tempo upon the rhythmic motor control in
macaque monkeys. Neuroscience Research.
Large, E. W., Velasco, M. J., & Gray, P. M. (2008). Rhythmic analysis of musical interactions between bonobo and
human. In Presentation given at the International Conference on Music Perception and Cognition. Sapporo,
Japan.
Lerdahl, F., & Jackendoff, R. (1983). A Generative Theory of
Tonal Music. Cambridge: MIT Press.
McAuley, J. D. (2010). Tempo and Meter. In M. R. Jones,
R. R. Fay, & A. N. Popper (Eds.), Music Perception.
Springer handbook of auditory research, Vol. 36, (165199). New York: Springer Science + Business Media.
Nagasaka, Y., Chao, Z. C., Hasegawa, N., Notoya T., & Fujii
N. (2013). Spontaneous synchronization of arm motion
between Japanese macaques. Scientific reports, 3.
Patel, A. D. (2008). Music, language, and the brain. Oxford
University Press, USA.
Patel, A. D., Iversen, J. R., Bregman, M. R., & Schulz, I.
(2009). Studying synchronization to a musical beat in
nonhuman animals. Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences, 1169(1), 459-469.
Pruetz J.D., Bloomsmith M.A., (1992). Comparing two manipulable objects as enrichment for captive chimpanzees.
Animal Welfare 1:127-137.
Ravignani, A., Matellán, V. Gingras, B., Hofer, R., Rodriguez, C., & Fitch, W.T. (in preparation) Sonification
devices for acoustic pattern production in non-human
primates using acceleration and strain sensors.
Schachner, A., Brady, T. F., Pepperberg, I. M., & Hauser,
M. D. (2009). Spontaneous motor entrainment to music
in multiple vocal mimicking species. Current Biology,
19(10), 831-836.
Schusterman, R. J. (2008). Vocal learning in mammals
with special emphasis on pinnipeds. The Evolution
of Communicative Flexibility: Complexity, Creativity,
and Adaptability in Human and Animal Communication,
41e70.
Zarco, W., Merchant, H., Prado, L., & Mendez, J. C. (2009).
Subsecond timing in primates: Comparison of interval
production between human subjects and rhesus monkeys.
Journal of neurophysiology, 102(6), 3191-3202.

1204

