UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Effects of Repeated Sequential Context on Recognition Memory

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9mn4g2qr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Kachergis, George
Cox, Gregory
Shiffrin, Richard

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Effects of Repeated Sequential Context on Recognition Memory
George Kachergis, Gregory E. Cox, and Richard M. Shiffrin
{gkacherg, grcox, shiffrin}@indiana.edu
Department of Psychological & Brain Science / Cognitive Science Program
Bloomington, IN 47405 USA
Abstract

matching target, and an unstudied prime reduces false
alarms to a matching target.
The ROUSE—Responding Optimally with Unknown
Sources of Evidence—model of short-term priming (Huber,
Shiffrin, Lyle, and Ruys, 2001) incorporates feature leakage
from the prime to the target, leading to biased responses.
However, ROUSE’s decision rule has a discounting
mechanism that attempts to correct for leakage: underdiscounting explains why primed words are chosen after
passive priming, and over-discounting accounts for foil
preference after active priming. Although ROUSE was
applied mainly to identity and orthographically similar
primes, semantic priming and leakage of semantic features
also occur, and all these features should (with some
probability) be incorporated in the storage of the next few
events, and in the test probe of the next few tests. This
might suggest episodic-recognition context effects would
match those in perceptual recognition, but Malmberg and
Annis (2012) investigated sequential dependencies in
recognition and found patterns that did not seem to match
those found in perceptual experiments. We will investigate
this issue in some detail in this research.
We examine the storage of associations between adjacent
words in a studied list, and how memory for a studied word
is affected at test by the presence of its study-list neighbor.
When people expect a memory test, they will form explicit
associations between nearby items using a variety of coding
schemes. Since our main interest is in automatic and nonstrategic storage and retrieval, we limit explicit associative
strategies by using an incidental study task: participants
make alternating pleasantness/animacy judgments at study.
Evidence for temporal associations have been found in
recall following explicit attempts to remember. Participants
are serially shown individual, unrelated words (e.g. ‘crow’,
‘bottle’, ‘house’, …) and then asked to recall words from
the list in any order. Given that a participant recalls a word
(e.g. ‘bottle’), the next word they recall is very likely to be
the next word that was presented (e.g. ‘house’; Kahana,
1996). In recognition tests, participants are shown words
one at a time, some from the studied list, and some new, and
asked to indicate those studied. A positive recognition
response is thought to occur when the test word seems
sufficiently familiar, via a fast and automatic parallel search
of memory, or when its study event is recalled explicitly,
typically via a slow and strategic process (Malmberg,
Holden & Shiffrin 2004). Models such as REM and TCM
explicitly have a role for word context. We seek to
understand such effects when study is incidental.

Many people have had the experience of knowing what song
will play next on an album (even one heard only a few times).
Conversely, many people fail to recognize an acquaintance
encountered in an unfamiliar context. Associations can likely
form simply because items appear nearby in time, and not
only due to semantic similarity. Using surprise recognition
testing, we examine the automatic storage of associations
between successively encountered words on a list of
incidentally studied words. Many modern memory models
assume storage of such associations, but with little evidence
as yet (e.g., Cox & Shiffrin, 2012; REM-II Mueller &
Shiffrin, 2006). We find evidence for sequential associations,
which are further improved by shared semantics or study
context. We also find improved accuracy and response time
for old words preceded by old words, and for new words
preceded by new words—regardless of the previous response.
Keywords: recognition; episodic memory; temporal context;
sequential association; priming

Introduction
We have all had the experience of knowing what song
will play next on an album that we have listened to several
times, even without having looked at the list of songs.
Conversely, we have also had the experience of seeing an
acquaintance in a new context and not immediately
recognizing them. Without realizing it, we often form
associations between co-occurring events in a context, and
memory is strengthened if the context reoccurs. In general,
associates stored together help us remember if they are
present at test. When any event is experienced there are a
host of potential associations that make up the context—
when and where and with what other things did the event
happen to me? The memory and its context, and the retrieval
of both, are termed episodic memory. The current study
investigates the formation and retrieval of one type of
context: the other words in a presented sequence of words.
A critical factor in this research is the existence of source
confusion. For example, given a recognition test of a word,
test word familiarity is partly governed by the familiarity of
the previous test word. At both study and test we confuse
features of nearby events. For example, Jacoby and
Whitehouse (1989) found in a recognition experiment when
unstudied words were preceded by a subliminal prime (50 or
35ms) of the same word, people were more likely to
incorrectly endorse the word as a studied one (i.e., false
alarm). When the prime was a different unstudied word than
the target, false alarms decreased for the 50ms primes, but
oddly not for 35ms primes. In contrast, for liminal primes
(200 or 600ms), a studied prime decreases hits for a

704

Experiment 1

meaning is presented just prior to the polyseme at both
study and test (e.g. ruby–diamond). In the Same, Unrelated
(SU) condition, an unrelated word is presented just prior to
the polyseme at both study and test (e.g. lawn–diamond).
The remaining conditions all have the strongest associate of
the dominant meaning immediately prior to the polyseme at
study, and a word that was studied elsewhere presented
prior to the polyseme at test. In the Same Sense (SS)
condition, a different associate from the same meaning was
presented prior to the polyseme at test (e.g. emerald–
diamond). In the Different Sense (DS) condition, the
strongest associate from the other meaning was presented
prior to the polyseme at test (e.g. spade–diamond). Finally,
in the Different, Unrelated (DU) condition, an unrelated
word was presented prior to the polyseme at test (fruit–
diamond), for comparison to SR.
These 40 pairs of words are shuffled among 80 common
filler words to compose a study list of 160 words. At study,
each word was rated for either animacy or pleasantness, in
an alternating fashion, in order to induce belief that this was
the primary task and to reduce explicit encoding of
successive words in identical ways. Each word was
presented for 900ms, followed by 2,000ms of prompting for
a response (which was not recorded), followed by 800ms of
blank screen before the next word was presented. After the
study list was completed, participants were instructed that
they would now perform a recognition test for the words
they had just studied. The 160 studied words were randomly
shuffled among 160 new words for surprise yes/no
recognition testing. In order to reduce the use of strategic
and explicit recollection we required participants to respond
to the old-new test task within 700ms. Slow responses
elicited a “Too slow!” feedback message. Feedback on
correctness was given on each test trial in Experiment 1.

This study explores the automatic formation and retrieval
of associations in recognition memory between temporally
proximal events. Specifically, we varied the relation of two
successive words at study for incidental judgments, and
explored the effect when words related to these were tested
successively, each for separate judgments of presence
during study. For example, if “banana” is followed by
“chair” at study, is “chair” recognized better or differently at
test when preceded by a test of “banana”? The words in this
example are semantically unrelated, but some of the
adjacent words were made to be semantic associates.
The conditions we used included identical repeats, i.e. the
same successive words at study and test, the case probably
most likely to produce recognition benefits. In another
condition the context word itself does not repeat, but its
meaning does: The forward migration of matching semantic
features at both study and test could produce improved
recognition. In addition, meaning could be altered by the
meaning of a recent word. For example, bank might be
encoded as an earthen side if preceded by river, but encoded
as a monetary institution if preceded by money. Table 1
shows examples of each condition, as well as the possible
features that the preceding word (cue) may contribute to the
target word at test: Familiarity (F) if the cue was a studied
word; Semantics (S) if the cue is semantically related to the
target; and Context (C), if the cue was also the target’s study
neighbor.
Cue Type

Study

Test

F

S

C

cash bank

1

1

1

cash bank

robber bank

1

1

0

cash bank

river bank

1

1*

0

cash bank

sloth bank

1

0

0

sloth bank

sloth bank

1

0

1

sloth bank

glass bank

1

0

0

Same, Related cash bank
Same Sense
Different
Sense
Different,
Unrelated
Same,
Unrelated
Unrelated

Results & Discussion
Of the 60 subjects, 12 were removed for having a mean
accuracy not significantly above chance (.522). Of the
remaining responses, 2.8% were removed for being faster
than 150ms. The remaining 13,397 responses were analyzed
using mixed-effects logistic regression, which is more
appropriate than ANOVAs for analyzing accuracy (Jaeger,
2008). As regressors, we used the features that the cue may
contribute to the target (see Table 1): Familiarity,
Semantics, and Context. The logistic regression (see Table
2) shows that each of the three factors increase the odds of
recognizing the target, with Semantics being the strongest
cue (OR=2.16), followed by Context (OR=1.60), and finally
Familiarity (OR=1.09).

Novel
… bank
lamp bank
0
0
0
Table 1: Features (Familiarity, Semantics, Context) that the
cue may contribute to the target at test in each condition.
*=related in the lexicon.

Subjects
Participants were 57 undergraduates at Indiana University
who received course credit for participating.

Stimuli & Procedure
We selected 40 common polysemous words (e.g.,
diamond) and their two strongest forward associates for
each meaning (e.g., ruby/emerald and spade/ace) from the
free association norms (Nelson, McEvoy, and Schreiber,
1998). For each participant, the 40 polysemes are assigned
randomly to one of five conditions. In the Same, Related
(SR) condition, the strongest associate of the dominant

Factor

705

Coefficient

Z

odds

p-value

(Intercept)

0.40

9.67

1.49

<.001

Familiarity

0.09

2.52

1.09

=.01

Context

0.47

4.95

1.60

<.001

Semantics

0.77

9.57

2.16

<.001

Table 2: Logistic regression coefficients for Experiment 1.

remaining responses, 1.8% were removed for being faster
than 150ms. The remaining 15,275 responses were analyzed
using multilevel logistic regression. As in Experiment 1, we
found positive effects of Semantics (OR=1.84), Context
(OR=1.51), and Familiarity (OR=1.25; see Table 4). Thus,
we have evidence for all of these three cues influencing the
proximal trial, with and without feedback, when responses
are limited to within 700ms. In both experiments, semantics
had the strongest effect, followed by context, and then
familiarity.

Shown by condition in Figure 1, participants were most
likely to respond old to old items in the SR condition,
followed by the SS and DS conditions, then the SU
condition, and finally the DU condition. The SR and SU
findings imply that automatically encoded temporal context
affects recognition, although we cannot say how much of
the effect is due to a bias shift vs. a performance shift
(because the design did not have equivalent conditions of
cuing preceding new trials). We note in particular that the
presence of a semantic relationship between the polyseme
and the previous word at study (DU) or at study and test
(SS, DS) increases the probability of giving an old response.
From these results, it is clear that automatic associations are
formed between both related and unrelated temporally
proximal items. We also infer that familiarity accruing to
the preceding test item tends to make the next test word
seem familiar.
Same, Related

Factor

●

Same, Unrelated

●

Different, Unrelated

●

Unrelated

●

Novel

0.6

p-value

(Intercept)

0.40

7.03

1.49

<.001

Familiarity

0.22

5.77

1.25

<.001

Context

0.41

4.00

1.51

<.001

Same, Related

●

0.5

odds

Figure 2 shows the probability of a “hit” (old to an old test
item) by condition for the polysemous manipulations in
Exp. 2, which look much like those in Exp. 1. The only
qualitative difference is that Same Sense was higher than
Different Sense in Exp. 2, whereas a trend in the opposite
direction was found in Exp. 1. Even given this difference,
the experiments—with and without feedback—had much
the same results.

●

Same Sense

Z

Semantics
0.61
7.17 1.84
<.001
Table 4: Logistic regression coefficients for Experiment 2.

●

Different Sense

Coefficient

●

Same Sense

0.7

0.8

●

Different Sense

0.9

Accuracy

●

Same, Unrelated

Figure 1: “Hits’, p(old|old), for polysemous conditions in
Exp. 1 (with feedback).

●

Different, Unrelated

Experiment 2

●

Unrelated

In Experiment 1, in contrast to traditional recognition
memory experiments, we provided corrective feedback after
each response at test. It may be that participants used the
feedback signal from the previous trial to classify their
feeling of familiarity and strategically used it on the next
trial in any of several ways. Thus, in Experiment 2 we did
not provide accuracy feedback at test.

●

Novel

●

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

Accuracy

Figure 2: “Hits” for polysemous conditions in Exp. 2
(without feedback).

Subjects

The previous results, from both studies, were those for the
carefully balanced conditions. However there also many
filler items that were studied and tested, and many new
items tested. Analyses of these items and their sequential
effects are taken up in the next section.

Participants were 57 undergraduates at Indiana University
who received course credit for participating.

Stimuli & Procedure
The same stimuli and procedure were used in Experiment 2,
except at test there was no accuracy feedback given.

Further Sequential Analysis

Results

Analyses of the filler words and new words showed a
more general sequential context effect. We analyzed all of
the data in both experiments using mixed-effects logistic

Of the 57 subjects, 4 were removed for having a mean
accuracy not significantly above chance (.522). Of the

706

regression, trying to predict correct responses (old for old,
new for new) as a function of the current item’s oldness, the
previous item’s oldness, the correctness of the response to
the previous item, and feedback (i.e., Experiment).

(Intercept)

Coeff
0.29

Z
4.31

●
●

New

New

Old

Old

0.75

p-value

●
●

0.70

<.001

●

Accuracy

Factor

Previous Correct
Previous Incorrect

0.65

Prev. Correct

0.37

5.39

<.001

Previous Old

0.13

1.53

=.13

Current Old

0.37

4.60

<.001

0.55

Feedback

0.16

1.73

=.08

0.50

PrevCorr*PrevOld

-0.58

-0.86

=.39

PrevCorr*CurOld

-0.66

-4.19

<.001

PrevOld*CurOld

0.08

0.67

=.51

PrevCorr*Feedback

-0.12

-1.37

=.17

PrevOld*Feedback

-0.52

-4.49

<.001

0.60

●
●

●
●

●

New

Old

Previous Item

Figure 3: Proportion of correct responses for unstudied
(New) items and studied (Old) items by panel, broken down
according to the studied/unstudied status of the item on the
previous trial, as well as the correctness of the response on
the previous trial. Note that New|(Previous New) items are
more likely to be correctly rejected than New|(Previous
Old), regardless of the correctness of the response on the
previous trial. Similarly, Old|Old accuracy is greater than
Old|New.

CurrOld*Feedback
-0.47
-4.30
<.001
PrevCorr*PrevOld*
1.06
6.88
<.001
CurrOld
PrevCorr*PrevOld*
0.50
3.43
<.001
Feedback
PrevCorr*CurrOld*
0.26
1.85
=.07
Feedback
PrevOld*CurrOld*
1.00
6.01
<.001
Feedback
PrevCorr*PrevOld*
-0.89
-4.22
<.001
CurrOld*Feedback
Table 3. Coefficients for accuracy in both experiments.

Previous Correct
Previous Incorrect

●
●

New

New

Old

0.75

●

Accuracy

0.70

Being correct on the previous trial increases the odds of
being correct on the current trial (previous: Mcorr = .64,
Mincorr = .61). The odds of being correct on the current trial
also increase if the previous trial was an old (i.e. studied)
word rather than a new (i.e. unstudied) word (prev old M =
.64, prev new M = .61). There is no significant effect of the
current item’s familiarity. There was a significant
interaction of previous correctness and the current item type,
showing that if a new cue was misidentified as old, subjects
were much worse at the current trial (.59 vs. .64). Most
strikingly, there was a significant interaction of the cue’s
and target’s familiarity: old targets were more likely to be
identified after an old cue (Old|Old = .73, Old|New = .56)—
regardless of the response to the cue—and new items were
similarly more likely to be correctly identified as new after a
new cue (New|New = .64, New|Old = .54).
Figure 3 displays correct rejection of unstudied (New)
items and recognition of studied (Old) items as a function of
the previous trial’s familiarity and response correctness for
Exp. 1 (with feedback). Figure 4 displays the same
information for Exp. 2.

Old

●
●

0.65
●

0.60
0.55

●

●

New

●

●

Old

Previous Item

Figure 4: Without feedback, almost the same pattern is
evident: Old|Old responses are more accurate than Old|New
responses, regardless of correctness on the previous trial.
New|(New,Correct)
responses
are
better
than
New|(Old,Correct), but New|(New,Incorrect) trends lower
than New|(Old,Incorrect), breaking the pattern.
We also investigated the 18,023 correct response times
using log-linear mixed-effects regression. Shown in Table 4,
there was a significant main effect of the previous item’s
oldness (Previous Old), and a significant interaction of
previous oldness with current oldness (PrevOld*CurOld).
The mean correct RT when the previous item was old was
506ms vs. 504ms when the previous item was new. When

707

Discussion

the current item is new, Ss were faster after new items
(504ms) than old items (526ms). When the current item is
old, Ss were faster after old items (490ms) than new items
(507ms). This corroborates the accuracy fluency finding,
showing an advantage when the current item is the same
oldness as the previous item. There was also a marginally
significant interaction of previous response correctness,
previous oldness, and feedback.
Factor

Coeff

t

p-value

(Intercept)

497.26

65.24

<.001

Prev. Correct

6.05

1.52

=.13

Previous Old

21.44

4.20

<.001

Current Old

-3.20

-0.69

=.49

Feedback

0.07

0.01

=.99

PrevCorr*PrevOld

-10.05

-1.58

=.11

PrevCorr*CurOld

4.31

0.73

=.47

PrevOld*CurOld

-27.43

-3.97

<.001

PrevCorr*Feedback

-4.04

-0.75

=.45

PrevOld*Feedback

-3.77

-0.53

=.59

In two recognition memory experiments with time-limited
responses—limiting the role of recollection—we found
evidence that associations form between incidentallystudied items. Although oldness and semantics can also
serve to increase the likelihood of correct recognition,
enhanced recognition due purely to sequential context was
also observed.

Context Effects
Roughly additive priming effects were found for oldness
(familiarity), semantics, and sequential context. Although
many models could account for one or even two of these
effects straightforwardly, additional assumptions would be
required to account for all three. We begin by making a
common assumption in memory modeling that study events
are encoded as a set of features and that recognition
decisions are made on the basis of a comparison of a
probe—also consisting of a set of features—to each stored
trace in memory with “old” responses given if this
comparison is strong enough (e.g., Hintzman, 1988;
Murdock, 1992; Shiffrin & Steyvers, 1997; Nelson &
Shiffrin, in press). We make the further assumption that
some features sampled during the preceding trial are able to
“leak” into the probe features present on the current trial.
The same leakage is assumed to occur at study, with
features of recent items being present in short term memory
during the encoding of a subsequent item, and hence joining
that item’s stored trace (implemented by Nelson & Shiffrin,
in press).
Thus, because the memory trace contains some features
from the preceding study item, preceding it by the same
item at test leads to a stronger match between the test probe
and the memory trace. The same account explains the
positive but smaller priming when the preceding test item is
semantically related—some of the semantic features
overlap, but not the many physical features that also overlap
when identity priming is used.
Priming due to oldness or semantics independent of
sequential context requires yet more modeling assumptions,
for which we turn to the dynamic model of recognition of
Cox & Shiffrin (2012). This model was able to account for
the Jacoby-Whitehouse illusion by assuming, as we have
thus far, that primes (in this case, previous test items)
contribute some features to the current test probe, at least
initially (see Cox, Lewis & Shiffrin, under review, for more
details). As more features are sampled and added to the
probe, its match to memory evolves over time. If the probe
begins with no features at all, the match to memory tends to
go down slightly with the first few features sampled,
regardless of whether the test item was studied or not. This
is because, even if the test item is a target, it will tend not to
match most of the other studied items and these mismatches
outweigh the single target match until a sufficient number of
features are sampled. Thus, after a few features have been
sampled, the match for a target test will tend to increase
while the match for a foil test will tend to continue to

CurrOld*Feedback
5.12
0.80
=.42
PrevCorr*PrevOld*
3.28
0.38
=.70
CurrOld
PrevCorr*PrevOld*
15.97
1.83
=.07
Feedback
PrevCorr*CurrOld*
3.88
0.48
=.63
Feedback
PrevOld*CurrOld*
-6.73
-0.71
=.48
Feedback
PrevCorr*PrevOld*
-12.98
-1.09
=.27
CurrOld*Feedback
Table 4. Coefficients for correct RTs in both experiments.
In summary, in an incidental-study recognition memory task
with fast responding, we found that the oldness of the prior
tested word affects the response time and accuracy on this
word. When the current test word is studied, having seen a
studied word on the previous trial makes you, on average,
faster and more accurate on the current trial – regardless of
your response on the previous trial. The accuracy effect
happened with and without feedback, so the responses
cannot merely be driven by feedback. Seeing a studied word
reinstates context features from the study list, and those
features contribute to the correct recognition on this trial.
For unstudied items preceded by other unstudied items,
there is no reinstated context from the previous trial to
discount. The need for discounting may explain why correct
responses for unstudied items preceded by studied items
were drastically slower than for unstudied items preceded
by unstudied items.

708

decrease. If, however, a few features are present at the start
of the trial, these initial negative steps are avoided for both
targets and foils, leading to a bias to say old. This bias is
proportional to the similarity between the prime and the test
item. Thus, an old unrelated item will lead to a slight bias,
and a semantically related item will lead to a larger bias, as
observed in the present studies.

the polyseme, as cues? If an associate of the nondominant
meaning is the cue at study, does it still provide an
advantage? If the associate is presented after the polyseme
at study, is the association still formed?
In the world, things that occur nearby in time (or space)
are often related, and if these relations can be remembered
they may prove important. Having shown that automatic
associations are formed—even between unrelated items—in
recognition memory, much work remains to be done to
determine how these associations are represented in
memory, and what other forms of context they capture.

Old/New Effects
This mechanism is qualitatively consistent with the
observed effects of oldness and correctness of the previous
trial in the no-feedback condition. If the preceding item is
new, it will tend to contribute features that do not match
anything on the list, minimizing the similarity not just with
the current test item, but with all the traces in recent
memory, leading to a lower tendency to respond “old” than
if the preceding item had been old. All else being equal, if
we assume that the decision on the preceding trial reflects
the quality of evidence provided by the test item on the
preceding trial, the effect of the oldness of the previous test
item should interact with correctness. For example, if the
previous trial was a false alarm, then although the previous
item was new, it had to contain enough old features to lead
the participant to judge it as old. This account then predicts
that the effect of the oldness of the previous test item on the
current trial is mainly a function of whether the participant
thought the previous item was old, manifesting as a
crossover interaction between oldness and correctness on
the previous trial.
This is the pattern observed in the no-feedback condition,
and is consistent with the idea that there is little or no
discounting (a la ROUSE; Huber, et al., 2001) of previous
item features in that condition. This interaction is absent
from the feedback condition, however: one is still more
likely to make an “old” response when the previous item
was old, but correctness does not have a large effect on
responses to old items; rather, correctness only seems to
affect responses to new items, with incorrect responses on
the previous trial leading to an overall bias to respond “old”
on the current trial. In terms of ROUSE’s discounting
mechanisms, these data suggest that participants might
engage in discounting when the previous trial was incorrect,
but they only discount new features. One problem with this
account, of course, is that it is unclear whether “old” and
“new” features can be identified and differentially
discounted. Another problem is that there is no clear reason
why participants would only discount new features since
doing so only leads to more errors.
An alternative explanation in terms of response criteria—
e.g., requiring more evidence to respond after an error—
does not hold up either, since that would predict increased
accuracy after an error, the opposite of what is observed
here. In short, although current models of memory might
account for most of the results reported here, the old/new
effects in the feedback condition seem to require additional
mechanisms that will require further research to elucidate.
Further questions include: What is the effect of using
lures that were not studied, but are semantically related to

Acknowledgments
Thanks to Brendan Johns for helpful discussions.

References
Cox, G. E., & Shiffrin, R. M. (2012). Criterion setting and
the dynamics of recognition memory. Topics in Cognitive
Science, 4(1), 135-150.
Huber, D. E., Shiffrin, R. M., Lyle, K.B., and Ruys, K.I.
(2001). Perception and preference in short-term word
priming. Psychological Review 108, 149-182.
Jacoby, L. L. and Whitehouse, K. (1989). An illusion of
memory: False recognition influenced by unconscious
perception. Journal of Experimental Psychology 118,
126-135.
Kahana, M. J. (1996). Associative retrieval processes in free
recall. Memory & Cognition 24, 103-109.
Malmberg, K. J., & Annis, J. (2012). On the relationship
between
memory
and
perception:
Sequential
dependencies in recognition testing. Journal of Exp.
Psychology: General, 141(2), 233-259.
Malmberg, K. J., Holden, J. E., and Shiffrin, R. M. (2004).
Modeling the effects of repetitions, similarity, and
normative word frequency on old-new recognition and
judgments of frequency. Journal of Experimental Psych.:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 30, 319-331.
Mueller, S. T. & Shiffrin, R. M. (2006). REM II: A model
of the developmental co-evolution of episodic memory
and semantic knowledge. Proceedings of the International
Conference on Learning and Development.
Nelson, D. L., McEvoy, C. L., and Schreiber, T. A. (1998).
University of South Florida word association, rhyme, and
word fragment norms. www.usf.edu/FreeAssociation/
Nobel, P. A. and Shiffrin, R. M., (2001). Retrieval processes
in recognition and cued recall. Journal of Experimental
Psych.: Learning, Memory, & Cognition, 27, 384-413.
Ratcliff, R. (1978). A Theory of mental retrieval.
Psychological Review, 95, 59-108.
Schwartz, G., Howard, M. W., Jing, B., and Kahana, M. J.
(2005). Shadows of the past: Temporal retrieval
effects in recognition memory. Psych. Science, 16, 898-904.
Shiffrin, R. M. and Steyvers, M. (1997). A model for
recognition memory: REM: Retrieving effectively from
memory. Psychological Bulletin & Review. 4(2), 145-166.
Turvey, M. (1973). On peripheral and central processes in
vision: Inferences from an information processing
analysis of masking with patterned stimuli. Psychological
Review, 80, 1-52.

709

