UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Myth of Cognitive Decline

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/45z283w5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Ramscar, Michael
Hendrix, Peter
Baayen, Harald

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The myth of cognitive decline
Michael Ramscar, Peter Hendrix & Harald Baayen
Seminar für Sprachwissenschaft, Wilhelmstraße 19
Universität Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany
Abstract

correctly identify greater variation in the cognitive
performance of older adults, successfully predicting that
older adults will show more sensitivity to fine-grained
differences in test items than younger adults. The models
run (and can be rerun) on computers, eliminating the
possibility that aging hardware influences their
performance, which instead reflects the informationprocessing costs incurred as knowledge increases. Once the
demands of processing this extra information are taken into
account, it becomes clear that much of the evidence for agerelated declines in cognitive capacity better supports the
idea that information processing costs rise as the amount of
information in a system increases.

Across a range of psychometric tests, reaction times slow as
adult age increases. These changes have been widely taken to
show that cognitive-processing capacities decline across the
lifespan. Contrary to this, we suggest that slower responses
are not a sign of processing deficits, but instead reflect a
growing search problem, which escalates as learning
increases the amount of information in memory. A series of
computational simulations show how age-related slowing
emerges naturally in learning models, as a result of the
statistical properties of human experience and the increased
information-processing load that a lifetime of learning
inevitably brings. Once the cost of processing this extra
information is controlled for, findings taken to indicate
declines in cognitive capacity support little more than the
unsurprising idea that choosing between or recalling items
becomes more difficult as their numbers increase. We review
the implications of this for scientific and cultural
understanding of aging.

The problem with “processing speed”

Keywords: Learning; Language; Memory; Psychometric
Testing;

The Age of Tithonus
More and more people live longer and longer lives.
Outside of 18 countries the UN describes as ‘outliers’
(Watkins et al, 2005), increased life expectancy and
declining birth rates are raising median ages in populations
across the globe. By 2030, 72 million Americans will be
aged 65 or older, a twofold increase from 2000. The world’s
population is more aged than ever before in history, and its
rate of aging is increasing.
People are clearly living longer; it is less clear that this is
a blessing. In Greek mythology, Tithonus was the mortal
lover of Eos, goddess of the dawn. While asking Zeus to
make Tithonus immortal, Eos forgot to mention “eternal
youth,” dooming Tithonus to an eternity of decrepit
babbling. The psychological and brain-sciences endorse the
Tithonean view of aging, portraying adulthood as an
extended period of mental decline: memories dim; thoughts
slow; problem-solving abilities diminish (Naveh-Benjamin
& Old, 2008; Deary et al, 2009); and each year, the onset of
cognitive decrepitude is set ever younger (Salthouse, 2009;
Singh-Manoux et al., 2012). One crumb of comfort is that
older adults are, on average, happier (Charles & Carstensen,
2010), although in the circumstances, this might be taken as
further evidence of their declining mental prowess.
In what follows, we show how the slowing response
speeds that are taken as evidence of “cognitive decline” in
adults emerge naturally in learning models (Baayen et al,
2011) as knowledge increases. These models, which are
supported by a wealth of psychological (Ramscar et al,
2010) and neuroscientific (Schultz, 2006) evidence,

Findings from a range of psychometric tests suggest that
the rates at which the mind processes information increase
from infancy to young adulthood, and decline steadily
thereafter (Salthouse, 2011). Increasing reaction times are a
primary marker for age-related cognitive decline (Deary et
al, 2010), and are even considered its cause (Salthouse,
1996), yet they are puzzling. Practice improves speed and
performance on individual cognitive tasks at all ages (Dew
& Giovanello, 2011). Since we get more practice using our
cognitive capacities as we age, why does our performance
on tests of them decline?
The answer lies in the way that psychometric tests neglect
learning, and its relationship to the statistical patterns
characteristic of human life. Learning is a discriminative
process that serves to locally reduce the information
processing costs associated with various aspects of
knowledge and skill (Rescorla & Wagner, 1972). However,
age increases the range of knowledge and skills individuals
possess, which increases the overall amount of information
processed in their cognitive systems. This extra processing
has a cost.

Learning and the long tail of linguistic experience
Statistically, the distribution of human experience is
highly skewed: Much of our day-to-day life is fairly
repetitive, involving a small repertoire of common
occurrences, such as reading the newspaper and going to
work. At the same time, we experience a far more diverse
repertoire of infrequent or even unique occurrences (we
rarely read the exact same newspaper twice). When data is
distributed like this, comparisons of means are often
meaningless. Consider the problem of remembering
birthdays: We are reminded of the birthdays of family
members on an annual basis, and this usually makes us
expert at remembering them. However, as we move through

1193

life, we also learn about other birthdays. Sometimes we hear
these dates only once, such as when we attend a party for
someone we barely know. As each new birthday is learned,
our mean exposure to all the birthdays we know will
decline, and the task of recalling a particular birthday will
become more complex. Recalling six hundred birthdays
with 95% accuracy need not imply a worse memory than
recalling six with 99% accuracy.
Standard psychometric tests do not take account of the
statistical skew of human experience, or the way knowledge
increases with experience. As a result, when used to
compare age groups, they paint a misleading picture of
mental development. This can be demonstrated most clearly
in relation to language. Language is a central aspect of
cognition, its statistics are more readily quantified than other
aspects of human experience, and all psychometric tests
involve some linguistic information processing.

fraction of its total vocabulary, and that vocabularies grow
steadily across the lifespan. However, the tests used to
measure cognitive decline assume that vocabulary size is
age-invariant in adults (Spearman, 1927; Carroll, 1993;
Bowles & Salthouse, 2008), an assumption seemingly
confirmed by psychometric vocabulary measures, which
suggest that vocabulary growth in adulthood is marginal
(such that slight increases are only reliably detected in metaanalyses; Verhaeghen, 2003).
Psychometric vocabulary measures are virtually
guaranteed to register these results, because they attempt to
extrapolate vocabulary size from sets of test words. These
tests, which are “normed” on the knowledge of
schoolchildren, are heavily biased towards frequent wordtypes (Raven, 1965; Heim, 1970; Wechsler, 1997).
Unfortunately, while extrapolation is feasible for frequent
words, for the millions of low-frequency word-types,
knowledge of one randomly sampled word does not predict
knowledge of another. Since the distribution of types
ensures that adult vocabularies overwhelmingly (and
increasingly) comprise low-frequency words, it follows that
reliably extrapolating their size or growth from a small test
sample is mathematically impossible (Baayen, 2001).

Simulating the effects of vocabulary learning on
information processing

Figure 1. The frequencies of the 1000 most common words in the
Corpus of Contemporary American English plotted by rank.

Importantly, linguistic distributions are skewed at every
level of description (Baayen, 2001). Consider the
relationship between word types (e.g., dog) and tokens (how
often “dog” occurs; Figure 1). In any large sample of
English, a few words occur very frequently (the, and), such
that half of a typical sample comprises tokens of only 100 or
so high-frequency types. The relative frequency of these
types decreases rapidly (the most-frequent word may be
twice as frequent as the second-most), while frequency
differences between types decrease as their relative
frequency declines. This means that the other half of a
typical sample is composed of ever-fewer tokens of a very
large number of types, with ever-smaller frequency
differences between them. Typically, around half of these
types occur just once.
This is a very long-tailed distribution: 49% of the 425
million tokens in the Corpus of Contemporary American
English (COCA; Davies, 2009) come from the 100 mostfrequent word types; the remaining 51% of tokens represent
over 2.8 million word types. Although individual lowfrequency types are, by definition, rare, their distribution
makes the chances of encountering a low-frequency token in
any given sentence extremely high (Möbius, 2003). This
distribution ensures that any English speaker learns only a

Most infants are sensitive to all the fine-grained phonetic
discriminations made by the world’s languages. As they
learn a native vocabulary, this sensitivity to non-native
phonetic distinctions diminishes (Werker & Tees, 1984).
Rather than indicating that cognitive decline begins in
infancy, this loss in sensitivity can be seen as an inevitable
result of learning. In discriminative learning models, the
values of initially undifferentiated sets of cues are shaped by
experience, which drives the discovery of cue values that
best predict a learning environment (Rescorla, 1988).
Because this process involves learning to ignore
uninformative cues, it can explain why decreasing
sensitivity to uninformative phonetic information goes hand
in hand with increasing knowledge about informative
phonetic distinctions (Ramscar et al, 2010).
The learning component of the model we use to simulate
the effects of experience on reading works in precisely this
way. It is an extension of the Naive Discriminative Reader
(NDR; Baayen et al, 2011), a two-layer network in which
letter unigrams and bigrams serve as input cues, and lexical
items serve as outcomes. The values of these cues are
initially undifferentiated, and are set competitively as the
model learns to predict words from the letters it ‘reads.’ In
the NDR, every predictive cue is linked to each lexical
outcome to form a set of subnets. The cue-weights in these
subnets are set by the equilibrium equations of the RescorlaWagner learning rule (Danks, 2003), and are completely
determined by the distributional properties of the model’s
training corpus. Simulated latencies derived from these
weights accurately capture a wide variety of empirical
effects in reading (Baayen et al, 2011).

1194

To model the influence of experience on different
populations, the NDR was modified to make it sensitive to
the physical and informational consequences of knowledge
growth. Given that the amount of activation a given cue
receives from the perceptual system remains constant over
time (Attwell & Laughlin, 2001), this modification keeps
the total amount of activation spreading from cues to
outcomes equal to the amount of activation arriving at them.
Analogous to the principle of conservation of electric
charge, this means that as vocabulary increases, and each
cue becomes connected to an increasing number of
outcomes, the amount of activation arriving at any given
outcome decreases. Given a vocabulary of size V, the
network support for any item i is proportional to ai /V where
ai is the activation an item receives from the cues in the
input.
This modification also accounts for the effects that an
increased number of outputs have on information processing
in neural systems (Hentchel & Barlow, 1991; supplementary
materials). Shannon’s source coding theorem shows that the
smallest coding scheme for V words requires, on average,
H(V) bits. Since V determines the length of a message in a
given code, the effective channel capacity C of an ensemble
of neurons decreases as code complexity increases and the
amount of redundancy in signals across the network
decreases (Hentchel & Barlow, 1991). We denote these
information costs by f(V), where f is an unknown nondecreasing function expressing the coding and signaling
costs in a vocabulary of size V.
The response latency (RT) associated with reading
(operationalized as reaction times to speeded judgments on
written words) is modeled as a weighted sum of these
components:

RT = w V /a + w f (V )+c
i

1

i

2

with c a constant denoting the time required for response
execution.
To€simulate the effects of vocabulary-growth on adult
reading, two NDR networks were trained on data drawn
from the Google Trigrams Corpus (a large, naturalistic data
set). The first network ‘read’ 500,000 word-trigram tokens,
simulating reading to age 21, the typical age for “young
adult” participants in studies; the second ‘read’ 3,000,000
word-trigram tokens,3 simulating reading to age 70 (the
typical age for “old adults”). Consistent with our analysis of
the way linguistic distributions influence vocabulary
growth, the old model acquired a much larger vocabulary:
32,536 word types, compared to the young model’s 21,307
(Figure 2). These growth estimates are very conservative:
the Trigram Corpus excludes trigrams with less than 40
occurrences, thereby omitting around 50% of the word types
in the complete Google Corpus. Even with this constrained
input, vocabulary expansion was far from asymptote, even
after 5 million trigram tokens.
To examine the models’ ability to simulate age-related
reading differences, we compared their projected reading
times for 2,904 English words to empirical latencies from
older (mean age 73.6) and younger (21.1) readers for the

same items (Balota et al, 1999). The empirical data exhibit
the expected effect of age: mean reaction times are 163 ms
shorter for younger than older adults. Simulated reaction
times mirror this difference, with an average difference of
167 ms.

Figure 2. Empirically observed vocabulary growth after sampling
from the Google Trigrams Corpus.

Figure 3. Left panel: fit of a generalized additive model to the
simulated response latencies from the old and young models. Right
panel: fit of a generalized additive model to the empirical response
latencies from young (mean age: 21.1) and old (73.6) adults
(Balota et al, 1999).

The models also correctly predict an important qualitative
difference in the empirical word-frequency effect. It is well
established that lexical decision responses are slower for
lower- (e.g., “whelp”) than higher-frequency words
(“where”). This overall effect of frequency is present for
both young and old adults (Figure 3; right panel). However,
while frequency effects asymptote at higher frequencies in
both models, they only level off at the lowest frequencies in
the younger model, a pattern that is also observed in the
empirical data: older adults are far better attuned to
frequency variations in the lower range of the test-set than
younger adults.
These results can be explained by considering the way the
models learn in more detail. In learning, weights on the
links between the cues and outcomes are adjusted in two
ways: They are strengthened whenever a cue and outcome
co-occur; For example, the link between the bigram WH
and the lexical target WHERE is strengthened when
“where” is encountered in reading, and the link between
WH and WHELP is strengthened when the “whelp” is
encountered. Conversely, links are weakened when cues
occur but outcomes do not.

1195

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

BLASH
SCHNOOK
LETCH
ZOUNDS
JAPE
SOUSE
WHIG
FILCH
RHEUM
PARCH

11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

CROME
GIBE
LISLE
FLAYS
SPLOTCH
VELDT
SLOE
CONK
FRAPPE
SKULK

21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30

TWERP
THWACK
DAUNT
RETCH
GYP
YAWL
FLUB
STANCH
PAUNCH
JOWL

31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40

WHELP
SHUCK
MOOCH
JELL
GROUCH
AWN
MANSE
WRACK
HOOCH
FLECK

41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50

BLEAT
CHIVE
WHIR
CROON
TAMP
BOSH
RILE
BLANCH
LILT
JEER

Table 1. The 50 lowest frequency items in the set used to test the models and the older and young adults; BLASH has the lowest frequency
of these items, and JEER the highest. As can be seen, many of the letter bigrams in this set of words are comparatively rare in English.

Thus when “where” is encountered, WH occurs without
WHELP, weakening the link between WH and WHELP.
The distribution of high-frequency words results in their
being encountered frequently, at a fairly constant rate over
time. This will consistently reinforce the link between WH
and WHERE, and consistently weaken the link between WH
In contrast, low-frequency words occur sporadically, so
the link between WH and WHELP is reinforced far less
(and the link between WH and WHERE weakened less).
These imbalances result in “selection pressures” on word
types that are reflected in the distribution of orthographic
(and phonetic) cues across lexical items (see Zipf, 1949):
high-frequency test items are both shorter (t(2901) = -10.58,
p < 0.001) and have higher mean bigram frequencies
(t(2901) = 8.98, p < 0.001) than low-frequency items. This
means that, on average, low-frequency words contain both
more cues, and more rare cues (Table 1). Although rare cues
have relatively high values in small vocabularies, they are
vulnerable to competition as vocabularies grow: newer
vocabulary items also have low frequencies, and are more
likely to contain the same rare cues.
All the predicted empirical effects were replicated in an
analysis of a second, independent dataset (Figure 4).

Figure 4. Average percentile RT differences (old – young) for the
naming latencies of 2,820 Single Syllable words (Yap et al, 2011)
by young (mean age: 22.6) and old adults (73.6), plotted against
the words’ log frequency in the Google 1-gram corpus, and a
generalized additive model fit to the RT differences. As can be
seen, the difference between older and younger readers’ RTs
increases as word frequency decreases.

Modeling ‘decline’ in a non-lexical task
To examine whether the relationship between information
load and response time also holds for “non-lexical” tests, we
considered the letter classification task (Posner & Mitchell,
1967), a standard non-lexical psychometric test in which
two letters are presented in upper or lowercase (A, a, D, d,
E, e, R, r, H, h) and participants judge whether they are
alphabetically the same or different. Older subjects are
typically slower than younger subjects in this task, a finding
that is straightforwardly replicated in the NDR models once
the coupling between letters and abbreviated meanings is
accounted for (e.g, H for entropy, R for a statistical
programming environment, r for correlation, etc.). The
network complexity function f(V) in (1), which models
response latencies as a function of the activation of the
meanings of both letters in a letter pair, predicts longer
latencies for older subjects as compared to younger subjects.
In short, because the older model has a larger system of
outcomes, it has more information to process, making
“accessing” a letter harder, and reaction times
concomitantly slower (see also Ramscar et al, 2010).
Psychometrically, letter classification is often described
as an “information-processing” measure, and older adults’
longer response times are taken as evidence of declining
information-processing capacity. Yet information theory—
which defines the workings of information-processing
system—is, at heart, a set of methods for formalizing the
uncertainty in distributions (be they bits of code, or
vocabulary items; Shannon, 1948). Information is a property
of systems, and processing demands are measured in
relation to them (MacKay, 2003). In letter classification, the
system comprises the task, a participant, and, crucially, what
that participant knows. Because psychometric tests neglect
this knowledge, they are formally incapable of measuring
information-processing in this task.

Lexical knowledge and paired-associate learning
Wherever vocabulary size increases with experience, this
increased knowledge predicts increasing processing costs
and slower responses in psychometric tasks.
As a
consequence, slower latencies reflect learning, not
“decline.”
Interestingly, this interaction between
experience, vocabulary-size and response speed can also be
seen in comparisons of monolingual and bilingual picture-

1196

naming (Gollan et al, 2008): the response latencies of
young-bilinguals more closely resemble older-monolinguals
than younger-monolinguals or older-bilinguals. Notably,
slower response times and increased tip-of-the-tongue rates
are not taken as evidence of cognitive decline when
observed in young-bilinguals (Gollan & Acenas, 2004), but
are instead seen to reflect the demands of processing the
larger vocabularies that bilinguals inevitably learn.
The finding that bilinguals experience increased tip-ofthe-tongue rates raises a question: could the same systemic
effects of learning that account for increased lexical
processing latencies explain age-related change in memory
measures, such as Paired-Associate Learning (PAL; a
psychometric measure of people’s ability to learn and recall
new information)? In PAL, e.g., the subtest of Wechsler’s
Memory Scale (WMS; desRosiers & Ivison, 1988)
participants have to learn more or less arbitrary pairings
between word cues (e.g., baby; jury) and responses (cries;
eagle). Although item-level performance is highly variable
(Figure 5), older adults’ overall PAL performance is slower
and less accurate, and it has been suggested that aging
causes encoding (Gilbert, 1941; MacKay & Burke, 1990)
and retrieval processing deficits (Burke & Light, 1981).

Figure 5. Mean performance by item for 100 older (age 60-69)
and 100 younger (20-29) adults on forms 1 and 2 of the WMSPAL subtest (desRosiers & Ivison, 1988). As in the lexical
decision and naming data, the relationship between old and young
PAL performance is nonlinear: again, older adults exhibit a more
marked ability to discriminate between ‘harder’ (unrelated) and
‘easier’ (related) items than younger adults.

There is, however, no reason to think PAL performance
should be age-invariant. Long-established principles of
associative learning predict that well-known items should be
harder to learn as Cues (w1) than newer items (Rescorla &
Wagner, 1972). Likewise, newer Response (w2) items
should support better learning than well-known, predictable
items (Kamin, 1969): w1-w2 pairs ought to become harder to
learn when w1 and w2 occur independently at high rates
(Rescorla, 1968; compare jury-eagle to baby-cries).
To examine whether age-related PAL differences simply
reflect learning, we analyzed the relationship between the
age-related variance in the performance of a large sample
adults on the WMS-PAL subtest (desRosiers & Ivison,
1988), and the factors that determine w1-w2 learnability. In a

regression analysis of item score differences (mean young –
mean old), w1 predictability (log frequency; t=-4.063,
p<0.001), the relationship between w2 and w1 predictability
(log(w2 frequency) / log(w1 frequency); t=-2.935, p<0.01)
and actual w1-w2
co-occurrence rates (log Google
frequency; t=6.773, p<0.0001) accounted for more than
75% of the variance in item performance between 20-29 and
60-69 year-olds (F(3)=16.432, r=.87, p<0.0001).
All things being equal, the relative learnabilty of w1-w2
pairs can be estimated from w1-w2 co-occurrence and
background rates. All things are not equal, however: Older
adults have more experience, and learnability is a matter of
experience. Accordingly, w2 words will become more
predictable the more they occur independently of w1, and w1
words will become less informative the more they occur
independently of w2; in each case, experience will make w1w2 learning harder. A natural, predictable consequence of
this is that PAL performance should increasingly reflect the
distributional properties of the w1-w2 items as experience
grows: if co-occurrence rates are low, a lifetime of learning
that jury is uninformative about eagle should make learning
jury-eagle harder; whereas high co-occurrence rates will
reduce background rate effects, making baby-cries easier for
older adults to learn relative to jury-eagle.

Figure 6. Mixed-effects slope estimates for the three learnability
predictors and mean item performance of old (60-69) and young
(20-29) adults in the WMS-PAL subtest (desRosiers & Ivison,
1988). All predictor effects and interactions in the model are
significant (see supplementary materials), and all slopes (except *)
are significantly different from 0 (t=>2). Older adults are more
sensitive to background rate information (negative slopes) than
young adults and, as the magnitude of the slopes shows, the overall
performance of older adults reflects a far more systematic
understanding of the English language.

A mixed-effects analysis of w1-w2 item scores by age
confirmed the accuracy of this prediction (Figure 6). For
each predictor, the magnitude of the slope for the older age
group is greater than that for the younger age group,
indicating that older subjects bring more lexical experience
to the task. Consistent with our earlier findings, older
adults’ PAL performance reflects their greater knowledge of
(and sensitivity to) the distributional properties of w1-w2
words, whereas younger adults’ less varied performance
reflects their more limited knowledge of them. As we noted
above, the statistical properties of human experience makes
comparing means invidious: in this case, it seems that high

1197

mean PAL performance is a measure of ignorance, not
“intelligence.”

Learning and Cognitive Maturation
These results suggest that older and younger adults’
performance in psychometric testing largely reflects the
same cognitive mechanisms, confronted with the task of
processing different quantities of information. The
performance of older adults on these tests is evidence of
increased knowledge, not declining processing capacity.
When discussing these conclusions with colleagues, a
question often arises: “Learning seems to predict linear
patterns of change, but cognitive decline seems to kick in
around age 60 or 70: how do you explain this?” To explain
why, we first note that as people age, they encode less
contextual information in memory (Naveh-Benjamin & Old,
2008). Although this has been taken as evidence that the
processes that “bind” contextual information in memory
decline with age, learning theory predicts that experience
will increasingly make people insensitive to context,
because ignoring less informative cues is integral to
learning.
Learning is also sensitive to the environment, and its
predictions change with it: If a common environmental
change—e.g., retirement—was to systematically reduce the
variety of contexts people typically encounter in their lives,
learning theory predicts that the amount of contextual
information they learn will also drop, as the background
rates of cues in remaining contexts rise. If these same people
were to increasingly spend their time in environments where
cues already have very high background rates (e.g., family
homes), this effect will be exacerbated. In other words,
because learning inevitably reduces sensitivity to everyday
context, retirement is likely to make memories harder to
individuate and more confusable, absent any change in
cognitive processing, simply because it is likely to decrease
contextual variety at exactly the time when, as a result of
learning and experience, the organization of older adult’s
memories needs it most.
Learning can explain both the apparent changes in older
adults “cognitive performance” around retirement-age, and
the fact that these changes are not detected in testing.
Similarly, the neglect of learning in the study of cognitive
aging makes it highly likely that, like Tithonus, many of our
beliefs about cognitive decline are myths. This does not
mean that the diseases that can undermine cognition in old
age are also mythical: However our understanding of these
diseases can only be increased by a better understanding
lifelong learning, and its sensitivity to the environment.

References
Attwell D, & S.B. Laughlin. (2001) An energy budget for signaling in the
grey matter of the brain. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab 21: 1133–1145.
Baayen, R.H. et al. (2011) An amorphous model for morphological
processing in visual comprehension based on naive discriminative
learning. Psychol. Rev. 118, 438-482.
Baayen. R.H. Word Frequency Distributions. (Kluwer Academic
Publishers, 2001).

Balota, D.A. & D.H. Spieler. (1998) The utility of item level analyses in
model evaluation. Psychol Sci 9, 238-240.
Burke, D. M., & Light, L. L. (1981) Memory and aging: The role of
retrieval processes. Psychol. Bulletin, 90, 513-546.
Carroll, J.B. Human cognitive abilities: A survey of factor-analytic studies.
(Cambridge University Press, 1993).
Danks, D. Equilibria of the Rescorla-Wagner model. (2003) J. Math.
Psychol. 47(2), 109-121.
Davies, M. (2009) The 385+ Million Word Corpus of Contemporary
American English (1990-present). Int. J. Corpus Ling. 14: 159-90.
Deary, I.J. et al. (2009) Age-associated cognitive decline. Brit. Med. Bull.
92, 135-152.
desRosiers G, Ivison D. (1986) Paired-associate learning: normative data
for differences between high and low associate word pairs. J Clin Exp
Neuropsychol; 8: 637–42.
Dew, I.T.Z. & K.S. Giovanello. (2010) The status of rapid response
learning in aging. Psychol. Aging 25(4), 898-910.
Gilbert, J.G. (1941) Memory loss in senescence. J. Abnormal & Social
Psychology, 36, 73-86.
Gollan, T.H. et al. (2008) Aging, bilingualism, and the weaker links
hypothesis. J. Mem. Lang. 58, 787-814.
Hale, S., S.D. Lima & J. Myerson. (1991) General Cognitive Slowing in
the Nonlexical Domain: An Experimental Validation. Psychol. Aging
6(4), 512-521.
Hayes, D. P. & M. Ahrens. (1988) Vocabulary Simplification for Children:
A Special Case of ‘Motherese’? J Child Lang 15, 395-410.
Heim, A.W. (1970) AH 4 group test of general intelligence. NFER-Nelson.
Hentchel, H.G.E. & H.B. Barlow. (1991) Fininding minimum entropy
codes with Hopfield Networks, Network, 2, 135-148.
Kamin L.J. (1969) Predictability, surprise, attention, and conditioning. In:
Campbell B, Church R (eds). Punishment and Aversive Behaviour.
Appleton-Century-Crofts: New York.
MacKay, D. G., & Burke, D. M. (1990) Cognition and aging: A theory of
new learning and the use of old connections. In T. Hess (Ed.), Aging and
cognition: Knowledge organization and utilization (pp. 213-263).
Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Naveh-Benjamin, M. & S.R. Old. (2008) Aging and memory (humans). In
J.H. Byrne, H. Eichenbaum, R. Menzel, H.L. Roediger, & D. Sweatt
(Eds.). Learning and memory: A comprehensive reference (2008).
Posner, M.J. & R.F. Mitchell. (1967) Chronometric analsis of
classification. Psychol. Rev. 74, 392-409.
Ramscar, M. et al. (2010) The Effects of Feature-Label-Order and their
implications for symbolic learning. Cognitive Sci. 34(6), 909-957.
Raven, J.C. Guide to using the Mill Hill vocabulary test with progressive
matrices. (HK Lewis, 1965).
Rescorla, R.A. & A.R. Wagner. A theory of Pavlovian conditioning. In:
Black & Prokasy (Eds.), Classical Conditioning II: Current Research
and Theory. (Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1972)
Salthouse, T.A. (1996) The processing-speed theory of adult age
differences in cognition. Psychol. Rev. 103, 403-428.
Schultz, W. (2006). Behavioral theories and the neurophysiology of
reward. Ann. Rev. Psychol. 57, 87-115.
Shannon, C.E. (1948) A mathematical theory of communication. Bell
Systems Technical Journal 27(3), 379-423.
Singh-Manoux, A. et al. Timing of onset of cognitive decline: Results
from Whitehall II prospective cohort study. BMJ 344, d7622 (2012).
Verhaeghen, P. Aging and vocabulary score: A meta-analysis. Psychol.
Aging 18, 332–339 (2003).
Watkins, K. et al. UN Human Development Report: International
Cooperation at a Crossroads-Aid, Trade and Security in an Unequal
World. (United Nations Development Programme, 2005).
Wechsler, D. Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale–Third Edition (WAIS-III).
(Harcourt Assessment, 1997).
Yap, M.J., D.A. Balota, D.E. Sibley & R. Ratcliff. (2011) Individual
Differences in Visual Word Recognition: Insights From the English
Lexicon Project. J Exp Psychol Hum Percept Perform 38(1), 53-79.
Zipf., G. K. Human behavior and the principle of least-effort. (AddisonWesley, 1949).

For a complete list of references and supplementary materials,
please consult the article copy hosted at www.sfs.uni-tuebingen.de/

1198

