UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Recognizability of Authenticity

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9779p1zg

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Henderson, Madeleine
Gabora, Liane

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Recognizability of Authenticity
Madeleine Henderson (madeleine.henderson@gmail.com) and Liane Gabora (liane.gabora@ubc.ca)
Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia
Okanagan Campus, 3333 University Way, Kelowna BC, V1V 1V7, CANADA
Abstract
The goals of this research were to (1) determine if there is
agreement both amongst viewers, and between viewers and
the performer, about the extent to which performances are
authentic, and (2) ascertain whether or not performers and/or
viewers can distinguish between authenticity and skill. An
authentic performance is one that is natural or genuine, while
an inauthentic performance feels faked, forced, or imitative.
Study participants were asked to rate the authenticity and skill
level of a series of videotaped performances by dancers and
stand-up comedians. Performers also rated their own
performances. Authenticity ratings amongst viewers were
significantly positively correlated. Ratings between viewers
and performers were not significant but all positive. A higher
correlation between ratings of both authenticity and skill of
performances for viewers than for performers suggests that
viewers make less of a distinction between authenticity and
skill than performers. The relationship between authenticity
and creativity is discussed.
Keywords: authenticity; comedy; creativity; dance; expertise;
fake; genuine; individual differences; performance; skill.

Introduction
With increasing frequency there are calls for research aimed
at a synthetic account of how the components of a cognitive
system function in synchrony to generate behavior in
everyday situations. We propose that the construct of
authenticity has an important role to play in such an
account. Authenticity refers to the ability to be genuine, to
accurately reflect who one really is, and be true to the
situation one is in. Writers speak of discovering one’s own
authentic voice. In theatre research the term ‘authentic’ is
used in discussion of the extent to which a performer gives a
performance something personal that goes beyond the script
(Lavy, 2005). In the dance community the term ‘authentic
movement’ refers to the strengthening of identity through
uninhibited movement of they body in a social context
(Goldhahn, 2009). In an area at the intersection of
anthropology and tourism research, the term ‘authenticity’ is
used to refer to the extent to which current creative works in
a given genre, such as Native American or First Nations art
or dance, employ the same tools, techniques, styles, and so
forth, as were traditionally used (Daniel, 1996; Maruyama et
al., 2008). Thus an authentic performance is one that seems
natural, or true to an underlying essence, while an
inauthentic performance feels faked, forced, or imitative.
Authenticity is important for many reasons. It feels highly
gratifying to both the performer and the observer. It is
relevant to many domains of life, including the generation
of artistic works and performance (e.g., art, acting, music,
and dance), non-artistic performances (e.g., teaching and

newscasts), and everyday social interactions with friends
and family. However, despite that performers, viewers, and
the general public regularly voice opinions about
authenticity, and despite that in the scholarly community
authenticity is assumed to be a genuine construct about
which viewers and performers are in agreement (e.g.,
Goldhahn, 2009; Kogan, 2002; Lavy, 2005; McClary, 2007;
Nemiro, 1997; Sawyer, 1992; Warja, 1994), we were unable
to locate any empirical research that supports this
assumption. Indeed we found no empirical evidence for
consensus as to which performances are authentic and
which are not, either amongst members of an audience, or
between a performer and an audience.

Authenticity and Skill
Audiences without artistic expertise emphasize skill over
originality in assessments of visual art, while the reverse is
true for audiences with expertise (Hekkert & van Wieringen,
1990a, 1990b, 1996). This suggests that originality—which
might be related to authenticity—can be confused with skill.
However, there is evidence that skill and authenticity are
distinct constructs (Kogan, 2002). While being skilled in a
domain may facilitate authentic performance, it does not
guarantee it, nor is it a necessary prerequisite. For example,
a dancer may have perfected her craft, and be technically
skilled, permitting a wide range of means for selfexpression, but not immerse herself in the work, or simply
imitate the instructor, yielding a performance void of
authentic style. Conversely, a performer lacking in technical
skill may exude personality or detectable “creative release”,
yielding a performance that comes across as authentic. In
short it remains an open question whether viewers confuse a
skilled performance with an authentic one.

Goals of Current Study
Although it would be difficult to pinpoint the potentially
myriad factors that contribute to authenticity or a lack of it,
it is possible to make headway toward determining whether
authenticity is a genuine construct by assessing the extent to
which viewers of a performance, and performers
themselves, agree in their assessments of authenticity. Thus
a first goal of this study was to determine if there is a
correlation amongst viewers’ assessments of the authenticity
of a given performance. A second, related goal was to
determine whether there is a correlation between viewers’
assessment of the authenticity of a performance and the
performer’s self-assessment of the authenticity of that
performance. We hypothesized that an audience can detect
an authentic or inauthentic performance, and that

2524

performances that feel authentic to a performer come across
as authentic to an audience, and vice versa.
A third goal was to determine whether authenticity and
skill are distinct constructs in the eyes of the performer
and/or viewers. Since it is possible to be skilled but perform
in an inauthentic manner, or to perform authentically but not
be skilled, we hypothesized that both performers and
viewers could distinguish between the two constructs.
A final goal was to determine what factors facilitate
authentic performance. Previous research on this is
inconclusive (e.g., McClary, 2007; Nemiro, 1997; Rhodes,
1999; Sawyer, 1992; Warja, 1994). By asking performers
open-ended questions about authenticity we hoped to shed
light on this seemingly elusive phenomenon that would pave
the way for further studies of the relationship between
authenticity and the therapeutic value of creative endeavors.

The Study
Participants
Three trained dance performers were recruited from a local
dance studio. Dancer A was 25, Dancer B was 29, and
Dancer C was 23. Each dancer had between 10 to 12 years
of dance experience, and took part in dance at least once per
week. Each trained dancer was paid $30 for their
participation in the study. They met with the experimenter
for a video recording session of three hours duration. A four
year old child with no formal dance training was also
recruited as a dance performer.
Three comedians were also recruited for the study. The
first was a 36-year old experienced stand-up comedian with
eight years of stand-up comedy experience. He was located
from a local directory. The second was a 24-year old
amateur stand-up comedian who had just started doing
stand-up comedy one month prior to the study. She was
recruited through a psychology of humour class at The
University of British Columbia. The third was a 23-year-old
‘social comedian’ known to the experimenter. He had no
stand-up comedy credentials, but had years of experience
being the center of attention for his humour in social
situations. None of the comedians were compensated for
their participation.
158 University of British Columbia undergraduates were
viewers of the performances. 45 were recruited through the
SONA system, which enables participation in university
research in exchange for credit in a psychology class. 50
students were recruited through psychology of creativity and
psychology of humor classes. They were not given
incentives to participate. The remaining participants were
recruited through online university class message boards,
and were also not given incentives to participate. The only
exclusion criterion was severe visual impairment, such as
blindness. Females accounted for approximately 58.2% of
the sample (n=92) and males accounted for the remaining
41.8% (n=66). Most (83.1%, n=128) were between the ages
of 17-25, and in a Bachelor of Arts (64%, n=96) program.

Procedure
The experienced dancers were filmed practicing original
choreographed dance routines in their dance studio. They
were told that the study was about the psychology of
movement. They met at the dance studio one hour prior to
filming to learn two different modern dance routines. Both
routines were choreographed to music and lasted one to two
minutes in duration. For one, the music was a quick, highenergy piece, while for the other it was slow and sombre.
After the hour-long practice, each dancer individually
performed the fast dance five times. After all dancers had
finished, they individually performed the slow dance five
times in the same order as the first. Each dance performance
was videotaped using a high-definition video camera.
Once the first dancer had completed all her dances, she
was directed to a laptop where footage of her routines was
uploaded. She was debriefed about the specific reasons for
conducting the study, and given a definition of authentic
performance. She was then asked to watch her own ten
performances in the order in which they were performed,
and given a questionnaire with the following items based on
each performance:
Please rate how authentic you felt this performance was based
on how you felt you were coming across or how you felt
inside during the performance” (Not authentic at all /
Somewhat authentic / Neutral or Don’t know / Quite authentic
/ Very authentic)
How would you rate your performance in regards to technical
skill?” (Very poor / Poor / Okay / Good / Very good)

This was repeated for the other dancers. All dancers were
also asked to fill out an open-ended portion of the
questionnaire, which asked the following questions
concerning factors that facilitate or hinder authenticity:
(1) Do you feel as though authenticity and technical skill are
the same thing or different concepts? Please explain.
(2) Are there particular situations or environments in which
you are able to produce your most authentic performance?
If so, please tell us about it.
(3) Do you believe that people become more able to find their
authentic style with experience?
(4) Was there a known time in your career where you felt that
you had made a transition to being more able to express
yourself? If yes, describe that transition.

The child dancer was filmed using a high-definition video
camera in her home. Filming began when she spontaneously
began dancing to upbeat dance music. The camera was not
hidden from view and the child was aware she was being
filmed. The footage was divided into two video clips of two
minutes each. Due to her age, she was not asked to assess
how authentic or skilled her performances were, nor to
respond to the open-ended questions.
The experienced stand-up comedian was asked to submit
between five and ten previously taped performances that he
had acquired over his career. We requested that each video
clip be under two minutes duration, and that together they

2525

portray a range of authenticity. He was also asked to rate the
authenticity and skill of each performance using the same
five-point Likert scale administered to the dancers. He
submitted six videotaped live performances and his ratings
for each.
Video footage was collected from the amateur stand-up
comedian without an audience (except for the
experimenter). She was asked a series of questions that
would potentially promote humourous responses, such as
“what was your most embarrassing moment?” or “what is
the strangest thing you have seen on campus?” She was also
asked to run through segments of her stand-up routine
which were narrative in nature, tell funny jokes (not
necessarily her own), or make up funny stories and deliver
them as though they were real. After approximately 30
minutes of recording, she was asked to look through the
footage on a laptop and rate the authenticity and skill of
each joke/story segment on the five-point Likert scale.
Video footage of the social comedian was collected in the
same manner as with the amateur stand-up comedian.
The video clips were loaded onto an online questionnaire
using www.surveymonkey.com with the exception of those
from Dancer C. Her performances were omitted due to
extreme homogeneity in her responses to the Likert items.
(Since her performances did not exhibit variation in selfrated authenticity, they were not useful for this study.) Her
responses to the qualitative questions were retained.
Viewers were given the following definition of
authenticity:
Authenticity in the performing arts commonly refers to the
ability of a performer to perform in such a way that they are
able to remain true to who they really are or to the character
they are trying to play. Conversely, a performer who is not
performing authentically is merely giving a performance that
seems artificial or imitated.

Viewers were asked whether they felt they understood the
construct of authenticity, and if they did not, further
discussion ensued until it was clear to them what
authenticity refers to. After each video clip, viewers were
required to rate it on the same five-point Likert scales that
the performers used. In order to minimize potential order
effects, the ordering of the performances was randomly
altered every time ten students had completed the survey.
Video clips belonging to the same performer were kept
together, but the order of the performers and the order of the
clips belonging to each performer were randomized.
The students who were recruited from the psychology of
creativity and psychology of humor classes were shown the
video clips on a projector screen, and they received a paper
version of the questionnaire. They were given 30 seconds to
rate each performance before the next one commenced. The
type of psychology class and the week in which the study
was conducted determined the types of performances that
were shown. For example, the psychology of creativity class
was approached earlier in the study, and was shown the
clips of the dancers and the experienced stand-up comedian
because these performances were the only ones available at

that time. The psychology of humour class saw only the
comedians’ performances because dance performances were
not relevant to the class content.

Analysis and Results
The means and standard deviations for the authenticity
ratings of the performances are given in Table 1. The
highest authenticity ratings were for the dancing child (M =
4.52) and the social comedian (M = 4.05).
Table 1: Mean authenticity ratings by viewers and
performers for all performances.
Performer
Experienced standup comedian
Amateur stand-up
comedian
Social comedian
Dancer A
Dancer B
Dancing child

Viewer ratings
M (SD)
3.68 (1.07)

Performer
Self-ratings
3.33

3.19 (1.31)

2.50

4.05 (1.08)
3.18 (1.12)
3.27 (1.18)
4.25 (1.01)

4.33
3.80
3.30
N/A

Recognizability of Authenticity
Between-Viewer Ratings To determine whether the
viewers agreed as to which performances seemed authentic,
the intraclass correlation coefficient (Ri) was calculated. The
Ri statistic is more appropriate for this study than the
widely-used Pearson product moment correlation because
the latter ignores the extent to which independent raters
agree on any single rating (Cicchetti, 1991). The Ri
coefficients for the extent of agreement amongst viewers
about the authenticity of the performances of each
performer are presented in Table 2. All values are
statistically significant at the .05 level with the exception of
those for Dancer A, and they are all statistically significant
at the .01 level with the exception of those for Dancer A and
the dancing child.
Table 2: Agreement of authenticity amongst viewers (Ri),
and between viewers and performer (r).
Performer
Experienced stand-up comedian
Amateur stand-up comedian
Social comedian’
Dancer A
Dancer B
Dancing child
*p<.05; **p<.01

Ri
.965**
.890**
.858**
.340
.879**
.822*

r
.712
.120
.609
.061
.520
N/A

Agreement Between Viewers and Performers. To
determine if there was agreement between viewer and
performer ratings of authenticity, we merged the multiple
viewer ratings to obtain the average composite rating for

2526

Distinguishing Authenticity from Skill

each performer. A Pearson product moment correlation was
conducted to see if the composite rating is in agreement
with the performer’s ratings of authenticity. These values
are also presented in Table 2.
The highest agreement was between the viewers and the
experienced stand-up comedian, followed by the social
comedian, Dancer B, the amateur stand-up comedian, and
Dancer A. There was considerable variation amongst the
performers with respect to the degree to which their
assessments of the authenticity of their performances were
correlated with the viewers’ assessments. While none of the
correlations were statistically significant, all were positive.
Moreover, significance was based on a small number of
performances for each performer. The lack of power from
the small n’s indicates that the significance tests were highly
prone to type II errors (failure to find a significant
difference when one exists). In such situations it may be
prudent to focus on the magnitude of the observed effect or
relationship instead of the significance tests (Gliner, Leech,
& Morgan, 2002; Serline & Lapsey, 1993; Wilkinson & the
APA Task Force on Statistical Inference, 1999).
Qualitative Results. To better understand what factors
facilitate the expression of authentic creative style we
conducted a content analysis of the open-ended questions.
There were recurring responses as well as individual
differences. Responses to the question, “Is the development
of an authentic voice related to experience?”, suggest that
experience facilitates the development of authentic style,
but that this happens differently for different performers.
Compare the responses of two dancers:

Quantitative Results. There was a modest but significant
Pearson correlation between mean ratings of authenticity
and mean ratings of skill as assessed by viewers. The
Pearson correlation for the performers’ mean ratings of
authenticity and skill was lower but significant. These
results are presented in Table 3. Thus although authenticity
and skill appear to be related for both performers and
viewers, performers made a stronger distinction between
them than viewers.
Table 3: Pearson correlation between mean ratings of
authenticity and mean ratings of skill (r).
r
Viewers
Performers
*p<.001

.641
.547

Qualitative Results. The qualitative data indicates that
the performers unanimously view authenticity and skill as
distinct concepts. For example:
Technical skill – is where you learn how to move and hold
yourself properly for the desired discipline. Authenticity – is
the feeling and expression that you can add to your technical
skill to create the “entire picture”.
Anybody can master technical skills with enough practice but
if you don’t have charisma as an artist – or better yet as a
stand-up comedian, people won’t think you’re very funny.

Experience is what helps one explore his or herself to
discover what authenticity means for them.

Responses suggested that skill can facilitate authenticity:
Technical skill opened the door of possibilities for me to
further express my emotions.

I have found that by taking a number of different dance styles
with a number of different instructors that I have developed
(and continue to develop) my own personal style. The more
experience that I’ve gained the more comfortable I’ve become
with myself and my movement and the more ideas that I can
“pull out of my hat”.

Once I know how to do a proper “plie” and the barre, it is
much easier for me to add some expression or feeling because
I’m not thinking nearly as much about how the plie should be
done and can focus on making it look “pretty.”

The performers put forward several factors that interfere
with the authenticity of their performances: excessive focus
on technical perfection, performing in front of large
audiences, or audiences that include friends or
acquaintances, performing while injured or tired, performing
content that is unfamiliar or that does not “lean towards
[one’s] natural expression”, and working with a
choreographer that has a different style. The performers also
put forward many factors that enhance with the authenticity
of their performances. The most commonly cited factor was
feeling safe from judgment. Other factors were being in a
performing mood, feeling inspired, and teaching
choreography. Interestingly, while some performers claimed
that having an audience increases the authenticity of their
performance, others claimed that it has the opposite effect.

However, one performer’s answers suggested that acquiring
skill may interfere with authenticity:
Sometimes a lot of technical training can make it difficult for
the dancer to separate their own authentic style from the
teachers. It all comes down to how they have been trained, if
their teacher demands uniformity and discourages personal
exploration it will be harder. If they have a good teacher who
knows how to pull out creativity and massage it, then the
experience will benefit their discovery of an authentic style.

The performers claimed that skill can facilitate authentic
performance by freeing them from concern with technical
details so they could be more fully immersed in the creative
process. A preoccupation with skill, however, can prevent a
performer from reaching a deeper connection with the task.
These qualitative responses, in conjunction with the
quantitative results, support the hypothesis that authenticity
and skill are related, yet distinct concepts.

2527

Discussion
The results of this study shed light on the seemingly elusive
construct of authenticity. The agreement amongst viewers as
to which performances were authentic, a result obtained
across a variety of performance types and situations,
suggests that authenticity is indeed a real concept as
opposed to existing in the eye of the beholder.
The variability in the correlations between authenticity
ratings for viewers and performers indicate that when a
performance feels authentic to a performer it may or may
not come across that way to others. This was addressed by
one of the dancers, who noted:
Some people have very ‘quiet’ personalities so when they are
authentically displaying anger they might be so quiet about it
[that] an audience would not see it. Those dancers might be
rated ‘less authentic’ because they are less obvious.

This comment suggests to us that the reason for the low
agreements between the amateur stand-up comedian and
Dancer A and the viewers is that outward manifestations of
their personalities may be subtle for the viewers to detect
them. Analyzing how the personality of an artist interacts
with the recognizability of authenticity in performance is an
interesting direction for future research.
Although the variety of performance types and settings
contributed to the generalizability and ecological validity of
the findings, caution must taken in drawing conclusions that
involve comparisons across performers or performance
settings, because differences such as ‘in a studio’ versus ‘at
home’ could be potential confounds. With this warning, we
offer some speculative discussion of between-performer
differences. There are several possible explanations for the
high agreement amongst viewer authenticity ratings of the
experienced comedian. First, over time he may have
solidified a strong authentic voice that is readily detectable
when present, making an inauthentic performance stand out
in contrast. Second, his performances were the only ones
that were filmed before he knew he would be rated. Some
research indicates that the pressure of knowing one is going
to be evaluated can inhibit creative expression (Nemiro,
1997; Rhodes, 1999), so it is possible that the rest of the
performers who knew they were going to be evaluated gave
performances that were more uniform with respect to
authenticity, giving viewers less opportunity to detect
differences amongst performances. It would be interesting
to investigate whether expertise can entail becoming skilled
at faking authenticity, i.e., whether there exist performers
for whom expertise is inversely correlated with agreement
between performer and viewer authenticity ratings.
The dancing child’s high authenticity ratings may reflect
in part the stereotype that children are authentic in whatever
they do. However, the fact that the social comedian’s
performance was also rated as highly authentic suggests that
these high ratings reflect instead the spontaneity of their
performances. While the other performers’ performances
(though to a lesser extent the amateur comedian) were
choreographed or scripted, those of the child and social

comedian were not. This interpretation is consistent with
findings that freedom facilitates authenticity (McClary,
2007; Nemiro, 1997; Sawyer, 1992; Rhodes, 1990, Warja,
1994). This explanation is further reinforced by the fact that
the experienced stand-up comedian’s highest rated
performance for authenticity was the only one in which he
was forced to improvise (due to verbal feedback from the
audience). This points to a weakness of the study. Since
most performers knew they would be judged, they may have
been less able to release inhibitions and be authentic.
Another weakness is that because dancers were confined to
rehearsed, choreographed routines, differences between
performances of the same dance may have been too subtle
for viewers to detect, thus limiting the range of authenticity
scores. Future studies will focus on spontaneously
improvised performances, which allow authenticity to be
expressed through content as well as delivery.
Another direction for future research is to investigate
whether there is a difference in the capacity to detect
authenticity in live versus videotaped performances.
Previous research indicating that there is a constant
interaction between a performer and a live audience
(Arnold, 1991; Bindeman, 1998; Nemiro, 1997) suggests
that viewers may be better able to detect cues or indications
of authenticity from a live performance than from a
performance on a television or computer screen.
This study of authenticity arose in the context of an
interest in what factors affect how the various components
of a cognitive system come together to produce overt
thought and behavior. It seemed reasonable that an authentic
response is one that genuinely reflects the state of one’s
associative network, including not just one’s internal model
of the world (including self-understanding) but one’s way of
seeing and being. We refer to this dynamical structure as a
worldview (Gabora, 1999, 2000, 2001). We speculated that:
(1) authenticity entails being entirely present and thereby
available to detect unresolved questions or issues, and open
to change, (2) a lack of authenticity may indicate that
elements of one’s worldview are repressed or
misrepresented because this interferes with the capacity to
detect unresolved questions or issues, and be open to
change, (3) authentic performance facilitates the process by
which one’s worldview self-organized into more stable
state, while unauthentic performance does not. However,
before we could address these issues it was necessary to
address the more fundamental question of whether
authenticity is a real construct.
The findings reported here, and in particular the key
finding that authenticity is recognizable, opens up many
questions and perspectives. It led us to speculate that
perhaps one is being creative even when not engaged in an
overtly creative activity if one responds to a new situation or
emotion in a way that authentically reflects how it affects
ones’ worldview. This is consistent with the honing theory
of creativity, according to which creative behavior arises
because one’s worldview tends to self-organize in response
to perturbation to achieve a more stable state, regain

2528

equilibrium, or resolve dissonance (Gabora, 2005; Gabora,
Ranjan & O’Connor, 2012). The creative product or
performance is viewed as an external reflection of this
internal transformation. This conceptualization of creativity
is consistent with the anecdotal evidence obtained in the
qualitative portion of this study that authentic performance
can be therapeutic. It is also consistent with the notion that
personal performance style is the result of inner
transformations (Kogan, 2002) and the view that creative
performance involves interaction and tension between the
creator’s conscious and subconscious which impact the
creator’s identity (Sawyer, 1992).

Acknowledgments
We are grateful for funding to the second author from the
Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of
Canada and the Concerted Research Program of the Flemish
Government of Belgium. We thank the performers, the
Creator’s Arts Centre, and Celine Dahmen-Formosa for
their assistance, and Gordon Rudolph for comments.

References
Chalnick, A., & Billman, D. (1988). Unsupervised learning
of correlational structure. Proceedings of the Tenth
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.
510-516). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Arnold, N. (1991). The manipulation of the audience by the
director and actor. In G. D. Wilson (Ed.), Psychology and
Performing Arts (pp. 75-81). Amsterdam: Swets &
Zeitlinger.
Bindeman, S. (1998). Echoes of silence: A
phenomenological study of the creative process.
Creativity Research Journal, 11(1), 69-77.
Cicchetti, D. V. (1991). The reliability of peer review for
manuscript and grant submissions: A cross-disciplinary
investigation. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 14, 119186.
Daniel, Y. P. (1996). Tourism dance performances:
Authenticity and creativity. Annals of Tourism Research,
23(4), 780-797.
Dudek, S. Z., & Marchand, P. (1983). Artistic styles and
personality in creative painters. Journal of Personality
Assessment, 47(2), 139-142.
Gabora, L. (1999). Weaving, bending, patching, mending
the fabric of reality: A cognitive science perspective on
worldview inconsistency. Foundations of Science, 3(2),
395–428.
Gabora, L. (2000). Conceptual closure. How memories are
woven into an interconnected worldview. Annals of the
New York Academy of Sciences, 901, 42–53.
Gabora, L. (2005). Creative thought as a non-Darwinian
evolutionary process. Journal of Creative Behavior,
39(4), 65–87.
Gabora, L. (2001). Cognitive mechanisms underlying the
origin and evolution of culture. Doctoral Thesis, Free
University of Brussels, Belgium.

Gabora, L., O’Connor, B., & Ranjan, A. (2012). The
recognizability of individual creative styles within and
across domains. Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, and
the Arts, 6(4), 351-360.
Getzels, J. W., & Csikszentmihalyo, M. (1976). The
creative vision: A longitudinal study of problem finding in
art. New York: Wiley-Interscience.
Gliner, J. A., Leech, N. L., & Morgan, G. A. (2002).
Problems with null hypothesis significance testing
(NHST): What do the textbooks say? Journal of
Experimental Education, 71(1), 83-92.
Goldhahn, E. (2009). Is authentic a meaningful name for the
practice of Authentic Movement? American Journal of
Dance Therapy, 31, 53-63.
Hekkert, P., & van Wieringen, P. C. W. (1990a).
Complexity and prototypicality as determinants of the
appraisal of cubist paintings. British Journal of
Psychology, 81, 483-495.
Hekkert, P., & van Wieringen, P. C. W. (1990b). Experts’
appraisal of cubist paintings. In L. Halasz (Ed.),
Proceedings of the XIth International Congress on
Empirical Aesthetics (pp. 118-121). Budapest: Institute
for Psychology of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences.
Hekkert, P., & van Wieringen, P. C. W. (1998). Assessment
of aesthetic quality of artworks by expert observers: An
empirical investigation of group decisions. Poetics, 25(5),
281-292.
Kogan, N. (2002). Careers in the performing arts: A
psychological perspective. Creativity Research Journal,
14(1), 1-16.
Lavy, J. (2005). Theoretial foundations of Grotowski’s total
act via negativa and conjunctio oppositorum. The Journal
of Religion and Theatre, 4(2), 175-188.
McClary, R. (2007). Healting the psyche through music,
myth, and ritual. Psychology of Aesthetics, Creativity, and
the Arts, 1, 155-159.
Nemiro, J. (1997). Interpretive artists: A qualitative
exploration of the creative process of actors. Creativity
Research Journal, 10, 229-240.
Rhodes, C. (1990). Growth from deficiency creativity to
being creativity. Creativity Research Journal, 3, 287-299.
Sawyer, K. (1992). Improvisational creativity: An analysis
of jazz performance. Creativity Research Journal, 5, 253263.
Serline, R. C., & Lapsey, D. K. (1993). Rational appraisal of
psychological research and the good-enough principle. In
G. Keren & C. Lewis (Eds.), A handbook for data
analysis in the behavioral sciences: Methodological
issues (pp. 199-228). Hillsdale, DJ: Erlbaum.
Warja, M. (1994). Sounds of music through the spiraling
path of individuation: A Jungian approach to music
psychotherapy. Music Therapy Perspectives, 12, 75-83.
Wilkinson, L., & the APA Task Force on Statistical
Inference. (1999). Statistical methods in psychology
journals: Guidelines and explanations. American
Psychologist, 54, 594-604.

2529

