UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Role of Visual Coherence in Graphical Passwords

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8kc3g1z3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Ayd?n, Ülkü Arslan
Acartürk, Cengiz
Ça??ltay, Kür?at

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Role of Visual Coherence in Graphical Passwords
Ülkü Arslan Aydın1 (ulku.arslan@gmail.com)

Cengiz Acartürk1 (acarturk@metu.edu.tr)

Kürşat Çağıltay2 (kursat@metu.edu.tr)
1
Cognitive Science, Informatics Institute
Computer Education and Instructional Technology
Middle East Technical University, 06800, Ankara, Turkey
2

systems (Herley et al., 2009). An alternative knowledgebased authentication method, namely graphical passwords,
has been recently gaining an increased use.

Abstract
Graphical password is an alternative method of authentication
to alphanumerical passwords. From the perspective of
research on human memory, it is yet another novel
technology that introduces challenges on human memory
components. In this study, we aim to investigate the previous
findings in human visual memory in the domain of graphical
passwords by analyzing the role of visual coherence in
passwords. The results of an experimental study reveal that in
terms of memorability, coherent images are better candidates
as graphical password images than jumbled images.

Graphical Passwords as an Alternative Method
to Alphanumerical Passwords

Keywords: Graphical passwords; visual coherence, visual
working memory, eye tracking.

Knowledge-Based Authentication Systems
The extended use of human computer interfaces in the past
few decades has introduced several challenges on users’
working memory. One such challenge is the requirement to
memorize numerous passwords for security authentication.
From the viewpoint of information security, user access to a
security system is granted in three phases: identification,
authentication and authorization (Figure 1). After
identification, the user supplies the proof of her/his identity
in the authentication phase. The proof of identity is usually
accomplished by employing methods such as using a
smartcard (token-based authentication), using biometric
information such as fingerprints (biometric-based
authentication), or entering an alphanumeric or a graphical
password (knowledge-based authentication).

Graphical passwords were developed to overcome some of
the security issues involved in the use of alphanumeric
passwords (Dunphy et al., 2008). Graphical passwords are
of different types, such as recall-based, recognition-based,
and click-based (Figure 2). In a click-based graphical
password system, a pixel-based image acts as a cue for
activating user’s memory. When creating a password in a
click-based system, the user selects a sequence of number of
(e.g., four or five) points on the presented image. After then,
to login the system, the user reselects the points on the
image in the same order by clicking on (or near to) them
(Blonder, 1996; Wiedenbeck et al., 2005; Chiasson et al.,
2007; Chiasson, 2008).

Figure 2: Sample graphical passwords (Dhamija & Perrig,
2000, Lashkari et al., 2009; Valentine, 1999).
From the end-user’s point of view, the major motivation for
the development of graphical passwords was to take the
advantage of picture memorability over text while
maintaining security (Wiedenbeck, et al., 2005), thus
providing a solution to the security-usability dilemma.1 The
motivation for the development of graphical passwords
finds its roots in early studies in cognitive psychology
research, which revealed that humans have a tendency to

Figure 1: A taxonomy of authentication methods in
information security systems.
Recently, knowledge-based authentication methods—in
particular, text-based, alphanumerical passwords—are
largely used for information access in information security

1 The security- usability dilemma refers to the observation that
“passwords are often either memorable-but-insecure or secure-butdifficult-to-remember” Chiasson, 2008, p. 3. Graphical passwords
as a solution to the dilemma are beyond the scope of this study.

1774

remember images longer and better than words (cf. the
picture superiority effect, Nelson et al., 1976). Accordingly,
images are usually expected to be “easier to remember and
more secure than words” (e.g., Cranor, & Garfinkel, 2005;
Kirkpatrick, 2002; Suo, Zhu, & Owen, 2005), thus leading
to memorability advantages over alphanumerical passwords.
In addition to offering a more memorable solution for
security system authorization, graphical passwords provide
a naturalistic environment for research on visual memory in
daily life tasks. Although the focus of research has been the
security-usability dilemma from an information security
point of view, there are many aspects that need further
investigation from the perspective of cognitive science, such
as the identification of the circumstances under which
graphical passwords achieve better memorability. One such
factor is visual coherence, as described below.

Visual Coherence in Graphical Passwords
Two major aspects of binding of objects in visual working
memory are the binding of objects to perceptual features,
such as color, shape and orientation, and the binding of
objects to locations (Hollingworth & Rasmussen, 2010). In
visual cognition, the concept of coherence has been studied
by Biederman (1972) and Biederman, Glass and Stacy
(1973), leading to research results which showed that the
objects were recognized and identified more efficiently and
quickly when the scene image was presented coherent rather
than jumbled.2 Mandler and colleagues have shown that the
presence of a coherent background scene improves memory
for both the location and the perceptual features of the
object in the scene (e.g., Mandler & Parker, 1976; Mandler
& Ritchey, 1977; Hollingworth, 2009). The facilitating
effect of context in memory retrieval has been observed in
both short-term time scale and long-term time scale (see
Brady et al., 2011 for a review) (Brockmole et al., 2006;
Foulsham et al., 2011). Those findings in visual working
memory research suggest that visual coherence in graphical
password images would improve memory for graphical
passwords. In other words, when used as a graphical
password image, a coherent image may reveal advantages
over jumbled images. To test this hypothesis, we conducted
an experimental study, in which the participants were shown
how to create a click-based graphical password and how to
login with the password, as described in the following
section.

screen to login, instead of the previously presented
graphical password image. This was the end of the first
session. In the second session, three days after the first
session, they were asked to login by using their password,
again on the black screen. In both sessions, participants’
login success and time were recorded. Participants’ eye
movements were recorded by a 50 Hz. non-intrusive eye
tracker, integrated into 17’’ TFT monitor.3 The experiment
was conducted in an office environment, with a developed
application which simulated the interfaces of operating
system that the participants were already familiar with.
Overall, the experimental setting provided a relatively
naturalistic environmental setting.

Participants, Materials and Design
Sixty-three participants (29 females, 34 males M= 32.1;
SD= 0.73) participated in the experiment. All of the
participants were employees at a governmental institution
and the participation in the study was voluntary. The
participants were divided into two groups, according to the
type of the graphical password image they were presented in
the password creation phase: (1) a coherent image or (2) a
jumbled image. Each group was further divided into two
groups according to the type of the image presented when
participant failed to login on a black screen.: (1) the same
image as the image presented in the password creating phase
or (2) a shuffled version of the previous image. The base
image for the graphical password was a high resolution
(2362*2362) image taken in a professional setting. The
image was converted into gray scale to reduce visual
saliency effects due to color contrast. This image was used
as the graphical password for the coherent-image group
participants (henceforth, the coherent group). The jumbled
image, which was used as the graphical password image for
the jumbled-image group participants (henceforth, the
jumbled group), was produced out of the coherent image by
randomly jumbling the pieces of the coherent image, in the
form of a 3x3 grid (Figure 3). There was at least one
identifiable object in each cell of the grid.

Experiment
In the practice session of the experiment, participants were
guided by on-screen instructions about how to create a
password. During the experiment, participants were
presented a visual distraction task and then they were asked
to login once. They were asked, however, to click on a black
2 The jumbled image was created by dividing the coherent
image into multiple sections and manipulating the relative
positions of the sections without rotating them.

Figure 3: The images (600*600) for the graphical password
in the coherent group (left) and the jumbled group (right).

3 The participants were seated at a distance of approximately 60
cm to the monitor. Spatial resolution and accuracy of the eye
tracker was about 0.25̊ and 0.50° degrees respectively.

1775

The participants were instructed to choose passwords which
they could remember but that would be difficult for others
to guess. They were guided by the instruction screens. The
experiment consisted of two sessions. The first session was
divided into five phases: practice, password generation,
questionnaires, mental rotation task and login. In the
practice session, the participant was shown how to create a
graphical password and how to login with the selected
graphical password. After the practice session, the
participants picked their passwords by clicking four clickpoints on the provided image. After then, they filled out a
demographic questionnaire and a usability questionnaire. A
30 second mental rotation task was then administered to
disrupt visual memory. In the last phase of the first session,
the participants were asked to use the selected password to
login the system. The second session was a login session
only; it was administered three days after the first session.

results suggested that coherent-group participants exhibited
better memory performance compared to the jumbled-group
participants, as presented below.

Login Success
The participants were allowed to try to login three times on
the black grid screen. We performed a comparative analysis
for the login success of the 56 participants in the first login
attempt only. A three-way loglinear analysis (Login Success
x Session x Group Type) produced a final model that
retained login success and group type effects. This indicated
that the interaction between login success and group type
was significant, independently from the session. χ2(1) =
5.20, p = .02 (Figure 4). Based on the odds ratio, the odds of
success in the first attempt was 2.98 times higher for the
coherent-group than the jumbled-group participants.

Results
In the last phase of the first session, the participants were
asked to login the system by clicking on a black grid screen,
without the graphical password image on the screen. This
screen consisted of nine black squares in the form of a grid.
The motivation for using the black screen was to investigate
participants’ strategy for choosing the password items. If the
participant chose password just by memorizing object
properties, without memorizing the spatial locations, s/he
would not be able to log in without seeing the graphical
password image. This was a surprise task for the
participants because they were not informed about the black
screen beforehand. The results showed that, however, the
participants achieved a very high success login ratio on the
black screen: Fifty-seven of sixty-three participants were
able to login on the black screen, before being presented the
graphical image (i.e., in the first, the second and the third
attempt). This finding suggests that the participants
remembered very well the locations of the click points in the
first session. The results also suggested that a comparative
analysis between the coherent-group participants (who were
presented a coherent image as the graphical password) and
the jumbled-group participants (who were presented a
jumbled image as the graphical password) would be
possible, because the results were similar between the pairgroups and the further division according to the type of the
image presented at the login phase (i.e., shuffled vs. same)
was no more necessary. Accordingly, the analyses were
performed in terms of the measures below
 The time to login, create and confirm the password
 Eye movement parameters (fixation count,
duration, Levenshtein distance) and visual saliency
 Password creation strategies
All the analyses were performed on participants’
performance on the black grid screen in the first session
(i.e., the login test in the same day) and in the second
session (i.e., the login test three days after the first session).
Additional analyses were also reported below, on visual
saliency and on answers to questionnaires. Overall, the

Figure 4: Login success of the participants in the first try
(the numbers show the success and the failure ratios of the
participants between 0 and 1)
The overall success ratio on the black screen, including the
further attempts (up to three), revealed a similar finding,
(i.e. the interaction between login success and group type
was significant, independently from the session, χ2(1) =
4.96, p = .04), showing that coherent-group participants
were more successful to login than the jumbled-group
participants in the overall login attempts on the black
screen.

Login Duration
The participants spent time to create the password and then
to login on the first day of the experiment (i.e., the first
session). In the first session, no difference was observed
between the jumbled-group (M = 25.2 seconds, SD = 15.7)
and the coherent-group participants (M = 22.4 s, SD = 11.6)
in creating the password, t(61) = 0.81, p = .42, r = .10.
Moreover, the time to login was not different between the
jumbled-group (M = 9.75 s, SD = 6.32) and the coherentgroup participants (M = 7.85 s, SD = 3.82). Although the
participants spent approximately the same time to login
between the first session (M = 8.79 s, SD = 5.25) and the
second session (M = 8.56 s, SD = 5.69), the time spent to
login in the second session was different between the
jumbled-group (M = 10.1 s, SD = 7.19) and the coherent-

1776

group participants (M = 7.07 s, SD = 3.19), t(57) = 2.02, p =
.048, with a small effect size of r = .26. To sum up, the
analysis of login durations showed that, in the second
session of the experiment which was conducted three days
after the first phase, the coherent-image group spent less
time to login compared to the jumbled-group participants.

Fixation Counts
In this study, the term fixation count is used for describing
the number of fixations on the black grid screen. The
fixation counts were analyzed for a comparison between the
jumbled group and the coherent group. The results were
similar to the results obtained for login duration: there was
no significant difference between the jumbled group (M =
18.3, SD = 12.3) and the coherent group (M = 14.4, SD =
8.83) in the first session. In the second session, however, the
difference in fixation counts between the jumbled group (M
= 18.6, SD = 16.6) and the coherent group (M = 11.1, SD =
6.57) was significant, t(56) = -2.00, p =.05, with an effect
size of r = .26. There was also a significant main effect of
the session in fixation counts, F(1, 56) = 10.16, p = .002,
showing that the participants produced more fixation counts
in the first session than they did in the second session. As
the final step of the fixation count analysis, we investigated
whether each fixation location belonged to the password
(i.e., a pass item) or it did not belong to the password (i.e., a
non-pass item). The participants in both groups spent more
fixations on their pass items than their non-pass items, both
in the first session, F(1, 61) = 79.9, p = .00, and in the
second session, F(1, 56) = 111.3, p =.00. Moreover, in the
second session, the coherent group spent less fixations on
the non-pass items (M = 0.47, SD = 0.51) compared to the
jumbled group (M = 1.63, SD = 2.07), t(56) = 3.17, p =.00.
To sum up, in the second session, the jumbled group
produced more frequent fixations compared to the coherent
group. Moreover, the coherent group focused more
efficiently on their pass items compared to jumbled group,
who were focusing on non-pass items as well as pass items.

the second session, mean fixation duration on pass items
were similar for both the coherent group (M = 562 ms, SD =
259.8) and the jumbled group (M = 486 ms, SD = 152). On
the other hand, the coherent group made shorter fixations on
non-pass items (M = 228 ms, SD = 173) compared to the
jumbled group (M = 373 ms, SD = 250), t(56) = 3.33, p =.00
in the second session. To sum up, the analysis of fixation
durations revealed that in contrast to the similarities
between the two groups in the first session, the jumbled
group exhibited shorter fixations compared to the coherent
group in the second session. Moreover, in the second
session, the coherent group exhibited shorter fixations on
the non-pass items.

Levenshtein Distance (LD)
The Levenshtein Distance (LD) is a specific application of
the string editing analysis, where the distribution of
fixations on certain locations (in our case, the grid cells) is
coded by letters. The letter strings of each participant are
then compared with the password of the participant for
similarity. The LD defines the number of modifications (i.e.,
insertions and deletions) on one string that is necessary to
make it the same as the other.
In our study, LD was used a specification of the similarity
between the two groups of participants. The results of the
LD analysis revealed that, the participants in the first
session (M = 8.22, SD = 7.18) exhibited longer LD
compared to the participants in the second session (M =
6.97, SD = 8.24), F(1, 56)= 9.69, p =.00. In addition, in the
first session, no significant difference was obtained in LD
between the jumbled-group participants (M = 9.35, SD =
7.96) and the coherent-group participants (M = 7.08, SD =
6.25). In the second session, the difference between the
jumbled-group participants (M = 9.64, SD = 10.2) and the
coherent-group participants (M = 4.30, SD = 4.29) was
significant, t(56)= 2.57, p =.01, with a medium-size effect of
r = .32, indicating more search effort in the jumbled-group
participants compared to the coherent-group participants.

Fixation Durations

Visual Saliency Analysis

The term fixation duration is used in this study for the mean
duration of single fixations on the black grid screen. There
was no significant difference between the coherent group
(M = 429.4 ms, SD = 95.2) and the jumbled group (M =
433.1 ms, SD = 145.7) in the first session. On the other
hand, in the second session, the participants in the jumbledimage group had shorter mean fixation duration on the black
grid (M = 453 ms, SD = 171) than the participants in the
coherent-image group (M = 496 ms, SD = 125). This
difference was significant t(56) = -2.12, p < .04 and it did
represent small-sized effect r = .27. As the final step of the
mean fixation duration analysis, we investigated whether
each fixation location belonged to a pass item or it belonged
to a non-pass item. The participants in both groups made
longer fixations on their pass items than their non-pass
items, both in the first session, F(1, 56) = 30.5, p =.00, and
in the second session, F(1, 56) = 50.8, p =.00. Moreover, in

The saliency maps of the coherent image and the jumbled
image were computed by using the algorithm provided by
Walther and Koch (2006).4 Based on this, the percentage
distribution of the saliency of each cell in the 3x3 grid was
calculated. The resulting distribution provided the relative
saliency distribution over the password image. The
distribution of participants’ pass-items was also calculated
by analyzing the selected graphical passwords in the
experiment. For the jumbled image, no relation was
obtained between the saliency values and the ratio of being
pass-item, r = -0.11, p =.34 (Figure 5).

1777

4

SaliencyToolbox library, http://www.saliencytoolbox.net

by group type. On the other hand, no relationship was
observed between the selected strategy and the login
success, χ2(3) = 4.46, p =.21.

Discussion

Figure 5: The saliency distribution in the jumbled graphical
password (left) and the percentage of being selected as a
pass-item by the participants (right).
A similar analysis was conducted for the coherent image.
Again, no significant relation was obtained between the
saliency values and the ratio of being pass-item, r = 0.30, p
=.47 (Figure 6).

Figure 6: The saliency distribution in the coherent graphical
password (left) and the percentage of being selected as a
pass-item by the participants (right).
In summary, visual saliency analyses revealed no useful
results to account eye movement behavior characteristics in
graphical passwords, in line with the findings in relevant
domains of visual cognition (Tatler & Vincent, 2009)

The Analysis of Password Creation Strategies
After the participants created the password in the first
session of the experiment, they filled in a questionnaire
about their strategy for creating the password. Four choices
were presented to the participants: (a) I created a pattern
that looked like an L-shape or a V-shape (create pattern), (b)
I memorized the names of the objects in the password
(object recognition) (c) The objects I selected had common
visual features (e.g., color, shape) or functional (e.g.,
cutting) features, (similar features) (d) I created a story
(story). The participants were allowed to make multiple
choices. The participants’ answers were analyzed in terms
of the relation between the group type, the session, the
adopted strategy and the login success. A main effect was
obtained for strategy, χ2(1) = 91.7, p =.00, indicating that
there was a significant difference between the adopted
strategies. Pattern creation was the most preferred strategy
(33 out of 77). Furthermore, the interaction between strategy
and group type was significant, χ2(3) = 8.61, p = .03,
indicating that adopted strategy was significantly affected

The results of the experimental investigation showed that a
high majority of the participants (57 of 63 participants) in
the first session was able to login the system by clicking on
a black screen. This finding indicates that the participants
memorized the locations of the pass-items in the graphical
password. The rest of the analyses were conducted on those
57 participants. Overall, the coherent-group participants,
who were presented a coherent image as the graphical
password, achieved better memory performance compared
to the jumbled-group participants, who were presented a
jumbled image as the graphical password. This finding was
obtained in terms of a set of measures, including login
success, login time, eye movement parameters and visual
saliency, as well as password creating strategies. The
analysis of login success showed that the coherent group
exhibited higher login success compared to the jumbled
group, independent of the session. This difference was
obtained both in the first attempt to login and in the analysis
of all attempts to login (the participants were allowed to try
three times to login). The performance difference between
the groups was evident, for some of the measures, in the
second session of the experiment, which was conducted
three days after the first session. For example, the analysis
of the login duration showed that in the first session, there
was no difference between the groups. The difference,
however, was significant in the second session in favor of
the coherent group: the coherent-group participants were
able to login in shorter time. These findings have
implications for end-users, as well as password system
designers. The facilitating role of image coherence suggests
that users should be encouraged to select coherent images
for graphical passwords rather than jumbled images.
The analysis of fixation counts revealed two major
findings: not in the first session but in the second session,
the jumbled group fixated more frequently on the black
screen compared to the coherent group. Moreover, in the
second session, the coherent group spent less fixations on
non-pass items, thus exhibiting a higher memory efficiency
for the pass items. The analysis of fixation durations
revealed that in the second session, the mean fixations of the
jumbled group were shorter than the mean fixations of the
coherent group. Shorter fixation durations may be indicators
for visual search (compared to normal scene viewing,
Rayner, 1998). Jumbled-group participants’ higher effort to
find the pass-items, as well as the longer Levenshtein
distance exhibited by the jumbled group, provide support
for our interpretation that they had more difficulty in
remembering the pass items compared to the coherentimage group participants. Finally, we observed no
relationship between likelihood of the selected pass items
and their visual saliency. This may be due to participants’
strategies in selecting the pass items. The analysis of the

1778

strategies, however, returned no significant relationship
between the selected strategy and the login success, though
higher preference of certain strategies (in particular, pattern
creation) by the participants over the others.

Conclusion and Future Work
Coherence has been a research topic in relevant domains to
human cognition. In linguistics, discourse coherence is
described as constructing the continuity in context by
constructing the meaning between the parts of the written
text or spoken utterance (Wolf, 2005). A coherent discourse
has comprehension advantages compared to an incoherent
discourse. In visual cognition, the studies reveal an
improved efficiency in object identification and memory in
favor of coherent images. These findings reveal the
importance of coherence for cognition in different
modalities. The findings in the present study show that the
coherence effect is also applicable to practical settings, in
this case graphical passwords. The present study also shows
that the advantages of visual coherence can be observed in
various measures, including login success and duration, as
well as eye movement parameters. Future studies will
address extending the evaluation by additional eye tracking
metrics, such as scan path ratio, the investigation of the role
of specific memory components, and a more extensive
analysis of users’ strategies for creating graphical
passwords.
Acknowledgments. Thanks the Capital Markets Board of
Turkey for providing the setting for the experimental
investigation. Thanks Deniz Zeyrek and our reviewers for
their valuable comments and suggestions.

References
Biederman, I. (1972). Perceiving real-world scenes. Science,
177, 77–80.
Biederman, I., Glass, A.L., & Stacy, E.W. (1973). Searching
for objects in real-world scenes. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 97(1), 22-27.
Blonder, G., (1996). United States Patent 5559961.
Brady, T.F., Talia, K., & Alvarez, G.A. (2011). A review of
visual memory capacity: Beyond individual items and
toward structured representations. J. Vision, 11(5):4, 1-34.
Brockmole J.M., Castelhano, M.S., & Henderson, J.M.
(2006). Contextual cueing in naturalistic scenes: Global
and local contexts. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 32(4), 699-706.
Chiasson, S. (2008). Usable autentication and click-based
graphical passwords. Carleton University dissertation.
Chiasson, S., Biddle, R., & Van Oorschot, P. (2007). A
second look at the usability of click-based graphical
passwords. Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security.
Cranor, L.F., & Garfinkel, S. (2005). Security and usability:
Designing secure systems that people can use. L. Cranor
& S. Garfinkel, (Eds.), OʼReilly.
Dhamija, R. & Perrig, A. (2000). Déjà Vu: A user study
using images for authentication. Proceedings of the 9th
conference on USENIX Security Symposium.

Dunphy, P., Nicholson, J., & Olivier, P. (2008). Securing
passfaces for description. Proceedings of the 4th
symposium on Usable privacy and security. ACM Press.
Foulsham, T., Alan, R. & Kingstone, A. (2011). Scrambled
eyes? Disrupting scene structure impedes focal processing
and increases bottom-up guidance. Attention, Perception
and Psychophysics, 73 (7), 2008-2025.
Herley, C., Van Oorschot, P., & Patrick, A. (2009).
Passwords: If we’re so smart, why are we still using
them? In Dingledine &Golle (Eds.) Financial
cryptography and data security (pp. 230-237). Springer.
Hollingworth, A. (2009). Two forms of scene memory
guide visual search: Memory for scene context and
memory for the binding of target object to scene location.
Visual Cognition, 17(1), 273-291.
Hollingworth, A., & Rasmussen, I.P. (2010). Binding
objects to locations: The relationship between object files
and visual working memory. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Percept. and Perf., 36(3), 543-564.
Kirkpatrick, E.A. (2002). An experimental study of
memory. Psychological Review, 1(6), 602-609.
Lashkari, A.H., Saleh, R., Farmand, S., Zakaria, O. (2009).
A wide range survey on recall based graphical user
authentications algorithms based on ISO and attack
patterns. International Journal of Computer Science and
Information Security, 6(3), 17-25.
Mandler, J.M. & Parker, R.E. (1976). Memory for
descriptive and spatial information in complex pictures.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human, Learning,
and Memory, 2, 38-48.
Mandler, J.M., & Ritchey, G.H. (1977). Long-term memory
for pictures. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Learning & Memory, 3, 386-396.
Nelson, D.L., Reed, U.S., & Walling, J.R. (1976). Pictorial
superiority effect. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Learning & Memory, 2, 523-528
Rayner, K. (1998). Eye movements in reading and
information processing: 20 years of research.
Psychological Bulletin, 124(3), 372-422.
Suo, X., Zhu, Y., & Owen, G.S. (2005). Graphical
passwords: A survey. 21st Annual Computer Security
Applications Conference, (pp. 463-472). IEEE.
Tatler, B. W., & Vincent, B. T. (2009). The prominence of
behavioural biases in eye guidance. Visual Cognition, 17,
1029-1054.
Valentine, T. (1999). An evaluation of the passface
personal authentication system. Technical Report
Goldsmith College University of London.
Walther, D., & Koch, C. (2006), Modeling attention to
salient proto-objects. Neural Networks, 19, 1395-1407.
Wiedenbeck, S., Waters, J., Birget, J.-C., Brodskiy, A., &
Memon, N. (2005). PassPoints: Design and longitudinal
evaluation of a graphical password system. International
Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 63(1-2), 102-127.
Wolf, F. (2005). Coherence in natural language: Data
structures and applications. MIT Dissertation.

1779

