UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The object without qualities: referring with negative properties

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0xh090n9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Goudbeek, Martijn
Haagmans, Inge
Krahmer, Emiel

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The object without qualities: referring with negative properties
Martijn Goudbeek (m.b.goudbeek@uvt.nl)
Tilburg center for Communication and Cognition, School of Humanities
Tilburg University, The Netherlands

Inge Haagmans (inge.haagmans@gmail.com)
Tilburg center for Communication and Cognition, School of Humanities
Tilburg University, The Netherlands

Emiel Krahmer (e.j.krahmer@uvt.nl)
Tilburg center for Communication and Cognition, School of Humanities
Tilburg University, The Netherlands
Abstract
Two experiments investigated the production and comprehension of referring expressions that contain a negative property
(”the marker without a cap”). Experiment 1 showed that participants do use negative properties in their object descriptions,
but that they were almost always accompanied by other properties, leading to referential overspecification. In experiment 2,
participants identified objects based on descriptions that contained negative properties. While participants were faster in
identifying objects that were described with preferred properties such as color, response times for objects described with a
negative property (”the marker without a cap”) and a positive
property (”the marker with a cap”) did not differ. The results
provide behavioral grounds for extending referring expression
generation algorithms to include negative properties.
Keywords: Referring expressions, speech production and
comprehension, negative properties

(A sort of) Introduction
Image you are reading an interesting cognitive science
manuscript and want to highlight an important passage. On
the desk of your colleague (see figure 1) are two markers and
since you prefer yellow markers, that is the one you would
like her to pass on to you. You could phrase your request like
this “Could you pass me the yellow marker, please?”. In that
case you have produced a referring expression with the property color as a means to distinguish between the two markers.
However, a viable alternative to this question is “Could you
pass me the marker without the cap, please?”. In that case,
you have used an negative property to refer to the marker of
your choice. This paper investigates to what extent speakers
produce referential expressions that contain negative properties and how listeners process these expressions. In doing so,
we aim to inform computational models of referring expression generation.
Producing a suitable referring expression can be seen as a
problem of choice (Krahmer & van Deemter, 2012). Which
properties does a speaker include in the description when asking for the marker? In addition to color and the absence of
a cap, the location (“the marker on the left”) and size (“the
slightly smaller marker”) come to mind as possible distinguishing properties for your marker. How to choose between
these properties, when they are all suitable candidates for inclusion in the referring expression? Many current compu-

Figure 1: The two markers on the desk of your colleague.

tational approaches, such as Dale and Reiter’s (1995) Incremental Algorithm use a fixed ordering of properties that are
serially added to the description until all distractors have been
ruled out. Since color is a property that is usually highly preferred (Pechmann, 1989), this is the first property that the Incremental Algorithm would add. Since the inclusion of color
in the description uniquely identifies the item of your choice,
the algorithm stops and produces “The yellow marker” and
because the preference order is a fixed order, negative properties like “without a cap”, would never be included in a referring expression.
Standard REG (Referring Expression Generation) algorithms such as the Incremental Algorithm do not consider
boolean operations such as negation in the generation process
(Krahmer & van Deemter, 2012). Recently however, several attempts have been made to incorporate negation (and
other boolean operators) in REG algorithms, either by extending the incremental algorithm (with a specific focus on
referring to sets of objects) with boolean expressions (van
Deemter, 2002; van Deemter & Krahmer, 2006), or by reinterpreting the problem of referring expression generation in
terms of description logic or conceptual graphs (Areces et
al., 2008; Croitoru & van Deemter, 2007). All of these approaches are computational in nature and until now the question of if, when, and how human speakers produce referring
expressions with negative attributes has not been addressed.
The behavioral data presented here can help inform computational approaches to referring expressions by, for example,

2440

making the generated expressions more natural (Viethen &
Dale, 2006; Dale & Viethen, 2010) or by providing inspiration for the further development of the algorithms. For example, the boolean extensions to the Incremental Algorithm
proposed by van Deemter (2002) assumes that negative properties are less preferred than their positive counterparts. Here,
we explicitly test this assumption with stimuli that do afford a
description with negative properties, but can also be uniquely
identified with other, more preferred properties.
While referring expression research is primarily concerned
with the production of referring expressions, there is an increasing need to assess how listeners process the descriptions that are generated by REG algorithms (Krahmer & van
Deemter, 2012). The most important criterion for a successful algorithm is whether the expressions generated mimic
those of humans. However, humans might not always be good
at taking the needs of their listeners into account (Horton &
Keysar, 1996) and the references produced by human speakers might not be the most optimal ones. Thus, if our production experiment shows that speakers do use negative properties in their descriptions, this does not necessary mean that
listeners will easily deal with such expressions. By combining a production experiment with a comprehension task, these
issues will be addressed.
Two separate experiments will investigate the production
and comprehension of referring expressions that contain an
negative property. In the production experiment, three research questions are addressed. The first is whether speakers will produce referring expressions with negative properties at all in situations that afford (but not necessitate) the use
of a negative property in a description. The second question
is whether the number of positive properties necessary for a
uniquely identifying description matters. It might be the case
that speakers are more likely to use a negative property when
the alternative means using a more complex description with,
for example, two positive properties. This finding would contrast with the expressions generated by the Incremental Algorithm, which has no backtracking ability to take the length of
the resulting referring expressions into account (Dale & Reiter, 1995; van Deemter, 2002). Finally, the phenomenon of
overspecification is addressed. Speakers often produce referential expressions that contain more information than strictly
necessary (for example, by referring to the marker with “the
yellow marker without a cap”). Speakers have been shown to
be more likely to produce overspecified references when they
use dispreferred properties such as orientation (Goudbeek &
Krahmer, 2012) and when they refer to target in more complex stimulus arrangements (Koolen et al., in press). Referring expressions with negative properties are arguably more
complex and less preferred, leading speakers to overspecify
descriptions that contain a negative property.
The comprehension experiment focuses on the processing
of negative properties and addresses the question whether
identifying objects that are described with negative properties
takes more time than identifying objects that are described

with positive properties.

Experiment 1: Producing referring expressions
with negative expressions
In Experiment 1 participants produced descriptions of everyday objects. They could either refer to these objects with one
or two positive properties (“the large marker” or “the large
yellow marker”) or with a negative property (“the marker
without a cap”)1 . Additionally, this experiment investigated
whether the number of properties necessary in the alternative
description influenced the referential choices of the speakers.

Method
Participants
Twenty undergraduate students (eleven females) from the participant pool of Tilburg University took part in exchange for
partial course credit. They were all native speakers of Dutch
and were between 18 and 25 years old.

Materials
In the production experiment, the stimuli consisted of 96 sets
of three objects. The target object was always presented in
the middle and was marked with a black rectangle. Of the
96 stimuli, 64 were target objects that needed one of more
properties for unique identification and and 32 were typeidentifiable objects. Crucially, of the target objects, 32 could
be described with a negative property such as “the marker
without a cap” and 32 could be described with a positive
property such as “the marker with a cap”. The objects that
had either positive or negative properties were a marker (with
or without a cap), a cup (with or without a handle), a basket
(with or without a lid) and a bottle (with or without a cap).
See figure 2 for an example of two stimuli.
In addition to these properties, the target objects could alternatively be described with properties such as color or size.
These are considered to be preferred properties in REG research (Dale & Reiter, 1995; Pechmann, 1989) and should
thus serve as viable alternatives. To investigate whether the
number of preferred properties necessary for identification
plays a role in determining whether speakers will use a negative property, there was a condition where one positive property would suffice (e.g., “the orange marker”, see figure 2a)
and a condition where two positive properties were necessary
(e.g., “the large orange marker, see figure 2b). In both conditions, one negative property (“the marker without a cap”)
would always suffice (see figure 2).
In addition, the experiment contained 32 type-identifiable
stimuli that could be described by using type only (e.g., “the
rabbit”, “the strawberry”), leading tot a total of 96 stimuli.

Procedure
Participants were seated in a sound-attenuated room and were
instructed to describe the object in such a way that a naive lis1 Here and elsewhere we give English versions of Dutch originals.

2441

(a) A target that can be referred to with one positive property (“the
orange marker”) or a negative property (“the marker without a cap”).

Figure 3: Proportion of descriptions with a negative property in conditions that afforded the use of negative properties
(left) and proportion of descriptions with the corresponding
positive property in conditions that afforded their use (right).

in the expressions it generates for these stimuli (since a preferred alternative is available). The results show that in almost
(b) A target that can only be referred to with two positive properties
(“the large yellow marker”) or a negative property (“the marker without half of the cases where the stimulus affords using a negative
property, our participants did so (M = .47, SD = 0.31, 95 %
a cap”).
CI = 0.33 - 0.62). A one sample t-test showed that this value
Figure 2: The target stimuli used in the production experidid indeed differ significantly from zero (t (20) = 6.76, p <
ment
.001, Cohen’s d = 1.52). To investigate the effect of the target
type (affording negative properties or not), we compared the
proportion of descriptions with negative properties for stimtener would be able to identity the target object from the other
uli that afforded the use of negative properties (M = .47, SD =
two. The target object was always presented in the middle,
0.31, 95 % CI = 0.33 - 0.62) with descriptions with the correand marked by a black square (see figure 2). Each stimusponding positive properties for stimuli that afforded the use
lus was presented for five seconds, during which the particof positive properties (M = .52, SD = 0.30, 95 % CI = 0.38 ipant’s description was recorded. After the presentation and
0.66). The boxplot in figure 3 shows a large amount of overrecording, a new set of objects immediately appears on the
lap, indicating little difference between using a negative or a
screen. Stimulus presentation and response recording took
positive version of a property. A logistic regression with tarplace on a PC and was controlled through the open-source
get type (positive versus negative) as outcome variable and
package Opensesame (Mathôt et al., 2012). The experiment
proportion of properties used as predictor confirmed the lack
lasted about ten minutes, after which participants were deof an effect of target type (β = 0.53, SE = 1.06, Wald = 0.25,
briefed and thanked for their cooperation.
p = .62, R2Nagelkerke = 0.01).
Next, we tested the hypothesis that speakers would be more
Results
inclined to use negative properties when the alternative description required two positive properties. Figure 4 shows
The descriptions of the participants were annotated with rethat speakers indeed produced more descriptions containing
spect to which property they used in their description (size,
negative properties when the alternative contains two positive
color, pattern, and whether their descriptions contained a negproperties (M = .57, SD = 0.34, 95 % CI = 0.41 - 0.72) comative property or not. We also annotated whether a description
pared to when the alternative contains one positive property
contained any redundant properties, to see whether the use
(M = .38, SD = 0.33, 95 % CI = 0.23 - 0.53). However, a
of negative properties might cause speakers to overspecify.
logistic regression analysis with number (one versus two) as
First, we investigated whether participants used the negative
predictor and the proportion of descriptions with a negative
property in their referring expressions at all in the condition
property as outcome variable only yielded a marginally sigthat afforded to do so (see the left side of figure 3).
nificant effect (β = 1.72, SE = 1.00, Wald = 2.98, p < .08,
While our prediction is that speakers would use the negaR2Nagelkerke = 0.10).
tive property in their descriptions, the algorithm proposed in
Finally, we investigated whether referring with a negative
van Deemter (2002) would never include negative properties

2442

Discussion
The results of this experiment show that speakers certainly do
not shy away from using negative properties in their referring
expressions. In almost half of the cases participants included
a negative property in their description when the stimulus
afforded to do so. Importantly, our participants were never
forced to use the negative property to identify the target referent: all objects could be uniquely identified by (a combination
of) color, size or pattern, or by their type alone. This provides
a psycholinguistic motivation for developing ways to generate referring expressions that contain negative attributes. Importantly, the boolean extensions of the Incremental Algorithm described in Areces et al. (2008), van Deemter & Krahmer (2006), and van Deemter (2002) do not fully do justice to
the patterns observed here. For instance, while van Deemter
(2002) assumes that negative properties are dispreferred, our
speakers produced them just as much as their positive counterparts, even when properties that are considered to be more
preferred (such as color and size) were at their disposal.
The comparison between alternatives that contained either
one or two positive properties showed, albeit marginally significant, that the more complex the alternative expression becomes, the more likely speakers are to use a negative property in their description. This is difficult to explain for REG
algorithms that depend on entering properties from a fixed
preference order and that do not take into account the length
or the complexity of the resulting referring expression. Interestingly, even though speakers often produce descriptions
with negative properties, our analysis also showed that the resulting referring expressions hardly ever contain only these
negative properties, but were often overspecified. This is in
line with findings from previous studies such as Goudbeek
& Krahmer (2012) and Koolen et al. (in press) that show
that speakers are more likely to overspecify when their references include less preferred properties or when visual scenes
get more complex. A possible explanation is that speakers
could take the processing limits of their listeners into account
(Arnold, 2008) and adjust the complexity of their utterances
to suit.

Figure 4: Proportion of referring expressions with a negative
property in conditions with alternatives that required one or
two positive properties for a uniquely identifying description.

Figure 5: Proportion of overspecification in referring expressions that contained a negative property versus referring expressions that did not contain a negative property.

property causes speakers to overspecify (with a positive property) more than referring with positive properties only. For
the subset of stimuli that afforded the use of negative properties, we calculated the proportions of overspecified references
(defined as any reference that contains an additional property that would have been sufficent to uniquely identify it)
for descriptions with negative and positive properties. Figure
5 clearly shows that when speakers use negative properties,
they are more likely to use additional properties (M = .78, SD
= 0.32, 95 % CI = 0.63 - 0.93) than when they do not use
negative properties (M = .123, SD = 0.16, 95 % CI = 0.05 0.20). A logistic regression analysis with referring expression
(negative versus positive) as predictor and the proportion of
overspecified descriptions as outcome variable showed a significant effect (β = 2.62, SE = 1.75, Wald = 13.35, p < .001,
R2Nagelkerke = 0.73).

Experiment 2: Understanding referring
expressions with negative properties
Experiment 2 investigated the comprehension of referential
expressions with negative properties.

Method
Participants
Twenty-eight undergraduate students (nineteen females) from
the participant pool of Tilburg University took part in exchange for partial course credit. They were all native speakers
of Dutch and were between 18 and 25 years old. None of the
participants took part in Experiment 1.

2443

Materials
For Experiment 2, the visual materials used in Experiment 1
were stripped from the black rectangle and were presented in
the upper left, middle and upper right corner of the screen (see
figure 6). They were complemented with a start box at the
bottom of the screen. In addition, we recorded instructions to
indicate the target object that contained five different ways
to refer to the target. These referential expressions either
used a positive property (“click on the marker with a cap”),
a negative property (“click on the marker without a cap”),
color or size (“click on the yellow marker”), color and size
(“click on the large yellow marker”), and type-identifiable
stimuli (“click on the strawberry”). All these descriptions
were minimally specifying in that they provided sufficient,
but not more, information to identify the target object. The
instructions were spoken with a neutral intonation by a female speaker of Dutch that was unaware of the goal of the
experiment. The position of the target was always either in
the left or right upper corner and was counterbalanced across
items. Since larger targets are easier to move towards and
click on (Fitts, 1954), the size of the objects was counterbalanced as well (e.g., sometimes the instruction was “click on
the small marker”).

Figure 6: The stimulus presentation in the comprehension experiment. The target in the left upper corner can be described
with “the marker without a cap” or “the large yellow marker”.
Table 1: Response times, standard deviations and confidence
intervals for the five different referring expressions in the
comprehension experiment
Type
Positive property
Negative property
Two properties
One property
Type identifiable

Procedure
Participants were seated in a sound-attenuated room and were
given headphones to listen to the prerecorded instructions.
They encountered the setup displayed in Figure 6 and could
start the spoken description by moving their mouse pointer
over the box labeled “START”, after which response recording started. The participants’ task was to click as quickly as
possible on the object that was being described by the prerecorded referring expression. We used the software package
MouseTracker (Freeman & Ambady, 2010) to present the images and speech stimuli and record the mouse movements and
clicks. The experiment lasted about 20 minutes. After the
experiment, the participants were debriefed and thanked for
their cooperation.

Results
Table 1 shows the response times of the participants for the
five different referring expressions. It should come as no
surprise that the participants responded fastest to the typeidentifiable items (”the strawberry”). Furthermore, the descriptions that used one were faster than those that used two
two preferred properties. These in turn have faster response
times than the conditions with either positive or negative
properties, that do not seem to differ much.
These effects were evaluated statistically with a one-way
within-subjects analysis of variance with type as a within
factor with five levels (positive, negative, one, two, typeidentifiable) and response time as dependent variable. This
analysis showed a significant effect of type (F[4,108] =
187.01, p < 0.001, η2 = 0.87). Planned contrast showed that
response times to type-identifiable objects (M = 1.6, SD =

RT (s)
2.39
2.31
1.91
1.72
1.60

SD (s)
0.26
0.28
0.26
0.24
0.18

95% CI
2.26 - 2.46
2.18 - 2.40
1.81 - 2.01
1.63 - 1.82
1.51 - 1.66

0.18) were faster than responses to descriptions with one preferred property (M = 1.72, SD = 0.26): F [1,27] = 38.46, p
< 0.001, r = .76, which in turn were faster than responses
to descriptions with two preferred properties (M = 1.72, SD
= 0.26); F [1,27] = 117.81, p < 0.001, r = .90. These were
faster than responses to descriptions with negative (M = 2.31
SD = 0.28) or positive properties (M = 2.39, SD = 0.26)); F
[1,27] = 634.2, p < 0.001, r = .98), which did not significantly differ from each other (F [1,27] = 2.25, p = 0.15, r =
.27).

Discussion
In Experiment 2 participants identified objects based on to
five types of referring expressions; these either contained a
negative property (“the marker without a cap”), its positive
counterpart (“the marker with a cap”), one preferred property
(“the yellow marker”), two preferred properties (“the large
yellow marker”) or no properties at all (type-identifiable stimuli such as “the strawberry”). The results showed that listeners’ response times closely follow the preferences of speakers. Our participants responded fastest to descriptions where
using the targets type was sufficient for unique identification.
They took (slightly) longer to respond to descriptions that
contained preferred properties such as color or size, and it

2444

took them significantly longer to identify targets that needed
two properties to be uniquely identified instead of one. Not
surprisingly, the response times were longest for the positive
and negative properties that were not as preferred as size or
color (having or lacking a cap, a lid, or a handle). Crucially,
selecting the appropriate target that was described with a referring expression that contained negative properties did not
take longer than selecting a target that was described with a
positive property. This is in line with the observation from
the production experiment, where speakers used the negative
description (“the marker without a cap”) as much as the the
positive description (“the marker with a cap”).
While we carefully controlled for the placement and size
of the targets and their properties, the length and complexity
of the descriptions was not the same for all descriptions. Descriptions that needed two properties contained more words
than descriptions that needed only one property. However,
the crucial comparison between descriptions with a positive
or negative property differed in only one syllable (“with” versus “without”2 ). In addition, we measured response times
from the start of the utterance, so our listeners could have
already identified the target before the end of the referring
expression, but see Arts (2004) for a discussion of measurements onsets in processing referential expressions. Although
these issues might be difficult to control (referential expressions containing a negative property are inherently more complex than those with only one property), we do plan to take
the length of the utterance into account in future work.

Conclusion
Taken together, the production and comprehension experiment provide experiential evidence for the use of negative
properties in referring expressions. Speakers easily produce
expressions such as “the marker without a cap” and listeners
are not particularly troubled by them. These findings contribute to our understanding of speech production and perception processes in general, and provide important data for
extending the scope of REG algorithms to descriptions containing negative attributes.

Acknowledgments
Many thanks to Carla van Gruijthuijsen for lending her voice
to the stimulus material and to Sandra Augustin for her assistance in conducting the experiments. We gracefully acknowledge the financial support we received from The Netherlands
Organization for Scientific Research (NWO, Vici grant 27770-007 awarded to Emiel Krahmer).

References
Areces, C., Koller, A., & Striegnitz, K. (2008). Referring expressions as formulas of description logic. In Proceedings
of the fifth international natural language generation con2 ”with” translates to the monosyllabic ”met” and ”without” to
the bi-syllabic ”zonder” in Dutch

ference (pp. 42–49). Stroudsburg, PA, USA: Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Arnold, J. (2008). Reference production: Production-internal
and addressee-oriented processes. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 23(4), 495–527.
Arts, A. (2004). Overspecification in instructive texts. Tilburg
University: Unpublished PhD thesis.
Croitoru, M., & van Deemter, K. (2007). A conceptual graph
approach to the generation of referring expressions. In Proceedings of the 20th international joint conference on artificial intelligence (ijcai) (p. 2456-2461).
Dale, R., & Reiter, E. (1995). Computational interpretations
of the gricean maxims in the generation of referring expressions. Cognitive Science, 19(2), 233-263.
Dale, R., & Viethen, J. (2010). Empirical methods in natural
language generation. In E. Krahmer & M. Theune (Eds.),
(pp. 163–179). Springer.
Fitts, P. M. (1954). The information capacity of the human
motor system in controlling the amplitude of movement.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 47, 381-391.
Freeman, J. B., & Ambady, N. (2010). Mousetracker: software for studying real-time mental processing using a computer mouse-tracking method. Behavioral Research Methods, 42(1), 226-241.
Goudbeek, M., & Krahmer, E. (2012). Alignment in interactive reference production: Content planning, modifier ordering and referential overspecification. Topics in Cognitive Science, 4, 269-289.
Horton, W. S., & Keysar, B. (1996). When do speakers take
into account common ground? Cognition, 59, 91–117.
Koolen, R., Goudbeek, M., & Krahmer, E. (in press). The
effect of scene variation on the redundant use of color in
definite reference. Cognitive Science.
Krahmer, E., & van Deemter, K. (2012, March). Computational generation of referring expressions: A survey. Computational Linguistics, 38(1), 173-218.
Mathôt, S., Schreij, D., & Theeuwes, J. (2012). Opensesame:
An open-source, graphical experiment builder for the social sciences. Behavioral Research Methods, 44, 314324.
Pechmann, T. (1989). Incremental speech production and
referential overspecification. Linguistics, 27, 89-110.
van Deemter, K. (2002). Generating referring expressions:
Boolean extensions of the incremental algorithm. Computational Linguistics, 28(1), 37-52.
van Deemter, K., & Krahmer, E. (2006). Graphs and
Booleans: On the generation of referring expressions. In
H. Bunt & R. Muskens (Eds.), Computing meaning (pp.
17–53). Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer.
Viethen, J., & Dale, R. (2006, July). Algorithms for generating referring expressions: Do they do what people do? In
Proceedings of the 4th international conference on natural
language generation (pp. 63–70). Sydney, Australia.

2445

