UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Thinking about norms: Epistemic, rational, and moral norms in human thinking

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9pf35081

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Proust, Joelle
Pothos, Emmanuel M.
Busemeyer, Jerome R.
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Thinking about norms: Epistemic, rational, and moral norms in human thinking
Joëlle Proust (jproust@ehess.fr)
Institut Jean-Nicod (EHESS-ENS), UMR CNRS 8129, Ecole Normale Supérieure, Paris, France

Emmanuel M. Pothos1 (e.m.pothos@gmail.com) and Jerome R. Busemeyer2 (jbusemey@indiana.edu)
1

2

Department of Psychology, Swansea University, UK
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Indiana University, Bloomington, IN, USA.

Ryan Miller (ryan_m_miller@brown.edu) and Fiery Cushman (fiery_cushman@brown.edu)
Dept. of Cognitive, Linguistic and Psychological Sciences, Brown University, Providence, USA

Katinka J.P. Quintelier (katinka.quintelier@gmail.com)
Amsterdam Business School, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands

1

Shira Elqayam (selqayam@dmu.ac.uk)1, Valerie A. Thompson (vat128@campus.usask.ca)2, Jonathan
St.B.T. Evans (jevans@plymouth.ac.uk)3, David E. Over (david.over@durham.ac.uk)4; and Meredith R.
Wilkinson (mwilkinson@dmu.ac.uk)1

School of Applied Social Sciences, De Montfort University, UK; 2Department of Psychology, University of Saskatchewan,
Canada; 3School of Psychology, University of Plymouth, UK; 4Department of Psychology, Durham University, UK

Discussant: Shulamith Kreitler (krit@netvision.net.il)
School of Psychological Sciences, Tel-Aviv University, Israel

Organiser: Shira Elqayam
Keywords: action; epistemic norms; is-ought problem; moral
norms; normative inference; rational norms

Thinking about norms
Humans are uniquely good at inventing norms, thinking
about norms, complying with norms and defeating norms. It
is small wonder, then, that norms are a focus of much
interest as well as debate across the cognitive sciences,
encompassing such diverse issues as rationality, morality
and action. The aim of the present symposium is to bring
together a range of psychological and philosophical
contributions to this pertinent debate. Contributors come
from diverse backgrounds, including epistemology, metaethics, moral judgment, decision making, and reasoning. We
will examine foundational issues in normative thinking,
such as: What is the relation between norms and
descriptions? What are the psychological mechanisms
underlying normative thinking? How do epistemic and
moral norms guide action? What, if any, are the appropriate
norms for knowledge, rationality, and moral behaviour, and
how can they be determined?

Proust: The norms of acceptance
An area in the theory of action that has received little
attention is how mental agency and world-directed agency
interact. The purpose of the present contribution is to clarify
the rational conditions of such interaction, through an
analysis of the central case of acceptance. There are several
problems with the literature about acceptance. First, it
remains unclear how a context of acceptance is to be
construed. Second, the possibility of conjoining, in
acceptance, an epistemic component, which is essentially
mind-to-world, and a utility component, which requires a

world-to-mind direction of fit, is merely posited rather than
derived from the rational structure of acceptance. Finally,
the norm of acceptances is generally seen as related to truth,
which turns out to be inapplicable in a number of cases.
We will argue, first, that the specific context-dependence
of acceptances is derived from their being mental actions,
each embedded in a complex hierarchy of acceptances
composing, together, a planning sequence. Second, that
acceptances come in several varieties, corresponding to the
specific epistemic norm(s) that constitute them. The
selection of a particular norm for accepting answers to
considerations of utility – to the association of an epistemic
goal with an encompassing world-directed action. Once a
type of acceptance is selected, however, the epistemic norm
constitutive for that acceptance strictly applies. Third, we
argue that context-dependence superimposes a decision
criterion on the output of the initial epistemic acceptance.
Strategic acceptance is regulated by instrumental norms of
expected utility, which may rationally lead an agent to
screen off her initial epistemic acceptance.

Pothos & Busemeyer: Implications for the
rationality debate from the quantum cognition
research programme
Bayesian theory has enabled an influential perspective on
human rationality, partly based on such arguments as long
term convergence and the Dutch book theorem. Moreover,
behavioral predictions in decision making from Bayesian
theory are typically supported by strong intuition. Yet, this
intuition often goes against empirical findings. For example,
Kahneman, Shafir, Tversky and collaborators have provided
many compelling demonstrations of violations of the law of
total probability or the conjunction principle. Recently,

101

researchers have shown that many of these violations can be
naturally accounted for within quantum probability theory, a
framework for formal probabilistic modeling alternative to
Bayesian theory. If one accepts that quantum theory
provides a more accurate framework for modeling human
behavior, at least in some cases, then what are the
implications regarding (or not) the debate on human
rationality? After all, probabilistic inference in quantum
theory can be strongly context and perspective dependent,
perhaps going against an intuition that probabilistic
inference is rational to the extent that it is objective (in some
sense). Equally, we note that probabilistic inference in
Bayesian models presupposes adherence to the, perhaps
cognitively unrealistic, principle of unicity, the requirement
that there is a complete joint probability distribution for all
relevant possibilities. Consideration of the above issues
provides us with two broad themes. First, is the Bayesian
notion of normative rationality cognitively feasible, even if
appropriate from an abstract perspective? Second, can a
perspective about normative rationality arise from quantum
cognitive models?

empirical findings to be relevant for ethics, we need an
account of how ‘is’ and ‘ought’ can be properly linked.
I illustrate this by means of the moral universalism versus
relativism debate: Scholars have advocated that we should
think of moral rules as universal because, among other
reasons, lay people intuitively think of morality as universal.
Recent studies however show a diversity of moral
reasoning, including relativist moral reasoning, in the folk.
Nevertheless, it is now debated how these data are relevant
for ethics because, arguably, ‘is’ and ‘ought’ should be kept
separated. In the moral universalism versus relativism
debate though, illegitimate inferences from ‘is’ to ‘ought’
are not the problem. While it is true that previous arguments
in favor of moral universalism relied on a specific relation
between ‘is’ and ‘ought’, this relation is refuted by presentday scholars. However, no alternative is put in place.
Moreover, at the same time, the rationale for doing
empirical research on this topic is to further a normative
debate. Thus, either existing empirical research is irrelevant,
or researchers have to defend a link between ‘is’ and
‘ought’.

Miller & Cushman: Action, outcome and value

Elqayam, Thompson, Evans, Over, &
Wilkinson: When do we infer ought from is?

How can we characterize the underlying cognitive
mechanisms that give rise to moral judgment? A popular
approach has been to contrast "emotion" with
"cognition", but this is widely regarded as a problematic
distinction--even by its chief proponents. We advocate
for an alternative approach motivated by the distinction
between model-based and model-free reinforcement
learning. A model-based system chooses actions with the
greatest expected value based on a detailed causal model
of their likely outcomes. A model-free system associates
positive or negative feelings with particular actions
intrinsically. We will present a series of studies
suggesting that this distinction between outcome-based
and action-based decision-making matches the dualsystem structure of moral judgment, with many benefits
over the traditional distinction of emotion vs. reason.
Dual system approaches in the moral domain have been
used widely, although controversially, to distinguish
normatively warranted and unwarranted moral
judgments. The application of reinforcement learning
theories to the moral domain has the potential to inform
debates over the normative status of moral judgments. It
allows us to state precisely the relationship between
value, experience and choice. Leveraging this formal
precision, we join others in arguing that psychological
facts have implications for the normative status of moral
judgments.

Quintelier: The real is-ought problem in ethics
Numerous scholars have pointed out that ‘is’ and ‘ought’
should be kept separated. While valuable, this pursuit
distracts from an equally important issue: In order for

The debate on norms in cognitive science goes back at least
as far as Hume’s critique of what has come to be known as
the is-ought problem: when, if ever, is it valid to infer
normative conclusions from descriptive premises? Whereas
philosophers are interested in the validity of such inference,
we ask about the psychological mechanisms underlying it.

We present a new processing model of inference from
‘is’ to ‘ought’. The relevant logic is deontic, the logic of
rules and regulations. We propose that such inference is
pragmatic, in the sense that it is socially rich,
contextualised, probabilistic, and defeasible. Agents infer
deontic, normative conclusions from descriptive premises
under a set of conditions: (1) an agent; (2) a goal, or a
valued outcome (3) an action causally linked to the goal.
We present a set of findings to show that the direction of
the deontic conclusion that people endorse matches the
psychological value of the goal; that the strength of the
conclusion is a function of the strength of the causal link
between action and outcome; and that the inference is
suppressed when additional premises present conflicting
goals, triggering a utilitarian conflict; or conflicting
norms, triggering a deontological conflict. We suggest
that this normative inference underlies much of human
epistemological and moral judgement and action.

Acknowledgments (Elqayam et al.)
The research reported in this talk is supported by a research
project grant from the Leverhulme Trust (RPG-2012-573).

References
Hume, D. (2000). A treatise on human nature (Original
publication date 1739-1740). Oxford: Clarendon Press.

102

