UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
'This is a wall' – Assigning Function to Objects

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7z59z7dm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Gralla, Linn
Tenbrink, Thora

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

‘This is a wall’ – Assigning Function to Objects
Linn Gralla (gralla@uni-bremen.de)
Department of Linguistics and Literary Studies
Bremen University, Germany

Thora Tenbrink (t.tenbrink@bangor.ac.uk)
School of Linguistics and English Language
Bangor University, UK

Abstract

Our scenario concerns the construction of a dollhouse
from wooden parts that bear little resemblance to their
function within the dollhouse. A board, for instance, needs
to be recognised as a 'wall' before it can be placed correctly
to serve its function. We investigate the linguistic
representation of function assignment in two set-ups: thinkaloud protocols collected while assembling the dollhouse,
and verbal instructions to another person assembling the
dollhouse. In particular, we analyze the referential terms
that are used in reference to both of the domains involved
(wooden objects with particular structural features and
functional parts within the dollhouse), as well as the
linguistic means by which the domains are linked. In the
next section we will take a closer look at relevant previous
findings on linguistic domain mapping.

Construction tasks involve numerous demanding sub-tasks
such as creating a mental model of the goal object and
integrating the object parts into this model. For this purpose
object parts need to be assigned a function within the overall
structure. In this paper we examine the linguistic representation of this process. Participants were given 16 object parts
to assemble without a manual, and were asked to think aloud
while doing so. Depending on condition they were not given
any specific information, or told that the goal object was a
dollhouse, or shown a picture of the dollhouse. In a second
study, participants were asked to instruct a partner to
assemble the dollhouse. Results of our linguistic analysis of
think-aloud data and instructions reveal three strategies of
assigning function to objects, one of which occurred exclusively in instructions. With less specific information about the
goal object, functions were more often assigned explicitly. In
these cases function tended to relate to the overall structure
(e.g. ‘house’) rather than to structural parts (e.g. ‘wall’).

Mapping between conceptual domains

Keywords: verbal reports, cognitive discourse analysis,
function assignment, conceptual domains

Use of functional terminology in construction tasks
Malt et al. (1999) propose that the categorization of objects
involves two levels: knowing an object vs. naming it. Object
perception leads to a representation in terms of a recognition
category, along with similar objects. The communication of
objects, however, involves a representation in terms of
linguistic categories, using conventional or new labels.
So far object categorization within construction tasks has
only been studied in settings involving a real or an imagined
addressee. Rieser (1996;1997), for example, studied object
references in a dialogue scenario where assembler and
instructor did not share the same workspace while
constructing a toy airplane. As a result, they could share
conceptualizations by spoken interaction only. Rieser
examined the instructors' strategies of reference to facilitate
identification of object parts, and found that they frequently
described them in terms of their function in the
conceptualized target object (i.e., the toy airplane; e.g., 'this
is a horizontal stabilizer', Rieser, 1997:181). He called this
phenomenon representational metonymy. The effect may be
seen as a kind of reconceptualization and is based on world
knowledge and the specific context. Apart from
representational metonymy, the physical object itself could
also be referred to in descriptive terms, based on the object’s
structural appearance along with conventional terms for
them (e.g. ‘Fünfträger’ refers to a bar with five holes).

Introduction
Adults who observe children play are often amazed by their
imagination. In their play a plastic cup becomes a boat that
sails on the stormy sea. The existence of the boat in the
children's mind can be seen as the result of a conceptual
mapping process. The child performs a mapping between
the domain of plastic objects (cup) and vehicles (boat).
Mapping phenomena between different conceptual domains
have been widely studied in research on metaphorical
transfer (Lakoff & Johnson, 1980; Croft, 1993) and
analogical problem solving (Gentner, 1983). Here we
address how speakers use language to assign an object's
function in relation to a target domain, in a situation where
this function is not self-evident and needs to be identified.
This kind of conceptual domain shifting is essential for
everyday reasoning. It is required whenever the 'meaning' of
an object or depiction needs to be determined that represents
something else, for example a symbol on a map that stands
for an environmental feature. Our study sheds light on this
kind of conceptual mapping by a closer look at the language
used to represent it, providing both qualitative (how do
speakers say this?) and quantitative (how often do they say it
under different circumstances?) insights.

513

Studies of conceptual layers in construction tasks have
focused on the frequency (e.g. von Stutterheim et al., 1993)
or interactional purpose of usage of goal structure specific
terminology (Rieser, 1997). For a task of instructing a
generic addressee on assembling a TV stand, Daniel and
Tversky (2012) report that lay instructors started their
instruction by giving a list of objects. Although they did not
analyze object reference directly, one of their examples
shows that functional assignment took place at least once.
Although various authors have thus reported sporadic
examples of function assignment, the phenomenon has not
been studied systematically so far, and it is unclear to what
extent it relates to the need to communicate. However, this
kind of conceptual domain mapping is central to the
ubiquitous process of recognizing what things are for. In
this paper we investigate the linguistic representation of
function assignment in two assembly scenarios, and we
discuss the cognitive implications that are implied by
different options. The next subsection gives some
indications of possible linguistic forms.

in various conditions (explained below). For the purposes of
this paper we inspected this corpus to identify the ways in
which participants spontaneously used language to assign
function to objects. Based on Malt et al.’s (1999) distinction
between perceiving and communicating about objects, we
expected systematic differences to emerge between the two
distinct discourse tasks (thinking aloud vs. instructing a
partner). Furthermore, the linguistic representation of
function assignment should also be affected by the amount
of prior knowledge available about the goal object.
In order to systematize our insights on linguistic forms,
we define a mapping phrase as consisting of the reference to
a physically present object x that is assigned the functional
term y by a relational term. Preliminary findings (reported
in Tenbrink & Gralla, 2009) and the examples seen in
Rieser (1996; 1997) suggest that these relational terms can
vary with respect to the amount of certainty expressed.
Relational verbs, as in “this is a wall”, for instance, signal
that the speaker is absolutely certain about the assignment,
since the relation is expressed as a plain fact. The modal
verb ‘müssen’ (must) implies a lesser but still high amount
of certainty, as in “this must be a wall”, whereas ‘können’
(can) reflects uncertainty, and ‘sollen’ (should) encodes a
medium level (Halliday, 1985). In other cases the relational
term expresses a comparison (look like, use as). This
strategy implies that the speaker decides that x represents y
because x and y share some features. This assignment is
tentative because x may also be something else.
Interestingly, Tenbrink and Seifert (2011) also identified
different kinds of modal verbs as markers of domain
mapping for their tour planning scenario, in which certainty
did not play any role as the planning process was entirely in
the participants' hands. However, modal verbs also carry
different connotations, which might play a role in this
context. Whereas ‘wollen’ (want) expresses the subject’s
intention ‘können’ (can) expresses the possibility given that
the subject is granted the permission (Engel, 2002), and
‘sollen’ (have to) signals an obligation. In our study, we
aimed to shed further light on the repertory of linguistic
forms used to express conceptual mapping, along with their
distribution across the different conditions in the corpus.
Regarding the influence of prior knowledge, we expected
that participants who were provided with unspecific
information about the goal object should signal more
uncertainty in their assignment of function than participants
provided with a picture of the goal object. Participants asked
to instruct another person (rather than think aloud while
constructing the dollhouse themselves) should introduce the
given objects and assign their function explicitly in mapping
phrases (cf. Rieser, 1996; 1997; Daniel & Tversky (2012).

Linguistic representation of assignment of function
in verbal reports
Rieser (1996; 1997) did not aim to analyze the linguistic
features of representational metonymy, but the examples in
these papers provide a good impression of how conceptual
mapping is represented in assembly dialogues. Participants
used phrases such as “das ist das Leitwerk” (this is a
horizontal stabilizer) (1997:181), “diese zwei Schienen als
Propeller” (those two tracks as propeller) (1997:191), and
“dieses Baufix, diese Baufixschraube” (this Baufix, this
Baufix screw) (1996:13).
Similar linguistic forms were found by Tenbrink and
Seifert (2011) for conceptual mapping processes in a spatial
problem-solving task. They analyzed written reports of
participants planning holiday tours based on a map. This
scenario involves two conceptual domains: that of the
physically present road map, and that of the real world
environment represented by the map. In their analysis of
conceptual mapping processes, Tenbrink & Seifert focused
on the distribution and nature of nouns, verbs, adjectives/
adverbs, and temporal markers as indicators of either
domain. If indicators for both domains were used within a
single sentence, this sentence typically also contained
indicators for conceptual mapping between them, such as
the modal verbs could and should (e.g., ‘I looked for a route
that could be traveled’). Further indicators were final
discourse markers (i.e. ‘in order to’) and the particle ‘als’
(as), which signaled “mapping from plan to purpose”
(Tenbrink & Seifert, 2011:116).

Methods

Dollhouse assembly: Empirical studies

In the first of the studies carried out by Gralla (in prep.),
think-aloud protocols were recorded while participants
assembled a two-story dollhouse for themselves. 50
university students (22 male, 28 female; aged 19-42 years,
mean age 24 years) participated for course credit or mone-

Research goals
Gralla (in prep.) collected an explorative corpus of
unconstrained language production data related to the
assembly of a dollhouse from a set of wooden object parts

514

tary compensation. They were told that they would be given
object parts to be assembled without a manual. Knowledge
of the goal state varied between mention of "a dollhouse"
(verbal goal condition), being shown a picture of the
assembled dollhouse for 30 seconds (verbal and visual goal
condition), and no such information (underspecified goal
condition). Following the instruction, participants entered a
room and saw a cardboard box, two wooden boards, and a
triangular piece of wood on a table. The box contained 13
wooden parts (see picture 1 for an example of one object).
Participants were instructed and reminded to think aloud
while solving the task. There were no time constraints.

Example 2 (which refers to the roof of the dollhouse)
illustrates representational mapping with the verb phrase
‘aussehen wie’ (look like) as the relational term, and the
nominal reference red building part for the object x that is
assigned the functional term roof.
(2)
… das rote Baustück nen bisschen wie n Dach
eines Hauses aussieht (… this red building part looks a
bid like a roof of a house.)
The qualitative analysis and annotation of categories then
led to the identification of quantitative frequencies in the
various conditions.

Picture 1: One wooden assembly piece

Results
131 mapping phrases were identified in the think-aloud
protocols. The highest frequency (54 cases produced by 14
participants) was observed in the underspecified goal
condition, as opposed to 44 cases produced by 14
participants in the verbal goal condition, and 33 cases
produced by 11 participants in the verbal and visual goal
condition. 23 cases of function assignment could be
identified in 12 of the 16 instructions.

In the second study, verbal instructions on the assembly
of the same two-story dollhouse were recorded. 16 students
(9 male, 7 female; aged 20-28 years, mean age 23 years)
who did not participate in the previous experiment were first
instructed to assemble the dollhouse for themselves. They
were given the same information as in the verbal and visual
goal condition but without the task to think aloud. After
successful completion of the task the participants were
introduced to another student (a confederate). They were
asked to instruct this person to assemble the dollhouse,
using a Skype-based one-way video connection that did not
allow for any responses by the assembler.

Figure 1: Distribution of mapping strategies
(mean raw frequency with error bars +/- 2SE)

Analysis methods
Our data set contained 50 think-aloud protocols that were
equally distributed between conditions (17 underspecified
goal, 16 verbal goal, 17 verbal and visual goal), and 16
instructions. First, mapping phrases were identified in a
qualitative analysis. They contained one object reference
(either deictic or nominal, e.g. this thing) and a domain
specific functional term, e.g. wall. Nouns belonging to the
semantic field of the goal domain ‘house’ were classified as
domain specific. Second, all phrases were classified either
as direct mapping (use of relational verbs) or as representational mapping (use of comparison). Third, all verbs were
annotated with regard to verb kind and type. Furthermore,
the referential terms for the object (either deictic or
nominal) as well as the functional term were annotated.
Example 1 (which refers to the object in picture 1)
represents direct mapping with the verb ‘sein’ (be) as the
relational term, and a deictic reference (this) for the object x
that is assigned the functional term (y) wall.

Assignment of function in assembly
Direct mapping (108 cases) was more frequent than
representational mapping (22 cases). The frequency of
mapping strategies did not differ significantly between
conditions (see Figure 1), χ2 (4, N = 131) = 7.12, p = .130.
With respect to the linguistic representation of both
mapping strategies, the verb ‘be’ was most frequent
(91.51%) in direct mapping. In representational mapping
‘look like’ (59.09%) was used along with ‘use as’ (22.73%).
29 modal verbs were identified in 18 protocols. They
were almost equally distributed between conditions (11 in
the underspecified goal condition: M = 0.59, SD = 0.23; 8 in
verbal goal: M = 0.50, SD = 0.13; and 10 in verbal and
visual goal: M = 0.58, SD = 0.23). Almost all (27) modal
verbs occurred in direct mapping phrases. Three modal

(1) so das ist dann so ne Wand (so this is some wall then)

515

verbs were used, namely could, must, and should. These
were distributed between conditions as follows (figure 2).
Participants in the underspecified goal condition used all
three modal verbs, with could (M = 0.83, SD = 0.31) and
should (M = 0.67, SD = 0.21) being more frequent than
must (M = 0.33, SD = 0.21). Participants in the verbal goal
condition showed a preference for could (M = 1.00, SD =
0.26) whereas participants in the verbal and visual goal
condition used must most frequently (M = 0.83, SD = 0.31).
However, the observed differences between conditions did
not reach statistical significance, Lχ2 (4, N = 29) = 8.51, p =
.075, probably due to the low numbers and varied individual
production of linguistic choices in our setting.

representational mapping and reframing (M = 0.31, SD =
0.12) were also frequently used. The influence of discourse
type on mapping strategies is significant, χ2 (3, N = 141) =
8.37, p = .039. Representational mapping was used more
frequently in instructions (0.44 (SD = 0.18)) than in think
aloud protocols (0.40 (SD = 0.77), z = 2.0, p <.05).

Object reference and functional terminology in
mapping phrases
A significant difference emerged between the two different
discourse types (think-aloud vs. instruction) with respect to
the referential term used for the object, Lχ2 (6, N = 154) =
57.73, p = .000. Participants who were thinking aloud while
assembling the dollhouse mostly used deixis (e.g., this, that)
rather than nominal references. Instructors, on the other
hand, used nominal object references (0.94 (SD = 0.85))
more frequently than assemblers (0.06 (SD = 0.24), z = 7.5,
p <.001), and they used deictic references (0.50 (SD =
0.63)) less frequently than assemblers (2.42 (SD = 2.54), z =
-2.6, p <.01).
Five nouns or their synonyms were used most frequently
to express function in the dollhouse: floor, roof, wall, story,
and house. This list represents two perspectives. Some of
these terms (floor, roof, and wall) highlight individual
pieces of the dollhouse and are therefore part-based, while
the others refer to the whole structure (house) or larger
portions of it (story), which may consist of several
individual pieces and are therefore structure-based, e.g. “aah
das könnten auch Stockwerke sein” (aah this could also be
stories). Conditions differed with respect to the distribution
of these two perspectives (see figure 3). While participants
in the underspecified goal condition used structure-based
terminology (M = 1.65, SD = 0.57) frequently, participants
in all other conditions (including instruction) referred to
individual parts significantly more often, χ2 (6, N = 154) =
13.44, p = .037.

Figure 2: Distribution of modal verb type in mapping
processes within conditions (mean raw frequency with error
bars +/- 2 SE)

Assignment of function in instructions
Besides identifying instances of direct and representational
mapping, our qualitative data analysis revealed a further
(unexpected) strategy of function assignment in instruction
texts. Instructors used a more implicit way of assigning
function, illustrated in example 3:

Figure 3: Functional terminology assigned to objects in
mapping phrases – categorized according to perspectives
(mean raw frequency with error bars +/- 2 SE)

(3) „jeweils mit einem kurzen Stück einem ähm einem
Wandelement …“ (each with a small piece a um a wall
element)
In this example the object (a small piece) is assigned its
function (wall element) by simply renaming it after a
hesitation phase. Since there is no relational term connecting
object reference and functional term, no conclusions can be
drawn about the level of certainty reflected in this strategy.
This type is called reframing because the speaker changes
the frame of conceptualization from unspecific to specific.
The distribution of mapping strategies shows that instructors
used direct mapping most frequently (M = 0.63, SD = 0.20).
A closer look at the linguistic structure of direct mapping
reveals that the verb ‘be’ was used in all cases; instructors
never used modal verbs to assign function. Furthermore,

516

Discussion

be seen as an explicit strategy of emphasizing that function
is assigned to an object. The instructors may have
considered their addressee's situation, who could only see
the wooden objects rather than their function. Explicitly
highlighting the mapping process may therefore be felt as a
useful supportive strategy.
The most interesting case, in our view, is the third
strategy, which was found only in instructions: introducing
the functional term after a marker of hesitation (reframing)
rather than a relational term. Although this construction may
seem accidental due to the hesitation marker, which is by its
nature exclusive to spoken language, it was used by as many
as 5 out of 12 participants. Arguably, Rieser's (1996:13)
example cited above (this Baufix, this Baufix screw) is
similarly structured, although no hesitation marker is
reported.
What might lead speakers to use this function assignment
strategy in instructions? In effect, the previous reference is
elaborated by the first. In interactive scenarios, such an
elaboration would happen frequently in response to a
request for clarification, as described in the literature related
to the referential communication paradigm (e.g. Clark &
Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986; Horton & Gerrig, 2002). However, this
cannot explain our observations, since our scenario did not
allow any interaction between instructor and assembler.
Instead, speakers apparently spontaneously felt the need to
be more specific with regard to the function of the object
that had just been referred to. Conceivably, the function of
this particular object was so prominent in their minds that
they directly reframed the sentence. Again, they started
from their addressee's perception, leading over to the
function of the wooden object. This suggests that the
strategy is specific to the communicative goal of shared
attention and object identification.
The analysis of the referential form for the physically
present object provides further evidence that our participants
in the instruction scenario took an addressee-centered
perspective. Participants who were thinking aloud while
assembling the dollhouse used deictic references more
frequently than instructors, who tended to use nominal
references instead. These findings highlight the influence of
communicative intention on referential form and thereby
support the assumption that think-aloud data reflects the
speaker’s thoughts that are not tailored for an addressee
(Ericsson & Simon, 1984).
A clear effect of prior knowledge emerged with respect to
the perspective expressed by the functional term assigned to
an object. Participants who had to construct the goal object
from scratch, i.e. without prior knowledge, frequently
assigned function by reference to the whole structure of the
goal object, or larger portions of it, as in house or story.
Participants who knew about the goal structure, on the other
hand, assigned function mostly to object parts (e.g. ‘wall’).
This difference suggests that participants who had
associations about typical parts of the goal object assigned
these functions to the given objects. Participants who
needed to construct a mental model of the goal object, on

Our studies addressed the linguistic representation of
function assignment in an unaided object assembly task. We
presented a qualitative analysis of the different components
of functional mapping phrases, i.e. relational term, object
reference,
and
assigned
functional
terminology.
Furthermore, we examined the relative frequencies of
occurrence in different conditions, highlighting the
influence of prior knowledge as well as differences between
think-aloud protocols and instructions. The most striking
differences were found with regard to the latter, revealing
the influence of the speaker’s communicative intention on
the linguistic representation of function assignment. With
respect to the former, lack of information appeared to lead
to a more structure-based (rather than part-based)
perspective, as expressed by the nouns used to refer to
objects.
In our qualitative analysis, we identified three strategies
of function assignment that reveal various levels of
certainty. In the direct mapping strategy, the relational terms
directly connect an object to a functional purpose, typically
using the verb ‘be’, which signals a high level of certainty.
Modal verbs (such as must, could) were used to modify the
level of certainty by weakening it. In the representational
mapping strategy, the relational terms look like, use as, etc.
signal that the object is assigned to a goal-object based
concept that serves a particular function. Since the relation
signals representation rather than ‘being’, participants signal
the tentative character of their assignment by choosing this
strategy. In the reframing strategy, which in our study only
occurred in instructions, the relational term is replaced by a
hesitation marker between the reference to the object and
the assigned functional term.
On the whole, participants giving instructions used
mapping phrases only rarely. This can be interpreted in two
ways. First, it may mean that they focused on the step-bystep procedure of the assembly, rather than attending to the
goal structure as such. This explanation is supported by the
finding that instructors used part-based terminology more
frequently than structure-based references when assigning
function. Furthermore, Daniel and Tversky (2012) found
that instructors omitted explicit information on object parts
and sequential order, but not on sequences of actions, when
time was constrained. Second, our instructors may have
believed that functional terms would not facilitate object
identification, but rather result in additional cognitive load
for their addressee (cf. von Stutterheim et al. 1993) because
the wooden objects did not resemble their function in the
goal structure in any obvious way.
Whenever instructors used mapping phrases, this
happened with certainty, as reflected in the linguistic form
chosen. This result straightforwardly reflects the fact that
participants were already familiar with the dollhouse
assembly task when they gave the instructions, and therefore
did not need to assign objects to function in a tentative way.
However, instructors used representational mapping more
often than participants in the assembly study did. This may

517

the other hand, additionally seemed to assign function to the
object arrangement as a whole, either to construct the model
or to confirm their hypotheses about the goal object. This
suggests that instances of function assignment are traces of
the mental process of conceptualization of objects within the
mental model of the goal object.
The consistency of using direct mapping strategies across
conditions in the unaided assembly study showed that
participants assigned function with a high amount of
certainty in most cases, independent of the amount of prior
knowledge. Some differences were observed at the level of
certainty expressed by the use of modal verbs. Surprisingly,
less knowledge about the goal objects appeared to result in
higher certainty as expressed in mapping phrases.
Specifically, participants who were provided with no
specific prior knowledge or only a verbal clue tended to use
mapping phrases frequently, with a preference for direct
mapping using the relational term be without modification
by modal verbs that signal uncertainty. This may suggest
that participants who were shown the picture of the goal
object may feel somewhat constrained by their expectation
to match the given objects to their memory of the picture. If
the provided objects do not match this memory, the
matching process may be felt as less certain than in a more
flexible situation where the only information given (if any)
is the nature of the goal object. The verbal clue would then
result in useful associations that are not too specific to
constrain the participants' flexibility in assigning function to
the wooden object parts.
In this paper we reported findings on explicit function
assignment only (i.e., verbalizations directly assigning
function to object parts). For this set of results, significant
differences could be found only in the comparison of thinkaloud vs. instruction studies, but not between the three
think-aloud assembly conditions. Gralla (in prep.) further
considered indirect function assignment by investigating all
domain-specific nominal references in the think-aloud
protocols. With this larger data set, a clear influence of prior
knowledge could be observed. Participants who were told
about the nature of the goal object used domain specific
nouns more frequently than participants in the other
conditions did (Gralla, in prep.).

Forschungsgemeinschaft DFG), I6-[NavTalk] is gratefully
acknowledged.

References
Clark, H.H. & Wilkes-Gibbs, D. (1986). Referring as a
collaborative process. Cognition, 22,1-39.
Croft, W. (1993). The role of domains in the interpretation
of metaphors and metonymies. Cognitive Linguistics
4(4):335-370.
Daniel, J-P. & Tversky, B. (2012). How to put things
together. Cognitive Processing, 13, 303-319.
Engel, U. (2002). Kurze Grammatik der deutschen Sprache.
München: Iudicium.
Ericsson, K.A. & Simon, H.A. (1984). Protocol Analysis.
Verbal Reports as Data. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-Mapping: A Theoretical
Framework for Analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Gralla, L. (in prep.). Linguistic representation of problem
solving processes in unaided object assembly –
Application of Cognitive Discourse Analysis. Unfinished
doctoral dissertation, Department of Linguistics and
Literary Studies, Bremen University.
Halliday, M.A.K. (1985). An Introduction to Functional
Grammar. London: Edward Arnold.
Horton, W.S. & Gerrig, R.J. (2002). Speakers’ experience
and audience design: knowing when and knowing how to
adjust utterances to the addressee. Journal of Memory and
Language, 47,589-606.
Lakoff, G. & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Malt, B., Sloman, S.A., Gennari, S., Shi, M., & Wang, Y.
(1999). Knowing versus Naming: Similarity and the
Linguistic Categorization of Artifacts. Journal of Memory
and Language, 40, 230-262.
Rieser, H. (1996). Repräsentations-Metonymie, Perspektive
und Koordination in aufgabenorientierten Dialogen.
Projektreport SFB 360 Situierte Künstliche Kommunikation, Universität Bielefeld.
Rieser, H. (1997). Repräsentations-Metonymie, Perspektive
und Koordination in aufgabenorientierten Dialogen. In C.
Umbach, M. Garski, & R. Hörnig (Eds.), Perspektive in
Sprache und Raum. Aspekte von Repräsentation und
Perspektivität. Wiesbaden: DUV.
Tenbrink, T., & Seifert, I. (2011). Conceptual layers and
strategies in tour planning. Cognitive Processing, 12, 109125.
von Stutterheim, C., Mangold-Allwinn, R., Baratelli, S.,
Kohlmann, U., & Kölbing, H-G., (1993). Reference to
objects in text production. In J. Nuyts & E. Pederson
(Eds.), Perspectives on language and conceptualization.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.

Conclusion
Our study addressed for the first time how speakers assign
function to objects during an explorative unaided object
assembly task and in instructions. Results show influences
of the situational context on the ways in which this domain
mapping is made explicit, on certainty expressed in
language, and on the functional term chosen for reference.
Those findings encourage more controlled studies to further
explore the effects of problem solving conditions on
mapping processes of this kind.

Acknowledgments
Funding by the Zentrale Forschungsförderung Universität
Bremen and the SFB TR8 Spatial Cognition (Deutsche

518

