UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Time and Causality: Mutual Constraints; Insights from Event and Time Perception, Motor
Control, and Gaming

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4vz034ck

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Buehner, Marc
Lagnado, David
Bechlivanidis, Christos
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Time and Causality: Mutual Constraints
Insights from Event and Time Perception, Motor Control, and Gaming
Marc J Buehner (BuehnerM@Cardiff.ac.uk) (Organizer/Moderator)
Cardiff University, School of Psychology, Tower Building, Park Place
Cardiff, CF10 3AT UK

David A Lagnado & Christos Bechlivanidis (d.lagnado@ucl.ac.uk, c.bechlivanidis@ucl.ac.uk)
University College London, Division of Psychology and Language Sciences, Gower Street,
London WC1E 6BT UK

Marc O Ernst & Marieke Rohde (marc.ernst@uni-bielefeld.de, marieke.rohde@uni-bielefeld.de)
Universität Bielefeld, Department of Cognitive Neuroscience, Universitätsstr. 25
33615 Bielefeld Germany

Michael E Young (michaelyoung@ksu.edu)
Kansas State University, Department of Psychology, 492 Bluemont Hall
Manhattan, Kansas 66506-5302 USA

Keywords: Causality, Time, Perception, Learning, Reasoning,
Binding, Event Segmentation, Sensory Integration

adaptation, or forward learning models of motor control),
while others adopt a broader perspective in line with models
of Bayesian Evidence Integration (e.g. Buehner, 2012).
Causal beliefs influence not only time perception, but also
judgments of temporal order, event segmentation, and
phenomena related to multi-sensory integration. This
symposium brings together researchers from various
disciplines and backgrounds who all explore the
interrelations between time, causality and perception, and do
so applying learning theory, Bayesian approaches,
physiological considerations, and high-level theories of
cognition.

General Background
The problem of how humans and other intelligent systems
construct causal representations from non-causal perceptual
evidence has occupied scholars in cognitive science since
many decades. Most contemporary approaches agree with
David Hume that patterns of covariation between two events
of interest are the critical input to the causal induction
engine, irrespective of whether this induction is believed to
be grounded in the formation of associations (Shanks &
Dickinson, 1987), rule-based evaluation (White, 2003),
appraisal of causal powers (Cheng, 1997), or construction of
Bayesian Causal Networks (Pearl, 2000). Recent research,
however, has repeatedly demonstrated that an exclusive
focus on covariation while neglecting contiguity (another of
Hume’s cues) results in ecologically invalid models of
causal inference. Temporal spacing, order, variability,
predictability, and patterning all have profound influence on
the type of causal representation that is constructed
(Greville & Buehner, 2010; Young & Cole, 2012).
The influence of time upon causal representations could
be seen as a bottom-up constraint (though current bottom-up
models cannot account for the full spectrum of effects).
However, causal representations in turn also constrain the
perception of time: Put simply, two causally related events
appear closer in subjective time than two (equidistant)
unrelated events. This reversal of Hume’s conjecture,
referred to as Causal Binding (Buehner, 2012) is a top-down
constraint, and suggests that our representations of time and
causality are mutually influencing one another. At present,
the theoretical implications of this phenomenon are not yet
fully understood. Some accounts (e.g. Haggard, Clark, &
Kalogeras, 2002) link it exclusively to human motor
planning (appealing to mechanisms of cross-modal temporal

Participant Abstracts
Temporal Binding: Causality, Intentionality, or
Both? (Buehner)
Since the first demonstration of temporal binding between
actions and their consequences (Haggard et al., 2002) more
than ten years ago, various theories have been put forward
to account for it, ranging from modifications of an internal
clock to sensory-specific re-adaptation. The common
denominator across all demonstrations of the effect appears
to be causality: binding in time and space occurs when there
is a causal relation linking an action and its effect. I will
discuss evidence of temporal binding in the complete
absence of motor action. These results are at variance with
theories based on sensuo-motor realignment and thus rule
out intentionality as the basis for the effect. Instead, they
can be accommodated by a Bayesian Framework of event
perception. Intentionality could be included in this
framework as an additional predictor.

71

Constructing Time and Cause (Lagnado &
Bechlivanidis)

References
Buehner, M. (2012). Understanding the Past, Predicting the
Future: Causation, Not Intentional Action, Is the Root
of Temporal Binding. Psychological Science.
Cheng, P. W. (1997). From covariation to causation: A
causal power theory. Psychological Review, 104, 367405.
Greville, W. J., & Buehner, M. (2010). Temporal
predictability facilitates causal learning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 139(4), 756–771.
Haggard, P., Clark, S., & Kalogeras, J. (2002). Voluntary
action and conscious awareness. Nature Neuroscience,
5(4), 382–385.
Lagnado, D. A., & Sloman, S. A. (2006). Time as a guide to
cause. Journal of Experimental Psychology-Learning
Memory and Cognition, 32(3), 451-460.
Pearl, J. (2000). Causality: Models, reasoning, and
inference. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
Press.
Shanks, D. R., & Dickinson, A. (1987). Associative
accounts of causality judgment. In G. H. Bower (Ed.),
Psychology of learning and motivation: Advances in
research and theory (Vol. 21). San Diego, CA:
Academic Press.
White, P. A. (2003). Making causal judgments from the
proportion of confirming instances: The pCI rule.
Journal of Experimental Psychology-Learning Memory
and Cognition, 29, 710–727.
Young, M. E., & Cole, J. J. (2012). Human sensitivity to the
magnitude and probability of a continuous causal
relation in a video game. Journal of Experimental
Psychology-Animal Behavior Processes, 38(1), 11–22.

The notions of time and causality are intimately linked.
Previous research shows that temporal information provides
critical cues for causal inference (Greville & Buehner, 2010;
Lagnado & Sloman, 2006) and that causal beliefs modulate
judgments of temporal duration (Buehner, 2012). Using a
novel experimental paradigm, where participants actively
engage with a software-based ‘physics world’, we show
both that temporal order guides causal judgments, and that
causal judgments can themselves determine perceptions of
temporal order. These findings highlight the constructive
nature of causal and temporal perceptions.

Asymmetries in Processing and Recalibration of
Visuo-Motor Time Perception (Ernst & Rohde)
If a voluntary movement event (e.g., a button press) and a
sensory event (e.g., a visual flash) belong together, the
button press has to happen before the flash, as a cause
always comes before its effect. We investigated in a series
of experiments whether this causal asymmetry also leads to
a perceptual asymmetry in the perceived timing of visual
and motor events. Participants had to judge the temporal
order and the temporal interval of a visual flash and a button
press after being trained to vision-lead and movement-lead
temporal discrepancies. To be able to present visual stimuli
both before and after motor events, we tracked participants'
finger movement in real time and predicted the moment of a
button press to time a visual flash with respect to this
estimate. While the perception of temporal order is
recalibrated symmetrically around the point of actual
simultaneity, there are strong asymmetries in the
recalibration of interval perception, which is mostly
confined to the movement-lead side of the range of
discrepancies. In a second study, participants had to rate
simultaneity and action authorship, where again
asymmetries around the point of actual simultaneity were
observed. The temporal order of cause and effect thus has
profound influences on human time perception of visual and
voluntary motor events.

Causal choice in the face of environmental
complexity (Young)
Prior research on causal judgment and choice has focused
on situations in which the events either lack temporal extent,
only one candidate cause and effect are being judged, or
events are presented as a series of discrete trials. All of
these approaches help to manage the complexity of the
interaction being judged, and evidence suggests that people
engage in forward inference under these simplified
conditions. I will discuss evidence from Video-game based
research that suggests that greater environmental
complexity appears to produce backward, rather than
forward, inference.

72

