UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Tracking Persons Over Time is Tracking What?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7bd8s3j6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Author
Brook, Andrew

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Tracking Persons Over Time is Tracking What?
Andrew Brook (andrew_brook@carleton.ca)
Department of Philosophy and Institute of Cognitive Science
Carleton University, Ottawa ON K1S 5B6 Canada


Abstract
Tracking persons, that is, determining that a person now is or
is not a specific earlier person, is extremely common and
widespread in our way of life and extremely important. If so,
figuring out what we are tracking, what it is to persist as a
person over a period of time, is also important. Trying to figure
this out will be the main focus of this paper. (This paper will
introduce a theme on tracking persons in Topics in Cognitive
Science.)





Keywords: tracking persons; personal identity; personal
identity – psychological criteria.

Tracking persons, that is, determining that a person now is
or is not a specific earlier person, is extremely common and
widespread in our way of life and extremely important. If
so, figuring out what we are tracking, what it is to persist as
a person over a period of time, is also important. Trying to
figure this out will be the main focus of this paper.
I will begin with three preliminary points.
1. Philosophers call persisting as the person one is over
time, i.e., what we are tracking when we track persons over
time, personal identity. This is an unfortunate term, not least
because the term ‘identity’ is now widely used to talk of
features of personality, attitude to oneself, and the like. In
this usage, it makes sense to talk of a strong identity, diffuse
identity, identity crisis, etc., terms that make no sense in the
philosophical context. For such reasons, I will generally
speak of a person persisting or personal persistence.
2. Because of the possibility (in brain bisection
operations, some say the actuality) of one person splitting
into two people, by ‘personal persistence’ I do not mean a
relationship that has to be one-to-one. (A charming
depiction of one person becoming two is central to the film,
To Be, by John Weldon (http://www.nfb.ca/film/to_be).)
Likewise, it would appear that there can be degrees of
persisting as oneself over time.
3. One might expect a paper on personal persistence to
begin with at least a few comments on what a person is.
That does not happen. The reason is that figuring out what
we track or should track when we track persons also tells us
a lot about what persons are.








And so on. There seem to be two general principles
behind tracking in these situations:
 Responsibility. A person is responsible only for
what s/he, the same person, did (or caused to be
done) in the past (a central feature of all western
legal systems).
 Entitlement. A person is entitled to praise, benefits
(including property), and compensation only for
what s/he did in the past.
Tracking persons is even central to
 Interpersonal relationships. If you have just lost
someone dear to you, your grief will not exactly
dissipate upon being told, ‘No problem. Your loved
one had an identical twin who can do everything
for you that s/he used to do.’

1. Where tracking persons is central
Tracking persons is at the heart of a great many social
institutions, including

Criminal law and punishment. Hence the effort that
goes into determining that the person under arrest
is the person who committed the crime.
Obligations. You are now responsible only for
obligations (contracts, promises, and the like) that
you took on in the past.
Property. You are now entitled to what you earlier
owned. Sometimes, as in the case of educational
policies, the changes to the person in the meantime
can be massive.
Credit. You are entitled to use only credit cards and
the like approved for your use earlier. Hence photo
ID.
Insurance and benefits. The only benefits that you
have now are ones that were assigned to you earlier
(a very large issue in medicine in the United
States). Likewise, you are entitled to recompense
for harm done only if the harm was done to you or
what belongs to you.
Compensation. You are paid only for services you
rendered or caused to be rendered earlier.
Rewards. For example, you get the grade that your
work earlier earned.

We even assume that we can track ourselves over time.
Each of us, for example, has a:

1940

•

Special concern for one particular person’s past. I
might regret something you have done but I will
not normally be ashamed of it (not normally
because when I have a stake in your actions, by
being your parent for example, I can feel ashamed
of something you have done). And a,

•

Special concern for one person’s future, the person
whom I believe will be me.

In short, tracking persons is central to much human social
activity. (For further discussion of where we track persons
in everyday life, see Shoemaker 2012.)

2. Current Tracking Practices
The importance of tracking persons in our way of life is
not matched by excellence in our tracking practices. The
most common tracking practice uses facial similarity,
whether in the form of eye-witness testimony in court (a
practice that is not entirely reliable) or photo identification
almost everywhere else now. Since two different people can
look a lot alike, even entirely like in the case of identical
twins, especially at a distance, and a single person can look
very different in widely separated periods of life, tracking
by facial similarity has its limitations.
Nonetheless, prosopagnosia, the inability to recognize
faces, demonstrates how large a role tracking by facial
appearance in fact plays. People with prosopagnosia cannot
recognize people by face, therefore cannot tell whether they
know a person before them or not. The result is that their
lives are endlessly and embarrassingly complicated. To
figure out whether they know a person before them, for
example, they might have to get the person to speak.
Almost as common and equally limited is tracking by
similarities in hand-writing, particularly signatures, a very
common practice with contracts. In the legal system,
similarity of fingerprints used to be the gold standard. It has
been replaced by DNA sequencing, i.e., looking for
similarities in the arrangement of molecule pairs in a
particular stretch of DNA.
A common tracking practice with people we know but
one that has received little attention is tracking by emotional
reaction. We seem to have a distinctive emotional reaction
to each person we know well. If a person before us triggers
the distinctive reaction that we have to A and there are no
countervailing factors (different gender, very different facial
appearance and the like), this is a good reason for us to treat
the person before us as A, the person to whom we have had
the same reaction in the past.
One important piece of evidence for the importance of
emotional reactions in tracking familiar people is the
Capgras delusion. The Capgras delusion is the delusion that
a person before one, a person whom one knows well and
would normally care about, is an impostor. Despite the
person before one looking like the familiar person, reacting

like the familiar person, expressing full and detailed
memories of earlier events in the life of the familiar person
– the person of course is the familiar person –, to someone
in the throes of the delusion the familiar person is taken to
be an impostor. (Capgras is usually accompanied by some
form of major cognitive impairment such as severe
schizophrenia.)
Neuroscience has not reached a settled view about what is
going on the Capgras delusion but one widely held view is
that, due probably to damage in the limbic system, the
person suffering from the delusion has stopped reacting with
the appropriate emotions to familiar, formerly liked or loved
people. This is enough to convince the victim of the
delusion that the person before him or her is not the person
he or she knows and likes or loves. If this explanation is
right, it would be evidence for the centrality of emotional
reaction in reidentifying familiar people at a later time.
How well do our tracking practices relate to what matters
in tracking persons? Not well. Return to fingerprints and
DNA sequences. Let us suppose that the claims made for
their uniqueness are right and the odds of two people having
the same fingerprint or relevant DNA sequence are one in
some billions. Would this tell us something valuable about
what we want to track when we track a person? Even if
fingerprints and DNA sequences were unique to each
person, I don’t think so.
The reason is that fingerprints and DNA are not what
personal persistence consists in. They are merely features
correlated with the person in question persisting. Again,
suppose that the correlation is nearly perfect. Even here,
knowing what a certain fingerprint is like or how a
particular DNA sequence goes would tell us almost nothing
about what being the bearer of that fingerprint or DNA
sequence over time consists in. Indeed, knowing the
fingerprint or sequence would tell us almost nothing about
either their bearer in particular or what a person persisting in
general consists in. Here is another way to put the same
point: To know how well similarity of fingerprints or DNA
correlate with the person before us being an earlier person,
we need an answer to the question, correlate with what?
What would it make the later person the earlier person?

3. Persons Over Time: What Interests Us?
In the philosophical literature, two approaches to what
must persist for a person to persist have dominated, the
psychological approach and the somatic or bodily approach.
On the psychological approach, the most frequent appeal is
to the later person remembering events in the life of the
earlier person in a particular way. However, psychological
continuity of personality, abilities, and dispositions has also
played a role. On the somatic or bodily approach,
persistence of a functioning body or sometimes just a
functioning brain has been front and centre.
It seems fairly clear that when we judge a person before
us to be some earlier person, what primarily interests us are
psychological factors. Even when somatic factors such as

1941

facial similarity drive the judgment, it is because we take the
somatic factor/s to be a reliable indication that the
psychological factors of interest are present.
That psychological factors are what interest us can be
shown in a number of ways. When we judge a person before
us to be an earlier person, in the absence of special factors
such a cognitive injury and dementia, we believe that the
person before us will have a host of values, commitments,
attachments, abilities, ways of viewing things, and so on so
very similar to the same factors in the earlier person.
Gaining this assurance is one of the reasons we track people.
(We will return to this issue of psychological similarity.)
Another indication that psychological factors dominate is
the way in which many people respond to brain bisection
patients when, in special laboratory conditions, the body in
question simultaneously does and disavows doing certain
actions, responds to and disavows having heard certain
requests, and so on. Many people (including Roger Sperry,
who won a Nobel Prize for his work with brain bisection
patients) take that it that, temporarily, two ‘centres of
consciousness’ have appeared in these patients. Since there
is only one body and brain throughout (albeit a brain whose
corpus callosum has been severed in part or in whole), we
cannot be making this judgment on somatic or even brain
evidence and have to be making it on psychological factors,
specifically, performance/lack of performance pairs.
A third argument is similar. When we learn about the idea
of teletransportation (in Stars Trek episodes or whatever),
the idea of a person being transported from one location to
another without a single molecule of their body being
transported makes instant sense to nearly everyone. For the
idea to make sense, we have to be conceiving of the transfer
as something psychological. (The same short film
mentioned earlier, To Be by John Weldon, depicts
teletransportation in a charming way.)
Finally, think of Kafka’s Metamorphosis. In this story, the
central character, Gregor Samsa, goes to sleep a human
being and wakes up a ‘monstrous vermin’. We have no
trouble making sense of the idea that it is him, the very same
person, who is now a bug. Yet the two bodies would not
share any structure and not much if any matter.
Conclusion: What matters to us about personal
persistence is something psychological. The next question
is, what?

4. Memory
What connects a later person to an earlier person when the
earlier person persists as the later? Memory has a property
that makes it a prime candidate. Unlike all other factors
whether somatic or psychological, memory depicts events in
the life of the earlier person. Its intentionality, to use that
term of art, is backward-looking.
What kind of memory? Clearly we are not interested in
short-term or working memory and we are not interested in
procedural memory, memory of how to do things. What
interests us is long-term declarative memory of some kind,

memory over substantial periods of time of what was the
case. In the literature, three kinds of long-term declarative
memory are distinguished:
Semantic memory (memory of facts, whether or not
you were there)
Episodic memory (memory of events, usually with a
requirement that you had witnessed the event)
Autobiographical memory (memory of events in one’s
own life, which can be both semantic and episodic)
However, this tristinction is not fine-grained enough for
our purposes. For there are at least two kinds of
autobiographical memory:
1. Remembering events in one’s life ‘from the inside’,
i.e., from the same point of view as the events were
originally experienced. Thus one not only remembers
an experience, a thought, or whatever, one remembers
having the experience, the thought, or whatever. One
not only remembers an action, one remembers doing
the action. One not only remembers a feeling, one
remembers having the feeling. And so on.
2. The rest – all the memories of events in one’s life
that are not from the standpoint of having lived them.
If I remember having had an experience, thought, feeling,
it will appear to me that I had that experience, etc. I will
appear to myself to be that person. And when I remember
having had the experiences of an earlier person, or a series
of person-stages tied together by a string of such memories,
the appearance of the earlier person being me will be
correct. Continuities and similarities can run from one
person to another (Shoemaker, 2012, p. 12). However, I do
not remember having others’ experiences, etc.1 Absent some
countervailing factor (such as reason to think that, for
example, a memory transfer has taken place), if I have
autobiographical memory ‘from the inside’ of having,
doing, feeling a single earlier person’s thoughts,
experiences, actions and feelings, I am that person. That
person has persisted as me.
Moreover, this suggestion about autobiographical
memory ‘from the inside’ has more than intuitive appeal
going for it, considerable though that is. We can use it to
generate a nice theory of why we are responsible for earlier
things we did and why we have a special concern for the
future person who will be oneself.
Ask, why am I responsible for what I am doing right
now?
Answer: Because I am the agent of the action – I
experience myself from the standpoint of originating
and doing the action.
And ask, why do I feel a special concern for me right now?
Answer: Because I will feel my pleasures and pains
and other experiences – I experience them ‘from the
inside’. Likewise with plans and intentions. I put my
plan in place, I act on my intentions. I merely observe
the experiences, plans, and intentions of others

1942

This suggests that I am responsible for an action of an
earlier agent if I remember doing it and similarly for
thinking, perceiving and feeling. Similarly, when I project
my hopes and plans for my life onto a specific future
person, when I feel special concern for a specific future
person, I project onto and feel concern for the future person
who will remember me as I am now ‘from the inside’. A
nice account. It flows directly from my account of
remembering ‘from the inside’.

the global memory, we know which earlier person the
current person was.
Unified global experience and unified global memory
‘from the inside’ are a central part of what it is to be a
(normal, cognitively intact) person. A persisting person is a
series of global representations, each of which contains or
contained memories of having thoughts and experiences,
doing actions, feeling feelings ‘from the inside’, i.e., from
the standpoint of having, doing and feeling them. Similarly,
mutatis mutandis, for anticipating a future person as oneself.
(This paragraph is my response to the wish discussed earlier
for an account of what a person is.)

5. Memory ‘From the Inside’ and Unified
Consciousness

6. Problems with Memory

There is a certain artificiality in what we have said about
memory up to now. Contrary to the way I have written so
far, we seldom remember having or doing or feeling
individual experiences or actions. Usually what we
remember about ourselves is far ‘bigger’ than that.
Memories ‘from the inside’ are usually a kind of global
representation:
Global representation – representing many objects as a
single complex object.
What characterizes a global representation is that the
representation of the elements of its object is united: One is
aware of all the elements together, in a single conscious act,
and one is aware of them not just as individual items but as
a group.
To see how this works, consider representation of items
that could be expressed by these sentences:
1. I am reading the words on the screen in front of me,
2. I am puzzled by your comments
3. I am enjoying the music I hear outside
4. I believe our agreement was to meet at 6:00
5. I thought I understood Kant's notion of the object
6. I wish the world were a fairer place

So far, so good. But so far is not far enough. We do not
ground judgments of personal persistence entirely on global
autobiographical memory ‘from the inside’ and there are at
least three challenges to the idea that we should do so.
1. In some cases, it appears that such memory is not
necessary for personal persistence.
2. Some pressure can be put on the idea that it is
always sufficient.
3. The kind of memory in question could in principle
branch, go back to two or more earlier persons, or
merge, two streams of memory becoming one.

Here there are three different elements that could be
united in a single global representation, (a) what I am
representing, (b) the acts (act when unified) of representing
them, and (c) myself as the subject doing the representing.
Similarly with memory. When I remember, for example,
doing something, I nearly always also remember how I felt
at the time, what I experienced at the time, the outcome of
the action and how I felt about that, and so on. If so, my
memory is a global representation that represents a unified
group of earlier experiences and actions (see Raymont and
Brook 2006)..
With this fuller description of memory, we can now give
a fuller description of the relationship of memory to
personal persistence. When we know the contents of a
person’s current global memory ‘from the inside’ of earlier
experiences had, actions done, etc., and we track back and
discover who had the global experience that is depicted in

Is memory necessary? Consider the most famous case in
neuropsychology, Mr. H.M. (Henry Molaison, recently
deceased). In the 1960s, to block epilepsy spreading from
one hemisphere of his brain to the other, surgeons severed
not just his corpus callosum but also the two halves of his
hippocampus (and removed some other structures). This
made it impossible for him to lay down new memories
lasting more than about twenty minutes. Yet he was still
taken to be a single, persisting person. No one questioned,
for example, whether it was appropriate to continue to call
‘him’ by the same name or suggest that he was not the
beneficiary of a pension plan created during the working life
of the earlier person who had his name. Sacks (1970)
discusses two cases with similar memory deficits.
To be sure, this attitude can be questioned. From the
moment of the operation, HM was very different from
people with normal memory. Post-operation, he never again
entered a significant human relationship. (Even his care staff
had to introduce themselves to him every morning.) He had
no idea where he was and could not travel or even take a
walk on his own. He had no knowledge of having had a life
since the operation and so in one sense did not know who he
was. If he had ever done anything that created entitlements
or responsibility, he would have had no knowledge of
having done so (so what would be the point of holding him
responsible?). Thus he had no sense of accomplishment or
failure, no pride in himself or guilt or shame, no sense of the
trajectory of his life, no ... no ... no ... . And he could not
plan a future for himself; his life did not have a planned or

1943

desired trajectory. People with radical amnesia are very
different from people with intact autobiographical memory.
Still, radical amnesia is not death. What makes
memories ‘from the inside’ especially pertinent to personal
persistence is that such memories depict, refer back to,
earlier experiences and actions (and do so from the point of
view of the person who had the original experience or did
the original action). They do not, as we said, share this
feature with any other kind of psychological state. However,
they do share something else. Memories were caused by
earlier experiences and actions.
Thus, memories are one kind of psychological
continuity. When memory is missing, we can back off to
other kinds of psychological continuity, ones that do not
have backward intentionality. These can include continuitycarried similarities – HM, for example, had the same
linguistic and arithmetic skills, the same knowledge of the
world, the same manual abilities, and so on after the
operation as before and the causes were primarily earlier
events in the same body. Because HM is causally
continuous with the body on whom the disastrous operation
was performed, tracking his current causal continuities
would lead us back to that body. We continue to find
personal persistence even when memory is absent, I think,
because we back off to these other kinds of causal
continuity.
One very important non-memory causal continuity is
continuity of plans, projects, and intentions. Usually I will
have or have acted on much the same plans, life projects,
etc., as I laid down for myself earlier and usually the main
cause of having those plans, etc., now is that I laid them
down for myself earlier. As we will see, continuity and
discontinuity of such plans can make a difference in certain
cases. I said that continuity of plans, etc., is a non-memory
continuity and that is correct. However, they are usually
carried from the past into the present in memories. Thus Mr.
HM could not form any such plans, any that required him to
remember them for more than half an hour at any rate. This
is another and highly significant way in which he was
radically unlike a person with normal memory.
Now our second question: Is global autobiographical
memory ‘from the inside’ always sufficient for personal
persistence? Cases where there has been massive personal
change over time put some pressure on the idea. Let me
sketch two real cases that certainly give one pause.
In 1941, one of Hitler’s lieutenants, Rudolph Hess, flew
to Scotland to try to negotiate a non-aggression treaty with
England. (This would have left Hitler free to invade eastern
Europe and the Soviet Union.) Hess was arrested as soon as
he landed – and never lived outside a prison again. For
many years, he was the sole inhabitant of last prison of the
Allies in Germany, Spandau Prison in Berlin (the Soviet
Union would not agree to his release), and so was
effectively in solitary confinement. He died a very old man
of 92 in 1987 (of either murder or suicide, theories vary). By
the end, he was an embittered, cognitively-impaired shadow
of his former self.

More recently, in 1998 Karla Faye Tucker was
executed in Texas. She had taken part in a drug-fuelled
murder at the age of 24 in 1983, so was in prison for close
to 40% of her life and nearly all her adult life. During her
time in prison, she converted to Christianity and was not
just a model prisoner but a counselor and mentor to other
inmates. She even married the prison chaplain. In short, by
the time she was killed, she could hardly have been more
different than the out-of-control drug addict who took part
in the murder.
Yet in both cases there was autobiographical memory
and also psychological continuity and a single history, both
psychologically and biologically. So all the tracking
mechanisms that we normally use would lead us back to the
same earlier person in both cases.
The trouble is, both cases raise the following question.
Even though both people retained autobiographical memory
and the usual continuities to the end, was there a sound basis
at the time they died for taking the earlier person who bore
their name, etc., at the time of their arrest, say, to have
persisted as them? More directly, was there any justification
for holding either of them responsible for what had been
done by someone with the same name so many long years
before?
Here is a basis for caution about how to answer these
questions. Normally personal persistence carries with it
persistence of character, life projects, and the like, so that if
these things had been vicious earlier, they will be vicious
now. And memory ‘from the inside’ will ensure that the
later person knows about the earlier character – or at least
the actions to which it gave rise. When character is no
longer vicious, projects no longer malign, especially if
accompanied by remorse or regret, the fact that the person
nonetheless remembers his/her earlier character, projects,
and actions ‘from the inside’ does not seem to matter as
much.
And here the two cases differ. Tucker clearly fit the
description of the paragraph above – but Hess did not.
Tucker’s character, life projects, and the like had been
transformed. Hess, however, merely lost the power to act on
his; he remained an unrepentant Nazi to his death. Thus,
there would seem to be a better basis for continuing to hold
Hess responsible for the actions of the triumphant young
Nazi of old than for continuing to hold Tucker responsible
for the actions of the earlier person who bore her name. (If
so, it is a source of regret that Gov. Bush, as he was then,
did not see things this way. Cases such as Hess and Tucker
illustrate vividly that tracking persons can have profound
ethical implications.)
Now the third question. What if a memories ‘from the
inside’ lead back to two or more different people? Here
there are two kinds of case, one where most of the memories
originated in one person but a few originated in another, and
one where the split is roughly equal.
In the first case, we could just ignore the aberrant
memories, maybe by treating them as transferred somehow
from another person. As to the second case, where

1944

memories ‘from the inside’ originated in two different
people about equally, we have grounds to hold that both
people have persisted as the single current person with the
memories. Because memories have a substructure of causal
continuities and in our world the preponderant causal path
carrying memory and other psychological continuities is
within a body, memory transfer would take some very
special technology.

7. ... And When There Is Little Or No
Psychological Continuity Of Any Kind?
There are also cases in which there is not just no memory
but little or no psychological continuity of any kind, where
nonetheless we take there to be a persisting person.
Vegetative state patients are one kind of case. Newborns are
a second. The relationship between me now as an adult and
the newborn who was given my name decades ago is a third.
(In the first two kinds of case, there is no psychological
continuity. In the third, psychological continuity eventually
developed but there is little or no psychological continuity
running all the way back to the newborn.) How do we track
persons in these cases?
Well, psychological continuities are causal continuities
and some causal continuities exist in all three kinds of case.
If materialism is correct, moreover, psychological
continuities are one kind of bodily continuity. So we can,
and do, fall back on other causal and bodily continuities
such as looking alike, similarity of DNA, and a continuous
causal history.
In summary, the pattern is this. When we have memory
‘from the inside’ and there are no countervailing factors, we
stop there. When memories don’t exist or have taken an
unhelpful form, we back off to other psychological
continuities. When psychological continuities are absent, we
back off further, to non-psychological bodily continuities.

the like. So we resort to such things as facial appearance,
fingerprints, and DNA pattern.
It may appear to be remarkable that such purely somatic
factors work as well as they do for tracking what is, except
in the rare special cases that we delineated in Stn. 7, a
matter of psychological continuities. In fact, it is not. All the
continuities we considered are underpinned by substantial
causal continuities. Such continuities do not have to run
though a single persisting body, as the very intelligibility of
teletransportation shows. But in our world, they invariably
do. For this reason, the rule, One persisting person per
persisting body, works pretty well – and finding a reliable
way to track persisting bodies over time is usually a pretty
good way to track persisting persons. So facial similarity,
fingerprints, and DNA sequences usually work pretty well.
(For an excellent discussion of the relationships between
cognition and the body, see Ismael 2007, Chapter 11,
especially Section 5.)2

References
Raymont, Paul and Andrew Brook. Unity of Consciousness,
Stanford Electronic Encyclopaedia of Philosophy
(plato.stanford.edu/unity of consciousness).
Ismael, J. 2007. The Situated Self/ Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Kafka, F. 1915, trans. I. Johnson 2009. The Metamorphosis.
<http://records.viu.ca/~johnstoi/stories/kafka-E.htm>.
Parfit, Derek. 1984. Reasons and Persons. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Sacks, Oliver. 1970. The Lost Mariner and A Matter of
Identity. In The Man Who Mistook His Wife for a Hat.
New York: Harper & Row, pp. 23-42 and 108-115.
Shoemaker, D. 2012. Personal Identity and Ethics. Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy <plato.stanford.edu/personal
identity>
Weldon, John. To Be. National Film Board of Canada
<http://www.nfb.ca/film/to_be>

8. Practicalities
Suppose that the story that we have told of what personal
persistence consists in is at least roughly right. How would
it connect to the tracking practices that we actually use, the
ones that we laid out earlier? The answer is: At a conceptual
level at least, not very tidily.
The problem is that in real life, it is often hard to gain
knowledge of memories and other psychological
continuities. To identify someone’s memories, we need
sophisticated skills in ‘mind-reading’ (assignment of
psychological states to others) and considerable cooperation from the person in question. Such co-operation
can, of course, be in short supply when you are trying to
track people in the context of the criminal law, fraud, and

Endnotes
1

Bishop Joseph Butler claimed in the 17th century that we cannot
by definition remember having an experience had by another. If so,
being the same person is a requirement of the kind of memory we
are discussing – and, of course, cannot be used to define or analyze
it. Here I will just assume that we can define a form of memory
that does not presuppose personal persistence.
2

Thanks to Ted Lougheed, Dave Matheson, Jordan Dodd, Nicolas
Bullot, and audiences at Carleton University and the University of
Ottawa for helpful comments.

1945

