UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Type-token representations in conceptual representation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2k34h7pw

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Author
Prasada, Sandeep

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Type-token representations in conceptual representation
Sandeep Prasada (sprasada@hunter.cuny.edu)
Department of Psychology, Hunter College, CUNY
New York, NY 10065 USA

Abstract

indefinitely many representations (2) each of which provide
the means for thinking about distinct instances of that kind.
Concepts of kinds of things (e.g. DOG), have the dual
(1)
Ki
function of specifying how to think about indefinitely
(2)
K1
K2
K3 …
many things as well as providing the means for thinking
about a single abstract kind which is constituted by
The mechanisms in (1) and (2) highlight the close
indefinitely many instances. In this talk, I sketch a theory
connection between the mechanisms needed to make generic
of conceptual representation that places this dual function
and non-generic reference. The mechanisms needed for
of concepts at its core. The theory is shown to provide a
thinking about instances of kinds (2) are generated by the
natural way of capturing four key characteristics of the
mechanism needed for thinking about kinds (1) which makes
ways in which we think about kinds and instances of kinds.
implicit reference to instances of kinds. As such, the
These characteristics are not accounted for by standard
mechanisms that underlie generic and non-generic reference
approaches to conceptual representation. In the final
are intrinsically related and thus one may expect the ability to
section of the paper, I consider how the phenomena
make generic and non-generic reference to be closely tied in
discussed in this paper may be accommodated by current
development. This is, in fact, the case. Recent research
approaches to conceptual representation.
suggests that children appear to use noun phrases generically
Keywords: concepts; type-token representations; kind
and non-generically from a very early age (Pappas &
representations; generic knowledge.
Gelman, 1998; Gelman & Tardif, 1998; Goldin-Meadow,
Mylander & Gelman, 2005; Gelman, Goetz, Sarnecka &
Concepts are the mechanisms by which we think about Flukes, 2008).
things. For example, the concept DOG provides the means for
thinking about indefinitely many distinct things as being a Instances of kinds may be qualitatively
given kind of thing (e.g. dogs). Furthermore, it also provides
the means for thinking about the kind dog itself. This dual identical.
The mechanisms in (1) and (2) also highlight a
function of specifying how to think about indefinitely many
fundamental
characteristic of the manner in which we think
things as well as providing the means for thinking about a
about
instances
of kinds. Instances of a given kind need not
single abstract kind which is constituted by indefinitely many
be
qualitatively
distinct in any way. They need only be
instances has generally escaped the focus of most research on
numerically
distinct.
Thus we are perfectly capable of
conceptual representation. In this paper, I sketch a theory of
thinking
about
qualitatively
identical instances of kinds. This
conceptual representation that places this dual function of
is,
of
course,
easier
to
do
for some kinds (e.g. paperclips)
concepts at its core. The theory is shown to provide a natural
than
others
(e.g.
dogs),
nevertheless,
it is possible for any
way of capturing four key characteristics of the ways in
kind
of
thing
and
our
conceptual
mechanisms
must support
which we think about kinds and instances of kinds. These
such
thoughts.
This
characteristic
of
how
we
think about
characteristics are not currently accounted for by standard
approaches to conceptual representation, however, they instances of kinds is captured by the fact that the
constitute empirical phenomena that any adequate theory of representations in (2) differ only in their indicies which have
conceptual representations would have to handle. In the final a purely indexical function and have no intrinsic descriptive
section of the paper, I consider how the phenomena discussed content.
in this paper may be accommodated by current approaches to
Distinct kinds cannot be qualitatively identical.
conceptual representation.
Turning our attention to the representation of kinds (1), a
natural
question is whether kind representations may also be
Mechanism for thinking about instances of
distinguished merely by an index (e.g. K1i & K2i). A
kinds and kinds.
moment’s reflection makes it clear that it makes no sense to
Following Prasada & Dillingham (2009) and Prasada speak of qualitatively identical and merely numerically
(2012), the theory developed here proposes that concepts for distinct kinds. Kinds, unlike instances of kinds, must be
kinds of things are represented via a generative type-token
qualitatively distinct. This means that the representation of
mechanism such as (1) which is capable of generating
kinds in (1) must be augmented with a component that has

3235

descriptive content that characterizes the kind and provides
the basis for individuating kinds.
Given that kinds are constituted by indefinitely many
instances, characterizing a kind must involve representing a
connection between the kind and properties that is
understood to be non-accidental and thus extendible to
indefinitely many instances that have yet to be encountered
(Goodman, 1955). Prasada, Khemlani, Leslie & Gucksberg
(2013) provide evidence that our conceptual systems
distinguish at least three types of non-accidental connections
between kinds and properties (principled connections,
statistical connections, and causal connections) that provide
at least three ways of characterizing kinds. Nevertheless,
kinds cannot be generally be individuated in terms of
properties that involve merely statistical connections to the
kind because such properties are extrinsic to the kind.
Furthermore, kinds cannot be generally be individuated in
terms of properties that involve causal connections to kinds
because such connections are only possible for material
kinds.
Principled connections, on the other hand, involve
properties that instances of kinds are understood to have by
virtue of their being the kinds of things they are (e.g. having
four legs for dogs) (Prasada & Dillingham, 2006). As such,
it is possible to identify properties that have a principled
connection to a kind for any kind of thing. Properties that
have a principled connection to a kind (k-properties in
Prasada & Dillingham’s (2006) terminology) are (i)
properties whose presence in instances of a kind receive
formal explanations -- explanations by reference to the kind
of thing something is (e.g. Fido has four legs because he is a
dog), (ii) properties for which we have normative
expectations such that instances of the kind that lack kproperties are judged to be defective or incomplete, and (iii)
properties that are generally expected to be present in
instances of the kind (Prasada & Dillingham, 2006, 2009). Kproperties differ from definitional properties in important
ways. Unlike definitional properties which are necessarily
present in all instances of a kind, k-properties need not be
present in all instances of the kind (e.g. there are many dogs
that do not have four legs). Relatedly, the representation of
definitional properties are understood as specifying necessary
conditions for the use of the kind concept of which they are a
part whereas k-property representations do not specify
conditions for the use of the kind concept with which they are
connected. Instead, k-property representations specify
properties that are understood to be lawfully related to being
that kind of thing such that the presence of k-properties in
instances of a kind is understood to be due the things being
the kinds of things they are. In fact, k-properties are
understood to be aspects of being the given kind of thing (e.g.
having four legs is one aspect of being a dog) and thus are
represented via a formal part-whole relation between the kind
and property (Prasada & Dillingham, 2009). These findings
lead Prasada & Dillingham (2009) to revise the mechanism
for representing kinds in the following manner.

(3) Ki ~< a1, a2...
In this representation (3), the mechanism for representing a
kind projects1 an aspect structure by means of which the
properties that have a principled connection to the kind (kproperties) can be represented as aspects of being that kind of
thing.2
The mechanism for representing kinds (3) is now seen to
have a descriptive component in terms of which kinds are
(qualitatively) individuated via distinct sets of k-properties. It
should be noted that though kinds cannot be merely
numerically distinct and thus kind representations cannot be
distinguished merely by indexical representations devoid of
1
2
any descriptive content (e.g. K i & K i), it is possible that
kinds may be distinguished indexically in addition to being
distinguished qualitatively via their k-properties. In fact, it is
possible that developmentally it is sometimes the case that
two kinds may initially be distinguished only indexically via
their names with the expectation that they will additionally
differ in yet to be discovered ways (Xu, 2012). The theory
being developed here suggests that in such cases, the
expectation is that the kinds also differ in their k-properties.

Modes of existence of instances of kinds and
kinds.
The mechanisms in (3) and (2) also highlight an important
difference between the ways in which we think about
instances of kinds and kinds. At any given time, there are
some definite number of instances of a kind that actually
exist or have actually existed. In addition, there are
indefinitely many instances of the kind that do not actually
exist, but exist only potentially. Potentially existing
instances of a kind differ from actually existing instances of a
kind only in their mode of existence. No qualitative
differences distinguish actually existing and potentially
existing instances of a kind. Given that this is the case, it
should be immediately evident that there cannot be
potentially existing kinds as this would require that the
putatively potentially existing kinds be qualitatively identical
to actually existing kinds, but as we saw above, distinct kinds
cannot be qualitatively identical.

Relation to existing theories of conceptual
representation.
The phenomena pertaining to the manner in which we
think about kinds and instances of kinds discussed in this
paper are generally not addressed by standard approaches to
conceptual representation. How might standard approaches to
conceptual representation respond to these phenomena? To
answer this question, it will be helpful to summarize the
1
I use the ~< symbol to mean “projects”. Prasada & Dillingham
(2009) and Prasada (2012) use -> for the same notion, however, that
is easily confused with implication.
2
As the details of how principled connections are represented via
such a mechanism are not pertinent here, I skip over them. See
Prasada & Dillingham (2009) for details.

3236

generative type-token mechanism theory proposed in the
present paper and situate standard approaches with respect to
it. As illustrated in Figure 1, a kind concept such as DOG is,
at its core, a generative mechanism which has the capacity to
generate indefinitely many representations each of which
represent an instance of the kind and which are distinguished
from one another numerically via an index devoid of any
intrinsic descriptive content. The generative mechanism
itself implicitly contains the indefinitely many instances and
thus provides the means for thinking about the kind itself.
Finally, the kind projects an aspect structure which provides
the means for representing the properties that have a
principled connection to the kind (k-properties) as aspects of
being that kind of thing. This component of the mechanism
serves to qualitatively distinguish the kind from other kinds.

	  

Figure 1. Schematic summary of the generative type-token
mechanism that provides the means for thinking about
kinds and instances of kinds.

Given this characterization, it becomes evident that the
definitional, prototype and theory approaches to conceptual
representation can best be understood as corresponding to the
aspect structure component of the approach developed here
in that they provide different accounts of how kinds are
qualitatively individuated from one another. As such, these
approaches, as currently formulated, lack the mechanisms for
thinking and reasoning about kinds and instances of kinds.
The exemplar approach to conceptual representation, on the
other hand, involves representations that correspond most
closely to those that represent instances of kinds. The
exemplar approach lacks any mechanisms for representing
kinds or information for individuating kinds, by design.
We are now in a position to consider how standard
approaches may accommodate the phenomena discussed in
the present paper which are handled naturally by the
generative type-token mechanism approach. One possibility
is that each approach may use the tools within their
framework to incorporate these phenomena. While this may
be possible, it is hard to see what relevant resources exist
within the definitional, prototype, exemplar, or theory
theories to form representation of instances of kinds and
kinds such that they have the characteristics discussed here.
A second possibility which would be available to the

definitional, prototype and theory approaches would be to
graft the formal mechanisms developed here onto one’s
favorite approach. This avenue would be in line with
suggestions in the philosophical and psychological favoring
hybrid theories of conceptual representation (e.g. Genone &
Lombrozo, 2012; Keil, 1989; McNorgan, Kotack, Meehan, &
McRae, 2007; Sloman, Love & Ahn, 1998). This option is
presumably not available to the exemplar approach which
eschews summary representations and thus kind
representations and components of kind representations that
individuate kinds could presumably not be grafted onto
exemplar representations. A third response may be to see the
present work as potentially increasing the diversity of
conceptual representations available thus providing further
fuel to theories favoring conceptual pluralism and
heterogeneity (Dove, 2009; Machery, 2009; Weiskopf,
2009).
The final possibility I’d like to consider and endorse is that
the present theory contains key elements from each of the
standard approaches and thus it may be possible to develop a
theory of conceptual representation that has many of the
advantages of hybrid theories, but in a manner that is more
principled and organic. The present theory involves the
generation of representations of instances of kinds (2) and
thus provides a natural way of accounting for phenomena that
are best handled by exemplar theories of concepts.
Furthermore, the k-properties that individuate kinds do not
specify conditions for the application of the kind concept.
Instead, they specify properties that instances of the kind are
expected to have in virtue of their being the kinds of things
they are but may be lacking in instances for reasons other
than their being the kinds of things they are (Prasada &
Dillingham, 2006, 2009). As such, the k-properties that
characterize a kind are like properties in prototype
representations in that they are typically present in members
of the kind, but need not be.
The link to the explanation-based theory approach to
concepts is evident in the fact that the k-properties are
represented as involving a lawful (non-accidental) link
between the kind and properties. The mechanism in (3)
represents principled connections between kinds and
properties by representing the property as an aspect of being
that kind of thing. As such, it supports a formal mode of
explanation whereby the presence of k-properties in instances
of kinds may be explained by reference to the kind of thing
something is (Prasada & Dillingham, 2009). The mechanism
in (3) also provides the basis for psychological essentialism
by identifying the properties that are understood to be caused
by the essence. As the essence is typically not known
(Medin & Ortony, 1989; Gelman, 2003), the properties
caused by the essence cannot be identified by the essence and
must be identified in another manner. The k-properties
represented in (3) thus potentially provide the basis for
psychological essentialism.
Furthermore, as mentioned above, kinds may also be
characterized via the causal and statistical connections they
have to properties (Prasada, Khemlani, Leslie & Gucksberg,

3237

2013). Though the addition of causal and statistical
connections between kinds and properties to the mechanism
in (3) is not required by our ability to think about kinds and
instances of kinds (as is the addition of principled
connections), their addition is necessary for capturing the
range of ways in which we can characterize kinds. As such,
their addition is principled and motivated within the present
approach and allows the theory to capture further phenomena
that are typically accounted for within the prototype and
theory views of concepts.
Though much more needs to be said, I hope it is already
evident that a theory which is centered on the generative
type-token mechanisms needed for thinking about kinds and
instances of kinds can not only capture the phenomena
discussed in the present paper, but potentially provides a
principled and organic way of capturing the key
characteristics of current approaches to conceptual
representation.

References

Prasada, S., & Dillingham, E. (2006). Principled and
statistical connections in common sense conception.
Cognition, 99 (1).
Prasada, S., & Dillingham, E. (2009). Representation of
principled connections: A window onto the formal aspect
of common sense conception. Cognitive Science, 33, 401448.
Prasada, S., Khemlani, S., Leslie, S-J., & Gucksberg, S.
(2013). Conceptual distinctions amongst generics.
Cognition, 126, 405-422.
Sloman, S. A., Love, B. C., & Ahn, W. (1998). Feature
centrality and conceptual coherence. Cognitive Science, 22,
189–228.
Weiskopf, D. A. (2009). The plurality of concepts. Synthese,
169, 145–173.
Xu, F. (2012). Count nouns, sortal concepts, and the nature of
early words. . In F.J. Pelletier, ed. Kinds, Things & Stuff.
New Directions in Cognitive Science, v. 12, Oxford Univ.
Press, NY.

Dove, G. (2009). Beyond perceptual symbols: A call for
representational pluralism. Cognition, 110, 412–431.
Gelman, S.A., & Tardif, T. Z. (1998). Generic noun phrases in
English and Mandarin: An examination of child-directed
speech. Cognition, 66, 215–248.
Gelman, S. (2003). The essential child: Origins of
essentialism in everyday thought. London: Oxford
University Press.
Gelman, S. A., Goetz, P. J., Sarnecka, B. S., & Flukes, J.
(2008). Generic language in parent-child conversations.
Language Learning and Development, 4, 1-31.
Genone, J. & Lombrozo, T. (2012): Concept possession,
experimental semantics, and hybrid theories of reference,
Philosophical Psychology, 25:5, 717-742.
Goldin-Meadow, S., Gelman, S.A. & Mylander, C. (2005).
Expressing generic concepts with and without a language
model. Cognition, 96, 109-126.
Goodman, N. (1955). Fact, fiction & forecast. Cambridge,
MA . Harvard University Press.
Keil, F. C. (1989). Concepts, kinds, and cognitive
development. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Machery, E. (2009). Doing without concepts. Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press.
McNorgan, C., Kotack, R.A., Meehan, D.C., & McRae, K.
(2007). Feature-feature causal relations and statistical cooccurrences in object concepts. Memory & Cognition, 35,
418–431.
Medin, D., & Ortony, A. (1989). Psychological essentialism.
In S. Vosniadou, & A. Ortony (Eds.), Similarity and
analogical reasoning. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge
University Press.
Pappas, A. & Gelman, S.A. (1998). Generic noun phrases in
mother-child conversations. Journal of Child Language,
25, 19–33.
Prasada, S. (2012). Mechanisms for characterizing kinds and
classes. Recherches Linguistiques de Vincennes, 41, 45-62.

3238

