UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Unifying Theories of Consciousness, Attention, and Conscious Attention

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6hr8m178

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Haladjian, Harry
Montemayor, Carlos

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Unifying Theories of Consciousness, Attention, and Conscious Attention
Harry Haroutioun Haladjian (h.haladjian@uws.edu.au)
School of Social Sciences and Psychology, University of Western Sydney
Bankstown Campus, Penrith, NSW 2751 Australia

Carlos Montemayor (cmontema@sfsu.edu)
Department of Philosophy, San Francisco State University
San Francisco, CA 94132 USA
Abstract
One of the more challenging research areas in cognitive
science is the attempt to understand how the brain supports
consciousness. This historically philosophical endeavor is
now actively studied in the sciences, with research on visual
attention being an especially promising area that can further
our understanding of consciousness. A major problem with
this cross-disciplinary pursuit, however, is that for
philosophers and scientists, the terms consciousness,
attention, and conscious attention are ambiguous and used
differently even by those within the same academic discipline.
The goal of this paper is to begin laying the groundwork for a
unified study of consciousness by delineating common
terminology for attention and consciousness and by
identifying the relationship between the two within the study
of conscious attention. This includes categorizing current
theories according to a spectrum of theoretical complexity.
Keywords: attention; consciousness; conscious attention;
philosophy of mind; perception.

Introduction
Although the relationship between consciousness and
attention has been at the center of recent discussions in
cognitive science, the proposals for this relationship are
based on assumptions that are problematic. For instance, it
is often assumed that the terms “attention” and
“consciousness” unambiguously describe specific types of
mental phenomena that can be identified experimentally.
There is empirical evidence, however, that there are
different types of attention, with different neural correlates
that cannot be reduced to one another (Parasuraman, 2000),
which complicates the attempt to establish a clear
relationship between attention and consciousness.
Furthermore, while many authors think that it is plausible to
define “attention” in terms of several basic types of
attention, other theorists think that defining “attention” is
hopeless (see Allport, 1993; Johnston & Dark, 1986).
Similarly, some theorists think that there are at least two
types of consciousness (e.g., Block, 1995), and that only one
of them is strictly related to the subjective experience of
conscious awareness. Other theorists think that the “hard
problem” of consciousness (i.e., the study of phenomenal or
subjective experience) makes the empirical study of
consciousness, unlike the study of perceptual attention,
intractable (e.g., Chalmers, 1996; Nagel, 1974). Finally,
there are theorists who think that the hard problem of
consciousness is just a pseudo-problem, and that

consciousness can and must be studied empirically (e.g.,
Churchland, 1996; Dennett, 2005). These contrasting
opinions and approaches have complicated the study of
consciousness in relation to attention, often resulting in a
gridlock of concepts between opposing theories. It is
possible, however, that many of the current theories on
consciousness are not necessarily in opposition, since there
may be semantic ambiguities producing these disputes.
Because of the polysemy of the terms “attention” and
“consciousness”, one should avoid stipulating definitions
without first delineating empirical and theoretical
constraints that such definitions must satisfy. It is crucial to
determine whether the different theoretical perspectives
refer to the same types of attention and the same types of
consciousness. Based on empirical findings and a theoretical
classification of the possible views on this topic, we propose
definitions for forms of consciousness, forms of attention,
and forms of conscious attention in order to provide a
foundation to compare and move forward different theories.
Another goal of this paper is to offer a brief account of
recent theories on consciousness, with a focused
consideration of how empirical research on attention can
provide the grounding for an empirically-driven account of
consciousness. One way to do this is by analyzing recent
theories on consciousness and attention by categorizing
them according to a spectrum of theoretical complexity,
starting with the theories that impose the strictest
requirements on the interpretation of empirical findings to
those that allow the widest range of possible interpretations.
For instance, Jesse Prinz (2012) has defended the view that
consciousness is just attention. This “strict” view entails that
there cannot be any finding about attention that is not a
finding about consciousness and vice versa.
Although an identity approach is parsimonious, since it
reduces that kinds of cognitive processes associated with
consciousness and attention to a single type, it creates the
problem of reducing significantly the room for
interpretation. For example, the desideratum of empirical
adequacy seems to demand more theoretical leniency for the
interpretation of research findings that indicate
disassociations between attentional processing and
conscious awareness. Should it not be possible that some
form of attention exists without consciousness, even if
consciousness cannot occur without attention? Michael
Cohen and colleagues (2012) argue in favor of this
possibility. At the extreme opposite of the spectrum, one

2470

finds the view that consciousness and attention can be fully
dissociated (i.e., there can be forms of consciousness
without attention and vice versa) advocated by Koch and
Tsuchiya (2007) and Lamme (2003), among others. This
range of possible theoretical complexities provides insight
to the approach one can take in studying conscious
attention. Due to the diverging views, a meta-analysis is
crucial for advancing this field, and future work should
focus on such an in-depth analysis. We present a brief
overview of the development of the views described above
and outline the start of a such meta-analysis.

Problems of Consciousness
Thomas Nagel (1974) said that the problem of conscious
experience is what makes the mind-body problem both
interesting and intractable. The problem of how the mind
connects with the world would lose its allure, and even
become trivial or irrelevant, if one had no idea how
solutions to this problem would explain consciousness.
Once the theoretical and empirical options to account for
consciousness are carefully assessed, however, it becomes
clear that they are all problematic. The best way of
formulating the intractability of this problem is in terms of
what David Chalmers called the “hard problem” of
consciousness, that is, why would anything physical have
conscious experiences and what is the relationship between
physical brain processes and the subjective experience of
consciousness? Much has been written about this problem,
and there is now widespread consensus that it is not only a
difficult philosophical problem, but also one of science’s
more difficult unsolved puzzles.

Access vs. Phenomenal Consciousness
Although the problem of consciousness is remarkably
intricate, a great deal of progress has been made on the
theoretical front. A significant amount of conceptual clarity
has been achieved with respect to the question of why
functions for cognitive processing may explain some forms
of conscious integration required for working memory (what
Ned Block, 1995, calls access consciousness), but may not
suffice to account for the qualitative aspects of conscious
experiences (what Block calls phenomenal consciousness).
Access consciousness provides a “workspace” for concepts
and multi-sensory information to be accessed for the
purposes of reasoning and performing complex actions.
These do not necessarily need to reach awareness (i.e., reach
a cognitive state where one can report experiencing it).
Another theory, by David Rosenthal (2002), proposes that a
higher-order thought (HOT) is required for one to be
conscious of mental states. These are thoughts about mental
states (resulting from sensations or memory retrieval) that
allow us to be conscious of them. The relationship between
access and phenomenal consciousness (between thoughts
and higher-order thoughts in awareness) is one area where
attention research may help, for example, by clarifying how
thoughts move from access to phenomenal consciousness.

Self Consciousness
Another source of problems concerning treatments of
conscious perception is the role of the self in phenomenal
experience. A number of intricate questions originate from
this topic. Can one be conscious of something (an emotion,
a perceptual representation, etc.) without also being
conscious that one is conscious of it? Is the “self”
constitutive of every possible experience without itself
being experienced? How should we understand
consciousness, self-awareness, and the conscious self? One
problem with an emphasis on the “self” view is that it seems
to demand too much to account for all conscious creatures
and because of this reason, it seems to be empirically
implausible. Christof Koch (2012), for instance, argues that
the self is not necessary to have conscious experiences. He
criticizes the mirror test, which infants and most animals
fail, as a test for consciousness (although it seems to be a
good test for self-awareness). The reasoning is that infants
and many animals must have some kind of consciousness
(of the phenomenal kind) because they experience pain, feel
emotions, etc. They may not have self-consciousness but,
the claim is, they do have phenomenal consciousness.
Plausible as this criticism is, however, the relationship
between consciousness and self is much more intricate than
first appearances suggest. In a passage where Koch is
defining the scientific problem of consciousness, he uses
two incompatible interpretations of the word “self” when
criticizing the conclusion that failure to pass the mirror test
indicates the lack of consciousness. One notion of the “self”
is the higher-order self that recognizes a particular thought
as hers (the recognitional self). Koch seems justified in
claiming that the recognitional capacities associated with
this kind of self may not be necessary for consciousness.
But how to interpret the more primitive “self” that Koch
associates with experiences of “flow” (the phenomenal
self)? This is a central question that needs to be answered in
order to understand the relationship between higher forms of
self-awareness and phenomenal consciousness.

Unconscious Processes
The progress on the experimental front in consciousness
research has been dramatic. The situation changed from
being one in which the problem was completely ignored
(perhaps because it seemed an intractable problem) to one in
which substantial resources are spent in research
laboratories, producing valuable empirical evidence about
the nature of conscious awareness. What paved the way
towards this progress was the experimental research on
unconscious perception and unconscious cognitive
processing. Bernard Baars (1988), for instance, used wellknown unconscious processes (with established research
methodologies) to probe the contours of conscious
processing. The comparison between the neural correlates of
conscious and unconscious processing has already produced
crucial insights into the nature of conscious awareness. For
example, the thesis that consciousness is the result of a
highly integrative process that occurs in a “global

2471

workspace” (Baars, 2002) has been confirmed with
neuroscientific evidence (e.g., Dehaene & Naccache, 2001;
Di Lollo, Enns, & Rensink, 2000).
Another area of advancement is the range of related topics
that are studied experimentally with the goal of better
understanding consciousness. Experiments on conscious and
unconscious perception, binocular rivalry, and mental
imagery have expanded our knowledge of perceptual
awareness. Additionally, research on the distinction between
conscious inclinations for action and the unconscious
processes that guide motor control has shown that the
processes that reach awareness are indeed just the tip of the
cognitive processing iceberg (Rosenbaum, 2002).

Contents of Consciousness
An important philosophical development that has taken
place in the last few years is the incorporation of insights
made by psychologists and phenomenologists concerning
the content of conscious experience. Susanna Siegel (2006),
for example, uses the notion of phenomenal contrasts (a
change in how one experiences something) in order to
account for the content of conscious vision. This topic in the
philosophy of perception concerns our understanding of the
difference between conscious perception, illusions, dreams,
and hallucinations.
In the history of cognitive psychology, ambiguous
images have been considered a paradigmatic case of such
contrasts. In the Necker cube (a geometrically ambiguous
image that appears to point upward or downward) or the
“duck-rabbit” drawing (a semantically ambiguous image
that can look like a duck or a rabbit), the stimulus—or
perceptual content—does not change but the subject
experiences it in one of two alternative ways at a time, and
never both at the same time. It is an established finding in
vision science that these images alternate at a constant rate,
regardless of the intentions of the subject. At first, one
interpretation is salient, then it recedes and the other
incompatible interpretation becomes the salient one. The
subject can also direct her attention, however, and “flip” the
interpretations, for example, by focusing on one of the inner
corners of the Necker cube (e.g., focusing on the lower inner
corner where three edges meet will encourage the
ambiguous drawing to be perceived as an upward pointing
cube). These attentional contrasts with phenomenological
implications show that voluntary and involuntary forms of
attention interact with consciously experienced contents in
analogous ways.
Other phenomenal changes seem to depend
fundamentally on attention, rather than represented content.
In discussing the implications of findings on visual attention
by Marisa Carrasco and colleagues (e.g., Carrasco, Ling, &
Read, 2004; Carrasco & Yeshurun, 2009), Block argues that
the phenomenal changes in experience, based on changes in
attention, are not dependent on either external changes or
changes in conceptual aspects of the stimuli (such as
semantic ambiguity or expertise). He notes that the quality
of these experiences (which he calls “mental paint”) feels

“unreal”, similar to visual experiences concerning
afterimages. Block contends that these findings cannot be
explained as illusions because the percept relies on how
attention is allocated rather than being a true
misrepresentation of the stimuli. The “subjective unreality”
of these changes, Block (2010) claims, has not received any
empirical investigation. They also remain unaccounted for
in a broader theoretical treatment of consciousness. Here is
where the study of attention can provide important insights.

What Is Attention?
Attention research in cognitive psychology is quite active
and covers a range of processes—from low-level perceptual
systems to high-level cognitive systems. These processes act
as “selection” mechanisms to determine what information
reaches higher-level cognition, including conscious
awareness. In this discussion, we are mainly referring to
visual attention, which has the most active research. It is
accepted in the scientific community that there are several
types of attention comprised of distinct cognitive systems,
which have been identified and supported through studies in
neuroscience. For example, Posner and Petersen (1990)
argued that there are at least three systems that are
individually responsible for alerting, orienting, and target
detection or executive function (e.g., the top-down
processes of visual search). These classifications have held
up over years of research, although there is recent evidence
for additional attention networks for self-regulation and selfcontrol (Petersen & Posner, 2012). It is crucial to identify
the implications of the various forms of attention on
cognition, especially to understand how attention and
consciousness are related.

Bottom-up vs. Top-down Attention
Attention can be stimulus-driven and automatically guided
toward important external events that involuntarily catch the
focus of attention, or it can be voluntarily guided through
willful selection. This distinction is commonly conceived as
bottom-up versus top-down processing (see Theeuwes,
2010). That is, attention can be thought of as a process that
is exogenous, data-driven, and beyond our control in a
cognitively impenetrable manner (bottom-up). This includes
pre-attentive mechanisms that are reflexive in nature, such
that salient features bias the neural activity for selection into
higher processes and can affect behavior without reaching
conscious awareness. Alternatively, attention can be
described as being endogenous and more deliberate, which
biases the competing neural activity in lower-level cognition
based on the goals of the current task (top-down). This
dichotomy has been challenged recently because there are
other forms of attention that do not neatly fall into these
categories, such as when learned rewards or habits influence
attention (Awh, Belopolsky, & Theeuwes, 2012).
Nevertheless, there are many attentional processes that fall
under one of these two descriptions.

2472

Effortless vs. Effortful Attention
Effortless attention, like bottom-up attention, is thought of
as an involuntary, sensory form of attention and does not
always reach conscious awareness. These “effortless”
processes serve to obtain information from the environment
for higher-level representations (which often require more
effort to maintain). On the other end of this spectrum is
effortful attention, which, like top-down attention, can be
described as focused, deliberate, voluntary, or goal-driven
and produces the subjective feeling of expending effort.
Some complex attentional processes, however, can be so
engrossing that they produce the subjective feeling of being
involved in a task effortlessly such that one loses a sense of
time (Bruya, 2010). It is this latter version of effortless
attention that is particularly insightful, which may be related
to expertise and is suggestive of how memory systems can
interact with attention to influence the perception of effort
and time (it is not a straightforward process).

Varieties of Attention
Beyond the distinctions described above, attention has been
characterized under several “varieties”. Attention can be
feature-based (see Maunsell & Treue, 2006) and drawn to
types of features, generally organized according to
specialized regions in the brain that process certain types of
sensory information (such as color, motion, or segment
orientation). It can also be object-based (Scholl, 2001) and
drawn to things in the world that display object-like
properties (e.g., cohesion, symmetry). Feature Integration
Theory and Object File Theory describe how object-based
attention can operate via “object file” representations
(Kahneman, Treisman, & Gibbs, 1992; Treisman & Gelade,
1980). This is a two stage process that requires the
individuation of objects (a bottom-up process) and the
identification of the object after a selective attention binds
and maintains the features in an object file. This exemplifies
the interaction between low-level and high-level forms of
attention that makes the study of attention so complex.
Another influential model for attention is the “spotlight
model” (Posner, Snyder, & Davidson, 1980), where
attention can be focused on a specific region, or it can be
distributed and more diffuse to cover more area (with less
detail). This spatial attention operates on empty space or
objects in space, and also can quickly determine the “gist”
of the information present. Covert attention is a particularly
insightful form of attention and refers to the voluntary shift
of attention outside the center of one’s gaze (Wright &
Ward, 2008). This has been shown through various tasks
where a subject views a center of a stimulus display but
shifts the focus of attention to the periphery without moving
their eyes (or making other physical movements). This type
of attention may correspond to the ability to attend to certain
thoughts from memory or other mental states that are not
immediately linked to sensory information.
Additionally, research on attention has identified peculiar
phenomena such as blindsight, inattentional blindness, and
the attentional blink. All these describe occasions when

attention fails to perform as expected, particularly because
focused attention overlooks targets (e.g., during a search
task). The failures may be due to the relevant information
not being detected by low-level sensory receptors or could
be higher up where it fails to reach awareness. This
exemplifies the complexity of the systems that make up the
broad term of “attention”, which all have the common goal
of selecting perceptual information for cognitive processes.

Conscious Attention
A problem in the empirical study of consciousness is how to
identify and explain all the nuances of the theoretical
understanding of consciousness at the neural level. For
example, even if the experimental evidence confirms that
consciousness correlates with a specific pattern of neural
activation, what would that finding signify? Could we be
able to distinguish access consciousness from phenomenal
consciousness? Could it be that the pattern of activation is
literally just correlated with consciousness and it neither
explains nor identifies what is truly unique about it (i.e., it
corresponds to the integration of information but not to the
integration mechanism)? Much has been said about this
issue, and we will not provide a metaphysical thesis here
about the relevance (or lack thereof) of attempts to identify
the neural correlates of consciousness. Despite the
difficulties underlying the metaphysics of consciousness, we
believe that the progress on the experimental front has been
substantive. By focusing on the largely unexplored issue of
conscious attention, we can outline the general features of
an adequate theory of consciousness that would successfully
guide future empirical research.
One way of clarifying the relationship between
consciousness and attention is by examining the relationship
responsible for successful reductions. The spectrum of
views that are possible, from most to least restrictive,
include: 1) Identity between consciousness and attention,
with specific definitions of the kinds of consciousness and
attention at stake; 2) Dissociative views of consciousness
and attention, where there are several forms of attention
without consciousness, but only one form of conscious
attention, and attention is a necessary condition for
consciousness; 3) Dissociative views that indicate all forms
of consciousness are of the same type but that attention is
not a necessary condition for consciousness; 4) Dissociative
views that indicate there are forms of attention without
consciousness but no possible form of consciousness
without attention, although there may be many forms of
conscious attention; and 5) Full dissociation between
consciousness and attention.
The identity thesis for consciousness and attention is the
most restrictive of these views and is akin to the reduction
of questions about “life” to questions about DNA.
According to this view, consciousness just is attention (e.g.,
Prinz, 2012). There are advantages of this view, but there
are also major problems, both theoretical (Koch &
Tsuchiya, 2007) and empirical (Kentridge, 2011). Many of
these problems are best understood as possible responses to

2473

two different questions. 1) Are all forms of attention forms
of conscious attention? The intuitive response is yes, but the
empirical evidence is not clear-cut. 2) The inverse question:
are all forms of consciousness forms of conscious attention?
Here, things are much trickier and no obvious response
seems without problems. The leading intuitions have
epistemic or metaphysical flavors, but no leading intuition
clearly commands the inquiry. Furthermore, this concerns
only theoretical issues—when one looks at the empirical
evidence, things are equally tricky. Despite its intuitive
strength, the identity thesis is too simplistic to account for
such intricate issues as identifying the various systems
supporting consciousness and attention—but full
dissociation seems to be too strong and so a landscape of
options emerges. There seems to be attention without
consciousness, for example, as in the case of blindsight.
How prevalent are these forms of unconscious attention
(i.e., to what extent do they guide cognitive processing)?
There may be consciousness without attention and the same
consideration about scope is pertinent. Depending on the
degree of dissociation, one can envision several possibilities
with critical theoretical implications.
What are the possible outcomes? Suppose the degree of
dissociation is insignificant. In this case, one could
distinguish a few forms of consciousness without attention
(or vice versa), but they would be rare cases of little
consequence such that one could almost identify
consciousness with attention. Yet, even in this case several
questions remain. Why would these forms of consciousness
without attention (or vice versa) exist? All issues of scope
are relevant here. Suppose that all forms of attention are
forms of conscious attention but that there are a few cases of
consciousness without attention (or attention without
consciousness). This possibility would suggest that these
forms of consciousness could not be easily integrated with
attentional processes, where some forms of consciousness
are more resilient to cognitive integration with other
processes than others. Or perhaps it is strictly due to there
being two fundamental kinds of consciousness.
Suppose, on the contrary, that the degree of dissociation is
severe (we focus only on these polar opposites in this
paper). Some cases of conscious attention could be
associated with what Block calls mental paint, and be highly
if not fully dependent upon subjectively unreal attentional
contrasts. Other cases of conscious attention could be highly
representational and depend on specific mental contents (as
attention is generally understood). Finally, other cases of
attention could be directed to the conscious self. Of course,
there will be many cases in which attention is not
accompanied by consciousness (at least phenomenal
consciousness) and there will also be cases in which
consciousness is not accompanied by attention. The main
result would be that consciousness and attention are
integrated in some cases, but operate independently from
one another. Based on current empirical evidence, however,
there is only weak support for consciousness without
attention, because there are several types of attention that

must be examined when testing for the presence of
consciousness without attention, and studies that claim this
dissociation have failed to do so (see Cohen, et al., 2012).
Also, this dissociation is unlikely if one accepts the premise
that the purpose of attention is to determine what
information reaches conscious awareness.
Examining the findings in neuroscience should help
clarify the relationship between attention and consciousness.
It is accepted that different areas of the brain support
different forms of attention. For example, it seems that the
cerebellum and other more “primitive” areas of the brain are
not necessary for consciousness (Koch, 2012), and yet the
cerebellum is crucial for navigation and thus has several
areas devoted to attending to features of the environment.
Areas associated with emotion, perception, and motivation,
which were thought to be deeply related to phenomenal
consciousness, are also unnecessary for conscious
awareness. So based on the neuroscientific findings, one can
make a very plausible case for dissociation. This conclusion
has to be evaluated in conjunction with the considerations
that led theorists to propose the identity thesis. Furthermore,
innovative theories on how consciousness emerges, for
example, from recurrent processes in the brain (Lamme,
2006), must be considered in this work.
To advance the understanding of conscious attention, one
must provide an integrated account of consciousness and
attention based on the latest psychological and neurological
findings. By doing so, we can elucidate theoretical
distinctions fundamental for an adequate understanding of
the conscious mind, such as the distinction between higher
forms of self-awareness (e.g., the recognitional self) and
more minimal ones (e.g., the phenomenal self). Also, higher
forms of attention and consciousness may be associated
with the emergence of social interactions within species.
That is, as social interactions become more complex (e.g.,
monogamous mating, social hierarchies, ability to follow
gaze), a more sophisticated cognitive system is necessary
and this may be correlated to consciousness. Research
considering such a social account is also warranted.

Conclusion
In order to advance the empirical study of consciousness
and attention, a concerted effort must be made to unify the
two areas in terms of language and goals. Attention research
is a promising area for understanding consciousness,
especially by clarifying the relationship between
consciousness and attention via conscious attention. A main
insight from the research findings on attention, which
should guide future inquiry, is that attention is mainly
concerned with connecting cognitive processing with
objects in the external world by processing selective
information—it is more analytic and selective in nature than
consciousness, which is highly integrative. The past
attention research in cognitive psychology, however,
presents a challenge for integrated accounts with
consciousness, such as the one we pursue here. Most
psychologists working on attention had, because of the

2474

intractability of the problem of consciousness mentioned
above, either no interest in consciousness or no way to
connect their findings with such considerations. Findings on
focused attention, divided attention, failures of attention,
and other aspects of attention shaped the field without
making it explicit how they were compatible with theories
of consciousness. Making these connections explicit is
another crucial goal for future work that will inform our
understanding of conscious attention, and can only emerge
from a unified theoretical and conceptual understanding.

Acknowledgments
This research was partially funded through a Postdoctoral
Fellowship from the University of Western Sydney (HHH).

References
Allport, A. (1993). Attention and control. Have we been
asking the wrong questions? A critical review of 25 years.
In D. E. Meyer & S. Kornblum (Eds.), Attention and
Performance XIV (pp. 183-218). Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Awh, E., Belopolsky, A. V., & Theeuwes, J. (2012). Topdown versus bottom-up attentional control: A failed
theoretical dichotomy. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
16(8), 437-43.
Baars, B. J. (1988). A cognitive theory of consciousness.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Baars, B. J. (2002). The conscious access hypothesis:
Origins and recent evidence. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 6(1), 47-52.
Block, N. (1995). On a confusion about a function of
consciousness. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 18(2),
227-47.
Block, N. (2010). Attention and mental paint. Philosophical
Issues, 20(1), 23-63.
Bruya, B. (2010). Effortless attention: A new perspective in
the cognitive science of attention and action. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Carrasco, M., Ling, S., & Read, S. (2004). Attention alters
appearance. Nature Neuroscience, 7(3), 308-13.
Carrasco, M., & Yeshurun, Y. (2009). Covert attention
effects on spatial resolution. Progress in Brain Research,
176, 65-86.
Chalmers, D. J. (1996). The conscious mind: In search of a
fundamental theory. New York: Oxford University Press.
Churchland, P. S. (1996). The Hornswoggle problem.
Journal of Consciousness Studies, 3(5-6), 402-8.
Cohen, M. A., Cavanagh, P., Chun, M. M., & Nakayama, K.
(2012). The attentional requirements of consciousness.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 16(8), 411-7.
Dehaene, S., & Naccache, L. (2001). Towards a cognitive
neuroscience of consciousness: Basic evidence and a
workspace framework. Cognition, 79(1-2), 1-37.
Dennett, D. C. (2005). Sweet dreams: Philosophical
obstacles to a science of consciousness. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.

Di Lollo, V., Enns, J. T., & Rensink, R. A. (2000).
Competition for consciousness among visual events: The
psychophysics of reentrant visual processes. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 129(4), 481-507.
Johnston, W. A., & Dark, V. J. (1986). Selective attention.
Annual Review of Psychology, 37, 43-75.
Kahneman, D., Treisman, A., & Gibbs, B. J. (1992). The
reviewing of object files: Object-specific integration of
information. Cognitive Psychology, 24(2), 175-219.
Kentridge, R. W. (2011). Attention without awareness: A
brief review. In C. Mole, D. Smithies & W. Wu (Eds.),
Attention: Philosophical and psychological essays (pp.
228-46). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Koch, C. (2012). Consciousness: Confessions of a romantic
reductionist. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Koch, C., & Tsuchiya, N. (2007). Attention and
consciousness: Two distinct brain processes. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 11(1), 16-22.
Lamme, V. A. (2003). Why visual attention and awareness
are different. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7(1), 12-8.
Lamme, V. A. (2006). Towards a true neural stance on
consciousness. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 10(11), 494501.
Maunsell, J. H., & Treue, S. (2006). Feature-based attention
in visual cortex. Trends in Neurosciences, 29(6), 317-22.
Nagel, T. (1974). What is it like to be a bat? Philosophical
Review, 83(4), 435-50.
Parasuraman, R. (2000). The attentive brain. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Petersen, S. E., & Posner, M. I. (2012). The attention system
of the human brain: 20 years after. Annual Review of
Neuroscience, 35, 73-89.
Posner, M. I., & Petersen, S. E. (1990). The attention system
of the human brain. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 13,
25-42.
Posner, M. I., Snyder, C. R., & Davidson, B. J. (1980).
Attention and the detection of signals. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 109(2), 160-74.
Prinz, J. J. (2012). The conscious brain: How attention
engenders experience. New York: Oxford University Press.
Rosenbaum, D. M. (2002). Motor control. In H. E. Pashler
& S. Yantis (Eds.), Stevens' handbook of experimental
psychology: Sensation and perception (3rd ed., Vol. 1, pp.
315-39). New York: Wiley.
Rosenthal, D. M. (2002). How many kinds of
consciousness? Consciousness and Cognition, 11(4), 65365.
Scholl, B. J. (2001). Objects and attention: The state of the
art. Cognition, 80(1-2), 1-46.
Siegel, S. (2006). Subject and object in the contents of
visual experience. Philosophical Review, 115(3), 355-88.
Theeuwes, J. (2010). Top-down and bottom-up control of
visual selection. Acta Psychologica, 135(2), 77-99.
Treisman, A. M., & Gelade, G. (1980). A feature-integration
theory of attention. Cognitive Psychology, 12(1), 97-136.
Wright, R. D., & Ward, L. M. (2008). Orienting of
attention. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

2475

