UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Uniquely human developmental timing may drive cerebral lateralization and
interhemispheric coupling

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5pb7p80d

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Cipollini, Benjamin
Cottrell, Garrison

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Uniquely human developmental timing may drive
cerebral lateralization and interhemispheric collaboration
Ben Cipollini (bcipolli@cogsci.ucsd.edu)
Department of Cognitive Science, 9500 Gilman Dr
La Jolla, CA 92093 USA

Garrison Cottrell (cottrell@eng.ucsd.edu)
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, 9500 Gilman Dr
La Jolla, CA 92093 USA
Abstract

brains. Whether or not the delay magnitude hypothesis is correct, it certainly is not complete.
We hypothesize that functional lateralization is not caused
by the magnitude of conduction delays. First, we’ll review
literature that supports our hypothesis. We’ll present a reanalysis of Ringo et al. (1994) that severely restricts the scope
of their results. We’ll propose a new hypothesis that the developmental trajectory of human brains enables functional
lateralization–specifically, that the vast and accelerated postnatal expansion of brain size and delayed maturation of the
corpus callosum causes unreliable timing of interhemispheric
information in pre-adult humans. We’ll review literature supporting this hypothesis, then we’ll present our own model
supporting the plausibility of our developmentalhypothesis.
Finally, we’ll summarize our results and discuss implications
of our findings to the general phenomena of lateralization,
asymmetry, and cognition.

Cerebral lateralization is intertwined with virtually every cognitive function that we think makes us human. Yet a clear dichotomy has never been explained: lateralized processing suggests independent, local development of neural circuits, but the
complementary nature of lateralized functions and extremely
strong functional coupling between homologous areas suggest
robust interhemispheric interactions. Here, we review literature and present modeling evidence that this dichotomy can be
explained by the uniquely steep trajectory of human post-natal
brain growth. This drastic volumetric change cause most long
distance, interhemispheric connections to be more unreliable
than shorter, intrahemispheric connections, leading to lateralization. Strong interhemispheric collaboration is enabled by
the later maturation and myelination of long-distance callosal
connections. We also review and reanalyze a well-cited modeling paper (Ringo, Doty, Demeter, and Simard (1994)) thought
to show a relationship between the degree of hemispheric coordination and length of conduction delays, showing that previous claims have a clear alternative explanation.
Keywords: corpus callosum; lateralization; asymmetry; conduction delays;

The failure of conduction delay magnitude
Callosal axons are especially long in humans, due to their
need to traverse through our large, highly gyrified brains to
connect to the opposite hemisphere. Because the average conduction velocity of axons does not sufficiently compensate
for the additional axon lengths when compared to smallerbrained animals, the resulting interhemispheric transmission
delay over the majority of callosal axons is longer in human
brains. The delay magnitude hypothesis suggests that this
increased delay would cause less interhemispheric collaboration and therefore enable cerebral asymmetry.
While the anatomy and physiology of callosal axons is
well-established, their seemingly intuitive effects on interhemispheric collaboration is supported by a single model in a
single paper (Ringo et al., 1994). Here, we argue against the
delay magnitude hypothesis in two parts. First, we present 4
results from the literature that are inconsistent with the delay
magnitude hypothesis. Second, we show that the model itself
does not support the hypothesis.

Introduction
A single concept, supported by a single paper, has dominated
thought as to the origins of cerebral lateralization. The modeling work of Ringo et al. (1994) has been exclusively and
extensively cited to support the notion that large magnitude
conduction delays, due to the large human brain size, enable
cerebral lateralization. This delay magnitude hypothesis has
intuitive appeal, as it supports another long-held notion: that
some combination of large brains and functional lateralization have made us human.
There is no denying the importance of functional lateralization in human cognitive abilities; we are functionally
lateralized in virtually all cognitive functions that we think
are special to our species, including language, high-precision
manual use of tools, spatial processing abilities, and even our
emotional processing (Gazzaniga, 2000; Craig, 2005). There
is also no denying, however, that the lateralized hemispheres
are also tightly coupled in terms of both their complementary abilities (Gazzaniga, 2000; Hellige, 2006) and their functional coupling (Stark et al., 2008). This dichotomy is simply
not captured by the delay magnitude hypothesis. Nor does the
hypothesis account for the anatomical and functional asymmetries that appear throughout the animal kingdom (Rogers
& Andrew, 2002; Rogers, 2009) in organisms with small

1. Increased interhemispheric collaboration is
associated with an increase in slow fibers
Larger corpus callosum size is associated with less lateralization. This is true for regions of the corpus callosum,
as well as the corpus callosum as a whole. The midbody
of the callosum, which carries fibers to and from motor

334

cortex, is larger for individuals with less lateralization in
handedness (Witelson, 1989; Luders et al., 2010). Callosal
cross-sectional area is proportionally larger for left-handers
(Witelson, 1985), who show less functional lateralization
than right-handers.
Within humans, larger corpus callosum size is associated
with a larger number of thin fibers, not with the thickness
of fibers (Aboitiz, Scheibel, Fisher, & Zaidel, 1992). This
suggests that those with more interhemispheric collaboration
have significantly more slow fibers–just the opposite of what
the delay magnitude hypothesis would predict.

mammals (born with our eyes open), we are the only species
known to extend the accelerated rate of prenatal brain growth
well beyond birth (Martin, 1983). This means that the rate of
brain growth is especially high in humans.
Lewis and Elman (2008) used a version of Ringo et al.’s
model to show that, the steeper the developmental brain
growth curve, the more detrimental interhemispheric connections are to learning. This is due to the fact that, as brain size
changes more quickly, the conduction delays change more as
well, and those larger changes are more detrimental to learning. As their model “matured”, even though the magnitude
of delays were longer, because they were more stable, they
promoted interhemispheric collaboration.
The delay magnitude hypothesis only addresses mature,
adult brains. We suggest that taking a developmental angle
to this problem may give more general results.

2. Homotopic areas show functional coupling
The corpus callosum largely connects corresponding (homotopic) areas between left and right cerebral hemispheres.
Thus, according to the delay magnitude hypothesis, homotopic areas connected with slow, thin fibers (Aboitiz & Montiel, 2003) should show weak functional connectivity. In fact,
this is not the case at all. For example, when examining interhemispheric correlations through resting-state fMRI, Stark
et al. (2008) found very strong interhemispheric correlations
between association areas. Reduced interhemispheric coherence (measured with EEG) at locations away from primary
sensory/motor cortices has been measured in mental disabilities or diseases, such as dyslexia (Dhar, Been, Minderaa, &
Althaus, 2010) and schizophrenia (Hoptman et al., 2012).
Hellige (2006) points out that functional specializations
tend to be complementary. For example, visual processing
of the left hemisphere seems biased towards high frequency
processing, while the right hemisphere seems biased towards
low-frequency processing (Sergent, 1982; Ivry & Robertson,
1998). If there is less interhemispheric integration due to
more independent processing, then why would the two hemispheres show any type of relationship at all? The delay magnitude hypothesis offers no answer.

5. Delays only affect the onset of communication

Figure 1: (a) The model architecture of Ringo et al. (1994).
Information flows from bottom to top; left model hemisphere is to the left, and right model hemisphere is to the
right. Arrows represent full connections between pre- and
post-synaptic units. All delays are 1 time-step, except the
interhemispheric (“callosal”) connections, whose delay were
varied across conditions. Note the shared output nodes,
which allow an (unintended) path for fast interhemispheric
coordination independent of the “callosal” connections.

3. Longer delays may support coordination
The corpus callosum in larger brains doesn’t simply have
longer conduction delays; it also has a broader range of conduction delays. Innocenti (2011) reviewed data suggesting
that a broader range of conduction delays supports a broader
range of oscillations across the corpus callosum (Caminiti,
Ghaziri, Galuske, Hof, & Innocenti, 2009), which may increase the stability of those oscillations (Roberts & Robinson,
2008). The current belief is that these oscillations are necessary for binding of information between two distant cortical
areas (Fries, 2005); stabilization of inter hemispheric oscillations would presumably enhance interhemispheric communication. Thus, longer delays may be associated with improved
ability to coordinate interhemispheric integration.

(b) The model architecture of Lewis and Elman (2008)
simplifies the structure and splits the inputs and outputs.
The model failed to control all interhemispheric transfer
Although Ringo et al. aimed to separate interhemispheric
communication through long conduction delays, their model
setup failed to do so (Fig. 1a). In addition to their “callosal”
connections that were varied with short and long delays, their
model also had converging connections from the hemispheres
to a shared bank of output nodes, whose delays were always
short. Thus, even if they re-trained their models without any
“callosal” connections, the hemispheres would still show interhemispheric dependence; one hemisphere would not be
able to complete the task without the other.1 This issue is

4. Shorter delays are detrimental in development
Many ideas of how the human brain may be unique have been
debunked, including suggestions that the human brain is specially gyrified or has a unique fundamental asymmetry. Human brains are clearly unique developmentally–as precocial

1 We

335

in fact verified this through simulations using their model.

The results are often misunderstood and misinterpreted
Fig. 3 describes the Ringo et al. methods; Fig. 3a shows the
original results. Citations to this paper are often made to
support the notion that functional lateralization is inevitable,
given the human brain size. This is a misrepresentation of the
Ringo et al. results. In the paper, the authors only claim that
lateralization at short settling times is caused by long delays.
Tasks that allow “multiple passes” across the callosum were
interpreted to show indistinguishable results across delays.
In fact, the original Ringo et al. results do not show anything except a static delay in interhemispheric coordination,
of exactly the value of a single pass across the model corpus callosum. When we transpose the results from the two
models by this value (9 time steps), the two models are indistinguishable (see Fig. 2 for details). This suggests that the
only change in interhemispheric interactions found by their
model is a simple, static delay in onset of interhemispheric
communication, of a value equal to the time it takes for information to move from one hemisphere to the other. Note that
this onset of activity may be mediated by “gigantic” callosal
fibers–the largest 0.1% of fibers that do vary with brain size
(Olivares, Montiel, & Aboitiz, 2001; Wang, 2008), an effect
not captured in this model.
The model does not provide any evidence of qualitatively
reduced interhemispheric interaction, only weak evidence for
a (slightly) delayed one.

a. Original Ringo et al. (1994) data
100
% correct output patterns

an important confound in interpreting their results.
This issue was addressed in the only paper to follow-up
the Ringo et al. study, by simply splitting the output nodes
into two separate banks (Lewis & Elman, 2008), as depicted
in Fig. 1b. All modeling work in this paper uses this same
split-output architecture.

Delay=10
Delay=1

b. Delay=1 shifted by 9 time−steps
100

80

80

60

60

40

40

10

20

30

40 50 60
time steps

70

80

10

Delay=10
Delay=1

20

30

40 50 60
time steps

70

80

Figure 2: (a) Original data from Ringo et al. (1994), showing
performance of networks after lesioning interhemispheric
fibers, for two networks with different interhemispheric
delays (1 time-step vs. 10 time-steps). Different networks
were required to process across a range of times (x-axis;
15-75 time-steps), while they were trained to output binary
strings that were associated with particular input binary
strings. After training, “callosal” connections were lesioned,
and network performance was measured. The network with
the shorter interhemispheric delays (D=1; empty triangles)
shows poorer performance on networks running for fewer
time-steps (x-axis=15-30 time-steps); this was interpreted as
indicating less interhemispheric interaction.
(b) We expect a network with delay=1 and delay=10 to
have a difference of 9 time-steps to the onset of hemispheric
interaction. We shifted the D=1 curve by 9 time-steps later
(right on the x-axis) to allow us to visualize any qualitative
difference in the interhemispheric interaction outside of this
difference in onset. The overlap of the curves suggest that
there is no other variation in interhemispheric communication
besides this simple static delay.

Our hypothesis: changes in timing reliability

disrupts the reliability of timing between cortical areas will
have a detrimental effect on their coordination.
In reviewing the developmental literature, we did find one
source of variability in the coordination of timing that is relevant to the corpus callosum: unreliable conduction delays in
unmyelinated fibers with a thickness less than 0.5µm (Wang,
2008). Interestingly, in all adult animal species, callosal fibers
are rarely found with a thickness below 0.5µm (Aboitiz &
Montiel, 2003). However, neonates have a preponderance of
such fibers2 (Berbel & Innocenti, 1988; LaMantia & Rakic,
1990). While some of these small-diameter, unmyelinated
fibers persist into adulthood, many become myelinated and all
become more reliable by increases in their diameter (Aboitiz
& Montiel, 2003).
Thus, we have a mechanism that fits all of our criteria: initially thin axon diameters decrease the reliability of the timing of information on a timescale relevant to neural processing (individual spikes), and follow a developmental trajectory
that would initially support more independence (through less

The delay magnitude hypothesis fails to explain the basic dichotomy of how functional areas become both lateralized and
functionally coupled. The developmental time-course of the
thin callosal fibers suggest a two stage process to us: an initial stage where all associative / pre-frontal white-matter connections are immature, favoring local processing, and then a
later stage were white-matter connections mature and come
on-line. This pattern is well-supported in white matter in
general, with some support in the corpus callosum as well
(e.g. the anterior, frontal portion) (Jernigan, Baar, Stiles, &
Madsen, 2011). Current imaging technologies can only detect particular types of maturational changes, with those that
we outline below (relatively small changes in fiber diameter)
currently excluded.
As mentioned above, previous work by Lewis and Elman
suggested that unreliability in conduction delays could affect interhemispheric processing. However, though human
postnatal brain growth is fast compared to other species, it is
still quite slow compared to the time-scale of plasticity in the
brain. Based on their work, we suggest that any factor that

2 This may be due to the need to compress brain size for successful birthing, and lower compressability of grey matter.

336

For this study, we set a fixed total time (30 time-steps) and
interhemispheric delay (10 time-steps).

reliable timing), with developmental maturation tending towards interhemispheric collaboration (more reliable timing).
We hypothesize that association areas develop with decreased interhemispheric contributions, due to the unreliability of interhemispheric signals through small, unreliable
fibers . This allows for the hemispheres to develop independently, which enables asymmetries to develop. Developmental changes in these fibers (diameter increases and myelination) make them reliable, and interhemispheric coordination
comes online. In the discussion section, we’ll expand this
hypothesis to show exactly how it can address each of the
questions laid out above.

Experimental Setup
We measured two values for performance: the classification
error was the percentage of output nodes that were not within
0.5 of their expected output value (+1 or −1), and the training error was the average (sum-squared) error at each output node. For each of these values, the lesion-induced error was computed as difference between performance of the
intact and lesioned network, as was done in Lewis and Elman. Again following that paper, our dataset contained both
intrahemispheric patterns (50% of the input patterns), one
hemisphere could determine its output without receiving any
information from the other, as well as interhemispheric patterns (50% of the input patterns), one hemisphere had to receive information from the other hemisphere to choose between 4 possible output strings. This allowed a more nuanced
analysis of network performance differences.
Importantly, we operationalized unreliable conduction delays as Gaussian noise of the activity (instantaneous firing
rate) transmitted over fixed (reliable) delays. In a rate-coding
system, variation in the arrival of individual spikes, or a missing spike, leads to jitter in the instantaneous firing rate. We
implemented this jitter directly in our rate-coded network as
Gaussian noise on the activity, on a per-synapse basis. The
jitter was a function of the delay at each synapse6 .
We ran 25 no-noise networks first (without any noise introduced on interhemispheric connections), to establish baseline measures. The networks were trained until they had zero
classification error or until 1000 training epochs elapsed. Every 100 epochs, we measured error in the in-tact networks, as
well as lesion-induced error. We then duplicated this procedure for 25 noise networks, which were identical except for
having random Gaussian noise (2% of average unit activity)
injected on the interhemispheric connections.
We thought that introducing Gaussian noise would cause
interhemispheric information to be less reliable than intrahemispheric information, causing intra-hemispheric patterns
to be learned more independently of the other hemisphere,
and delaying learning of interhemispheric patterns. Therefore, we predicted that (1) the learning trajectory of the network with interhemispheric noise would be more gradual (i.e.
have a smaller slope), and asymptote earlier. We also predicted that lesion-induced error would be lower in the noise
vs. no-noise networks.

Methods
We implemented a version of Lewis and Elman’s model (Fig.
1b), which uses rate-coded leaky-integrator units. We suggest this is plausible: asymmetries are linked to higher-order
cortical areas (Sergent, 1982; Schenker, Sherwood, Hof, &
Semendeferi, 2007) which tend to interconnect over the corpus callosum using slow fibers (Aboitiz & Montiel, 2003) that
are suggested to use rate-coding, rather than spike-time coding employed by thicker, faster fibers (Wang, 2008).
All connections in the model carry a delay; in all simulations cited and implemented, intrahemispheric delays are set
to 1 time-step. Each hemisphere consists of 5 input units,
fully connected to 15 hidden units. The hidden units have full
recurrent self-connections, as well as full feed-forward connections to 5 output units. 3 hidden units from each hemisphere connected fully and reciprocally to each other as a
model “corpus callosum”; these were the only shared connections between the hemispheres3 . For all simulations, only
these interhemispheric connections were manipulated.
As in the previous studies, the task for the network was
to learn associations between input binary strings and output binary strings. We used a version of backpropagation
through time appropriate for learning with conduction delays (Pearlmutter, 1989), for calculating our error gradients,
and used resilient backpropagation for computing our gradient updates (Riedmiller & Braun, 1993). We used the sumsquared error function function4 .
We found that learning in the networks with published
learning rates was slow; we also found that the degree
of interhemispheric communication was dependent on
parameters that were not varied in each study. We chose
parameters to optimize learning speed, while balancing between interhemispheric and intrahemispheric dependencies5 .
Since the purpose of this study was to examine changes in
intrahemispheric and interhemispheric processing, and not
their actual magnitude, this seemed a reasonable approach.

Results
Fig. 3a shows learning trajectories of classification error, for
no-noise and noise networks on both in-tact and lesioned conditions. As predicted, learning in the noise networks was
slower and reached asymptote at a higher error than the nonoise networks. We show these results for comparison to pre-

3 Lewis and Elman used 10 hidden units and 2 interhemispheric
units; we increased these numbers to facilitate task-learning. Select
simulations run with their parameters showed similar effects.
4 We used a gradient ((y −t)3 ) that penalized local minima where
a many patterns were learned quickly by sacrificing a few patterns
which were not learned at all.
5 Parameters: T = 5, α = 10−3 , κ = 10−2

6 noise = N (2∗10−4 ∗delay, 1∗10−4 ); constant chosen such that
µ is ≈ 2% of average activity over all units.

337

a) Lesion−induced error (Learning Error)

vious papers. Fig. 3b shows the learning trajectories for learning error, on the same set of networks. Notice that, consistent
with our predictions, lesion-induced error (the difference between corresponding intact and lesioned curves) is smaller
for the noise networks vs. the no-noise networks on both
measures. Interestingly, for learning error (a more nuanced
measure of network performance), noise networks had less
error in the lesioned networks than the no-noise networks.

\b) Delta Lesion−induced error (Learning Error)
0.5
Intrahemispheric patterns
Interhemispheric patterns

0.4
∆ ∆ Sum−squared error

∆ Sum−squared Error

Intra− (no−noise)
Intra− (noise)
Inter− (no−noise)
Inter− (noise)

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.2
0

a) Learning Trajectory (Classification error)

50%

25%

0

200

400
600
training epoch

800

1000

Sum−squared Error (average per output)

% of wrongly classified outputs

Intact (no−noise)
Intact (noise)
Lesioned (no−noise)
Lesioned (noise)

75%

0%

b) Learning Trajectory (Training error)
0.1

100%

0

200

400
600
training epoch

800

1000

0

200

400
600
training epoch

800

1000

0.6
0.5

Figure 4: (a) Lesion-induced error for both noise and nonoise networks, split into interhemispheric and intrahemispheric patterns. (b) Difference between noise and no-noise
networks for lesion-induced error; positive values mean more
lesion-induced error in no-noise networks.

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

0

200

400
600
training epoch

800

1000

The results of our computational experiments showed that
timing unreliability, in the form of Gaussian noise of our instantaneous firing rate, could induce more independent development of the cerebral hemispheres. This effect need not
be related to the magnitude of conduction delay–but in mammalian brains it is: longer fibers have both longer delays and
more jitter in their timing. These effects are also temperaturedependent (Wang, 2008); perhaps a mechanism leading to the
large number of asymmetries found in cold-blooded species
(Rogers & Andrew, 2002).
Our simulations also hinted at how asymmetry may
emerge. We found that noisy callosal fibers led networks to
try and use local, intrahemispheric processing, even for patterns requiring interhemispheric information. This type of
early local processing is an indication that these networks
may encourage developmental asymmetries.
Finally, we note a few recent papers on the benefits of noise
in learning (Ermentrout, Galn, & Urban, 2008; Faisal, Selen, & Wolpert, 2008; Vincent, Larochelle, Lajoie, Bengio, &
Manzagol, 2010). We intend to investigate whether initially
noisy interhemispheric interactions facilitate both generalization and specialization of the hemispheres. Shared processing
of highly salient features may allow each hemisphere to select
secondary features that it is more specialized to process.

Figure 3: Changes in (a) classification error and (b) training
error over training epochs, for noise and no-noise networks
in-tact and lesioned conditions.
In order to examine these results more closely, we computed lesion-induced error on for the noise and no-noise networks for training error, then separated them into intrahemispheric and interhemispheric patterns (Fig. 4a). The noise
networks showed less lesion-induced error for both interhemispheric and intrahemispheric patterns. Looking more
closely at the differences between noise and no-noise networks (Fig. 4b), we find the surprising result that noise
networks had much less lesion-induced error for intrahemispheric patterns than the non-noise networks, while the two
had relatively equal levels of lesion-induced error for interhemispheric patterns.
These results indicate that the network with noisy interhemispheric fibers tried to accomplish the task (as much as
possible) intrahemispherically, particularly in cases where
both hemispheres are necessary to complete a task.

Discussion
We argued that current thought on interhemispheric integration fails to explain a basic dichotomy: how interhemispheric
segregation may be necessary for developing asymmetries,
but must be overcome to produce interhemispheric coupling
found in adults. We showed that ideas based on the magnitude
of conduction delays cannot explain interhemispheric segregation, nor can they explain strong interhemispheric coupling. We suggested that the especially steep developmental
gradient of humans may hold the key. Our literature review
revealed that two properties of these fibers might cause such
a pattern: their changing length and their changing reliability in timing. The latter is relevant on the necessary timescale, so we focused our work here on examining the effects
of changes in the reliability of the timing of information.

Acknowledgments
This work was partly funded by a Center for Academic Research and Training in Anthropogeny (CARTA) fellowship
and by NSF grant SMA 1041755 to the Temporal Dynamics
of Learning Center, an NSF Science of Learning Center.

References
Aboitiz, F., & Montiel, J. (2003). One hundred million years
of interhemispheric communication: the history of the corpus callosum. Brazilian journal of medical and biological
research, 36(4), 409–20.
Aboitiz, F., Scheibel, A. B., Fisher, R. S., & Zaidel, E. (1992).

338

Fiber composition of the human corpus callosum. Brain
Research, 598(1-2), 143–153.
Berbel, P., & Innocenti, G. M. (1988). The development
of the corpus callosum in cats: a light- and electronmicroscopic study. The Journal of comparative neurology,
276(1), 132–156.
Caminiti, R., Ghaziri, H., Galuske, R., Hof, P. R., & Innocenti, G. M. (2009). Evolution amplified processing
with temporally dispersed slow neuronal connectivity in
primates. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 106(46), 19551 –19556.
Craig, A. B. (2005). Forebrain emotional asymmetry: a neuroanatomical basis? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 9(12),
566–571.
Dhar, M., Been, P. H., Minderaa, R. B., & Althaus, M.
(2010). Reduced interhemispheric coherence in dyslexic
adults. Cortex, 46(6), 794–798.
Ermentrout, G. B., Galn, R. F., & Urban, N. N. (2008). Reliability, synchrony and noise. Trends in neurosciences, 31(8),
428–434.
Faisal, A. A., Selen, L. P. J., & Wolpert, D. M. (2008). Noise
in the nervous system. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 9(4),
292–303.
Fries, P. (2005). A mechanism for cognitive dynamics: neuronal communication through neuronal coherence. Trends
in Cognitive Sciences, 9(10), 474–480.
Gazzaniga, M. S. (2000). Cerebral specialization and interhemispheric communication: Does the corpus callosum
enable the human condition? Brain, 123(7), 1293–1326.
Hellige, J. B. (2006). Evolution of brain lateralization in
humans. Cognition, Brain, Behavior, 10(2), 211–234.
Hoptman, M. J., Zuo, X.-N., D’Angelo, D., Mauro, C. J.,
Butler, P. D., Milham, M. P., et al. (2012). Decreased
interhemispheric coordination in schizophrenia: A resting
state fMRI study. Schizophrenia Research, 141(1), 1–7.
Innocenti, G. M. (2011). Development and evolution: two
determinants of cortical connectivity. Progress in brain research, 189, 65–75.
Ivry, R. B., & Robertson, L. C. (1998). The two sides of
perception. The MIT Press.
Jernigan, T. L., Baar, W. F. C., Stiles, J., & Madsen, K. S.
(2011). Postnatal brain development: structural imaging of
dynamic neurodevelopmental processes. Progress in brain
research, 189, 77–92.
LaMantia, A. S., & Rakic, P. (1990). Axon overproduction
and elimination in the corpus callosum of the developing
rhesus monkey. The Journal of neuroscience, 10(7), 2156–
2175.
Lewis, J. D., & Elman, J. L. (2008). Growth-related neural reorganization and the autism phenotype: a test of the
hypothesis that altered brain growth leads to altered connectivity. Developmental Science, 11(1), 135–155.
Luders, E., Cherbuin, N., Thompson, P. M., Gutman, B.,
Anstey, K. J., Sachdev, P., et al. (2010). When more is
less: associations between corpus callosum size and hand-

edness lateralization. NeuroImage, 52(1), 43–49.
Martin, R. D. (1983). Human brain evolution in an ecological
context. American Museum of Natural History.
Olivares, R., Montiel, J., & Aboitiz, F. (2001). Species differences and similarities in the fine structure of the mammalian corpus callosum. Brain, Behavior and Evolution,
57(2), 98–105.
Pearlmutter, B. A. (1989). Learning state space trajectories
in recurrent neural networks. Neural Computation, 1(2),
263–269.
Riedmiller, M., & Braun, H. (1993). A direct adaptive
method for faster backpropagation learning: the RPROP
algorithm. In , IEEE international conference on neural
networks, 1993 (pp. 586–591). IEEE.
Ringo, J. L., Doty, R. W., Demeter, S., & Simard, P. Y.
(1994). Time is of the essence: A conjecture that hemispheric specialization arises from interhemispheric conduction delay. Cereb. Cortex, 4(4), 331–343.
Roberts, J. A., & Robinson, P. A. (2008). Modeling distributed axonal delays in mean-field brain dynamics. Physical review. E, 78(5 Pt 1), 051901.
Rogers, L. J. (2009). Hand and paw preferences in relation
to the lateralized brain. Phil. Transactions of the Royal
Society B: Biological Sciences, 364(1519), 943–954.
Rogers, L. J., & Andrew, R. (2002). Comparative vertebrate
lateralization (1st ed.). Cambridge University Press.
Schenker, N. M., Sherwood, C. C., Hof, P. R., & Semendeferi, K. (2007). Microstructural asymmetries of the cerebral cortex in humans and other mammals. In Special topics
in primatology (Vol. 5, pp. 92–118).
Sergent, J. (1982). The cerebral balance of power: confrontation or cooperation? Journal of Experimental Psychology.
Human Perception and Performance, 8(2), 253–272.
Stark, D. E., Margulies, D. S., Shehzad, Z. E., Reiss, P., Kelly,
A. M. C., Uddin, L. Q., et al. (2008). Regional variation
in interhemispheric coordination of intrinsic hemodynamic
fluctuations. The Journal of neuroscience, 28(51), 13754–
13764.
Vincent, P., Larochelle, H., Lajoie, I., Bengio, Y., & Manzagol, P.-A. (2010). Stacked denoising autoencoders:
Learning useful representations in a deep network with a
local denoising criterion. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 11, 3371–
3408.
Wang, S. S.-H. (2008). Functional tradeoffs in axonal scaling: Implications for brain function. Brain, Behavior and
Evolution, 72(2), 159–167.
Witelson, S. F. (1985). The brain connection: the corpus callosum is larger in left-handers. Science, 229(4714), 665–
668.
Witelson, S. F. (1989). Hand and sex differences in the isthmus and genu of the human corpus callosum a postmortem
morphological study. Brain, 112(3), 799–835.

339

