UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Unmet Expectations in the Comprehension of Relative Clauses in Japanese

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1pp1w93k

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Miyamoto, Edson T.
Nakamura, Michiko

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Unmet Expectations in the Comprehension of Relative Clauses in Japanese
Edson T. Miyamoto (MIYAMOTO@Alum.Mit.Edu)
Graduate School of Humanities and Social Sciences, Tennodai 1-1-1
Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8571 Japan

Michiko Nakamura (M-NAKA@Fun.Ac.Jp)
School of Systems Information Science, Kamedanakano-cho 116-2
Hakodate, Hokkaido 041-8655 Japan
Abstract

b. Object relative clause (prenominal)
[dansei-ga gap j mita] josei j
man-nom
saw woman
‘the woman that the man saw’

In two self-paced reading experiments, subject relative clauses
(e.g., ‘the woman who saw the man’) were read faster than
object relative clauses (‘the woman who the man saw’) in
Japanese. Previous formulations of working-memory factors
do not predict the patterns observed. A preference to complete
fragments as object relative clauses indicates that ambiguity
and expectation are unlikely to explain the reading-time data.
The results support the proposal that accessibility of the position relativized affects how natural the relative clause is as a
statement about the modified noun.
Keywords: relative clauses, Japanese, subject, object

Introduction
An accessibility hierarchy of grammatical roles has been
shown to constrain the grammaticality of relative clauses in
49 typologically distinct languages (Keenan & Comrie, 1977;
also Comrie, 2007, for a recent summary). Subjects are
ranked higher than objects to reflect the observation that more
languages allow subject relative clauses than object relative
clauses. Postnominal relative clauses as in (1) follow the
modified noun woman (brackets mark the boundaries of the
embedded clause; the extraction site or gap is coindexed with
the modified noun, or filler).
(1) a. Subject relative clause (postnominal)
the womani [that gapi saw the man]

The object before subject preference

b. Object relative clause (postnominal)
the woman j [that the man saw gap j ]
In languages that allow both alternatives, subject relatives
are predicted to be easier to understand, that is, comprehension is facilitated when woman is interpreted as the subject of
the embedded verb saw as in (1a). The subject advantage
is well-documented for constructions in which both nouns
are animate (man and woman in (1); Dutch: Mak, Vonk &
Schriefers, 2002; English: Traxler, Moris & Seely, 2002; inter alia). We report evidence supporting accessibility as a
factor in the comprehension of relative clauses in Japanese.
Japanese is an SOV (subject-object-verb order) language
and relative clauses are prenominal as they precede the modified noun as in (2).
(2) a. Subject relative clause (prenominal)
[gapi dansei-o mita] joseii
man-acc saw woman
‘the woman that saw the man’

The words and their order are exactly the same except for
the case marker on the coargument, ‘man’ (i.e., the argument
inside the embedded clause). When the coargument is an accusative object, extraction is from subject position; when it is
a nominative subject, extraction is from object position. This
similarity allows for a cleaner comparison between the constructions as it avoids comparing words with different parts
of speech as is often the case in languages such as English.
As a universal constraint, the accessibility hierarchy predicts subject relatives to be easier to understand in Japanese.
The prediction is supported by off-line judgments (e.g.,
difficulty ratings, Sheldon, 1976) and self-paced reading
(Ishizuka, Nakatani & Gibson, 2003; Miyamoto & Nakamura, 2003; Ueno & Garnsey, 2008, Experiment 1, also Experiment 2, for event related potential data). But these studies fail to address alternative explanations, especially those
related to ambiguity factors, which we discuss later in this
introduction. Moreover, some aspects of the preference are
better explained by a new type of accessibility.
Although often described as taking two arguments, transitive
verbs are more closely associated with their direct objects
than their subjects (Marantz, 1984; the verb-object bonding
principle, Tomlin, 1986). A transitive verb can thus be represented as a function that takes the direct object as its only
argument to yield a one-place predicate, which in turn takes
the subject as its argument. Hence, the semantic role of the
object is assigned by the verb, and the role of the subject is
assigned by the verb-object compound (Marantz, 1984).
This subject-object asymmetry leads to a processing preference to assign the role of the object more locally than the
role of the subject (the object before subject bias or ObS). Locality is assumed to be determined by clause structure. Relative clauses are statements about the modified noun, that is,
they are functions that are applied onto the modified noun. Intuitively, we must understand what the statement means (e.g.,
determine the semantic roles of the coargument) to apply the
statement to the modified noun.
In subject relative clauses, the object is in the same clause
as the verb and receives its semantic role first. Next, the

3074

a. Object relative clause: man-nom

object-verb complex assigns a semantic role to the subject
(see the left-hand side of Figure 1). Therefore, the semantic role assigned to the modified noun is congruent with the
statement that the relative clause makes about this noun.

saw womani
↑

b. Subject relative clause:

man-acc saw womani
↑

Subject RC

Object RC
Figure 2: Linear decay in Japanese (horizontal lines mark
the material that contributes to decay; vertical arrows indicate
from where in the sentence retrieval occurs)

Figure 1: Order of semantic-role assignment in Japanese
In object relative clauses, the verb assigns a semantic role
to the modified noun (its object) and only then the object-verb
as a unit assigns a role to the coargument inside the relative
clause (the subject; see Figure 1). The statement that the relative clause makes about the modified noun is complex in that
it is partly based on the modified noun itself and it does not
match the order in which roles are assigned by the verb.
The ObS maintains the intuition from traditional accessibility that extraction position affects the naturalness of the
relative clause as a statement about the modified noun. But
in traditional accessibility the hierarchy is fixed (Keenan &
Comrie, 1977) and it incorrectly predicts that subject extraction is always favored (Nakamura & Miyamoto, 2013).

Ambiguity in relative clauses in Japanese
There are no markers in Japanese that differentiate relative
clauses from simple clauses (i.e., clauses without extractions
such as adjunct, matrix or complement clauses). The relative
clauses in (2) can be initially interpreted as simple clauses
with an argument left implicit or dropped. Subject extraction
is less likely to be affected by this type of ambiguity because
the relative clause may be detected as soon as the coargument
is read for the following reasons. First, the object coargument
is an early indicator that there is no subject in the clause (although possible, a subject rarely follows an object; e.g., less
than 2% of accusative objects are followed by a subject in a
newspaper corpus, Miyamoto & Nakamura, 2005). Second,
in a null context, the missing subject lacks a referent, therefore the relative-clause interpretation has been claimed to be
favored so that a referent can be provided (Ishizuka, 2005).
In object relative clauses, the subject coargument provides
little information about an upcoming object NP. It is only at
the predicate (e.g., ‘saw’ in (2b)) that it is clear that the object
is missing. In short, subject relatives may be detected as soon
as the coargument NP is read, while object relatives may not
be noticed until past the embedded predicate.

Alternative explanations
One line of research has articulated a compelling alternative
to accessibility models by proposing that working-memory
factors such as decay and interference increase the difficulty
in creating the dependency between the modified noun and
the extraction position. In English, more material intervenes

from the modified noun to the object position than to the subject position, therefore these proposals correctly predict more
difficulty in object relative clauses such as (1b).1 The following is a summary of working-memory factors proposed in the
literature and their predictions for Japanese.
A. Linear-span decay is based on the material in the sentence
intervening between the modified noun and the extraction position (metrics based on number of words, King & Just, 1991;
new discourse referents, Gibson, 1998). For Japanese, greater
difficulty is predicted for subject relatives than for object relatives (see Figure 2).
B. Temporal-span decay measures the material processed
from the moment in time an element was inserted in the representation until the time it is retrieved (Lewis, Vasishth, & van
Dyke, 2006). A missing object is only detectable when the
transitive verb is read, thus an empty object position is created after the verb is read and this is the point in time that is
relevant for object relatives (Figure 3a). Figure 3b illustrates
the observation that a sentence-initial object can indicate that
the subject is missing from its canonical position, therefore
an empty subject position may be created when the object is
read and decay will start from that point in time.
Predictions may change depending on reactivation.
C. Reactivation of a constituent can reverse decay, facilitating retrieval (Lewis, Vasishth, & van Dyke, 2006). Therefore,
when a constituent was last reactivated, as opposed to when it
was first inserted in the representation, may be a better indicator of temporal decay. In relative clauses in Japanese, both the
extraction position and the coargument are reactivated at the
embedded verb, but predictions depend on reactivation order.
C1. Simultaneous reactivation of the two positions will lead
a. Object relative:

man-nom saw

womani
↑

b. Subject relative:
man-acc
(no reactivation at saw)

saw womani
↑

Figure 3: Temporal decay in Japanese (horizontal lines mark
the material that contributes to decay; vertical arrows indicate
the point in time the empty position is retrieved from)
1 If

relative clauses and modified nouns are directly associated
without the mediation of gaps (Pickering & Barry, 1991), workingmemory factors predict no extraction advantage in languages with
verb-final embedded clauses such as Dutch, German, Japanese.

3075

them to have similar activation levels when the modified noun
is read, therefore subject and object relatives are predicted to
be equally easy to process (Kwon, Lee, Gordon, Kluender &
Polinsky, 2010). But reactivation at the verb is linguistically
motivated (as arguments are linked to the verb), and linguistic
constraints may affect reactivation order as in the following
two alternatives.
C2. Canonical reactivation requires arguments to be reactivated in the canonical, most common, order of the language
(i.e., subject and then object). Hence, the object position
should have an advantage as the last one to be reactivated
and object relatives should be easier than subject relatives.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants Thirty native Japanese speakers undergraduates at the University of Tsukuba were paid to participate.
Materials Twelve pairs of items (see (3) for an example)
were distributed into two lists according to a Latin Square
design so that each sentence in a pair appeared in one list.
(3) a. Subject relative clause
Daikigyo-no keesya-o
maekara utagatteita
company’s manager-acc a while distrusting-was
kanryo-wa
totemo mukutida.
bureaucrat-top very
quiet-is

C3. ObS-based reactivation assumes that the ObS is implemented as a constraint on reactivation. The object is reactivated first to be associated with the verb, then the O-V compound is applied onto the subject, which is thus reactivated
last. Hence, subject relatives should be easier to process.

‘The bureaucrat who has distrusted the company manager for a while is very quiet.’
b. Object relative clause
Daikigyo-no keesya-ga
maekara utagatteita
company’s manager-nom a while distrusting-was
kanryo-wa
totemo mukutida.
bureaucrat-top very
quiet-is

D. Interference from similarity is another factor related to
working memory that has been discussed in the literature. Interference should occur when the case marker on the coargument and the modified noun are the same, increasing confusability (Kwon et al, 2010; also Gordon, Hendrick & Johnson,
2001, for other types of similarity-related difficulty).

‘The bureaucrat who the company manager has distrusted for a while is very quiet.’

The predictions by working memory and accessibility may
be obscured by other factors, especially ambiguity.
E. Expectation-based models predict that an interpretation
is easier to understand if it is more likely to be generated during production (as measured by, for example, fragment completions). Results in English suggest that object relatives are
less predictable because they allow more alternative interpretations as the sentence unfolds, thus requiring longer reading
times to zero in on the intended interpretation (Gennari &
MacDonald, 2008; inter alia). But expectation may fail to
predict the exact point of greatest difficulty in English (Grodner & Gibson, 2005) and, in some formulations, expectation
is not relevant in long-distance dependencies (Levy, 2008).
Supporting contexts may reduce ambiguity and allow
working-memory effects to be measured more clearly. In
one such study in Japanese, subject relatives were found to
be harder to process than object relatives (Ishizuka, Nakatani
& Gibson, 2006; but see Kwon, Lee, Gordon, Kluender &
Polinsky, 2010, footnote 12, for communication from Edward
Gibson reporting failure to replicate and retracting the result;
see also Roland, Mauner, O’Meara & Yun, 2012, for contextrelated factors facilitating object relatives in English, and
Sato, 2011, who failed to replicate such effects in Japanese).
We report two self-paced reading experiments confirming the subject advantage for relative clauses in Japanese.
The advantage is not explained by previous formulations of
working-memory factors (Gibson, 1998; Gordon, Hendrick
& Johnson, 2001; King & Just, 1991; Lewis, Vasishth, & van
Dyke, 2006; inter alia). Expectation-based models (Gennari
& MacDonald, 2008) are unlikely to be relevant either given
the results of two fragment-completion questionnaires.

Each sentence was shown one region at a time on a single
line in a non-cumulative fashion using double-byte characters with the uniform-width Japanese font MS Mincho. The
segmentation used is indicated with spaces in (3).
Norming 1 The predictions by expectation-based models
(Gennari & MacDonald, 2008) depend on production preferences. Therefore, 42 native Japanese speakers who did not
participate in the reading-time study, were shown fragments
ending at the embedded verb (e.g., ‘distrusting-was’ in (3))
and were asked to write completions for them. There were
more object relatives than subject relatives (Median of the
difference = 1; two-tailed Exact Wilcoxon Signed Rank,
function wilcoxsign test in the package coin, R Development
Core Team, 2009; Wilcoxon, for short: Z1 = 3.47, P < .001;
Z2 = 2.86, P < .01; see Ueno & Garnsey, 2008, for similar results). Contrary to previous reports, the object advantage held even when the comparison was restricted to relative clauses with animate modified nouns, which are the most
similar to the items in the reading experiment (Median = 1;
Wilcoxon: Z1 = 2.41, P < .05; Z2 = 2.59, P < .05), probably
because we chose embedded verbs that were biased towards
animate objects. Therefore, expectation-based models should
predict an object advantage in the reading time data.
Norming 2 To ensure that the two types of relative clauses
are equally plausible, simple transitive sentences were created by placing the modified noun in the intended extraction
position in the embedded clause. Thirty-two native Japanese
speakers, who did not participate in any of the other studies,
rated each sentence on a 5-point scale (1 as natural and 5 as

3076

strange). No difference was detected (subject: 1.74; object:
1.66; Wilcoxon: Zs < 1).

Results and discussion
In the crucial region, the modified noun ‘bureaucrat’, subject relatives were marginally faster than object relatives
(F1 (1,28) = 2.96, MSe = 92,790, P = .096; F2 (1,10) = 4.94,
MSe = 15,300, P = .051). A spillover was observed in the
following region, which contained the same words across the
two conditions, and the difference was reliable at this point
(F1 (1,28) = 11.19, MSe = 12,933, P < .01; F2 (1,10) = 6.63,
MSe = 10,210, P < .05).
The results suggest that subject relative clauses are easier
to process than object relative clauses, replicating previous
results (Ishizuka, Nakatani & Gibson, 2003; Miyamoto &
Nakamura, 2003; Sheldon, 1976; Ueno & Garnsey, 2008).
This is compatible with accessibility and the ObS in particular, but not with previous formulations of working-memory
factors (e.g., Gibson, 1998; King & Just, 1991).
Temporal-span models (Lewis, Vasishth, & van Dyke,
2006) can account for the results if reactivation at the embedded predicate obeys the ObS. To date, we know of no other
formulation of working-memory factors that has the potential to provide an explanation for the subject preference in
the Japanese constructions discussed in this paper. However,
even ObS-based reactivation fails to account for other types
of relative clauses in Japanese, such as those with the coargument dropped (Nakamura & Miyamoto, 2013).
Difficulty in object relatives was observed even though
they were more expected according to Norming 1 (contra
Gennari & MacDonald, 2008).

(4) a. Subject relative clause
Kinjono
obaasan-o basutei-made
neighbor-gen woman-acc bus-stop-to
onnanoko-ni-wa sanpochuuno inu-ga
girl-dat-top
walk
dog-nom

miokutta
accompanied
jareteita.
frolicking-was

‘As for the girl who accompanied the woman from the
neighborhood to the bus stop, a dog taken for a walk
was frolicking around (her).’
b. Object relative clause
Kinjono
obaasan-ga basutei-made miokutta
neighbor-gen woman-nom bus-stop-to accompanied
onnanoko-ni-wa sanpochuuno inu-ga
jareteita.
girl-dat-top
walk
dog-nom frolicking-was
‘As for the girl who the woman from the neighborhood
accompanied to the bus stop, a dog taken for a walk
was frolicking around (her).’

Participants Thirty-two native speakers of Japanese at the
Future University Hakodate, who had not participated in the
other studies, were paid to participate in the experiment.

Following previous studies (Ishizuka, Nakatani & Gibson,
2003; Ueno & Garnsey, 2008), the modified noun (‘girl’
in (4)) was marked with the dative marker ni and the topic
marker wa. The two combined particles are not shared with
either of the extraction positions (the nominative-subject or
the accusative-object positions), therefore there should be no
interference from attraction (Keenan, 1981; Sauerland & Gibson, 1998). A sentence-initial animate noun marked with ni
is usually interpreted as an indirect object, therefore a strict
interpretation of parallelism (requiring the exact same grammatical role for the extraction position in the relative clause
and for the modified noun in the matrix clause; Sheldon,
1976) would also predict no difference between the two types
of relative clauses. But to the extent that ni-marked objects
are more similar to direct objects than to subjects,2 a looser
version of parallelism may favor object relative clauses.
Perspective shift elaborates on parallelism by considering
whose point of view is adopted as the representation for the
event is built. According to work on Hungarian (MacWhinney & Pleh, 1988), perspective depends on whether the language is subject-prominent (SP; i.e., languages in which sentences are based on the relation between subject and predicate; e.g., Indo-European languages) or topic-prominent (TP;
in which sentences are based on the relation between topic
and comment; e.g., Chinese; Li & Thompson, 1976). In TP
languages like Hungarian, parallelism is claimed to hold for
topics. In particular, a sentence-initial object is the topic in
Hungarian, therefore its perspective is adopted, and because
of parallelism, there is a preference for relative clauses to
be object extracted when they modify a topicalized object
(MacWhinney & Pleh, 1988).
The test sentences in (4) are TP constructions because the
dative object ‘girl’ is topicalized with the marker wa; there-

Materials Twelve pairs of items were used with the same
procedure as in the first experiment. The following is an example pair.

2 For example, the object of verbs such as au ‘meet’, intabyusuru
‘interview’, denwasuru ‘call/phone’ is a direct object in English, but
it is marked with the dative ni in Japanese.

Experiment 2
The role of the modified noun in the outer clause (usually the
matrix clause) has also been implicated in the comprehension
of relative clauses. Parallelism predicts facilitation when the
extraction site and the modified noun share properties such as
grammatical role (Sheldon, 1976). Alternatively, facilitation
occurs when the two positions share the same case marker
(Sauerland & Gibson, 1998). This type of case-marking attraction is grammaticalized in some languages so that the
case marker on the modified noun can affect the marker on
the relative pronoun or vice-versa (e.g., Ancient Greek, Persian; see Keenan, 1981, for examples). We controlled for
these factors in this experiment.

Method

3077

fore, similar to Hungarian, perspective shift should favor object extraction.3
Norming 3 A new group of 46 native speakers of Japanese
participated. As in Norming 1, there were more object
relative-clause completions (66.3%) than subject relative
clauses (52.45%; Wilcoxon: Z1 = 3.04, P < .01; Z2 =
2.36, P < .05). The same trends were observed when counts
were restricted to relative clauses with head nouns depicting
humans (object relatives: 61.7%; subject relatives: 51.1%;
Wilcoxon: Z1 = 2.73, P < .01; Z2 = 2.05, P < .05).
Norming 4 As in Norming 2, no plausibility difference between the subject condition (1.9) and the object condition
(1.73; where 1 was natural and 5 was strange; Wilcoxon:
Ps > .2) according to 16 native Japanese speakers, who had
not participated in any of the other studies reported.

Results and discussion
In the critical region (‘girl’ in (4)), there was a numerical advantage for subject relatives. The difference was reliable in
the following region, which contained the same words across
the two conditions (P < .05; function lmer in the package
lme4, R Development Core Team, 2009). Moreover, the coargument in five items was a proper name while in the remaining seven items it was a common noun. Because the modified
noun was always a common noun, proper names should decrease confusability and facilitate comprehension, but there
was no interaction when type of noun was included in the
analysis (P > .8; contra Gordon, Hendrick & Johnson, 2001).
The results replicated the advantage for subject relatives
over object relatives. Because the modified noun was
marked dative-topic, factors such as parallelism (Sheldon,
1976), attraction (Keenan, 1981; Sauerland & Gibson, 1998)
and perspective shift (MacWhinney & Pleh, 1988; Mitsugi,
MacWhinney & Shirai, 2010) incorrectly predict an object preference or no preference between the two types of
relative clauses. The subject advantage is not compatible
with expectation-based models either (Gennari & MacDonald, 2008) given that there was an advantage for object relatives in the completion results of Norming 3.

General discussion
We can classify languages into four types according to the
positions of the relative clause (prenominal or postnominal)
and the object (OV or VO) as follows: postnominal/SVO
(e.g., English, French), postnominal/SOV (Dutch, German),
prenominal/SVO (Chinese), and prenominal/SOV (Japanese,
Korean, Turkish). Previous discussions of working-memory

factors correctly predict the subject advantage in both types
of postnominal languages as well as the object advantage in
prenominal/SVO languages (Hsiao & Gibson, 2003; Lin &
Garnsey, 2011; inter alia). The exception is prenominal/SOV
languages, for which working-memory factors predict no difference or an object advantage. The results reported confirm
the exceptional status of these languages even when ambiguity and expectation are taken into consideration.
We raised the possibility that ObS-based reactivation may
explain the subject advantage in Japanese. It is also possible that simultaneous reactivation at the embedded verb cancels out any working-memory difference (Kwon et al, 2010),
therefore only accessibility has an effect in Japanese. But
there are at least two other alternatives that will also need
future research. The first alternative is that the workingmemory load difference is small in Japanese-type languages
because linear decay involves only one NP (see Figures 2ab).
If so, working memory may not be enough to explain the subject advantage in Dutch and German, for which the difference
between subject and object extraction is also of one NP only.
This would reinforce the need for another factor such as the
ObS to complement working-memory factors in order to explain the subject advantage in these languages.
Another possibility is that closure may be relevant because it flushes out verbatim material out of working memory.
Memory load is likely to decrease after closure is performed
on a phrase. Moreover, the load may vary across languages
depending on the timing of closure. In Japanese, a consistently head-final language, closure is likely to be performed
immediately at the end of the phrase (for example at the verb
of an embedded clause). In contrast, head-initial languages
do not have a marker to indicate the end of the phrase; consequently, closure may be delayed and memory load linger in
languages such as English. Mixed languages such as Chinese
may also fail to generate closure consistently at phrase end especially if the marker is a short functional word (e.g., de for
relative clauses) that can be easily skipped during reading.
In sum, a second factor apart from working-memory constraints is needed to explain the subject advantage in prenominal/SOV relative clauses. This may provide an opportunity
to better understand how memory use is affected by processes
such as closure during language comprehension.

References

3 Before the topicalized noun is read, the sentences may be mistaken for SP constructions. It has been argued that perspective in
SP relatives may remain unspecified after an accusative NP is read,
therefore no shift occurs and subject extraction may be relatively
easy (Mitsugi, MacWhinney & Shirai, 2010). However, it is unclear
what exactly an unspecified perspective entails for the kind of representation assumed in perspective shift. Even the “neutral” point of
view of an uninvolved spectator or the speaker would still require a
shift when the perspective of the modified noun is adopted.

Comrie, B. (2007). The acquisition of relative clauses in relation to language typology. Studies in Second Language
Acquisition, 29, 301-309.
Gennari, S. P., & MacDonald, M. C. (2008). Semantic indeterminacy in object relative clauses. Journal of Memory
and Language, 58, 161-187.
Gibson, E. (1998). Linguistic complexity: locality of syntactic dependencies. Cognition, 68, 1-76.
Gordon, P. C., Hendrick, R., & Johnson, M. (2001). Memory interference during language processing. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cogni-

3078

tion, 27, 1411-1423.
Grodner, D. J., & Gibson, E. A. F. (2005). Consequences of
the serial nature of linguistic input for sentential complexity. Cognitive Science, 29, 261-291.
Hsiao, F., & Gibson, E. (2003). Processing relative clauses in
Chinese. Cognition, 90, 3-27.
Ishizuka, T. (2005). Processing relative clauses in Japanese.
In Okabe and Nielsen (Eds.), Working Papers in Psycholinguistics, 2 (pp. 135-157), UCLA Working Papers in Linguistics 13.
Ishizuka, T., Nakatani, K., & Gibson, E. (2003). Relative
clause extraction complexity in Japanese. Poster presented
at the 16th Annual CUNY Conference on Human Sentence
Processing, Boston, March 2003.
Ishizuka, T., Nakatani, K., & Gibson, E. (2006). Processing
Japanese relative clauses in context. Paper presented at
the 19th Annual CUNY Conference on Human Sentence
Processing, NY, March 2006.
Keenan, E. L. (1981). Relative clauses. In B. Comrie (Ed.),
Language Universals and Linguistic Typology (pp. 138164). Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Keenan, E. L., & Comrie, B. (1977). Noun phrase accessibility and Universal Grammar. Linguistic Inquiry, 8, 63-99.
King, J., & Just, M. A. (1991). Individual differences in syntactic processing: The role of working memory. Journal of
Memory and Language, 30, 580-602.
Kwon, N., Lee, Y., Gordon, P. C., Kluender, R., & Polinsky,
M. (2010). Cognitive and linguistic factors affecting subject/object asymmetry: An eye-tracking study of prenominal relative clauses in Korean. Language, 86, 546-582.
Levy, R. (2008). Expectation-based syntactic comprehension. Cognition, 106, 1126-1177.
Lewis, R. L., Vasishth, S., & Van Dyke, J. A. (2006). Computational principles of working memory in sentence comprehension. Trends in Cognitive Science, 10, 447-454.
Li, C. N., & Thompson, S. A. (1976). Subject and topic: a
new typology of language. In C. N. Li (Ed.), Subject and
Topic (pp. 457-61). London/New York: Academic Press.
Lin, Y., & Garnsey, S. (2011). Animacy and the resolution of
temporary ambiguity in relative clause comprehension in
Mandarin. In H. Yamashita, Y. Hirose, & J. L. Packard
(Eds.), Processing and Producing Head-final Structures
(pp. 241-275). Dordrecht: Springer.
MacWhinney, B., & Pleh, C. (1988). The processing of restrictive relative clauses in Hungarian. Cognition, 29, 95141.
Mak, W. M., Vonk, W., & Schriefers, H. (2002). The influence of animacy on relative clause processing. Journal of
Memory and Language, 47, 50-68.
Marantz, A. (1984). On the Nature of Grammatical Relations. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Mitsugi, S., MacWhinney, B., & Shirai, Y. (2010). CueBased Processing of Relative Clauses in L2 Japanese. In
M. T. Prior, Y. Watanabe, and S.-K. Lee (Eds.), Selected
Proceedings of the 2008 Second Language Research Fo-

rum: Exploring SLA Perspectives, Positions, and Practices
(pp. 123-138). Somerville, Mass.: Cascadilla Proceedings
Project,
Miyamoto, E. T., & Nakamura, M. (2003). Subject/object
asymmetries in the processing of relative clauses in
Japanese. In G. Garding & M. Tsujimura (Eds.), Proceedings of the 22nd West Coast Conference on Formal Linguistics (pp. 342-355). Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.
Miyamoto, E. T., & Nakamura, M. (2005). Unscrambling some misconceptions: a comment on Koizumi and
Tamaoka (2004). Gengo Kenkyu, 128, 113-129.
Nakamura, M. & Miyamoto, E. T. (2013). The object before subject bias and the processing of double-gap relative
clauses in Japanese. Language and Cognitive Processes,
28, 303-334.
Pickering, M., & Barry, G. (1991). Sentence processing without empty categories. Language and Cognitive Processes,
6, 229-259.
R development core team. (2009). R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing. Vienna: R Foundation
for Statistical Computing, http://www.R-project.org.
Roland, D., Mauner, G., O
Meara, C., & Yun, H. (2012).
Discourse expectations and relative clause processing.
Journal of Memory and Language, 66, 479-508.
Sato, A. (2011). Nihongo kankeisetuno syori fukao ketteisuru
yoinno kento - koopasuni okeru siyo hindono eikyoo chuusinni (An Investigation of Factors that Determine Processing Load in Japanese Relative Clauses - With a Focus on Frequency Use in Corpora) (In Japanese). Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Hiroshima University, Higashi
Hiroshima, Japan.
Sauerland, U., & Gibson, E. (1998). Case matching in relative clause attachment. Paper presented at the 11th Annual
CUNY Sentence Processing Conference, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ, March 1998.
Schriefers H., Friederici A. D., & Kuhn K. (1995). The processing of locally ambiguous relative clauses in German.
Journal of Memory and Language, 34, 499-520.
Sheldon, A. (1976). Speaker’s intuition about the complexity of relative clauses in Japanese and English. In S. S.
Mufwene, C. A. Walker and S. B. Sanford (Eds.), Papers
from the Twelfth Regional Meeting of the Chicago Linguistic Society (pp. 558-567). Chicago: Department of Linguistics: University of Chicago.
Sheldon, A. (1977). On strategies for processing relative
clauses: A comparison of children and adults. Journal of
Psycholinguistic Research, 6, 305-318.
Tomlin, R. S. (1986). Basic Word Order — Function Principles. London: Croom Helm.
Traxler, M. J., Morris, R. K., & Seely, R. E. (2002). Processing subject and object relative clauses: evidence from eye
movements. Journal of Memory and Language, 47, 69-90.
Ueno, M. & Garnsey, S.M. (2008). An ERP study of the processing of subject and object relative clauses in Japanese.
Language and Cognitive Processes, 23, 646-688.

3079

