UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Using Property Induction to Evaluate Understanding of Mixing

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3g5659ch

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Quinn, Conor
Ellefson, Michelle
Schlottmann, Anne
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Using Property Induction to Evaluate Understanding of Mixing
Connor Quinn1 (cq209@cam.ac.uk)
Michelle R. Ellefson1 (mre33@cam.ac.uk)
Anne Schlottmann2 (a.schlottmann@ucl.ac.uk)
Keith S. Taber1 (kst24@cam.ac.uk)
1

2

Faculty of Education, University of Cambridge
Psychology and Language Sciences, University College London

Abstract
Although reasoning skills have been investigated in a number
of different domains, very little is known about how children
and adults use them in chemistry. Here, participants from 4
years to adults saw various mixtures presented using a
standard property induction paradigm. The category and
appearance of everyday materials were varied to assess the
extent that participants use these features to inform their
judgments about what happens when these materials are
mixed with water. In general, the results followed similar
patterns seen when this paradigm has been applied to other
domains, with both category and appearance informing
inductive generalizations. The findings contrast with
interview-based measures of children’s understanding of
chemistry and offer an important addition to the field.
Keywords: property induction; chemistry; reasoning;
cognitive development

Background
There is a growing consensus that children learn and
reason about novel situations by basing their generalizations
on their previous experiences (e.g., Wellman & Gelman,
1998). Children have extensive experience of chemistry in
their everyday world, e.g., baking or rusting. However, there
are few studies in cognitive science exploring children’s
reasoning about the chemical world. Here, we present a
novel application of a property induction paradigm to
investigate how primary school children (ages 4 to 11)
reason about one basic chemical phenomenon - the mixing
of different materials.1
1

The terms used in this paper are compatible with standard
terminology used by chemists in technical writing. Items such as
soap, coconut, or sugar are a mixture of substances and are not
considered pure ‘substances’ by chemists. Instead, chemists refer
to these items as ‘materials’. For simplicity, the term ‘materials’ is
used here to refer to all items rather than having to distinguish
between materials and substances. This terminology does not fit
squarely within the typical cognitive science framework where
‘substances’ might be used to indicate different categories and
‘materials’ used to refer to the stimuli and props used in an
experiment. In addition, when materials are added to water there
may or may not be a chemical reaction, depending on the makeup
of the materials involved. Therefore, we use the term ‘mixing’ to
capture the process for all items, regardless of the chemical
outcome of the mixing process.

The focus of this study is mixing because it is one of the
earliest chemical phenomena children are deemed capable of
grasping (e.g., Au, Sidle, & Rollins, 1993; Johnson, 2000;
Rosen & Rozin, 1993) and because very little work exists in
this area (Çalýk, Ayas, & Ebenezer, 2005). Most of the few
existing studies have used interviews. The results of these
interviews suggest that young children attend almost
exclusively to what they can see, i.e., the macroscopic
properties of the materials (Arnold, Moye, & Winer, 1986;
Ebenezer & Erikson, 1996; Haider & Abraham, 1991) and
have little or no conception of the particulate nature of
matter (Liu & Lesniak, 2006; Nakhleh & Samarapungavan,
1999; Renström, Andersson, & Marton, 1990). Briefly, the
particulate nature of matter refers to the idea that materials
are made up of invisible, sub-microscopic particles, with
molecules being the smallest particles of most materials.
Some knowledge of the particulate nature of matter is
necessary to understand materials and how they interact with
each other; naïve (incomplete or incorrect) understanding of
particles likely leads to misconceptions of chemical
phenomena. The assumption is that because young children
are not able to explain the particulate nature of matter or the
microscopic properties of materials that they lack the ability
to reason adequately about materials
One issue with these findings is that the interview
method relies on children having the appropriate language of
chemistry to be able to explain the phenomena. As a result,
it may be the case that children’s abilities in this area have
been greatly underestimated. Extensive studies of naïve
physics and naïve biology indicate that children’s reasoning
abilities about these science phenomena surpass their
abilities to explain them verbally. Tasks that are not reliant
on verbal ability indicate that even infants have some
understanding of physics (Wellman & Gelman, 1998). For
example, infants know that solid objects cannot just
appear/disappear or move through physical barriers (Spelke,
Breinlinger, Macomber, & Jacobson, 1992), are distinct
from one another (Xu & Carey, 1996), and once put into
motion travel over distances related to the force of that
motion (Kotovsky & Baillargeon, 1998). These tasks
indicate young children do have some appreciation of the
properties of materials; 3-year-olds know that wooden
pillows are hard (Kalish & Gelman, 1992) and 4-year-olds
know that material is conserved if the object is broken up

1181

(e.g., a plastic toy taken apart is still plastic even if it no
longer operates as a toy; Smith, Carey, & Wiser, 1985).
The success of these language-sparse experimental
paradigms in uncovering the foundations of young
children’s emerging understanding in naïve physics and
biology might suggest that young children can make sense
of chemical phenomena. Here, we use a language-sparse
property induction paradigm to study early chemistry
reasoning. Briefly, the property induction paradigm
investigates how children use category and appearance
information in their generalizations of natural kinds,
typically biological kinds (Gelman & Markman, 1986;
Gelman & Markman, 1987). For example, Farrar, Raney, &
Boyer (1992) showed 5- to 10-year-old children a familiar
target object with its familiar name (e.g., egg) and taught
them a novel property about that object (e.g., ‘has
mitochondria inside’). Next, children were asked whether
the four test items below also had that novel property:
1. Same category, same appearance (e.g., plain egg);
2. Same category, different appearance (e.g., spotted egg);
3. Different category, same appearance (e.g., snow ball);
4. Different category, different appearance (e.g., leaf).
At all ages, generalizations depended both on category
and appearance, but how children relied on these cues
changed with age. Pre-school children generalized more to
objects in the same category with the same appearance than
to the other items; in other words, they thought the typical
cue correlation was necessary. Second graders generalized
more to objects that matched in category and appearance
than to objects matching in only one cue than to objects
matching in neither cue; that is, they realize that category
and appearance are separable predictors. Only fourth graders
generalized more to same category, different appearance
items than to different category, same appearance items,
realizing that category was a better predictor than
appearance. This mature pattern appeared even for second
graders in a second study varying knowledge of the
categories/properties in question, but only when children
reasoned about known categories/properties. Generalization
about materials may include more features than category and
appearance. For example, 8-year-olds seem to generalize
more often to items with matching causal information
compared to perceptual features and 5-year-olds seem to be
able to make use of causal information when it is not in
competition with physical features (Hayes & Thompson,
2007). This distinction may be relevant for chemistry where
the causal factors that determine mixing outcomes may not
correspond to perceptual features. The results from these
property induction studies have indicated that children as
young as 2 years are not limited to appearance-based
reasoning when categories/properties are well known
(Gelman & Coley, 1990), but variations in knowledge
continue to play a vital role at older ages.
Given the success of this paradigm in furthering the
understanding of young children’s reasoning, it seems well
suited as an application for the chemical phenomena
investigated here – mixing. More specifically, do children

generalize from one mixture outcome to another if the
substances involved are of the same category or of the same
appearance? How does this depend on age and on children’s
knowledge of the substances involved?
In contrast to studies of biological properties,
generalization of mixture properties does not depend on
category only, but on appearance as well. Mapping the
category and appearance properties onto chemistry, it might
be useful to think of categories in chemistry as relating to
materials and appearances in chemistry as relating to forms
like powder, granule or larger chunks. Whether different
materials dissolve in water or not depends on a variety of
factors related to molecular structure. For instance, water is
polar and can break other polar or ionic materials like salt
(NaCl) apart, but not non-polar or covalent materials like
sand (SiO2); roughly, like dissolves like. How different
forms of a material mix with water might depend on factors
related to surface area. For instance, table salt (NaCl, in
granular form) usually dissolves more quickly in water than
rock salt (NaCl, in a large chunk) because it has a greater
surface area. As such, in addition to examining the role of
language in children’s reasoning about basic chemical
phenomena, the current design allows for an investigation of
whether children’s generalizations about chemical properties
are similar to those in other domains. Specifically, will
reasoning about chemistry follow both material (category)
and form (appearance) cues in the same way as for biology,
will there be a different pattern for chemistry, reflecting
domain differences in cue efficacy, or will young children
remain appearance-bound, as predicted by the findings from
interview studies?

Method
Participants
A total of 142 participants (Nfemale = 81) took part in this
experiment. There were 122 children recruited from schools
in eastern England, including 24 children from reception (M
= 4.87 years, SD = 0.35, Nfemale = 11), 32 children from year
two (M = 6.62 years, SD = 0.46, Nfemale = 19), 33 from year
four (M = 8.60 years, SD = 0.41 Nfemale = 15) and 35 from
year six (M = 10.74 years, SD = 0.28, Nfemale = 21). In
addition, 20 adult participants were recruited from the
university and local community (M = 26.45, SD = 6.70,
Nfemale = 15). For simplicity, these different age groups are
referred to here as 5-year-olds, 7-year-olds, 9-year-olds, 11year-olds, and adults. Adults were paid £10 for their
participation and represented a range of chemistry
experience. Children were invited to dress up as scientists
for the duration of the study and were given stickers and
their schools given a special science presentation by a local
science outreach program. The participating schools were
typical schools in terms of their range of student abilities
and backgrounds according to publically available
government data (www.ofsted.gov.uk).

1182

some items were given alternative names 2 . Finally, the
relative mass and volume of the targets and probes were as
similar as possible so that these perceptual features would
not act as additional cues to the outcomes. Transparent
400mL plastic beakers (see Figure 1) were used to show the
mixing of each target with water. The beakers were filled
with 250mL of water and had lids to allow mixing of the
targets with the water without risk of spillage. The probes
were presented in transparent 140mL plastic containers (see
Figure 2), sealed with clear plastic lids for safety.

Figure 1. An example of a target. The picture on the left
shows the water and the target (e.g., granulated brown
sugar) before mixing. The picture on the right shows the
water and target after they were mixed.

Procedures

Figure 2. An example of a set of probes: (1) same
material, same form (e.g., granulated brown sugar); (2) same
material, different form (e.g., brown sugar cube); (3)
different material, same form (e.g., sand); and (4) different
material, different form (e.g., a pebble).

Participants sat opposite the experimenter at a table in a
quiet area of their primary school or university. A clear
plastic beaker with water was placed on the table and
identified as water. A transparent plastic tub containing the
target was displayed and identified for the participant, using
the phrase “See this tub? This tub has [target name]. I’m
going to mix the [target name] with the water.’
All items were named for the participants. In order to
ensure no cues about the type of material could be implied
from the instructions, mass/count words were not used (e.g.,
“This is a vitamin.” or “This is some sugar.”). Instead, only
general names were given (e.g., “This is vitamin.” or “This
is sugar.”). The form of the target and probe were not
mentioned.
The target was added to the water, the beaker was sealed
and it was turned upside down once to facilitate mixing.
Participants were asked to describe what happened both to
the target and to the water. This step ensured they were
attending to the mixing.
Table 1: List of Target and Probe Materials
Target
Form

Materials
Everyday items (e.g., sugars, salts, sand, etc.) were
selected as stimuli because children may reason better about
familiar content and for safety reasons. Twelve sets of items
were chosen, with each set including a target and four
probes (see Table 1). The probes followed the conditions
mentioned above: (1) same material, same form; (2) same
material, different form; (3) different material, same form;
and (4) different material, different form.
Several constraints were imposed on the selection of the
targets and probes based on pragmatics and the experimental
design: (1) the target and probes were safe and appropriate
for use with young children; (2) the target-probe pairs had
similar appearances for their matching forms (solid, granule,
or powder); and (3) the targets and probes were balanced in
terms of their outcomes when mixed with water. When
controlling for mixing outcomes it was noticed that long
names, (e.g., antacid) were often associated with exciting
outcomes such as fizzing. To avoid this possible confound

Solid

Granule

Powder

Target
Material
Chalk
Chocolate
Vitamin
Paint
Peppercorns
Bath Bomb
Sugar
Coffee
Coconut
Antacid
Salt
Kool-Aid

Probe
Material
Lolly
Almond
Sweet
Incense
Candy
Wax
Stone
Stock cube
Soap
Washing Soap
Rice
Play-Doh

After mixing the target with water, the experimenter
displayed and identified each of the four probes, one at a
2

Antacid became ‘meds’, bath bomb and washing powder
became ‘stuff for the bath’ and ‘Stuff for the Wash’ respectively.
Peppercorn was shortened to ‘pepper’, and stock cube was ‘stock’.
‘lolly’ was a short stick of candy.

1183

time in a pre-established randomized ordering. For each
probe participants were asked if it would do the same as the
target using the phrase 'See this tub? This tub has [probe
name] in it. Do you think this would do the same as [target
name] if I put it in water?’
Participants were instructed to give “Yes” or “No”
replies. Simplifying the required responses in this way was
important in order to make the task accessible for the
youngest participants. For the younger groups two sheets of
paper were also available, green and red, with ‘yes’ and ‘no’
written on them respectively. Children could point to these if
they did not give a verbal response. Only one child made use
of these sheets. If participants did not give a specific ‘yes’ or
‘no’ response, the question was repeated to prompt a ‘yes’
or ‘no’ answer. Sessions were video recorded so that replies
could be verified and confirmed off-line.
The target remained in view on the table mixed with the
water while the participants saw the probes. After each of
the four probes was presented, the target and water were
cleared out of view before the next set of items was
presented.
There were 12 sets of items each containing a target to
be mixed with water and four probes for a total of 48 trials.
Both the order of the 12 sets and the order four probes
within each set were presented pseudo-randomly. The
youngest group always completed the study in two separate
sessions.

Proportion of 'Yes' Responses

1
0.9

Form: Same

0.8

Form: Different

0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

0.1
0
Material: Same

Material: Different

Figure 3. The mean proportion of “Yes” responses made
to the same and different materials and forms across all age
groups.
1

5-year-olds

Proportion of 'Yes' Responses

0.9

7-year-olds

0.8

9-year-olds

0.7

11-year-olds

0.6

adults

0.5

0.4
0.3

0.2
0.1

Results
The proportion of “Yes” responses given by the
participants to the probes were analyzed using a 5 × 2 × 2
repeated measures ANOVA with the between-subjects
factor of age group (5-year-olds, 7-year-olds, 9-year-olds,
11-year-olds, and adults) and the within-subjects factors of
material (same vs. different from the target) and form (same
vs. different from the target). This ANOVA was conducted
using the restricted maximum likelihood technique (REML;
Bagiella, Sloan, & Heitjan, 2000). There were no overall
significant differences among the three forms (powder,
granule, or solid), making it feasible to combine them
together and focus the analyses on same vs. different form
only.
There was a significant effect of both material, F(1,
139.1) = 445.44, p < .0001, and form, F(1, 139.2) = 418.56,
p < .0001, as well as a significant interaction between
material and form, F(1, 139.3) = 119.42, p < .0001 (See
Figure 3). More specifically, participants responded ‘Yes”
most often when the probe was the same material, and same
form as the target (M = .96, SD = .21), followed by probes
that were the same material and different form (M = .59, SD
= .49), probes that were a different material and same form
(M = .49, SD = .50), and probes that were a different
material and different form (M = .30, SD = .46). Post-hoc
tests using Tukey’s HSD indicated that each probe type was
different from the others.

0
Material: Same
Form: Same

Material: Same
Form: Different

Material: Different
Form: Same

Material: Different
Form: Different

Figure 4. The mean proportion of “Yes” responses made to
the same and different materials and forms by each age
group.
The main effect of age group was not significant, F(4,
139.1) = 0.89, p = .47. Similarly, age group did not interact
significantly with material, F(4, 139.1) = 2.03, p = .09,
form, F(4, 139.1) = 1.15, p = .34, or material and form
combined, F(4, 139.2) = 1.53, p = .20 (see Figure 4).

Discussion
This paper presents a novel adaptation of the property
induction paradigm to explore how children reason about the
chemical process of mixing. The design was created in order
to use language-sparse methods as a way of further
examining children’s reasoning in this domain by addressing
whether: (1) young children display a better understanding
of mixing processes when assessed using a language-sparse
method compared to interviews; and (2) whether children
differentially attend to the category (material) or appearance
(form) of materials when generalizing about mixing.
In terms of the first question, the results confirm that
young children’s reasoning about these materials does not
differ from older children and adults in terms of mixing in

1184

this context. These findings are consistent with other
property induction studies, but are contrary to the results of
interview studies (Gelman & Markman, 1986; Gelman &
Markman, 1987; Liu & Lesniak, 2006; Au, Sidle, & Rollins,
1993). As such, there is some indication that this type of
language-sparse methodology might be useful in further
exploring how young children reason about other chemical
phenomena.
In relation to the second question, participants of all age
groups attend to category and appearance when making
generalizations about mixing. The presence of this finding
for the youngest age group suggests that even young
children bring their everyday reasoning skills to
understanding chemistry despite not yet being able to
articulate sophisticated explanations. The findings presented
here replicate the overall pattern found with property
induction studies in other domains (e.g., Gelman &
Markman, 1987). Specifically, the category seems to have
more influence than appearance on the generalizations that
were made.
However, these findings are distinctive to property
induction studies in other areas. Specifically, this study did
not replicate the common finding of age related differences
in the use of category and appearance. In a chemistry
context like that presented here, both features seem to be
influencing generalizations, whereas in other studies from
the domain of biology the categorical information becomes
more important for generalizations in older children than
younger children (e.g., Farrar et al., 1992).
One explanation for the discrepancy between the results
found here and other property induction studies might be
that this task used naturalistic materials and actual mixing
events, whereas most of the previous studies used pictures,
words or text (Farrar et al., 1992; Gelman & Coley, 1990;
Gelman & Markman, 1986; Gelman & Markman, 1987;
Hayes & Thompson, 2007). More specifically, these
previous studies mostly frequently used artificially selected
stimuli with a constrained set of properties that allowed for a
limited number of inductions, whereas the materials used
here are more ecologically valid but they do include a wider
variety of properties and more possible inductions.
Using real materials might have inadvertently allowed
participants to attend to properties other than the category
and appearance properties explicitly examined here (e.g., the
density of objects could have been assumed by participants
to have played a role in the outcome). In contrast, when
experimental stimuli are created to vary only on a limited set
of properties, then participants may base their
generalizations more on the specific properties for which
these artificial stimuli were designed to control. Thus, the
inherent complexity of real-world materials might have
prevented well-controlled and systematic studies of
reasoning about chemistry. This language-sparse design
provides a platform from which additional studies might be
developed that control for the wide variety of features that
may play a role when natural stimuli are used in property
induction studies, while still being more ecologically valid.

It may be the case that children exploit multiple redundant
cues in their natural environment, so the pattern found here
may be indicative of their reasoning in their everyday lives.
Another reason for this finding in chemistry, but not
biology might be due to domain-specific differences in the
way chemistry information is processed. It could be the case
that reasoning skills are applied differently in the biological
and chemical contexts because the features that help in
terms of generalization have different predictive validity.
In chemistry, appearance might be both an unreliable
predictor and necessary for making a prediction. Firstly,
appearance alone is generally an unreliable predictor of
category. For example, white powder can be any number of
different materials with a wide range of possible chemical
properties. Secondly, it is difficult to make a prediction
about the outcome based on the knowledge of the category
without information about appearance. For example,
aluminum is inert as a solid block, but easily combusts in
powdered form. In contrast, in biology, appearance might be
a reliable predictor of behavior when it predicts category
membership (e.g., wings might predict bird and flying).
Most property induction studies introduce unreliable
correlations amongst features like appearance and category
and assuming that biology naturally includes more reliable
correlations amongst these features, then it could be the case
that property induction studies introduce unnatural reasoning
settings. As such, the age difference apparent in biology
generalizations
may
reflect
children’s
growing
understanding of what to do when the correlations they
experience in their everyday lives are broken by our
experimental designs in property induction. On the other
hand, in chemistry, the correlations are naturally unreliable,
matching the usual property induction design. Thus, the
property induction paradigm might be more representative
of naturalistic reasoning in chemistry but not biology. If that
were the case, then the more mature reasoning seen in this
chemistry context might be related to the match between the
experimental design and children’s everyday experiences
rather than the differences inherent to reasoning about
biology and chemistry.
This aspect of chemistry raises an intriguing perspective
on development of categorization and reasoning skills.
Cognitive science includes a large body of studies
investigating the basic building blocks of cognition with
which children learn about the world. In physics, biology,
and psychology evidence has suggested that children
generalize existing knowledge to extend their ability to
reason about the world. A debate remains about the origins
of these basic reasoning skills. Most areas of reasoning
struggle to separate the question of how much of reasoning
is dependent upon domain-specific experiences and how
much is due to domain-general strategies. Chemistry may
offer a unique perspective for this debate. Like physics,
biology, and psychology, children are exposed to chemical
phenomena throughout childhood, but the differences
between these domains in terms of predictive validity of
features might provide a new direction for further study.

1185

If it is indeed the case that children are sensitive to the
idea that different cues are meaningful in biology versus
chemistry, then it could be the case that children are
bringing very sophisticated reasoning skills to their attempts
to understand chemistry. However, this is the first study in
this area and other relevant cues (e.g., density, naming, etc.)
should to be explored before firm conclusions can be made.
In sum, this novel application of the property induction
paradigm to chemistry raises important questions about the
development of reasoning skills in chemistry and further
offers directions of research to address key questions of how
children learn to reason about the world. The question of
how abstract reasoning skills develop is a core issue for
education. Previous research into young children’s
understanding of chemistry has relied upon language-based
measures. This study offers a more sensitive measure of
chemistry reasoning that is not constrained by a child’s
language development. The findings presented here might
be useful in re-evaluating the assumptions that educators
make about the reasoning skills children bring to chemistry
learning and could be applied to develop more effective
ways of learning for chemistry students of all ages.

Acknowledgements
This project was supported by The Leverhulme Trust (No.
RPB-115). Special thanks to Polly Basak and Hyunji Kim
for help with data collection and Elaine Wilson for advice
and support. Further thanks to Katja Rieger, Gina Plant
Cabrita, Sarah Laupper, and Matthew Cairnduff for help
with selection and preparation of materials.

References
Arnold, K. D., Moye, J., & Winer, G. A. (1986). Illusion
versus reality: Children’s understanding of temperature
adaptation. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology,
42(2), 256-272.
Au, T. K., Sidle, A. L., & Rollins, K. B. (1993). Developing
an intuitive understanding of conservation and
contamination: Invisible particles as a plausible
mechanism. Developmental Psychology, 29(2), 286-299.
Bagiella, E., Sloan, R. P., & Heitjan, D. F. (2000). Mixedeffects models in psychophysiology. Psychophysiology,
37(1), 13-20.
Çalýk, M., Ayas, A., & Ebenezer, J. V. (2005). A review of
solution chemistry studies: insights into students’
conceptions. Journal of Science Education and
Technology, 14(1), 29-50.
Ebenezer, J. V., & Erickson, G. L. (1996). Chemistry
students’ conceptions of solubility: A phenomenography.
Science Education, 80(2), 181-201.
Farrar, M. J., Raney, G. E., & Boyer, M. E. (1992).
Knowledge, concepts, and inferences in childhood. Child
Development, 63(3), 673-691.
Gelman, S. A., & Coley, J. D. (1990). The importance of
knowing a dodo is a bird: Categories and inferences in 2-

year-old children. Developmental psychology, 26(5),
796-804.
Gelman, S. A., & Markman, E. M. (1986). Categories and
induction in young children. Cognition, 23(3), 183-209.
Gelman, S. A., & Markman, E. M. (1987). Young children’s
inductions from natural kinds: The role of categories and
appearances. Child Development, 58(6), 1532-1541.
Haidar, A. H., & Abraham, M. R. (1991). A comparison of
applied and theoretical knowledge of concepts based on
the particulate nature of matter. Journal of Research in
Science Teaching, 28(10), 919-938.
Hayes, B. K., & Thompson, S. P. (2007). Causal relations
and feature similarity in children’s inductive reasoning.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 136(3),
470-484.
Johnson, P. (2000). Children’s understanding of substances,
part 1: recognizing chemical change. International
Journal of Science Education, 22(7), 719-737.
Kalish, C. W., & Gelman, S. A. (1992). On Wooden
Pillows: Multiple Classification and Children’s
Category-based Inductions. Child Development, 63(6),
1536-1557.
Kotovsky, L., & Baillargeon, R. (1998). The development of
calibration-based reasoning about collision events in
young infants. Cognition, 67(3), 311-351.
Liu, X., & Lesniak, K. (2006). Progression in children’s
understanding of the matter concept from elementary to
high school. Journal of Research in Science Teaching,
43(3), 320-347.
Nakhleh, M. B., & Samarapungavan, A. (1999). Elementary
school children’s beliefs about matter. Journal of
Research in Science Teaching, 36(7), 777-805.
Renström, L., Andersson, B., & Marton, F. (1990).
Students’ conceptions of matter. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 82(3), 555-569.
Rosen, A. B., & Rozin, P. (1993). Now you see it, now you
don’t: The preschool child’s conception of invisible
particles in the context of dissolving. Developmental
Psychology, 29(2), 300-311.
Smith, C., Carey, S., & Wiser, M. (1985). On
differentiation: A case study of the development of the
concepts of size, weight, and density. Cognition, 21(3),
177-237.
Spelke, E. S., Breinlinger, K., Macomber, J., & Jacobson, K.
(1992). Origins of knowledge. Psychological Review,
99(4), 605-632.
Wellman, H. M., & Gelman, S. A. (1998). Knowledge
acquisition in foundational domains. In W. Damon (Ed.),
Handbook of child psychology: Volume 2: Cognition,
perception, and language (pp. 523-573) Hoboken:
Wiley.
Xu, F., & Carey, S. (1996). Infants’ metaphysics: The case
of numerical identity. Cognitive Psychology, 30(2), 111153.

1186

