UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Using Music as a Turn in Conversation in a Lesson

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5n40g8kk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Duffy, Sam
Healey, Patrick

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Using Music as a Turn in Conversation in a Lesson
Sam Duffy (s.duffy@eecs.qmul.ac.uk)
Patrick G. T. Healey (ph@eecs.qmul.ac.uk)
Cognitive Science Research Group
School of Electronic Engineering and Computer Science
Queen Mary University of London
London, E1 4NS, United Kingdom
Abstract
Music is sometimes compared to language as a system of communication, however this comparison is usually at a generic
formal, cultural or social level. This paper explores this analogy at the detailed level of interaction: to what extent can musical contributions act as conversational turns? We explore this
question through an ethnographic study of music lessons. We
describe a new transcription notation designed to capture the
interactional details of musical contributions. Using this notation we show that although the ultimate objective of a lesson
is development of musical performance, the detailed structure
of the musical contributions depends on their interactional organisation. We show that musical contributions display interactional structure at the turn and sub-turn level and are closely
integrated with other verbal and non-verbal cues as part of the
unfolding conversation.
Keywords: music tuition; conversational turn; interaction; repair

Introduction
Comparisons of music and speech are well documented, for
example Feld and Fox (1994) critically review a broad interdisciplinary collection of anthropological work on the relationship of music to language. Besson, Chobert, and Marie
(2011) take a cognitive approach, considering evidence for
the bidirectional influence of musical expertise on speech processing and of linguistic expertise on the processing of harmonic sounds. Zatorre, Belin, and Penhune (2002) show that
whilst each auditory cortex, in the left and right hemispheres
of the brain, has been shown to favour processing of either
music or speech, this complimentary specialisation should
“be seen as arising from a single underlying principle rather
than being unrelated phenomena”.
In this paper we look at the relationship between music and
speech in social interaction through the study of instrumental
music lessons. We describe a new transcription notation designed to capture the interactional details of musical contributions. This is used to investigate the extent to which musical utterances produced during a lesson act as conversational
turns. Initially we will summarise some of the characteristics and rules which govern turn taking in conversation. We
will then look at the different, context-dependant roles that
music can play in different types of interaction. We will use
an ethnographic study of clarinet lessons to provide examples
of the interplay between music and speech in a pedagogical
setting

What is a Turn?
In conversation, the participants manage their exchange of
units of speech. Sacks, Schegloff, and Jefferson (1974) set out

rules describing the mechanics of how this is achieved, identifying dialogue as a turn organised activity. In order to investigate any turn taking system, be it playing a game of cards or
managing a queue, there is a need to define what constitutes a
turn. In conversation analysis, the building block for turns
is the turn construction unit (TCU), which can be formed
from a single word or utterance, a sentence, or a phrase. As
one speaker approaches the possible completion of a TCU,
another speaker may recognise this as a transition-relevance
place (TRP) where they can take the floor. However this is an
opportunity rather than an obligation. It may be that the current speaker starts a new TCU and continues with their turn.
Since it is possible to predict when turns are heading towards
completion, the next speaker can often start their turn without a perceivable gap in the conversation, or even start before the current speaker has finished, causing a brief overlap.
Whilst we do not usually talk at the same time as someone
else for prolonged periods, brief overlaps like this at transition points are frequent. To investigate these rules in action, a
set of notations was proposed for use in conversation analysis
transcripts (for example see Figure 1).

Figure 1: Conversation analysis notation (Sacks et al., 1974)

Non-verbal interaction
The gestures which accompany speech are an important scaffold to conversation as well as an integral part of interaction.
Bavelas, Chovil, Lawrie, and Wade (1992) explain that conversation is not made up of alternating monologues but is an
interactive social system, and show that interactive gestures
are essential in maintaining conversation. Cassell and Thorisson (1999) describe the importance of envelope feedback,
non-verbal accompaniments to speech such as beat gestures,
gaze and head turns. Engle (1998) demonstrate that when
gesture and speech are consistent with respect to the underlying referent, they are understood as composite signals rather
than separate channels. Clark and Krych (2004) show the im-

2231

The Role of Music in a Pedagogical Context

portance of visual modality to collaborative work with shared
objects, gesturing in relation to an object whilst another is
speaking effectively reducing the number of turns required
for task completion. Non-verbal interactions can also function as a turn in themselves, the expected response to a verbal
turn taking the form of physical activity rather than speech.
For example, a request at the family dinner table during a
busy multi-party conversation to pass the butter can be actioned without any reference in the continuing conversation
(E. A. Schegloff, 2007, pp.10 Chicken Dinner).
In the same way that gestures act as a scaffold to to speech,
non-verbal interaction is vital to the co-ordination of musical
sound production. In jazz, a solo may be scored as for a prescribed number of bars with a chord structure, but it may also
be open, thrown around the group for others to take a turn or
even choose to play against each other, so non-verbal communication with fellow performers is important to manage
improvisation. Observing a group of musicians engaged in
free improvisation sessions, Healey, Leach, and Bryan-Kinns
(2005) found that the musicians used the patterns of body position and orientation, or f-formations (Kendon, 1990) typical
of face-to-face conversation to organise the timing of their
musical contributions. Moran (2011) observes a group of
North Indian musicians whose vocal and bodily responses to
musical ideas could be interpreted as comparable to the function of back channelling in everyday conversation. Even in
the performance of a predetermined composed score, an ensemble must synchronise entrances and exits, and changes
in dynamics and tempo and this is usually achieved by gestures, head and body movement and gaze. In an analysis of
co-ordination between members of a string quartet, Davidson
and Good (2002) wrote “The nature of the interaction and coordination in conversation are, we believe, analogous to that
in small group music-making contexts.”

There are many different types of interaction involving the
production of music. From an ethnomethodological perspective, the social norms which govern how members of a group
understand their world and so behave in it (Garfinkel, 1964)
are relevant to any interaction, whatever the mode of communication. The context of a musical interaction is therefore
important in determining the roles of the participants and the
communication content of the music produced. Players in
an ensemble rehearsal will use verbal interaction to analyse,
discuss and shape their approach to a piece. During a performance, they cannot use the same level of verbal interaction
unless they want to share their inner workings with the audience. A soloist is not generally expecting to enter into a
dialogue with the audience, however they may engage in extensive non-verbal interaction with fellow performers and the
conductor, as part of co-ordinating their performance with an
orchestra.
In a pedagogical context, such as an instrumental lesson,
both student and tutor produce music but it is subject to
immediate scrutiny, their musical utterances being produced
with the expectation of immediate feedback. The tutor is not
listening to the performance from the perspective of an audience member, but as an expert critic and must be able to
immediately verbalise their assessment of the student’s performance. In order to prepare a complete piece or movement,
they will focus on a small part of it each week, building up
the work gradually. Small fragments of music, perhaps only
a few bars, are worked on at a time. The student plays them,
receives feedback, then plays them again for the tutor to assess if they have incorporated the feedback, and so on in an
iterative process.

Representing Music in a transcript

Turn breakdown and self repair
An important part of maintaining conversation is dealing with
turn-taking errors or rule violations such as a misunderstandings, interruptions, gaps and overlaps. These are frequent in
natural dialogue and we manage these breakdowns through
repair. Self-repair occurs when the current speaker manages
an error within the same turn in which it was made. To do
this, the speaker must be able to self-monitor and detect a
problem in what they are saying, or see some outward sign
of the listener’s confusion. Correction is made promptly once
the problem has been detected, a neutral holding term such
as ‘uh’ often being used to communicate error detection to
the listener and so hold the turn for the self-repair to be made
(Levelt, 1983). Self-repair occurs much more frequently than
other-initiated repair in natural speech. However even if the
other speaker initiates repair, they are much more likely to encourage the original speaker to correct themselves, rather than
make a direct correction (E. Schegloff, Jefferson, & Sacks,
1977).

It is surprising how few authors looking at interaction in a
musical context attempt to represent the musical sounds produced. When they do, one approach is to use musical notation
to locate activity on a musical timeline, for example Figure 2
(Holck, 2002). However this presentation is less meaningful
for those who do not read music.
In applying the rules of conversation analysis to musical
utterances, our notation needs to be comprehensible to those
who are used to working with transcripts, whilst being able
to capture the interactionally relevant aspects of music production. A system has been devised with two main aims:
to make representation of the music understandable for both
musicians and non-musicians, and make it possible for a written transcript to convey the full interaction whether utterances
are verbal or musical. The starting point was established notation for conversational analysis as shown in Figure 1. This
was adapted to produce notation for musical sounds as shown
in Figure 3.

2232

4 5 6 7 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8. The instances of octaves are shown
separately on the transcript below for clarity. The student (S)
is expected to play all three octaves ascending and then descending in one smooth phrase. He commences the ascending scale, flicking his eyes up to the tutor (T) occasionally, but
makes an unpleasant squeak at the start of note 7 of the third
octave. He elongates this note and then briefly stops playing
(Figure 4).

Figure 2: Extract from a transcript using musical notation.
English translation used with permission Holck (2007, pp 33)

Figure 3: Notation devised to represent musical sounds.
Figure 4: The student seeks guidance musically and verbally.

Applying Musical Notation to Data
We have observed clarinet lessons with four students and two
tutors at two music schools in London which prepare young
adults for the study of performance at an undergraduate level.
For explanatory purposes we focus on the turn-like organisation of musical contributions in one lesson however, we
have found that these phenomena recur across the sample.
The student is a male clarinet player studying for his grade
eight exam. Throughout, we will indicate the areas of interest
which are to be the subject of further work using the broader
dataset which has been collected.

Non-verbal interaction as a scaffold for musical
utterances
The student is being tested on playing scales from memory.
The tutor holds a small book containing the syllabus in her
hands, at chest height. The student is holding his clarinet in
front of his body with both hands and they are facing each
other. The tutor has asked him to play a three octave scale.
There are eight notes in an octave, the last note and the first
note are the same, the last note being an octave higher in
pitch. To simplify our transcript, we can represent this as
numbers rather than notes 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8(1), where 8 represents the top of the scale. To play a scale over several octaves
you would play seven notes, then start the next octave so a
three octave scale could be represented as 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 1 2 3

The tutor does not change her position or gaze, or seek to
interrupt in this brief pause, and the student continues with
the next note in the scale (note 8) again elongating it, looking
up at the tutor as he plays and raising his eyebrows. This is
a possible parallel with Levelt’s word-completion hypothesis
(Levelt, 1983) in which it is suggested that speakers have a
tendency to complete words after detection of trouble. Musicians may exhibit a similar tendency to finish a musical idea,
although this does not always happen, since examples of the
student restarting mid-phrase after a mistake have also been
found. The circumstances around whether the student finishes a phrase or restarts mid-phrase is a potential area of
further investigation. The tutor still does not visibly react.
Rather than continue with the scale (which would now be the
three octave descent), the student stops and verbally seeks
guidance ‘there?’ with the clarinet still in his mouth (Figure 5). Finally she responds, verbally indicating that the error
was with the note that played by not referring to the squeak.
The tutor puts her book down on the music stand, turns
away and picks up her clarinet from its resting place on the
piano. She then twists her body back to look up and meet
the student’s gaze as he retries the top of the scale tentatively
(Figure 6). They continue to make frequent brief direct eye
contact and the tutor nods and encourages him verbally ‘yeah’
as he starts the descent. He continues down the scale, picking

2233

arms from their listening pose or picking up a pencil (to write
an instruction on the score). If the tutor decides to demonstrate the fragment, they start to pick up their instrument, or
bring it closer to a playing position, whilst the student finishes
the phrase. Student and tutor will not deliberately play at the
same time during this part of the lesson, however we will see
later that brief overlap does occur.

Figure 5: The student seeks verbal guidance ”There?”
up speed to finish with a confident long final note. The tutor
continues to hold her clarinet close to her mouth but does not
play, letting him finish before giving verbal feedback on the
rest of the scale.

We will now examine this in more detail using the notation
devised. In this extract, student and tutor have been working
on an exam piece together for several weeks (Clarinet Sonata
in Eb Major Op.167 Mvmt IV Molto Allegro by Saint-Saens).
It includes passages of ascending and descending scales and
arpeggios which are challenging to play fluidly. The tutor
suggests that they pick up where they left off the previous
week. The student starts by playing the phrase shown in Figure 7 however he plays a wrong note from a different scale
which changes the tonality of the passage. The tutor indicates
that she has noticed the error by adjusting her gaze and listening position but does not interrupt the student yet. He restarts
mid-phrase, from just before the error (Figure 7). This may
be for the benefit of the tutor, who has to solve a continuation
problem, i.e., how to relate the repair to the original utterance
(Levelt, 1983) or for his own benefit in ease of correction.
The choice of where to start a musical self-repair is another
area worthy of further investigation.

Figure 6: The student continues after encouragement
In this short vignette we see the student’s use of gaze to
seek feedback whilst playing. When this is unacknowledged,
it is escalated to a verbal utterance. When gaze is used to seek
a response again but encouragement is received, the student
continues to play without seeking feedback verbally. We then
see how the student uses tempo to express confidence in the
descent, holding the turn long enough to complete the scale.
Speeding up talk has been shown to be a way to hold on to a
turn (Button, 1993).

Figure 7: Bars 118-120 Clarinet Sonata in Eb Major Mvmt
IV Publisher Durand, 1921. Plate D. & F. 10,063, Paris.
The tutor moves closer to the score with her pencil and as
the student reaches the long note at the end of the phrase, she
talks over it and moves the pencil towards the score (Figure
8). We see that rather than interrupt mid-phrase, she lets the
student attempt self-repair, only taking over the turn at the
TRP presented by the long note at the end of the phrase.

Delayed interruption
We have previously noted that in a music lesson, where a verbal request by the tutor is usually followed by a musical response, it is reasonable to assume that this musical phrase is
analogous to a conversational turn, and we should therefore
be able to see the characteristics of turn management (Duffy
& Healey, 2012). The tutor will often interrupt the student’s
playing once a problem has been detected. However rather
than stop them as soon as the error has occurred, the end of a
musical phrase is preferred by the tutor as a TRP to take the
turn, even if they have detected the problem earlier. During
the short period of time between detection and interruption,
the tutor’s non-verbal behaviour reveals their intention to interrupt, such as moving in closer to the music, raising their

Figure 8: The tutor delays interruption

2234

Using ‘readiness to play’ to signal the intent to
interrupt
Here we will see how the tutor uses the position of her clarinet
to indicate her ‘readiness to play’, effectively taking the floor
through playing. The student has become stuck on a particular section and the tutor has decided that they will practice
it together. She picks up her clarinet and demonstrates the
phrase in full at a steady pace, as they both read from the student’s score (Figure 9). The tutor bounces her clarinet bell
to emphasis the rhythm of the phrase and briefly glances at
the student, who is still looking at the score. He starts to nod
in time with her clarinet bell, signalling his attention to the
demonstration in response to the tutor’s checking glance.

clarinet closer to the playing position, she is escalating the
likelihood of interruption (Figure 11). The student lowers his
mouthpiece as soon as he finishes his last note, even though
on this final attempt he has played the last part of the phrase
correctly. The tutor takes over straight away and plays the
end of the phrase that the he has been struggling with.

Figure 11: Escalation of visible intention to interrupt

Self-repair and overlap

Figure 9: The tutor plays the phrase to be worked on in full
The student then tries the phrase himself as directed. He
makes several undesirable squeaking sounds in place of the
expected notes (Figure10) and as he exhales loudly, the tutor
turns towards him.

Continuing straight on from the last extract we now see the
pair negotiate moving into a period of exchanging musical
turns. The student takes the floor again in order to try the
phrase himself. They now enter a period of alternating turns
with brief overlaps, repeating the same phrase again and
again, small corrections to the phrasing and rhythm being
made by the tutor on each round (Figure 12). The tutor keeps
her clarinet in her mouth during the student’s turns, resting
on her bottom lip, only lifting her top lip to take in breath
between playing. The student briefly lowers his clarinet from
his mouth during the tutor’s turns, indication perhaps that the
tutor is going to continue until the phrase is right whilst the
student would like to move on.

Figure 10: The student makes undesirable squeaking sounds
Figure 12: Student and tutor alternate the same phrase
She brings her left hand up to clasp the barrel of her instrument, which she had been holding in her right hand. By
moving from holding her clarinet in just one hand, to both
hands, the tutor is signalling an intention to interrupt through
demonstration. However the student restarts the phrase and
the tutor brings her right hand back down to her side. Now
she is holding her clarinet in just one hand again, using the
change in state of readiness to play to signal that he should
keep the turn and continue playing.
This time he manages a substantial part of the phrase without any mistakes however he plays an incorrect note on starting the final scale descent. As he restarts and makes a further
mistake, the tutor moves her clarinet back to playing position in three stages, first by bringing her left hand back to
the instrument body, then raising the clarinet vertically in her
hands so that they are closer the the keys, and then bringing
the mouthpiece towards her mouth. Each time she brings the

Then the tutor elongates the phrase, adding in more notes
at the beginning and the student copies her, again overlapping
with her last note. He manages to play this longer extract,
but the tutor repeats it, implying there is still something that
needs correction. On his second attempt, the student stumbles after just two notes. He then exhales noisily and continues, restarting twice at mistakes. The tutor keeps her clarinet
in her mouth and small head movements indicate that she is
preparing to take the floor from the student, however she does
let him get to the end of the phrase (Figure 13).
The tutor allows a brief pause before playing the full phrase
at a much faster tempo than previously. The student tries to
match her but soon stumbles, however the tutor has removed
her clarinet from her mouth now and she lets him self repair
(Figure 14).

2235

Figure 13: The tutor elongates the phrase

Figure 14: The tutor allows the student to self-repair

A Final Note
It is worth noting that some findings around turn taking mechanisms cannot be so easily applied to the production of music.
The phrases played by a clarinetist are defined by the structure of the music - both in terms of notes and phrasing, complete bars, tempo and breathing. Hence some of the recognised ways to manage and hold turns are not available to the
player. With a woodwind instrument, holding a turn through
an in-breath (Button, 1993) is not always possible since sound
production relies on breathing out. It is also difficult to use
speed to hold a turn when control of tempo (either consistent
speed or dictated rallentando or accelerando) is a goal. Whilst
we saw this device used during the part of the lesson devoted
to scales, it is less likely to be employed when the student is
performing a piece of music for the tutor.

Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the students and tutors who
participated in these studies. This work is supported by the
Media and Arts Technology programme, EPSRC Doctoral
Training Centre EP/G03723X/1.

References
Bavelas, J., Chovil, N., Lawrie, D., & Wade, A. (1992). Interactive Gestures. Discourse Processes, 15, 469–489.
Besson, M., Chobert, J., & Marie, C. (2011, September).
Language and Music in the Musician Brain. Language and
Linguistics Compass, 5(9), 617–634.
Button, G. (1993). Answers as interactional products: two
sequential practices used in job interviews. In P. Drew &
J. Heritage (Eds.), Talk at work: Interaction in institutional
settings (pp. 212–234). Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Cassell, J., & Thorisson, K. R. (1999, May). The power of
a nod and a glance: Envelope vs. emotional feedback in
animated conversational agents. Applied Artificial Intelligence, 13(4-5), 519–538.
Clark, H. H., & Krych, M. a. (2004, January). Speaking
while monitoring addressees for understanding. Journal of
Memory and Language, 50(1), 62–81.

Davidson, J. W., & Good, J. M. M. (2002, October). Social and Musical Co-Ordination between Members of a
String Quartet: An Exploratory Study. Psychology of Music, 30(2), 186–201.
Duffy, S., & Healey, P. G. T. (2012). Spatial Co-ordination in
Music Tuition. In N. Miyake, D. Peebles, & R. P. Cooper
(Eds.), Proceedings of the 34th annual conference of the
cognitive science society (pp. 1512–1517). Sapporo: Cognitive Science Society.
Engle, R. A. (1998). Not Channels but Composite Signals. In Proceedings of the twentieth annual conference
of the cognitive science society (pp. 321–326). University
of Wisconsin-Madison: Routledge.
Feld, S., & Fox, A. a. (1994, October). Music and Language.
Annual Review of Anthropology, 23(1), 25–53.
Garfinkel, H. (1964). Studies of the routine grounds of everyday activities. Social Problems, 11(3), 225–250.
Healey, P., Leach, J., & Bryan-Kinns, N. (2005). Inter-play:
Understanding group music improvisation as a form of everyday interaction. In Proceedings of less is more, simple
computing in an age of complexity. Cambridge: Microsoft
Research.
Holck, U. (2002). ’Kommunikalsk’ samspil i musikterapi.
Phd., Aalborg University.
Holck, U. (2007). An Ethnographic Descriptive Approach
to Video Microanalysis. In T. Wosch & T. Wigram (Eds.),
Microanalysis in music therapy: Methods, techniques and
applications for clinicians, researchers, educators and students (chap. 2). London: Jessica Kingsley Publishers.
Kendon, A. (1990). Spatial organization in social encounters: the F-formation system. In Conducting interaction:
Patterns of behavior in focused encounters (pp. 209–237).
Cambridge: Cambridge Univ Pr.
Levelt, W. J. (1983, July). Monitoring and self-repair in
speech. Cognition, 14(1), 41–104.
Moran, N. (2011, May). Music, bodies and relationships: An
ethnographic contribution to embodied cognition studies.
Psychology of Music.
Sacks, H., Schegloff, E., & Jefferson, G. (1974). A simplest
systematics for the organization of turn-taking for conversation. Language, 50(4), 696–735.
Schegloff, E., Jefferson, G., & Sacks, H. (1977). The Preference for Self-Correction in the Organization of Repair in
Conversation. Language, 53(2), 361–382.
Schegloff, E. A. (2007). Sequence Organization in Interaction: Volume 1: A Primer in Conversation Analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Zatorre, R. J., Belin, P., & Penhune, V. B. (2002, January). Structure and function of auditory cortex: music
and speech. Trends in cognitive sciences, 6(1), 37–46.

2236

