UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Value of a friend, a friend of your friend, and a friend of the friend of your friend:Social
discounting in n degrees of separation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2qn6n9j5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Author
Nakamura, Kuninori

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Value of a friend, a friend of your friend, and a friend of the friend of your friend:
Social discounting in n degrees of separation
Kuninori Nakamura (knaka@seijo.ac.jp)
Faculty of Social Innovation, Seijo Universtiy, 6-1-20, Seijo, Setagayaku,
Tokyo 152-0061, Japan

Abstract
Jones and Rachlin (2008) found that the amount of money a
person is willing to forgo in order to give $75 to another
person decreased as a hyperbolic function of perceived social
distance, in the same way as occurs in intertemporal choice.
This study aimed to extend this finding to the domain of social
networks, in which social distance is defined by degrees of
separation. A total of 334 participants responded to tasks very
similar to those in Jones and Rachlin (2008), except that they
were required to choose whether they would prefer to receive
an amount of money for themselves only or an amount of
money for themselves and a person who is n degrees of
separation from them up to six degrees. The results show that
the hyperbolic function fit the data well, and that several
processes appear to contribute to the judgments made in the
experimental tasks.
Keywords: social discounting; n degrees of separation;
intertemporal discounting, probability discounting

Introduction
In modern society, people must use money to live.
However, as a matter of course, people cannot use all their
money at once. Rather, people must allocate it between
several purposes or several time periods. They distribute
money between several stock options so as not to lose all
their money at once. They save money for the future to
avoid financial difficulties when they are old. Additionally,
we also must share money with others in order to prevent
poverty. As these examples show, how people use money is
of vital importance in life, and appears to be organized
according to several dimensions.
According to Julian Simon (1995), a person’s
allocation of available goods can be described in terms of a
three-coordinate system: one is the coordinate of their own
current consumption, included in which is the concept that a
person has several selves corresponding to their various
positions, such as the family self or working self, and so
need to allocate goods to these selves. The second is a
coordinate of later times, representing sequential temporal
persons as different from each other. The third is
consumption by other people, according to which the feeling
of sympathy between people may be measured by a discount
factor. Simon (1995) suggested that this discount function
may be similar to that of intertemporal discounting.
Consumption in later time periods corresponds to what
is called intertemporal discounting. Many studies have
demonstrated that people discount the value of goods as
time goes by. Generally, it is known that people prefer small
but immediate goods to large but delayed goods (e.g.,

Lowenstein & Prelec, 1998). To account for this preference,
exponential and hyperbolic functions have been proposed.
An exponential discounting function has a form in
which the discounted value v of rewards V is expressed as
follows:
(1)
where v and V are the discounted and undiscounted reward
values, respectively, and D is the time delay.
Alternatives to exponential discounting have been
proposed by psychologists, behavioral ecologists, and
behavioral economists. One major alternative proposal is
that the discounting function is hyperbolic (e.g., Mazur,
1987):
(2)
Until now, many studies have demonstrated that the
hyperbolic function, rather than the exponential function, is
the most appropriate because it fits the data better than the
exponential function, under various experimental conditions
(for a review, see Green & Myerson, 2002).
On the basis of findings within the intertemporal
choice literature, Jones and Rachlin (2006) investigated
whether discounting similar to intertemporal choice could
also be found in Simon’s third coordinates. In their
experiments, Jones and Rachlin (2006) required participants
to imagine that they had made a list of the 100 people
closest to them in the world, ranging from their dearest
friend at position #1 to a mere acquaintance at #100, and
then participants answered whether they would forgo a fixed
amount of money to give it to another person or not. The
results showed that the amount of money people were
willing to give to another person decreased as a hyperbolic
function of the perceived social distance between them,
indicating that the discounting function with regard to social
distance is similar to that in intertemporal choice, as Simon
(1995) claimed. This study aims to extend the findings of
Jones and Rachlin (2006) by considering another type of
social distance.
Recent studies in network science have begun to pay
attention to the concept of human society considered as a
network (Barabasi, 2002; Christarski & Fowler, 2008;
Milgram, 1967). You have a friend, and your friend has a
friend. If you do not know the friend of your friend, you can
still have a link to the person via your friend. You can
extend such connections infinitely. In this vein, our society
is a network of friend connections, and much research has

3133

paid attention to various aspects of our society considered as
such a network (Barabasi, 2002; Christarski & Fowler,
2008).
In a social network, the nth degree of separation can be
considered as one type of social distance between two
persons. The degree of separation refers to the number of
links via friends between two persons. For example, your
friend is a friend of the first order, because there is one link
between you and your friends, and a friend of your friend is
of the second order because there are two links; one is
between you and your friend, and the other is between your
friend and the friend of your friend. The number of links (n)
between two persons can be increased infinitely, and as n
increases, the social distance from you increases. For
example, a second order friend is more remote than a first
order friend, because you have not met the former whereas
you directly know the latter. In addition, a third order friend
is more remote than a second order friend, because even
your friend does not know the former person. If the degree
of separation is taken as social distance, the following
questions arise: Does social discounting also appear with
this type of social coordinate? If so, is it hyperbolic or
exponential? The first purpose of this study is to address
these questions.
A second purpose of this study is to explore the
relationship between social ranking and degrees of
separation as measures of social distance. Although both
social ranking and degrees of separation can be considered
as indices of social distance between persons, their
meanings are a little different. Whereas the former measure
reflects the distance among in-group members because it
assumes that the ranking orders the 100 people closest to a
person, from the dearest friend to a mere acquaintance, the
latter measure contains not only in-group but also out-group
individuals, because one cannot know a friend whose degree
is of more than two. Thus, even if hyperbolic discounting is
found in the nth degree of separation measure, the
relationship between social ranking and degrees of
separation would still be an interesting question. Therefore,
this study also aims to address this issue.
For this research two empirical studies have been
performed. Study 1 was to examine whether social
discounting occurs with social distance in terms of degrees
of separation. Study 2 explored the relationship between
degrees of separation and closeness ranking, as used in
Jones and Rachlin (2006).

Study 1
Study 1 required participants to answer whether they would
prefer (a) an amount of money for themselves or (b) an
amount of money for themselves and the person who is n
degrees of separation from them, up to 6 degrees of
separation. By this procedure, we tried to determine the
amount of money forgone to give a person 60,000 yen. This
procedure is almost the same as that of Jones and Rachlin
(2006), except that the closeness ranking had been
exchanged for degrees of separation.

Procedure
One hundred and nineteen undergraduates participated in
Study 1 for course credits, and all materials and response
formats were provided in booklets. The booklets explained
the meaning of the degrees of separation on the first page,
and the experimental tasks began on the second page. The
second page contained the following instructions:
You know a person who is called “your friend.” The
minimal condition for a person to be called a friend is
that you and s/he know each other. In addition, there is a
“friend of your friend” who is known to your friend but
unknown to you. This “friend of your friend” can also
know a “friend of the friend of your friend” and a chain
of friends can extend infinitely. Thus, we connect to
various people through friends, friends of friends, and
friends of friends of friends, and so on, although most of
them are unknown to you.
Next, you will be asked to make a series of judgments
based on your preferences. On each line, you will be
asked if you would prefer to receive an amount of
money for yourself or an amount of money for the
person listed. Please circle A or B for each line.
Each of the next six pages summarized the above
instructions and then presented a list of questions as follows,
with a different N-value on each page:
Now imagine the following choices between an amount
of money for you and an amount for you and for your
friend. Circle A or B to indicate which you would
choose in EACH line.
(A) 120,000 yen for you alone
(B) 60,000 yen for you and 60,000 yen for your friend
(A) 110,000 yen for you alone
(B) 60,000 yen for you and 60,000 yen for your friend
…………………(continuing down to)………………..
(A) 60,000 yen for you alone
(B) 60,000 yen for you and 60,000 yen for your friend
The A-rows listed 9 amounts decreasing by 10,000 yen on
each line, from 120,000 to 60,000 yen. Row-B had a
different degree of separation on each page. The degrees of
separation were from one to six. On each line, the
participants were asked to choose between an amount of
money just for themselves and 60,000 yen each for
themselves and for the person. The degrees of separation
were manipulated by adding “of friend” to the sentence in
line B. For example, the second order friend was described
as the “friend of your friend,” and the third order friend as
the “friend of the friend of your friend.” All participants
finished their questionnaire within fifteen minutes.

3134

Study 2
Study 2 was designed to investigate a relationship
between n degrees of separation and social rankings.
Although the two are similar as they both represent some
kind of social distance, they do differ as while the latter
distance can only represent the remoteness of in-group
members, the former includes that of both in-group and outgroup people. Thus, although Study 1 demonstrated
hyperbolic discounting occurs in n degrees of separation, the
way in which social ranking and degrees of separation are
similar types of social distance still remains unclear.
Therefore, Study 2 required participants to indicate their
preference between receiving money for themselves and
sharing money with their friends, under both social ranking
and degrees of separation types of distance.

50000
30000
10000

Hyperbolic: R2=0.995

Exponential: R2=0.971

0

Amount of money forgone for 60,000yen to friend

Results and discussion
The crossover point was estimated as the average of the
last selfish (row-A) choices and the first generous (row-B)
choices, in the same way as in Jones and Rachlin (2006) or
Rachlin and Jones (2008). For example, if a participant
preferred 90,000 yen for herself to having 60,000 yen and
giving 60,000 yen to the Nth degree of separation friend, but
preferred to have 60,000 yen and give 60,000 yen to the Nth
friend over having 80,000 yen for herself, then the crossover
point was taken as being 85,000 yen for that participant at
that N-value. Some participants (the majority at N 5 1 and N
5 2) chose the generous option even when the alternative
was 120,000 yen for themselves. In these cases, a crossover
point of 125,000 was assumed. In contrast, many
participants chose the selfish option even when the choice
was between 60,000 yen for themselves and 60,000 yen for
themselves in addition to 60,000 yen for their friends. In
these cases, the crossover point was assumed to be 0.
Figure 1 shows the mean allocation of money to friends
who have n degrees of separation. We fitted both the
hyperbolic and exponential functions to this data and
compared their performances. The solid line is the best
fitting hyperbolic discount function and the dashed line is
the best fitting exponential discount function. The fit is
remarkably good (R2=0.995) when compared with the fit of
intertemporal choice (e.g., Rachlin & Raineri, 1992) or of
social discounting (Jones & Rachlin, 2006).
For comparison, the best fitting exponential discount
function is also shown in Figure 1, as the dashed line.
Although the fit with exponential discounting is high
(R2=0.971), the percentage of variance accounted for by the
exponential discount function is less than that of the
hyperbolic function. The difference found between the fit of
the hyperbolic and the exponential discounting is almost the
same as that in Jones & Rachlin (2006). In sum, these
results show that the hyperbolic function provides a better
fit to the data than the exponential discount function. Thus,
we can conclude that people’s discounting in terms of
degrees of separation is similar to that of social ranking and
intertemporal choice.

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Degree of separation

Figure 1 Hyperbolic and exponential discount functions under the
nth degree of separation in Study 1

Procedure
Two hundred and fourteen participants answered social
discounting tasks using both social ranking and degree of
separation conditions. As tasks to explore preferences with
social distance as degrees of separation, we employed the
same tasks as those in Study 1. For the social ranking tasks,
we employed a procedure almost the same as that of Jones
and Rachlin (2006). Precisely, the participants were
provided with instructions that had been translated into
Japanese from the original ones used by Jones and Rachlin
(2006). Then participants were required to make choices
between receiving an amount of money for themselves or
receiving an amount of money for themselves and their
friends, using the following response form:
Now imagine the following choices between an amount
of money for you and an amount for you and for your
friend. Circle A or B to indicate which you would
choose in EACH line.
(A) 120,000 yen for you alone
(B) 60,000 yen for you and 60,000 yen for your #_person
(A) 110,000 yen for you alone
(B) 60,000 yen for you and 60,000 yen for your #_person
……………………(continuing down to)………………..
(A) 60,000 yen for you alone
(B) 60,000 yen for you and 60,000 yen for your #_person
The blanks shown above was replaced by a number (N=1, 2,
5, 10, 20, 50, or 100), with a different number used on each
of the seven question pages.

3135

50000
10000

30000

Hyperbolic: R2=0.998

Exponential: R2=0.873
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

70000
50000
10000

30000

Hyperbolic: R2=0.936

Exponential: R2=0.850

0

Amount of money forgone for 60,000yen to friend

Degree of separation

0

20

40

60

80

100

Social ranking

Figure 2 Hyperbolic and exponential functions with data from the
n degrees of separation and social ranking tasks in Study 2: The
upper graph shows results in the n degrees of separation case, and
the lower shows those in the social ranking case.

Social ranking

Results and discussion
Figure 2 shows the results of both the social ranking and the
degree of separation tasks. We found that the hyperbolic
function fitted the data better than the exponential function
in both cases. The differences between the hyperbolic and
exponential discounting in Study 2 are more remarkable
than those in Study 1, or in Jones and Rachlin (2006);
whereas the R2s of the exponential functions are 0.873 and
0.850, those of the hyperbolic functions are greater than
0.90. Additionally, the data points systematically deviate
from the exponential functions. Thus, we can conclude that
Study 2 replicated the results of Study 1 and of Jones and
Rachlin (2006).
To explore the relationship between social ranking and
degrees of separation in depth, we performed the following
two additional analyses. First, we estimated the k parameters
of hyperbolic functions for the social ranking and degree of
separation tasks. There was no relationship (r=-0.03, p> .01:
Figure 3) between k parameters in the two tasks (Figure 3),
indicating that the steepness of the functions in the social
ranking and degrees of separation cases are somewhat
independent from each other.
Second, we also performed a factor analysis of the
crossover points with promax rotation using the maximum
likelihood method. The eigenvalues for the first three factors
were 7.04, 2.54, and 1.35, respectively. Mainly due to the
eigenvalue results, we adopted a three-factor solution
pattern for the discounting tasks shown in Table 1, assuming
the following interpretations of the meaning of the three
factors.
Factor 1 leads mainly to allocations for high ranking
friends and first degree friends. To define, these friends can
be interpreted as close friends, so we named this factor
“close friends.” Factor 2 can be considered as the “unknown
others” factor, because it strongly influences the allocation
to friends who have more than one degree of separation.
Logically, one cannot directly know friends who are of
more than the second order, and specifically, friends who
have more than two degrees of separation are actually
unknown because they are not even the friend of a first
order friend. Factor 3 mainly impacts friends with rankings
higher than 10th, and in particular those who are ranked at
20th place or higher. These friends are considered as not
being so close. Thus, we named this factor as the
“acquaintances” factor.
The above results suggest that there are several
dimensions to social discounting. Specifically, it is
interesting that people have two dimensions of social
distance with others who are not so close to them. To
examine this indication more precisely, we also performed
structural equation modeling and compared models of one,
two, and three factors (see Figure 4).

0

Amount of money forgone for 60,000yen to friend

Participants answered both the social ranking and degree
of separation tasks in random order. All participants
completed all the tasks within 20 minutes.

Degree of separation

Figure 3 Scatterplot of k parameter

3136

Table 1 Results of factor analysis

Factor1

Factor2

Factor3

Degree of separation
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th

0.78
0.35
0.11
-0.03
-0.05
-0.06

0.12
0.43
0.75
0.94
0.99
0.99

-0.07
0.10
0.07
0.06
-0.02
-0.03

Social ranking
1st
2nd
5th
10th
20th
50th
100th

1.00
1.01
0.79
0.50
0.26
-0.09
-0.16

-0.03
-0.03
-0.06
-0.08
-0.11
0.05
0.18

-0.10
-0.07
0.23
0.53
0.79
0.97
0.83

Correlations
Factor1
Factor2
Factor3

1.00
0.36
0.53

1.00
0.49

1.00

The one factor model represents a hypothesis that both
social rankings and degrees of separation can be
summarized by one dimension, that people’s dimension of
social discounting is unitary. In contrast, the two and three
factor models assume that social discounting can be
decomposed into several dimensions. The two-factor model
entails that social discounting occurs separately in the social
ranking and the n degrees of separation tasks. In other words,
this model assumes that participants construct a dimension
of social discounting in accordance with experimental tasks.
The three-factor model expresses an implication, based on
the results of the factor analysis, that the two types of social
distance considered in this study can be decomposed into
three factors: one influences both social ranking and degrees
of separation, and the other two factors affect these two
dimensions, respectively.
The results of the structural equation modeling, shown
in Table 2, clearly support the three factor model, as all of
the fit indices indicate it is superior to the other two models.
Thus, we can conclude that although social discounting in
social rankings and degrees of separation share the same
components, they can be decomposed into several
dimensions. That is, while these two types of social distance
are similar in how they reflect allocations made to closer
friends, they differ in representing the allocations made to
others who are not so close.

(a)

(b)

(c)
Figure 4 Three structural equation models: (a) a one-factor model
that indicates both the social ranking and n degrees of separation
can be summarized by one dimension; (b) a two factor model that
implies participants construct dimensions of social discounting
corresponding to the experimental tasks; (c) a three-factor model
that reflects the implication of the factor analysis that social
rankings and degrees of separation share one common factor
(“friend”), but are also individually affected by “acquaintances”
and “unknown others” factors, respectively.

General discussion
The results of the two studies can be summarized as
follows. First, we found that there is hyperbolic social
discounting with the n degrees of separation type of social
distance. Recently, many researchers have paid attention to
the way in which the structure of our social networks affects
human life (e.g., Christarski & Fowler, 2009). Most of these
studies investigate how people’s behavior affects others
through links between persons. However, previous studies
have not considered the way in which people consider
others in their social network. In this vein, this may be the

3137

first study that concerns how people consider others who
have n
Table 2 Results of structural equation modeling.

AIC

BIC

GFI

CFI

Model 1

311.98

497.11

0.88

0.96

Model 2

342.47

534.33

0.90

0.95

Model 3

186.37

331.11

0.94

0.99

degrees of separation. Furthermore, as far as we know, this
is the first study that shows hyperbolic discounting
occurring with social distance other than in closeness
rankings. Hyperbolic discounting is found not only in the
domain of social discounting but also in probability or
intertemporal discounting (Jones & Rachlin, 2010). Thus,
this study applied hyperbolic discounting to another type of
social distance and has demonstrated with evidence the
hyperbolic function’s ability to explain discounting under
various types of psychological distance.
Second, from the results of estimating the parameters of
hyperbolic discounting and the structural equation modeling,
we can conclude that people have two dimensions to their
conceptualization of others who are not so close to them:
one applies to others who are known but are not so close,
and the other applies to those who are unknown. Intuitively,
these appear to be quite natural results. However, these
results are interesting because hyperbolic discounting occurs
under both dimensions, despite them being independent of
each other. Additionally, this finding is also of interest
because it appears to contradict Simon’s (1995) suggestion
that social discounting is one-dimensional.
The results of this study may support construal level
theory (Trope & Lieberman, 2010). This theory assumes
that people’s judgments of various types of psychological
distance can be decomposed into two levels of construal:
higher and lower levels. The theory claims that high-level
construals are relatively abstract, coherent, and superordinate mental representations as compared with low-level
construals. It also argues that people use increasingly higher
levels of construal to represent an object as the
psychological distance from the object increases. The results
of our factor analysis and structural equation modeling
consistently show that both the social ranking and n degrees
of separation can be decomposed into two factors. One
factor reflects allocations made to psychologically close
friends, and the other reflects those to psychologically
remote friends. This factor structure appears to match the
structure entailed by construal level theory.
In addition, what is more interesting in the results of the
factor analysis is that the factor reflecting allocations to
close friends is related to both the social ranking and n
degrees of separation types of distance. As stated in the
introduction, social rankings and degrees of separation are

somewhat different dimensions of social distance: while the
former represents distances between known others, the latter
contains those between unknown others. In this vein, the
results of the factor analysis suggest that the contents of the
“friends” factor are richer than those of the other two factors,
because this factor influences the two different types of
social dimension. If we interpret the “friends” factor as a
lower level construal that is psychologically closer, this
indication corresponds to a proposition of construal level
theory that lower level construals have more complex
representations than higher level construals (Trope &
Lieberman, 2010).
One important issue for future research regarding social
discounting in cases of n degrees of separation may be its
relationship to probability or intertemporal discounting.
Jones and Rachlin (2009) reported that the steepness of
discounting, represented by the k parameter, was correlated
for probability, intertemporal, and social ranking
discounting across participants. The results of Study 2 show
that the k parameter did not correlate between the social
ranking and n degrees of separation experiments, suggesting
that the latter dimension may be unique and different from
the other three dimensions. If so, what is the meaning of
social discounting? Why does the n degrees of separation
differ from delay, probability, and social ranking in its
discounting? Pursuing this question may be fruitful in
exploring how “social” is represented in the human mind.

References
Barabási, A. L. (2002). Linked: The New Science of
Networks, Perseus Books Group
Christakis, N. A., & Fowler, J. (2009). Connected: The
Surprising Power of Our Social Networks and How They
Shape Our Lives. Little, Brown and Company.
Green, L., & Myerson, J. (2002). A discounting framework
for choice with delayed and probabilistic reward.
Psychological Bulletin, 130, 769–792.
Jones, B., & Rachlin, H. (2006). Social discounting.
Psychological Science, 17, 283–286.
Jones, B., & Rachlin, H. (2009). Delay, probability and
social discounting in a public goods game. Journal of
Experimental Analysis of Behavior, 91, 61–73.
Lowenstein, G., & Thaler, R. (1989). Intertemporal choice.
Journal of Economic Perspective, 3, 181–193.
Milgram, S. (1967). The Small-world problem. Psychology
Today, 1, 60–67.
Rachlin, H., & Raineri, A. (1992). Irrationality,
impulsiveness, and selfishness as discount reversal effects.
In G.F. Loewenstein & J. Elster (Eds.), Choice over time
(pp. 93–118). New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Simon, J. L. (1995) Interpersonal allocation continuous with
intertemporal allocation: binding commitments, pledges,
and bequests. Rationality and Society, 7, 367–392.
Trope, Y., & Lieberman, N. (2010). Construal-level theory
of psychological distance. Psychological Review, 117,
440–463.

3138

