UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Verb bias and structural priming in non-linguistic grammar acquisition task

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/45c5x85h

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Janciauskas, Marius
Chang, Franklin

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Verb bias and structural priming in non-linguistic grammar acquisition task
Marius Janciauskas (m.janciauskas@liv.ac.uk)
Franklin Chang (franklin.chang@liverpool.ac.uk)
University of Liverpool, School of Psychology, Bedford Street South, Liverpool, L69 7ZA UK
Abstract

said to have double object dative bias. This phenomenon is
thought to occur as a result of learning distributional
relationships between verbs and structures (Juliano &
Tanenhaus, 1994). In this example, the DO bias arises from
stronger probabilistic association of the verb ‘give’ with the
DO structure. A verb’s occurrence in its preferred structure
(verb-structure match hereafter) is known to influence
structural choices and reduce processing time at the choice
point where alternating structures diverge (Ferreira, 1996;
Garnsey, Pearlmutter, Myers, & Lotocky, 1997; Stallings,
MacDonald, & O’Seaghdha, 1998).
Another phenomenon of interest is structural priming,
which is the tendency for participants to repeat previously
produced sentence structures (Bock, 1986). For example, if
participants heard the DO sentence like “the boy threw the
dog the ball” and are then given a picture which can be
described using a DO (e.g. “the man gave the woman the
dress”) or a PD (e.g. “the man gave the dress to the
woman”) structure sentence, they were more likely to use
the same DO structure. Structural priming has been found to
persist over time, suggesting that it is supported by learning
(Bock & Griffin, 2000). Chang, Dell and Bock (2006) used
a connectionist model to show that priming could be
explained as SL over abstract structural representations.
Like verb bias, structural priming influences structural
choices in sentence production and comprehension times at
the post-verbal position (Corley & Scheepers, 2002; Weber
& Indefrey, 2009).
In sum, verb bias and structural priming are thought to
depend on SL processes involving linguistic units. If these
processes are not specific to language then it should be
possible to find verb bias- and structural priming-like effects
in a non-linguistic SRT task. The present studies are a step
towards such a paradigm.

Domain-general statistical learning (SL) is thought to support
language phenomena like verb bias and structural priming.
We explored this idea by inducing these phenomena within a
non-linguistic serial reaction time (SRT) task where
participants learned an English-like artificial language using
SL. In a series of two experiments we found error rates to be
sensitive to verbs’ structural preferences and abstract
structural priming. The similarities between the behaviour in
this task and previous linguistic research suggests that this
method may be useful for studying the nature of SL in
language learning and processing.
Keywords: statistical learning; verb bias; structural priming.

An important question in the study of language is the degree
to which language acquisition depends on language-specific
mechanisms or general-purpose statistical learning (SL)
mechanisms (e.g., Kidd, 2012). Research has found that SL
takes place in real and artificial language learning tasks
(Fine & Jaeger, 2013; Qi, 2012; Saffran, 2003, Wells,
Christiansen, Race, Acheson, & MacDonald, 2009).
However, the use of language or auditory stimuli could
cause language-specific systems to become activated in
these tasks (Gervain, Nespor, Mazuka, Horie, & Mehler,
2008). Non-linguistic artificial grammar learning (AGL) or
serial reaction time (SRT) tasks provide a paradigm for
studying grammar learning that is independent of linguistic
knowledge. But the grammars used in the existing studies
(e.g. Hunt & Aslin, 2010) are quite different from real
language and it is hard to link findings in these studies to
human syntactic phenomena. Thus, it is still not known if
domain-general SL can account for the acquisition and
processing of human syntactic knowledge.
The present study set out to develop a method to study SL
processes within a non-linguistic task designed to
approximate the contexts in which certain linguistic
phenomena occur. We developed an SRT task where
participants had to implicitly learn statistical regularities in
symbol sequences generated from an English-like grammar
in a symbol-matching task. If participants learn this
language as they process it (linguistic adaptation; Chang,
Janciauskas, & Fitz, 2012), then their accuracy and reaction
times should reveal how linguistic phenomena arise out of
general-purpose SL.
We applied our paradigm to explain two language
phenomena: verb bias and structural priming. Verb bias is
the tendency for individual verbs to prefer particular
structures. For example, if a verb occurs more often in the
double object (DO) structure as in “the man gave the
woman the dress” rather than the prepositional dative (PD)
structure “the man gave the dress to the woman”, the verb is

Study 1: Dative Alternation SRT Task
The first study used a variant of Hunt and Aslin’s (2001)
SRT study. In the centre of a computer screen participants
saw sequences of letters appearing one at a time, which
required them to find that letter on a circle of 21 letters
surrounding the centre by moving a mouse cursor over it.
The sequences were structured based on a grammar that
included English dative alternation-like structures. For
example, the symbol string “H J Z C M” approximated a PD
sentence without articles like “man gave dress to woman”.
The corresponding DO symbol string was “H J M Z” (“man
gave woman dress”). Verb bias was created by varying the
frequency of the symbols (verbs hereafter) appearing in the
verb’s position with particular structures. For example, J
and B occurred more often with PD structure, while D and

657

N occurred more often with DO structures. Structural
priming was tested by manipulating the structures of
adjacent strings (prime and target) so that half of them had
matching structures (e.g. DO-DO) and half of them had
mismatching structures (e.g. DO-PD). The input was created
in sections of 24 items consisting of eight prime-target pairs
separated by structurally unrelated fillers (120 items total).
Twelve of the 16 PD and DO strings in each section
contained a verb which matched its preferred structure and
four strings contained a verb that mismatched it. These
sections created temporal points at which the behaviours
associated with learning structural constraints could be
assessed.
Like in language studies, verb bias and structural priming
effects were measured at the first ‘post-verbal’ symbol (e.g.
after ‘G’), hypothesizing that verb-structure match and
structural match between adjacent strings would reduce
error rate and the reaction times taken to process that
element. If these effects are the result of learning, we
predicted that verb bias and structural match between
adjacent strings would show a growing influence over the
different sections of the study.

categories swapped to create ungrammatical transitions (e.g.
MBHF and MHBF).

Figure 1: Visual display for Experiment 1 (left) and
Experiment 2 (right, production trial)
Table 1: Category type, names, and symbols in Exp 1.
Category Type
Animate Noun
Inanimate Noun
Intransitive Verb
Transitive Verb
Dative verb with PD bias
Dative verb with DO bias
Preposition

Method
Participants and materials
An opportunity sample of 79 participants was recruited from
the University of Liverpool student population. The visual
display consisted of letter symbols forming a circle (Fig. 1)
and a space in the centre where stimulus strings were
presented one symbol at a time. The language from which
the strings were created consisted of 17 letters randomly
allocated to 7 categories that resembled syntactic categories
found in English language (Table 1). The categories were
combined following English grammar rules to create
grammatical letter strings (Table 2).
To test structural priming, presentation of the strings was
structured so that PD and DO occurred in all combinations
in pairs (prime and target) followed by one filler sentence of
either intransitive (IN) or transitive (TR) structure. To create
‘verb bias’, the DVERBP (PD bias) and DVERBD (DO
bias) categories occurred in PD and DO structures
respectively 75% of the time.
The letter strings were generated by randomly selecting
symbols from the appropriate categories with no overlap in
symbols between adjacent strings with the priority given to
the lower frequency members to ensure equal distribution. A
total of 120 letter strings were used in the experiment. The
development of verb bias and structural priming effects was
tested every 24 items, which created 5 temporally different
sections containing 8 instances of prime-target pairs.
After the letter-matching task people were given a
grammaticality judgment test. Twenty-four randomly
generated whole grammatical strings were presented sideby-side with another string that was identical to the target
string but with two members belonging to the different

Category
ANOUN
INOUN
IVERB
TVERB
DVERBP
DVERBD
PREP

Symbols
X,M,Y,H
F,Z,Q,P
W,L
S,G
J, B
D,N
C

Table 2: Rules used to create letter strings.
Type
IN
TR
DO
PD

Category
ANOUN IVERB
ANOUN TVERB
INOUN
ANOUN
DVERBD/DVERBP
ANOUN INOUN
ANOUN
DVERBD/DVERBP
INOUN PREP ANOUN

Letter string
(English-equivalent)
X W (Boys sleep)
Y G Z (Girls like
books)
M B H F (Woman
showed boys car)
H J Z C M (Man gave
dress to woman)

Procedure
Participants were tested in a quiet room, with up to six
people on individual computers per session. They were not
told that the letter strings followed certain rules. They
processed the strings by matching the letters appearing in
the centre to those on the circle using a mouse on a letterby-letter basis. Each response reset the position of the
mouse cursor to the centre and triggered the next symbol.
Letter strings were separated by a blank screen. After 120
items participants received a grammaticality judgment task
(described above). Participants were told that the strings
they saw earlier followed certain rules and that their task
was to decide which of the two strings was grammatical.
The experiment took approximately 20 minutes to complete.

658

suggested speed-accuracy tradeoff but the exact nature of
this effect remains to be established. No two-way interaction
was observed.
For the structural priming error analysis, a binomial
mixed model was used with structural prime-target match
(match vs. mismatch, effect coded) crossed with section
(centered) as predictor variables. Since verb bias was varied
in these items, verb was included as an additional random
factor and maximal models were fitted. We found no
significant main effects or interactions. For reaction times, a
main effect of section was observed (b=-0.03, SE=0.005,
Χ2=7.67, p=.006) indicating that reaction times decreased as
the experiment progressed, showing a general learning
effect. In sum, participants implicitly acquired knowledge of
symbol strings such that they were better than chance at
judging their grammaticality. We found a growing verb bias
effect in the error rates but no structural priming effects
were observed, suggesting that people may not have learnt
to distinguish the required structures well enough.

Data collection and analysis
Error rates and reaction times in milliseconds were recorded
for the time taken to move the mouse cursor to the correct
symbol on the circle. Verb bias and priming were tested
after the DVERBD/DVERBP symbol (3rd position). For the
reaction time data, only correct items were used and
responses were log-transformed. Reponses that were two
standard deviations above or below the mean were removed.

Results
The grammaticality judgment task was assessed using a
one-sample t-test against chance (50%, two-tailed).
Participants successfully recognized 56% of grammatical
strings (t(76) = 4.4; p <.001) showing that they had learned
some structural aspects of the language.
The task produced a total of 36,340 responses with an
error rate of 5.7%. To assess the influence of verb bias on
error rate, accuracy data (correct or incorrect response) were
submitted to a binomial mixed model with verb-structure
match (match vs. mismatch, effect coded) crossed with
section (centered) as predictor variables. Participants were
included as a random factor with maximal random structure
(Barr, Levy, Scheepers, & Tily, 2013). We found a
significant two-way interaction (b=-0.22, SE=0.11, z=2.09,
p=.04), showing that verb-structure match reduced the
likelihood of making an error and that this knowledge grew
as the participant learned the language (Figure 2).

Study 2: Semantic and Task Constraints
We postulated that the lack of a priming effect was due in
part to the difficulty in distinguishing the PD/DO structures.
In natural language, non-linguistic animacy provides a cue
that enhances the distinctiveness of these structures (e.g.
gave the dress/woman). In addition, the random position of
the letters on the circle made anticipation more difficult.
Therefore, we conducted a second experiment where
symbols were grouped together (Figure 1b). To add animacy
cues, we replaced the animate noun letters with the stick
figures and the inanimate noun symbols with object-like
symbols.
Since abstract priming is not always found in reaction
times in comprehension (Tooley & Traxler, 2010), we
added a production-like string generation task (production
hereafter), where participants occasionally saw the whole
string in the centre and were required to produce it from
memory by selecting the appropriate symbols in the circle
(Figure 1b). Studies of human sentence production often use
sentence recall to test verb bias or priming (e.g., Potter &
Lombardi, 1998).
Like before, we predicted that verb-structure match and
structural prime-target match would influence processing
times and error rates in both comprehension and production
tasks. If these effects are learned over the study, they would
increase over section.

Figure 2: Mean proportions of errors (top) and reaction
times (bottom) in each section when verb and structure
matched (solid line) or mismatched (dashed line).

Participants and materials
39 participants were recruited from the pool of university
students participating for course credits. The task was
identical to Experiment 1 with the following changes. To
aid category learning, letters belonging to the same category
were grouped together on the circle (Figure 1b). ANOUN
and INOUN letters were replaced with symbols providing
semantic cues to those categories. To implement the
production task, participants were shown the whole string,
which disappeared once the mouse was moved. They were

Similar mixed model assumptions were used for the
reaction time analysis unless specifically mentioned.
Reaction times were submitted to a mixed model. We found
faster reaction times as the experiment progressed, showing
a general learning effect (b=-0.03, SE=0.005, Χ2=26.13,
p<.001). Verb-structure match increased processing times
(Fig. 2; b=0.05, SE=0.01, Χ2=19.02, p<.001). This

659

then required to produce the string from memory by
selecting the appropriate symbols as quickly as possible.
Twenty-four production trials were added by replacing four
comprehension trials (target strings) in each section. An
additional section of 24 items was added for a total of 144
items.

target category (67%), indicating that in most cases people
anticipated the correct category but chose the wrong
symbol. This was likely to be due to the grouping and visual
similarity of the symbols.
The reaction time analysis revealed a general learning
effect in which participants reacted faster across trials
(b=-0.03, SE=0.003, Χ2=122.38, p <.001). Participants were
also faster in production than in comprehension (b=-0.32,
SE=0.902, Χ2=83.04, p<.001) due to task differences. Verbstructure match produced a significant main effect where
reaction times decreased when verb matched its structure
(b=-0.07, SE=0.01, Χ2=21.42, p <0.001). The mismatch with
error rate resulted from speed-accuracy tradeoff where faster
reaction times in verb-structure match condition resulted in
more errors (b=0.001, SE=0.0004, z=2.95, p=.003).

Results
Participants’ grammatical knowledge at the end of the
experiment was assessed using a one-sample t-test
comparison against chance (50%, two-tailed). They
successfully recognized 64% (t(41)=6.63, p<.001) of
grammatical strings showing that they learned the language
as in other artificial language learning studies.

Figure 4: Mean proportions of errors in each section in
production and comprehension tasks when prime structure
was the same (solid line) or different (dashed line).

Figure 3: Mean proportions of errors and reaction times in
each section in production and comprehension tasks when
verb and structure matched (solid line) or mismatched
(dashed line).

To examine structural priming, error rates and reaction
times were submitted to similar mixed models as in
Experiment 1 with the addition of task type fully crossed
with other variables. A general learning effect was indicated
by decreasing error rates over sections (b=-0.18, SE=0.07,
z=-2.68, p=.007). Participants produced more errors in
production than in comprehension (b=1.14, SE=0.23,
z=5.23, p<.001), reflecting task demands. Finally, there was
a three-way interaction between structural match, section
and task type (b=-0.98, SE=0.24, z=-4.0, p<.001), indicating
that the reduction in error rates due to prime structure was
greater in production relative to comprehension as section
increased (Figure 4).
The reaction time analysis found a general improvement
over section (b=-0.04, SE=0.004, Χ2=84.13, p<.001) and

The task produced a total of 22,464 responses, 5.5% of
which were incorrect. Error data and reaction times were
analyzed as in Experiment 1 with the addition of task type
(production or comprehension, effect coded) fully crossed
with the other variables. We found that error rates went
down over section (b=-0.2, SE=0.06, z=-3.15, p=.002)
showing general learning effect. Participants made more
errors in production than in comprehension (b=1.47,
SE=0.23, z=6.34, p<.001), but also improved more in
production over sections (b=-0.26, SE=0.12, z=-2.22,
p=.03). Finally we found that error rates were higher when
verb and structure matched (b=0.71, SE=0.21, z=3.36,
p<.001), which contradicts our prediction. However, this is
due to the fact that the majority of errors belonged to the

660

faster responding in production (b=-0.32, SE=0.02,
Χ2=11.12, p<.001), reflecting a general learning effect and
the nature of the task respectively. No priming effect was
found in reaction times.
In sum, the production task and semantic grouping gave
rise to structural priming in participants’ errors. The fact
that this priming is only evident at the end of the study
suggests that participants had to learn structures before
generalizing across the different strings (structural priming
as language learning, Chang, Dell, & Bock, 2006). Verb
bias seemed to be present early in the experiment suggesting
that grouping of the letters on the circle made verb bias
acquisition relatively easy and did not allow capturing the
growth of the effects over time.

verb bias and priming tasks. Errors in this study are related
to structural choice in production tasks, because an “error”
at the choice point can become a grammatical utterance
depending on how the participant completes the sentence.
Reaction time is related to graded measures like sentence
initiation time or comprehension reading time. Effects of
verb preferences on structural choice are well documented
(Ferreira, 1996; Stallings et al., 1998), but the results for
reaction times are mixed, with some studies finding
facilitation (Garnsey et. al, 1997) and other studies finding
no effect (e.g. Kjelgaard & Speer, 1999). Likewise,
structural priming results are robust in production
(Pickering & Ferreira, 2008), but abstract priming across
verbs is less robust in comprehension studies (Arai, Van
Gompel, & Scheepers, 2007; Branigan, Pickering, &
McLean, 2005). Since the computational properties of the
linguistic and non-linguistic mechanisms show these
similarities, the differences observed in the way people
express their knowledge in the comprehension-like task and
the production-like task suggests that it may be beneficial to
study these mechanisms within such an SRT paradigm,
where both tasks are closely matched and the input tightly
controlled.
To conclude, linguistic theories have long claimed that
language involves specialized linguistic systems (Chomsky,
1965). These systems help to explain why verbs govern the
structures that they appear in and how children acquire
abstract syntactic representations from experience with
word sequences. For these reasons, it should be difficult to
use a domain-general visual-motor task to model the
acquisition of a new language and find behaviours that
mirror linguistic phenomena like verb bias and abstract
structural priming. The fact that we observed these effects is
particularly intriguing considering the short time taken to
learn our language (our study took 20 minutes compared to
360 minutes in Hunt and Aslin, 2001). These difficulties
were overcome in part due to the integrated learningprocessing approach taken here. The approach that is often
used in SL studies involves separating testing from learning
in order to test novel combinations that provide a strong test
of abstract grammatical knowledge. Instead, we used
linguistic adaptation of the existing representation in
response to the input as evidence for abstraction and
learning (e.g., structural priming). Since these items can be
tested multiple times, it is possible to factor out individual
variation and see changes as learning unfolds. The addition
of semantic cues made it easier for participants to exhibit
structural knowledge and allowed linguistic adaptation to
take place at a higher level with these categories as lower
level elements. Since our goal was to look at how
representations change over time, rather than how they
emerge from scratch, building semantics into the task is
justified as children have an animacy distinction before they
fully acquire structures like the dative (Gropen et al., 1989).
Finally, an addition of a production task showed that the
effects of learning manifest differently depending on the
task that draws upon the acquired knowledge. In sum,

Discussion
This is the first study to provide evidence that verb bias and
structural priming in a non-linguistic artificial language task
arise from learning distributional constraints. Verb bias was
found in Experiment 1, where participants were less likely
to make errors when the structure matched the verb’s
preference. Structural priming was found in Experiment 2,
where participants were less likely to make an error in
producing a target sentence from memory if the previous
sentence was of the same structure. Importantly, the prime
and target shared no common symbols, so this effect cannot
be due simply to the recall of particular symbol
combinations. Both verb bias and priming effects increased
over the experiment as participants learned the language,
showing that these effects resulted from learning some
language-related knowledge and not from some methodspecific features. This supports the prediction that such
linguistic effects would also manifest in non-linguistic tasks,
pointing to the commonalities in the underlying SL
mechanisms (Chang, Janciauskas, & Fitz, 2012).
One may note, however, that reaction times and errors
showed conflicting results for verb bias, where in
Experiment 1, verb-structure match created fewer errors, but
slower reaction times, while the opposite pattern was
observed in Experiment 2. The main difference between the
two studies was the semantic similarity and grouping of the
stimuli (verb bias did not interact with task type in Exp. 2).
In Experiment 2, the semantic grouping meant that
anticipation of the category that resulted from verb’s bias
(left for ANOUNs, right for INOUNs) resulted in faster
reaction times, but also triggered more errors, particularly
for the same category members. However, the exact cause
for the patterns observed in Experiment 1 remains to be
established but it is likely to be due to the differences in the
way the letters were distributed on the screen in the two
experiments. Interestingly, speech errors in natural language
also exhibit speed-accuracy tradeoffs with speech rate
(MacKay, 1982) and within-category effects (Dell, 1986)
warranting further investigation of these effects in such nonlinguistic tasks.
Although our task is an artificial grammar-learning task,
there are intriguing similarities with dissociations in human

661

although there are still methodological issues to address, our
results so far suggest that this task could be a way to
examine the processes that take place in language
production and comprehension.

Gropen. J., Pinker. S., Hollander. M., Goldberg. R., &
Wilson, R. (1989). The learnability and acquisition of the
dative alternation in English. Language, 65(2), 203-257.
Howard, D., Nickels, L., Coltheart, M., & Cole-Virtue, J.
(2006). Cumulative semantic inhibition in picture naming:
Experimental and computational studies. Cognition,
100(3), 464–482.
Hunt, R. H., & Aslin, R. N. (2001). Statistical learning in a
serial reaction time task: Access to separable statistical
cues by individual learners. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 130(4), 658–680.
Hunt, R. H., & Aslin, R. N. (2010). Category induction via
distributional analysis: Evidence from a serial reaction
time task. Journal of Memory and Language, 62(2), 98–
112.
Juliano, C., Tanenhaus, M. K. (1994). A constraint-based
lexicalist account of the subject/object attachment
preference. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 23(6),
459-471.
Kidd, E. (2012). Implicit statistical learning is directly
associated with the acquisition of syntax.
Developmental Psychology, 48(1), 171–184.
Kjelgaard, M. M., & Speer, S. R. (1999). Prosodic
facilitation and interference in the resolution of temporary
syntactic closure ambiguity. Journal of Memory and
Language, 40(2), 153–194.
MacKay, D. G. (1982). The problems of flexibility, fluency,
and speed–accuracy trade-off in skilled behavior.
Psychological Review, 89(5), 483–506.
Qi, Z. (2012). Neurocognitive plasticity in verb bias
learning in children and adults. Dissertation. University
of Illinois.
Pickering, J. M., & Ferreira, S. V. (2008). Structural
priming: A critical review. Psychological Bulletin,
134(3), 427-459.
Potter, M. C., & Lombardi, L. (1990). Regeneration in the
short-term recall of sentences. Journal of Memory and
Language, 29(6), 633-654.
Saffran, J. R. (2003). Statistical language learning
mechanisms and constraints. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 12(4), 110–114.
Stallings, L. M., MacDonald, M. C., & O’Seaghdha, P. G.
(1998). Phrasal ordering constraints in sentence
production: Phrase length and verb disposition in heavyNP shift. Journal of Memory and Language, 39(3), 392–
417.
Tooley, K. M., & Traxler, M. J. (2010). Syntactic priming in
comprehension: A critical review. Language and
Linguistic Compass, 4(10), 925-937.
Weber, K., & Indefrey, P. (2009). Syntactic priming in
German–English
bilinguals
during
sentence
comprehension. NeuroImage, 46(4), 1164–1172.
Wells, J. B., Christiansen, M. H., Race, D. S., Acheson, D.
J., & MacDonald, M. C. (2009). Experience and sentence
processing: Statistical learning and relative clause
comprehension. Cognitive Psychology, 58(2), 250–271.

Acknowledgments
This research was funded by an ESRC Ph.D. studentship
(grant number ES⁄ J500094 ⁄ 1).

References
Arai, M., Van Gompel, R. P. G., & Scheepers, C. (2007).
Priming ditransitive structures in comprehension.
Cognitive Psychology, 54(3), 218–250.
Barr, D. J., Levy, R., Scheepers, C., & Tily, H. J. (2013).
Random effects structure for confirmatory hypothesis
testing: Keep it maximal. Journal of Memory and
Language, 68(3), 255–278.
Bock, J. K. (1986). Syntactic persistence in language
production. Cognitive Psychology, 18(3), 355–387.
Bock, K., & Griffin, Z. M. (2000). The persistence of
structural priming: Transient activation or implicit
learning? Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
129(2), 177-192.
Branigan, H. P., Pickering, M. J., & McLean, J. F. (2005).
Priming
prepositional-phrase
attachment
during
comprehension. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 31(3), 468.
Chang, F., Dell. S. G., & Bock, K. (2006). Becoming
syntactic. Psychological Review, 113(2), 234-272.
Chang, F., Janciauskas, M., & Fitz, H. (2012). Language
adaptation and learning: Getting explicit about implicit
learning. Language and Linguistics Compass, 6(5), 259–
278.
Chomsky, N. (1965). Aspects of the theory of syntax.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Corley, M., & Scheepers, C. (2002). Syntactic priming in
English sentence production: Categorical and latency
evidence from an internet-based study. Psychonomic
Bulletin & Review, 9(1), 126–131.
Dell, G. S. (1986). A spreading-activation theory of retrieval
in sentence production. Psychological Review, 93(3), 283321.
Ferreira, V. S. (1996). Is it better to give than to donate?
Syntactic flexibility in language production. Journal of
Memory and Language, 35(5), 724–755.
Fine, A. B., & Jaeger, T. F. (2013). Evidence for Implicit
Learning in Syntactic Comprehension. Cognitive
Science, 37(3), 578–591.
Garnsey, S. M., Pearlmutter, N. J., Myers, E., & Lotocky,
M. A. (1997). The contributions of verb bias and
plausibility to the comprehension of temporarily
ambiguous sentences. Journal of Memory and Language,
37(1), 58–93.
Gervain, J., Nespor, M., Mazuka, R., Horie, R., & Mehler, J.
(2008). Bootstrapping word order in prelexical infants: A
Japanese–Italian cross-linguistic study. Cognitive
Psychology, 57(1), 56–74.

662

