UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Virtual Humans: A New Toolkit for Cognitive Science Research

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9j9404c3

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Gratch, Jonathan
Hartholt, Arno
Dehghani, Morteza
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Virtual Humans: A New Toolkit for Cognitive Science Research
Jonathan Gratch (gratch@ict.usc.edu), Arno Hartholt (hartholt@ict.usc.edu),
Morteza Dehghani (morteza@ict.usc.edu), Stacy Marsella (marsella@ict.usc.edu)
Institute for Creative Technologies, University of Southern California
12015 Waterfront Drive, Playa Vista, CA 90094, USA

Social Cognition: People interact socially through their
bodies and VHs allow researchers to systematically examine
and model the cognitions underlying social interaction. VHs
can act as “virtual confederates” (Blascovich et al., 2002),
allowing systematic manipulation of visual appearance,
speech type, and contextual graphical environments. This
makes VHs a convenient platform to isolate unique sociocultural characteristics and realize them through simulation.
Along with enhanced experimental control, ease of manipulations, consistency and controlled measurements, these
features make VHs useful and reliable tools for studying
social cognitions. In the tutorial, we will review several examples, including how expressions of emotion by VHs can
influence decision making in negotiations tasks and social
dilemmas (e.g. de Melo et al., 2012; Dehghani et al., 2012);
the role of accent in cultural cognition (Dehghani et al.,
2012) and the role of rapport and gender in enhancing participants’ performance (Karacora et al., 2012).

Keywords: Virtual humans, embodied cognition, social cognition, virtual confederates

Tutorial Objectives
Virtual humans (VHs) are digital anthropomorphic characters that exist within virtual worlds but are designed to perceive, understand and interact with real-world humans. Although typically conceived as practical tools to assist in a
range of application (e.g., HCI, training and entertainment),
the technology is gaining interest as a methodological tool
for studying human cognition. VHs not only simulate the
cognitive abilities of people, but also many of the embodied
and social aspects of human behavior more traditionally
studied in fields outside of cognitive science. By integrating
multiple cognitive capabilities (e.g., language, gesture, emotion, and the control problems associated with navigating
and interacting with a simulated virtual world) and requiring
these processes to support real-time interactions with people, VHs create a unique and challenging environment within which to develop and validate cognitive theories. In this
tutorial, we will review recent advances in VH technologies,
demonstrate examples of use of VHs in cognitive science
research and provide hands on training using our Virtual
Human Toolkit (http://vhtoolkit.ict.usc.edu/).

The Virtual Human Toolkit
The University of Southern California’s Institute for Creative Technologies (ICT) is recognized as a leader in the development of VH technology (Gratch et al., 2002) and in
applying this research to application domains including “virtual role players” for interpersonal-skills training (e.g.,
Campbell et al. 2011), informal science education (e.g.
Swartout et al., 2010), intelligent tutoring, (e.g. Lane et al.,
2011), and as “virtual confederates” to study cognitive and
social processes (e.g. de Melo et al., 2012; Dehghani et al.,
2012). One goal of the institute is to foster research in VH
by making this technology freely available for research purposes through the Virtual Human Toolkit.
The research underlying the toolkit draws heavily on
cognitive science research. For example, VH “brains” are
inspired by psychological theories of human cognition (e.g.
Swartout, Gratch et al., 2006), language (e.g. Traum, 2008)
and emotion (Gratch & Marsella, 2005), VH bodies are informed by knowledge of physiological and biomechanical
processes (e.g. Honglun, et al. 2007; Thiebaux et al., 2008)
and the relation between the VH’s brain and body is informed by social psychology research (Lee & Marsella,
2006, Wang et al, 2013). Translating these theories and
findings into working software requires the integration of
advanced capabilities from a number of domains of computer science research including machine perception, artificial
intelligence, cognitive modeling, graphics and animation.
The complexity of creating a VH can appear daunting.
Fortunately, considerable research has focused on the de-

Virtual Humans and Cognitive Science
In helping to define the field of cognitive science, Herb Simon emphasized the importance of “understanding by simulating” (Simon 1969, 17-22). From the perspective of cognitive science, VHs provide the opportunity to understand the
mind by simulating the body. Although still limited in their
capabilities, VHs combine a rich set of capabilities for exploring how cognitive processes manage interactions with
the physical and social world. In this sense, they complement recent interest in robotics as a tool for cognitive science, and address many of the limitations of physical robots.
Embodied Cognition: Embodied theories argue that the
brain and body are tightly linked: the configuration and state
of one’s body profoundly influence cognitive processes and
vice versa. For example, posture can impact how easily we
are persuaded (Petty, et al. 1983); gestures and language are
closely coupled, often grounded in shared metaphors
(McNeill 2005); and facial expressions can influence our
emotions (Niedenthal, et al., 2010). VH technology is increasingly used to unpack this relationship between mind
and body (e.g., Sprague, et al., 2007) and in the tutorial we
will review research in this growing area.

41

velopment of modular, sharable software architectures to
facilitate application development. The Virtual Human
Toolkit is a general-purpose collection of integrated VH
capabilities, including speech recognition, natural language
processing, perception, and nonverbal behavior generation
& execution. The goal of the Virtual Human Toolkit is to
make creating VHs easier and more accessible, and thus
expand the realm of VH research as well as other research
areas, including cognitive science.
In this tutorial, participants will have the opportunity to
get hands-on experience with the Toolkit, with the intent to
create a basic virtual confederate. In particular, participants
will be able to select a character from a library; place the
character in a scene; author a set of lines for the confederate
to speak; manipulate its gestures and facial expression; and
create a set of experimental stimuli that they can take home.
At the conclusion of the workshop participants should
have gained a basic understanding of VHs and their capabilities, of how VHs can be of value in the field of cognitive
science in the form of virtual confederates, and of how to
utilize several aspects of the Virtual Human Toolkit.

Dehghani, M., Khooshabeh, P., Huang, L., Nazarian, A. &
Gratch J. (2012). Using Accent to Induce Cultural
Frame-Switching. In Proceedings of CogSci 2012.
Gratch, J., Rickel, J., André, E., Cassell, J., Petajan, E., &
Badler, N. (2002). Creating Interactive Virtual Humans:
Some Assembly Required. IEEE Intelligent Systems,
July/August, 54-61.
Gratch, J. & S., Marsella (2005). Lessons from Emotion
Psychology for the Design of Lifelike Characters.
Applied Artificial Intelligence, 19, pp 215-233.
Honglun, H., Shouqian, S., & Yunhe, P. (2007). Research
on virtual human in ergonomic simulation. Computers &
Industrial Engineering, 53(2), 350-356.
Karacora, B., Dehghani, M., Krämer-Mertens, N. & Gratch,
J. (2012). The Influence of Virtual Agents’ Gender and
Rapport on Enhancing Math Performance. In Proceedings CogSci 2012.
Lane, H. C., Noren, D., Auerbach, D., Birch, M. &
Swartout, W. (2011). Intelligent tutoring goes to the museum in the big city: A pedagogical agent for informal
science education. In Proceedings of AIED 2012.
Lee J. and S. Marsella (2006). Nonverbal Behavior Generator for Embodied Conversational Agents, in Proceedings
of Intelligent Virtual Agents, 2006, pp. 243-255.
McNeill, D. (2005). Gesture and Thought: University of
Chicago press.
Niedenthal, P. M., Mermillod, M., Maringer, M., & Hess,
U. (2010). The simulation of smiles (SIMS) mode: embodied simulation and the meaning of facial expression.
Behavioral and brain sciences, 33, 417-480.
Petty, R. E., Wells, G. L., Heesacker, M., Brock, T. C., &
Cacioppo, J. T. (1983). The Effects of Recipient Posture
on Persuasion. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 9(2), 209-222.
Simon, H. (1969). The sciences of the Artificial. Cam
bridge, MA: MIT Press.
Swartout, W., J. Gratch, et al. (2006). Toward Virtual
Humans. AI Magazine 27(1).
Thiebaux, M., A. Marshall, S. Marsella, and M. Kallmann
(2008), SmartBody: Behavior Realization for Embodied
Conversational Agents, in Proceedings of Autonomous
Agents and Multi-Agent Systems.
Traum, D. (2008). Talking to Virtual Humans: Dialogue
Models
and
Methodologies
for
Embodied
Conversational Agents. Modeling Communication with
Robots and Virtual Humans. I. Wachsmuth and G.
Knoblich. Berlin, Springer: 296-309.
Sprague, N., D. Ballard, et al. (2007). Modeling embodied
visual behaviors. ACM Trans. Appl. Percept. 4(2): 11.
Swartout, W., Traum, D., Artstein, R., Noren, D., Debevec,
P., Bronnenkant, K., ... & White, K. (2010). Ada and
Grace: Toward realistic and engaging virtual museum
guides. In Intelligent Virtual Agents (pp. 286-300).
Springer Berlin/Heidelberg.
Wang, Z., Lee, J. and Marsella, S. Multi-party, multi-role
comprehensive listening behavior, Journal Of Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems, 2013.

Audience
The likely audience for this tutorial consists of researchers
looking to incorporate VHs in their work. This includes researchers in the fields of human computer interaction, education, social cognition, embodied cognition, language and
dialogue among others. All participants are encouraged to
bring a laptop for installing the Virtual Human Toolkit for
hands-on interactions to build a virtual human.

Presenters
The presenters combine over 40 years of experience researching virtual human technologies, developing virtual
human applications for health and training, as well as using
the technology as a methodological tool in the study of human behavior.

References
Blascovich, J., Loomis, J., Beall, A., Swinth, K., Hoyt, C.,
& Bailenson, J. N. (2002). Immersive virtual
environment technology as a methodological tool for
social psychology. Psychological Inquiry, 13, 103-124.
Campbell, J. C., Hays, M. J., Core, M., Birch, M., Bosack,
M., & Clark, R. E. (2011). Interpersonal and Leadership
Skills: Using Virtual Humans to Teach New Officers. In
I/ITSEC 2011.
de Melo, C., Carnevale, P., Gratch, J. (2012). The impact of
emotion displays in embodied agents on emergence of
cooperation with people. Presence: Teleoperators and
Virtual Environments Journal, 20(5), 449-465.
Dehghani, M., Gratch, J. & Carnevale P. (2012).
Interpersonal Effects of Emotions in Morally-charged
Negotiations. In Proceedings of CogSci 2012.

42

