UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Visualizing the Invisible: Generating Explanations of Scientific Phenomena

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/12p47172

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Author
Bobek, Eliza

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Visualizing the Invisible: Generating Explanations of Scientific Phenomena
Eliza Bobek (ebobek@packer.edu)
The Packer Collegiate Institute
Brooklyn, NY 11238 USA

Abstract

explanations were
explanations.

This study investigated the ability of learner-generated
visualizations to improve learning in science. The hypothesis
was tested in two domains, a mechanical system and a
chemical system, and the results were analyzed separately to
compare low and high spatial ability learners. The production
of visual explanations of a mechanical system, a bicycle tire
pump, increased understanding of the pump particularly for
participants with low spatial ability. In the domain of
chemical bonding, visual explanations were more effective
than verbal explanations for all participants. Visual
explanations often included crucial yet invisible features; their
accurate construction requires and provides a check for
completeness of explanations.

Introduction
Many topics in science are notoriously difficult for students
to learn. Mechanisms and processes that exist on a scale
outside student experience, such as gravitational pull,
chemical bonding, and cellular processes, present particular
challenges. When students attempt to learn these
phenomena, they often experience difficulty because they
must understand not only the individual components of the
process (structure) but also the interactions and mechanisms
(function). While instruction often involves visualizations,
students typically explain in words, spoken or written.
Visualizations have many advantages over verbal
explanations, especially for science, so asking student to
produce visual rather than verbal explanations should
improve their learning.

When learners make connections between information,
knowledge, and experience, by generating headings,
summaries, pictures, and analogies, deeper understanding
develops (Wittrock, 1990). Mayer and colleagues have
conducted several experiments that have shown a learning
benefit to generative activities in domains involving
invisible components, including electric circuits (Johnson &
Mayer, 2010), lightning formation (Johnson & Mayer,
2009), and the chemistry of detergents (Schwamborn et al.,
2010). Hausmann & Vanlehn (2007) addressed the
possibility that generating explanations is beneficial because
learners merely spend more time with the content material.
In their study in the domain of physics, provided

as

effective

as

generated

Learner-generated Explanations in Visual and
Verbal Formats

Keywords: learning; drawing; external representation;
structure; function; spatial ability; self-generated explanation

Learner-generated Explanations

not

The cognitive processes underlying the development of
understanding may differ for visual and verbal explanations.
Language has words for some parts, configurations, actions,
and causes, but complex and complete descriptions of
spatial and dynamic systems can be difficult to produce.
Visualizations can readily depict the parts, shape, and
configuration of a system, but it may be more difficult to
depict the operation of a system, its functionality, and its
causal mechanisms. Of course, the configuration provides
clues for the system’s operation and causality, and visual
information can be supplemented with non-depictive
diagrammatic devices, notably arrows (Heiser & Tversky,
2006; Tversky et al., 2000, Tversky, 2002, 2011).
Importantly, visual explanations demand completeness. Like
other types of models, all of the essential parts of a system
need to be represented in the proper configuration for it to
work. In this way, drawings provide a visual check for
completeness that verbal descriptions do not require.
Inferences can then be made from diagrams that preserve
and map the parts and configuration of the represented
system or process. In an experiment that asked students to
take notes while reading a text that they could later use to
answer questions about the text, many students used only
language, but those who made diagrams performed better
(Schneider et al., 2010). Furthermore, requiring diagrams
benefited all students.
Some researchers have demonstrated visual explanations’
superiority over written explanations. Gobert & Clement
(1999) investigated the effectiveness of student-generated
diagrams versus student-generated summaries on
understanding plate tectonics after reading an expository
text. Students who generated diagrams scored significantly
higher on a post-test measuring spatial and causal/dynamic
content, even though the diagrams contained less domainrelated information. Hall, Bailey, & Tillman (1997) showed
that learners who generated their own illustrations from text
performed equally as well as learners provided with text and
illustrations. Both groups outperformed learners only
provided with text. In a study concerning the law of
conservation of energy, participants who generated
drawings scored higher on a post-test than participants who
wrote their own narrative of the process (Edens & Potter,
2003). In addition, the quality and number of concept units
present in the drawing/science log correlated with

1911

performance on the post-test. Van Meter (2001) found that
drawing while reading a text about Newton's Laws was
more effective than answering prompts in writing. Finally,
Witherspoon et al. (2007) showed that generating external
representations while studying the circulatory system
increased scores compared to re-reading the provided text.

The Role of Spatial Ability in Learner-generated
Explanations
Developing an ability to visually manipulate a model of
scientific processes is complicated. In constructing a visual
representation of a scientific process, people may need to
first imagine actions. Kozhevnikov, Hegarty, & Mayer
(2002) found that low spatial ability participants interpreted
graphs as pictures, whereas high spatial ability were able to
construct more schematic images and maniupulate them
spatially. Hegarty & Just (1993) found that the ability to
mentally animate mechanical systems correlated with spatial
ability, but not verbal ability. In their study, low spatial
ability participants made more errors in movement
verification tasks. However, Leutner, Leopold, & Sumfleth
(2009) found no effect of spatial ability on the effectiveness
of drawing compared to mentally imagining text content.

Experiment 1: Explaining the Function of a
Bicycle Tire Pump
Method
Participants Participants were 127 7th and 8th grade
students, ages 12-14, enrolled in an independent school in
New York City. Of the 127 students, 59 were females, and
68 were males.
Materials Each participant was given a 12-inch Spalding
bicycle tire pump, a blank 8.5 x 11 sheet of paper, a 16
question post-test, and the Vandenberg-Kuse Mental
Rotation Test (MRT). Half of the participants received
instructions to create a verbal explanation in writing; the
other half received instructions to create a visual
explanation in a drawing.

Coding
Coding for Structure and Function. A maximum score of
twelve points was awarded for the inclusion and labeling of
six structural components: chamber, piston, inlet valve,
outlet valve, handle, and hose. Information was coded as
functional if it depicted or described the function/movement
of an individual part, or the way multiple parts interact.
There was no maximum imposed on the number of
functional units.
Coding of Essential Features. Explanations were also coded
for the inclusion of information essential to its function
according to a four-point scale (adapted from Hall, Bailey,
& Tillman, 1997). One point was given if both the inlet and
the outlet valve were clearly present in the drawing or
described in writing, one point was given if the piston
inserted into the chamber was shown or described to be
airtight, and one point was given for each valve if they were
shown or described to be opening/closing in the correct
direction. The maximum score for essential features was
four points.
Coding of Invisible Features. The presence of three invisible
features (the inlet valve, the outlet valve, and the movement
of air) were coded separately, with one point given for the
presence of each valve, and three points given for
movement of air (entering, moving through, and exiting the
pump). The maximum score for invisible features was thus
five points.
Coding Visual Elements: Arrows and Multiple Steps.
Arrows were coded for three purposes: label for a part or
action, to show motion, or to indicate sequence. Each use of
arrows was coded for one of these purposes and a score
tallied for each use. The use of multiple steps/frames was
used to show starting and ending positions, and change in
location of parts of the pump and air.

Results

Procedure On the first of two non-consecutive school days,
participants completed the MRT as a whole-class activity.
Participants were read aloud the instructions, and were
given untimed practice on several items. They were then
given three minutes to complete items 1-10, and an
additional three minutes to complete items 11-20. On the
second day, participants were given the pump and
instructions to try to understand how it worked. This
segment was untimed. The next set of instructions asked
students to verbally explain how the pump worked (in
words) or to visually explain how the pump worked (in a
drawing). Upon completion of the explanation, participants
were given the 16 question post-test.

Spatial ability. Participants scores’ on the MRT were used
to divide participants into low and high spatial ability
groups based on a median split in the data. Scores on the
MRT range from 0-20; the mean score for participants was
10.56, and the median was 11. Scores were significantly
higher for males (M = 13.5, SD = 4.4) than for females (M =
8.8, SD = 4.5), F(1, 126) = 19.07, p<.01.
Structure and Function. Both visual and verbal explanations
contained from two to ten structural components. Visual
explanations contained a significantly greater number of
structural components (M= 6.05, SD = 2.76) than verbal
components (M = 4.27, SD = 1.54), F (1, 126) = 20.53,
p<.05, while there was no difference in the number of
expressed functional components between visual and verbal
explanations.
Essential Features. Scores for the inclusion of essential
information were significantly higher for visual
explanations (M = 1.78, SD = 1.0) than for verbal
explanations (M = 1.20, SD = 1.21), F (1, 126) = 7.63,
p<.05. No significant differences were found between low
(M = 1.34, SD = 1.04) and high spatial participants (M =

1912

1.45, SD = 1.2). Essential features were also found to
positively correlate with delayed post-test scores, r = .197,
p<.05).
Invisible Features. Scores for the inlet valve were higher for
visual explanations (M = .67, SD = .45) than verbal
explanations (M = .51, SD = .5), however the effect was
only marginally significant, F(1, 126) = 3.13, p = .07.
Scores for air movement also showed a marginally
significant difference, F(1, 126) = 2.93, p=.09, with visual
explanations (M = 2.35, SD = 1.28) containing a greater
number than verbal explanations (M = 1.88, SD = 1.45). No
significant differences between visual (M = .92, SD = .43)
and verbal explanations (M = .79, SD = .65) were found for
the outlet valve. Analysis of the invisible parts between low
and high spatial participants also failed to show any
significant differences in the inclusion of the inlet valve, the
outlet valve, or air movement. Finally a total score for the
inclusion of invisible parts was calculated for each
participant by totaling the scores for the inlet valve, the
outlet valve, and for air movement. The mean score was
3.26, SD = 1.25. The data was analyzed using linear
regression, and revealed that the total score for invisible
parts significantly predicted scores on the post-test, F(1.
118) = 3.80, p=.05.
Multiple Steps. The number of steps used by participants
ranged from one to six. Participants whose explanations
contained more than a single step scored significantly higher
(M = .76, SD = .18) on the post-test than participants whose
explanations consisted of a single step (M = .67, SD = .19),
F(1, 126) = 5.02, p<.05.
Learning Outcomes. Scores on the post-test by group and
spatial ability are shown in Figure 1. A test of the overall
interaction between group and spatial ability was
significant, F(1, 124) = 4.094, p<.01. In particular, low
spatial participants who generated verbal explanations had
significantly lower scores (M = .609, SD = .145) than low
spatial participants who drew explanations (M = .716, SD =
.121). Analyzing structure and function questions separately
on the post-test found no differences in performance
between low and high spatial participants on structural
questions. However, analyzing performance on functional
questions found a significant effect: low spatial participants
who generated verbal explanations (M = .502, SD = .194)
scored significantly lower than low spatial participants that
drew (M = .678, M = .122), see Figure 2.

Discussion
The results of Experiment 1 show that low spatial ability
participants were able to learn as successfully as high spatial
ability participants when they first generated an explanation
in a visual format. Importantly, this result was particularly
strong for functional understanding. Visual explanations
were more likely to contain certain invisible features of the
pump, such as the valves. Including the inlet valve and
attempting to explain its function is crucial because then it is
performing its function it is inside the chamber and air
entering or exiting cannot be felt by the user.

Figure 1: Scores on the post-test, by group and spatial
ability.

Figure 2: Scores on functional questions on the post-test,
by group and spatial ability.
As mentioned previously, drawing encourages
completeness. They force learners to decide on the size,
shape, and location of parts/objects, and how the parts are
related. Understanding the “hidden” function of the invisible
parts is key to understanding the function of the entire
system and requires an understanding of how both the
visible and invisible parts interact. The visual format may
have been able to elicit components and concepts that are
invisible and difficult to integrate into the formation of a
mental model.
Finally, an analysis of the visual explanations revealed
that 67% also added written components to accompany their
explanation. Arguably, some types of information may be
difficult to depict visually, and our verbal language has
many possibilities that allow for specificity. Indeed, several
studies by Mayer and colleagues have found that

1913

understanding a system is enhanced when text and pictures
are presented simultaneously to learners (e.g. Mayer &
Gallini, 1990).
The utility of visual explanations may differ for scientific
phenomena that are more abstract, or contain elements that
are invisible due to their scale. ‘

components. Table 1 and Table 2 show the components that
were coded for structure and function, respectively.
Table 1: Coding Guide for Structure
Structural Components (1 pt. each)
Atoms with the correct number of electrons/valence
electrons
Atoms with the correct charges (magnitude,
positive/negative)
Bond between appropriate elements (i.e. between nonmetals for covalent molecules and between a metal and a
non-metal for ionic molecules)
Ionic bonds depicted/described as crystalline structure
Covalent bonds depicted/described as individual
molecules

Experiment 2: Explaining the Process of
Chemical Bonding
Method
Participants Participants were 126 8th grade students, ages
13-14, enrolled in an independent school in New York City.
Of the 126 students, 58 were females, and 68 were males.
Materials Each participant was given an immediate posttest, a delayed post-test, a blank 8.5 x 11 sheet of paper, and
the Vandenberg-Kuse Mental Rotation Test (MRT). Half of
the participants received instructions to create a verbal
explanation in writing; the other half received instructions to
create a visual explanation in a drawing. In addition, the
experimenter showed all participants a pre-recorded video
lesson on bonding (13 minutes, 22 seconds long). The video
began with a brief review of atoms and their structure, and
introduced the idea that atoms combine to form molecules.
Next, the lesson discussed how location in the periodic table
affects behavior and reactivity of atoms, and makes atoms
more or less likely to gain, lose, or share electrons.
Examples of atoms, their valence shell structure, stability,
charges, transfer and sharing of electrons, and the formation
of ionic, covalent, and polar covalent bonds were discussed.
The immediate post-test and delayed post-test each
consisted of seven multiple-choice items and three freeresponse items.
Procedure On the first of three non-consecutive school
days, participants completed the MRT as a whole-class
activity, following the same procedures as Experiment 1. On
the second day, participants viewed the recorded lesson on
chemical bonding. They were instructed to pay close
attention to the material but were not allowed to take notes
on material presented in the video. Immediately following
the video, participants were administered the immediate
post-test of chemical bonding knowledge. Participants were
given twenty minutes to complete the test; all participants
finished within this time frame. On the third day, the
particpants were randomly assigned to either the visual or
verbal condition. The next set of instructions asked students
to either visually or verbally explain how atoms bond and
how ionic and covalent bonds differ). Upon completion of
the explanation, participants were given the delayed posttest.
Coding
Coding for Structure and Function. Visual and verbal
explanations were coded for structural and functional

Table 2: Coding Guide for Function
Functional Components (1 pt. each)
Transfer of electrons in ionic bonds
Sharing between atoms in covalent bonds
Attraction between ions of opposite charges
Outcome of bonding shows atoms with stable valence
electron shell configurations.
Outcome of bonding shows molecules with overall
neutral charge

Coding system for arrows. Arrows were present in 92% of
visual explanations. Their use was categorized into the use
of arrows as labels and to show movement/action. Each use
was tallied for each explanation.
Coding system for the use of specific examples.
Explanations were coded for the use of specific atoms, such
as NaCl to illustrate ionic bonding.
Coding for the use of multiple representations. Explanations
were coded as symbolic (e.g. NaCl), atomic (showing
structure of atom(s), and macroscopic (visible).

Results
Spatial ability. As in Experiment 1, participants’ scores on
the MRT were used to divide participants into low and high
spatial ability groups based on a median split in the data.
Scores were significantly higher for males (M = 12.5, SD =
4.8) than for females (M = 8.0, SD = 4.0), F(1, 125) =
24.49, p<.01.
Structure and Function. The maximum score for structural
and functional information was five points. Visual
explanations contained a significantly greater number of
structural components (M= 2.81, SD = 1.56) than verbal

1914

components (M = 1.30, SD = 1.54), F (1, 125) = 13.69,
p<.05, while there was no difference in the number of
expressed functional components between visual and verbal
explanations. Structural information was more likely to be
depicted in pictures (M = 3.38, SD = 1.49) than described in
words (M = .429, SD = 1.03), F(1, 62) = 21.49, p<.05, but
functional information was equally likely to be expressed in
pictures (M = 1.86, SD = 1.10) and words (M = 1.71, SD =
1.87). Functional information in words added to visual
explanations significantly predicted scores on the post-test,
F(1, 62) = 21.603, p<.01. As in Experiment 1, there were no
significant differences in the amount of structural
information contained in explanations created by low and
high spatial ability participants. However, explanations
created by high spatial participants contained significantly
more functional components, F(1, 125) = 7.13, p<.05.
Arrows. 83% of visual explanations contained arrows. The
use of arrows was positively correlated with scores on the
post-test, r = .293, p<.05.
Specific examples. High spatial participants (M = 1.6, SD =
.69) used specific examples in their explanations more often
than low spatial participants (M = 1.07, SD = .79). The
difference was marginally significant F(1. 125) = 3.65,
p=.06. There were no significant differences in the use of
specific examples between visual and verbal groups. The
inclusion of a specific example was positively correlated
with scores on the delayed post-test, r =.555, p<.05.
Multiple representations. Multiple representations were
included in 65% of the explanations. Participants generated
significantly more when creating visual explanations (M =
1.79, SD = 1.20) compared to verbal explanations (M =
1.33, SD = .48), F (1, 125) = 6.03, p<.05. However, the use
of multiple representations did not significantly correlate
with delayed post-test scores.
Learning outcomes. The immediate post-test was scored
so that the maximum score was ten points. Each of the
seven multiple choice questions and three free-response
questions was given one point for the correct answer. The
mean score (defined by proportion correct) on the
immediate post-test was .463, SD= .469. Scores did not
differ significantly between participants in the visual group
(M= .486, SD = .308) and the verbal group (M = .443, SD =
.260), F(1, 125) = .740, p>.05. Scores between high spatial
(M= .532, SD - .421) and low spatial participants (M= .402,
SD = .390) also did not differ significantly, F(1, 125) =
2.72, p>.05.
The mean score on the delayed post-test (after participants
generated explanations) was .704, SD = .299. Participants in
the visual group improved significantly from the immediate
post-test (M = .822, SD = .208), F(1, 125) = 51.24, p<.01,
Cohen’s d = 1.27. Participants in the verbal group also
showed significant increases from the immediate post-test
(M = .631, SD = .273), F(1,125) = 15.796, p<.05, Cohen’s
d=.71.
A comparison of the delayed post-test scores between
groups found significant differences. Figure 3 shows scores
on the post-test by group and spatial ability. Participants

generating visual explanations (M = .822, SD = .208) scored
higher on the post-test than participants generating verbal
explanations (M = .631, SD = .273), F(1, 125) = 19.707,
p<.01, Cohen’s d=.88. In addition, high spatial participants
(M = .824, SD = .273) scored significantly higher than low
spatial participants (M= .636, SD = .207), F(1, 125) = 19.94,
p<.01, Cohen’s d=.87 (Figure 4-12). The results of the test
of the interaction between group and spatial ability was not
significant. A separate analysis comparing performance on
multiple choice questions and free response questions did
not show any differences between visual and verbal groups
or between low and high spatial ability groups.

Discussion
The results of Experiment 2 supported those of Experiment
1: learner-generated visual explanations provided an
advantage over learner-generated verbal explanations.
Visual explanations resulted in higher scores on the post-test
for both low spatial and high spatial participants.
No difference was found between low and high spatial
participants in the amount of structural information
contained in the explanations, but high spatial participants
included more function, were more likely to use specific
examples, and scored higher on the delayed post-test.
An interesting finding of Experiment 2 was that the use of
arrows significantly correlated with scores on the delayed
post-test. How does their use lead to greater understanding?
Arrows were most often used to label structure, or to label
an action. They were also used to differentiate an initial
versus and ending state, to show change. Previous research
has shown arrows to serve a number of purposes. Notably,
studies have shown the addition of arrows able to convey
functional information in a structural diagram (Heiser &
Tversky, 2006). While the purpose of this study was to
examine student-generated explanations, these results
support those of previous work that shows when arrows are
used in diagrams in a way that encourages the development
of mental models, they become more effective.

1915

Conclusion
Experiment 1 showed that learning about a physical bike
pump and generating visual explanations was primarily a
benefit to low-spatial ability participants. The measures of
learning (from a true/false post-test) were of course limited,
and it is possible that higher-order learning by high spatial
ability participants was not revealed. Experiment 2 showed
that viewing a class lesson on chemical bonding and
generating visual explanations benefited both low and high
spatial ability students, although to different degrees (high
spatial ability participants scored significantly higher on the
post-test). In the generation of visual explanations, learners
use the information they gather from new material to create
internal representations that become richer with the
integration of verbal and non-verbal representations,
forming a mental model that then informs and direct the
creation of visual explanations. Learners with high spatial
ability are more adept at forming and manipulating mental
images; this may make the generation of visual explanations
easier for them. Learners with low spatial ability may find
the task difficult, but may be able to be more successful
with generating visual explanations if support is provided.
Together, the results from the two experiments
support the use of learner-generated visual explanations as a
learning strategy in science. Future studies should explore
how this strategy mediates the comprehension of concepts
presented in physical models, experiments, and textbooks,
and posttest performance. Students live in a macroscopic
world, where objects have mass and occupy space.
Understanding “invisible” processes in science, then,
presents a challenge. Generating visual explanations through
drawing is likely an underused method of monitoring and
supporting students’ understanding of scientific concepts.

References

Johnson, C. I., & Mayer, R. E. (2009). A testing effect with
multimedia
learning.
Journal
of
Educational
Psychology, 101, 621-629.
Johnson, C. I., & Mayer, R. E. (2010). Applying the selfexplanation principle to multimedia learning in a
computer-based game-like environment. Computers in
Human Behavior, 26, 1246-1252.
Kozhevnikov, M., Hegarty, M., & Mayer (2002). Spatial
abilities in kinematics problem solving. In M. Anderson,
B. Meyer & P. Olivier (Eds). Diagrammatic
Representation and Reasoning (pp. 155-171). Berlin:
Springer-Verlag.
Leutner, D., Leopold, C., & Sumfleth, E. (2009). Cognitive
load and science text comprehension: Effects of drawing
and mentally imagining text content. Computers in
Human Behavior, 25, 284-289.
Mayer, R.E. & Gallini, J. K. (1990). When is an illustration
worth ten thousand words? Journal of Educational
Psychology, 82, 715-726.
Schwamborn, A., Mayer, R. E., Thillmann, H., Leopold, C.,
& Leutner, D. (2010). Drawing as a generative activity
and drawing as a prognostic activity. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 102, 872-879.
Tversky, B., Zacks, J., Lee, P. U., & Heiser, J. (2000).
Lines, blobs, crosses, and arrows: Diagrammatic
communication with schematic figures. In M. Anderson,
P. Cheng, & V. Haarslev (Eds.), Theory and application
of diagrams, (pp. 221-230). Berlin, Germany: Springer.
Tversky, B. (2002). What do Sketches Say about Thinking?
2002 AAAI Spring
Symposium, Sketch Understanding Workshop, Stanford
University, AAAI Technical Report SS 02-08, March,
2002, pp. 148-151.
Tversky, B. (2011). Visualizing Thought. Topics in
Cognitive Science, 3, 499–535.

Gobert, J.D., & Clement, J.J. (1999). Effects of studentgenerated diagrams versus student-generated summaries
on conceptual understanding of causal and dynamic
knowledge in plate tectonics. Journal of Research in
Science Teaching, 36(1), 39-53.
Hall, V. C., Bailey, J., & Tillman, C. (1997). Can studentgenerated illustrations be worth ten thousand words?
Journal of Educational Psychology, 89(4), 677-681.
Hausmann, R. G. M., & Vanlehn, K. (2007). Explaining
self-explaining: A contrast between content and
generation. In Luckin, R., Koediner, K. R., & Greer, J.
(Eds). Artificial intelligence in education: Building
technology rich learning contexts that work, 158 (pp. 417424). Amsterdam: IOS Press.
Hegarty, M., & Just, M. A. (1993). Constructing mental
models of machines from text and diagrams. Journal of
Memory and Language, 32, 717-742.
Heiser, J., & Tversky, B. (2006). Arrows in comprehending
and producing mechanical diagrams. Cognitive Science,
30, 581-592.

1916

