UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
What if? Counterfactual reasoning, pretense, and the role of possible worlds

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/23k2r470

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Buchsbaum, Daphna
Walker, Caren
Gopnik, Alison
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

What if? Counterfactual reasoning, pretense, and the role of possible worlds
Daphna Buchsbaum (daphnab@berkeley.edu)
Caren M. Walker (caren.walker@berkeley.edu)
Alison Gopnik (gopnik@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA

Nick Chater (nick.chater@wbs.ac.uk)
Behavioural Science Group, Warwick Business School, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK

David Danks (ddanks@cmu.edu)
Department of Philosophy, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

Christopher G. Lucas (cglucas@cmu.edu)
Charles Kemp (ckemp@cmu.edu)
Department of Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA

Eva Rafetseder (Eva.Rafetseder@sbg.ac.at)
Josef Perner (josef.perner@sbg.ac.at)
Department of Psychology, University of Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria
might contribute to our causal understanding of the world,
even without exposing us to new data (Chater; Danks).

Keywords: counterfactuals; pretense; causal reasoning

Symposium Moderator: Daphna Buchsbaum

Children’s complex causal reasoning in pretend play
Authors: Daphna Buchsbaum, Caren M. Walker & Alison Gopnik In causal counterfactuals and in causal interventions we take some value of a causal model that we currently think is not true as a premise, and calculate what would
follow if it were. We propose that these crucially important
abilities – creating possible causal interventions and testing
alternative causal hypotheses – depend on the same cognitive
machinery that children use when they pretend: adopting a
premise that is currently not true, creating an event sequence
that follows from that premise, and quarantining the result of
this process from reality.
Empirical results with preschool children support these
ideas. Buchsbaum, Bridgers, Weisberg, and Gopnik (2012)
found a significant and specific relationship between counterfactual inference and pretense in a causal task. In a new
study, we gave children a complex causal structure involving
four different variables (e.g. the sun comes up, which makes
the rooster crow and the birds chirp, and the rooster crowing
wakes up the farmer). Children’s counterfactual inferences
about this complex structure paralleled their inferences about
pretense and both were significantly accurate. Interestingly,
children were more likely to make “backtracking” counterfactual inferences when explicitly asked to reason counterfactually. In contrast, they were significantly more likely to treat
the “fixed” variable as an intervention (“non-backtracking”)
when asked to pretend its value.

Motivation
Counterfactual thinking, where one envisions alternative possible events and their outcomes, is hypothesized to be one of
the primary ways in which we reason about causal relationships (e.g., Pearl, 2000; Woodward, 2003). Recent computational and experimental work suggests that both adults and
children may reason about causality in a manner consistent
with probabilistic graphical models – coherent, complex representations of causal structure that allow distinctive kinds of
inferences (e.g., Gopnik et al., 2004; Griffiths & Tenenbaum,
2009). In particular, the causal models approach supports
and distinguishes two types of inferences, predictions, on the
one hand, and interventions, including counterfactual interventions, on the other. In predictions, we take what we think
is true now as a premise and then use the model to calculate
what else will be true. In counterfactuals, we take some value
of the model that we currently think is not true as a premise,
and calculate what would follow if it were.
Intuitively, childhood pretense bears a striking resemblance to counterfactual inference, but this relationship has
not been widely explored. In general, pretend play seems
paradoxical. Why should children spend so much time thinking about unreal worlds? Moreover, why would counterfactual inference itself be useful, since it is also about things that
are not real? In this symposium we will explore the ways
in which pretense and counterfactual thinking might be related (Buchsbaum, Walker & Gopnik; Rafetseder & Perner),
the types of computations that might underly both kinds of
thought (Lucas & Kemp; Chater) and the ways in which both

Representations, counterfactuals, and pretense
Author: Nick Chater Cognitive science views thought as
computation. Computations are often conceived of as functions between input and output. But it may be more produc-

69

tive to explore the standard mantra from computer science,
that a computer program consists of an algorithm operating
over a data structure (see Chater & Oaksford, in press; and related work by Pearl, 2000). The behaviour of the algorithm is
well-defined even if there are interventions into the contents
of the data structure, during the computation (if, for example, the contents of the Turing machine tape, or a register in a
pocket calculator, are modified, the algorithm will react in a
well-defined way). Thus, a computer program can be viewed
as defining a rich set of counterfactuals over possible modifications to the data structure, as the computation unfolds.
It turns out that this point of view provides a natural analysis of what it means for information to be represented: that
which is represented can be modified by an intervention on
the data structure. From this perspective, human counterfactual thinking and pretend play may have a common basis: they may be different sources of evidence concerning the
flexibility with which the cognitive system is able to modify
its own data structures, to reason about how the world might
have been (e.g., modifying the representation of the past and
tracing the consequences), or how it might differently be conceived (in children’s play acting, modifying a representation
of a banana to be a representation of phone).

terfactual scenarios. We present a Bayes net model of counterfactual reasoning that generalizes and extends the work of
Pearl (2000). The model distinguishes between counterfactual observations and counterfactual interventions, and can
reason about both backtracking and non-backtracking counterfactuals. Several experiments demonstrate that our model
accounts better for human inferences than Pearl’s original
proposal and a more recent Bayes net account developed by
Rips (2009).

Counterfactual reasoning vs reasoning
counter-to-fact
Authors: Eva Rafetseder & Josef Perner Pretense has
some affinity with counterfactual reasoning. It typically contains a counterfactual supposition that something (a prop)
is something other than what it really is, and like reasoning, it proceeds to further suppositions in a constrained, nonarbitrary way. Rafetseder, Cristi-Vargas, and Perner (2010)
have distinguished counterfactual reasoning from hypothetical reasoning counter to fact. Reasoning counter to fact
makes suppositions that may contradict known facts and then
uses known regularities to draw further inferences. Counterfactual reasoning is more constrained; it has to adhere to the
nearest possible world constraint, i.e., the reasoning from the
counterfactual assumption has to stay as close as possible to
what actually happened. Conformity to this constraint develops rather late around 6 to 12 years. In hypothetical reasoning
typical regularities (e.g., If [whenever] somebody takes shoes
off floors tend to be clean) are applied to counterfactual questions (e.g., If Carol had taken her shoes off, would the floor
be dirty or clean?) without regard to what actually happened
(e.g., that Max had also been walking across the floor with
dirty shoes). The importance of this distinction for pretense
is that the affinity of pretense to counterfactuality is limited
to reasoning with premises counter to fact.

Counterfactuals, causal learning, simulation, and
pretense
Author: David Danks Causal structures provide information not just about what actually did occur, but about what
would have occurred in various alternative scenarios. Counterfactuals are thus a key — in fact, necessary — guide for
learning causal structures. Any method for learning about
causal structures in the world must employ counterfactuals,
whether explicitly or implicitly. The standard ways to judge
counterfactuals for causal learning are through the use of interventions, or by focusing on ”similar” (in relevant ways)
cases. In many situations, however, these methods are too
risky, too expensive, or infeasible for any number of other
reasons. We must instead find other ways to judge counterfactuals.
Simulations based on one’s present, uncertain causal beliefs provide a natural method for discovering surprising implications and incoherence in one’s causal beliefs. We can
use what we currently think about some causal structure to
consider alternative possibilities, and thereby learn about our
own (implicit) expectations and beliefs. Entirely mental simulation of causal relations is a challenging task, however, even
for adults who have received training in it. One way to simplify the task is to ground the simulations in external, physical
events that are analogous (in appropriate ways) to the underlying causal structure. That is, pretense and pretend play can
help us learn about causal structures in the real world.

References
Buchsbaum, D., Bridgers, S., Weisberg, D. S., & Gopnik, A. (2012).
The power of possibility: Causal learning, counterfactual reasoning, and pretend play. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society B: Biological Sciences, 367, 2202-2212.
Chater, N., & Oaksford, M. (in press). Programs as causal models: Speculations on mental programs and mental representation.
Cognition.
Danks, D. (2009). The psychology of causal perception and reasoning. In H. Beebee, C. Hitchcock, & P. Menzies (Eds.), Oxford
handbook of causation (p. 447-470). Oxford University Press.
Gopnik, A., Glymour, C., Sobel, D., Schulz, L., Kushnir, T., &
Danks, D. (2004). A theory of causal learning in children: Causal
maps and Bayes nets. Psychological Review, 111, 1-31.
Griffiths, T., & Tenenbaum, J. (2009). Theory-based causal induction. Psychological review, 116(4), 661–716.
Pearl, J. (2000). Causality. Cambridge University Press.
Rafetseder, E., Cristi-Vargas, R., & Perner, J. (2010). Counterfactual
reasoning: Developing a sense of “nearest possible world”. Child
Development, 81(1), 376-289.
Rips, L. J. (2009). Two causal theories of counterfactual conditionals. Cognitive Science, 1-47.
Woodward, J. (2003). Making things happen: A theory of causal
explanation. Oxford University Press.

A unified theory of counterfactual reasoning
Authors: Christopher G. Lucas & Charles Kemp
Bayesian networks have been used to account for many aspects of causal reasoning, including inferences about coun-

70

