UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
What Aspects of Cyber Cruelty are judged most distressing? An Adaptive Conjoint Study
with Two Independent Samples

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/40n000kj

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Kuhlmann, Christina
Pieschl, Stephanie
Porsch, Torsten

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

What Aspects of Cyber Cruelty are judged most distressing?
An Adaptive Conjoint Study with Two Independent Samples
Christina Kuhlmann (s1chkuhl@uni-trier.de)
Stephanie Pieschl (pieschl@uni-muenster.de)
Torsten Porsch (t.porsch@uni-muenster.de)
Department of Psychology, Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität Münster, Fliednerstraße 21,
48149 Münster, Germany

Abstract
Cyberbullying is defined as bullying via electronic means
including the defining characteristics of repetition over time,
intent to harm, and power imbalance. However, this
normative top-down definition is discussed controversially.
We argue that the term “cyberbullying” and the associated
defining criteria might constrict our focus artificially.
Therefore, we investigate bottom-up which aspects of cyber
cruelty contribute to victims’ distress in an adaptive conjoint
design with two independent samples (sample 1: n = 131;
sample 2: n = 82). Six potentially relevant factors were
investigated, each with multiple attributes: number of
incidents, perpetrator status, perpetrator motive, and type,
medium, and publicity of cyber incident. Contrary to the
definition of cyberbullying, number of incidents, publicity,
and type of cyber cruelty emerged as most important factors.
These results allow us to further map the cognitive
representation of cyber cruelty and are practically relevant for
the definition and measurement of cyberbullying.
Keywords: cyberbullying; electronic communication;
emotional distress; cognitive representation; conjoint
analysis.

Theoretical Background
Cyberbullying – namely bullying via electronic means – is a
prevalent problem among today’s youth with mostly
negative consequences (Tokunaga, 2010). In order to
adequately research this phenomenon and to ultimately
design effective prevention and intervention measures, a
precise conceptualization of this construct is paramount
(Ybarra, Boyd, Korchmaros, & Oppenheim, 2012).
However, one area of controversy is the literal
connotations of the composite term “bullying”. Today most
scientists agree that bullying denotes an “aggressive,
intentional act or behavior that is carried out by a group or
an individual repeatedly and over time against a victim who
cannot easily defend him or herself” (Olweus, 1993; cited in
Smith, Mahdavi, Carvalho, Fisher, Russell, & Tippett, 2008,
p. 376). Thus, repetition, power imbalance, and intent to
harm are considered the key defining characteristics of
bullying. But research shows that the understanding of
“bullying” differs between historical eras, cultures or age
groups (Smith & Monks, 2008). For example, in cultural
comparisons, one of the biggest challenges is finding
translations of “bullying” with equivalent meaning. Most
often, terms vary in breadth and cognitive connotations; “the
social construction of meaning and its cultural and temporal
variability become apparent” (ibid., p. 110).

With the advent of electronic communication and the first
reported cases of online cruelty, the term “cyberbullying”
was coined to refer to this new phenomenon. The definition
of conventional bullying was transferred to cyberspace, and
cyberbullying was defined as “an aggressive, intentional act
carried out by a group or individual, using electronic forms
of contact, repeatedly and over time against a victim who
cannot easily defend him or herself” (Smith et al., 2008, p.
376). However, this theory-based top-down definition of
cyberbullying has been discussed controversially ever since
(e.g., Dooley, Pyzalski, & Cross, 2009; Grigg, 2010;
Menesini & Nocentini, 2009; Pieschl et al., in press).
Recent empirical investigations about the connotations
and cognitive representations of the term “cyberbullying”
offer the possibility to shed further light onto this issue from
a data-driven, bottom-up perspective. Results from a
multidimensional scaling analysis with 2,257 adolescents
from six European countries (Menesini et al., 2012) show
that the most important dimension of cyberbullying is
characterized by the imbalance of power and the second
most important dimension is characterized by intentionality.
When adolescents classify a scenario as cyberbullying, they
seem to mainly consider the presence of these criteria.
Focus-group interviews of 70 Italian, Spanish and German
adolescents (Nocentini, Calmaestra, Schultze-Krumbholz,
Scheithauer, Ortega, & Menesini, 2010) on the other hand
show that in some cases, subjects consider the publicity of
an incident as a substitute of the criterion of repetition.
Further, they consider victims’ perceived level of distress
more important than an existing imbalance of power and
view victims’ interpretation of an incident more critical than
an existing intent to harm. These results seem to imply that
the cyber-victims’ experience is more important than the
adherence to normative criteria. Adolescents from another
focus group study go even one step further; they consider
the term cyberbullying “vague, inadequate and restricted”
(Grigg, 2010, p. 151) because of the broad and varied set of
negative incidents that can happen on the internet but that
are not covered by this term.
We argue that these investigations about subjects’
interpretation of the term “cyberbullying” can only show
one side of the coin: Subjects evaluate the normative criteria
of cyberbullying. But generations of students have been
taught the definition of “bullying” in school. Therefore, it is
not surprising that they consider incidents as
“cyberbullying” that are consistent with this learned

2784

definition. Thus, the term “cyberbullying” might artificially
constrict researchers’ and practitioners’ focus. Many hurtful
online experiences do not fall into this narrow definition.
Therefore, we advocate a complementary route of
investigation to also shed light onto the other side of the
coin: We explore which aspects of cyber incidents are
evaluated as most distressing and use these as cognitive
criteria underlying a more inclusive definition of cyber
cruelty. This approach is consistent with adolescents’ views
(Grigg, 2010; Nocentini et al., 2010). It is also consistent
with the diagnosis of psychological disorders; only those
disorders are considered that cause clinically significant
distress or impairment in specific areas of functioning
(American Psychiatric Association, 2000).
We assume that not only defining criteria of
“cyberbullying” are relevant to the experience of distress
but also cyber-specific factors (for an overview see
Table 1). More specifically, the criterion of repetition can be
captured in a straightforward way by investigating the
impact of different number of incidents. Power imbalance,
on the other hand, can have many facets, such as age,
competence or intelligence; in this study we consider the
social status of the perpetrator in terms of perceived
popularity (Pieschl et al., in press) as well as anonymity
(Dooley et al., 2009; Menesini et al., 2012) (perpetrator
status). Besides intent to harm and the related motives of
feeling superior and whish for appreciation (Olweus, 1996),
we also consider that perpetrators might not be aware of the
consequences of their behavior and instigate seemingly
cruel incidents for fun (Twyman, Saylor, Taylor, &
Comeaux, 2010) or that they might seek retaliation
(Vandebosch & Van Cleemput, 2008) (perpetrator motive).
For these criteria of (cyber-)bullying, we predict that those
incidents including repetition, power imbalance and intent
to harm will be more distressing than other incidents.
As first cyber-specific factor, we consider selected types
of cyberbullying and cyber cruelty (Pieschl et al., in press;
Willard, 2007): harassment (insults or threats), denigration
(spreading rumors), outing (revelation of secrets),
impersonation (passing off as someone else) and exclusion
(from online groups and activities). The second cyberspecific factor is the medium. Because recently, hardware
and software applications merge, we will consider the
representational code as most relevant dimension; we
predict that pictorial incidents will be more distressing than
written / verbal ones (Pieschl et al., in press; Smith et al.,
2008). Our third cyber-specific factor is the publicity of the
incident; we predict that public incidents are more
distressing than semi-public and private ones (Nocentini et
al., 2010).
In the context of cyberbullying, distress has mainly been
investigated on an emotional level, for example as feeling
upset or stressed (Ortega, Elipe, Mora-Merchán,
Calmaestra, & Vega, 2009). But it also incorporates
cognitive facets such as helpless cognitions, for example
thoughts like “My situation is hopeless” (Pieschl et al., in
press). Furthermore, previous research shows that

participants with a history of victimization consistently
report higher levels of distress when confronted with
bullying and cyberbullying scenarios (Bauman & Newman,
2013). Thus, we also predict that previous cyber experience
is relevant for the level of cognitive-emotional distress.

Hypotheses
In this study we investigate two main hypotheses in an
adaptive conjoint design: (1) Not all factors are equally
important for the experience of distress as a result of cyber
cruelty; the utility values of these factors differ significantly.
More specifically, we predict that not all defining
characteristics of (cyber-)bullying (number of incidents,
perpetrator status, and perpetrator motive) are judged more
important than cyber-specific factors (type, medium, and
publicity of cyber incident). (2) The part-worth utility values
of the attributes of each factor differ significantly (all
attributes are given in Table 1). We predict more distress
associated with more frequent cyber incidents (number of
incidents), with popular perpetrators (perpetrator status
indicating power imbalance) who have an intent to harm
(perpetrator motive), and pictorial (medium) and public
(publicity) cyber incidents. For type of cyber incident, this is
an explorative research question. Furthermore, we explore
two research questions about between-subject differences:
(3) The results regarding (1) and (2) differ significantly
according to previous cyber-experience; previous cybervictims report the highest level of distress, significantly
more than previous cyber-perpetrators. (4) The results
regarding (1) and (2) can be validated in two independent
samples; in both samples we predict similar results.

Method
Samples
Sample 1 consists of 133 high school students. Data from 2
students had to be excluded because of missing data, thus
the final sample size is n = 131. These 43 boys (32.8 %) and
88 girls (67.2 %) are on average 17.47 (SD = 1.01) years old
and spend on average 2.43 hours (SD = 1.50) on weekdays
and 3.66 hours (SD = 2.72) on weekend days on the internet.
Sample 2 consists of 91 young adults. Data from 9 young
adults had to be excluded because of missing data, thus the
final sample size is n = 82. These 18 young men (22.0 %)
and 64 young women (78.0 %) are on average 20.29
(SD = 1.14) years old and spend on average 2.90 hours
(SD = 1.75) on weekdays and 3.85 hours (SD = 2.69) on
weekend days on the internet.

Material
Adaptive Conjoint Analysis: Distress Measure An
adaptive conjoint analysis (ACA; Gustafsson, Herrmann, &
Huber, 2007) was presented by the online survey system
Unipark (© Questback). In this part of the study,
participants had to imagine that they were cyberbullied and
they had to rate their level of distress associated with
multiple fictitious incidents that were described by

2785

combinations of attributes. The relevant factors and
attributes can be seen in Table 1. Because of the high
number of factors and attributes in this study, we used a
fractional factorial design. Yet the maximum gain of
information was reached by using the adaptive conjoint
design. The system automatically arranges the scenarios
based on subjects’ previous judgments by choosing those
attributes whose comparison provides the maximum of new
information.
Table 1: Factors (defining characteristics and cyberspecific) and corresponding attributes investigated in the
adaptive conjoint analysis.
Defining Characteristics
number of incidents

perpetrator status

perpetrator motive

Cyber-Specific Factors
medium

publicity

type of cyber incident

Attributes
once
2-3 times per month
weekly
multiple times per week
anonymous
popular
unpopular
intent to harm
feeling superior
appreciation by others
retaliation
fun
Attributes
written / verbal
pictorial
private
semi-public
public
harassment
denigration
outing
impersonation
exclusion

In the preference for levels phase of the ACA, participants
rated the level of distress associated with each attribute on a
6-point scale (1 = not upsetting – 6 = very upsetting). In the
attribute importance phase, the most and least distressing
attributes of each factor were contrasted and participants
had to judge on a 4-point scale if these were “equally
upsetting” or “one is more upsetting than the other”. In the
phase of paired-comparison trade-off questions, we
presented two fictitious cyber incidents, each consisting of 2
or 3 attributes of different factors. On a 5-point scale with
one situation located at each end, subjects had to decide
which situation was more distressing. In the final calibrating
concepts phase, participants had to rate the level of distress
associated with cyber incidents consisting of a combination
of 4 attributes of different factors on a scale from 0 (not at
all distressing) to 100 (very distressing).
Based on participants’ judgments, Unipark (© Questback)
automatically computes part-worth utilities for each

attribute and utility values for each factor. High values
indicate that a specific factor (or attribute) is relatively
important for participants’ judged distress while low values
indicate relative unimportance.
Cyber Experiences Questionnaire We adapted the
cyberbullying questionnaire of Riebel, Jäger and Fisher
(2009) to include the following five of Willard’s (2007)
categories: harassment, denigration, impersonation, outing,
and exclusion. Students were asked how often these
incidents happened to them via cell phone or the internet
(cyber-victim) and how often they instigated such incidents
themselves (cyber-perpetrator) in the last two months. All
answers were given on 5-point scales with the categories
“never”, “once”, “2-3 times per month”, “weekly”, and
“multiple times per week”. Cyber involvement was
diagnosed if students gave at least once a different answer
than “never” (cyber-victim and cyber-perpetrator).
Participants who reported both cyber-victim and cyberperpetrator experiences were classified as cyber-perpetratorvictims. Note that we do not refer to these experiences as
cyberbullying because some of the conventional criteria for
bullying are not fulfilled, for example repetition over time.

Procedure
Sample 1 was recruited at the Open Day of the Westfälische
Wilhelms-Universität Münster, Germany. High school
students visiting the Department of Psychology volunteered
and their data was collected in group sessions in a computer
lab. Sample 2 was recruited from a database of adult
volunteers maintained by the same department of
psychology; participants were sent the link to the online
survey and answered at will. All participants answered the
same electronic survey presented by Unipark (©
Questback). It consists of demographic questions, the
adaptive conjoint analysis, the cyber experience
questionnaire and further questions1.

Results
Descriptive Results
Sample 1 and sample 2 differ significantly in age
(t (211) = -18.92, p < .001) and average internet use on
weekdays (t (211) = -2.11, p = .036). On average, sample 2
participants are older and spend more time on the internet
on weekdays. Sample 1 and sample 2 also differ
significantly in their cyber experience (X2 (3) = 13.82,
p = .003). In sample 1, only 37.4 % of students were not
involved in cyber incidents in the last two months, 22.9%
were classified as cyber-victims, 15.3% as cyberperpetrators, and 24.5% as cyber-perpetrator-victims. In
1

More specifically, participants answered additional questions
about their internet use and their experience with sexual
harassment on the internet. These questions were part of a larger
project; the results will not be reported since they are irrelevant for
our hypotheses.

2786

sample 2, a total of 61.0% young adults were not involved
in cyber incidents in the last two months, 18.3% were
classified as cyber-victims, 12.2% as cyber-perpetrators, and
8.5% as cyber-perpetrator-victims. Therefore, the variables
“sample” and “cyber-experience” will be included as
between-subject factors in all subsequent analyses.

Hypothesis 1: Factor Differences
To investigate hypothesis 1, we computed a repeatedmeasure ANOVA with the utility values of the six factors as
repeated-measure dependent variable and cyber-experience
and samples as between-subject factors. The results show a
significant main effect of the repeated-measure factor
(F [4.5, 921.7] = 19.67, p ˂ .001), but no significant
differences between groups with different cyber-experiences
(F [3, 205] = 1.73, p > .05) or between samples
(F [1, 205] = 3.45, p > .05; see Figure 1), and no significant
interactions between these factors (F [13.5, 921.7] = 0.5,
p > .05).
0.2
0.18
0.16
0.14
0.12
0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0

Sample 1
Sample 2

publicity number

type

motive

status

In all ANOVAs we found main effects of the repeatedmeasure variable: More frequent incidents were judged
more
distressing
(number:
F [2.1, 432.4] = 183.11,
p < .001), popular perpetrators were judged more distressing
than anonymous ones, followed by unpopular ones (status:
F [1.9, 389.7] = 50.79, p < .001), the intent to harm was
judged more distressing than fun, followed by retaliation,
appreciation by others, and feeling superior (motive:
F [3.6, 731.7] = 35.64, p < .001). Furthermore, pictorial
incidents were judged more distressing than written / verbal
ones (medium: F [1, 205] = 123.00, p < .001), more public
incidents were judged most distressing, followed by semipublic
ones
and
private
ones
(publicity:
F [1.5, 306.7] = 203.20, p < .001), and outing was judged
most distressing, followed by harassment, denigration,
exclusion, and impersonation (type: F [3.8, 774.6] = 7.51,
p < .001). To give one more specific example (number; see
Figure 2): incidents “multiple times per week” were judged
significantly more distressing than “weekly” incidents
(F [1, 205] = 11.90, p ˂ .001) which were in turn judged
significantly more distressing than incidents “2-3 times per
month” (F [1, 205] = 72.36, p ˂ .001) and those were
judged significantly more distressing than a single incident
(“once”: F [1, 205] = 157.84, p ˂ .001).

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3
-0.4

medium

Figure 1: Utility values of the six factors extracted from
the conjoint analysis; these values indicate distress.

once

As can be seen in Figure 1, publicity, number, and type of
cyber incidents were assigned the highest utility values and
these did not differ significantly from one another (publicity
vs. number: F [1, 205] = 0.75, p > .05; number vs. type:
F [1, 205] = 0.96, p > .05). Perpetrator motive was judged
significantly
less
important
(type
vs.
motive:
F [1, 205 = 12.42, p = .001), followed by perpetrator status
(motive vs. status: F [1, 205] = 8.72, p = .004). Medium of
incident was judged least important but did not differ
significantly from perpetrator status (F [1, 205] = 3.00,
p > .05).

Hypothesis 2: Attribute Differences
To investigate hypothesis 2, we computed repeated-measure
ANOVAs for the attributes of each factor separately. In
each ANOVA the part-worth utility values of all attributes
of one factor constitute the repeated-measure dependent
variable, while cyber-experience and samples constitute the
between-subject factors. We report only significant effects
ordered by factor.

2-3 times/
month

cyber-victims
cyber-perpetrator-victims

weekly

several
times/week
non-involved participants
cyber-perpetrators

Figure 2: Part worth utilities of the attributes for the factor
number extracted from the conjoint analysis; these values
indicate distress.
In all ANOVAs we also found main effects of the betweensubject factor cyber-experience. More specifically for
number of incidents (F [3, 205] = 3.21, p = .024),
perpetrator status (F [3, 205] = 3.21, p = .024), perpetrator
motive (F [3, 205] = 3.21, p = .024), and for medium
(F [3, 205] = 3.21, p = .024), publicity (F [3, 205] = 3.21,
p = .024), and type of cyber incident (F [3, 205] = 3.21,
p = .024). In all cases cyber-victims judged most attributes
significantly more distressing than cyber-perpetrators.
Additionally, we found significant interactions between the
repeated-measure factor and cyber-experience for
perpetrator motive (F [10.7, 731.7] = 1.87, p = .041) and
publicity (F [4.48, 306.7] = 2.7, p = .025). To give one more
specific example (number; see Figure 2): across all

2787

frequencies of cyber incidents, cyber-victims judged level of
distress was significantly higher than that of cyberperpetrators (MD = .11, p = .012). Furthermore, the judged
level of distress of non-involved participants did not differ
significantly from that of cyber-victims (MD = .03, p > .05)
and the judged level of distress of cyber- perpetrator-victims
did not differ significantly from that of cyber-perpetrators
(MD = .01, p > .05).
We found no significant main effects of the two
samples in any of the ANOVAs.

Discussion of Results
Our first hypothesis was confirmed: These results show that
there are aspects of cyber cruelty that are perceived as
significantly more distressing than others. As predicted, not
all defining characteristics of cyberbullying were judged
more important than cyber-specific factors. More
specifically, while number of incidents was considered
among the most important factors, status and motive of the
perpetrator – indicative of power imbalance and intent to
harm respectively – are considered significantly less
important. On the other hand, the cyber-specific factors type
of cyber incident and publicity are among the most
important factors. Medium of cyber incident emerged as the
least important factor.
Our second hypothesis was also confirmed: These results
indicate that, for each factor, some of the associated
attributes are perceived significantly more distressing than
others. As predicted, more distress was associated with
more frequent incidents (number), with popular bullies
rather than with unpopular bullies (status), with intent to
harm (motive), with pictorial rather than with written
incidents (medium), and with more publicity. Furthermore,
results regarding the perpetrator status indicate that
anonymous perpetrators are perceived more distressing than
unpopular ones but less distressing than popular ones.
Additional results regarding perpetrator motives indicate
that all other motives but intent to harm were judged
significantly less distressing, more specifically retaliation,
fun, appreciation by others and feeling superior. Finally, our
explorative research question regarding types of cyber
incidents indicates that outing was considered most
distressing, followed (in order of descending importance) by
harassment, denigration, exclusion, and impersonation.
Consequently, the most distressing case of cyber cruelty
would be the following one: several public incidents of
outing per week, by a popular bully in form of pictures or
videos, where the perpetrator wants to harm the victim.
Our third and fourth hypotheses were also (mostly)
confirmed: We found no significant effects of the betweensubject factor cyber-experience regarding hypothesis one,
but in all analyses regarding hypothesis two the results
confirm our predictions (hypothesis 3): For all investigated
factors, cyber-victims (and often non-involved participants)
reported significantly more distress across all attributes than
cyber-perpetrators (and often cyber-perpetrator-victims)

(main effects); further interactions indicate that these
differences disappear for very distressing attributes.
Furthermore, the pattern of results in sample 1 and sample
2 did not differ significantly in any of our analyses, pointing
to the validity of our findings (hypothesis 4).
On a theoretical level, these findings underline, on the one
hand, that defining characteristics of conventional bullying
are indeed relevant to the experience of cyberbullying.
Repeated incidents with intent to harm and power imbalance
are perceived more distressing than other incidents. On the
other hand, these results also show that cyber-specific
factors are just as or even more important for victims’
experience of cyber cruelty. Especially the type of incident
and its publicity seem to be important. Therefore, the
experience of cyber cruelty seems not (only) to be
determined by the (artificial) boundaries of a normative,
theory-driven, top-down definition of cyberbullying. Rather,
subjects’ cognitive representation of such incidents (datadriven bottom-up approach) shows that all proximal factors
that concern the content of the incident and thus also the
cyber-victim directly – namely number of incidents, type of
incident, and the incident’s publicity – are judged more
important for the experience of distress than more distal
factors regarding the perpetrator or medium – namely status
and motive of the perpetrator or medium.

Limitations and Implications
The advantage of using the innovative approach of adaptive
conjoint analysis to assess implicit judgments unfortunately
goes hand in hand with a possible loss in external validity.
Since the attributes needed to be suitable for every potential
combination of attributes, they had to be expressed on a
rather abstract level. Therefore, imagining concrete cyber
incidents might have been complicated and the imagined
situations might have been quite idiosyncratic. Additionally,
we do not know if the results can be generalized since the
experience of cyber cruelty presumably also depends on
further personal and contextual factors, for example on
previous cyber-experience as shown in this study. But we do
not know if the effects of cyber-experience are due to the
fact that previous cyber-victims are better able to take the
victim perspective or if they point to a cumulative
vulnerability as a result of cyber-victimization. Further
research is needed. However, the fact that we could replicate
our results with two independent samples points to the
validity of our findings.
Despite these limitations these results have further
theoretical and practical implications that are not only
highly relevant for psychology, but might also have
implications for other cognitive science disciplines such as
linguistics or philosophy. For example, the question of how
technical terms such as “cyberbullying” are conceptualized
and might constrain human cognition clearly lies at the
intersection of psychology and linguistics. On a more
concrete theoretical level these results contribute to the
controversial discussion within psychology about the
definition of cyberbullying: We suggest that cyber-victims’

2788

level of distress should be taken into account for the
definition and diagnosis of cyberbullying. Such definitions
and diagnosis criteria should not only be based on
normative, theory-driven, top-down considerations but also
on subjects’ cognitive representations of cyber cruelty (datadriven bottom-up approach). We would like to propose the
affected subjects’ level of distress as potential defining
criterion. However, because of the widely accepted criteria
of “bullying”, another more inclusive term for all kinds of
cyber cruelty might be more useful. Further research
regarding this issue is needed. However, we can still draw
some practical conclusions: For example, the distress
associated with outing indicates that adolescents need to be
advised of the dangers of sharing private information online.
Additionally, the distress associated with publicity indicates
that education about data protection and privacy settings
could also contribute to the prevention of cyber cruelty.

Acknowledgments
The data was collected as part of the first author's Bachelor
thesis requirement.

References
American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed., text
revision). Washington, DC: Author.
Bauman, S., & Newman, M. L. (2013). Testing assumptions
about cyberbullying: Perceived distress associated with
acts of conventional and cyber bullying. Psychology Of
Violence, 3(1), 27-38.
Dooley, J. J., Pyżalski, J., & Cross, D. (2009).
Cyberbullying versus face-to-face bullying: A theoretical
and
conceptual
review.
Zeitschrift
Für
Psychologie/Journal Of Psychology, 217(4), 182-188.
Grigg, D. (2010). Cyber-aggression: Definition and concept
of cyberbullying. Australian Journal Of Guidance And
Counselling, 20(2), 143-156.
Gustafsson, A., Herrmann, A. & Huber, F. (2007). Conjoint
measurement: Methods and applications. Berlin
Springer.
Menesini, E., & Nocentini, A. (2009). Cyberbullying
definition and measurement: Some critical considerations.
Zeitschrift Für Psychologie/Journal Of Psychology,
217(4), 230-232.
Menesini, E., Nocentini, A., Palladino, B., Frisén, A.,
Berne, S., Ortega-Ruiz, R., & ... Smith, P. K. (2012).
Cyberbullying definition among adolescents: A
comparison
across
six
European
countries.
Cyberpsychology, Behavior, And Social Networking,
15(9), 455-462.
Nocentini, A., Calmaestra, J., Schultze-Krumbholz, A.,
Scheithauer, H., Ortega, R., & Menesini, E. (2010).
Cyberbullying: Labels, behaviours and definition in three
European countries. Australian Journal Of Guidance And
Counselling, 20(2), 129-142.
Olweus, D. (1996). Gewalt in der Schule. Was Lehrer und
Eltern wissen sollten – und tun können.[Bullying at

school: What we know and what we can do]. Verlag Hans
Huber. 2. Aufl., Bern.
Ortega, R., Elipe, P., Mora-Merchán, J. A., Calmaestra, J.,
& Vega, E. (2009). The emotional impact on victims of
traditional bullying and cyberbullying: A study of Spanish
adolescents. Zeitschrift Für Psychologie/Journal Of
Psychology, 217(4), 197-204.
Pieschl, S., Porsch, T., Kahl, T., & Klockenbusch, R. (in
press). Relevant dimensions of cyberbullying - results
from two experimental studies. Journal of Applied
Developmental Psychology.
Raskauskas, J., & Stoltz, A. D. (2007). Involvement in
traditional and electronic bullying among adolescents.
Developmental Psychology, 43(3), 564–575.
Riebel, J., Jäger, R. S. & Fischer, U. C. (2009).
Cyberbullying in Germany – An exploration of
prevalence, overlapping with real life bullying and coping
strategies. Psychology Science, 51(3), 298-314.
Smith, P. K., & Monks, C. P. (2008). Concepts of bullying:
Developmental and cultural aspects. International Journal
Of Adolescent Medicine And Health, 20(2), 101-112.
Smith, P.K., Mahdavi, J., Carvalho, M., Fisher, S., Russell,
S., & Tippett, N. (2008). Cyberbullying: Its nature and
impact in secondary school pupils. Journal Of Child
Psychology And Psychiatry, 49(4), 376-385.
Tokunaga, R. S. (2010). Following you home from school:
A critical review and synthesis of research on
cyberbullying victimization. Computers In Human
Behavior, 26(3), 277-287.
Twyman, K., Saylor, C., Taylor, L. A., & Comeaux, C.
(2010). Comparing children and adolescents engaged in
cyberbullying to matched peers. Cyberpsychology,
Behavior, and Social Networking, 13(2), 195 – 199.
Vandebosch, H., & van Cleemput, K. (2008). Defining
Cyberbullying: A Qualitative Research into the
Perceptions of Youngsters. CyberPsychology & Behavior,
11(4), 499–503.
Willard, N. E. (2007). Cyberbullying and cyberthreats:
Responding to the challenge of online social aggression,
threats, and distress. Champaign, Ill: Research Press.
Ybarra, M. L., Boyd, D., Korchmaros, J. D., & Oppenheim,
J. (2012). Defining and measuring cyberbullying within
the larger context of bullying victimization. Journal Of
Adolescent Health, 51(1), 53-58.

2789

