UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
What, When and How do the Models of Conceptual Change Explain?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9r456940

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Rusanen, Anna-Mari
Lappi, Otto

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

What, When and How do the Models of Conceptual Change Explain?
Anna-Mari Rusanen (anna-mari.rusanen@helsinki.fi)
ConChaMo/Department of Physics, PO BOX 64,
00014 University of Helsinki, Finland
Department of Philosophy, History, Art and Culture Studies,
PO BOX 24, 00014 University of Helsinki

Otto Lappi (otto.lappi@helsinki.fi)
Cognitive Science/ Institute of Behavioural Sciences,
PO BOX 9
00014 University of Helsinki, Finland

Abstract
There are certain theoretical issues in conceptual change research
that are still puzzling researchers. First, there is no agreement on
what kinds of changes in belief and concept systems constitute
conceptual change. Second, there is no consensus on what the
mechanisms of conceptual change are. Third, there is no common
understanding how to explain, model and describe in an exact way
these underlying mechanisms. In this paper, we offer a diagnostic
analysis these issues by reviewing current theories of conceptual
change in a framework of mechanistic explanations of cognitive
phenomena, and present a possible sketch for explanations of
conceptual change.
Keywords: Conceptual Change; Explanation; Cognitive
Mechanisms

Introduction
Concepts enable thought, reasoning and problem solving.
Acquiring new concepts or reorganizing the conceptual
framework one uses to think about a domain is a powerful
kind of learning. This sort of learning is known as
conceptual change.
Conceptual change is one of the most studied fields in
science education, and there are hundreds, if not thousands
studies, on this topic. However, there are still some
foundational issues in conceptual change research on which
no clear consensus has emerged, and that are still puzzling
most of the researchers. Firstly, there is no agreement on
what kinds of changes in belief and concept systems actually
constitute conceptual change. Secondly, there is no
consensus on what the mechanisms of conceptual change
are. Also, when compared to the level of detail at which,
say, basic visual processing is understood, often the
descriptions of these “mechanisms of conceptual change”
are quite shallow and offer no exact specification of the
precise structure of mechanisms.
As Clement (2008) remarks, there are very few, if any,
models of conceptual change, in which the mechanisms of
conceptual change are specified in sufficient detail. This
suggests that many of the current accounts might not in a

strict sense qualify as sufficient for explanation and
manipulation of learning phenomena involving conceptual
change.
Moreover, having numerous loose filler terms in an
explanation does not only threaten to undermine its
explanatory power, but filler terms may also be barriers to
scientific progress when they veil failures of understanding
(Craver, 2006, 2007). If, for example, the terms “reassign”
or “assimilation” are used to stand for processes with largely
unknown properties, then we really do not explain what
happens. Instead, we have a possible sketch for an
explanation. If this sketch is taken to be genuinely
explanatory, then - in the worst case scenario - it is possible
that we have only an illusion of explanation instead of
having a genuine one (Rosenblitz & Keil, 2002; also Craver,
2006).
In what follows, we analyse the explanations of
conceptual change from a philosophical point of view. Our
analysis is partially based on the so-called “mechanistic
account of explanation” (Bechtel & Richardson, 1993;
Machamer et al., 2000; Craver, 2006,2007).
This
mechanistic approach has not previously been applied to
explanations of conceptual change.
However, it should be emphasized that the focus of this
paper is only on cognitive accounts of conceptual change.
There are other accounts of conceptual change that examine
conceptual change from socio-cultural, emotional or
motivational perspectives. However, explanation of
cognitive phenomena is a unique form of explanation, and it
is an open question, whether it is possible to extend this
form of explanation to cover explanation involving
interpersonal dynamics etc. This topic is, however, beyond
the scope of this paper.

Variable Accounts of Conceptual Change
The study of conceptual change has focused, on the one
hand, on the acquisition of commonsense concepts in
childhood (e.g. Carey, Spelke) and on the other hand, the

3331

acquisition of scientific concepts in science education,
especially at the secondary and tertiary level (Chi, 1992; Chi
et al, 1994; Vosniadou, 1992; DiSessa,1993).
In this paper we examine the latter form of research, in
which conceptual change is seen as a specific kind of
learning process, in which a student does not merely
accumulate more knowledge, but her conceptions of
phenomena in a certain domain undergo a restructuring
process that affects ontological commitments, inferential
relations, and standards of explanation (Posner et al, 1982;
Carey, 1985; Chi, 1992; Vosniadou, 1994; diSessa, 1993).
In a nutshell, this sort of conceptual change can be
characterized as transformation process of the initial
knowledge-state (a commonsense picture of the world) to
one of various outcome knowledge states. The outcome
state can be an accurate scientific conception (when the
learning process has been successful) or, when the learning
process has not been successful, one of a number
misconceptions (when it has not).
One difficulty with conceptual change research is that
there are a huge number of different accounts of the details
conceptual change, and they all characterize conceptual
change different ways. In the literature 1, there are different
views on the learner´s initial and outcome conceptions, on
the trajectories along which change occurs, on the
mechanisms that are underlying the conceptual change, on
the obstacles of learning and also on the factors that support
the change.However, on the basis of a careful reading, the
literature seems to suggest that there are roughly three
“major” kinds of conceptual change. These different kinds,
or forms, of conceptual change can be titled as revision,
reinterpretation and invention:
Revision. In some cases conceptual change seem to
require a revision of an existing conceptual system. For
example, Chi and her colleagues suggest that conceptual
change takes the form of category shift (Chi, 1992, 2008;
Chi et al, 1994). Another example of this form of conceptual
change is described by Thagard´s “tree jumping”, in which
conceptual change happens when hierarchies of concepts are
reorganized by shifting a concept from one branch of a
hierarchical tree of concepts to another. Also in DiSessa´s
Knowledge in Pieces- account conceptual change is
understood as a form of revisionary process, because
conceptual change is seen as a process that integrates
initially piecemeal, incoherent (sub)conceptual system by
complex process of organizing and reorganizing the
elements of the system (diSessa, 1993, 2002,2004).
Reinterpretation. In some cases conceptual requires that
a learner gives a new interpretation for a domain. For
example, according to Ohlsson (2009) conceptual change
occurs when a learner uses analogical transfer to map
conceptual system from one domain to new domain to
which it has not previously been applied, and to which some
other conceptual system had been predominant. Another
examples of conceptual change as a form of reinterpretation
1
For example, for an analysis of the various types or accounts of
conceptual change, see Chinn and Samarapungavan (2009).

are described by Carey´s differentiations (when initially
undifferentiated concept is differentiated) and coalescence
(when initially distinct concepts are subsumed by a same
concept).
Invention. In some cases conceptual change requires
construction or production of a novel (for the learner)
conceptual system. For example, Carey (1985,2011)
describes a form of conceptual change, in which a learner
constructs a new set of concepts from already existing
concepts by “bootstrapping” in way that makes novel
concepts incommensurable with the earlier concepts,
because the content of new concepts cannot be captured in
terms of any previously possessed concepts. The first stage
of bootstrapping, or “Quinian bootstrapping”, occurs when a
learner encounters a set of explicit public symbols, such as
sentences of a scientific theory. These public symbols, “the
placeholders”, are not initially mapped onto any already
existing concepts that a learner holds. Rather, for a learner
they are either partially or completely uninterpreted. During
the process of learning, these placeholders are then taken up
by various “modeling processes”, which includes abstract
forms of theoretical inference such as analogical reasoning,
abduction and induction etc. The idea is that a learner
constructs the interpretation or the content for a placeholder
by using these different mechanisms. At the end of the
process, the placeholders will have conceptual content in
virtue of acquiring a stable conceptual role in a new
theoretical structure.
Conceptual change as an umbrella term. This variety
of different kinds of conceptual change might reasonably be
taken to indicate that “conceptual change” is a sort of
umbrella term, which covers several types of phenomena
instead of referring to a singular type of learning. This
would entail that there cannot be a singular “grand theory”
of conceptual change, which could explain all possible
instances and trajectories of conceptual change.
Instead, explaining conceptual change seems to require
that different learning trajectories are explained by referring
to different mix of underlying mechanisms and processes
(see also Chinn & Samarapungavan, 2009; Ohlsson, 2009b).
These learning trajectories can be considered conceptual
change because the learning is seen in some way “radical”.
However, this does not necessarily indicate that these
different phenomena are instances of a common
explanandum i.e. a common learning phenomenon, which
the various mechanisms would account for. Instead, if one
used this as a reason for adopting the umbrella term, it
would be merely a pragmatic reason.

Towards the Explanation of Conceptual
Change
The explanans and explanandum. In the case of
conceptual change research, it is not always apparent, what
the explanandum (the thing to be explained) and what the
explanans (the things that explain) are. For example, Mayer

3332

(2002, p. 671) defines conceptual change as “the mechanism
underlying meaningful learning”. On this view, meaningful
learning would be the explanandum, and conceptual change
would be the mechanism that explains the meaningful
learning. However, others seem to think of conceptual
change as the thing that should be explained, and the
explanation should be given in terms of underlying
mechanisms. For example, Chinn and Samarapungavan
(2009) emphasize this view, when they argue that there are
many routes (with many underlying cognitive mechanisms)
to conceptual change.
We emphasize the latter view, according to which the
explanandum is conceptual change (a learning episode that
can be observed behaviorally, e.g. as correct responding to
diagnostic questions), and the explanans is given in terms of
underlying cognitive mechanisms for variety of reasons.

Dissection of Explanation.
From a philosophical point of view, explanation of
cognitive phenomenon typically involves at least (1) the
characterization of the specific cognitive task performed by
a system, (2) the descriptions of how certain cognitive
mechanisms execute, produce or sustain the phenomenon to
be explained. In some cases, explanation in cognitive
science also requires the (3) description of how cognitive
mechanisms are implemented in cognitive systems or why it
makes rational (or evolutionary) sense that the phenomenon
should be sustained in the first place.
Explanation step 1: The characterization of the
specific cognitive task. In cognitive explanations of
behavioral phenomena, the description for the task is given
by characterizing the information processing task, and it
answers to questions such as: “What is the cognitive goal of
this process” or “What is the cognitive task of this
competence?”
This aspect of explanation is important for two reasons; it
not only characterizes the cognitive task in a specific way,
but it creates also some constraints for the possible
underlying mechanisms. This aspect of explanation
characterizes, why certain - but not all - learning mechanism
are appropriate for fulfilling the cognitive task.
The task of conceptual change. So, what is the task of
conceptual change? Even if the issue of the task is not often
expressed explicitly in current literature, many seem to echo
the same normative intuition that the task of conceptual
change is to reorganize the conceptual system in a way that
makes - in a case of successful learning – somehow “better”.
Depending on the larger picture of conceptual change,
different authors have described this “better” different ways.
One early formulation can be found in the seminal paper
by Posner et al. (1982), where they propose that conceptual
change makes the system “more fruitful, intelligible and
plausible” etc. (Posner et al, 1982). In their paper,
intelligible means roughly that the new conception must be
clear enough to make sense to the learner. Plausible means
the new conception must be seen as believable, and even

true. Fruitful means the new conception must appear
potentially productive to the learner for solving problems
and seek for new intellectual directions. The approach
Posner et al. propose is based on the Kuhnian idea of
paradigm shifts and their emphasis of the conceptual
ecology of a student. By conceptual ecology Posner and
collegues meant the framework of a learner´s conceptions
and “cognitive mechanisms”, such as analogies, metaphors,
explanatory anomalies and so on (Posner et al, 1982; Strike
& Posner, 1992). So, according to this view, conceptual
change happens if the changes make the ecology “better”
i.e. more productive and fruitful, and it increases the ability
to solve problems.
Sometimes this “better” is interpreted in terms of utility.
For example, Stellan Ohlsson recently proposed that some
forms of conceptual change make the conceptual system
more useful (Ohlsson, 2009). In Ohlsson´s account
cognitive utility measures the usefulness of a knowledge
system for a learner. The basic idea is that in a situation,
where there are competing knowledge systems, the system
that requires less cognitive load, and leads to faster, more
efficient and more cognitively satisfactory end states, will
become associated with higher strength and will be easier to
activate (Ohlsson, 2009). Over time, the system will become
the person´s “standard way of looking at the target domain”
(Ohlsson, 2009).
In some cases, the task of conceptual change is given also
in terms of coherence. For instance diSessa (1993, 2002,
2004) describes novice knowledge as a weakly organized
system that is highly context dependent and internally
inconsistent, thereby lacking internal coherence. In
diSessa´s account commonsense physical knowledge is
organized into p-prims, empirical typologies or low-level
abstractions of everyday experience. For example,
according to this knowledge-in-pieces- account novices’
knowledge systems are fragmented and consist of loosely
connected pieces, which often lacks not only coherence but
are also employed with little co-ordination (diSessa 1993,
2002, 2004). In diSessa´s and colleagues account, the task
of conceptual change is to integrate the piecemeal structure
of a conceptual system in a way that increases the internal
coherence of the system (diSessa, 1993, 2002, 2004).
Coherence, of course, is as Disessa himself writes, “a
vague word”, but as he continues, “one important core
meaning (of coherence) has inherently to do with relations;
that is, the meaning of coherence requires an articulation of
structure.” (diSessa, 2008). Even if the term is often left
unspecified in the context of conceptual change studies, a
useful description for conceptual coherence can be found,
for example, from Thagard and Verbeugt (1998, also
Thagard et al, 2002). Thagard and Verbeugt defines
coherence as follows: (i) Conceptual coherence is a
symmetric relation between the pairs of concept, (ii) a
concept coheres with another concept if they are positively
associated i.e. if there are objects to which they both apply,
(iii) the applicability of a concept to an object may be given
perceptually or by some other reliable source, (iv) a concept

3333

incoheres with another concept, if they are negatively
associated, i.e. if an object falling under one concept tends
not to fall under the other concept. Finally (v) the
applicability of a concept to an object depends on the
applicability of other concepts. Even if Thagard and
Verbeugt speak explicitly about coherence of concepts,
there is no reason a priori, why their description of
coherence could not be applied to the elements of
subconceptual systems or more complex entities, such as
elements of belief or knowledge systems.
These three approaches are perhaps the most widely
accepted descriptions for the task of conceptual change. In
an ideal account, these descriptions would be given in an
exact way, but at least to our knowledge there are not any
exact formulations of conceptual change available. In
addition, philosophically speaking, it is still an open
question, what is it about fruitfulness, plausibility, utility or
coherence that makes the learning task as an instance of
conceptual change. Perhaps, very roughly, one might say
that conceptual change happens when a student does not
merely accumulate more knowledge, but her conceptions of
phenomena in a certain domain undergo a restructuring
process that affects the conceptual system in a way that
increases utility, plausibility or coherence of that system.
Explanation step 2: The Mechanisms of Conceptual
Change. Now, let´s move to the second step of explanation.
This aspect of explanation answers questions like: “how
does the mechanism transform the input to generate the
output (step by step)?”. In the literature of mechanistic
explanations, there are several attempts to specify this
notion of “cognitive mechanisms”. For example, Bechtel
(2008) defines cognitive mechanisms as follows:
A
(cognitive) mechanism is a structure performing a
(information processing) function in
virtue of its
components parts, component operations, and their
organization2. Typically in the case of hard core cognitive
explanations, these mechanisms are given descriptions by
specifying the precise algorithms or by other formal means.
The mechanisms of conceptual change. In the literature,
there are many suggestions for the ”mechanisms” of
conceptual change. For example, Chi talks about
categorization and recategorization, while Carey speaks
about differentiation, coalescence and bootstrapping.
Vosniadou focuses on accommodation and assimilation,
Thagard writes about branch jumping and tree jumping, and
Ohlsson focuses on resubsumption.
However, often these purported mechanisms of
conceptual change are rarely specified with sufficient
(computational) detail (for discussion, see Rusanen and
Pöyhönen, 2012). The descriptions of these mechanisms are
often quite shallow and offer no information about the
precise structure of mechanisms. For example, Chi describes
conceptual change as a form of recategorization process by
saying that “[c]ategorizing is the process of identifying or
2

There are some controversies about the precise definition of
cognitive mechanisms. See Piccinini, 2006, also Shagrir, 2002;
Lappi & Rusanen, 2011.

assigning a concept to category to which it belongs“(Chi
2008, 62), and by writing how ”Conceptual change is the
process of removing misconceptions… (which) are, in fact,
miscategorizations of concepts” and ”conceptual change is
merely a process of reassigning or shifting a miscategorized
concept from one category to another” (Chi, 2008, 62,
italics added).
However, Chi offers no description of how “identifying”
or “assigning” actually happens, or what kind of cognitive
mechanisms they actually are. From an explanatory point of
view, this is problematic. Genuinely explanatory models are
models, in which the phenomenon is explained by giving an
accurate and sufficient description of how a (causal)
mechanism, a hierarchical system composed of component
parts and their properties sustains or produces the
phenomenon (Bechtel and Richardson, 1993; Machamer at
al., 2000; Craver, 2006, 2007). In addition, genuine
explanations offer the ability to say not merely how the
system in fact behaves, but to say how it would behave
under a variety of circumstances or interventions (Craver
2000, Craver 2007, Woodward 2003).
So, even if even if these “identifyings”, “assignings” and
“categorizings” (or any other similar “ings”), were
constantly referred as mechanisms, they often fail to satisfy
the requirements for genuine mechanism descriptions,
becausee the structure of these mechanisms is not specified
in a detail. Instead, often the purported “mechanisms” are,
or include, more or less filler terms. Filler terms describe
only the relationship between the input and the output of the
process, but they offer little specific information of how the
change was brought about.
If a mechanistic model is incomplete, and it includes filler
terms, it should rather be called a “mechanism sketch” than
a
genuine
explanation
(Craver,
2006,
2007).
Philosophically speaking, having numerous filler terms in
an explanation does not only threaten to undermine its
explanatory power, but filler terms may also be barriers to
scientific progress when they veil failures of understanding
(Craver, 2006, 2007). If, for example, the term “assign” is
used to stand for a process with largely unknown properties,
then we really do not explain what happens, but in the worst
case scenario we may also have only an illusion of
explanation (Craver, 2006; Rozenblitz & Keil, 2002).
The details of mechanisms. In addition, when the details
of these mechanisms (reorganisation, bootstrapping,
resubsumption, category shifts, etc.) is analyzed, they are
often just collections of some more basic cognitive
mechanisms (such as categorization, mapping, transfer,
assimilation, accomodation, analogical reasoning, inductive
inference, abduction and so forth), which are ultimately
thought to be responsible for the conceptual change.
For example, in Stellan Ohlsson´s (2009) account
conceptual change happens, when a person uses analogical
transfer to map conceptual system from one domain A to a
new domain B, which has been earlier conceptualized by
another system. According to Ohlsson´s model, if the new

3334

system is evaluated to be more useful, the target domain is
reinterpreted by it.
As Ohlsson says, the resubsumption theory “does not
introduce any cognitive processes that are specific to
conceptual change” and “no special purpose cognitive
mechanism kicks in to produce conceptual change”
(Ohlsson, 2009, p. 32). Instead, resubsumption is simply a
process, which involves analogical reasoning, transfer,
analogy, transfer, different kinds of mapping and
interpretation and all these familiar cognitive mechanisms.
From the explanatory point of view, this is not shocking
news. It is quite common, as for example Bechtel and
Richardson (1993) emphasize, that complex mechanisms
are, and often must be, decomposed into simpler (or more
basic) submechanisms that are ultimately responsible for the
orchestrated functioning of the higher level mechanism
(Bechtel & Richardson, 1993, see also Craver, 2007).
However, if the submechanisms are finally doing the
explanatory work, they should be given a proper
description. If they are not described in a detail, then we
really have no explanation as to how conceptual change
happens.
Evaluation of relevance. Given the complexity of
cognitive processes in general, and especially the
complexity of conceptual change, in practice it is really
difficult to distinguish those underlying submechanisms
(attentional- , memory- , reasoning-, mapping mechanisms
etc. ) that are doing the explanatory work from those which
are not. As Ohlsson emphasizes (Ohlsson, 2009b, p. 70), a
theory of conceptual change just cannot be the list of all
possible mechanisms underlying conceptual change, but it
must also constraint mechanisms in theoretically principled
way. In other words, what we need is a theoretically
principled way to evaluate the relevance of submechanisms.
This is, of course, a very difficult demand.
Philosophically speaking, one possible line might be to
argue that the relevance for a certain mechanism - or certain
mechanisms - could be evaluated by knowing how the
mechanism`s inputs and outputs interact with their context
i.e. by knowing its causal (as opposed to say, intentional
relations) with the environment3. A natural way to continue
this argument would be to refer to the manipulationist
account i.e. to argue following Woodward (2003) that those
mechanisms are relevant, which do not only have impact on
how the cognitive system of a learner in fact behaves, but
which have impact also on how it would behave under a
variety of circumstances or interventions.
However, it seems to be that in the case of conceptual
change - and in genuinely cognitive explanations in general
- the explanatory relevance must also be described at least
partially by referring the task of the conceptual change as
well. A theory of conceptual change should be able to tell,
why certain mechanisms are required or are appropriate for
achieving conceptual change, and why some other aren´t.

The task level description is needed to characterize
representational requirements and constraints for the
descriptions of appropriate learning mechanisms. If one
thinks that the task should define in terms of utility, then
one should characterize those mechanisms that are
responsible for “utility making”. However, for doing this,
the task level – utility, coherence, intelligibility – must be
specified first, and then this specification provides
justification to relevance claims concerning the specific mix
of concrete mechanisms underlying conceptual change.

Concluding remarks
Conceptual change is organizing a multiplicity of learning
mechanisms to achieve learning that makes the conceptual
system “better” by way of creating new (for the learner)
concepts. These concepts do not “pop” into existence in a
miraculous way but are typically gradually and sometimes
painfully crafted by the cognitive mechanisms from existing
material.
According to the mechanistic account, explanation
requires that the mechanisms responsible for a certain type
of conceptual change should be specified in a detail. This
can be really challenging in the case of conceptual change.
Conceptual change is a really complex cognitive process,
and it may involve a hierarchical collection of many
different submechanisms. Some of those are better ”known”
(categorization, inductive reasoning), some of those aren´t
(mapping mechanisms). In addition, there are many
different forms of conceptual change, and they may involve
several different mechanisms.
However, as also Ohlsson emphasizes (Ohlsson, 2009b),
a theory of conceptual change cannot just be the list of all
possible mechanisms, but it must also make some
constraints for the list of explanatory relevant mechanisms.
A theory of conceptual change should be able to tell, why
certain mechanisms are required or appropriate for
conceptual change, and why some other aren´t. For this
reason, the task level also matters. The task level identifies
the learning episode as conceptual change by identifying the
relevant type of difference between initial state (no concept)
and outcome (has concept) is an essential part of
explanation because it provides not only the
characterization for the explanandum of explanation, but it
is also needed to evaluate the explanatory relevance of
mechanisms.

Acknowledgments
The participants of ConChaMo-workshops. This work was
funded by Finnish Academy (project number 1133369).

3
see Piccinini, 2006, for an analysis of relevance in the
context of computational explanations.

3335

References
Bechtel, W. & Richardson, R. (1993). Discovering
Complexity, Decomposition and Localization as
Strategies in Scientific Research. New Jersey: Princeton
University Press.
Carey, S. (1985). Conceptual Change in Childhood.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Carey, S. (2000). Science education as conceptual change.
Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology, 21(1),
13–19.
Carey, S. (2011). Précis of the Origin of Concepts.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 34, 113-167.
Chi, M. T. H. (1992). Conceptual change within and across
ontological categories: Examples from learning and
discovery in science. In R. Giere (Ed.), Cognitive Models
of Science: Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of
Science, (pp. 129–186). University of Minnesota Press:
Minneapolis, MN.
Chi, M.T.H. (2008). Three types of conceptual change:
Belief revision, mental model transformation, and
categorical shift. In S. Vosniadou (Ed.), Handbook of
research on conceptual change (pp. 61–82).Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Chi, M. T. H., Slotta, J. D. & de Leeuw, N. (1994). From
things to processes: A theory of conceptual change for
learning science concepts. Learning and Instruction, 4:
27–43.
Chinn, C. A., & Samarapungavan, A. (2009). Conceptual
Change - Multiple Routes, Multiple Mechanisms: A
Commentary on Ohlsson. Educational Psychologist,
44(1), 48-57.
Clement, J. (2008) The role of explanatory models in
teaching for conceptual change. I S. Vosniadou (Ed.),
International Handbook of Research in Conceptual
Change (pp. 417–452). New York: Routledge.
Craver, C.F. (2006). When mechanistic models explain.
Synthese. 153: 355-376.
Craver, C.F. (2007). Explaining the Brain: What a Science
of the Mind-Brain could be. New York: Oxford
University Press.
diSessa, A. A. (1988). Knowledge In Pieces. In G. Forman
& P. Pufall (Eds.), Constructivism in the Computer Age
(pp. 49–70). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
diSessa, A. A. (1993). Toward an Epistemology of Physics.
Cognition and Instruction, 10, (2 & 3), 105–225.
diSessa, A. A. (2008). A Bird’s Eye View of the “Pieces”
vs. “Coherence” Controversy (From the “Pieces” Side of
the Fence). In S. Vosniadou (Ed.), International
Handbook of Research on Conceptual Change (pp. 35–
60). New York: Routledge.
diSessa, A. A. & Sherin, B. (1998). What changes in
conceptual change? International Journal of Science
Education, 20(10), 1155–1191.
Machamer, P., Darden, L. and Craver, C.F. 2000. Thinking
about Mechanisms, Philosophy of Science. 67(1): 1–25.

Markman, A. (2011). Can developmental Psychology
provide a blueprint for the study of adult cognition.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 34, 140-141.
Mayer, R.E. (2002). Understanding Conceptual Change: A
Commentary. In M. Límon & L. Mason (eds.),
Reconsidering Conceptual Change. Issues in Theory and
Practice, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Netherlands, 101111.
Lappi, O. & Rusanen, A-M. (2011). Turing machines and
causal mechanisms in cognitive science InMcKay Illari,
P., Russo, F. & Williamson, J. (eds.), Causality in the
Sciences. (pp. 224-239). Oxford: Oxford University Press,
Ohlsson, S. (2009a). Resubsumption: A possible mechanism
for Conceptual Change and Belief Revision. Educational
Psychologists, 44(1), 20-40.
Ohlsson, S. (2009b).Meaning Change, Multiple Routes, and
the Role of Differentiation in Conceptual Change:
Alternatives
to
Resubsumption?
Educational
Psychologists, 44(1), 64-71.
Posner, G. J., Strike, K. A., Hewson, P. W., & Gertzog, W.
A. (1982). Accommodation of a scientific conception:
Towards a theory of conceptual change. Science
Education, 66 (2), 211–227.
Piccinini, G. (2006). Computational Explanation and
Mechanistic Explanation of Mind. In M. DeCaro, F.
Ferretti & M. Marraffa (Eds.), Cartographies of the Mind:
The Interface Between Philosophy and Cognitive Science.
Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Shagrir, O. (2001). Content, Computation and Externalism.
Mind 110, 369-400.
Rozenblit, L., & Keil, F. (2002). The misunderstood limits
of folk science: An illusion of explanatory depth.
Cognitive Science, 26, 521-562.
Rusanen, A-M. & Pöyhönen, S. (2012). Concepts in
Change. Science & Education, 2012. (On line first). DOI:
10.1007/s11191-012-9489-x
Strike, K.A., & Posner, G.J. (1992). A revisionist theory of
conceptual change. In R.Duschl & R. Hamilton (eds.),
Philosophy of science, cognitive psychology, and
educational theory and practice (pp. 147-176). Albany,
NY: SUNY Press.
Thagard, P. (1990). Concepts and conceptual change.
Synthese, 82: 255–274.
Thagard, P., & Verbeurgt, K. (1998). Coherence as
Constraint Satisfaction. Cognitive Science, 22 (1), 1-24.
Vosniadou, S. (1992). Knowledge acquisition and
conceptual change. Applied Psychology: An International
Review, 41(4), 347–357.
Vosniadou, S. (1999). Conceptual Change Research: State
of the Art and Future Directions. In W. Schnotz, S.
Vosniadou, & M. Carretero (Eds.) New Perspectives on
Conceptual Change, Elsevier Science, 3–13.
Vosniadou, S., & Brewer, W. F. (1992). Mental Models of
the Earth: A Study of Conceptual Change in Childhood.
Cognitive Psychology, 24, 535–585.
Woodward, J. (2003). Making Things Happen: a Theory of
Causal Explanation, Oxford, 2003.

3336

