UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
When Is Language a Window into the Mind? Looking Beyond Words to Infer Conceptual
Categories

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/05q9t0g8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Holmes, Kevin
Wolff, Phillip

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

When Is Language a Window into the Mind?
Looking Beyond Words to Infer Conceptual Categories
Kevin J. Holmes (kjholmes@berkeley.edu)
Department of Linguistics, University of California, Berkeley, 1203 Dwinelle Hall, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA

Phillip Wolff (pwolff@emory.edu)
Department of Psychology, Emory University, 36 Eagle Row, Atlanta, GA 30322 USA

Dissociations between words and concepts

Abstract

A large literature documents the pervasiveness of semantic
diversity, with cross-linguistic variation in word meaning
observed in such disparate domains as artifacts (Malt et al.,
1999), spatial relations (Levinson et al., 2003), and number
(Frank et al., 2008), among many others. If language is a
window into the mind at the level of words, such diversity
should also be observed at the conceptual level. That is,
speakers of different languages should perform differently
on relevant nonlinguistic tasks, in a manner that aligns with
the lexical distinctions of their respective languages.
Although this prediction has been supported by a number
of studies investigating the Whorfian hypothesis (see Wolff
& Holmes, 2011), other studies have shown striking
asymmetries in performance on linguistic and nonlinguistic
tasks. Malt et al. (1999) found that speakers of English,
Spanish, and Chinese differed markedly in how they named
a set of common household containers (e.g., bottles, jars,
etc.), yet showed remarkable agreement when sorting the
objects based on overall similarity. Munnich et al. (2001)
observed that English, Japanese, and Korean speakers
differed in their naming, but not their memory, of spatial
locations. Papafragou et al. (2008) found that English and
Greek speakers described motion events differently despite
showing similar attentional patterns when viewing the
events. Together, these findings suggest that the distinctions
picked out by words are not invariably salient at the
conceptual level, implying some degree of dissociation
between words and conceptual representations.
Several factors might account for this word-concept
mismatch. Word meanings are shaped, to a much greater
degree than conceptual knowledge, by historical forces such
as language contact and past speakers’ concerns (Malt,
Gennari, & Imai, 2010), and by communicative pressures,
such as the need to maximize informativeness and minimize
cognitive load (Kemp & Regier, 2012). As a consequence,
the words of a language will tend to reflect the language’s
history and support efficient communication, but may often
fail to capture salient conceptual distinctions – despite the
long-standing intuition that they should (cf. Rosch, Mervis,
Gray, Johnson, & Boyes-Braem, 1976).

Language is often regarded as a rich source of evidence about
the mind. However, a number of findings challenge this
position, at least at the level of words: Where languages differ
in their lexical distinctions, conceptual differences are not
always observed. We ask here how language might serve as a
window into the mind despite an apparently loose connection
between words and concepts. We propose that prominent
conceptual distinctions, though not necessarily captured by
individual words, may be revealed by elements of meaning
shared by multiple words. Testing this hypothesis in the
domain of space, we show that clusters of spatial terms,
identified through dimensionality reduction analyses of
semantic similarity data, align with conceptual categories
spontaneously accessed during the perceptual discrimination
of spatial relations. These findings suggest that aspects of
semantic structure beyond the level of words may provide
considerable insight into the conceptual system. Implications
for research on linguistic relativity are discussed.
Keywords: language and thought; word meaning; concepts;
semantic structure; space; categorical perception.

Introduction
Many cognitive scientists regard language as a window into
the mind (Chomsky, 1975; Lakoff, 1987; Pinker, 2007).
Complicating this view, however, is the observation that
languages differ dramatically in how they partition the
world by name (Malt & Wolff, 2010). Critically, this
semantic diversity is not necessarily mirrored by
corresponding conceptual diversity: Where languages differ
in their lexical distinctions, conceptual differences are not
always observed (e.g., Malt et al., 1999; Munnich, Landau,
& Dosher, 2001; Papafragou, Hulbert, & Trueswell, 2008).
Such findings suggest that, at least at the level of words,
language may not be a particularly good window into the
mind. In this research, we look beyond individual words to
identify other aspects of semantic structure that might prove
more tightly connected to the conceptual system. In
particular, we propose that prominent conceptual
distinctions may be revealed by elements of meaning shared
by multiple words. Investigating this hypothesis in the
domain of space, we identify clusters of spatial prepositions
with similar meanings and assess the extent to which those
meanings are spontaneously accessed during the
nonlinguistic processing of spatial relations. Our ultimate
conclusion will be that language can provide an illuminating
window into the mind—if you know where to look.

The semantic clusters hypothesis
Although the factors outlined above render individual words
an unreliable guide to conceptual representations, there may
be other ways in which language can provide insight into

597

the conceptual system. Several recent approaches combine
semantic data from multiple languages, motivated by the
idea that cross-linguistically frequent semantic distinctions
may be linked to prominent, perhaps even universal,
conceptual ones (Malt et al., 2011; Regier, Khetarpal, &
Majid, in press). However, a similar idea can be applied to a
single language: Elements of meaning that are shared by
many words – and hence apply across a wide range of
communicative contexts – may be particularly likely to
capture key conceptual distinctions. Words that share the
same element of meaning can be likened to snapshots of the
same underlying concept: No single word will capture the
concept on its own, but by examining multiple words with
closely related meanings, the concept may emerge (cf.
Regier et al., in press). Accordingly, conceptually salient
distinctions may be revealed by clusters of related words.
We call this proposal the semantic clusters hypothesis.
Testing this hypothesis requires (1) identifying clusters of
words within a given domain, and (2) assessing their
conceptual salience. The first step may be achieved by
obtaining a measure of the similarities among all of the
words in a domain. A common method for collecting
semantic similarity data is to have people divide words into
groups based on their meanings (e.g., Wolff & Song, 2003).
Words with similar meanings will tend to be grouped
together often, while words with dissimilar meanings will
rarely be grouped together. These co-occurrences may be
combined across participants to construct a similarity
matrix, which in turn may be analyzed using dimensionality
reduction techniques, such as multidimensional scaling
(MDS). Any clusters of words, or latent categories, within
the semantic similarity space for the domain are likely to be
revealed by such techniques.
The second step requires examining the extent to which
the latent categories factor into cognitive processes
unrelated to language. One way to establish the role of
categories in nonlinguistic processing is to show that the
category membership of a set of items influences how the
items are perceived. Items from different categories are
often easier to tell apart than items from the same category,
even after controlling for the physical distance between the
items – a phenomenon known as categorical perception
(CP; Goldstone & Hendrickson, 2010). In the case of latent
categories, CP could be tested by having people
discriminate among items from the domain of interest, with
the items coming from either different latent categories or
the same latent category. CP would be indicated by superior
discrimination on between- compared to within-category
trials. Such an effect, if found, would indicate that the latent
categories are spontaneously accessed in a nonlinguistic
context, providing evidence for their conceptual salience.
We adopted the approach outlined above to test the
semantic clusters hypothesis in the domain of space, a
perennial battleground in research on the language-thought
interface (Li & Gleitman, 2002; Majid et al., 2004). In
Experiment 1, participants sorted a large inventory of spatial
prepositions into groups, and MDS was used to identify

latent categories. Experiment 2 examined the conceptual
salience of these categories, using CP as a diagnostic.
Recent evidence suggests that CP is stronger in the left
hemisphere than the right (Gilbert et al., 2006), even for
unnamed categories (Holmes & Wolff, 2012) – consistent
with specialization of the left hemisphere for categorical
processing independent of language (Kosslyn et al., 1989).
Thus, even though the items within a latent category might
share no common name, we expected CP for such categories
to be left-lateralized.

Experiment 1
The goal of Experiment 1 was to obtain a measure of the
semantic structure of the spatial domain, from which
clusters of prepositions could be identified.

Method
Participants Sixty-three Emory University undergraduates,
all native English speakers, participated for course credit or
payment. One participant was excluded for not following
instructions.
Materials An inventory of English spatial prepositions was
assembled by adapting a comprehensive list from Landau
and Jackendoff (1993). Forty-two prepositions were
selected from the original list, omitting archaic (e.g.,
betwixt, without), intransitive (e.g., apart, downstairs), nonspatial, (e.g., ago, despite) and predominantly metaphorical
(e.g., in line with) prepositions, and those requiring a
phrasal verb construction (e.g., through, as in “pierce
through”). The resulting inventory is shown in Table 1.
Table 1: Spatial prepositions used in Experiment 1.
about
above
across
after
against*
along
alongside
amid
among
around
at

atop
before
behind
below
beneath
beside
between
beyond
by
down
far from

in
in back of
in front of
inside
near
off
on
on top of
opposite
outside
over

past
to the left of
to the right of
to the side of
toward
under
underneath
up
within

*excluded from analyses

Each of the prepositions was printed in bold at the top of a
4” × 6” index card. Below each term were two example
sentences reflecting prototypical spatial usages of the term.
Procedure The experiment consisted of two phases. In the
first phase, participants were presented with the randomly
ordered stack of index cards and were asked to write a
definition for each preposition based on the two example
sentences. The purpose of this task was to encourage
participants to think relatively deeply about the meanings of
the prepositions. For a subset of participants, the term

598

against was inadvertently omitted from the stack of cards;
as a result, this term was excluded from analyses.
In the second phase, participants were asked to divide the
index cards into as many groups as they felt were
appropriate. They were told that the prepositions in each
group should have “essentially the same meaning.”
Participants were given as much time as they needed to
complete both phases of the experiment.

of K (i.e., number of clusters). In these analyses, substantial
reduction in within-cluster variance occurred up to K = 4,
with only minimal further reduction thereafter. These results
suggest that the MDS similarity space is most optimally
partitioned into four clusters. These clusters –labeled abovebelow, front-back, left-right, and in – are marked on the
solution in Figure 1.2 Notably, three of the clusters contain
words that are essentially opposite in meaning. This suggests
that the clusters cannot be reduced to individual word
meanings, but instead may be viewed as latent categories.3
The next experiment investigated the conceptual salience of
these categories; that is, the extent to which they play a role in
the nonlinguistic processing of spatial relations.

Results and discussion
The number of groups of prepositions ranged from 5 to 29
(M = 14.1, SD = 5.8). The raw sorting data were converted
into a pairwise similarity matrix, with the similarity between
each pair of prepositions taken to be the proportion of
participants who grouped them together. For example, if all
62 participants grouped above and below together, the
similarity between them would be 62 ÷ 62 = 1; if 31
participants grouped above and below together, the
similarity between them would be 31 ÷ 62 = .5, and so on.
The similarity matrix was submitted as input to a MDS
algorithm, ALSCAL (ordinal model), and solutions of
increasing dimensionality were generated. Because the
largest decline in stress (a measure of the degree of fit
between the actual and estimated inter-item distances)
occurred between 1 and 2 dimensions, the 2-dimensional
solution (stress = .26) is shown in Figure 1.1

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2, participants were presented with multiple
pictures showing spatial relations from the above-below,
left-right, and front-back categories.4 Their task was to
decide whether the pictures were perceptually identical or
one of the pictures (the target) was different from the others
(the distractors). On “different” trials, the target was from
either the same category as the distractors (within-category;
e.g., above vs. below) or a different category (betweencategory; e.g., above vs. left). CP would be revealed by
faster or more accurate performance on between- than
within-category trials. Note that because the target and
distractors had different names on both within- and
between-category trials, CP – if observed – would reflect
the influence of categorical rather than linguistic
representations. Given evidence that CP for both named and
unnamed categories is left-lateralized (Holmes & Wolff,
2012), we expected that latent categories would likewise
yield left-lateralized CP. To examine this possibility, the
location of the target was varied, with left-lateralized CP
indicated by stronger CP effects when the target is presented
in the right visual field (RVF; i.e., left hemisphere) than the
left visual field (LVF).

2

Other dimensionality reduction techniques (hierarchical clustering
and principal components analysis) yielded similar results, suggesting
that the clusters are not an artifact of MDS (Holmes, 2012).
3
In addition to identifying clusters within the 2-dimensional
similarity space, the dimensions themselves may also be interpreted.
These dimensions seem to capture broad distinctions among spatial
relations in the world. The y-axis reflects a distinction between
topological and projective relations (Levinson et al., 2003); most of
the prepositions in the above-below and in clusters refer to relations
between contiguous objects, whereas those in the front-back and leftright clusters specify a frame of reference. The x-axis is less easily
interpreted. Several researchers have noted that the above-below and
front-back axes are perceptually asymmetric with respect to
canonical body position, whereas the left-right axis is perceptually
symmetric (e.g., Clark, 1973). However, the in cluster is not well
captured by this distinction; relations of containment and proximity
are not readily characterized in terms of symmetry.
4
The in category was not included because it was the only
category that did not contain terms with opposite meanings, making
CP more difficult to assess than for the other categories.

Figure 1: Multidimensional scaling solution of sorting
data from Experiment 1. K-means clusters are marked on
the solution and labeled for descriptive purposes.
To help identify clusters within the solution, the estimated
inter-item distances were combined into a new pairwise
similarity matrix. This matrix was then submitted as input to a
series of K-means clustering analyses, using increasing values
1

The 3-dimensional solution (stress = .17) provided little
additional information. The third dimension could be interpreted as
reflecting a distinction between metric (e.g., far from, near) and
nonmetric (e.g., above, to the left of) prepositions, but this dimension
also distinguished the four clusters in Figure 1 reasonably well.

599

Method

On half of the test trials in each block, the 4 pictures in
the display were identical (“same” trials). This resulted in 4
unique “same” displays in each block, with each display
presented 24 times. On the other half, 3 pictures
(distractors) were identical and the fourth (target) was
different (“different” trials). There were 2 kinds of
“different” trials: (a) within-category, in which target and
distractors were from the same category (above-below, leftright, or front-back); and (b) between-category, in which
target and distractors were from different categories (see
Figure 3). Across “different” trials, each picture served as
the target at all 4 positions in the display (2 LVF, 2 RVF),
resulting in 48 unique “different” displays per block (16
within-category, 32 between-category), each presented
twice. Trials were presented in random order.
On each trial, a fixation marker appeared centrally for 500
ms, followed by one of the displays for 200 ms (to discourage
eye movements). Participants indicated whether there was an
“odd one out” (i.e., target) by pressing the “S” key for same
(i.e., no odd one out) or the “D” key for different, using their
left and right index fingers, respectively. The next trial began
after participants logged a response. Feedback was provided
after practice, but not test, trials.
Following the discrimination task, participants wrote a
brief description of the relative locations of the bird and
airplane in each of the 12 pictures, presented on index cards.
This served as a manipulation check to verify that
participants interpreted the pictures as showing the spatial
relations they were intended to depict.

Participants Twenty-two Emory University undergraduates,
all right-handed native English speakers, participated for
course credit or payment. Four participants were excluded, 3
for low accuracy (< 65% correct on “different” test trials)
and 1 for a mean reaction time (RT) greater than 2.5
standard deviations above the mean for all participants.
Materials The materials were 12 pictures of a bird and an
airplane (see Figure 2). Each picture displayed the objects
from one of 3 perspectives (front, side, or top view). There
were 4 pictures from each perspective, each showing the
bird in a different location. The distance from the bird to the
airplane, as determined by their closest edges, was the same
across locations.

Figure 2: Stimuli used in Experiment 2. (a) front view:
above, below, left, and right. (b) side view: above, below,
front, and back. (c) top view: left, right, front, and back.
In the discrimination task, each display consisted of a
fixation marker surrounded by 4 pictures, all from the same
perspective (see Figure 3). In each picture, the center of the
airplane subtended 11.5° (h) × 12.8° (v) visual angle.

Figure 4: Results of Experiment 2.
Error bars are 95% within-subjects confidence intervals.
LVF = left visual field; RVF = right visual field.

Results and discussion
As shown in Figure 4, the categories above-below, leftright, and front-back elicited CP: Participants were faster to
discriminate spatial relations from different categories than
from the same category. Notably, this effect was found only
in the RVF, indicating that CP was left-lateralized,
consistent with a left hemisphere specialization for
categorical processing (Kosslyn et al., 1989) and previous
left-lateralized CP studies (e.g., Holmes & Wolff, 2012).
On the discrimination task, mean accuracy was 89.1%
(SD = 7.5), with no difference between “same” and

Figure 3: Examples of displays used in Experiment 2.
(a) within-category trial (below target, above distractors).
(b) between-category trial (front target, above distractors).
Design and procedure There were 3 blocks of trials, each
consisting of 16 practice trials and 192 test trials. All
displays in each block were from a single perspective (front,
side, or top). The order of the blocks was counterbalanced.

600

“different” trials (p > .1). Subsequent analyses focused on
the “different” trials, for which CP could be assessed. Trials
in which participants responded incorrectly (12.2%) or RT
was greater than 2.5 SD from individual means (2.8%) were
excluded. A 2 (visual field: LVF vs. RVF) × 2 (category
relation: within- vs. between-category) repeated-measures
analysis of variance (ANOVA) on RT for the remaining
trials yielded main effects of visual field, F(1, 17) = 8.83, p
= .009, and category relation, F(1, 17) = 8.53, p = .01, and
an interaction, F(1, 17) = 11.60, p = .003. Participants
responded faster on between- than within-category trials
with RVF targets, t(17) = 5.17, p < .0001, but not LVF
targets, t(17) = .34, p > .7 (see Figure 4), indicating leftlateralized CP. An analogous ANOVA on the accuracy data
yielded no significant effects (all ps > .05), suggesting that
there was no speed-accuracy tradeoff.

preposition to describe pictures from different categories,
but never the same category). In addition, none of the 216
descriptions included superordinate terms (e.g., “horizontal”
for left-right pictures), suggesting that left-lateralized CP
was not driven by linguistic representations.
In sum, the results of Experiment 2 provide evidence for
the conceptual salience of the above-below, left-right, and
front-back categories identified in Experiment 1. The
findings support the semantic clusters hypothesis in
showing that clusters of related words align with conceptual
categories that are spontaneously accessed during
nonlinguistic processing, with consequences for simple
perceptual decisions.

General Discussion
Recent research on the language-thought interface has led to
a paradox. Although language has long been viewed as a
window into the mind, a number of studies have suggested
that word meanings may often be dissociated from
conceptual representations. The present research offers a
potential resolution to this discrepancy: Language may be a
better reflection of the conceptual system at the level of
clusters of words than at the level of individual words.
According to the semantic clusters hypothesis, clusters of
words capture salient conceptual distinctions. Consistent
with this hypothesis, groups of spatial prepositions that
clustered together in a semantic similarity space in
Experiment 1 aligned with conceptual categories that
yielded CP in Experiment 2. These findings suggest that
language and the conceptual system may share a common
underlying structure that is obscured when focusing solely
on individual word meanings and their conceptual
analogues. In related work, we have shown that clusters of
words elicit stronger CP effects than individual words
(Holmes, 2012), further supporting our conclusions.
We used CP as a tool for assessing conceptual salience,
but our findings also inform the nature of CP itself. In
particular, our findings show that CP can occur in the
perception of relations, not just in the perception of objects
or object properties – the focus of the vast majority of
previous CP research (Goldstone & Hendrickson, 2010). Our
findings also lend support to the generality of left-lateralized
CP effects, recently contested in the domain of color (e.g.,
Witzel & Gegenfurtner, 2011), though they challenge the
dominant linguistic interpretation of such effects (cf. Gilbert
et al., 2006). Given that left-lateralized CP occurred for
categories whose members share no common label, the
phenomenon appears to be driven by categories rather than
their names (Holmes & Wolff, 2012), despite the propensity
to link left hemisphere processing to language.
Although our findings demonstrate a clear connection
between language and the conceptual system, they do not
address the origins of this connection, including the
possibility that language is the causal agent. The spatial
clusters identified here, though shown to be conceptually
salient in the minds of English speakers, are not necessarily
universal. In principle, the clusters might vary cross-

Figure 5: Results of Experiment 2 by category.
Planned comparisons revealed left-lateralized CP for each
of the 3 categories assessed. Within-category trials were
divided according to the category membership of target and
distractors: above-below (i.e., above target and below
distractors, or below target and above distractors), left-right,
and front-back. For RVF targets, discrimination was faster
on between-category trials than on each of the 3 kinds of
within-category trials [above-below: t(17) = 2.17, p = .04;
left-right: t(17) = 2.66, p = .02; front-back: t(17) = 2.13, p =
.05; see Figure 5]. For LVF targets, none of these
differences reached significance (ps > .2).
The results of the picture description task were as
expected. Across the 12 pictures, 87.5% of the descriptions
included prepositions from the intended category (e.g., “the
bird is above the plane” or “the plane is below the bird” for
above pictures); for 6 of the pictures, there was 100%
agreement. The descriptions of the 4 front-back pictures
were the most variable. Six participants consistently
described these pictures using horizontal or vertical terms
(e.g., “to the right of” for the front picture in Figure 2b),
implying that they viewed them as 2-dimensional.
Importantly, however, any ambiguity in the stimuli could
not itself account for left-lateralized CP, as the existence of
multiple interpretations for a given picture would
presumably lead to slower responses on both within- and
between-category trials (if not more so for the latter, given
that individual participants occasionally used the same

601

linguistically, and those differences could lead to differences
in nonlinguistic spatial processing. On the one hand, such
differences seem unlikely because the elements of meaning
associated with the clusters presumably reflect, and are
constrained by, structure in the world to a much greater extent
than are individual word meanings (see Malt et al., 2010). On
the other hand, striking cross-linguistic differences in the
meanings of spatial terms have been documented (e.g.,
Levinson et al., 2003), suggesting the possibility of further
differences at deeper levels of semantic structure.
If such differences exist, an investigation of analogous
conceptual differences would provide a strong test of the
semantic clusters hypothesis. Though agnostic with respect to
the universality of semantic structure, the hypothesis would
predict that clusters of words within a particular language
should be conceptually salient for speakers of that language.
Thus, speakers of languages with different sets of clusters
should show correspondingly different patterns of CP for
those clusters. Notably, this kind of Whorfian effect would be
unlike any previously reported, in that it would be driven by
categories not explicitly encoded in the semantic system –
and of which many language users likely have no conscious
awareness. Probing the existence of such effects may
represent the next frontier in research on linguistic relativity.

Kosslyn, S. M., Koenig, O., Barrett, A., Cave, C. B., Tang,
J., & Gabrieli, J. D. E. (1989). Evidence for two types of
spatial representations: Hemispheric specialization for
categorical and coordinate relations. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 15, 723-735.
Lakoff, G. (1987). Women, fire, and dangerous things.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Landau, B., & Jackendoff, R. (1993). “What” and “where”
in spatial language and spatial cognition. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 16, 217-265.
Levinson, S. C., Meira, S., & The Language and Cognition
Group (2003). ‘Natural concepts’ in the spatial
topological
domain—Adpositional
meanings
in
crosslinguistic perspective: An exercise in semantic
typology. Language, 79, 485-516.
Li, P., & Gleitman, L. (2002). Turning the tables: Language
and spatial reasoning. Cognition, 83, 265-294.
Majid, A., Bowerman, M., Kita, S., Haun, D. B. M., &
Levinson, S. C. (2004). Can language restructure
cognition? The case for space. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 8, 108-114.
Malt, B. C., Ameel, E., Gennari, S., Imai, M., Saji, N., &
Majid, A. (2011). Do words reveal concepts? Proceedings of
the 33rd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 519-524). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Malt, B. C., Gennari, S., & Imai, M. (2010). Lexicalization
patterns and the world-to-words mapping. In B. C. Malt &
P. Wolff (Eds.), Words and the mind: How words capture
human experience. New York: Oxford University Press.
Malt, B. C., Sloman, S. A., Gennari, S., Shi, M., & Wang,
Y. (1999). Knowing versus naming: Similarity and the
linguistic categorization of artifacts. Journal of Memory
and Language, 40, 230-262.
Malt, B. C., & Wolff, P. (Eds.) (2010). Words and the mind:
How words capture human experience. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Munnich, E., Landau, B., & Dosher, B. A. (2001). Spatial
language and spatial representation: A cross-linguistic
comparison. Cognition, 81, 171-207.
Papafragou, A., Hulbert, J., & Trueswell, J. (2008). Does
language guide event perception? Evidence from eye
movements. Cognition, 108, 155-184.
Pinker, S. (2007). The stuff of thought: Language as a
window into human nature. New York: Penguin Books.
Regier, T., Khetarpal, N., & Majid, A. (in press). Inferring
semantic maps. Linguistic Typology.
Rosch, E., Mervis, C. B., Gray, W. D., Johnson, D. M., &
Boyes-Braem, P. (1976). Basic objects in natural
categories. Cognitive Psychology, 8, 382-439.
Witzel, C., & Gegenfurtner, K. R. (2011). Is there a
lateralized category effect for color? Journal of Vision, 11.
Wolff, P., & Holmes, K. J. (2011). Linguistic relativity.
WIREs Cognitive Science, 2, 253-256.
Wolff, P., & Song, G. (2003). Models of causation and the
semantics of causal verbs. Cognitive Psychology, 47, 276332.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Larry Barsalou, Harold Gouzoules, Stella
Lourenco, Laura Namy, Marjorie Pak, and Terry Regier for
helpful feedback, Ted Guio for graphic design, and Tyler
Brown and Lee Kugelmann for help with transcribing and
coding descriptions. This research was supported by an
APA Dissertation Research Award to KJH.

References
Chomsky, N. (1975). Reflections on language. New York:
Pantheon.
Clark, H. H. (1973). Space, time, semantics, and the child.
In T. E. Moore (Ed.), Cognitive development and the
acquisition of language. New York: Academic Press.
Frank, M. C., Everett, D. L., Fedorenko, E., & Gibson, E.
(2008). Number as a cognitive technology: Evidence from
Pirahã language and cognition. Cognition, 108, 819-824.
Gilbert, A. L., Regier, T., Kay, P., & Ivry, R. B. (2006).
Whorf hypothesis is supported in the right visual field but
not the left. PNAS, 103, 489-494.
Goldstone, R. L., & Hendrickson, A. T. (2010). Categorical
perception. WIREs Cognitive Science, 1, 69-78.
Holmes, K. J. (2012). Language as a window into the mind:
The case of space. Doctoral dissertation, Department of
Psychology, Emory University.
Holmes, K. J., & Wolff, P. (2012). Does categorical perception
in the left hemisphere depend on language? Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 141, 439-443.
Kemp, C., & Regier, T. (2012). Kinship categories across
languages reflect general communicative principles.
Science, 336, 1049-1054.

602

