UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
When seeing isn't believing: Influences of prior conceptions and misconceptions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0r81d5m1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Stampfer, Eliane
Koedinger, Kenneth

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

When seeing isn’t believing: Influences of prior conceptions and misconceptions
Eliane Stampfer (stampfer@cs.cmu.edu)
Kenneth R. Koedinger (krk@cs.cmu.edu)

Human Computer Interaction Institute, 5000 Forbes Ave
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Abstract
Instruction often employs visual representations to support
deep understanding. However, students‟ prior misconceptions
may override the meaning in these scaffolds. We investigate
fraction bars, a common representation intended to promote
sense-making. Our prior work found that students often did
not use the fraction bars effectively. This difficulty factors
assessment compares four scaffold types: pictures only, two
forms of pictures with numbers, and numbers only, to assess
which interpretation steps were difficult. On equivalence
items, students performed equally well with all scaffolds that
included pictures, but worse with the numbers-only scaffold,
indicating that fraction bars improved scores for equivalence.
However, including numbers with the pictures decreased
performance for fraction addition. Although students
demonstrated competence with fraction bars in fraction
equivalence, they did not transfer this knowledge to addition.
These results suggest caution in designing and teaching
representations for sense-making.
Keywords: graphical representation; fraction addition;
symbolic fractions.

Many researchers strive to identify ways to
support deep understanding, as it is thought to
promote robust and adaptable learning. One
strategy has been to use multiple representations,
particularly ones that connect to students‟ prior
knowledge and aid sense-making. However, there
is little data on what representations will make
sense to the students. Singapore textbooks and
the NCTM standards, for example, advocate using
concrete visual representations in mathematics as
a bridge to more formal, abstract thinking
(NCTM, 2013; Leinwand & Ginsburg 2007). But,
perhaps we should question the benefits of these
representations (Rittle-Johnson & Koedginer,
2001; Booth & Koedinger, 2012): Are they
actually easy entry points for students?
Our tutors for 5th graders aim to support sensemaking by providing conceptual representations
as feedback, a strategy that appears effective with
adults (Mathan & Koedinger, 2005; Nathan,
1998). In our fraction-addition tutor interfaces,
equally-divided rectangles, or fraction bars,
provide immediate feedback by dynamically

showing the fractions that students enter
numerically. We hypothesized that fraction bars
would be a more intuitive representation than
symbolic fractions, and having students input
symbolic fractions and get feedback from fraction
bars would prompt thinking on how the two
representations were related. Also, we thought it
would show students that the common mistake of
adding both numerators and denominators was
incorrect. We termed this feedback grounded
feedback because it was grounded in student‟s
prior knowledge, and grounded an unfamiliar
representation (fraction symbols) in a more
intuitive one (fraction bars). An initial think aloud
study showed promise. The 5th grade participants
seemed to understand what the fraction bars
meant, and used them to find and correct fractionaddition errors (Stampfer, Long, Aleven, &
Koedinger, 2011). An experimental study found
learning benefits with a fraction bar tutor
(interface in Figure 1) (Stampfer & Koedinger
2012). This tutor does not indicate explicitly if an
individual step is right, but students cannot
advance to the next problem until all steps have
been solved correctly.
Although students learned from the tutor
(improved from pre-test to post-test), process
measures show incorrect interpretations of the
fraction bars. Students often indicated they were
done solving the problems even though the
fraction bars did not line up. They clicked the
“done” button on the tutor screen an average of
about 2.5 times per problem (rather than the one
necessary click). This finding revealed that one of
our key assumptions about this form of grounded
feedback for these students was not fully satisfied.
It appeared that the fraction bar representations of
addition were not as meaningful to all students as
the think-aloud results suggested. Thus, we were
led to investigate more deeply the cognitive

1384

Figure 1: Fraction Addition Tutor. Top row of
fractions and fraction bars are given, second row
reflects students‟ inputs, typed in the boxes at the
bottom. Text hints appear below when requested.

Figure 2: Pictures. Does area equal quantity?

mechanisms required for processing these
representations and, in particular, to attempt to
identify the sticking points where student
processing deviates from expectation. This
difficulty factors assessment (cf., Koedinger,
Alibali, & Nathan, 2008) examines how students
understand fraction bars in the context of the
fractions they represent; if this process changes
depending on the topic (addition vs. equivalence);
and how each processing step affects
performance.

Figure 3: Pictures and Numbers. Are images
comprehensible as fractions?

Difficulty Factors: Pictures and Numbers
Using a theoretical cognitive task analysis, we
identified three likely skills needed to understand
the fraction bar representations for fraction
addition: 1) equal areas represent equal amounts;
2) the rectangular bars represent the symbolic
fractions written above or below them; 3) if two
shaded areas are equal, the fractions they
represent are equal. We developed matched test
items intended to isolate those skills (Figures 2-5).
Fraction addition items presented a fully solved
problem and students indicated whether it was
solved correctly (true or false). Fraction
equivalence items presented two fractions and
students indicated if the first fraction was bigger
than, equivalent to, or smaller than the second
fraction. The four question presentations are
intended to isolate the skills needed to make sense
of the tutor interface in Figure 1. The pictures
format (Figure 2) assesses if students know that
the shaded rectangles use area to represent
quantity, such that two rectangles with equal-sized

1385

Figure 4: Half Pictures and Numbers. Can
students map relationships from images to
symbols?

Figure 5: Numbers-Only Control. Can students
evaluate solved problems?

shaded areas represent equal quantities. Picturesand-numbers items (Figure 3) include fraction
symbols with the fraction bars, to test if students
can understand the fraction bars as representations
of fractions. Half-pictures-and-numbers items
(Figure 4) also include both fraction bars and
fraction symbols, but only presents the fraction
bars as the hint at the top of the problem. This
determines if students can find the relationship
between the two fraction bars, map that
relationship to the symbolic fractions represented,
and then select the relationship that the symbolic
fractions have to each other. Numbers-only
(Figure 5) provides a baseline for how well
students can evaluate the equivalence and addition
problems without fraction bars. Another pair of
questions gives a baseline for translating a single
fraction bar to a fraction symbol (e.g., when
shown a rectangle divided in 5 parts with 3 of
them shaded, the student should write 3/5).
Methods and Participants

155 fifth grade students from a local public school
participated in this study during their normal
school day. They were given 20 minutes for a 30item assessment. The school tracked these classes,
with 57 students in the highest track, 61 in the
middle track and 37 in the lowest track.
Each test included 8 equivalence items and 8
addition items (one correctly solved and one
incorrectly solved for each scaffold type). All
addends in these items had unlike denominators.
The sums in the incorrect addition items followed
the popular misconception of adding both
numerators and both denominators. Tests also
included two single fraction bar items, one with
numbers for how many pieces were shaded and
how many total. Item presentations were
counterbalanced with the specific numbers in the
problems to avoid confounding. Item order was
determined randomly and half of the tests were
given with the order reversed. Questions were
scored as 1 if correct and 0 otherwise.
Results: Scaffold Type Affects Performance

Scores on the single-fraction-bar items were near
perfect (94% correct). Figure 6 shows the mean
scores for the equivalence and addition items by

1.0
.8
.6

.82

.81

.79

.50
.64

.4
.2
.0

.83

Equivalence
Addition

.46
.21

Pictures Pictures &
Half
Numbers
Only
Numbers Pictures & Only
Numbers
Figure 6: Mean scores (max. 1) on equivalence
and addition items
scaffold type. Mean scores on the fraction
equivalence items were high, with 81-83% correct
for all scaffold types with pictures, and 50% for
the numbers-only presentation. Equivalence items
offered three options (bigger, equivalent, or
smaller) so even the numbers-only score is well
above 1/3 chance. Mean scores on the fraction
addition items were lower (21% to 79%). These
scores steadily decreased as the saliency of the
numbers increased. Lower-than-chance results
indicate that instead of guessing randomly on the
more difficult scaffolds, students answered based
on a systematic misconception. Blank answers
were scored as 0 and they could reduce
performance below the 50% chance rate.
However, students were no more likely to skip the
numbers-only addition items than the other
addition items that included numbers (numbersonly addition was skipped 13 times, while halfpictures-and-numbers and pictures-and-numbers
were skipped 14 times each).
There is a strong interaction effect between
question type and scaffold type. We ran an
ANOVA on the item scores: 3 (class tracking
level: high, middle, low) x 4 (scaffold type:
pictures, pictures and numbers, half pictures and
numbers, numbers only) x 2 (item: equivalence or
addition) with repeated measures for the scaffold
type and item. With the Huynh-Feldt correction
(since sphericity could not be assumed), results
showed significant within-subjects effects for
scaffold type and item, and a significant scaffold

1386

by item interaction (all p<.0005). Results also
showed significant between-subjects effects for
class tracking level, with parameter estimates
indicating that higher-tracked students got higher
scores.
The patterns in figure 6 suggest that all scaffold
types with pictures have a similar effect for
equivalence, but each scaffold type has a different
effect for addition. To verify these hypotheses
statistically, we ran separate ANOVAs on each
tracking level for equivalence and addition scores,
with scaffold type as a fixed factor and student as
a random factor. For each of those analyses on the
equivalence scores, scaffold was significant
(p<.0005) and post-hoc Tukey tests showed that
the numbers-only scaffold was significantly
different from the other three (p<.0005). For each
of those analysis on the addition scores, scaffold
was again significant (p<.0005). Tukey tests for
the middle track show significant differences
among all scaffold types (p<.01). The lowest track
did not have significant differences between halfpictures-and-numbers and numbers-only, likely a
floor effect. The highest track did not have
significant differences between pictures and
pictures-and-numbers, likely a ceiling effect.
Figure 6 also suggests that addition with the
pictures-only scaffold is no more difficult than
equivalence with the pictures-only scaffold. To
test this, we ran an ANOVA on the item scores for
the pictures-only scaffold: 3 (class tracking level:
high, middle, low) x 2 (item: equivalence or
addition) with repeated measures for item. Results
showed no significant difference for scores on the
two question types (p = .2 with the Huynh-Feldt
correction). Subsequent ANOVAs on each of the
other scaffold types showed significant
differences for scores on the two question types
(all p<.0005 with the Huynh-Feldt correction).
Finally, we examined the effect of spatial
reasoning on scores. One may hypothesize that
when pictures are present, students would be more
accurate when there is a large disparity in the area
of the quantities being compared. To test this
hypothesis, we calculated a disparity measure for
each question where the two fractions were not
equivalent or the two addends did not equal the
sum. For the equivalence items, the disparity is

the absolute value of the first fraction minus the
second fraction. For the addition items, the
disparity is the true sum of the addends minus the
sum in the question. We ran separate ANOVAs
for each question type, with scaffold type and
disparity as fixed factors and student ID as a
random factor. For both addition and equivalence,
between-subject main effects were significant for
scaffold type and student ID (p<.0005) but not for
disparity (p=.141 for addition, p=.888 for
equivalence), and there was no scaffold*disparity
interaction (p=.257 for addition, p=.136 for
equivalence). This indicates that disparity did not
affect scores, and the effect of disparity did not
change with scaffold type. Additionally, the
equivalence questions all had smaller disparities
than the addition questions (means: .06 for
equivalence, .39 for addition), yet the equivalence
questions were as easy or easier, further evidence
that disparity did not affect scores.
Discussion: Fraction Bar Skills are Context-Based

Students were at ceiling for writing the symbolic
fraction represented by a single fraction bar.
Students were quite good at comparing two
fractions and indicating if the first was greater
than, equivalent to, or smaller than the second.
Further, scores on these equivalence items were
equally high for all scaffold types that included
pictures.
On the equivalence items, students demonstrate
competence with the three skills identified in the
cognitive task analysis: equal areas represent
equal quantities (pictures), the bars represent
fractions (pictures and numbers), the relationship
between the bars maps to the relationship between
the fractions they represent (half pictures and
numbers). Students were likely not solving these
equivalence problems with the numbers alone,
since numbers-only performance is much lower.
Surprisingly, these skills are not consistently
demonstrated with fraction addition. Pictures-only
scores are just as high with addition as they are
with equivalence, indicating that the knowledge
that equal areas represent equal quantities does
transfer to addition. However, performance
decreases steadily across pictures-and-numbers
and
half-pictures-and-numbers,
suggesting

1387

difficulty both with understanding the bars in the
context of fractions and mapping the relationship
between the fraction bars to the relationship
between the fraction symbols. Yet, the bars still
increase performance above the numbers-only
control (which has worse-than-chance scores).
We hypothesize that the temptation of the
incorrect add-both-numerators-and-denominators
strategy overrides the area-as-quantity reasoning
that students demonstrate when the numbers are
not shown. A cognitive-load hypothesis may
predict that fraction symbols are distracting
because they visually clutter the problem. In that
case, scores with half pictures and numbers
should be higher than pictures and numbers, since
there is less information and less visual clutter.
Yet, scores decrease, indicating that performance
is not correlated with cognitive load.
Byrnes and Wasik (1991) discuss a theory that
conceptual knowledge will prevent students from
making certain procedural errors. In this theory, a
“self-critic” (our name), evaluates procedural
outcomes for conceptual errors. For example, if a
student adds 3/4 and 1/7 and gets 4/11, their
“self-critic” may reason that 4/11 cannot be right
because it is less than half while 3/4 is greater.
With the picture scaffolds, these steps are easier –
instead of numeric mental operations, students can
compare the fraction bars. Scores on the
equivalence and the pictures-only addition items
demonstrate students‟ skill in comparing fraction
bars, yet they still seem to not use their “critic” on
the fraction addition items with numbers.
Interestingly, Byrnes and Wasik argue against
the self-critic theory, claiming that conceptual and
procedural knowledge are not activated
simultaneously in problem solving. Further,
conceptual knowledge may precede procedural
skill, so in some stages of learning conceptual
knowledge would not be correlated with
procedural performance. Instead, procedural skills
improve through proper discrimination and
generalization. To test these theories, they
compared three instructional techniques for LCD
fraction addition. One was procedural, and
stressed that “you can‟t add fractions the way you
add ordinary numbers.” The other techniques
added conceptually-based instruction (one with

paper fraction bars) to that procedural instruction.
Results showed that the conceptual methods did
not improve learning above the purely procedural
one. These findings suggest that aiding
discrimination will improve procedural skill, and
that skill is not enhanced further with brief
conceptual instruction. These findings and the
results from the fraction equivalence items
suggest that students will not benefit from more
conceptual instruction on fraction bars, even
though they performed poorly on fraction addition
items with fraction bars. Instead, they may benefit
from support for separating whole-number and
fraction addition. Alternatively, students may
benefit from practice and support in invoking their
“self-critic.” However, these critics may be
stifled by a misconception unrelated to fractions:
the meaning of the equals sign.
McNeil et al. (2006) found that 6th-8th grade
students looking at a problem such as 3 + 4 = 7
were more likely to interpret the equals sign to
mean „write answer here‟ than „both sides are
equivalent.‟ Perhaps this misinterpretation of the
equals sign in equations with operations interfered
with students‟ internal “critic” in the addition
items. Even when the pictures show the sum to be
smaller than one of the addends, the student may
not realize that the two sides of the equal sign are
supposed to be equivalent. A “critic” that
interprets “=” as „write output of procedure here‟
may simply verify that the add-both-numeratorsand-denominators strategy was executed well. In
other words, the presence of numbers may not
only prompt over-generalization of whole-number
addition, but also interfere with students‟
interpretation of the equals sign and thus throw
off the “critic.”
Conclusion

These data imply that the usefulness of the
fraction bar scaffold is dependent on the topic for
which it is employed, and the specific
combination of images and numbers. When
naming fractions represented by individual
fraction bars and solving equivalence problems
with fraction bars, students were equally
proficient whether the numeric symbols were
present or not. However, for fraction addition, the

1388

fraction symbols were detrimental. The picturesonly addition problems may invite reasoning
based on conceptual understanding (the sum of
two areas cannot be smaller than either addend),
while the presence of fraction symbols may invite
procedural problem solving that is initially
divorced from the underlying concepts.
This DFA study suggests that students‟
difficulty with dynamic fraction bars in a tutoring
system was due to the specific addition context.
More broadly, it suggests caution in the design
and use of conceptual scaffolds for math
problems. Students may demonstrate proficiency
with a scaffold in one domain without being able
to transfer those skills, even to a closely related
domain. Procedural misconceptions may override
the conceptual reasoning these scaffolds attempt
to induce. Perhaps students need instruction to
support their “self-critics” in checking procedural
outcomes against conceptual knowledge. Or,
perhaps students require certain domain-specific
knowledge before their “self-critics” are triggered.
Our future work with fraction bars will explore
the effect of metacognitive “self-critic” training
and domain-specific instruction on the meaning of
the equals sign.
Acknowledgments
We thank our participants, their teachers, Jo
Bodner, and Stephanie Butler. This work was
supported in part by the Pittsburgh Science of
Learning Center through NSF award SBE0836012, and by a Graduate Training Grant
awarded to Carnegie Mellon University by the
Department of Education (# R305B090023).
References
Booth, J. L., & Koedinger, K. R. (2012). Are
diagrams always helpful tools? Developmental
and individual differences in the effect of
presentation format on student problem solving.
British Journal of Educational Psychology
82(3) 492-511.
Byrnes, J.P., & Wasik, B.A. (1991). Role of
conceptual
knowledge
in
mathematical
procedural learning. Developmental Psychology
27(5) 777–786.

Koedinger, K.R., Alibali, M.W., & Nathan, M.J.
(2008). Trade-offs between grounded and
abstract representations: Evidence from algebra
problem solving. Cognitive Science 32(2) 366–
97.
Leinwand, S., & Ginsburg, A.L. (2007). Learning
from Singapore Math. Making Math Count 65
(3) 32-36.
Mathan, S., & Koedinger, K. R. (2005). Fostering
the Intelligent Novice: Learning From Errors
With Metacognitive Tutoring. Educational
Psychologist, 40(4), 257–265.
McNeil, N.M., Grandau, L., Knuth, E.J., Alibali,
M.W., Stephens, A.C., Hattikudur, S., & Krill,
D.E.
(2006).
Middle-School
Students‟
Understanding of the Equal Sign: The Books
They Read Can't Help. Cognition and
Instruction 24(3) 367–385.
Nathan, M. J. (1998). Knowledge and Situational
Feedback in a Learning Environment for
Algebra Story Problem Solving. Interactive
Learning Environments 5, 135–159.
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics
(2001). Navigating Through Algebra in Grades
6-8, as cited in http://illuminations.nctm.org/
LessonDetail.aspx?ID=L605
Rittle-Johnson, B., & Koedinger, K. (2001).
Using cognitive models to guide instructional
design: The case of fraction division. In J.
Moore & K. Stenning (Eds.), Proceedings of the
23rd Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society. (857-862). Mahwah, NJ,
Erlbaum.
Stampfer, E., & Koedinger, K.R. (2012) Tradeoffs
between immediate and future learning.
Presented at the European Association for
Research on Learning and Instruction Special
Interest Groups 6&7 Conference. Bari, Italy.
Stampfer, E., Long, Y., Aleven, V., & Koedinger,
K.R.
(2011) Eliciting intelligent novice
behaviors with grounded feedback in a fraction
addition tutor. In G. Biswas, S. Bull, J. Kay, &
A. Mitrovic, (Eds.), Proceedings of the 15th
International
Conference
of
Artificial
Intelligence in Education (560-562) Auckland,
New Zealand: International AIED Society.

1389

