UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
When does the majority rule? Preschoolers’ trust in majority informants varies by task
domain

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2n88m66m

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Hu, Jane
Buchsbaum, Daphna
Griffiths, Thomas
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

When does the majority rule? Preschoolers’ trust in majority informants varies by task domain
Jane C. Hu (jane.hu@berkeley.edu)
Daphna Buchsbaum (daphnab@berkeley.edu)
Thomas L. Griffiths (tom_griffiths@berkeley.edu)
Fei Xu (fei_xu@berkeley.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, Berkeley, Tolman Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720 USA
Abstract
In order to learn about the world, young children rely on
information provided by social partners. Past research has
shown children consider a variety of factors when learning
from others, including consensus. Corriveau, Fusaro, and
Harris (2009) found that in an object labeling task, children
trust responses that receive majority support, and they
concluded that children prefer members of a majority as
social informants. However, it is possible that children prefer
majority members only in domains that rely strongly on
socially constructed norms, such as object labeling, where
non-social information is unavailable. We formalized this
prediction using a rational model of learning from testimony
across tasks, and compared our model’s predictions to
children’s responses in object labeling and causal learning
tasks. We find that in a causal learning task, a domain that
relies less on socially constructed norms, children rely more
on their personal observations than informant testimony.
Keywords: social learning; Bayesian modeling; social
cognition; consensus; testimony; epistemic trust

Introduction
We humans are inherently social creatures, and throughout
our daily interactions, we openly share our thoughts and
opinions with one another. The ubiquity of our social
sharing and learning is rare among animal species
(Tomasello et al., 2005; Warneken & Tomasello, 2009), and
has been cited as an explanation for the robustness of human
culture (Boyd, Richerson, & Henrich, 2011). Listening to
others who share their knowledge can save precious time
and effort, as learning through experience can be difficult
and time-consuming. In listening to others’ testimony, we
can instantly and effortlessly learn how to prepare a dish,
where to hunt, or who to hire to fix the kitchen sink.
Learning from others is especially important for young
children, who have a relatively small pool of life
experiences to draw on in new situations. However, one
potential drawback to social learning is the possibility of
receiving incorrect or misleading information. Therefore, it
would be advantageous for children to employ mechanisms
to evaluate sources’ reliability. Previous work has found that
children use informants’ past accuracy as an indicator of
trustworthiness (Sabbagh & Baldwin, 2001, Birch, Vauthier,
& Bloom, 2008; Koenig, Clement & Harris, 2004; Pasquini
et al., 2004; Corriveau & Harris, 2009) and selectively
imitate others (Gergely, Bekkering, & Kiraly, 2002;
Brugger et al., 2007; Buchsbaum, Gopnik, Griffiths, &

Shafto, 2011; Schulz, Hooppell, & Jenkins, 2008). On the
other hand, other studies suggest children’s social learning
is sometimes surprisingly unselective and irrational (Lyons,
Young, & Keil, 2007; McGuigan & Whiten, 2009).
We can learn not only from reliable individuals, but also
from “crowd sourcing” information from a group of people.
Adults often turn to others for advice, assuming that
opinions held by many must be valid by virtue of their
popularity. This intuition echoes the law of large numbers in
probability theory: the more individual testimonies, the
more likely the collective conclusion of those testimonies is
accurate. Corriveau, Fusaro, and Harris (2009) found that
three- and four-year-old children view consensus as an
indication of reliability; they were more likely to endorse
novel object labels that received majority support, and to
choose a member of the majority group as an informant
about other object labels. The authors concluded that
preschoolers prefer information endorsed by the majority,
and prefer members of a majority as informants.
The extent to which children prefer members of a
majority as informants is still unclear. One possibility is that
children prefer majority members as informants in all
situations where multiple testimonies are available. In this
view, children would indiscriminately weigh information
from others as the most valuable source of information,
perhaps prizing it above their own observations. Social
psychologists have discovered that consensus opinions can
override adults’ existing opinions (Asch, 1956; Cialdini &
Goldstein, 2004), which can result in internalization of the
consensus opinion (Kelman, 1958; Nolan et al., 2008).
However, if children are rational learners, they should not
always prefer majority testimonies. Domain demands
should affect the weight children place on others’ testimony.
When learning about domains that are heavily socially
constructed (e.g. object labels or tool use conventions),
testimony from others should be highly valuable because the
relevant knowledge is transmitted through others, and
children cannot learn this type of information on their own.
By virtue of the social conventions that dictate object
labeling, typically only one label is regarded as correct
(Markman, 1989). Alternatively, learning about domains
that are not socially constructed (e.g. causal relationships, or
naïve physics), children should consider not only
informants’ endorsements but also their own knowledge,
because this type of knowledge can be gained through
personal observation and is not typically bound by social

2584

convention. This leaves open the possibility that an effect
can have multiple causes.
In this paper, we explore how children’s endorsement of
majority testimony varies as a function of domain type, and
compare these empirical results to rational behavior as
predicted by a Bayesian model of learning from testimony.
Specifically, we compare children’s endorsement of
majority testimony in an object labeling task versus a causal
learning task. We predict that when given two options – one
endorsed by a three-person majority, and one endorsed by a
single minority informant – children should be more likely
to endorse the majority’s testimony when learning socially
constructed facts (object labeling) than when learning nonsocially constructed facts (causal learning).

has knowledge about the strength of cause c, kc,i.1 We
assume that kc,i ∈ {0, 1}, corresponding to two possible
states of knowledge of a cause: knowledgeable and naïve. If
kc,i = 1 (informant i knows about the causal strength of c),
then p(rc,i = wc | kc,i = 1, wc ) = 1 − ε — an informant with
knowledge of cause c will give correct testimony about the
causal strength of c with probability 1 − ε, where ε is a small
probability of giving incorrect testimony. In this work, we
use ε = 0.01. On the other hand, if kc,i = 0 then p(rc,i = wc |
kc,i = 0, wc ) = p(rc,i = wc | kc,i = 0) = 0.5 – the informant will
guess uniformly at random between the two possible
actions. The probability of informant i being knowledgeable
about a particular cause is p(kc,i = 1) = τ.

Modeling Testimony Across Task Domains
In order to rationally learn from others’ testimony, children
must consider several types of information: the testimonies
themselves, their own observations, and social and
pragmatic cues that can affect the interpretation of others’
testimony. The specific cues and information available to
children vary depending on domain, leading them to rely
more heavily on pure testimony in some domains. Learning
object labels is a task that is especially dependent on social
conventions. Speakers of a language must implicitly agree
that certain words refer to specific objects, concepts, or
ideas (Clark, 1988; 1990) and use them accordingly. In
contrast, causal knowledge can be gained through nonsocial cues, like personal experience, that also provide
reliable information.
A Bayesian ideal observer model is a natural way to
formalize our assumptions about the types of evidence
available in these different domains, and about the preexisting biases and pragmatic assumptions that learners may
bring to linguistic versus causal inferences. Buchsbaum et
al. (2012) developed a model of how a rational learner
should make causal inferences from both informant
testimony and direct observations of causal outcomes. In
this model, the learner receives testimony from one or more
informants about the causal efficacy of one or more actions,
and may also observe the causal outcome of these actions.
The learner’s goal is to choose a causally effective action.
Here, we adapt this model to compare rational inferences
from testimony in object labeling and causal tasks.

Model Details
Our model for causal inference from testimony is very
similar to the model presented in Buchsbaum et al. (2012).
In this model, learners receive testimony rc,i from informant
i about whether they think candidate cause c is effective.
Learners can also directly observe the effects ec,j of those
causes (with Nc being the number of observations of the
effect of cause c) Each cause c has a true underlying causal
strength wc, where p(wc = ρ) = γ and p(wc = 1 − ρ) = 1 – γ,
where ρ is a relatively high causal strength value, and γ is
the probability of a cause having high causal strength. The
probability of an effect e following c is wc. Each informant i

Figure 1: Dependencies of the variables in our Bayesian
ideal observer model.
Finally, we assume p(choose c) ∝ p(effect | c, obs) —
children choose causes in proportion to how likely they
think they are to produce the effect, given the evidence. We
can use this model to compute the probability that the
learner should choose to perform a particular action to bring
about the effect, using the dependencies defined in our
graphical model shown in Figure 1 (for further details, see
Buchsbaum et al., 2012). We can use the same model to
infer novel object’s labels from testimony. In this case, we
have unnamed objects instead of causes, and instead of a
causal strength, each object has a probability of
corresponding to the novel label. However, unlike the causal
case, there are no independent observations to incorporate
into the model; you cannot “see” whether a label truly
names an object.

Model Predictions
We can examine a simple contrast between object labeling
versus causal learning, where in each task, we assume two
possibilities per task: i.e. two objects that could be the
referent of a novel label, versus two actions to perform on a
toy to elicit music. Corriveau, Fusaro, and Harris (2009)
showed children three majority informants making one
prediction, and a minority informant making an alternate
prediction, so in a similar object labeling task, the majority
1

The previous model also represented informants’ expressed
confidence, overall knowledgeability, and tendency towards
overconfidence. These are not included in the current work.

2585

a)

b)

Figure 2: Proportion of responses endorsing majority testimony from (a) model predictions and (b) child data.
may each label Object 1 modi once, while the minority
informant labels Object 2 modi three times. In a comparable
causal task, the majority may all activate a toy using Action
1, while the minority informant activates the same toy three
times using Action 2. Here, statements drawing attention to
the demonstrated action are treated as testimony that the
action is causally effective. As in the graphical model, the
effect of an action is independent of the actor. We can use
the model defined above to formalize some of the
differences between these two tasks, then examine the
model’s predictions for whether rational learners should
endorse majority testimony.
In labeling objects, we know that there exists a pragmatic
mutual exclusivity assumption (Markman, 1989). If an
informant labels Object 1 as the modi, this strongly implies
that they believe that Object 2 is not a modi. In contrast,
using one causal action does not necessarily imply that other
actions are ineffective. We can capture this difference by
having an informant’s testimony that Object 1 is the modi
implicitly include testimony that Object 2 is not a modi. In
contrast, testimony in the causal case about the efficacy of
Action 1 is left neutral with respect to the efficacy of Action
2. Instead, we treat testimony about Action 2 as unobserved
for this informant (as are any demonstrations of Action 2
they might have performed).
Our remaining modeling assumptions are similar for both
the causal and object labeling tasks. From previous work,
we know that children assume that causes are relatively rare
– most effects can only be brought about in one or two ways
(Buchsbaum et., al, 2011; Bonawitz & Lombrozo, 2012).
Similarly, children generally assume that an object has only
one basic-level label (Markman, 1989), so if it is a modi, it
is probably not also a toma or a blicket. We can represent
both of these prior biases by using a small value for γ,
making multiple causes and multiple labels relatively
unlikely. We also know that children are biased to assume
that causes are deterministic or near-deterministic (Schulz &
Sommerville, 2006), and similarly that if an object is a
modi, it is probably a modi every time, rather than
occasionally something else. We can represent both of these
assumptions using a high value for ρ. Finally, we know that
children are a priori biased to assume adults are generally
knowledgeable and helpful (Taylor, Cartwright, and
Bowden, 1991), which can be represented by using a high
value of τ.

We can now look at model predictions for the simple
object labeling and causal inference tasks described above.
We present predictions using the example parameter values
γ = 0.05 ρ = 0.9 and τ = 0.8 in Figure 2a. However, the
qualitative differences in model predictions described below
are robust to a wide range of parameter values, and in
particular hold for any combination of values consistent
with our assumptions. Given object-label testimony from a
majority of three informants and one minority informant,
the model predicts that learners should strongly favor the
majority label. This is true not only if we explicitly force the
model to consider only hypotheses where exactly one object
is a modi (representing a hard mutual exclusivity constraint),
but also if we remove this constraint, but continue to hold
the softer pragmatic assumption that an informant who calls
one object a modi is also saying that the other is not a modi.
In contrast, in the case where three informants activate a
toy one way, and the minority informant activates the toy in
another, the model predicts that after observing both actions
bringing about the effect equally often, learners should be
equally likely to choose either action themselves, despite the
conflicting testimony. Finally, we examine a case where
informants make causal predictions, but do not demonstrate
the actions, paralleling the lack of non-testimony evidence
in object labeling. In this case, we do not assume that
predicting that one action is effective entails that the other
action is not. Here, the model again predicts that the learner
should endorse the majority’s action choice, but only if they
believe causes are rare. If they believe that causes are very
common, they should continue to be roughly evenly split.
Given our assumption that children are biased to believe
causes are rare, we predict that they will again endorse the
majority’s demonstration in this case.

Experiment 1: Comparing tasks
In this study, we present preschoolers with four informants’
conflicting testimony about objects. In the object labeling
condition, informants identify the referent of a novel label,
and in the causal learning condition, they demonstrate a
novel action on the object that results in a song.

Methods
Participants Participants were 64 preschoolers, 29 male
and 27 female (mean age = 4 years 2 months; range = 36 –
65 months). Participants were recruited in the San Francisco
Bay Area by mail and phone calls or from local preschools

2586

and museums. An additional five children were tested, but
were excluded due to fussiness (4) or experimenter error (1).
Materials In the object labeling condition, stimuli were four
novel objects. In the causal condition, stimuli were two
plush toys, each of which contained a wireless, batterypowered doorbell chime box. The boxes played short
melodies when activated by a handheld remote to create the
illusion that children’s actions were causally efficacious.
Pre-recorded video clips of informants’ testimonies were
shown to children on a 13” laptop screen.
Procedure Participants were randomly assigned to either
the object labeling condition or causal condition. Each
participant participated in two test trials of their condition.
In each condition, the experimenter introduced novel
objects to participants and explained that they were
unknowledgeable about their labels or causes. Participants
then watched four video clips of four informants evaluating
the objects.
Each clip began with a female informant sitting at a table
with the novel objects. She visually inspected them, then
picked up one of the toys and called it by the novel label
(e.g. modi), or acted on the toy, resulting in the toy playing a
short song. In three of the four video clips, the “majority”
informants each endorsed one object as a modi or performed
one action to elicit music, and the minority informant
informant endorsed the other object the modi, or performed
an alternate action to elicit music. The minority informant
always repeated the novel label or alternate action three
times so that each participant heard the label used to refer to
each object an equal number of times.
After participants watched the video clips, the
experimenter presented the child with the objects from the
video clips and asked children to identify the referent of the
novel label, or to make the toy play music. Participants’ first
gestural or vocal response was recorded. Participants in the
causal condition were invited to activate toys three times.
Half of the video clips were mirror images of original
recordings to control for the location of objects (object
labeling condition) and handedness of informants when
manipulating toys (causal condition). The trial presented
first and identity of the minority informant were also
counterbalanced.

Results and Discussion
Participants were assigned a score (0, 1, or 2) based on the
number of trials in which they endorsed the majority
informants’ testimony (0-2) first responses in the two trials
they participated in (see Table 1).
The distribution of scores in the object labeling condition
was significantly different from those in the causal
condition, 𝛘2(1, N = 64) = 6.72, p < .03. The proportion of
endorsements of majority testimony over the minority
informant’s was significantly greater in the object labeling
trials (49/64) than in causal trials (32/64), 𝛘2(1, N = 128) =
8.61, p < .003 (see Figure 2b). These results closely match

our model’s predictions. There were no significant
differences in responses based on gender or age (younger
vs. older than mean age).
Table 1: Participant scores by condition.
Condition
Exp 1: Object labeling task
Exp 1: Causal task
Exp 2: Causal task (no feedback)

0
4
13
2

Score
1
7
6
3

2
21
13
12

In the causal condition, participants were invited to
activate each toy three times. Not all participants made three
attempts, but collectively, participants made a total of 179
attempts to activate toys in the causal trials. Ninety-four
attempts (53% of total attempts) were actions performed by
majority informants, 84 attempts (47% of total attempts)
were actions performed by the minority informant, and one
attempt was a novel action performed by none of the
informants. All participants in this condition attempted at
least one action performed by the minority informant.
As predicted by our model, these data show children were
more likely to endorse majority testimony when learning
socially constructed facts (object labels) than non-socially
constructed facts (cause-and-effect relationships).
Though there was no formal coding scheme for children’s
spontaneous comments during the study sessions, anecdotal
evidence suggests that children’s intuitions matched our
model assumptions about mutual exclusivity. In the causal
condition, children’s comments suggested they accepted
both the majority testimony and the minority informant’s
testimony (“Both [actions] make it go!”). Furthermore, all
children in this condition attempted an action performed by
a minority informant at least once in the study, suggesting
that children were open to multiple possibilities when
learning about cause and effect. In the object labeling
condition, however, several children expressed the belief
that there was only one correct answer (“That one isn’t the
modi!” about the minority-endorsed object).
A possible alternative explanation of these results is that
children in the causal condition did not use information
gained through their observations or informants’ testimony;
rather, they were simply confused by the task and randomly
imitated informants’ responses. To rule out this possibility,
we designed another causal condition in which we expected
children to endorse the majority testimony.

Experiment 2: The effect of feedback
In the causal condition of Experiment 1, children
indiscriminately imitated the majority and minority
informant actions, presumably because they were able to
rely on their own observations, which suggested both
demonstrated actions were equally effective at activating the
toy. This second experiment examines how children behave
when they do not have their own observations to rely on, but
instead only have information from informants. We predict

2587

that when children lack personal observations indicating the
efficacy of informants’ testimony, they will be more likely
to endorse the majority’s testimony.

Participants
Participants were 17 preschoolers, 7 male and 10 female
(mean age = 4 years 4 months; range = 40 – 62 months).
Participants were recruited in the San Francisco Bay Area
by mail and phone calls or from preschools. An additional
three children were tested, but excluded due to fussiness.

Materials and Procedure
The materials and general procedure of Experiment 2
were identical to those used in Experiment 1. The crucial
difference between the two experiments was the content of
the video clips participants watched. While in Experiment 1,
children watched informants in the video clips perform
actions that resulted in the toy playing music, in Experiment
2, informants in the video clips only mimed the actions they
endorsed, and no music played as a result of miming the
actions. In other words, children who viewed the
Experiment 2 video clips received no information about the
efficacy of the informants’ testimony.
The script of the videos also differed from Experiment 1.
Unlike the informants in Experiment 1, who did not verbally
describe the action they performed, informants in the
Experiment 2 video clips explicitly described their endorsed
action and its hypothetical causal effect before miming the
action, in order to provide context to children about why the
action was being mimed: “It plays music if you pull the pink
one!”

Results
As in Experiment 1, Experiment 2 participants were given a
score of 0, 1, or 2 based on their first responses (see Table
1). The number of first responses endorsing majority
informants’ testimony was significantly higher in
Experiment 2 than in the Experiment 1 causal condition,
𝛘2(1, N = 94) = 6.84, p < .008, and was correctly predicted
by our model (see Figure 2b).
Participants in Experiment 2 were also invited to attempt
to activate each causal toy three times. Participants
collectively made 99 attempts to activate the toys. Of those
attempts, 64 (65% of total attempts) were actions performed
by majority informants, and 35 (35% of total attempts) were
actions performed by the minority informant. Unlike in
Experiment 1, where all causal condition participants
attempted at least one action performed by the minority
informant, four of the 14 participants in Experiment 2
attempted only actions endorsed by the majority.

General Discussion
In this set of studies, we found that children do not
indiscriminately endorse majority opinions; rather, their
endorsement of majority opinions varies by task domain
type and availability of alternate sources of knowledge. In

Experiment 1, children were significantly more likely to
endorse majority testimony when learning about socially
constructed facts (object labels) than non-socially
constructed facts (causal relationships). Experiment 2 found
that in the absence of information about the efficacy of
informants’ actions, children endorse majority testimony.
Children’s responses were predicted by a Bayesian model,
suggesting that children make rational inferences from
informants’ testimony, and, when available, weigh other
sources of information (e.g. personal observations) more
heavily than testimony.
Though these results suggest children consider different
sources of information in a non-socially-constructed
domain, it is unknown whether they would do so in a
socially constructed domain. In the causal conditions, the
amount of feedback (i.e., hearing the toy play music)
children received about actions’ effects was easily
quantifiable; however, it is less straightforward what would
demonstrate positive or negative feedback about informants’
endorsements in a object labeling condition. Future studies
could explore how to convey feedback in an object labeling
condition – perhaps showing successful or unsuccessful
communication achieved through using the label – and the
effect it would have on children’s inferences.
Follow-up studies could also examine the effects of the
informants’ language in Experiment 2. In designing
Experiment 2, we tried to make informants’ video
demonstrations as natural as possible while maintaining a
similar script to Experiment 1, but creating parallel
conditions proved difficult. Recall that the informants in
Experiment 1 video clips performed their endorsed action
without naming their actions. The informants in Experiment
2 narrated their actions and those actions’ hypothetical
effect (“It plays music if you pull the pink one!”) to explain
why informants were miming actions and to present
possible actions for children to attempt at test. The
hypothetical language used could imply to children that
informants had prior experience with or knowledge about
the toy. This prior knowledge, combined with informants’
explicit demonstration, could be interpreted as evidence that
informants were acting pedagogically, or upholding a social
norm. Future work could examine how much of Experiment
2’s effect was driven by children’s lack of access to
personal observations, versus pedagogical effects or social
norm adherence.
Another difference between the conditions is the number
of objects used in object labeling and causal conditions. In
each of the causal conditions, participants saw the
informants perform one of two actions on a single object,
but the object labeling condition, participants saw
informants call one of two objects by a novel label. A
follow-up study to the object labeling condition could
feature video clips with informants calling one object by
two names, so that procedures of the object labeling and
causal conditions would be more parallel.
In Experiment 1, we found that children’s endorsement of
majority testimony varies by task domain, but the flexibility

2588

with which children incorporate conflicting information has
yet to be determined. Accepting majority testimony as
universally informative could potentially mislead a learner;
individual members of the majority opinion could be
mistaken, or the majority opinion as a whole could be
flawed (see Esser, 1998 for a review on groupthink). Future
work can identify the cues used to identify a reliable or
unreliable majority. Children could discount informant
testimony for rational reasons – for instance, if an informant
is unreliable or unknowledgeable – or for less rational
reasons – for instance, bias against out-group members
(Kinzler & Spelke, 2011).
Additionally, the nature of the beliefs underlying
children’s endorsements has yet to be examined. Children
may endorse majority testimony in the moment in order to
conform to societal norms, but do not truly believe this
testimony correct. In social psychology, this is called
compliance. It is also possible that children internalize this
new social knowledge and believe it to be true. Future
studies could explore whether children are merely
complying with social norms in similar object labeling
tasks, or whether they internalize the majority’s testimony.
Children could be asked to teach others the names of
objects, or to recall objects’ novel labels in sessions hours or
days later.
Overall, the similarity between our model’s predictions
and empirical data suggest that young children are
discerning when considering others’ testimony; the extent to
which they prefer majority testimony is dependent on task
domain type. This work also adds to the growing body of
literature that suggests children consider information from
multiple sources to make rational inferences.
Acknowledgments This work was supported by grant
number 0845410 from the National Science Foundation, and
two National Science Foundation Graduate Research
Fellowships.

References
Asch, S. E. (1956). Studies of independence and conformity: a
minority of one against a unanimous majority. Psychological
Monograms, 70(9).
Birch, S. A. J., Vauthier, S. A., & Bloom, P. (2008). Three-andfour-year-olds spontaneously use others’ past performance to guide
their learning. Cognition, 107(3), 1018-1034.
Bonawitz, E.B, & Lombrozo, T. (2012) Occam's Rattle: Children’s
use of simplicity and probability to constrain inference. Developmental
Psychology, 48, 1156-1164.
Boyd, R., Richerson, P. J., & Henrich, J. (2011). The cultural niche:
Why social learning is essential for human adaptation. Proceedings of
the National Academies of Sciences, 108(2), 10918-10925.
Brugger, A., Lariviere, L. A., Mumme, D. L., & Bushnell, E. W.
(2007). Doing the right thing: Infants' selection of actions to imitate
from observed event sequences. Child Development, 78(3), 806-824.
Buchsbaum, D., Gopnik, A., Griffiths, T. L., & Shafto, P. (2011).
Children’s imitation of causal action sequences is influenced by
statistical and pedagogical evidence. Cognition, 120(3), 331-340.
Buchsbaum, D., Bridgers, S., Whalen, A., Seiver, E., Griffiths, T.
L., & Gopnik, A. (2012). Do I know that you know what you know?

Modeling testimony in causal inference. Proceedings of the 34th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Cialdini, R. B., & Goldstein, N. J. (2004). Social Influence:
Compliance and Conformity. Annual Review of Psychology, 55, 591621.
Clark, E. V. (1988). On the logic of contrast. Journal of Child
Language, 15, 317–335.
Clark, E. V. (1990). On the pragmatics of contrast. Journal of Child
Language, 17, 417– 431.
Corriveau, K. H., Fusaro, M., & Harris, P. L. (2009). Going with the
flow: Preschoolers prefer nondissenters as informants. Psychological
Science, 20(3), 372-377.
Corriveau, K. H. & Harris, P. L. (2009). Choosing your informant:
weighing familiarity and recent accuracy. Developmental Science,
12(3), 426-437.
Esser, J. K. (1998). Alive and well after 25 years: a review of
groupthink research. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 73(2–3), 116–141.
Gergely, G., Bekkering, H. & Kiraly, I. (2002). Rational imitation in
preverbal infants. Nature, 415, 755.
Kelman, H. C. (1958). Compliance, Identification, and
Internalization: Three Processes of Attitude Change. The Journal of
Conflict Resolution, 2(1), 51-60.
Kinzler, K.D., & Spelke, E.S. (2011). Do infants show
social preferences for people differing in race? Cognition, 119, 1-9.
Koenig, M., Clement, F., & Harris, P. (2004). Trust in testimony:
Children’s use of true and false statements. Psychological Science,
15(10), 694-698.
Lyons, D. E., Young, A. G., & Keil, F. C. (2007). The hidden
structure of overimitation. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, 104(50), 19751.
Markman, E. M. (1989). Categorization and Naming in Children:
Problems of Induction. MIT Press.
McGuigan, N., & Whiten, A. (2009). Emulation and
“overemulation” in the social learning of causally opaque versus
causally transparent tool use by 23- and 30-month-olds. Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology, 104, 367–381.
Nolan, J. M., Schultz, P. W., Cialdini, R. B., Goldstein, N. J., &
Griskevicius, V. (2008). Normative social influence is underdetected.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 34(7), 913-923.
Pasquini, E. S., Corriveau, K. H., Koenig, M., & Harris, P. L.
(2007). Preschoolers monitor the relative accuracy of informants.
Developmental Psychology, 43(5), 1215-1226.
Sabbagh, M. A., & Baldwin, D. A., (2001). Learning words from
knowledgeable versus ignorant speakers: Links between preschoolers’
theory of mind and semantic development. Child Development, 72(4),
1054-1070.
Schulz, L. E., Hooppell, C., & Jenkins, A. C. (2008). Judicious
imitation: Children differentially imitate deterministically and
probabilistically effective actions. Child Development, 79(2), 395–410.
Schulz, L.E., & Sommerville, J. (2006). God does not play dice:
Causal determinism and preschoolers’ causal inferences. Child
Development, 77(2), 427-442.
Taylor, M., Cartwright, B. S., and Bowden, T. (1991). Perspective
taking and theory of mind: Do children predict interpretive diversity as
a function of differences in observers’ knowledge? Child Development,
62(6), 1334-1351.
Tomasello, M., Carpenter, M., Call, J., Behne, T., & Moll, H.
(2005). Understanding and sharing intentions: The origins of cultural
cognition. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 28.
Warneken, F., & Tomasello, M. (2009). Helping and cooperation at
14 months of age. Infancy, 11(3), 271-294.

2589

