UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Where What You Count is What Really Counts

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6q8887w7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Noori, Nader
Itti, Laurent

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Where What You Count is What Really Counts
Nader Noori (nnoori@usc.edu), Laurent Itti (itti@usc.edu)
Department of Computer Science, University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90089 USA
Abstract
We noticed that human subjects were notably faster and more
accurate in concurrent counting of three location-based events
while they ignored the identity of targets, compared to concurrent counting of three identity-based events while they ignored
the locations. In a control experiment, subjects performed a
location-based triple counting task, while now also paying attention to the target identity. This did not incur any additional
cost, compared to the cost of the location-based counting. Performing each of these tasks relies on maintaining three running numerical counters, and on switching between them to
increase each one. Our results suggest that switching between
these counters has lower cost when they are associated to spatial locations, compared to when they are associated to identities. This difference is not affected when additionally processing the identity of items. We argue that this might be related
to the advantage of the space in switching attention between
internal representations.
Keywords: Symbolic Working Memory; Working Memory;
Spatial Strategies; Spatial Registry; Visuospatial Short-Term
Memory; Concurrent Counting; Triple Counting; Focus of Attention.

Introduction
The challenge of many non-trivial intellectual symbolic
working memory tasks lies in the difficulty of juggling several residents of working memory at the same time; there are
one or two items that are being acted upon while a few others are actively maintained and kept apart for future steps of
the process. For example think of adding 34 to 89 mentally
while looking away from the paper or the screen. During
early mathematics education, students are taught to perform
this task in a sequential way, and by several calls on the addition table for single-digit numbers. In this example, while 3
and 8 (or 30 and 80?) are maintained for the next step of the
operation, 9 and 4 are the ones that are acted upon first.
Due to the increasing role of abstract representations in
solving difficult problems, intellectual symbolic tasks such
as this example have become increasingly important as a part
of necessary mental skills for a civilized individual in modern time. Understanding our limitations in maintaining and
manipulating mental concepts that are needed for intellectual
tasks is key to understanding our cognitive limitations, and
to possibly improving individuals’ performance. This in turn
poses the question of how we manage to keep some items in
our working memory, and how we can handle selecting them
for the right operation at the right time.
The common metaphor among cognitive psychologists,
which captures the selectivity of operations on several actively maintained items, is the shiftable spotlight or focus of
attention. Attention in this sense refers to the special treatment that a few representations receive, which in turn makes
it possible to be acted upon (or processed) with more agility
(in terms of response time or accuracy).

Cowan goes even further and uses the concept of attention
to directly relate working memory representations to longterm memory representations. In his view, residents of working memory are those representations in long-term memory
which have received attention. He states that this attention
may apply to only four items at a time, and hence the number of representations in working memory is limited to four
(Cowan, 1999). Some other researchers have mentioned that
indeed the spotlight of attention is even narrower than four
items, and there is room for only one representation (Garavan,
1998; McElree, 2001). Experimental support for this claim
comes from the observation that the most recently attended
resident of working memory is privileged in terms of processing speed (McElree & Dosher, 1989; Mcelree, 2006; Garavan, 1998; Voigt & Hagendorf, 2002). For example Garavan
studied the execution time of human subjects in a self-paced
dual counting task where subjects had to keep count of how
many of two possible visual shapes (triangles versus squares)
had been presented. The sequence of switching between internally maintained counters is dictated by the stimulus sequence of triangles and squares. Garavan noticed that updating a recently updated counter (e.g., when two squares or two
triangles are presented consecutively) is significantly faster
than updating alternative counters (e.g., when a square is presented after a triangle or vice-versa). Garavan showed that
this speedy update of a recently updated internal counter is
not related to the perceptual priming in detecting the associate signal. He posited that the execution time difference between updating one counter twice and updating two different
counters is related to the cost of shifting the focus of attention
from one counter to the other one.
Oberauer has tried to reconcile Cowan’s concept of attention with the single spotlight focus of attention, to establish a framework that explains storage and processing as two
features of working memory (Oberauer, 2002). While the
concept of shifting the focus of attention seems to capture
the dynamics of working memory during mental processing,
one question remains to be answered: what is the underlying mechanism for switching between two working memory
representations? In particular, is there a unitary system for
switching attention between items of working memory, either
in space or in other dimensions?
For this matter, some researchers have looked at brain activities of human subjects during tasks that involve reconfiguration of cognitive resources by switching between different representations. Yantis and his colleagues, in a series of
fMRI studies, have compared BOLD signals during switching attention in the visual-spatial domain or in other representation domains. They have identified a fronto-parietal net-

3157

work which is common among different tasks (Shomstein
& Yantis, 2006; Tamber-Rosenau, Esterman, Chiu, & Yantis, 2011; Greenberg, Esterman, Wilson, Serences, & Yantis,
2010; Chiu & Yantis, 2009). Among these regions, the superior parietal lobule (SPL) of the posterior parietal cortex
(PPC), which is also known for its role in shifting visual attention and eyes in space, is shown to be engaged in all of
the studied switching tasks. Based on this evidence, Yantis proposes a general-domain switching mechanism (Chiu &
Yantis, 2009).
Yet, an important question is whether such a switching
mechanism is indeed a domain-independent machinery, or is
in fact a part of an evolutionary older system that is lent or
co-opted for use in different domains. It is important to distinguish between these two alternative views as they propose
two different views of the evolution of human cognition. On
the one hand, the domain-independent machinery may sound
more appealing to some researchers in terms simpler description of the functioning mind. On the other hand, the idea
of co-opting evolutionary older systems (e.g., sensory-motor
systems) for switching is more plausible from an evolutionary perspective (Dehaene & Cohen, 2007; Paillard, 2000)
and provides an opportunity to ground working memory machinery in perceptual-motor systems in line with more recent
trend in grounded and embodied cognition (Lakoff & Núñez,
2000; Barsalou, Simmons, Barbey, & Wilson, 2003; Damasio
& Damasio, 2006; Dehaene & Cohen, 2007).
As an example of a grounded model for working memory
processing mechanisms, Noori and Itti (Noori & Itti, 2013a,
2013b, 2011) propose a framework for management of working memory items which relies on the role of sensory-motor
working memory systems for manipulation of working memory items, even in the context of symbolic and abstract items.
They assume that manipulation of memory items is facilitated
by a registry of memory items to spatial locations, accessible to visuospatial attention mechanisms. Switching spatial
attention between those locations, is then based on operational schemas, similar to what Arbib has proposed in the
perception-action domain (Arbib, 1992). Their proposal suggests the performance on mental operations that need memory manipulation, even in the case of abstract and symbolic
representations, would depend on how those sensory-motor
systems are utilized.
To test the dependency of switching between working
memory representations on utilization of space, we studied
speed and accuracy of our subjects in performing a modified version of Garavan’s task (Garavan, 1998). We arranged
two versions of a triple counting task: identity-based counting (counting appearances of three possible symbols) and
location-based counting (counting any symbols appearing in
three possible locations). A domain-independent account predicts that the switching time between internal counters should
be independent of our counting paradigms. Our results do not
favour this prediction.

#:3

Re
po
r
(se ting
lf
c
pa oun
ce te
d) rs:

s:
ter
un )
o
c ed

ng ac
rti f p
po (sel
e
R

?:4
%:3

I
Tr den
ip tity
le
Co -Ba
un sed
tin
g

9

4

5

2

sti
m
ulu
s

p

(se res
lf ent
pa at
ce io
d) n
ev
#:1

?:0

P

g p
tin elf
en (s
s
re

s
ter

un
co

al
iti d)
in ace

%:1

L
Tr oca
ip tio
le nCo Ba
un sed
tin
g

%

en
ts:

1

Pr
es
en
tin
( g

1

se ini
lf
pa tial
ce co
d) un
t

0

er
s

Figure 1: Schematic view of both triple-counting paradigms. Nine
target presentation events (at the center of the diagram) is similar for
both paradigms.

Experiment 1
The first experiment compares the cost of switching between
different running counters in a concurrent triple counting task
for an identity-based and a location-based mental counting.
Subjects in both versions of the task maintain three running
counters in their memory. These counters are associated to
three different events.
In both versions of the task, an event is a subject-initiated
brief visual presentation of a keyboard character in a box on
the screen. In the case of location-based counting, the difference between events is defined based upon the location of
the character, while the identity is irrelevant. In contrast, in
the identity-based counting version, the difference between
counting events is defined based on the identity of characters,
and the location is irrelevant. Counters should be updated
upon perceiving their associated signal. Since a signal presentation is initiated by the subject, the task progresses with
a pace determined by the subject, which allows us to measure
execution times.
We measured the time between two consecutive signal initiations and analysed them based on similarity or dissimilarity of counting-relevant and counting-irrelevant features
of two consecutive events, to explore the effect of type of
counter-event binding. Moreover, we analysed the error rates
in counting using different measures, to explore possible effects of counter-event binding on the accuracy of counting.

Method
Apparatus Stimuli were displayed on a 46-inch LCD monitor (Sony Bravia XBR-III, 89cm × 50cm), 97.8 cm in
front of participants (corresponding field of view is 54.7◦ ×
32.65◦ ). To control the viewing distance, subjects used a chin

3158

rest to maintain their head position during the experiment. A
gray background (0.62 cd/m2) was displayed during the experiment.
Subjects Seven female and four male undergraduate students with normal or corrected to normal vision, participated
for course credit. Subjects’ ages ranged between 19 to 21
(M = 19.7, SD = 0.78).
Procedure Figure 1 depicts a schematic view of the triple
counting paradigm for both identity and location based concurrent counting. Events for both types of counting paradigm
presented in a similar way: one of three keyboard characters
$, # or ? would be selected to appear in one of three fixed
boxes located in three of four main quadrants randomly and
upon subject’s press of any of keys on the keyboard. In each
trial boxes centered at vertices of a virtual square with sides
that would appear 3.5◦ wide from subject’s view point. In
each trial three out of four possible boxes were selected randomly and remained on screen throughout the counting process. In trials of location-based counting boxes appeared on
the screen from the beginning of the trial and during presentation of the initial counters.
Each trial started by presenting three initial counters. Initial counters were either 0 or 1 which were selected randomly.
During trials of counting identity-based events each item was
presented next to its initial counter at the center of screen and
during trials of location-based counting initial counters appeared at the center of boxes. Each trial included nine counting events. The pace of counting was determined by subjects. At the end of ninth counting event subjects reported the
counters using the keyboard and in the same order of initial
counter presentation.
Independent of the type of the counting task the identity
and the location of target character changed randomly and
independently. The identity of two consecutive characters
changed with 50% of the chance and the location of two
consecutive character presentation changed with 50% of the
chance. This arrangement roughly balanced the change in
counting-relevant and counting-irrelevant features.
Five trials of each counting paradigm defined a block. The
type of counting paradigm change in two consecutive blocks.
Each subject performed between 20 to 30 blocks which left
us between 50 to 75 trials of each counting paradigm. At
most 10 blocks were performed in each session. A five minute
break administered between each two consecutive sessions.
Results Tables 1 and 2 summarize the results of experiment
1. Table 1 shows the average execution time for four possible
combinations of changing the location or the identity of two
consecutive signals separated based on the type of concurrent
counting paradigms.
The effect of three factors on execution times were examined: a. the type of concurrent counting (with LBTC and
IBTC as its two levels), b. change in the counting-relevant
feature (the location in LBTC and the identity in IBTC) for
two consecutive signals (changed or same as two levels) and

Location Based Counting
Same Id
Changed Id

Same Location

Changed Location

0.834 ± 0.077
0.889 ± 0.102

1.552 ± 0.136
1.564 ± 0.116

Identity Based Counting
Same Id
Changed Id

Same Location

Changed Location

1.126 ± 0.135
2.122 ± 0.190

1.198 ± 0.143
2.120 ± 0.205

Table 1: Mean ± SE of the execution times (experiment 1).
c. change in the counting-irrelevant feature (the identity in
LBTC and the location in IBTC) for two consecutive signals
(changed or same as two levels). The execution time data
with these three factors was submitted to a 2 × 2 × 2 withinsubjects ANOVA.
The analysis revealed a significant main effect of the type
of counting task [F(1, 10) = 16.4, p = 0.0151], with a faster
response time for the location-based triple counting (M =
1.2100s, SE = 0.055) compared to the identity-based triple
counting (M = 1.6415s, SE = 0.0819). The main effect of
change in the counting-relevant feature also proved to be significant [F(1, 10) = 171, p = 0.0009]. A change in countingrelevant feature requires switching between the counters, and
the average execution time for this case was higher than when
two consecutive signals shared the same counting-relevant
feature (i.e., the same counter is updated twice in a row).
However, for the counting-irrelevant feature whose change
does not require switching between counters, no significant
impact was observed [F(1, 10) = 1.9237, p = 0.1956].
The analysis also revealed a significant interaction between the type of the double counting task and the change in
counting-relevant feature with F(1, 10) = 24.1, p = 0.0006.
A further analysis showed that indeed the change in countingrelevant feature resulted in a larger difference in execution
times for IBTC compared to LBTC. All three other possible
interactions were non-significant.
We quantified counting errors using four different measures: a. the proportion of trials that had at least one mistake
in the reported counters (Incorrect Trials), b. the absolute
difference between the reported values and the actual values
(Counter Error), c. the absolute difference between reported
values and actual values, after sorting both the counters and
the reported values (Sorted Counter Error) and d. the absolute
difference between the sum of reported values and the sum of
actual counters (Sum Error). Among these four measures, a.
and b. are the most sensitive measures, while c. discounts any
error in incorrectly reporting the order of counters, and d. is
the least sensitive measure as it does not account for any error
in adding to the right counter or in reporting the counters in
the correct order.
Table 2 shows mean ± standard error values for each of
these error measures for two types of concurrent triple counting. To assess the significance of the effect of the type

3159

Error Type
Trials with Error
Value Error
Sorted Value Error
Sum Error

LBTC
20.5% ± 5.4%
0.11 ± 0.03
0.10 ± 0.03
0.24 ± 0.08

IBTC
39.3% ± 7.1%
0.31 ± 0.07
0.22 ± 0.04
0.40 ± 0.09

Sig.
**
**
**
*

Table 2: Mean ± SE of error measures (experiment 1). ** means
p < 0.01 , * means p < 0.05

of the counting task on each of these four measures, the
data of each error measure was submitted to a separate oneway within-subject ANOVA. A significant main effect of the
counting type on the error rates was revealed, for all four
measures of error. The significance of this impact on the
first measure is quantified by [F(1, 10) = 20, p = 0.0012];
for the absolute difference, this significance is quantified by
F(1, 10) = 15.4, p = 0.0028; for the absolute difference in
sorted sequence of counters and reported values, the significance is quantified by [F(1, 10) = 17.2, p = 0.00197]; and
finally for the absolute difference between the sum of counters and the sum of reported values, the significance of the
main effect is quantified by [F(1, 10) = 9.11, p = 0.0129].
Discussion Changing the counting-relevant feature in two
consecutive events for both counting paradigms requires increasing a counter which is different from the previously
increased counter, and thus involves switching to a different counter. We observed that, independent of what defines
the counting-relevant feature (location or identity of items),
switching between counters results in a significantly lower
speed for counting. Thus, we could replicate what Garavan
had previously reported in the case of an identity-based dualcounting task (Garavan, 1998). However, compared to Garavan’s study, our subjects were slower than his (both in updating one counter in a row or switching between counters and
updating). This difference might be related to the fact that
we had three counters, which might have had an extra load
for maintaining the items. Moreover, our subjects needed to
switch between two different counting paradigms frequently,
and this might have had some impact on the execution time.
Finally, we did not impose a delay between blocks of different counting paradigms, and subjects were only notified about
the change in the counting paradigm by displaying a message
on the screen.
However, the striking result of this experiment is related to
the significant difference in execution time and counting errors of our two paradigms. Compared to the identity-based
paradigm, the location-based paradigm proved to be both
faster and more accurate. Even when the sums of reported
counters were compared to the sums of actual counts, subjects
were significantly more accurate in the location-based counting. Note that this measure for counting error is not even sensitive to the counting-relevant feature, and yet identity-based
counting is significantly slower and less accurate with respect
to this measure. This reveals that the slower execution time

in identity-based triple counting is not the result of a trade-off
between accuracy and speed.
Another striking result was related to the fact that not only
the overall execution time during LBTC was less than the execution time during IBTC but also the switching cost was
significantly less for LBTC. This is related to the fact that
in our analysis we observed a significant interaction between
switching condition and the counting paradigm. While updating the same counter during LBTC was about 300 milliseconds faster than IBTC, updating a different counter, which
involves switching between counters, was about 560 milliseconds faster. This result suggests that using location as
the counting-relevant feature has saved on the switching cost
rather than a cost associated to maintaining or updating counters. We discuss the significance of this result in the general
discussion.

Experiment 2
In our second experiment, we test whether the higher cost
for both counting and switching in the identity-based concurrent counting is indeed the result of differences in character versus location perception. It is known that processing visual forms and locations engages two different pathways; the ventral pathway specialized in identifying visual
forms, which serves object perception, and the dorsal pathway specialized in identifying spatial locations, which serves
action (Goodale & Milner, 1992). One may argue that the
observed differences between execution times in two concurrent counting paradigms is indeed related the processing of
the visual input, and before the processing of the counters.
To test the effect of identity recognition on the counting cost,
we replaced the Identity-Based Triple Counting task with a
modified version of the Location-Based Triple Counting task
which involves identification of characters. In this paradigm,
the running counters are still associated to locations; however,
an occasional appearance of a dummy target can change the
counter values and the rule of the concurrent counting thereafter. Thus, every time a valid target appears at a location, its
identity should be checked before updating the counter associated to the target presentation location. We call this task IdControlled Location-Based Triple Counting or IC-LBTC for
short.

Method
Subjects Seven female and four male undergraduate students with normal or corrected to normal vision, participated
for course credit. Subjects’ ages ranged between 19 to 24
(M = 20.1, SD = 1.4).
Procedure In this experiment # and ? were targets for incrementing a counter and % was used as the dummy character. Subject were instructed that trials were arranged in
two type of blocks, no-dummy blocks and dummy-possible
blocks. In no-dummy blocks which contained 5 trials, only #
and ? could appear in boxes and all events had to be counted.
However, in 50% of the dummy-possible blocks, at some ran-

3160

Error Type
Trials with Error
Value Error
Sorted Value Error
Sum Error

Location Based Counting
Same Id
Changed Id

Same Location

Changed Location

0.719 ± 0.068
0.716 ± 0.071

1.214 ± 0.105
1.285 ± 0.105

Id-Controlled Location Based Counting
Same Id
Changed Id

Same Location

Changed Location

0.724 ± 0.071
0.710 ± 0.060

1.205 ± 0.113
1.285 ± 0.104

LBTC
19.1% ± 3.9%
0.11 ± 0.02
0.08 ± 0.02
0.21 ± 0.05

IC-LBTC
18.1% ± 4.1%
0.10 ± 0.03
0.07 ± 0.02
0.17 ± 0.04

Sig.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.

Table 4: Mean ± SE of error measures (experiment 2). n.s. : nonsignificant

Table 3: Mean ± SE of the execution times (experiment 2).

dom time the character % would appear only once in a box;
in this case, the counter for that box had to be reported as 0
(i.e., reset and ignored during subsequent stimulus presentations). In the beginning of each block, subjects were notified
about the type of block by a written message appearing on the
screen.
Thus each trial of a IC-LBTC block could be similar to trials of the LBTC or could have the dummy character appearing only once in one of the boxes. Choosing to include the
dummy character in a IC-LBTC trial was decided randomly
and with 50% of the chance.
Given that blocks of different counting paradigms were
similar in every sense we imposed a 10 second delay with
a message on the screen informing the subject about whether
in the next block there will be dummy characters or not.
Results Table 3 shows the average execution time for four
possible combinations of changing the location or the identity
of two consecutive signals, separated based on the type of
concurrent counting paradigms. For the controlled locationbased counting, only those trials without dummy characters
were included in the analysis.
To assess the significance of the effect of controlling for
the identity of characters during the triple concurrent task,
switching locations and switching identities, execution times
were submitted to a 2 × 2 × 2 within-subject analysis of variance with type of counting, switching location and switching
identity as three factors. The analysis showed no effect of
attending to the identity of characters on the execution times
[F(1, 10) = 0.011, p = 0.92]. A significant effect of changing
the location of target in two consecutive events on the execution times was observed [F(1, 10) = 53.9, p = 0.00557] and
marginally-significant effect of switching the identities was
observed [F(1, 10) = 4.13, p = 0.07].
The data for all measures of error were separately submitted to within-subject one-way ANOVAs with type of counting as the main factor to assess the impact of attending to the
identity of characters on the error rates. None of the analyses
returned a significant main effect of the counting paradigm on
the error rates.
Except for one subject, all subjects correctly reported the
incidence of appearance of the dummy character with 100%
accuracy.

Discussion The analysis of both execution times and error measures showed that compared to LBTC, attending to
the identity of characters during IC-LBTC incurred no extra cost. This suggests that attending to the identity of the
items in IBTC does not seem to be the source of extra cost of
IBTC counting paradigm relative to LBTC.
However compared to the LBTC in experiment 1, subjects
were significantly faster in LBTC trials of the second experiment. Given that subjects had to switch between LBTC and
IBTC in the first experiment and LBTC and IC-LBTC in
the second experiment, the faster execution time in the second experiment might have been related to a lower cost for
switching between the two tasks in the second experiment.
This difference might be related to either the 10 second imposed delay between blocks of experiment 2, or the fact that
both tasks in the second experiment are indeed two versions
of the same counting paradigm, and thus switching between
blocks of experiment 2 is less costly. Furthermore, since
there was no significant interaction between the identity of
experiments and changing counting-relevant factor in both
LBTC trials, the effect of switching between blocks of tasks
seems to have had equal effects on both updating the same
counter in a sequence or updating two different consecutive
counters. This suggests that the extra cost on switching between counters during IBTC counting is not likely related to
the cost of switching between blocks of experiment 1.

General Discussion
The goal of this study was to test the dependency of putative switching mechanisms for managing working memory in
the internal domain and in a seemingly abstract and symbolic
context, on the explicit utilization of space. We analysed our
subjects’ execution time in two concurrent counting tasks that
differed in their reference to spatial locations. In one version
of the task, where counting events were associated to spatial
locations on the screen, subjects were faster and more accurate than when the identity of visual targets was the basis for
the counting events. More importantly, not only the speed of
counting in the location-based counting paradigm was generally faster, but also this speed was significantly faster when
subjects had to switch between internal counters. Below, we
argue that a faster switching between internal counters indicates that the source of speedup indeed is not related to a
verbal shortening effect in rehearsing.
In Garavan’s process model for a dual-counting task, each
counting event consists of a sequence of five steps: 1. stimu-

3161

lus identification, 2. orientation of attention, 3. updating the
associated count, 4. rehearsing the other count, 5. key-press.
He suggests that the source of a 300 to 400 msec difference in
updating the same counter subsequently versus updating two
different counters is related to the cost of the second step:
a recently attended resident of the working memory is privileged in terms of processing speed or accuracy (Garavan,
1998), and thus updating a counter which was just updated
saves on the cost of bringing the item of working memory
into the focus.
This model could be adopted for the triple-counting task
by considering a third counter which needs to be included in
the switching and the rehearsing steps. This model does not
assume that the second step of this process, which accounts
for the extra switching cost between two different counts, is
dependent on perceptual aspects of the counting tasks. Likewise, no other model of working memory, to our knowledge,
in which the focus of attention plays a critical functional role
in regulating the process, assumes that the second and the
third steps of this process are relevant to the perceptual aspects of the counting task. Hence, according to this process
model, steps 2, 3 and 5 should be independent of the type of
counting events. Our second experiment controlled for the
influence of potential effects of perceptual differences, and
showed that the source of speed difference in two paradigms
cannot be attributed to the perception of events. Consequently, according to this model, the only source of difference
in counting speed might be in rehearsing other counts (step 4).
However, this effect would affect the speed of counting in a
similar way for both updating the same counter or updating
counters alternatively. Moreover, the analysis of errors adds
another dimension to our argument: even when misplaced
counters and signals are discounted in the error calculation,
the location-based counting is still significantly more accurate. In sum, we argue that a model that confers a special role
to space (unlike Garavan’s process model), may be necessary
to fully explain our findings.
Noori and Itti’s spatial registry framework for manipulation of information in working memory is an example of a
model where space plays a special role. According to this
model, which assumes that working memory items are bound
to spatial locations, accessing items in the internal domain
draws on shifting spatial attention to different locations. In
the case of location-based counting, counters can be directly
bound to the location of boxes, and thus attending to the visual stimulus will automatically draw attention to the location
of counters for accessing the counter value. In contrast, during the identity-based triple counting, each signal will draw
spatial attention, but the signal location is not correlated with
its identity and thus with the associated counter, thus likely a
second shift of attention is required to point attention to the
correct counter. When items need an update, two shifts in
spatial attention may thus be required. The extra shift of attention may account for the slower response time during the
identity-based triple counting.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation
(CRCNS Grant No. BCS-0827764), the Army Research Office
(W911NF-11-1-0046), and the U.S. Army (W81XWH-10-2-0076).

References
Arbib, M. (1992). Schema theory. Encyclopedia of artificial intelligence, 2, 1427–1443.
Barsalou, L. W., Simmons, W. K., Barbey, A. K., & Wilson, C. D.
(2003). Grounding conceptual knowledge in modality-specific
systems. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7(2), 84–91.
Chiu, Y., & Yantis, S. (2009, March). A Domain-Independent
Source of Cognitive Control for Task Sets: Shifting Spatial Attention and Switching Categorization Rules. The Journal of Neuroscience, 29(12), 3930 –3938.
Cowan, N. (1999). An embedded-processes model of working memory. Models of working memory: Mechanisms of active maintenance and executive control, 62–101.
Damasio, A., & Damasio, H. (2006). Minding the body. Daedalus,
135(3), 15–22.
Dehaene, S., & Cohen, L. (2007). Cultural Recycling of Cortical
Maps. Neuron, 56(2), 384–398.
Garavan, H. (1998, March). Serial attention within working memory. Memory & Cognition, 26(2), 263–276.
Goodale, M., & Milner, A. (1992). Separate visual pathways for
perception and action. Trends in neurosciences, 15(1), 20–25.
Greenberg, A. S., Esterman, M., Wilson, D., Serences, J. T., & Yantis, S. (2010, October). Control of Spatial and Feature-Based
Attention in Frontoparietal Cortex. The Journal of Neuroscience,
30(43), 14330 –14339.
Lakoff, G., & Núñez, R. (2000). Where Mathematics Comes From:
How the Embodied Mind Brings Mathematics into Being (1st ed.).
Basic Books.
McElree, B. (2001). Working memory and focal attention. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
27(3), 817–835.
Mcelree, B. (2006). Accessing Recent Events. In Psychology of
Learning and Motivation (Vol. 46, pp. 155–200). Elsevier.
McElree, B., & Dosher, B. (1989). Serial position and set size in
short-term memory: The time course of recognition. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 118(4), 346.
Noori, N., & Itti, L. (2011). Spatial Registry Model: Towards a
Grounded Account for Executive Attention. Proceedings of the
33rd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 3187–
3192.
Noori, N., & Itti, L. (2013a). Schema-driven, space-supported random accessible memory systems for manipulation of symbolic
working memory. In Proceedings of the 35th annunal conference
of the cognitive science society.
Noori, N., & Itti, L. (2013b). Traces of intellectual working memory
tasks on visual-spatial short-term memory. In Proceedings of the
35th annunal conference of the cognitive science society.
Oberauer, K. (2002, May). Access to information in working memory: exploring the focus of attention. Journal of Experimental
Psychology. Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 28(3), 411–421.
(PMID: 12018494)
Paillard, J. (2000). Neurobiological roots of rational thinking.
In Prerational Intelligence: Adaptative Behavior and Intelligent
Systems Without Symbols and Logic (pp. 343–355). Kluwer Academic Publisher.
Shomstein, S., & Yantis, S. (2006, January). Parietal Cortex Mediates Voluntary Control of Spatial and Nonspatial Auditory Attention. The Journal of Neuroscience, 26(2), 435 –439.
Tamber-Rosenau, B. J., Esterman, M., Chiu, Y., & Yantis, S. (2011,
October). Cortical Mechanisms of Cognitive Control for Shifting
Attention in Vision and Working Memory. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 23(10), 2905–2919.
Voigt, S., & Hagendorf, H. (2002). The role of task context for component processes in focus switching. Psychologische Beitrage.

3162

