UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Why we Should Not Forget About the Non-social World: Subjective Preferences, Exploratory
Eye-movements, and Individual Differences

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/27b260g1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Wui, David W.-L.
Jakobsen, Tanya
Anderson, Nicola C.
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Why we Should Not Forget About the Non-social World: Subjective
Preferences, Exploratory Eye-movements, and Individual Differences
David W.-L. Wu (david.wl.wu@gmail.com)
Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia, 2136 West Mall, Vancouver, BC, V6T 1Z4, Canada
Tanya Jakobsen (tanya.jakobsen@psych.ubc.ca)
Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia, 2136 West Mall, Vancouver, BC, V6T 1Z4, Canada

Nicola C. Anderson (n.c.c.anderson@vu.nl)
Department of Cognitive Psychology, Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

Walter F. Bischof (wfb@ualberta.ca)
Department of Computing Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada

Alan Kingstone (alan.kingstone@ubc.ca)
Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia, 2136 West Mall, Vancouver, BC, V6T 1Z4, Canada
Abstract
We investigated both subjective and objective differences in
viewing non-social versus social scenes. Specifically, we examined
four related questions: 1) Do participants prefer non-social or
social scenes? 2) Are there differences in subjective exploration of
non-social and social scenes? 3) Are there differences in objective
exploration of these scenes? 4) Does a non-social trait –
connection to nature – influence the extent of non-social scene
exploration? Experiment 1 found, surprisingly, that participants
prefer non-social over social scenes, and correspondingly, they
reported exploring these scenes more. Experiment 2 used eyetracking to test the validity of this introspection and confirmed that
participants explore non-social scenes more than social scenes. We
also discovered that connection to nature selectively modulates
exploration of non-social scenes, demonstrating a critical
interaction between observer and scene characteristics in the
deployment of spatial attention.
Keywords: eye-tracking; exploration;
differences; subjective experience.

attention;

individual

Introduction
The desire to understand how attention is guided in the real
social world has increased the use of eye movement
tracking in complex natural environments. Accordingly,
there has been a growing interest in the role that social
stimuli play in the allocation of human attention and eye
movements (for a recent review see Risko, Laidlaw, Freeth,
Foulsham, & Kingstone, 2012). However, this leaves a
pertinent question unanswered: what role, if any, do nonsocial stimuli play in the allocation of attention in real world
scenes?
Recent evidence indicates that when social and non-social
scenes are put in direct competition, there is a distinct
preference to look at social scenes, and particularly, at the
eyes of the people in the social scenes (Fletcher-Watson,
Findlay, Leekam, & Benson, 2008; Birmingham, Bischof, &
Kingstone, 2008). Given that attention operates largely in

service of an individual’s goals and intentions, and that
looking behaviour is positively correlated with reward
(Sullivan, Johnson, Rothkopf, Ballard, & Hayhoe, 2012), a
straight-forward prediction is that a selection bias for social
stimuli over non-social stimuli reflects a subjective
preference. However, an alternative possibility is that eye
movements towards the social content of scenes
(particularly the eyes of the people in the scenes) is being
driven by a low-level neural system that is preferentially
biased to process biologically relevant information
(Laidlaw, Risko, & Kingstone, 2012). In this case, one’s
subjective preference of the stimuli is not necessarily
driving gaze behaviour. The aim of Experiment 1 was to
determine whether subjective preference may be driving
attention towards social stimuli.
Participants were asked to subjectively rate their liking for
non-social scenes and social scenes. Importantly, previous
research has shown that the social scenes used in the present
study attract fixations to the eyes of the people in the scenes
(Birmingham et al., 2008). We also asked participants to
introspect on how much they thought they had explored the
social and non-social scenes. We did this to investigate the
accuracy of subjective intuition as to how one looks at
scenes. Because our past work has shown that there is a
marked tendency for participants to fixate onto the eyes of
people in the scenes, we predicted that participants would
report they had explored social scenes less than non-social
scenes.

Experiment 1
Methods
Participants Sixteen students from the University of British
Columbia participated in the 30-minute experiment in
exchange for course credit.
Stimuli Participants viewed a slideshow of 51 unique
images at their own pace. Of interest were 6 interior and 6

3801

landscape scenes from Foulsham, Kingstone, and
Underwood (2008), as well as 7 social scenes from
Birmingham et al. (2008) that have been shown to trigger
rapid and sustained eye movements to the eyes of the
individuals in the scenes. The social scenes either depicted 1
person alone, or 3 people interacting. Only these scenes
were analyzed for the purposes of this study because they
were used directly in Experiment 2.1 Exploratory eye
movements are potentially affected by the saliency
distribution of the stimuli (Itti, Koch, & Niebur, 1998). For
example, stimuli with widely distributed salient locations
could lead to a distributed eye movement pattern, and
stimuli with salient locations concentrated in a small area
could lead to a concentrated pattern. For this reason, we
ensured that the image areas spanned by the most salient
points were matched across image types.2

	  
Figure 1: Average ratings of how much participants liked
each scene type. Participants significantly rated landscapes
highest and social scenes lowest (all p’s < .001). Error bars
represent the standard error of the individual means.	  

Questionnaires Participants were asked to rate, on a 5-point
Likert-type scale, how much they liked the scenes, and how
much they explored the scenes.
Data Analysis A one-way repeated-measures analysis of
variance (ANOVA) was used to compare the average
preference and exploration ratings of the interior, landscape,
and social scenes.

Results
There was a main effect of scene type on the average
preference ratings, F(2, 30) = 46.94, MSE = 8.95, p < .001.
Post-hoc, Bonferonni-corrected t-tests revealed that
participants significantly preferred landscapes over interiors,
t(15) = 5.60, p < .001, and social scenes, t(15) = 8.59, p <
.001. See Figure 1.
There was a main effect of scene type on the exploration
ratings, F(2, 30) = 12.00, MSE = 1.14, p < .001. Post-hoc,
Bonferonni-corrected t-tests revealed that participants
reported greater exploration of the interior and landscape
scenes compared to the social scenes (interiors: t(15) = 3.56,
p = .003; landscapes t(15) = 4.32, p = .001). There were no
significant differences in exploration ratings between
interiors and landscapes, p > .10. See Figure 2.

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1

The remaining slideshow images were used in different
experiments not reported here. They included other social, interior,
and landscape scenes from the same stimuli sets, in addition to
other scenes from a different stimuli set (Foulsham & Kingstone,
2010). When all images from the current stimuli set are analyzed,
the same results are obtained.
2
	  We computed saliency maps for each scene using the Saliency
Toolbox (Walther, 2012) and determined the location of the most
salient locations (defined as the set of locations with a saliency
value of at least 50% of the maximum saliency in the scene). We
then calculated the image area spanned by these locations (i.e.,
their convex hulls). A comparison of all scene types showed that
there were no significant differences in the image areas between
the scenes.	  

	  
Figure 2: Average ratings of how much participants
explored each scene type. Participants significantly rated
landscapes (p = .001) and interiors (p = .003) above social
scenes. Error bars represent the standard error of the
individual means. 	  

Discussion
In Experiment 1 we found that participants preferred the
non-social landscape scenes and interior scenes over the
social scenes. Given that our previous work using the
current social stimuli has demonstrated a marked looking
preference for social versus non-social stimuli, and that this
finding has been confirmed by other researchers (FletcherWatson et al. 2008), it was reasonable to predict that this
preference in looking behaviour would reflect a subjective
preference for social over non-social stimuli. However, in
contrast to reward theory, the data appears to support the
notion that selection bias towards social stimuli is driven by
something other than subjective preference.

3802

In addition, subjects showed the strongest preference
towards landscape scenes. This finding supports the idea
that people have a unique preference for nature (Grinde &
Patil, 2009; Mayer & Frantz, 2004; Nisbet, Zelenski, &
Murphy, 2011; Schultz & Tabanico, 2007).
Consistent with past work indicating that people tend to
‘lock’ their eyes on people in social scenes, our study found
that participants rated their exploration of the non-social
scenes to be significantly greater than the social scenes. This
finding seems to validate the accuracy of subjective
intuition about how one allocates attention. Nevertheless,
research has demonstrated that individuals can be very poor
at judging whether their eyes have moved or not (e.g.,
Belopolsky, Kramer, & Theeuwes, 2008). Even when
individuals do realize their eyes have moved, they can be
notoriously poor at judging where they may have looked
(Foulsham & Kingstone, 2013). Thus we thought that it was
important to objectively confirm the validity of participants’
subjective reports, by testing subjects’ exploratory looking
behaviour with the same stimuli.
In addition, and in light of our recent work that an
individual difference trait in visual curiosity can influence
visual exploration (Risko, Anderson, Lanthier & Kingstone,
2012), we took this opportunity to investigate the intriguing
hypothesis that a non-social trait may selectively predict
how one looks at non-social content. To test this idea we
used the Connectedness to Nature Scale (CNS; Mayer &
Frantz, 2004). Connectedness to nature has been
demonstrated to be implicitly part of an individual's identity,
that is, how the natural world is included in one's
representation of self (Schultz & Tabanico, 2007).
In a sense, connection to nature can be seen as an
antithesis of scales that measure social traits. While scales
like the Autism Quotient (AQ) measure one's connection to
the social world (Baron-Cohen, Wheelwright, Skinner,
Martin, & Clubley, 2001), the CNS measures one's
connection to the non-social world. Thus, if autism
spectrum disorders and social skills scores on the AQ are
predictive of how people look at social content (Chen &
Yoon, 2011; Freeth, Foulsham, & Kingstone, 2013), it is
plausible that CNS may be predictive of how people look at
non-social content.
In Experiment 2, participants performed a free-viewing
task of interior, landscape, and social scenes while being
eye-tracked, and then completed the CNS. We looked at
how exploration may be different across scene types, and
whether CNS scores were related to these exploratory eye
movements (Risko et al., 2012). Following the results of
Experiment 1, we predicted that exploration should be equal
for interiors and landscapes, and significantly less in social
scenes.

Experiment 2
Methods
Participants Twenty-three participants from the University
of British Columbia were given course credit, or paid $5, to
participate in the 30 minute study.

Stimuli The same scenes were used as the ones analyzed in
Experiment 1. The scenes were 1024 x 768 pixels, and
corresponded to a horizontal visual angle approximately
42°, and a vertical visual angle approximately 33°.
Questionnaires Each participant was asked to provide
demographic information, and to complete the CNS. The
CNS is a 14-item questionnaire with a 5-point Likert-type
scale, used to measure participants' trait levels of feeling
emotionally connected to the natural environment (Mayer &
Frantz, 2004). This inventory has acceptable internal
reliability (α = .84; Mayer & Frantz, 2004).
Apparatus An SR Research Eyelink 1000 eye-tracking
system, recorded participants' eye movements at 1000 Hz.
Stimuli were presented to participants on a 23" monitor.
Scenes and eye movements were also presented to the
experimenter on an adjacent monitor located in the testing
room, relaying real-time feedback on system accuracy.
Procedure Participants were seated 60 cm from the
computer monitor, with their heads positioned in a chin rest.
Participants were told to view each image as they would
normally do. Scenes were presented for 10 s. Participants
viewed the images before being asked to complete the
questionnaire.
Data Analysis An 8 x 8 grid was created for each image,
yielding 64 interest areas that were invisible to participants.
Each region subtended approximately 5.25° horizontal
visual angle, and 4.13° vertical visual angle. We quantified
participants’ exploratory eye movement behaviour using an
exploratory index (EI). This index is the ratio between the
number of unique regions visited in a scene, and the total
number of fixations in that scene (i.e., the number of regions
visited with the number of fixations normalized). We
believe the EI measure gives a more accurate quantification
of exploratory strategy. A raw count of regions visited is
easily biased by the total fixations a participant makes: the
greater the total number of fixations, the greater number of
regions that would be visited simply by chance. This is
reflected in the data as a raw count of regions visited
correlates highly with the total number of fixations in nonsocial scenes: r = .73, p < .001, and social scenes: r = .67, p
< .001, whereas our EI measure does not, both p’s > .22.3
By normalizing for the number of fixations, the EI measure
assesses how participants spatially allocate their attention
given the same constraints (number of fixations).
It is arguable that this EI value misses within-region
exploration, and reversing the ratio (number of fixations
over regions visited) would better capture exploration.

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	   	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
3

Using raw counts of regions visited instead of EI also gives us
different results. Interiors had the greatest counts, with landscapes
in the middle, and social scenes garnering the least. In addition,
raw counts did not correlate with CNS in social or non-social
scenes.

3803

However, this value would be unable to distinguish whether
participants are simply repeatedly looking at the same
features within a region. Given the size of the regions, it is
likely only one attractive feature (e.g., eyes) is contained
within it. While it is true that a participant who attends these
features more can be said to have “explored” them more, it
is inconsistent with our operational definition of
exploration. We are interested in exploration in the sense of
spatial distribution of attention, not exploration in the sense
of focus toward one specific feature.
A repeated-measures ANOVA was conducted between
the average EI values of each scene type. Pearson’s
correlations were conducted separately between the EI mean
for non-social scenes and CNS scores, and the EI for social
scenes and CNS scores. Pearson correlations were also
conducted between CNS scores and other eye movement
measures (total fixations and fixation durations), to see if
the trait was related uniquely to exploration.

Table 1: Correlations between scores on the Connectedness
to Nature Scale (CNS), and EI values, total fixations, and
fixation durations in non-social and social scenes. Value
bolded indicates p < .05.
Measure
Non-social:
EI
Fixation count
Duration
Social:
EI
Fixation count
Duration

CNS
.43
-.05
-.03
.08
-.02
-.07

Discussion
The results of Experiment 2 confirm our findings in
Experiment 1. Participants explored the non-social scenes
far more than the social scenes, in keeping with the
subjective reports in Experiment 1. Equally remarkable, we
found that a non-social trait, connectedness to nature,
predicted the variation in exploratory eye movements. This
power to predict scene exploration was specific to the nonsocial scenes.

General Discussion

Figure 3: Average exploratory index values of participants
viewing social, interior, or landscape scenes. Participant’s
significantly explored non-social scenes significantly more
than social scenes (both p’s < .001). Error bars represent the
standard errors of the individual means.

Results
There was a main effect of scene type on EI values, F(2,44)
= 31.67, MSE = 0.88, p < .001. Post-hoc repeated-measure,
Bonferonni-corrected, t-tests revealed that participants did
not differ in exploring interiors and landscapes, but explored
both significantly more than social scenes (interiors: t(22) =
10.62, p < .001; landscapes: t(22) = 6.26, p < .001). See
Figure 3.
The correlations between CNS scores and EI measures are
shown in Table 1. The correlation between CNS scores and
EI for non-human scenes was significant, r = .43, p = .04.
However, CNS scores were not correlated with EI for social
scenes, nor for any of the other eye movement measures.

We began our work by asking the following question: In
light of the field’s growing interest in social attention, what
important role, if any, do non-social stimuli play in the
allocation of attention in real world scenes? Our work has
provided at least four new insights.
First, in Experiment 1, we found that participants
preferred non-social scenes – whether they are outdoor
scenes or interior scenes – significantly more than social
scenes. This finding suggests that subjective preference and
reward mechanisms are not responsible for the preferential
bias to look toward social stimuli rather than non-social
stimuli.
Second, in Experiment 1 we found that participants
provided a subjective report that they explored non-social
scenes (both landscapes and interiors) more than social
scenes. Despite good reason to question the accuracy of this
self-assessment, Experiment 2 found that people did explore
non-social scenes far more than social scenes.
This finding in turn revealed that people are in fact
accurate at subjectively gauging the extent to which they
move their eyes through different scene types.
Finally, in Experiment 2, we discovered that a non-social
trait, one’s connectedness to nature, was selectively related
to exploratory eye-movements in non-social scenes. In other
words, non-social traits can selectively influence attention in
certain scene types. This finding demonstrates the
importance of using non-social scenes in exploring the
influence of trait differences on attention. After all, if we

3804

had only used social scenes we would have missed the
effect. It is also noteworthy that our work extends the work
of Risko et al. (2012) to include a new individual trait
related to exploratory eye movement behaviour –
connectedness to nature.
Yet why was connectedness to nature not related to
exploration in social scenes? There are at least three
possibilities, all worthy of future investigation. First, it may
be that there is an overwhelming pull to attend to human
stimuli such that any differences in attention that might be
influenced by individual traits are over-ridden. Highly
attractive features that capture attention, like eyes and faces,
may lead to failure of an exploratory viewing bias. This
possibility suggests social EI and non-social EI are not
distinct constructs. CNS would be related to both social and
non-social EI if not for the overwhelming pull of eyes and
faces. Alternatively, human content may produce a viewing
strategy itself (e.g., making sense of the scene; Birmingham
et al., 2008), and this strategy is prioritized over exploratory
behaviour. Such an explanation has important implications
for researchers wanting to study individual differences in
areas related to attentional exploration, such as inspiration,
creativity, and curiosity (Fredrickson & Anderson, 1999;
Kasof, 1997; McCoy & Evans, 2002; Risko et al., 2012;
Schlewitt-Haynes, Earthman, & Burns, 2002). The third
possibility is that the CNS is not related to human
connectedness. There may be ‘connectedness to human’
traits that could be related to human content. As mentioned
previously, there is evidence that AQ scores are predictive
of how people look at social content (Chen & Yoon, 2011;
Freeth et al., 2013), as well as evidence of other traits like
social anxiety related to attention to social stimuli (Mansell,
Clark, Ehlers, & Chen, 1999). This would suggest that
social EI and non-social EI are distinct constructs, and that
different traits would relate independently to each scene
type. Further study will be needed to examine these three
possibilities.
In addition to stable characteristics like personality (Risko
et al., 2012), our findings raise the possibility that factors
like attitudes and feelings may also influence one’s eye
movements, and thus be embodied in eye movement
behaviour. For example, connection to nature relates
positively to pro-social and outward looking values, but
negatively to inward looking values (Weinstein, Przybylski,
& Ryan, 2009). Might these attitudes be embodied in
broadness or narrowness of attentional focus (see Chua,
Boland, & Nisbett, 2005, for a similar hypothesis)? Since
the current study was purely correlational, inferences about
such a possibility cannot be made. In the future, we hope to
investigate the direction of this relationship.
Results from our two experiments combined support the
possibility that the bias to look at social stimuli is subserved not by one’s subjective preferences for social versus
non-social stimuli. If one wishes to maintain that these eye
movements to social stimuli are due to reward mechanisms
(Sullivan et al., 2012) then one must abandon the
assumption that the reward system is related to preference.

However, if that is true, then perhaps the notion of reward
itself needs to be reconceptulaized. Perhaps a better account
for our results comes from recent evidence of a primitive
low-level neural system that automatically drives attention
and eye movements toward biologically relevant
information, such as the eyes of others (Laidlaw et al., 2012;
Levy, Foulsham & Kingstone 2012).
On a more practical level, our investigation provides an
example of the validity of using subjective reports, in
addition to measuring objective variables. The fact that the
subjective results in Experiment 1 were mirrored by the
objective results in Experiment 2 mitigates some of the
concerns cognitive scientists may have about doing
subjective experience research (for a review, see Kingstone,
Smilek, & Eastwood, 2008). For example, we show that
subjective reports are reliable and replicable across
individuals. We also show that attentional exploration does
not operate below conscious awareness since participants’
subjective reports were consistent with looking behaviour
(cf. Nisbett & Wilson, 1977). Our study gives empirical
backing to the validity, and necessity, of using subjective
experiences in addition to objective measures (Kingstone et
al., 2008).
Overall, our results suggest that the use of non-social
stimuli in studying real-world attention should not be
overlooked. Non-social stimuli offers participants a chance
to avoid the overwhelming pull of social stimuli. As such,
factors like individual traits and subjective preferences that
affect eye-movement behaviour may be buried when using
social stimuli. On a more theoretical level, our study
contributes to a burgeoning field that seeks to uncover how
psychological aspects of one’s identity are intimately linked
to the lowest levels of one’s underlying physiology (Chua et
al., 2005; Dodd et al., 2012; Dodd, Hibbing & Smith, 2011;
Risko et al., 2012). Continuing to identify these subjective
aspects will surely lead to interesting and important
knowledge about how different individuals uniquely select,
perceive, and ultimately act towards different stimuli.

Acknowledgements	  
This work was funded by grants to WFB and AK from the
Natural Sciences and Engineering Council of Canada.
	  

References	  
Baron-Cohen, S., Wheelwright, S., Skinner, R., Martin, J.,
& Clubley, E. (2001). The autism-spectrum quotient
(AQ): Evidence from asperger syndrome/high-functioning
autism, males and females, scientists and mathematicians.
Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 31, 5-17.
Belopolsky, A. V., Kramer, A. F., & Theeuwes, J. (2008).
The role of awareness in processing of oculomotor
capture: Evidence from event-related potentials. Journal
of Cognitive Neuroscience, 20, 2285-2297.
Birmingham, E., Bischof, W. F., & Kingstone, A. (2008).
Social attention and real-world scenes: The roles of action,
competition and social content. The Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 61, 986-998.

3805

Chen F., & Yoon, J. (2011). Brief report: Broader autism
phenotype predicts spontaneous reciprocity. Journal of
Autism and Developmental Disorders, 41, 1131-1134.
Chua, H. F., Boland, J. E., & Nisbett, R. E. (2005). Cultural
variation in eye movements during scene perception.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America, 102, 12629-12633.
Dodd, M. D., Hibbing, J. R., & Smith, K. B. (2011). The
politics of attention: gaze-cuing effects are moderated by
political temperament. Attention, Perception, &
Psychophysics, 73, 24-29.
Dodd, M. D., Balzer, A., Jacobs, C. M., Gruszczynski, M.
W., Smith, K. B., & Hibbing, J. R. (2012). The political
left rolls with the good and the political right confronts the
bad: connecting physiology and cognition to preferences.
The Philosophical Transactions of The Royal Society B,
367, 640-649.
Fletcher-Watson, S., Findlay, J. M., Leekam, S. R., &
Benson, V. (2008). Rapid detection of person information
in a naturalistic scene. Perception, 37(4), 571–583.
Foulsham, T., & Kingstone, A. (2013). Fixation dependent
memory for natural scenes: An experimental test of
scanpath theory. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 142, 41-56.
Foulsham, T. & Kingstone, A. (2010) Asymmetries in the
direction of saccades during perception of scenes and
fractals: Effects of image type and image features. Vision
Research, 50, 779-795.
Foulsham, T., Kingstone, A., & Underwood, G. (2008).
Turning the world around: Patterns in saccade direction
vary with picture orientation. Vision Research, 48, 17771790.
Fredrickson, L. M., & Andreson, D. H. (1999). A qualitative
exploration of the wilderness experience as a source of
spiritual inspiration. Journal of Environmental
Psychology, 19, 21-39.
Freeth, M., Foulsham, T., & Kingstone, A. (2013). What
affects social attention? Social presence, eye contact, and
autistic traits. PLoS ONE, 8,
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0053286
Grinde, B., & Patil, G. G. (2009). Biophilia: Does visual
contact with nature impact on health and well-being?
International Journal of Environmental Research and
Public Health, 6, 2332-2343.
Itti, L., Koch, C., & Niebur E. (1998). A Model of SaliencyBased Visual Attention for Rapid Scene Analysis, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence, 20, 1254-1259.
Kasof, J. (1997). Creativity and breadth of attention.
Creativity Research Journal, 10, 303-315.
Kingstone, A., Smilek, D., & Eastwood, J. D. (2008).
Cognitive ethology: A new approach for studying human
cognition. British Journal of Psychology, 99, 317-340.

Laidlaw, K. E. W., Risko, E. F., & Kingstone, A. (2012). A
new look at social attention: Orienting to the eyes is not
(entirely) under volitional control. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception &
Performance, 38, 1132-1143.
Levy, J., Foulsham, T., & Kingstone A. (2012). Monsters
are people too. Biology Letters,
doi:10.1098/rsbl.2012.0850
Mayer, S. F., & Frantz, C. M. (2004). The connectedness to
nature scale: A measure of individuals’ feeling in
community with nature. Journal of Environmental
Psychology, 24, 503-515.
Mansell, W., Clark, D. M., Ehlers, A., & Chen, Y.-P.
(1999). Social anxiety and attention away from emotional
faces. Cognition & Emotion, 13, 673-690.
McCoy, J. M., & Evans, G. W. (2002). The potential role of
the physical environment in fostering creativity. Creativity
Research Journal, 14, 409-426.
Nisbet, E. K., Zelenski, J. M., & Murphy, S. A. (2011).
Happiness is in our nature: Exploring nature relatedness as
a contributor to subjective well-being. Journal of
Happiness Studies, 12, 303-322.
Nisbett, R. E., & Wilson, T. D. (1977). Telling more than
we can know: Verbal reports on mental processes.
Psychological Review, 84, 231-259.
Risko, E. F., Anderson, N. C., Lanthier, S., & Kingstone, A.
(2012). Curious eyes: Individual differences in personality
predict eye movement behavior in scene-viewing.
Cognition, 122, 86-90.
Risko, E. F., Laidlaw, K. E. W., Freeth, M., Foulsham, T.,
& Kingstone, A. (2012). Social attention with real versus
reel stimuli: Toward an empirical approach to concerns
about ecological validity. Frontiers in Human
Neuroscience, 6:143, doi:10.3389/fnhum.2012.00143.
Schlewitt-Haynes, L. D., Earthman, M. S., & Burns, B.
(2002). Seeing the world differently: An analysis of
descriptions of visual experiences provided by visual
artists and nonartists. Creativity Research Journal, 14,
361-372.
Schultz, P. W., Tabanico, J. (2007). Self, identity, and the
natural Environment: Exploring implicit connections with
nature. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 37, 12191247.
Sullivan, B. T., Johnson, L., Rothkopf, C. A., Ballard, D., &
Hayhoe, M. (2012). The role of uncertainty and reward on
eye movements in a virtual driving task. Journal of Vision,
12(13):19, 1-17.
Walther, D. The Saliency Toolbox (Version 2.2). Available
from http://www.saliencytoolbox.net.
Weinstein, N., Przybylski, A. K., & Ryan, R. M. (2009).
Can nature make us more caring? Effects of immersion in
nature on intrinsic aspirations and generosity. Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 35, 1315-1329.

3806

