UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Why 100 Once Is Worse Than 10 Times 10: Dread Risks versus “Continuous” Risks

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3p4495vt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Bodemer, Nicolai
Ruggeri, Azzurra
Galesci, Mirta

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Why 100 Once Is Worse Than 10 Times 10: Dread Risks versus “Continuous”
Risks
Nicolai Bodemer (bodemer@mpib-berlin.mpg.de)
Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Lentzeallee, 94, 14195 Berlin, Germany

Azzurra Ruggeri (ruggeri@mpib-berlin.mpg.de)
Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Lentzeallee, 94, 14195 Berlin, Germany

Mirta Galesic (galesic@mpib-berlin.mpg.de)
Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Lentzeallee, 94, 14195 Berlin, Germany

Abstract
People tend to react more strongly to a dread risk, a rare event
that kills many people at once, than to a continuous risk, a
relatively frequent event that kills many people over a longer
period of time, even when both cause the same number of
fatalities. This different reaction to the dread risk is often
considered a bias, but we show that it is an ecologically
rational strategy. In a series of simulations, we found
evidence that dread risks affect the population more severely
over time than continuous risks causing the same number of
fatalities. This holds particularly true when the risks affect
children and young adults who would have produced future
offspring if they had survived longer.
Keywords: dread risk; continuous risk; risk perception;
ecological rationality

Introduction
Imagine two different risky events: One threatens to kill 100
people at once; the other threatens to kill 10 people every
year over a period of 10 years. The first event represents a
dread risk, a rare event that kills many people at once, such
as a pandemic, an earthquake, or a terrorist attack. The
second event represents a continuous risk, a relatively
frequent event that kills many people over a longer period of
time, such as diabetes, air pollution, or car accidents. Which
of the two risks is more severe? Both events kill the same
number of people and differ only with respect to the time
frame. Yet, people react much more strongly to dread risks
than to continuous risks, in terms of both perception and
avoidance behavior (Gigerenzer, 2004, 2006; Slovic, 1987).
For instance, in reaction to the 9/11 terrorist attacks (a
typical dread risk), many Americans avoided air travel and
switched to their cars without considering that the risk of
dying in a car accident (a continuous risk) is larger than the
risk of an airplane terrorist attack, and even of dying in an
airplane accident in general (Sivak & Flannagan, 2003). The
avoidance of flying and the elevated use of cars increased
the number of fatal highway crashes after the 9/11 attacks
(Gaissmaier & Gigerenzer, 2012).
People’s higher sensitivity to dread risks compared with
continuous risks is often considered a bias: If the continuous
risk causes the same number of fatalities, it should not be
perceived as less dreadful. In this paper we offer an

alternative explanation to the assumption of biased minds
and argue that a stronger reaction to dread risks is
ecologically rational, because dread risks actually cause a
larger cumulative reduction in the population size.

Previous Accounts
Different hypotheses have been proposed to explain why
people fear dread risks more than continuous risks. First, the
psychometric paradigm (Slovic, 1987) suggests that high
lack of control, high catastrophic potential, and severe
consequences account for the increased risk perception and
anxiety associated with dread risks. Second, people might
lack knowledge about the statistical information underlying
risks (Gigerenzer, Mata, & Frank, 2009), in particular about
the large number of fatalities caused by continuous risks.
Third, because people estimate the frequency of a risk by
recalling instances of its occurrence from their social circle
or the media, they may overvalue relatively rare but
dramatic risks and undervalue frequent, less dramatic risks
(Hertwig, Pachur, & Kurzenhäuser,2005; Lichtenstein,
Slovic, Fischhoff, Layman, & Combs, 1978). Fourth,
according to the preparedness hypothesis, people are prone
to fear events that have been particularly threatening to
survival in human evolutionary history (Öhman & Mineka,
2001). Given that in most of human evolutionary history
people lived in relatively small groups, rarely exceeding 100
people (Hill et al, 2011; Lee & DeVore, 1968), a dread risk,
which kills many people at once, could potentially wipe out
one’s whole group. This would be a serious threat to
individual fitness, as being in a group reduces predation
risk, helps with finding food and hunting, and increases
survival chances when injured (Dunbar & Schultz, 2007;
Krause & Ruxton, 2002). In line with this hypothesis,
Galesic and Garcia-Retamero (2012) found that people’s
fear peaks for risks killing around 100 people and does not
increase if larger groups are killed.

A population-based perspective
A different perspective reveals that dread risks lead to
significantly worse short- and medium-term consequences
than continuous risks, even if they do not eliminate a whole
group. Thus, we focus not only on the overall number of

1923

immediate fatalities, as in previous accounts, but also on (a)
the population size over time, and (b) the role of the age
group that is affected by the risky event. Note that a fatal
event strikes twice: it kills a number of people immediately,
and it reduces the number of future offspring by reducing
the number of their potential parents. A risk that affects
children and young adults will have stronger negative
effects on future group growth than a risk that affects group
members who are past their reproductive period. Dread risks
such as pandemics, terrorist attacks, or nuclear accidents are
more likely to strike children and young adults compared to
many continuous risks such as diabetes, cancer, heart attack,
or household accidents, which affect primarily older people
(Statistisches Bundesamt Deutschland, 2012). For example,
the H1N1 pandemic in 2009 was more likely to infect
younger people, whereas older people were relatively
immune, probably due to previous exposure to a similar
virus strain (ECDC, 2009).
Hypothesis We hypothesize that dread risks cause larger
cumulative losses on the population level than continuous
risks. More specifically, we hypothesize that the number of
people-years lost because of a dread risk is larger than the
number of people-years lost because of a continuous risk, in
particular when the event affects the younger age groups.
People-years correspond to the number of people who live 1
year in the population. Hence, by killing a large number of
children or young adults at once, dread risks not only
deprive the society of their contribution in subsequent years,
but they also remove the potential contribution of the
offspring the victims could have had if they had survived
longer.
To illustrate this hypothesis, consider first a very
simplified example. Imagine a population of 40 people,
uniformly distributed across four age groups:
Children and adolescents, aged 0—19 years: Pre-fertile
generation that may produce offspring in the future.
Young adults, aged 20—39 years: Fertile generation that
currently produces offspring.
Older adults, aged 40—59 years: Post-fertile generation.
Elderly adults, aged 60—79 years: Post-fertile generation.
Further assume that the population growth is constant and
that every year each young adult produces exactly one
offspring. This implies that the number of children at time
point i, ti, corresponds to the number of young adults at time
point i-1, ti-1. Moreover, at every ti a generation shift takes
place, so that the number of young adults at ti+1 corresponds
to the number of children at ti, and so on for the other
groups. Moreover, all elderly adults at ti-1 will be dead at ti.
In the absence of any dread risk or continuous risk, the
population is constant over time with Ntotal = 40 (see Figure
1).
What happens if a dread risk occurs at t1 that kills 50% of
the young adults (i.e., 5 young adults)? At t1, the total
population is reduced to Ntotal = 35 (Nchildren = 10, Nyoung adults =
5, Nolder adults = 10, Nelderly adults = 10). At t2 the population is
further reduced to Ntotal = 30 (Nchildren= 5, Nyoung adults = 10,

Nolder adults = 5, Nelderly adults = 10), because the number of
newborn offspring is smaller due to the fewer young adults.
Finally, the population size settles at Ntotal = 30, with
continuous fluctuation within the respective groups.
What happens if a continuous risk, a disease, occurs at t1
that kills five young adults over a period of five time steps
(one young adult at every ti, from t1 to t5)? Note that the
total number of fatalities directly caused by the risk is the
same as in the dread risk scenario (i.e., 5). The total
population is reduced to Ntotal = 39 at t1 and continues to
decline until t6, where it finally corresponds to the size of
the population hit by the dread risk.
In sum, the continuous risk takes five more generations to
affect the population as severely as the dread risk. The
difference in the cumulative losses caused in the population
by the dread versus continuous risk, can be calculated by
determining the area between the curves representing the
difference in the cumulative population sizes of the two
conditions (i.e., the difference in people-years over time). In
the example in Figure 1, this integral is 20, meaning that the
population hit by the dread risk lost 20 people-years more
than the population experiencing the continuous risk.

Figure 1: Development of the population size when no
risky event is present (baseline), and when a continuous risk
(1 individual killed from t1 to t5) or a dread risk (5
individuals killed at t1) event occurs. A dread risk leads to a
more immediate impact on cumulative population size that
lasts longer compared with the continuous risk.

Simulation Set 1
In the first set of simulations, we assumed a small
population size, similar to groups in which people lived
throughout most of evolutionary history (Lee & DeVore,
1968). We manipulated whether the population growth rates

1924

were constant, increasing, or decreasing, and which age
group was exposed to a dread or to a continuous risk.

small samples that would reflect the sample size of social
circles. With a second set of simulations we investigated the
effects of such risks on a much larger population of the size
of the U.S. population in 2010.

Method
We set the total population to 160 people. The individuals
were distributed equally across 80 years (i.e., there were 2
individuals for each age at t0) and across four age groups, as
in the illustrative example above. Between conditions, we
manipulated (a) whether a dread or a continuous risk
occurred, (b) the population growth rate, and (c) which age
group was hit by the risk. The risk simulated was either a
dread risk that immediately killed 50% of the population of
the age group hit, or a continuous risk that killed the same
total number of people in the same age group over a period
of 10 years. The population growth rate was manipulated by
setting the birth rate to either 0.05 (constant population),
0.075 (increasing population), or 0.025 (decreasing
population). All individuals would die naturally after their
79th year. The risk hit only children, only young adults,
only older adults, or only elderly adults.
In total there were 24 scenarios. Each scenario was
simulated 500 times, and we calculated for every time point
the average population size within the simulations. We
analyzed each scenario by comparing the log difference in
cumulative people-years between the dread risk condition
and the continuous risk condition after 25, 50, 75 and 100
years.

Results
Figure 2 shows the results for the log difference in
cumulative people-years depending on the population
growth rate and the hit group after 25, 50, 75, and 100 years.
A zero value indicates no difference in cumulative peopleyears between the dread risk and continuous risk; a negative
value indicates a higher loss in cumulative people-years in
the dread risk condition, and a positive value a higher loss in
the continuous risk condition.
When children and young adults were hit by the risks, the
effect was stronger and lasted for the entire 100-year-range
simulated. When older and elderly adults were hit, the
difference between dread and continuous risks was weaker,
decreased over time, and sometimes even became positive.
Figure 2. Log difference in people-years lost because of
continuous and dread risk, by age group hit by the risk,
separately for A. constant, B. increasing and C. decreasing
populations. The dread risk killed 50% of a specific age
group at once; the continuous risk the same total number of
people over a period of ten years. A negative value of the
difference indicates that the loss in people-years is larger for
the dread risk; a positive value that the loss is larger for the
continuous risk.
In sum, the results show that the dread risk affected the
cumulative population size more strongly for most
scenarios, particularly when it hit children or younger
adults. The objective of this first set of simulations was to
evaluate the impact of a dread and a continuous risk on

Figure 2: Log difference in people-years lost because of
continuous and dread risk, by age group hit by the risk,
separately for A. constant, B. increasing and C. decreasing
populations. The dread risk killed 50% of a specific age
group at once; the continuous risk the same total number of
people over a period of ten years. A negative value of the
difference indicates that the loss in people-years is larger for
the dread risk; a positive value that the loss is larger for the
continuous risk. Results show that dread risks lead to larger
losses in people-years across time compared with
continuous risks, in particular when children and young
adults are affected.

Simulation Set 2
Method
We set the population size to the actual U.S. population size
in 2010 (Howeden & Meyer, 2011) with the respective age

1925

1

distributions and population growth rates. As in Simulation
Set 1, we manipulated which age group (children, young
adults, older adults, elderly adults) was hit by the risk. The
risk killed either 20% of the hit group, or the same total
number of people over 10 years.
We again ran 500 simulations for each scenario,
calculated the averaged population size of the dread risk and
continuous risk and plotted the log integrals after 25, 50, 75,
and 100 years.

Results
Using real U.S. data, we found support for the findings of
the previous simulations. The differences between the
cumulative population hit by dread versus continuous risks
occurred across all conditions and lasted over, at least, 100
years. Independent of which age group was affected, the
dread risk led to a higher loss in people-years than the
continuous risk (Figure 3). Loss was highest when children
and young adults were hit by the risk.
Although our simulations are simplified and ignore death
rates for different age groups, fluctuations in population
growth rates, immigration and migration, gender
differences, and fluctuations in disease, they illustrate the
rationale of our hypothesis. Moreover, sensitivity analyses
showed that the conclusions do not change when the
continuous risk is distributed over a longer period or when
the number of fatalities is larger or smaller.

Discussion
People’s stronger reaction to dread risks compared with
continuous risks is often perceived as a bias. This result
proposes a new perspective against which the current
hypotheses accounting for people’s perception and reaction
to dread risks might be reconsidered.
We showed through two different sets of simulations that
this is in fact an ecologically rational strategy. The effect of
dread risks compared with continuous risks is amplified
twice: First by killing more people at a specific point in
time, and second by reducing the number of children and
young adults who would have potentially produced
offspring. Hence, this effect is particularly strong when
children and young adults are hit which is often the case for
dread risks (e.g., earthquakes, terrorist attacks, pandemics).
This result is also in line with findings suggesting that
people are more concerned about risks killing younger, and
hence more fertile, groups (Wang, 1996).
There are important practical implications of this finding.
For instance, from a public policy perspective, an
appropriate reaction to dread risks would be to stimulate
increase in birth rates and/or immigration to counterbalance
the stronger loss in population size.
In sum, people’s fear and stronger risk perception of
dread risk, compared to continuous risks, should not be
considered an irrational bias, an emotional overreaction to a
dramatic event. In fact, people’s intuition seems to capture
the objective severity of the two different risks.

References

Figure 3. Log difference in people-years lost because of
continuous and dread risk, based on the US population. The
dread risk killed 20% of a specific age group at once; the
continuous risk killed the same total number of people over
a period of 10 years. Results show that the dread risk leads
to a larger loss in people-years over time across all age
groups. The loss was largest when children and young
adults were affected.

1
The statistics only provided population size for age groups. For
instance, 20,201,362 children <5 years old lived in the United
States in 2010. For simplicity, we assumed an equal distribution of
the children across 0–4 years.

Dunbar, R.I.M., Schultz, S. (2007). Evolution in the social
brain. Science, 317, 1344–1347.
ECDC (2009). 2009 influenza A(H1N1) pandemic (Version
7 – 17 December). Stockholm: European Centre for
Disease Prevention and Control.
Gaissmaier, W., Gigerenzer, G. (2012). 9/11, Act II: A Finegrained analysis of regional variations in traffic fatalities
in the aftermath of the terrorist attacks. Psychological
Science, 23, 1449-1454.
Galesic, M., Garcia-Retamero, R. (2012). The risks we
dread: A social circle account. PloS One, e32837.
Gigerenzer, G. (2004). Dread risk, September 11, and fatal
traffic accidents. Psychological Science,15, 286-287.
Gigerenzer, G. (2006). Out of the frying pan into the fire:
Behavioral reactions to terrorist attacks. Risk Analysis, 26,
347–351.
Gigerenzer, G., Mata, J., Frank, T. (2009). Public
knowledge of benefits of breast and prostate cancer
screening in Europe. Journal of National Cancer Institute,
101, 1216–1220.
Hertwig, R., Pachur, T., Kurzenhäuser, S. (2005).
Judgments of risk frequencies: tests of possible cognitive
mechanisms. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 31, 621–642.
Hill, K.R., Walker, R.S., Bozicevic, M., Eder, J., Headland,
T., Hewlett, B.,…Wood, B. (2011). Co-residence patterns

1926

in hunter-gatherer societies show unique human social
structure. Science, 331, 1286–1289.
Howeden, L.M., Meyer, J.A. (2011). Age and sex
composition: 2010. Washington, DC: US Census Bureau.
Krause, J., Ruxton, G.D. (2002). Living in Groups. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Lee, R.B., DeVore, I. (Eds.) (1968). Man the Hunter.
Chicago: Aldine.
Lichtenstein, S., Slovic, P., Fischhoff, B., Layman, M.,
Combs, B. (1978). Judged frequency of lethal events.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning
and Memory, 4, 551–578.
Öhman, A., Mineka, S. (2001). Fears, phobias, and
preparedness: Toward an evolved module of fear and fear
learning. Psychological Review, 108, 483–522.
Sivak, M., Flannagan, M.J. (2003). Flying and driving after
the September 11 attacks. American Scientist, 91, 6–8.
Slovic, P. (1987). Perception of risk. Science, 236, 280–285.
Statistisches Bundesamt Deutschland. (2012). Gesundheit:
Todesursachen in Deutschland (Fachserie 12, Reihe 4).
Wiesbaden: Statistisches Bundesamt.
Wang, X.T. (1996). Evolutionary hypotheses of risksensitive choice: Age differences and perspective change.
Ethology and Sociobiology, 17, 1-15.

1927

