UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Won’t You Think of the Children?: Traits Predicting Intergenerational Preferences

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/42r5h7kz

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Luhmann, Christian
Pak, Sarah

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Won’t You Think of the Children?: Traits Predicting Intergenerational
Preferences
Christian C. Luhmann (christian.luhmann@stonybrook.edu)
Department of Psychology, Stony Brook University
Stony Brook, NY 11790 USA

Sarah S. Pak (sarah.pak@princeton.edu)
Department of Psychology, Princeton University
Princeton, NY 08540 USA

2002 for a review of this literature), altruistic behavior has
been observed in a range of contexts and across a variety of
species (Piliavin & Charng, 1990). The dominant models
suggest that altruism is highly dependent on reciprocity.
That is, decision makers may act in order to achieve benefits
for others, even at personal cost, if the beneficiaries may
later return the favor. In the context of intergenerational
dilemmas, however, reciprocity plays no obvious role. That
is, decision makers in the present generation have no reason
to behave altruistically towards future generations because
future generations have neither an opportunity to reciprocate
beneficial actions nor the means to retaliate for detrimental
actions. In fact, according to traditional models of altruism,
it is in the present generation’s best interest to make
decisions that ignore the welfare of future generations.

Abstract
Individuals are frequently asked to make sacrifices in an
attempt to produce benefits for future generations. Such
decisions are referred to as intergenerational dilemmas.
Previous research on intergenerational dilemmas has shown
that situational manipulation of factors such as the delay
between sacrifice and benefits and the perceived similarity
with future others modulate intergenerational preferences.
However, it is unclear whether there are traits that predict
intergenerational preferences across a variety of dilemmas.
Individual differences were quantified using econometric
measures of delay discounting and social discounting.
Results indicated that individual differences on these
measures accounted for a significant portion of the variance
observed in a broad measure of intergenerational preferences.
Keywords: intergenerational choice, delay discounting,
social discounting

An Economic Perspective
It is increasingly clear that many of our everyday actions not
only have immediate consequences, but also have
consequences for those in future generations. Decisions
about such actions are somewhat peculiar in that a thorough
evaluation requires considering the interests of individuals
that do not yet exist. These decisions become even more
complicated when they require short-term sacrifices on the
part of the present generation in order to achieve benefits for
(or to avoid harming) future generations. Decisions about
such tradeoffs have been referred to as intergenerational
dilemmas (e.g., Gardiner, 2006).
Intergenerational dilemmas are frequently encountered in
the context of policy-making and involve everything from
global warming and overfishing to more mundane decisions
about infrastructure investments. Occasionally, policy
makers place will act on behalf of future generations. For
example, Norway’s gasoline prices are among the world’s
highest at $10.12 per gallon, resulting from taxes on fossil
fuels designed to reduce global warming (Randall, 2012;
Romero, 2005). However, due to a lack of political will,
intergenerational dilemmas are often resolved in ways that
favor the current generation.
Intergenerational dilemmas are an example of a larger
class of social dilemmas in which the interests of the
decision maker are at odds with the interests of others.
Despite the pervasive assumption of self-interested motives
by economists (see Frederick, Loewenstein, & O’Donoghue,

When contemplating intergenerational dilemmas at the
policy level, economists are typically employed to produce
cost-benefit analyses that are used to guide policy-making.
When a policy’s consequences (either costs or benefits)
extend over long time periods, these analyses are forced to
specify exactly how current and future welfare are balanced.
The strategy typically taken is to take the interests of future
generations into consideration, but to a lesser extent than the
interests of the current generation. The degree to which
future consequences impact intergenerational choices is
controlled by what is known as the social discount rate
(Moore, Boardman, Vining, Weimer, & Greenberg, 2004).
Assuming a social discount rate of ten percent, immediate
consequences are considered to be twice as important as
identical consequences that will occur in seven years and ten
times greater than consequences that will occur in 14 years.
For example, imagine a proposal to fix aging sewer systems.
If the proposed legislation would cost $100 million dollars
immediately, but would avert a potentially costly failure
estimated to occur in 30 years, then the ultimate cost of the
failure would have to exceed $2 billion in order to justify
the immediate expenditure.
These social discount rates can lead to potentially
undesirable conclusions. For example, the ten percent
discount rate suggests that the welfare of the current
generation’s grandchildren (two generations or 50 years
from now) will be valued at less than one percent of the

2949

welfare of the current generation. Thus, these standard
discount rates suggest that we ought to essentially disregard
the welfare of future generations and instead act to
maximize welfare over a short temporal horizon.
However, policymakers and even economists themselves
often disagree about what social discount rates are
appropriate. For example, the Stern Review (2007), a
comprehensive report assessing the costs of climate change,
was criticized by some economists for employing a social
discount rate that was too low (e.g., Beckerman & Hepburn,
2007), whereas others have argued for a lower discount rate
(e.g., a discount rate of zero, Cline, 2008).
In contrast, Dasgupta (2007) noted that one could be
similarly dissatisfied with the selection of another parameter
in Stern’s model, what Stern calls eta ( ). Eta is an ethical
parameter that reflects people’s attitude about disparities in
welfare both between individuals within the current
population and disparities in welfare between current and
future populations. Dasgupta (2007) argues that society
ought to have more egalitarian attitudes than implied by the
value of eta Stern selected.

A Psychological Perspective
Psychologists have also investigated factors related to
intergenerational preferences (though to a far more limited
degree). Wade-Benzoni (2008), for example, has compiled
a set of factors that appear to modulate intergenerational
preferences.
These factors include the delay and
uncertainty associated with future consequences, affinity
towards future generations, and the behavior of past
generations. Both individually and taken together, these
factors appear to predict, to varying degrees, one’s
intergenerational choices.
One intuitive influence on intergenerational preferences is
the delay between the current generation’s behavior and the
associated consequences. This mirrors the economic idea of
a social discount rate reviewed above.
That is,
consequences expected to occur only after long delays are
discounted more (i.e., exert less of an influence on
intergenerational choices) than those expected to occur after
shorter delays. For example, Wade-Benzoni (2008) found
that participants who were told that future generations
would begin to reap the benefits of a proposed gas tax in the
relatively near future were willing to bear significantly
higher gas taxes than those who believed the benefits were
more temporally delayed.
Preferences in intergenerational dilemmas have also been
found to depend on the affinity between decision-makers
and the recipients of future benefits. For example, WadeBenzoni (2008) asked office staffers to distribute a sum of
money between themselves and a future subject in the study.
Results indicated that participants left significantly larger
sums of money if they believed they were leaving money
for a fellow staff member (high affinity) than when they
believed they were leaving money for a stranger (low
affinity). This is in line with past findings (e.g., Hoffman,

McCabe, & Smith, 1996) that social distance acts to
attenuate generosity toward others.
Lastly, intergenerational preferences appear to be
influenced by the behavior of past generations. As
described above, intergenerational generosity (or greed)
cannot generally be reciprocated. However, there is recent
evidence that individuals unable to reciprocate may “pay
forward” past acts on unrelated third parties (Gray, Ward, &
Norton, in press). In the case of intergenerational dilemmas,
this would suggest that individuals might attempt to
“reciprocate” the actions of previous generations, but to do
so with future generations. That is, if previous generations
have sacrificed on our behalf, then perhaps we may be more
willing to do so on behalf of future generations. Consistent
with this suggestion, Wade-Benzoni (2002) found that
intergenerational precedents can exert a strong influence on
intergenerational choices, but only when individuals
believed that previous generations were willing to make
sacrifices. Apparently, previous generations’ generosity
serves as a model for the current generation in a way that
previous generations’ selfishness does not.
This previous work has pointed to several major factors
that influence intergenerational preferences. However,
these previous studies have focused on the manipulation of
situational factors.
For example, beliefs about the
consequences of overfishing predicted were related to
willingness to accept fishing quotas (Wade-Benzoni, 2008).
Furthermore, because factors such as delay, uncertainty, and
precedent should vary from one intergeneration dilemma to
another, one would also expect people’s intergenerational
preferences to vary from one dilemma to another as well.
The goal of the current study is to explore how
intergenerational preferences may be predicted by decisionrelated traits that are relatively stable across decision
making contexts. That is, the current study concerns our
ability to predict individual differences in intergenerational
preferences. Because of our focus on individual differences,
we evaluate decision-relevant traits using measures that are
both quantitatively rigorous and that generalize across a
variety of contexts.
Specifically, we evaluate decision makers’ preferences
regarding delay and social distance because past work has
found situational manipulation of these factors to modulate
intergenerational preferences. To evaluate preferences
about delay, we use a standard delay discounting task
(Kirby & Marakovic, 1996). Delay discounting refers to the
tendency for immediate rewards to be preferred over
delayed rewards and for the value of rewards to decline with
increasing delay.
To evaluate social preferences, we
employ a recently developed measure of social discounting
(Rachlin, 2002). Similar to delay discounting, work on
social discounting has found that rewards to the self are
preferred over rewards given to others and that the
subjective value of others’ rewards declines as social
distance increases.

2950

Method
Participants
Sixty-three Stony Brook University undergraduate
students participated for partial course credit.

Dependent Measures
The intergenerational decision-making task consisted of
four scenarios. Specifically, we adapted items involving the
topics of overharvesting fisheries and a gasoline tax (based
on materials from Wade-Benzoni, 2008). Two additional
scenarios were developed specifically for the current study,
one involving an increase in tuition and one involving an
increase in rent. These items were included to increase the
relevance of the intergenerational dilemmas to our
undergraduate participants. Each scenario embodied the
same basic set of features characteristic of a standard
intergenerational dilemma. That is, the scenarios each
described an immediate, costly sacrifice and stated that the
benefits of this sacrifice would only be enjoyed by other
individuals (but not by the participant) and that the benefits
would only arrive at some point in the future. As in WadeBenzoni’s (2008) study, each scenario involved reading a
brief passage that provided factual information about the
issue, including short-term costs and future benefits, and
included a graphical visualization of the relationship
between the magnitude of the short-term sacrifice and the
corresponding benefits to future generations. The graph did
not include numbers of any sort and was not intended to be
thoroughly informative. Instead, it was intended to simply
illustrate the idea that greater present sacrifice would yield
greater future benefit. Participants were then asked to
indicate whether they would agree with a series of proposed
sacrifices. For example, participants were asked if they
would agree to pay an additional $0.20 tax, raising the price
of a gallon of gasoline to $3.20.
The delay discounting task was adapted from a previous
study by Kirby and Marakovic (1996). On each trial of this
task, participants chose between a smaller reward, which
was available immediately (i.e., “tonight”), and a larger
reward, which was only available after some delay. For
example, one item asked participants to select between $30
dollars tonight and $85 to be delivered in 70 days. Each of
these items is associated with a discount rate that represents
how patient a decision maker would need to be in order to
be indifferent between the immediate and delayed rewards.
For example, in the preceding example, indifference would
be associated with a discount rate of exactly .008571. The
task consisted of 27 items. Twenty-one of these items were
identical to those used by Kirby and Marakovic (1996),
capable of detecting discount rates from 0.0007 to 0.25. In
our experience, we have found that undergraduates’
preferences fall toward the impatient end of this range. To
ensure that we did not artificially exclude particularly
impatient participants, we amended the original 21 items
with 6 additional items that extended the range of
measurable discounting rates from 0.0007 to 1.0, a change

we have adopted in previous investigations (Luhmann, in
press).
The social discounting task was adapted from Jones and
Rachlin (2006). Participants were first asked to imagine
100 people, ranging from one’s closest friend or relative
(i.e., person #1) to a mere acquaintance (person #100). On
each trial, participants were asked to choose between a
reward for themselves and a reward for someone on their
list of 100 people. For example, one item asked participant
to choose either $30 dollars for themselves and $85 for
Person #70. The specific quantities were identical to those
used in the delay discounting task. That is, the reward
magnitudes were identical and the delays (e.g., 70 days)
were converted into social distances (e.g., person #70).

Procedure
Before the experiment began, instructions were read to
participants.
Participants were told that they would
complete a number of measures on their preferences on a
variety of topics. The instructions further emphasized that
there were no “correct answers”. The order for both the
scenarios within the intergenerational decision task and the
three measures themselves were counterbalanced across
participants. The entire procedure took approximately 30
minutes.

Results
Each participant’s delay discount rate was estimated as
the discount rate most consistent with her choices. For
example, if a participant chose the larger reward for all
items representing discount rates equal to and smaller than
.01 but chose the smaller reward for all items equal to and
larger than .02, her discount rate would be estimated as the
geometric mean of the discount rates associated with the
items on each side of this “switch point” (.014 in this case).
If more than one discount rate was found to be equally
consistent with a set of choices, the geometric mean of the
consistent estimates was taken to be the participants’
discount rate (for further details, see Kirby & Marakovic,
1996). The procedure for estimating of social discount rates
was identical. Because discount rates are highly skewed,
they were transformed by taking their natural log before
being submitted to the statistical analyses described below.
To quantify participants’ intergenerational preferences,
we first estimated the maximum sacrifice that each
participant would accept in each scenario. This maximum
was estimated using a procedure similar to that used to
estimate the discount rates. For example, if a participant
agreed to all the sacrifices equal to and smaller than $300
but rejected all sacrifices equal to and larger than $400, her
maximum willingness was estimated as the mean of these
two “cross-over” quantities (e.g. $350). If more than one
estimate was found to be equally consistent with a set of
choices, the mean of the most consistent estimates was
taken. These estimates were then normalized by computing
z-scores. This yielded a total of six z-scores for each
participant, one for each scenario.
Finally, each

2951

Coefficient

-1.59
Intercept
-0.79
Delay Discounting
-1.06
Social Discounting
-0.54
Delay * Social Discounting
Note: Overall R2 = 0.1264 (p < .005)
participant’s six z-scores were averaged. These averages
represent participants’ intergenerational preferences: their
average, relative willingness to sacrifice on behalf of future
generations.
We constructed a multiple regression model with the
social and delay discount rates acting as predictor variables
and the intergenerational preference measure acting as the
outcome variable (Table 1). Results demonstrated that this
model accounted for a significant proportion of the variance
in intergenerational choices. Turning to the individual
factors (see Figure 1), results indicate that participants’
delay discount rates significantly predicted their
intergenerational choices, with lower delay discount rates
(i.e., greater patience) predicting greater willingness to
sacrifice on behalf of future generations. Social discount
rates were also a significant predictor of intergenerational
preferences, with lower social discount rates (i.e., greater
generosity) predicting greater willingness to sacrifice on
behalf of future generations. Finally, results indicate that
the interaction between social discounting and delay
discounting was also a significant predictor of
intergenerational preferences. Specifically, the direction of
this relationship suggests that delay and social discounting
combined super-additively to predict intergenerational
choices. That is, a decision maker who was both patient and
generous was even more willing to sacrifice on behalf of
future generations than would have been expected by her
individual delay and social discount rates.

Discussion
The goal of the current study was to investigate
intergenerational preferences; the willingness to make
sacrifices on behalf of future generations. Whereas prior
studies have focused on situational factors that influence
intergenerational decision making, we have instead
investigated how individuals’ decision-related traits might
predict their intergenerational preferences. Our results
suggest that both delay discount rates (i.e., patience) and
3

1
0
-3.5

-2.5

-1.5

-0.5

Delay Discount Rate

Adj. Intergenerational
Intergenerational
Adjusted
Preference
Preference

2

-1

t

p

-2.77
-2.24
-2.61
-2.18

0.007
0.028
0.011
0.033

social discount rates (i.e., generosity) were significant
predictors of intergenerational preferences. Individuals
displaying greater patience when choosing between personal
rewards were also significantly more willing to make
sacrifices for the benefit of future generations. Similarly,
individuals who made more generous choices, more
frequently preferring rewards to others at personal cost,
were also more inclined to make intergenerational
sacrifices. Finally, we also found that individuals who
displayed both greater generosity and greater patience were
even more willing to sacrifice on behalf of future
generations than would be expected given these individual
traits.
The finding that individuals’ generosity predicts their
intergenerational preferences is consistent with previous
research. For example, Jones and Rachlin (2009) have
demonstrated that social discount rates (but not delay
discount rates) predict altruistic behavior in public goods
games, which is a multi-player version of the classic
Prisoner’s Dilemma game (Axelrod, 1984). Those with low
social discount rates (i.e., high generosity) have been found
to be more cooperative than those with high social
discounting rates. Jones and Rachlin (2009) suggest that
when assessing the tradeoff between personal rewards and
rewards to others, the latter is necessarily discounted
according to the social distance between the decision maker
themselves and the others. Wade-Benzoni (2008) has also
reported that individuals are more willing to make
intergenerational sacrifices on behalf of similar others than
dissimilar others. Wade-Benzoni (2008) refers to this
dimension as affinity, but it is roughly equivalent to social
distance, particularly as it has been conceived by Trope and
colleagues (Trope & Liberman, 2011).
The finding that individuals’ patience predicts their
intergenerational preferences is somewhat more curious. Of
course, individuals’ distaste for delayed payoffs is a robust
finding (Soman et al., 2005). Indeed, delay has been found
to systematically devalue rewards. Wade-Benzoni (2008)
has reported a related finding in which intergenerational

B

5
4
3
2
1
0

-4

-3

-2

-1

Social Discount Rate

0

Adjusted
Intergenerational
Adj. Intergenerational
Preference
Preference

A

SE
0.574
0.351
0.404
0.246

-1
-2

C

0.5
Intergenerational
Adj.Intergenerational
Adjusted
Preference
Preference

Variable

-0.5 0

1

2

3

4

5

-1.5
-2.5
-3.5

Delay * Social Discount Rate

Figure 1 – Partial residual plots illustrating the relationship between intergenerational preferences and delay discounting (A), social
discounting (B), and the interaction between delay and social discounting (C). Discount rates have been log-transformed.

2952

6

preferences were found to be more generous when the
benefit to future generations was described as occurring
sooner rather than later. Given that intergenerational
benefits only arrive in the distant future, it may seem
reasonable that patience should be associated with greater
intergenerational discounting. However, delay discount
rates are typically assumed to describe attitudes toward the
delay associated with personal rewards, not the rewards of
others. Given that intergenerational tradeoffs are between
the current self and future others, it is not immediately
obvious why one’s evaluation of one’s own future rewards
is particularly relevant. However, if one is attempting to
assess the magnitude of the intergenerational benefits, it
may not be possible to perform this evaluation without
one’s own intertemporal attitudes influencing the valuation.
Alternatively, some researchers have suggested that
intertemporal attitudes may reflect one’s beliefs about the
uncertainty present in the environment (Bixter & Luhmann,
2012). That is, it is permissible, and even advisable, to be
impatient if it is believed that future rewards are unlikely to
be delivered as promised. Under this view, patience is not
about one’s unique attitudes toward personal rewards, but
about the risk associated with waiting; risk that everyone
faces. Consistent with this account, Wade-Benzoni (2008)
reported that intergenerational preferences were more
selfish when the future benefits were associated with greater
uncertainty.
The interaction between patience and generosity is
interesting and may be a natural extension of the reasoning
outlined above. Because intergenerational sacrifices are
made so as to bring about benefits that are both temporally
and socially distant, it makes sense that these two factors
might jointly influence intergenerational preferences.
Indeed, the way in which discounting is typically formulated
suggests that rewards are reduced by a discount factor that
combines both the magnitude of the dimension (e.g., delay)
and the decision maker’s attitude toward that dimension
(e.g., patience). When rewards are discounted along more
than one dimension, these discount factors are combined
multiplicatively (e.g., Ho, Mobini, Chiang, Bradshaw, &
Szabadi, 1999), which naturally predicts an interaction and
more specifically suggests that patience and generosity
should combine super-additively.
It is also interesting to note that our results found patience
and generosity to be independent because prior work (Jones
& Rachlin, 2009) has found these traits to be significantly
correlated. The correlations reported by Jones and Rachlin
were not overwhelming (r = .25-.28), so it is possible that
we did not have sufficient power to detect this relationship.
However, the predictive power each factor provided in our
multiple regression analysis suggests that this may not be a
plausible explanation. It is perhaps even more surprising
that we failed to find any overlap between patience and
generosity because our study assessed these dimensions
using nearly identical tasks (e.g., identical rewards and
distances). If participants were not paying close attention to
the materials and simply making choices based on the

numbers presented on each trial, their choices should have
been identical. This suggests that the independence of delay
and social discounting is even stronger evidence for
separable traits.
The current results suggest implications for policymaking.
Specifically, the current study suggests that social discount
rates should reflect a variety of decision-related
psychological attitudes. For example, one cannot simply
assume that the delay between immediate costs and future
benefits captures the entirety of the current generation’s
attitudes toward future generations. Echoing the concerns
of Dasgupta (2007), more general attitudes about equality,
fairness, and generosity appear to be just as powerful in
determining individuals’ intergenerational preferences.
Though this may complicate the calculation of social
discount rates, attitudes about social equality are arguably
easier to contemplate because they can be evaluated intragenerationally.
The notion that intergenerational preferences are a unique
blend of intertemporal and social preferences also has
implications
for
those
seeking
to
encourage
intergenerational sacrifice. For example, policymakers can
make efforts to deemphasize the delay until
intergenerational benefits will be achieved (thereby
mollifying impatience) and deemphasize the social
differences between current and future generations
(encouraging greater generosity). Indeed, because of the
interactivity between these factors, policymakers
accomplishing both of these goals simultaneously would be
expected to get an extra “boost” of selflessness toward
future generations.

References
Axelrod, R. (1984). The Evolution of Cooperation. New
York: Basic Books.
Beckerman, W., & Hepburn, C. (2007). Ethics of the
discount rate in the Stern review on the economics of
climate change. World Economics, 8(1), 187-201.
Bixter, M. T. & Luhmann, C. C. (2012). Evidence for
implicit risk: Delay information primes the processing of
uncertainty information. Manuscript submitted for
publication.
Cline, W. (2008, January). Comments on the Stern Review.
Remarks at the Roundtable Discussion on the Stern
Review of the Economics of Climate Change and Its
Critics, American Economic Association, Annual
Meeting,
New
Orleans.
Retrieved
from:
http://www.iie.com/publications/papers/paper.cfm?Resear
chID=874
Dasgupta, P. (2007). Commentary: The Stern review’s
economics of climate change. National Institute of
Economic Review, 199(4), 4-7.
Frederick, S., Loewenstein, G., & O’Donoghue, T. (2002).
Time discounting and time preference: A critical review.
Journal of Economic Literature, 40(2), 351-401.

2953

Gardiner, S. M. (2006). A perfect moral storm: Climate
change, intergenerational ethics and the problem of moral
corruption. Environmental Values, 15, 397-413.
Gray, K., Ward, A. F., Norton, W. I. (in press). Paying it
forward: Generalized reciprocity and the limits of
generosity, Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General.
Ho, M. Y., Mobini, S., Chiang, T. J., Bradshaw, C. M., &
Szabadi, E. (1999). Theory and method in the quantitative
analysis of ‘impulsive choice’ behaviour: Implications for
psychopharmacology. Psychopharmacology, 146, 362–
372.
Hoffman, E., McCabe, K., & Smith, V. L. (1996). Social
distance and other-regarding behavior in dictator games.
The American Economic Review, 86, 653–660.
Jones, B.A., & Rachlin, H. (2009). Delay, probability, and
social discounting in a public goods game. Journal of The
Experimental Analytical Behavior, 91(1), 61-73.
Jones, B. A. & Rachlin, H. (2006). Social discounting.
Psychological Science, 17(4), 283-286.
Kirby, K. N., & Marakovic, N. N. (1996). Delaydiscounting probabilistic rewards: Rates decrease as
amounts increase. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 3(1),
100-104.
Luhmann, C. C. (in press). Discounting of Delayed Rewards
is Not Hyperbolic, Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, & Cognition.
Moore, M. A., Boardman, A. E., Vining, A. R., Weimer, D.
L., & Greenberg, D. H. (2004). “Just give me a number!”
Practical values for the social discount rate. Journal of
Policy Analysis and Management, 23(4), 789-812.
Piliavin, J. A. & Charng, H. W. Altruism: A review of
recent theory and research. Annual Review of Sociology,
16(1), 27-65.
Rachlin, H. (2002). Altruism and selfishness. Behavioral
Brain Science, 25(2), 239-250.
Rachlin, H., & Jones, B.A. (2007). Social and delay
discounting. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making,
20(1), 1-15.
Randall, T. (2012, August 13). Highest & cheapest gas
prices by country. Bloomberg News. Retrieved from
http://www.bloomberg.com/slideshow/2012-0813/highest-cheapest-gas-prices-by-country.html.
Romero, S. (2005, April 30). The $6.66-a-Gallon Solution.
The
New
York
Times.
Retrieved
from
http://www.nytimes.com/2005/04/30/business/worldbusin
ess/30norway.html
Stern, N. (2007). The Economics of Climate Change: The
Stern Review. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Soman, D. G., Ainslie, Frederick, S., Li., X., Lynch, J.,
Moreau, P., Mitchell, A., Read, D., Sawyer, A., Trope, Y.,
Wertenbroch, K., & Zauberman, G. (2005).
The
psychology of intertemporal discounting: Why are distant
events valued differently from proximal ones? Marketing
Letters, 16(3, 4), 347-360.

Trope, Y., & Liberman, N. (2011). Construal-level theory
of psychological distance. Psychological Review, 117(2),
440-463.
Wade-Benzoni, K.A. (2002). A golden rule over time:
Reciprocity in intergenerational allocation decisions. The
Academy of Management Journal, 45(5),1011-1028
Wade-Benzoni, K. A. (2008). Maple trees and weeping
willows: The role of time, uncertainty, and affinity in
intergenerational decisions. Negotiation and Conflict
Management Research, 1(3), 220-245.
Wade-Benzoni, K.A., Hernandez, M., Medvec, V., &
Messick, D. (2008). In fairness to future generations: The
role of egocentrism, uncertainty, power, and stewardship
in judgments of intergenerational allocations. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 44(1), 233-245.
Wade-Benzoni, K.A., & Tost, L. P. (2009). The egoism and
altruism of intergenerational behavior. Personality and
Social Psychology Review, 13(3), 165-193.

2954

