UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Word Reading Practice Reduces Stroop Interference in Children

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8rt3973n

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 35(35)

Authors
Ziaka, Laoura
Moirou, Despoina
Vlahou, Eleni L.
et al.

Publication Date
2013-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Word Reading Practice Reduces Stroop Interference in Children
Laoura Ziaka (laoura.ziaka@yahoo.gr)
Despοina Moirou (moimina1984@yahoo.gr)
Graduate Program in Basic and Applied Cognitive Science, University of Athens
Ano Ilissia University Campus, GR-15771 Zografos, Greece

Eleni L. Vlahou (eleni.vlahou@uni-ulm.de)
Clinical and Biological Psychology, Institute of Psychology & Education
University of Ulm, 89069 Ulm, Germany

Athanassios Protopapas (aprotopapas@phs.uoa.gr)
Department of Philosophy & History of Science (MITHE)
Ano Ilissia University Campus, GR-15771 Zografos, Greece
Abstract
Stroop interference is often explained by an automaticity
account, according to which it arises due to more extensive
practice in reading than in color naming. Here we investigated
the effect on interference of isolated practice in color naming
(of incongruent and neutral stimuli) and in word reading (of
color names) in adults and children in Grades 4–5. In both
groups interference was reduced after practicing color naming
of incongruent stimuli. For children, interference was also
reduced after practice in word reading of color names. In
neither group was interference diminished after practice in
color naming of neutral stimuli. These findings are consistent
with a negative relationship between reading ability and
interference and challenge the automaticity account.
Keywords: Stroop Interference; Reading; Color Naming;
Training; Automaticity

Stroop Interference and Reading Ability
One of the most familiar, most studied and most cited
phenomena in cognitive psychology is Stroop interference.
It is a robust finding that it takes longer to name the color of
the ink in which a word is printed when the stimulus is a
word denoting a different color (e.g. the word “red” printed
in green ink) than when the stimulus is a string of colored
letters (e.g. XXX) or a plain rectangular patch. MacLeod
(1991) reviewed the evidence for variants of this task and
addressed three issues that are crucial for understanding the
causes of the Stroop effect: practice, integration, and the
relation between facilitation and interference.
For the purposes of our analysis the concepts of practice
and automaticity are of major importance. The notion of
automaticity has been central for understanding and
explaining the Stroop effect, since it is generally considered
obligatory to read the word but not to name the color. This
imbalance is thought to arise from our extensive practice in
reading but not in color naming. The automaticity account
considers Stroop interference as a consequence of a betterpracticed skill, namely reading, that dominates color naming
without regard of attention (Logan, 1997; MacLeod, 1991).
Cohen, Dunbar, and McClelland (1990) proposed a
connectionist model whereby practice in a task such as

reading strengthens its connections and allows it to interfere
with other tasks that have weaker connections, like color
naming. Practice is seen as influencing the relative level of
automaticity of two dimensions, resulting in interference.
From this point of view reading and color naming differ
along a continuum of practice and the degree of interference
in the Stroop task may reflect the degree of word reading
automaticity (Logan, 1997; Samuels, 1999).
Consequently, the degree of interference is often taken as
a marker of word reading automaticity. This has significant
practical implications, taking into account that word reading
automaticity is been considered a fundamental element of
reading development and as an essential background for
more complex processes like reading comprehension (Kuhn
& Stahl, 2003; Wolf & Katzir-Cohen, 2001).
One prediction that derives from the automaticity account
is that poorer and less skilled readers will exhibit less
interference in the standard Stroop task than good readers as
a result of less practiced and therefore less automatized
reading. This prediction stands in contrast to empirically
observed data. A number of studies have showed that poor
readers produce robust interference	   (Alwitt, 1966; Everatt,
Warner, & Miles, 1997; Helland & Asbjørnsen, 2000;
Kelly, Best, & Kirk, 1989; van der Schoot, Licht, Jorsley, &
Sergeant, 2000). Everatt et al. (1997) found that children
with dyslexia exhibit more interference than age-matched
controls. More recently, Protopapas, Archonti, and
Skaloumbakas (2007) showed that reading ability is
negatively related to Stroop interference. In a first study
they compared children with dyslexia to age-matched
controls in the Stroop task and reported greater interference
for the children with dyslexia. In a second study they
examined the relationship between interference and reading
skills in the general school population and found that poorer
reading skills were associated with more interference.
Furthermore, interference was found to be primarily
associated with reading speed. Protopapas et al. suggested
that reading ability and interference are directly linked,
without mediation from executive functions such as
attention and inhibition.

1659

In line with these observations, Faccioli et al. (2008) also
found that 7- to 12-year-old Italian children with dyslexia
exhibited larger interference than a control group. The same
pattern of results was reported by Kapoula et al. (2010) for
French teenagers with dyslexia. These findings run counter
to the automaticity account and challenge the notion that
interference can be used to assay word reading automaticity.
In place of automaticity, a blocking mechanism, as
implemented in the computational model WEAVER++
(Roelofs, 2003), may account for the empirical findings.
According to this model, word reading can directly activate
lemma retrieval and word-form encoding, whereas colornaming must pass through conceptual identification before
activating lemma retrieval and word-form encoding. Stroop
interference is assumed to occur because color naming must
wait until the incorrect response (from word reading) is
suppressed. As a consequence of the basic assumptions of
the model, greater reading speed leads to less Stroop
interference, consistent with the data.

Training
Although the effects of practice on the Stroop task have
been of concern since the very beginning, only a small
number of studies have examined this relationship. Stroop
(1935) himself tried to examine the development of
interference through practice in color naming and found that
interference can be present even after 8 days of practice.
MacLeod and Dunbar (1988) trained participants to
respond to shapes with familiar color names. Prior to
practice, “shape naming” suffered from interference from
incompatible colors, an effect that was reversed 20 days
later. After training, participants showed interference in
naming the colors but not in naming the shapes.
Other studies have used mixed or inconguent-only stimuli
and have succeeded to reduce but not eliminate interference
(Davidson, Zacks, & Williams, 2003; Dulaney & Rogers,
1994; MacLeod, 1998). However, so far no study has
examined the effects of practice on the individual task
dimensions involved in Stroop interference, namely plain
color word reading and color naming of neutral stimuli.

In contrast, practice in word reading could lead to a
reduction of interference insofar as there is any potential for
increase in the speed of reading the color words.
Adults are skilled readers and are considered to have
achieved a high level of word reading automaticity.
Therefore training in word reading should not affect
interference in this population. In contrast, word reading
automaticity has only partially developed in children and
can improve further through practice, leading us to the
prediction of a reduction in Stroop interference through
practice in word reading.

Method
Participants
The study included adults and children from the general
school population. The adult sample comprised 92
volunteers 18–40 years old, including 25 in the incongruent
color group, 23 in the neutral color group, 22 in the word
group, and 22 in the control (no-training) group. The school
sample consisted of 105 children attending Grades 4–5,
including 22 in the incongruent color group, 26 in the
neutral color group, 31 in the word group, and 26 in the
control group.

Materials
The Greek words for red (κόκκινο /kocino/), green
(πράσινο /prasino/), and yellow (κίτρινο /citrino/) were
used, because they have the same number of letters and
syllables, comparable written frequency, and begin with
voiceless stops, which facilitate response time triggering.
The corresponding colors are familiar and easily
distinguishable. The color word condition included these
three words in white font.
Stimuli for the neutral color condition were made up of 7
repetitions of the letter X (no spaces) in red, green, and
yellow color (RGB #FF0000, #00FF00, and #FFFF00,
respectively). For the incongruent condition the Greek
words for red, green and yellow appeared in a non-matching
color. All stimuli were presented on a black background.

Rationale of the Present Study

Procedure

In light of the aforementioned findings the aim of the
present study was to examine how interference is affected
by practice not only in color naming but also in word
reading. According to the automaticity account, practice in
color naming should make this otherwise unpracticed
dimension more competitive and thereby decrease
interference, while practice in word reading might
strengthen an already practiced dimension and thereby
further increase interference, at least when reading skill has
not yet reached ceiling performance. However, if the
relationship between reading ability and interference is
negative, as proposed by Protopapas et al. (2007), practice
in color naming should have little effect on interference,
because the bottleneck causing interference does not involve
the processing of color but the delay in rejecting the word.

Testing. On Day 1 the first interference measurement
was taken. Participants were asked to name the color of the
ink as quickly as possible and to try to avoid errors. A
blocked design was implemented to minimize errors. The
neutral condition was administered first (24 stimuli,
including 8 in each color), followed by the incongruent
condition (24 stimuli, including 4 in each mismatching
word-color combination). The number of test trials was
determined in a pilot study, to minimize learning due to
testing. Each stimulus appeared on the screen for up to 2 s.
Responses were recorded via a headset under the control of
DMDX (Foster & Foster, 2003). Four practice trials
preceded data collection. The entire testing session lasted
about 3 minutes. An identical measurement was made on
Day 5, following practice.

1660

Children

Adults

Children

Adults

0.1

400

0.0
0.5

1200

0.4

1000

0.3

800

0.2

600

0.1

400

0.0
0.5

1200

RT Neutral
RT Incongruent

1000

Errors Neutral
Errors Incongruent

0.4
0.3

800

0.2

600

0.1

400

0.0
0.5

1200

0.4

1000

0.3

800

0.2

600

0.1

400

0.0

Pre

Post

Pre

Post

Pre

Post

Pre

Interference

0.2

600

Neutral color

0.3

800

Neutral word

0.4

1000

No training

0.5
1200

Post

Figure 1 : Response times in milliseconds (left) and proportions of incorrect responses (right) for each sample (adults
and children) in each condition (neutral and incongruent) and time point (pre- and post-practice). Each row of panels
displays data for one experimental group (top to bottom: D, no practice; A, incongruent; B, color naming; C, reading).
Each colored box contains the middle two quartiles of individual participant logarithmic means; the thick horizontal
line marks the median; error bars extend to the full range.
Practice. Participants were assigned randomly into one of
four conditions to practice for three consecutive days. Group
A practiced color naming of incongruent stimuli (e.g. red),
Group B color naming of neutral stimuli (e.g. XXXXXXX),
and Group C practiced word reading of neutral stimuli (e.g.
“red”). Children were required to complete one block of 144
trials per day. Adults completed one block of 192 trials per
day. A fourth group (D) of control participants included no
practice, to serve as a reference baseline.

the lme4 package (Bates, Maechler, & Bolker, 2012) in R
(R Core Team, 2012). Each training group was thus
compared for effects of practice against the no-practice
group. We employed linear mixed-effects models with
maximal random structures (Barr, Levy, Scheepers, & Tily,
2013), that is, including random intercepts for participants
as well as random slopes for time, condition, and their
interaction. For response time, in R notation the model
formula was specified as:
logRT~time*cond*group+(time*cond|subject)

Results
Responses were examined with CheckVocal (Protopapas,
2007) to determine accuracy and placement of the timing
marks. Response times were subsequently logarithmically
transformed to bring their distribution closer to normal.
To examine the differential effects of practice on
interference between groups we tested a triple interaction
between group, time, and condition using function lmer of

Here, “time” refers to before vs. after practice and “cond”
refers to neutral vs. incongruent (condition coding). Models
were estimated with full maximum likelihood. The
significance of the critical triple interaction was then tested
via likelihood ratio test against a simpler model excluding
the interaction from the fixed effects.
For children, as expected, the group practicing color
naming in the incongruent condition significantly reduced

1661

€

€

their time interference relative to the no-practice group ( βˆ =
−.14, t = −3.83; χ2 = 12.84, df = 1, p < .0005). The group
practicing color naming in the neutral condition did not
differ from the no-practice group ( βˆ = −.03, t €
= −.04; χ2 =
.49, df = €1, p = .482). In contrast, the group practicing color
word reading significantly reduced their time interference
( βˆ = −.07, t = −2.05; χ2 = €
4.05, df = 1, p = .044).€
For adults, the group practicing color naming in the
incongruent condition significantly reduced their
interference relative
to the no-practice group ( βˆ = −.13, t =
€
2
−3.44; χ = 10.56, df = 1, p = .001). However, there was no
significant change in interference either for the group
practicing color naming in the neutral€condition ( βˆ = −.03, t
2
€= −.83; χ = .69, df = 1, p = .408) or for the group practicing
word reading ( βˆ = −.02, t = −.45; χ2 = .20, df = 1, p = .652).
To analyze error rates, we employed€ generalized linear
mixed-effects
models with binomial responses modeled via
€
a logit€link. Again, a maximal
random structure was used.
€
For children, the group practicing color naming in the
incongruent condition significantly reduced their accuracy
interference relative to the no-practice group ( βˆ = −1.89, z =
−2.34, p = .019). The group practicing color naming in the
neutral condition did not differ from the no-practice group
( βˆ = −.43, z = −.68, p = .494), €in contrast the group
practicing color word reading significantly reduced their
accuracy interference ( βˆ = 1.46, z = 2.04, p = .041).
For adults, there were no significant effects in the
accuracy analyses (all p > .5).
€

Discussion

The results of the present study show that just three days of
practice in word reading suffice to produce a reduction in
Stroop interference in children. In contrast, interference did
not diminish with practice in color naming of neutral stimuli
in either population. Even though color naming is
considered to be insufficiently automatized (indeed this is
the usual explanation for the interference) and therefore
presumably amenable to improvement through practice, this
dimension of performance did not seem to have much effect
on interference. In contrast, we found that interference can
be reduced in children through practice in word reading of
color names, a highly counterintuitive finding from the
point of view of automaticity but a predicted outcome on the
basis of the blocking hypothesis. It is strengthened by the
fact that it was not replicated in adults, whose reading is
skilled and presumably not amenable to improvement.
Our findings cannot be explained by the automaticity
account. If Stroop interference derives from the imbalance
between reading and color naming due to extensive practice
in reading, then we should have observed the opposite
pattern of results. Specifically, practice in color naming of
neutral stimuli should strengthen the unpracticed dimension
and thereby decrease interference, while practice in word
reading should have made reading even more dominant and
further increase interference. Both of these predictions were
contradicted by the results.

Our main finding that word reading practice led to a
reduction of Stroop interference is consistent with a
negative relationship between reading ability and Stroop
interference, as proposed by Protopapas et al. (2007). This
relationship is due to the dependence of interference
primarily on the speed of processing of the irrelevant
stimulus, that is, of reading the word. The time needed to
retrieve the irrelevant word response is a crucial factor in
the process of interference because it sets a lower limit on
the time taken to reject (inhibit) this response. Therefore the
speed of reading puts severe constraints on interference. In
contrast, neutral color naming may be related to incongruent
color naming, because they are both color naming tasks (cf.
di Filippo & Zoccolotti, 2012), but it is not specifically
predictive of interference because there is ample time for the
color naming response to build up while the inappropriate
one (word reading) is retrieved and subsequently inhibited.
This suggestion links word reading and neutral color
naming, the two component tasks involved in Stroop
interference, with the phenomenon of interference directly,
via a blocking mechanism as proposed by Roelofs (2003).
Specifically, according to the computational model
WEAVER++ (Roefols, 2003) a blocking mechanism
prevents obligatory responses from being produced while
allowing their processing speed to determine the nondominant response latency. In this theoretical context,
interference does not occur because of the relative
processing strength of reading and color naming but because
a fundamental architectural distinction forces color naming
responses to wait until word reading responses are activated
and then suppressed. This approach can explain our results
in children, assuming that word lemma activation can
benefit through reading practice by strengthening the direct
connections between visual word stimuli and phonological
word forms. This leads to a faster suppression of the word
and ultimately to a faster color naming response.
Interference was also reduced in both groups with practice
in color naming of incongruent stimuli. Presumably, in this
condition participants learned to apply cognitive control
more effectively and suppress the irrelevant response faster.
As our data were not constrained by any participant
selection criteria and the participants were randomly
assigned to the experimental conditions, there is no factor to
attribute the differential development of interference other
than the experimental manipulation, namely practice.
Moreover, our implementation of an individual-item
computerized version of the Stroop task, instead of the oftemployed sheet form, alleviates concerns related to task
demands and spatial context that might impose
consideration of attentional allocation factors (Lachter,
Forster, & Ruthru, 2004; Risko, Stolz, & Besner, 2005).
Without diminishing the significance of executive functions
and attentional processes in interference, our data are
consistent with the idea of a direct link between reading
ability and Stroop interference.
One objection that may be raised against our
interpretation is that three days of practice in color naming

1662

of neutral stimuli may not have been enough to
counterbalance years of experience in word reading in
children, and especially in adults, so that a reduction of
interference can be observed. However, if we take into
account the effect of word reading practice in children, we
see that three days of practice were enough to reduce
interference despite years of previous experience with
words. Thus it seems that a few hundred trials may be
sufficient for these kinds of effects to emerge. Certainly, it
cannot be precluded that additional factors modulate color
and word processing and act differentially in the naming and
reading tasks, but this is an issue beyond the scope of our
current analysis, to be addressed in future study. However,
from the point of view of a graded automaticity account, it
still cannot be explained why practice in word reading did
not increase Stroop interference but, instead, decreased it.
Close examination of the raw response times for children
(Figure 1, left) reveals that post-training performance tended
to be slower than pre-training performance, a trend visible
also in the no-training group. This is an additional reason to
use a control group rather than directly comparing pre- to
post-training times. As it turned out, significant reduction of
interference was associated with a lack of increase in posttraining incongruent color naming times. So, in comparison
with the control group, this amounts to faster responses.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first training
study of the simple skills involved in Stroop interference,
namely reading and color naming, carried out with children.
Therefore there is no closely related literature to compare
our findings to. Because of the theoretical importance of
these results and the implications for cognitive theories of
conflict resolution processing, further research will be
required to confirm and extend these findings to additional
populations and tasks.

References
Alwitt, L. F. (1966). Attention in a visual task among nonreaders and readers. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 23,
361–362.
Barr, D. J., Levy, R., Scheepers, C., & Tily, H. J. (2013).
Random effects structure for confirmatory hypothesis
testing: Keep it maximal. Journal of Memory and
Language, 68, 255–278.
Bates, D., Maechler, M., & Bolker, B. (2012). lme4: Linear
mixed-effects models using S4 classes. R package version
0.999999-0. http://CRAN.R-project.org/package=lme4.
Cohen, J. D., Dunbar, K., & McClelland, J. L. (1990). On
the control of automatic processes: a parallel distributed
processing account of the Stroop effect. Psychological
Review, 97, 332–361.	  
Davidson, D. J., Zacks, R. T., & Williams, C. C. (2003).
Stroop interference, practice, and aging. Aging,
Neyropsychology, and Cognition, 10, 85-98.
Dulaney, C. L. & Rogers, W. A. (1994). Mechanisms
underlying reduction in Stroop interference with practice
for young and old adults. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, Cognition, 20, 470–484.

Everatt, J., Warner, J., & Miles, T. R. (1997). The incidence
of Stroop interference in dyslexia. Dyslexia, 3, 222–228.
Faccioli, C., Peru, A., Rubini, E., & Tassinari, G. (2008).
Poor readers but compelled to read: Stroop effects in
developmental Dyslexia. Child Neuropsychology, 14,
277–283.
Helland, T., & Asbjørnsen, A. (2000). Executive functions
in dyslexia. Child Neyropsychology, 6, 37–48.
Kapoula, Z., Lȇ, T.-T., Bonnet, A., Bourtoire, P., Demule,
E., Fauvel, C., Quilicci, C., & Yang, Q. (2010). Poor
performance in 15-year old dyslexic teenagers.
Experimental Brain Research, 203, 419–425.
Kelly, M. S., Best, C. T., & Kirk, U. (1989). Cognitive
processing deficits in reading disabilities: A prefrontal
cortical hypothesis. Brain and Cognition, 11, 275–293.
Kuhn, M. R., & Stahl, S. A. (2003). Fluency: A review of
developmental and remedial practices. Journal of
Educational Psychology, 95, 3–21.
Logan, G. D. (1997). Automaticity and reading:
Perspectives from the instance theory of automatization.
Reading and Writing Quarterly, 13, 123–146.
MacLeod, C. M., & Dunbar, K. (1988). Training and
Stroop-like interference: Evidence for a continuum of
automaticity. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 14, 126–135.
MacLeod, C. M. (1991). Half a century of research on the
Stroop effect: An integrative review. Psychological
Bulletin, 109, 163–203.
MacLeod, C. M. (1998). Training on integrated versus
separated Stroop tasks: The progression of interference
and facilitation. Memory & Cognition, 26, 201–211.
Protopapas, A. (2007). CheckVocal: A program to facilitate
checking the accuracy and response time of vocal
responses from DMDX. Behavior Research Methods, 39,
859–862.
Protopapas, A., Archonti, A., & Skaloumbakas, C. (2007).
Reading ability is negatively related to Stroop
interference. Cognitive Psychology, 54, 251–282.
R Core Team (2012). R: A language and environment for
statistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical
Computing, Vienna, Austria. http://www.R-project.org/.
Roelofs, A. (2003). Goal-referenced selection of verbal
action: Modeling attentional control in the Stroop task.
Psychological Review, 110, 88–125.
Samuels, S. J. (1999). Developing reading fluency in
learning-disabled students. In R. J. Sternberg & L. SpearSwerling (Eds.), Perspectives on learning disabilities:
Biological, cognitive, contextual. Boulder, CO: Westview.
Stroop, J. R. (1935). Studies of interference in serial verbal
reactions. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 18, 643–
662.
van der Schoot, M., Licht, R., Jorsley, T. M., & Sergeant, J.
A. (2000). Inhibitory deficits in reading disability depend
on subtype: Guessers but not spellers. Child
Neuropsychology, 6, 297–312.
Wolf, M., & Katzir–Cohen, T. (2001). Reading fluency and
intervention. Scientific Studies of Reading, 5, 211–239.

1663

