UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Brief Introduction to the Guidance Theory of Representation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8vf74098

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Rosenberg, Gregg
Anderson, Michael L.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Brief Introduction to the Guidance Theory of Representation
Gregg Rosenberg (ghrosenb@ai.uga.edu)
Artificial Intelligence Center, University of Georgia
Athens, GA 30602 USA

Michael L. Anderson (anderson@cs.umd.edu)
Institute for Advanced Computer Studies, University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742 USA

analyze this relation of aboutness—the intentionality of a
representation—in terms of some other, presumably more
basic relation. For instance, a typical causal theory of
representation might hold that a given representation R is
about E just in case it has a certain specified set of causal
relations to E, for instance, that perceiving an instance of
E will cause one to represent with R (Fodor, 1981; 1987).
Likewise an information-content approach might hold that
a given representation is about that object from which the
information it contains in fact derived (Dretske, 1981;
1986; 1988). Conceptual role theories, on the other hand,
try to analyze meaning in terms of the role played by the
concept in inferential and other conceptual/cognitive
processes: roughly speaking, the representation R is about
E just in case it is used to make warranted inferences
about E (Harman, 1982; 1987). Naturally, there are also
theories that try to combine these two approaches,
producing the so-called “two-factor” accounts (Block,
1986; Loar, 1981; Lycan, 1984). There is no need, nor is
this the place, to rehearse the standard critiques of these
various theories (but see Anderson, forthcoming-b).
However, by way of situating and introducing our own
account of representational content, let us say that we find
the various causal approaches too input focused, meaning
they give too much importance to the ways in which the
environment affects the organism to endow its states with
representational meaning, and while the conceptual role
theories seem to us a step in the right direction in that they
draw attention to the importance of cognitive actions
taken by the subject with its representations, none of the
theories outlined above give sufficient weight to the full
range of what a subject does with its representations.
In contrast, we ask first not what a representation is, but
what it does for the representing agent, and what the agent
does with it; what is a representation for? Our contention
is essentially that representations are what representations
do, and that what a representation does is provide
guidance for action.
Whatever the details of its
instantiation or structure, whatever its physical,
informational, or inferential features (and these are quite
various across different representing systems), what
makes a given item representational is its role in
providing guidance to the cognitive agent for taking
actions with respect to the represented object. In our
view, each of those other special features a given
representing token might possess—e.g. co-variance with,

Abstract
Recent trends in the philosophy of mind and cognitive
science can be fruitfully characterized as part of the
ongoing attempt to come to grips with the very idea of
homo sapiens—an intelligent, evolved, biological agent—
and its signature contribution is the emergence of a
philosophical anthropology which, contra Descartes and
his thinking thing, instead puts doing at the center of
human being. Applying this agency-oriented line of
thinking to the problem of representation, this paper
introduces the guidance theory, according to which the
content and intentionality of representations can be
accounted for in terms of the way they provide guidance
for action. We offer a brief account of the motivation for
the theory, and a formal characterization.

Introduction and Background
Recent trends in the philosophy of mind and cognitive
science can be fruitfully characterized as part of the
ongoing attempt to come to grips with the very idea of
homo sapiens—an intelligent, evolved, biological agent—
and its signature contribution is the emergence of a
philosophical anthropology which, contra Descartes and
his thinking thing, instead puts doing at the center of
human being. Work that falls under this broad umbrella
includes accounts of human cognition which stress
embodiment and environmental situatedness (Anderson,
2003; forthcoming-a; Ballard et al., 1997; Clancey, 1997;
Clark, 1995; Varela, Thompson, & Rosch, 1991),
pragmatic and evolutionary accounts of human
knowledge and culture (Barkow, Cosmides, & Tooby,
1992; Guignon, 1983; Hacking, 1983; Munz, 1993;
O’Donovan-Anderson, 1997; Rescher, 1990) and actionoriented accounts of perception (Aloimonos, 1992;
Ballard, 1991; Gibson, 1966; Milner & Goodale, 1995;
O’Regan & Noë, 2001), to name only a few categories,
and a few of the many works in each. The current essay
introduces the results of our effort to build a theory of
representation on the basis of the same kind of agencyoriented approach. It is only an introduction, and many
difficult issues will have to be treated briefly, or not at all.
The interested reader is encouraged to consult the fuller
treatment given in (Rosenberg & Anderson, forthcoming).
A representation is something that stands in for, is in
some sense about, something else. How is one thing ever
about another? To answer this question is usually to

1185

to direct motor processes. A cognitive process is
under intentional control if the working of that
cognitive process is subject to modification by
processes of attention, short-term memory, valuation,
assent and dissent, practiced learning, and
consciously administered self-criticism and praise.
As mentioned already, the fact that subjects take action
with respect to things is what confers content on
representations; it is how representations reach outside the
organism and touch things in the world. The central
importance of the intentionality of action means that it is
vital to correctly understand—without regress—what it is
for an action to be taken with respect to something.
(6) An action is taken with respect to an entity E if, and
only if,
(6.1) The action is a motor program, E is the focus of
the intended change or efforts at control in the world;
or
(6.2) The action is a motor program and an
assumption of information about E is a motivating
reason that the given action, rather than some
alternative non-E involving action, was undertaken;
or
(6.3) The action is a cognitive process undertaken to
discover or confirm facts, to modify values, or to
decide between alternative actions, and an
assumption of information about E is necessary if the
process as a whole is to provide guidance for the
subject’s motor actions.
This definition uses three further terms—motivating
reason, focus, and assumption of information—that
present the potential for regress and require further
discussion.

openness to the causal influence of, or resemblance to its
object—correspond to one of the range of strategies that
our various representation-forming and representationconsuming systems have evolved to solve the biologically
fundamental problem of providing autonomous organisms
with guidance for action.
On the guidance theory action is fundamentally
intentional: it is first and last a directed engagement with
the world. Our basic claim is that representations come
into existence and derive their content from their role
supporting the basic intentionality of action. The fact that
subjects take action with respect to things is what confers
content on representations; it is how representations reach
outside the organism and touch things in the world. The
guidance theory presumes, then, that the intentionality of
representation can be grounded in the intentionality of
action.

A Formal Account of the Guidance Theory
Let us say that a token provides guidance to a subject by
making its features available to the subject’s motor
systems and rational control processes for use in making
discriminating choices between possible actions or
possible ways of executing actions. Below we introduce
the foundations of the guidance theory in terms of a set of
propositions, which together characterize the most central
features of the theory.
(1) An entity is anything that can be represented: a
property, a concrete particular, an aspect of a thing, a state
of affairs, a number, etc.
(2) A subject is any representation-consuming
cognitive engine. To be a representation consumer, it
must be capable of interacting in the world in a rational,
goal directed way due at least partly to guidance it
receives from tokens within its cognitive systems.
(3) A circumstance is a circumstance of the subject. A
circumstance consists in the subject’s internal states,
including the subject’s bodily changes, registrations,
representations, expectations, priorities, values, options
for action, homeostatic self-evaluations, procedural
knowledge, motor schemas and also the subject’s
immediate environment.
(4) A subject standardly uses tokens (of a type) to
provide guidance with respect to an entity E in a given
(type of) circumstance C if, and only if, the subject has an
enduring conscious preference or conditioned reflex to
use the tokens (i.e., members of the type) to provide
guidance with respect to E when in circumstance C.
(5) An action can be a motor process or a cognitive
process. This yields two clauses in the definition of
action:
(5.1) In the case of a motor process, a motor process
is an action if, and only if, it is activated under
control of perceptual/cognitive feedback processes
capable of effectively modulating or bringing about
changes in the organism or in the world
(5.2) In the case of cognitive processes, a cognitive
process is an action if, and only if, it is a mental
process under intentional control whose results
contribute to circumstances (as defined above) used

Motivating Reason
For an account of motivating reason, we hold only that
any analysis must be such that it would be applicable to
goal-directed behavior of entities that do not have
representations at all. For example, it must be of a piece
with how we would identify the motivating reasons for
why a plant turns toward the sunlight. The plant’s
behavior is goal-directed behavior even if it is not action
in the sense defined above, and the motivating reason for
the behavior is to maximize the amount of sunlight
available for photosynthesis. Because the plant does not
have representations, a correct account of motivating
reason cannot appeal to representational content.
We also distinguish motivating reasons from
applications of causal force. A child may go to bed early
on Christmas Eve to encourage Santa Claus to bring
presents, and this may be the child’s motivating reason,
even though Santa Claus is not capable of applying causal
force on the child’s mind. A hungry wolf may look for
prey and its motivating reason may be a future state of
satiety, even if the cause of its behavior is a present
internal state. Any account of motivating reasons must
allow for motivating reasons that are non-representational
facts and entities, even for agents that possess
representations.

1186

printer. From the perspective of the guidance theory, here
is the key fact: these character strings represent what they
do both because of the circumstances in which the
computer is reading them and also because of the
assumptions built into those circumstances. The computer
processes the strings as if they conveyed information
about the printer to which it sends its commands and
which communication protocol it should use. There is no
regress involved in claiming it makes this assumption,
because the assumption itself is not a matter of having
representational content. There is no representation inside
the computer with the content: I assume that this string
has information about the printer. Even more strongly, its
ability to make an assumption of information does not
require that the computer actually possesses information,
nor that it ever did.1 In the case described, the character
string the computer accesses could have been placed on
the disk via the output of a random number generator and
by coincidence be effective in directing it to the printer.
Even were that to be true, the string still would be
providing guidance and the computer would still be
making an assumption that the string contained
information about the correct printer. Therefore, the
ability to make an assumption of information does not
require an ability to have or obtain information.
Rather, the assumption of information about the printer
is a matter of know-how that is built into the architecture
of the computer: how it accesses representations, in what
circumstances it accesses them, how it reads and
interprets their structure, what actions it initiates and
monitors upon accessing them, how those actions cause it
to interact with the world, and so forth. We can provide a
candidate analysis of this know-how. To do this, we first
need to define, for any given token, the class of actions it
supports. The class of actions a token T supports is
relative to the kinds of circumstances C where the system
is prepared to use the token for guidance. It consists of all
the actions the system can initiate or modulate in C due to
its processing of T. Let us label this class of supported
actions Asupp.
(8) An action A is a member of the class of actions,
Asupp, supported by a token T used by a subject S in
circumstances C if, and only if, S in C would use T for
guidance regarding the initiation or manner of execution
of A.
We should think of the actions in Asupp as focus-neutral
descriptions of an action in need of association with a
focus in particular initiations. So, for example, if in some
circumstances a system is prepared to use a token for
guidance in running, the action running is the focus
neutral description. If the specific initiation of this action
occurs when the focus of the action is a bear, the focusneutral action “running” is initiated as the focus-specific
action “running away from a bear.” Actions obtain a focus
in the way discussed above.
Furthermore, since subjects do not initiate actions at
random, for each action in Asupp, there will be a (possibly

At its heart, the concept of a motivating reason is
deeply tied to concepts of rational interpretation like the
one found in Daniel Dennett’s description of the
intentional stance (Dennett, 1987). We take no position
here on the basis of, or constraints on, any specific
standards of rational interpretation.

Focus
As it is used above, the idea of an action’s focus is
intended to express a functionalist concept. When a
subject is performing an action it places itself into a
potential feedback loop with its environment. Its purpose
is to monitor the result of the action and to plan
adjustments to its course of action.
(7) The focus of an action is the ultimate entity being
monitored through the feedback channels taken to provide
indications of its status.
A subject may monitor the focus directly, or indirectly
by monitoring the status of some entity being used as an
indicator of facts about the focus. Because indicators are
made part of an extended guidance control system,
indications about the focus will cause in the subject
beliefs, decisions or equivalent states about further
appropriate actions or perhaps that action may cease.
When the focus is monitored through an indicator the
subject may have an indirect causal connection to the
focus or even no causal connection at all. An example of
an indirect causal connection to a focus would be an
engineer monitoring a gauge that is itself monitoring
engine pressure. Examples of focii to which there is no
causal connection are things like the time of day or a
mathematical operation on numbers. To monitor the first
we might monitor an indicator like a clock face and to
monitor the second we might monitor a progression of
numerals manipulated according to established rules. In
both of these cases the focus of the action is something
that is not present and to which the subject is not even
indirectly causally connected, but which can be monitored
nevertheless, despite the lack of causal causation, by
establishing a connection to something else that can be
manipulated to vary systematically with facts about the
focus.
Identifying the focus of an action in a given case
requires establishing the facts about what the subject is
monitoring in its circumstances, and understanding these
facts in terms of the subject’s motivating reasons.

Assumption of Information
An assumption of information is to be cashed out in terms
of facts about the actual operation of the representing
system (or subject). Beginning with an example will make
the concept easier to grasp. Imagine a computer
processing a user’s command to print a document. To do
this, the computer must determine to which printer it
should send its own commands. To guide this action, the
computer reads several character strings contained on its
hard disk, one identifying the printer and others with other
information about the printer. These strings guide it
regarding where it should send its print commands and
what protocol it should use to communicate with the

1

This, assuming that possessing information depends on causal
history and connection, which may not be the case.

1187

very large but) finite set of circumstances capable of
triggering the initiation of the action. We can call this set
of triggering circumstances Acirc. The number of triples
<A ∈Asupp, C ∈ Acirc, Focus> representing supported
actions A initiated in circumstances C with focus Focus
provides a class of counterfactual action scenarios, Ascene,
in which the token T provides guidance for a subject.
These are the action scenarios in which T participates.
Most actions are complex, both in the sense that they
have many different specific features that must be
managed (e.g., the trajectory and velocity of a running
motion), and in the sense that they almost always require
initiating smaller or tangential actions involving entities
besides its focus if they are to succeed in affecting their
intended change or control (e.g., jumping over the branch
on the ground while running from the bear). Because of
the complexity of action, subjects needing to execute an
action will almost always use representations other than
the tokens representing the focus of the action. In fact,
activation of these further tokens is necessary to fill out
the circumstances in which all the tokens are used.
These other active representations will fall into several
categories: conscious representations with foci of their
own serving the larger action program; unconscious but
potentially conscious representations supporting the
interpretation of the circumstances and manner in which
the action is executed; and sub-conscious representations
that can never be conscious but that provide support for
basic perception, adjusting bodily movements, and
triggering emotion. We should construe the entities
towards which the supporting tokens provide guidance as
sub-foci in sub-actions lying under the umbrella of the
main action. Therefore, these further tokens, the ones that
support the guidance for the main action within a given
Ascene, have functional roles determined by their potential
relationships to their own foci within the circumstances C
of Ascene.
Relative to these action scenarios, the guidance theory
supposes that in each Ascene where an active token
succeeds in having reference2 the token can be mapped to
an entity through its functional role under the rational
constraints associated with assigning motivating reasons
to their sub-actions. This supposition is justified because,
in providing guidance, a token will make features of itself
available to the subject, which the subject can use to
differentially control its actions with respect to an entity
which is a focus or sub-focus of a given action.
The know-how involved in an assumption of
information, then, is a question of the way that the
subject’s decoders and action mechanisms process and/or
respond to representations (i.e., how it accesses
representations, in what circumstances it accesses them,
how it reads and interprets their structure, what actions it
initiates and monitors upon accessing them, how those
actions cause it to interact with the world, and so forth)
given the subject’s capabilities, needs, environment, and
cognitive architecture. The general idea is that

assumptions
of information consist
in
nonrepresentational facts about how the subject works, not in
further representational facts about, or representations
used by, the subject. Although this account is clearly
preliminary, it does at least show how the idea of an
assumption of information can be interpreted, and used as
part of the machinery involved in determining the content
of a representation, without initiating a vicious regress or
involving circular appeals to representational content.
This brings us, finally, to the cumulative definition of
representation. On the guidance theory, representation is
simply tracking in the sense defined below:
(9) A token T tracks an entity E for a subject S in token
circumstances C if, and only if, T is standardly used to
provide guidance to S for taking action with respect to E
in C.
(10) A token T represents an entity E for a subject S in
token circumstances C if, and only if, T tracks E for S in
C.
By linking representation to guidance in this way, the
guidance theory distributes responsibility for the existence
of representational content across a representational token
(the representation) and an interpretative decoding
mechanism (the decoder) integrated with a subject’s
action-determining processes. The effect of distributing
responsibility is to introduce new degrees of freedom
regarding the exact physical or informational
requirements for something to be a representation, as the
requirements on the representation will depend on the
capabilities of the decoder and the circumstances in which
it is used. In general, the demands on each part of the
coupled system vary inversely with the demands on the
other. A representation that is highly structured and
closely coupled with what it represents needs a less
sophisticated decoding mechanism, while a very
sophisticated (or very rigid and simple) decoding
mechanism may embody (or presume) so much implicit
domain knowledge that it can get by with very sparse
representations.

Representation and Misrepresentation
One of the most important problems that any theory of
representation must solve is the problem of normativity:
representations are assessable for accuracy, and therefore
they can be in error. To be complete, the guidance theory
must account for this feature of representations. Because
the guidance theory is an action-based theory of
representation, the natural thing to do is to base error on
the failure of action and the way that a representation’s
guidance contributes to that failure. The intuitive idea,
then, is that a representation is in error if it provided
guidance to an action that failed in its intent, and it failed
partly or wholly because of the guidance provided by that
representation. This intuitive idea can be formalized as
follows:
(11) An action fails in its intent if, and only if,
(11.1) It is a motor action and the intended change is
not achieved or the intended process is not brought
under control; or

2

The concept of error will be defined formally in the next
section.

1188

(11.2) It is a cognitive process and it (a) confirms a
representation that is in error3; or (b) disconfirms a
representation that is not in error; or (c) modifies a
value in a way that the subject later regrets; or (d)
recommends a course of action that fails.
(12) An action A fails in its intent because of R if, and
only if, (a) A failed; and (b) A was taken with respect to
an entity E; and (c) R provided guidance for A w.r.t. E;
and (d) R has feature F; and (e) R with F represents that
E has property P; and (f) A failed because E was not P.
Note that the term “represents” in clause (e) is to be read
in light of the current theory of representation.
(13) A token representation R is in error for subject S
and action A in token circumstances C if, and only if, A
would fail because of R if taken by S in C.
The representation may be said to be in error for S
simpliciter if and only if the class of actions for which R
provides guidance in S’s circumstances C is dominated by
actions that would fail because of R.

fades quickly as the details are examined. For while we
agree on this very general characterization of cognitive
systems, we differ as to the core point: that mental
representations must be pictures and, even when they are
pictures, we differ as to what makes such “abstract
pictures” representations.
There are three main components to this very basic
disagreement. First, on our view, a given mental token is
a representation just in case it is standardly used by a
given organism to guide its behavior with respect to the
intended object; Millikan, in contrast, suggests that it is
only a representation if it is the result of (or consumed by)
a properly functioning system, performing the function it
was selected to perform: “It is not the facts about how the
system does operate that make it a representing system
and determine what it represents. Rather, it is the facts
about what it would be doing if it were operating
according to biological norms.” (Millikan, 1993:10-11)
Second, and deeply related to the first, Millikan relies
heavily on the notion of such a “proper function” to
explain the possibility of representational error (a
representation is in error when the relevant
representation-producing or representation-consuming
system is not functioning according to biological norms).
In contrast, our theory allows for the possibility that a
system serving some function other than that for which it
was selected, or mal-functioning in some very lucky way,
could, in its use of mental tokens, be representing just in
case (roughly speaking) the mental tokens in question
were being used to (successfully) guide the agent’s
actions with respect to the indicated objects. Rather than
analyze representational error in terms of mal- or nonstandardly-functioning systems, we cash it out in terms of
failure of action. Although we think representational
systems did evolve, and attention to their evolutionary
history can help us understand how and why they function
as they do, we believe a system can sometimes
competently perform a function, including representing,
for which it was not selected, and in these cases its
unusual provenance should be no barrier to recognizing
this fact.
Third (and finally), whereas Millikan’s view of
behavior and action revolves around the function or
purpose of the organism or its parts (a movement by the
organism is only a behavior of that organism if it can (or
perhaps must) be understood in terms of the organism’s
proper function or biological purposes), our own
definition of action includes motor and cognitive
processes effected for a broader range of motivating
reasons. Although some element of teleology is
apparently necessary to ground the idea of a motivating
reason for acting, it is not clear to us that this must
necessarily be accounted for in terms of natural selection.
It could be the teleology of the subject itself, understood
as having a subjective purpose like maintaining its
homeostatic condition, pursuing hedonic value, or
maintaining adherence to a moral, political, or aesthetic
principle. A more detailed discussion relating the
guidance theory to some alternative theories, including
Millikan’s, can be found in (Anderson, forthcoming-b).

Comparison to Related Work
The guidance theory, broadly speaking, takes both a
naturalistic and a functional perspective on representation.
It is motivated by the same fundamental insight regarding
the epistemic importance of action and interaction as gave
rise to the theory of interactive representation (Bickhard,
1993; 1999). However, we offer a significantly different
development and formalization of this shared insight. For
instance, Bickhard’s analysis relies heavily on control
theory, cashes out representational content in terms of
‘environmental interactive properties’, and assumes some
version of process ontology. The guidance theory, while
compatible with these possibilities, does not require them.
Still, the relative advantages of these two analyses remain
largely to be determined. While there are many other
naturalistic theories of representation on offer, very few
adopt the functional perspective in as thoroughgoing a
way as we do. For instance, Dretske (1986; 1988) adopts
the functional perspective largely as a post-hoc fix to
what remains an information-content approach to
representation, so as to be better able to account for
misinformation. In contrast, Ruth Millikan does take the
functional perspective as the starting point for her theory
of representation, and the guidance theory thus bears the
most resemblance to hers (Millikan, 1984; 1993). Thus,
although the current article is meant only as a concise
introduction to the guidance theory, and is not the place
for any detailed comparisons with rival theories, it is
nevertheless worthwhile to say a few words about
Millikan’s theory in particular.
The resemblance between the guidance theory and
Millikan’s own biologically inspired theory is strongest
when she writes things like: “Cognitive systems are
designed by evolution to make abstract pictures of the
organism’s environment and to be guided by these
pictures in the production of appropriate actions.”
(Millikan, 1993:11) However, the impression of similarity
3

This clause in the definition is an embedded recursion, not a
circularity.

1189

Conclusion

Clark, A. (1995). Being There. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Dennett, D.C. (1987). The Intentional Stance. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Dretske, F. (1981). Knowledge and the flow of
information. Cambridge, MA, MIT Press.
Dretske, Fred (1986). Misrepresentation. In R. Bogdan,
(Ed.), Belief: Form, Content, and Function. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Dretske, F. (1988). Explaining behavior. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Fodor, Jerry A. (1981). Representations: Philosophical
Essays on the Foundations of Cognitive Science.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Fodor, J. (1987). Psychosemantics. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Gibson, J. J. (1966). The senses considered as perceptual
systems. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Guignon, C. (1983). Heidegger and the Problem of
Knowledge. Indianapolis, IN: Hackett Publishers.
Hacking, I. (1983). Representing and Intervening.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Harman, G. (1982). Conceptual role semantics. Notre
Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 23, 242-56.
Harman, G. (1987). (Nonsolopsistic) conceptual role
semantics. In E. LePore (Ed.), Semantics of Natural
Language. New York: Academic Press.
Loar, B. (1981). Mind and meaning. London: Cambridge
University Press.
Lycan, W. (1984). Logical form in natural language.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Millikan, R. (1984). Language, Thought, and Other
Biological Categories. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Millikan, R. (1993). White Queen Psychology and Other
Essays for Alice. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Milner, A. D. & Goodale, M. A. (1995). The Visual Brain
in Action. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Munz, P. (1993). Philosophical Darwinism: On the
Origin of Knowledge by Means of Natural Selection.
London: Routledge.
O’Donovan-Anderson, M. (1997). Content and
Comportment: On Embodiment and the Epistemic
Availability of the World. Lanham, MD: Rowman and
Littlefield.
O’Regan, K. & Noë, A. (2001). A sensorimotor account
of vision and visual consciousness. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 24 (5), 883-917.
Rescher, N. (1990). A Useful Inheritance: Evolutionary
Aspects of the Theory of Knowledge. Lanham, MD:
Rowman.
Rosenberg, G. (2004). A Place For Consciousness: The
Theory of Natural Individuals. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Rosenberg G. & Anderson M.L. (forthcoming). Content
and action: The guidance theory of representation.
Varela, F. J., Thompson, E., & Rosch, E. (1991). The
Embodied Mind: Cognitive Science and Human
Experience. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

The guidance theory is an action-focused theory of
representation according to which content is derived from
the role a representational vehicle plays in guiding a
subject’s actions with respect to other things. What
qualifies an element of experience as a representation is,
strictly speaking, only that the element of experience be
capable of providing a subject with guidance for its
actions with respect to entities. To be capable of
providing guidance an element of experience only needs
to have features useful for exploitation by the subject’s
action-producing mechanisms.
In the full formalization, we show that the guidance
theory can account for various problem cases of
representational content such as abstract, fictional and
non-existent
objects
(Rosenberg
&
Anderson,
forthcoming). Twin-Earth and swampman are discussed
in (Anderson, forthcoming-b). Future work will consider
the evolutionary development of representation in more
detail, and the implications of the guidance theory for the
correspondence theory of truth, for scientific realism, and
for consciousness and phenomenal content (Rosenberg,
2004).

References
Aloimonos, Y. E. (1992). Purposive active vision.
CVGIP: Image Understanding, 56, 840-50.
Anderson, M. L. (2003). Embodied cognition: A field
guide. Artificial Intelligence, 149(1), 91-130.
Anderson, M. L. (forthcoming-a). Cognitive science and
epistemic openness. Phenomenology and the Cognitive
Sciences.
Anderson, M. L. (forthcoming-b). Representation,
evolution and embodiment. In: D. Smith (Ed.),
Evolutionary Biology and the Central Problems of
Cognitive Science, special issue of Theoria et Historia
Scientarum, 9 (2005/1).
Ballard, D. H., Hayhoe, M. M., Pook, P. K., & Rao, R. P.
N. (1997). Deictic codes for the embodiment of
cognition. Behavioral & Brain Sciences, 20(4), 723767.
Ballard, D. H. (1991). Animate vision. Artificial
Intelligence, 48, 57-86.
Barkow, J. H., Cosmides, L. & Tooby, J. (Eds.) (1992).
The Adapted Mind: Evolutionary Psychology and the
Generation of Culture. New York, NY: Oxford
University Press.
Bickhard, M. H. (1993). Representational content in
humans and machines. Journal of Experimental and
Theoretical Artificial Intelligence, 5, 285-333.
Bickhard, M.H. (1999). Interaction and representation.
Theory & Psychology, 9(4), 435-458.
Block, N. (1986). Advertisement for a semantics for
psychology. In P. French, T. Uehling & H. Wettstein,
(Eds.), Midwest Studies in Philosophy X, 615-678.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Clancey, W. J. (1997). Situated cognition: On human
knowledge and computer representations. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

1190

