UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Computational Model of Children's Semantic Memory

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2dg5b94j

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Denhiere, Guy
Lemaire, Benoit

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Computational Model of Children's Semantic Memory
Guy Denhière (denhiere@up.univ-mrs.fr)
L.P.C & C.N.R.S. Université de Provence
Case 66, 3 place Victor Hugo
13331 Marseille Cedex, France

Benoît Lemaire (Benoit.Lemaire@upmf-grenoble.fr)
L.S.E., University of Grenoble 2, BP 47
38040 Grenoble Cedex 9, France

Abstract
A computational model of children's semantic memory is
built from the Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) of a
multisource child corpus. Three tests of the model are
described, simulating a vocabulary test, an association test
and a recall task. For each one, results from experiments with
children are presented and compared to the model data.
Adequacy is correct, which means that this simulation of
children's semantic memory can be used to simulate a variety
of children's cognitive processes.

Introduction
Models of human language processing are usually based on
a layer of basic semantic representations on top of which
cognitive processes are described. For instance, the
construction-integration model (Kintsch, 1998) describes
processes that operate on a network of propositions. These
basic representations can just be descriptions of what the
human memory looks like, in order for the upper models to
be explicitly stated, but they can also be operationalized so
that the model can be tested on a computer. In the first case,
these representations are usually designed by hand, but this
method prevents large-scale simulations.
This was the case with Kintsch's construction-integration
model until 1998. Before that, researchers had to code
propositions by hand and guess relevant values to code the
strength of links between nodes. Then Kintsch (1998) used
the Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) model (Deerwester et
al., 1990; Landauer et al., 1998) which provides a way to
automatically build these basic representations. This was a
major step since the construction-integration processes
could then be tested on a large variety of inputs, while being
less dependent on idiosyncratic codings. Such a mechanism
for automatically constructing basic semantic representations should be carefully designed and tested in order to
simulate as good as possible human semantic memory.
LSA is nowadays considered as a good candidate for
modeling an adult semantic memory based on a large
corpora of representative texts: Bellissens et al. (2002),
Kintsch (2000) and Lemaire & Bianco (2003) used it for
modeling metaphor comprehension; Pariollaud et al. (2002)
used it for modeling the comprehension of idiomatic
expressions; Howard & Kahana (2002) relied on it to model
free recall and episodic memory retrieval; Laham (1997) did
the same for modeling categorization processes; Landauer

297

& Dumais (1997) designed a model of vocabulary
acquisition based on LSA; Lemaire & Dessus (2001),
Rehder et al. (1998) and Wolfe et al. (1998) used it for
modeling knowledge assessment; Quesada et al. (2001)
modeled complex problem solving by means of LSA basic
representations; Wolfe & Goldman (2003) worked on a
model of reasoning about historical accounts based on LSA.
However, to our knowledge, no computational basic
representations were made that mimic full children's
semantic memory.
This paper aims at presenting such a model. First, we
present LSA. We then describe our corpus, which is
supposed to mimic the kind of texts children are exposed to.
Finally, we present three experiments which aim at
validating the model.

Latent Semantic Analysis
Basic semantic representations
There are many ways of constructing basic semantic
representations that can be processed by a computer. The
first one is to build them by hand. Powerful formalisms like
description logic (Borgida, 1996) or semantic networks
(Sowa, 1991) have been designed to accurately represent
concepts, properties and relations. However, in spite of
huge efforts (Lenat, 1995), no full set of symbolic representations has been made that can be considered a reasonable
model of human semantic memory. Hand-coding semantic
information is tedious and, as we mention later, symbolic
representations might not be the best formalism for that.
Another strategy is to rely on corpora to get the semantic
information. Artificial intelligence researchers have
designed sophisticated syntactic processing tools for
automatically describing the knowledge using the kind of
symbolic formalisms mentioned earlier. They usually refer
to them as ontologies or knowledge bases (Vossen, 2003).
However, in spite of great strides, this approach still cannot
be the means to form the basic semantic representations that
cognitive researchers need. First, it cannot be fully
automatized, except for specific domains, thus preventing
complete descriptions of the language. Second and quite
paradoxically, since the descriptions are quite elaborated, it
is very hard to design reasoning processes on top of them.
For instance, a simple process like estimating the degree of
semantic association is very hard to operationalize on
complex structures like semantic networks.

Instead of relying on symbolic representations, a third
approach consists in (1) analyzing the co-occurrence of
words in large corpora in order to draw semantic similarities
and (2) relying on very simple structures, namely highdimensional vectors, to represent meanings. In this
approach, the unit is the word. The meaning of a word is not
defined per se, but rather determined by its relationships
with all others. For instance, instead of defining the
meaning of bicycle in an absolute manner (by its properties,
function, role, etc.), it is defined by its degree of association
to other words (i.e., very close to bike, close to pedals, ride,
wheel, but far from duck, eat, etc.). This semantic
information can be established from raw texts, provided that
enough input is available. This is exactly what human
people do: it seems that most of the words we know, we
learn by reading (Landauer & Dumais, 1997). The reason is
that most words appear almost only in written form and that
direct instruction seems to play a limited role. Therefore, we
would learn the meaning of words mainly from raw texts,
by mentally constructing their meaning through repeated
exposure to appropriate contexts.

Relying on direct co-occurrence
One way to mimic this powerful mechanism would be to
rely on direct co-occurrences within a given context unit. A
usual unit is the paragraph which is both computationally
easy to identify and of reasonable size. We would say that:
R1: words are similar if they occur in the same paragraphs.
Therefore, we would count the number of occurrences of
each word in each paragraph. Suppose we use a 5,000paragraph corpus. Each word would be represented by
5,000 values, that is by a 5,000 dimension vector. For
instance:
avalanche: (0,1,0,0,0,0,1,0,2,0,0,0,0,0,0,1,1,0,1,0,1,0,0,0,0,0,0…)
snow:
(0,2,0,0,0,0,0,0,1,1,0,0,0,0,0,0,2,1,1,0,1,0,0,0,0,0,0…)

This means that the word avalanche appears once in the 2nd
paragraph, once in 7th, twice in the 9th, etc. One could see
that, given the previous rule, both words are quite similar:
they co-occur quite often. A simple cosine between the two
vectors can measure the degree of similarity. However, this
rule does not work well (Perfetti, 1998; Landauer, 2002):
two words should be considered similar even if they do not
co-occur. French & Labiouse (2002) think that this rule
might still work for synonyms because writers tend not to
repeat words, but use synonyms instead. However, defining
semantic similarity only from direct co-occurrence is
probably a serious restriction.

For your fitness, you can practice bike. It is very nice and
good to your body.
Bicycling and bike appear in similar paragraphs. If this is
repeated over a large corpus, it would be reasonable to
consider them similar, even if they never co-occur within
the same paragraph. Now we need to define paragraph
similarity. We could say that two paragraphs would be
similar if they share words, but that would be restrictive: as
illustrated in the previous example, two paragraphs should
be considered similar although they do not have words in
common (functional words are usually not taken into
account). Therefore, the rule is:
R2: paragraphs are similar if they contain similar words.
Rules 1* and 2 constitute a circularity, but this can be
solved by a specific mathematical procedure called singular
value decomposition, which is applied to the occurrence
matrix. This is exactly what LSA does. To state it in other
words, LSA is not only based on direct co-occurrence, but
rather on higher-order co-occurrence. Kontostahis &
Pottenger (2002) have shown that these higher-order cooccurrences do appear in large corpora.
LSA consists in reducing the huge dimensionality of
direct word co-occurrences to its best N dimensions. All
words are then represented as N-dimensional vectors.
Empirical tests have shown that performance is maximal for
N around 300 for the whole general English language
(Landauer et al., 1998; Bellegarda, 2000) but this value can
be smaller for specific domains (Dumais, 2003). We will
not describe the mathematical procedure which is presented
in details elsewhere (Deerwester, 1990; Landauer et
al., 1998). The fact that word meanings are represented as
vectors leads to two consequences. First, it is straightforward to compute the semantic similarity between words,
which is usually the cosine between the corresponding
vectors, although others similarity measures can be used.
Examples of semantic similarities between words from a
12.6 million word corpus are (Landauer, 2002):
cosine(doctor, physician) = .61
cosine(red, orange) = .64
Second, sentences or texts can be assigned a vector, by a
simple weighted linear combination of their word vectors.
This is a powerful feature of a semantic representation to be
able to go easily from words to texts. An example of
semantic similarity between sentences is:
cosine(the cat was lost in the forest, my little feline
disappeared in the trees) = .66

Modeling children's semantic memory

Relying on higher-order co-occurrence
Therefore, another rule would be:
R1*: words are similar if they occur in similar paragraphs.
This is a much better rule. Consider the following two
paragraphs:
Bicycling is a very pleasant sport. It helps keeping a good
health.

298

Semantic space
As we mentioned before, our goal was to rely on LSA to
define a reasonable approximation of children's semantic
memory. This is a necessary step for simulating a variety of
children cognitive processes.
LSA itself obviously cannot form such a model: it needs
to be applied to a corpus. We gathered French texts that
approximately correspond to what a child is exposed to:

Tests
In order to test whether this semantic space can be an
acceptable approximation of the semantic memory of
children, we tested three features: its extent, its organization
and its use. For each one, we relied on a specific task and
compared the data from the simulation of the task to data
obtained from children on the exact same task.
The extent feature has to do with the size of lexical
knowledge. Does our semantic space knows the kind of
words that a child knows? We used a vocabulary task for
that: given a word, the goal is to find the correct definition
from four of them. By comparing the model data with
children's data at various ages, our goal is to approximately
identify the kind of children we are mimicking.
The organization feature concerns the way words are
associated to others in memory. Do we correctly mimic the
semantic neighborhood of words? The task we used for
testing that feature is an association task :given a word, the
goal is to provide the most associated one. We will compare
children's association norms to association measures in the
semantic space.
The use feature has to do with the way semantic memory
is used. Is our semantic space adequate enough so that it can
account for a process that uses it? We used a recall task for
studying the text comprehension process which obviously
largely relies on semantic representations.
These three experiments cover different tasks and
different grain sizes of language entities, from words to
texts: the first one consists of word comparisons, the second
one compares a word and a sentence and the third one
compares texts. We expect a good match between human
data and model data. In addition, we hypothesize that results
will be higher with our children corpus than with adult
corpora.

- what is used to feed the body (correct);
- what can be eaten (close);
- matter which is being spoiled (far);
- letter exchange (unrelated).
Participants were asked to select what they thought was the
correct definition. This task was performed by four groups
of children: 2nd grade, 3rd grade, 4th grade and 5th grade.
These data were compared with the cosines between the
given word and each of the four definitions. For instance,
the four cosines on the previous examples were: .38
(correct), .24 (close), .16 (far) and .04 (unrelated). 116
questions were used because the semantic space did not
contain four rare words.
The first measure we used was the percentage of correct
answers. Figure 1 displays the results. The percentage of
correct answers is .53 for the model, which is exactly the
same value as the 2nd grade children. Except for unrelated
answers, the model data globally follow the same pattern as
the children's data.

Percentage of answers

stories and tales for children (~1,6 million words), children's
productions (~800,000 words), reading textbooks (~400,000
words) and children's encyclopedia (~400,000 words). This
corpus is composed of 57,878 paragraphs for a total of 3.2
million word occurrences. All punctuation signs were ruled
out, capital letters were transformed to lower cases, dashes
were ruled out except when forming a composed word (like
tire-bouchon). This corpus was analyzed by means of LSA
and the occurrence matrix reduced to 400 dimensions,
which appears to be an optimal value as we will see later.
The resulting semantic space contains 40,588 different
words. This step took 15 minutes on a 2.4 Ghz computer
with 2 Gb RAM.

75
70
65
60
55
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Correct

The first experiment, which aims at validating the model,
involves a vocabulary task. The design of the material as
well as the experiments with children were realized by
Denhière et al. (in preparation). Material consists of 120
questions, each one composed of a word and four
definitions: the correct one, a close definition, a far
definition and an unrelated definition. For instance, given
the word nourriture (food), translations of the four
definitions are:

299

Far

Unrelated

Definition types

Figure 1: Percentage of answers for different types of
definitions
In order to compare our semantic spaces with adult semantic
spaces, we defined a measure which integrates the four
values. We used a d measure, which is a normalized
difference between the cosines for correct and close
definitions together and the cosines for far and unrelated
definitions together. The higher this measure, the better the
result. Given a word W, four definitions (correct, close, far
and unrelated) and a global standard deviation S, the
formula is the following:
cos W , correct

Experiment 1

Close

d=



2

cos W , close 

cos W , far  cos W , unrelated 
2


S

We also compared these results with several adult corpora,
in order to test whether our semantic space was specific to
children. We used five corpora: a literature corpus,
composed of novels from the XIXth and XXth centuries and
four corpora from the French daily newspaper Le Monde, of
the years 1993, 1995, 1997 and 1999. Table 1 shows the
results.

Table 1: Comparison between children's semantic space
and adult semantic spaces
Semantic space
Children
Literature
Le Monde 1993
Le Monde 1995
Le Monde 1997
Le Monde 1999

Size (in
Percentage of
million words) correct answers
3.2
.53
14.1
.38
19.3
.44
20.6
.37
24.7
.40
24.2
.34

d
.69
.52
.23
.21
.28
.25

In accordance with the previous experiment, the children's
semantic space has the better results, although its size is
much smaller. Student tests have shown that the children
semantic space is significantly different from others
(p < .05) except for the percentage of correct answers when
compared to the Le Monde 1993 corpus (p < .1).

Experiment 2
This second experiment is based on verbal association
norms published by de La Haye (2003). Two-hundred
inducing words (144 nouns, 28 verbs and 28 adjectives)
were proposed to 9 to 11-year-old children. For each word,
participants had to provide the first word that came to their
mind. This resulted in a list of words, ranked by frequency.
For instance, given the word cartable (satchel), results are
the following for 9-year-old children:
- école (school): 51%
- sac (bag): 12%
- affaires (stuff): 6%
...
- classe (class): 1%
- sacoche (satchel): 1%
- vieux (old): 1%
This means that 51% of the children answered the word
école (school) when given the word cartable (satchel). The
two words are therefore strongly associated for 9-year-old
children. These association values were compared with the
LSA cosine between word vectors: we selected the three
best-ranked words as well as the three worst-ranked (like in
the previous example). We then measured the cosines
between the inducing word and the best ranked, the 2nd bestranked, the 3rd best ranked, and the mean cosine between the
inducing word and the three worst-ranked. Results are
presented in Table 2.
Table 2: Mean cosine between inducing word and various
associated words for 9-years-old children
Words
Best-ranked words
2nd best-ranked words
3rd best ranked-words
3 worst-ranked words

Mean cosine with inducing word
.26
.23
.19
.11

Student tests show that all differences are significant
(p < .03). This means that our semantic space is not only

300

able to distinguish between the strong and weak associates,
but can also discriminate the first-ranked from the secondranked and the latter from the third-ranked.
Measure of correlation with human data is also significant
(r(1184 =.39, p<.001). Actually, two factors might have
lowered this result. First, although we tried to mimic what a
child has been exposed to, we could not control all word
frequencies within the corpus. Therefore, some words might
have occurred with a low frequency in the corpus, leading
to an inaccurate semantic representation. When the previous
comparison was performed on the 20% most frequent
words, the correlation was much higher (r(234 =.57,
p<.001).
The second factor is the participant agreement: when
most children provide the same answer to an inducing word,
there is a high agreement, which means that both words are
very strongly associated. However, there are cases when
there is almost no agreement: for instance the three first
answers to the word bruit (noise) are crier (to shout) (9%),
entendre (to hear) (7%) and silence (silence) (6%). It is not
surprising that the model corresponds better to the children
data in case of a high agreement, since this denotes a strong
association that should be reflected in the corpus. In order to
select answers whose agreement was higher, we measured
their entropy. The formula is the following:
1

entropy item 
freq answer  . log

freq
answer
answer
A low entropy corresponds to a high agreement and vice
versa. When we selected the 20% items with the lowest
entropy, the correlation also raises (r(234)=.48, p<.001).
All these results show that the association degree between
words defined by the cosine measure within the semantic
space seems to correspond quite well to children's
judgement of association.
We also compared these results with the previous adult
semantic spaces. Results are presented in Table 3.
Table 3: Correlations between participant child data and
different kinds of semantic spaces
Semantic space
Children
Literature
Le Monde 1993
Le Monde 1995
Le Monde 1997
Le Monde 1999

Size (in million
words)
3.2
14.1
19.3
20.6
24.7
24.2

Correlation with
child data
.39
.34
.31
.26
.26
.24

In spite of much larger sizes, all adult semantic spaces
correlate worse than the children's semantic space with the
data of the participants in the study. Statistical tests show
that all differences between the child model and the other
semantic spaces are significant (p<.03).

Experiment 3
The third experiment is based on recall or summary tasks.
Children were asked to read a text and write out as much as
they could recall, immediately after reading or after a fixed

delay. We used 7 texts. We tested the ability of the semantic
representations to estimate the amount of knowledge
recalled. This amount is classically estimated by means of a
propositional analysis: first, the text as well as the
participant production are coded as propositions. Then, the
number of text propositions that occur in the production is
calculated. This measure is a good estimate of the
knowledge recalled. Using our semantic memory model,
this is accounted for by the cosine between the vector
representing the text and the vector representing the
participant production.
Table 4 displays all correlations between these two
measures. They range from .45 to .92, which means that the
LSA cosine applied to our children's semantic space is a
good estimate of the knowledge recalled.
Table 4: Correlations between LSA cosines and number
of propositions recalled for different texts.
Story

Task

Poule
Dragon
Dragon
Araignée
Clown
Clown
Ourson
Taureau
Géant

Immediate recall
Delayed recall
Summary
Immediate recall
Immediate recall
Summary
Immediate recall
Delayed recall
Summary

Number of Correlations
participants
52
.45
44
.55
56
.71
41
.65
56
.67
24
.92
44
.62
23
.69
105
.58

In an experiment with adults, Foltz et al. (1996) have shown
that LSA measures can be used to predict comprehension.
Besides validating our model of semantic memory, this
experiment shows that an appropriate semantic space can be
used to assess text comprehension in a much faster way than
propositional analysis, which is a very tedious task.

Conclusion
A model of the development of children's semantic
memory
Our model is not only a computational model of children's
semantic memory, but of its development. Other
computational models of human memory have been
developed but some of them are based on inputs that do not
correspond to what humans are exposed to. They are good
models of the memory itself, but not of the way it is
mentally constructed. In order to be cognitively plausible,
models of the construction of semantic memory need to be
approximately based on the kind of input to humans.
LSA is such model. Its performance is similar to those of
human people. It needs an input of a few million words,
which is comparable to what humans are exposed to
(Landauer & Dumais, 1997). On the contrary, PMI-IR
(Turney, 2001) is a good model of semantic similarities,
even better than LSA in modeling human judgement of
synonymy, but it is based on an input of thousands of
millions of words, since it relies on all the texts published
on the web. This is of course cognitively unplausible. HAL

301

(Burgess, 1998) is another model of human memory. It is
quite similar to LSA except that it does not rely on a
dimension reduction step. It is currently based on a corpus
of 300 million words, which is closer to the human inputs
than PMI-IR, although this could be considered quite
overestimated.

Further investigations
Our semantic space provides a means for researchers
studying children's cognitive processes to design and
simulate computational models on top of these basic
representations. In particular, computational models of text
comprehension could be tested using the basic semantic
similarities that the space provides. It would also be possible
to investigate the development of semantic memory by
looking at the evolution of various semantic similarities
according to the size of the corpus in detail. In particular,
Landauer & Dumais (1997) claim that we learn the meaning
of a word through the exposition to texts that do not contain
it. Our semantic space gives the opportunity to test this
assertion by checking the kind of paragraphs that cause an
increase of similarity through incremental exposure to the
corpus.

Improvements
Our semantic space could be improved in many ways. Its
composition (50% stories, 25% production, 12.5% reading
textbooks, 12.5% encyclopedia) is very rough and work has
to be done to better know the amount and nature of texts
that children are exposed to. Several studies led us to think
that lemmatization could significantly improve the results,
especially for the French language that has so many forms
for some verbs. We did perform the previous experiments
on a lemmatized version of the corpus (using the Brill
tagger on the French files developed by ATILF, and the
Flemm lemmatizer written by Fiametta Namer). Results
were worse than with the non-lemmatized version. In order
to know more about this surprising result, we distinguished
between verbs and nouns. We found that the overall
decrease is mainly due to a decrease for the nouns. One
reason could be that the singular and plural forms of a noun
are not arguments of the same predicates. For instance, the
word vague (wave) is generally used in its plural form in the
context of the sea, but more frequently in the singular form
in its metaphorical meaning (a wave of success). Therefore,
if both forms are grouped into the same one, this affects the
co-occurrence relations and modifies the semantic
representations.
Another way of improvement would have to deal with
syntax. LSA does not take any syntactic information into
account: all paragraphs are just bags of words. A slight
improvement would consist in considering a more precise
unit of context than a whole paragraph. A sliding context
window (like in the HAL model for instance) would take
into account the local context of each word. This might
improve the semantic representations, while being
cognitively more plausible. We are working in that
direction.

For the moment, our model is an estimation. We cannot
precisely identify to which age it corresponds. Our goal is to
stratify it so that we would have a model for each age.
Developmental models would then be able to be simulated.

Acknowledgements
This work was done while the second author was in
sabbatical at the university of Aix-Marseille. We would like
to thank D. Chesnet, E. Lambert and M.-A. Schelstraete, for
providing us with parts of the corpus, F. de la Haye for the
association data as well as M. Bourguet and H. Thomas for
the design of the vocabulary test. We also thank P. Dessus
and E. de Vries for their comments on a previous version.

References
Bellegarda, J. (2000) Exploiting Latent Semantic
Information in statistical language modeling. Proceedings
of IEEE, 88 (8), 1279-1296.
Bellissens, C., Thiesbonenkamp, J. & Denhière, G. (2002).
Property attribution in metaphor comprehension:
simulations of topic and vehicle contribution within the
LSA-CI framework. Twelfth Annual Meeting of the
Society for Text and Discourse, June 2002.
Borgida, A. (1996). On the relative expressive power of
description logics and predicate calculus, Artificial
Intelligence, 82, 353-367.
Burgess, C. (1998). From simple associations to the
building blocks of language: modeling meaning in
memory with the HAL model. Behavior Research
Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 30, 188-198.
Deerwester, S., Dumais, S. T., Furnas, G. W., Landauer, T.
K. & Harshman, R. (1990). Indexing by Latent Semantic
Indexing. Journal of the American Society for
Information Science , 41-6, 391-407.
de la Haye, F. (2003). Normes d'associations verbales chez
des enfants de 9, 10 et 11 ans et des adultes. L'Année
Psychologique, 103, 109-130.
Dumais, S. D. (2003). Data-driven approaches to
information access. Cognitive Science 27 (3), 491-524.
Foltz, P. W. (1996). Latent Semantic Analysis for textbased research. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments
and Computers, 28-2, 197-202.
French, R.M. & Labiouse, C (2002). Four problems with
extracting human semantics from large text corpora.
Proceedings of the 24th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, NJ:LEA.
Howard, M.W. & Kahanna, M.J. (2002). When does
semantic similarity help episodic retrieval? Journal of
Memory and Language 46, 85-98.
Kintsch, W. (1988). The role of knowledge in discourse
comprehension: a construction-integration model.
Psychological Review, 95, 163-182.
Kintsch, W. (2000). Metaphor comprehension: a
computational theory. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 72, 257-266.
Kontostathis, A. & Pottenger, W.M. (2002). Detecting
patterns in the LSI term-term matrix. Workshop on the
Foundation of Data Mining and Discovery, IEEE
International Conference on Data Mining.

302

Laham, D. (1997). Latent Semantic Analysis approaches to
categorization. In M. G. Shafto & P. Langley (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 19th annual meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society (p. 979). Mawhwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Landauer, T. K. & Dumais, S. T. (1997). A solution to
Plato's problem : the Latent Semantic Analysis theory of
acquisition, induction and representation of knowledge.
Psychological Review, 104, 211-240.
Landauer, T. K., Foltz, P. W. & Laham, D. (1998). An
introduction to Latent Semantic Analysis. Discourse
Processes , 25, 259-284.
Landauer (2002). On the computational basis of learning
and cognition: Arguments from LSA. In N. Ross (Ed.),
The psychology of Learning and Motivation, 41, 43-84.
Lemaire, B & Dessus, P. (2001). A system to assess the
semantic content of student essay. Journal of Educational
Computing Research, 24-3, 305-320.
Lemaire, B. & Bianco, M. (2003). Contextual effects on
metaphor comprehension: experiment and simulation.
Proc. of the 5th International Conference on Cognitive
Modeling (ICCM'2003), Bamberg, Germany.
Lenat, D.B. (1995). CYC: A large-scale investment in
knowledge infrastructure. Comm. of the ACM, 11, 32-38.
Pariollaud, F., Denhière, D. & Verstiggel, J.C. (2002)
Comprehension of idiomatic expressions: effect of
meaning salience. Proc. of the 9th Int. Conference on
Information Processing and Management of Uncertainty
in Knowledge-Based Systems (IPMU), Annecy, July 1-5.
Perfetti, C. A. (1998). The limits of co-occurrence: tools
and theories in language research. Discourse Processes,
25, 363-377.
Quesada, J., Kintsch, W., & Gomez E. (2002) A theory of
complex problem solving using Latent Semantic
Analysis. In W. D. Gray & C. D. Schunn (Eds.)
Proceedings of the 24th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
Mahwah, NJ.
Rehder, B., Schreiner, M. E., Wolfe, M. B. W., Laham, D.,
Landauer, T. K. & Kintsch, W. (1998). Using Latent
Semantic Analysis to assess knowledge: some technical
considerations. Discourse Processes, 25, 337-354.
Sowa, J.F. (1991). Principles of Semantic Networks:
Exploration in the Representation of Knowledge, Morgan
Kaufmann.
Turney, P. (2001). Mining the Web for synonyms: PMI-IR
versus LSA on TOEFL. In De Raedt, L. and Flach, P.,
(Eds). Proceedings of the 12th European Conference on
Machine Learning (ECML-2001) , 491-502, Freiburg.
Vossen, P. (2003). Ontologies. In R. Mitkov (Ed.) The
Oxford Handboof of Computational Linguistics. Oxford,
464-482.
Wolfe, M. B. W., Schreiner, M. E., Rehder, B., Laham, D.,
Foltz, P. W., Kintsch & W., Landauer, T. K. (1998).
Learning from text: matching readers and texts by Latent
Semantic Analysis. Discourse Processes, 25, 309-336.
Wolfe, M.B.W. & Goldman, S.R. (2003) Use of Latent
Semantic Analysis for predicting psychological
phenomena: two issues and proposed solutions. Behavior
Research Methods Instruments & Computer, 35(1), 2231.

