UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Connectionist Model of False Memories

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3hg9w0qk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
van Dantzig, Saskia
Postma, Eric O.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Connectionist Model of False Memories
Saskia van Dantzig (vandantzig@fsw.eur.nl)
Psychology Department, Erasmus University Rotterdam
Postbus 1738, 3000 DR Rotterdam, The Netherlands

Eric O. Postma (postma@cs.unimaas.nl)
Department of Computer Science, University of Maastricht
P.O. Box 616, 6200 MD Maastricht, The Netherlands
The outline of the remainder of this paper is as follows. In
the next section we discuss the theoretical background.
Then, we present the Associative Self-Organizing Network
as a model of false memories. In addition, three simulations
are described. Finally, we discuss the results and conclude
upon the approach.

Abstract
We present a connectionist model of false memories called
the Associative Self-Organizing Network (ASON) model.
Four mechanisms underlying the Constructive Memory
Framework (CMF) guide the design of the ASON model, a
connectionist operationalisation of the CMF. Simulation
studies of experiments in the DRM paradigm reveal the
ASON model to exhibit false memories. In addition, the
effects of Mean Backward Associative Strength and output
order on the probability of false recall are simulated. We
conclude that the ASON model is capable of simulating and
explaining the main findings on false memories.

Theoretical Background

Introduction
Memory is fallible. Every day people are confronted with
the shortcomings of their memory, when forgetting things
such as -for example- the phone number of a good friend,
the title of a book, or the location of their car keys. Memory
can also fail in another way; instead of forgetting things that
did happen, people may remember events that never took
place. These memories can be just as realistic as memories
of real events. Such memories of never-happened episodes
are called commission errors or false memories. False
memories may occur in different situations and their
severity can range from attributing a memory to the wrong
source to confabulating a complete event (Parkin, 1997).
Various studies suggest that false memories are not
simply random errors (Gallo & Roediger, 2002; Schwartz et
al., 1998). Instead, they appear to be an inevitable
consequence of the dynamics of human memory (Schacter
et al., 1998). False memories are considered to arise from
the very same mechanisms that underlie veridical recall and
recognition of true memories. More specifically, we
hypothesize that false memories result from the way in
which memory representations are stored, processed, and
retrieved.
Our approach is to investigate the occurrence of false
memories in a connectionist model called the Associative
Self-Organizing Network (ASON) model. The ASON
model is made up of two associatively connected selforganizing maps, for storing and representing stimuli and
the contexts in which they occur. Although the scientific
literature on false memories is abundant (e.g. Gallo &
Roediger, 2002; Johnson et al., 1993; Schacter et al., 1998),
to our knowledge, no connectionist model of false memories
has yet been proposed.

The common view of memory is that of a (re)constructive
process (Roediger & McDermott, 1995; Schacter et al.,
1998). This means that memories, rather than being literal
reproductions of past events, are considered to be
reconstructions that are susceptible to a variety of distorting
factors. In this view, memories are distorted by schemes,
attribution processes, prior knowledge, assumptions, and so
forth. This makes it almost impossible to draw a clear
boundary between true and false memories in real life
situations. For this reason, our study focuses solely on false
memories occurring in the experimental setting of the
Deese-Roediger-McDermott (DRM) paradigm. A false
memory is formalized as a recollection of a stimulus that is
ascribed to the experimental context, whereas it was not
presented during the experiment. Below, we describe the
DRM paradigm in more detail.

The DRM Paradigm
In order to investigate false memories experimentally,
Roediger and McDermott (1995) developed the DRM
paradigm, which was a variation of a design originally used
by Deese (1959). The experimental set up is as follows.
Subjects are presented with lists of twelve or fifteen words
that are the strongest associates of a “critical lure”; a target
word which is not presented. Immediately following the
presentation of a list, subjects are instructed to recall as
many of the list items as possible and to mention only those
words of which they are certain that they appeared on the
list. Despite this instruction, subjects are about equally
likely to recall the critical lure as the other items on the list
(Roediger & McDermott, 1995). After completion of the
experiment, which usually involves the presentation of
multiple lists, recognition performance of items on all the
lists is tested. It is found that subjects identify the critical
lure as being a list item as often as or more often than words
that were actually presented (Roediger & McDermott,

1375

1995). These results have been widely replicated, using
various lists and different variations on the basic paradigm.
The propensity to elicit false recall and false recognition
of the critical item varies widely with the type of list used.
Roediger et al. (2001) investigated the causes of this
variability and found that the strongest predictor of false
recall of the critical lure was a variable called Mean
Backward Associative Strength (MBAS). MBAS is defined
as the average probability that a list item elicits the critical
item as its associate. Roediger et al. found that MBAS
correlates positively with both false recall (r = + .70) and
false recognition (r = +. 43) of the critical lure.
The ASON model is inspired by the Constructive
Memory Framework of Schacter et al. (1998). In the
following section this framework is discussed in detail.

The Constructive Memory Framework
Many different theories exist that address the topics of
memory formation, source monitoring or reality monitoring
and false memories (e.g. Gallo & Roediger, 2002; Johnson
et al., 1993; Reyna & Brainerd, 1995). The general
assumption underlying these different theories is that
memory is constructive. This is also the central assumption
of the Constructive Memory Framework (CMF) (Schacter et
al., 1998). CMF proposes four mechanisms that are involved
in a constructive memory system.
First, according to CMF, episodic memories can be
viewed as patterns of features, with different features
representing different aspects of the episode. The
constituent features of a memory representation are
distributed widely across different parts of the brain.
Forming an episodic memory involves binding together an
arbitrary configuration of information from different sources
(visual, auditory, affective, semantic etcetera) about a
specific episode into a unitary whole (O'Reilly & Rudy,
2001; Rolls & Treves, 1998; Schacter et al., 1998). This
process is called feature binding.
Second, each episode activates a unique representation
that can easily be discriminated from memories of similar
events. Even if different memories overlap extensively, the
memory system is able to retrieve the unique characteristics
of each particular episode, rather than retaining only the
general similarities or gist (Reyna & Brainerd, 1995). This
requires a process called pattern separation (Schacter et al.,
1998).
Third, retrieval of memories involves a process of pattern
completion. At retrieval, a small part of the original memory
is used as a retrieval cue. The subset of features representing
this part of the memory is activated. Activation spreads
from the activated features to the rest of the constituent
features that represent that experience, and the complete
memory is reconstructed.
Fourth, once a memory is reconstructed, it must be
decided whether the retrieved information constitutes a real
memory or is derived from internally generated information,
such as thoughts or fantasies. This process is called reality
monitoring. Source monitoring is a broader concept and

refers to determining the source of a retrieved memory.
According to Source Monitoring Theory (Johnson et al.,
1993), memories from different sources have different
qualitative characteristics. Source monitoring decisions
capitalize on these differences. When the source monitoring
mechanism fails, source amnesia occurs. One is then able to
remember specific information, but unable to recall the
source of this memory.
The four mechanisms of the Constructive Memory
Framework lead to the notion that false memories result
from a combination of two factors: (1) memories from
different sources (e.g. internal and external) may form
overlapping representations, and (2) the source monitoring
mechanism fails to distinguish between those
representations.
The activation/monitoring framework, (Gallo & Roediger,
2002; Roediger et al., 2001) explains variations in the
probability of false remembering in the DRM paradigm in
terms of the two factors. According to this framework, two
processes, activation and monitoring, take place during the
encoding and retrieval of memories. Although activation
occurs mostly at the encoding stage and monitoring mostly
at the retrieval stage, both processes are at work during both
encoding and retrieval. The activation/monitoring
framework assumes that the presentation of some items can
activate entire knowledge structures or schemata. As a
consequence, non-presented items can be activated because
they are strongly associated with the presented items (i.e.,
they are part of the same knowledge structure). The
activation may be the result of conscious, deliberate
association, or of automatic and unconscious spreading
activation. In the case of the DRM paradigm, activation
spreads from the list items to related or associated concepts.
The critical lure receives much activation because this item
is strongly associated to each of the presented list items.
This assumption is supported by the high correlation
between MBAS and false remembering of the critical lure.
The stronger the association between the list items and the
critical word, the stronger the activation of this critical word
due to automatic or deliberate spreading of activation.
Summarizing, false remembering of the critical lure
occurs when the monitoring process fails to correctly
attribute its activation to an internal source and the critical
lure is falsely ascribed to the learning context. This
monitoring process is analogous to the source monitoring or
reality monitoring mechanism proposed by Johnson et al.
(1993).

Implementing CMF in a Connectionist Network
The CMF acted as a guideline for the design of the ASON
model. The four mechanisms of the CMF translate into the
following four desired abilities of the ASON model.
(1) Ability to form episodic memories, whereby each
episode leaves a unique, distinctive trace that is easily
distinguishable from memories of similar episodes
(i.e., demonstrate feature binding and pattern
separation).

1376

(2) Ability to retrieve or reconstruct a complete
representation when cued with only a small part of the
original memory (i.e., exhibit pattern completion).
(3) Ability to spread activation among related or
associated concepts.
(4) Ability to monitor memory using a mechanism that
decides upon the trueness of each retrieved
representation.
We incorporate the four abilities in the ASON model as
follows.
(1/2) Feature binding and pattern completion. Feature
binding is accomplished by using an associative network, or
more specifically, an auto-associator. An auto-associator
typically consists of one fully-connected layer. The
network’s task usually is to produce an output that is similar
to its input. When an input pattern is presented, the
network’s connection weights are changed according to a
Hebbian learning algorithm. Connections between
simultaneously active neurons are strengthened, whereas
connections between non co-active neurons are weakened.
In this way, the network is able to associate co-occurring
input elements. In addition, the auto-associator is able to
completely reconstruct a stored pattern, when provided with
only a small part of that pattern. In other words, it can also
perform pattern completion (McLeod et al., 1998).
(1/3) Pattern separation and spreading activation. In an
auto-associative network, pattern separation is obtained by
using sparsely distributed representations. A competitive
network can be used to transform densely distributed input
patterns into more sparse, separated patterns which can be
processed by an auto-associator without suffering from
interference. A specific kind of competitive network is the
Kohonen network or self-organizing network (Haykin,
1999). For our purposes, the self-organizing network has
two important advantages over a standard competitive
network. First, the self-organizing network creates a
topological map of the input space (Haykin, 1999). A
distributed, multidimensional input is transformed into a
localist representation. The self-organizing principle ensures
that the information regarding relations or similarities
among input patterns is not lost in this transformation. By
creating a topological map of the input space, the similarity
between two input patterns is reflected in the lateral distance
between the two neurons representing them. This is a
biologically plausible way of representing information.
There is evidence that at least lower level sensory
representations are organized topologically (Haykin, 1999).
However, it is still uncertain whether semantic information
in higher association areas is represented in a topological
way as well. A second important characteristic of a selforganizing network is that there is spreading of activation
among neighboring neurons. When a specific neuron in the
network is excited, activation spreads to its neighbors. The
degree of spreading activation is a function of the distance
between the excited neuron and its neighbor. The nearest
neighbors receive the most activation, and activation

decreases with increasing distance. Since the neighbors of
the winning neuron represent concepts resembling the input
pattern, there is spreading activation between related
concepts. In this way the network resembles a semantic, or
conceptual map. It is generally assumed that much of our
knowledge is indeed stored in the form of semantic maps or
knowledge structures.
(4) Memory monitoring. A memory monitor mechanism
may be implemented in the form of a module that modulates
the response thresholds or connection weights of neurons in
the associative layer.
In the next section the incorporation of the ASON model
is described in detail.

The Associative Self-Organizing Network
The ASON model, shown in figure 1, receives two different
types of input; context input and stimulus input. Input is first
processed by the input/output layer of the model. This layer
is made up of two unconnected parts. One part processes
contextual information, the other part deals with stimulus
information. Both parts of the input/output layer have I
neurons. The input of the model is formed by
multidimensional binary patterns. In those patterns, each bit
represents the presence or absence of a specific feature by
which the stimulus (item) or context is characterized. The
input patterns therefore reflect conceptual representations of
different stimuli and contexts.

Figure 1: Schematic drawing of the Associative SelfOrganizing Network. Each input pattern corresponds to one
winning neuron in the hidden layer. Simultaneous
presentation of a stimulus input and a context input causes
an increase in the connection strength between the hidden
neurons representing that stimulus and context, respectively.
Information is propagated from the input/output layer to
the hidden layer. The hidden layer consists of two selforganizing maps. These maps are organized as twodimensional lattices, each having N × N neurons. The part
of the hidden layer that represents stimuli is henceforth
called the stimulus hidden layer. The neurons making up
this layer are called stimulus neurons. The other part of the
hidden layer is called the context hidden layer and the
constituent neurons are called context neurons. Both hidden
layers are fully connected to each other via two-directional
modifiable associative connections.

1377

The Four Processing Stages
The processing of information in the ASON model proceeds
in four stages: (i) the initialization stage, (ii) the topologicalmapping stage, (iii) the learning stage, and (iv) the
performance stage. Below, we discuss each of these stages
in detail.
In the initialization stage, the connection weights between
the input/output layer and the hidden layers, and those
between both hidden layers are set to small random values.
In the topological-mapping stage, contexts and stimuli are
presented to the input layer of the network and, using the
Kohonen learning algorithm or SOM algorithm (Haykin,
1999), a topological organization in the hidden layers is
created: semantically related concepts (overlapping input
patterns) are represented by neurons that lie close to one
another in the two-dimensional grid that makes up the
hidden layer. In addition, associations are formed between
stimuli and contexts. Whenever a particular stimulus cooccurs with a particular context, there is simultaneous
activation of the winning context neuron and the winning
stimulus neuron. Following an associative learning
algorithm, the (associative) connection between these two
hidden neurons is strengthened. Simply said, the stimulus is
coupled to the context.
The learning stage simulates the learning phase of the
DRM task. It refers to the presentation of the list items.
During this stage, a number of stimuli are presented in one
specific context -the learning context- and associations
between the presented stimuli (the list items) and this
context are formed. Due to spreading of activation, not only
the connections between the winning context neuron and the
winning stimulus neurons are strengthened, but also those
between the context neuron and the neighbors of the
winning stimulus neuron. The connections between the
context neuron and even further neighbors of the winning
stimulus neuron are actually decreased.
During the performance stage, the network can either
perform a recall task or a recognition task. When
performing a recall task, a context input is presented to the
network as a recall cue. The winning context neuron in the
hidden layer is determined and activation is propagated
forwards through the associative connections towards the
stimulus hidden layer. The stimulus neuron that is most
strongly associated to the winning context neuron is
activated and propagates its activation to the stimulus
input/output layer. The weights of the connections between
the winning stimulus neuron and the input/output layer have
changed during the topological-mapping stage so that they
have come to resemble the input pattern to which this
neuron responds most strongly. Therefore, propagating
activation through these connections will result in an output
that resembles the original input pattern to a large degree. In
other words, reconstruction of the stimulus that is most
strongly associated with the presented context takes place.
Subsequently, the connection between the winning context
neuron and the activated stimulus neuron is ‘blocked’, the
stimulus neuron with the second-strongest association to the

context is determined and the next stimulus is recalled.
Most of the time, the stimulus recalled is one that was
actually presented during the learning stage (a list item).
Occasionally, however, the network recalls a stimulus that
has not been presented. In other words, it has false
memories. Clearly, false memories occur whenever there
exists a strong association between the non-presented
stimulus and the context, caused by spreading activation.
When performing a recognition task, the network is
presented with a number of stimuli, both list items and a
number of non-presented distractors (including the critical
item). Based on the stimulus input, the winning stimulus
neuron in the hidden layer is determined. The strength of the
association between this winning stimulus neuron and the
learning context is determined. If the strength exceeds a
certain threshold, the stimulus is marked as a target and as a
distractor otherwise. The decision whether to accept or
reject a retrieved item is based on the strength of its
association to the learning context. Raising the threshold
reduces the probability of falsely recognizing the critical
item, but it also decreases the hit rate. On the other hand,
lowering the threshold leads to more hits, but also to more
false alarms. This process is a formalization of the memory
monitoring or source monitoring mechanism in various
theories of memory (Gallo & Roediger, 2002; Johnson et
al., 1993; Schacter et al., 1998).
To evaluate the ability of the ASON model to exhibit the
false-memory performance as observed in the DRM
paradigm, we performed a number of simulations that are
described in the following section.

Simulations
Our simulations focus on three aspects of false memories in
the DRM paradigm: the DRM effect, the role of association
strength and the output order effect. All simulations were
performed with the following parameter values: I = 30 and
N = 10. The results reported do not depend critically on
these choices.
The DRM effect The simulation of the DRM effect has two
conditions; the DRM condition and a control condition. In
the DRM condition, the network learns six list items that are
semantically related to the critical lure. Their input patterns
closely resemble the input pattern of the critical lure. In the
control condition, the six list items are randomly chosen
from the input set. After learning the six list items, the
network performs a recall task. The results of the simulation
are shown in figure 2. As is evident from the graph, the
probability of recalling the critical lure is much higher in the
DRM condition (P = 0.65) than in the control condition (P =
0.05), but it is lower than the average recall rate of the list
items (P = 0.78). Hence, the ASON model simulates the
DRM effect faithfully.

1378

a

1,0

b

1,0

,7

,8

,6

,2

0,0
CL Control

CL DRM

List items

,6
,4
,2
0,0
2

Condition

3

4

5

6

7

Lateral distance

Figure 2: Probability of recalling the list items and the
critical lure in the DRM (CL DRM) and control (CL
Control) conditions.

,5
,4
,3
,2
,1
0,0
0,0

,1

,2

,3

,4

,5

Backward Associative Strength

Figure 3: The probability of recalling the critical lure as a
function of (a) average lateral distance between list items
and the critical lure: r = -.76, and (b) MBAS: r = +.73.
The effect of output order In the third simulation we
investigated the effect of output order on the probability of
false recall. The output order effect (Schwartz et al., 1998)
refers to the finding that the probability of a false memory
increases with the position of items in the recall sequence.
The output order effect can be explained by the variation
in association strength of presented and non-presented
stimuli. False memories occur when non-presented stimuli ,
become strongly connected to the learning context through
the processes of spreading activation and association. The
association strength of those stimuli to the context is usually
smaller than that of the most strongly associated targets, but
larger than that of the most weakly associated targets. Since
memories are generated in the order of their association
strength, the probability that a false memory is generated
increases with the position in the recall sequence. In our
third simulation, the network performed a simple recall task,
rather than a DRM task. The network learned twenty stimuli
in a single context. Afterwards it performed a recall task. As
can be seen in figure 4a, the probability of a false memory is
largest in the last quartile of the output. Figure 4b shows the
results of Schwartz et al. (1998), in which subjects
performed a similar task. Evidently, our results have a
striking similarity to the experimental results of Schwartz et
al.
a
b

1379

Percentage of false memories

The effect of association False recall and recognition of the
critical lure is affected by a number of factors. As stated in
the introduction, the most important factor is the Mean
Backward Associative Strength (MBAS). A stronger
association between the list items and the critical lure is
correlated with stronger false recognition and false recall
effects (Roediger et al., 2001). In the Associative SelfOrganizing Network, spreading activation from the list
items to the critical lure causes false recall and recognition
of the latter. It is important to realize that in the ASON
model concepts are related semantically instead of
associatively. In contrast to what is proposed by the
activation/monitoring framework, activation spreads along
semantic relations rather than along associative connections.
However, if we disregard this difference, we can define the
Backward Associative Strength between two concepts as the
lateral distance between the winning neurons that represent
these concepts. The smaller the distance, the more related
the two concepts are. In the network, the degree of
spreading activation is a function of the distance between
the excited neuron and its neighbor. Consequently, the
smaller the average lateral distance between the list items
and the critical lure, the stronger the activation of this
critical item due to spreading activation from the list items
will be. This stronger activation leads to a stronger
association of the critical lure to the context, and therefore
to an increasing likelihood of falsely recalling the critical
lure. Figure 3a shows the results of a simulation in which
the average lateral distance from the list items to the critical
lure is varied. As can be seen, the probability of recalling
the critical lure decreases sharply with increasing distance.
The correlation between lateral distance and probability of
recalling the critical lure is -.76. We compare our results
with the results from a multiple regression analysis done by
Roediger et al. (2001) where MBAS was found to be the
strongest predictor of false recall of the critical lure (with
the correlation between MBAS and probability of recalling
the critical lure being +.73). Figure 3b shows the probability
of recalling the critical lure as a function of MBAS, as
found in the study of Roediger et al. (2001). Clearly, the
results of the ASON model agree very well with those of
Roediger et al.

,7

,7

,6

,6

Percentage of false memories

Probability of recall

,4

Probability of false recall

Probability of false recall

,8
,6

,5
,4
,3
,2
,1
0,0
1

Quartile

2

3

4

,5
,4
,3
,2
,1
0,0
1

2

3

4

Quartile

Figure 4: Number of false positives as a function of output
order. Results of (a) our simulations, and (b) Schwartz et al.
(1998).

Discussion and Conclusion
The ASON model demonstrates how the essential features
of a constructive memory system, as put forward by CMF,
can be translated into a connectionist model. Specifically,
the ASON model incorporates the encoding processes of
feature binding and pattern separation, as well as the
retrieval processes of pattern completion and memory
monitoring. In addition, it explains how spreading activation
leads to high false memory scores for the critical lure in the
DRM paradigm. The remaining question is to what degree
the model’s architecture resembles that of brain structures
that are involved in the processes of storing, retrieving and
monitoring of memory.
The brain structure that is considered to be responsible for
the storage of episodic memories is the hippocampus (Rolls
& Treves, 1998). The hippocampus is not thought to be the
site of storage itself. Rather it is regarded as the mechanism
that binds together the sensory features of a situation or
episode to create a unitary representation of the experience.
In other words, it is the structure that performs feature
binding. The hippocampus receives, via the adjacent
parahippocampal gyrus and entorhinal cortex, inputs from
virtually all association areas in the neocortex. In addition, it
gets input from the amygdala and from cholinergic and
other regulatory systems (Rolls & Treves, 1998). It thus
receives highly elaborated, multimodal information from
various sensory pathways. Within the hippocampus,
information is processed along a mainly unidirectional path,
consisting of three major stages; the Dentate Gyrus (DG),
the Cornu Ammonis 3 (CA3) and the Cornu Ammonis 1
(CA1). From CA1, backprojecting pathways lead via the
subiculum and the entorhinal cortex back to the neocortex.
The hippocampus shares two essential characteristics with
our model. First, there is a large degree of interconnectivity
among neurons in the CA3 area of the hippocampus. This
interconnectivity makes this area perfectly suited to perform
auto-association. In fact, the idea that the CA3 area serves
as an auto-associator that binds together the various
elements of an episode is a core assumption in a number of
computational models (O'Reilly & Rudy, 2001; Rolls &
Treves, 1998). Second, the hippocampus receives a load of
multimodal information from various cortical areas. The
forward pathways to the hippocampus are thus characterized
by strong convergence. It is hypothesized that these
pathways, and the DG in particular, serve as a competitive
network, transforming the widely distributed information in
the cortex into more sparse, orthogonal and separated
patterns that can be processed by the auto-associator without
much interference (O'Reilly & Rudy, 2001).
Instead of a standard competitive network, the ASON
model features a self-organizing map. The specific
characteristics of this type of network, its ability to form a
topological map of the input and spreading activation
among neighboring neurons, can provide an explanation of
false memories. Specifically, according to our model, false
memories arise when activation spreads from the list items
to the critical lure, causing a faulty association between this

non-presented item and the learning context. This explains
how false memories occur in the DRM paradigm, and gives
an account of the effect of MBAS on false recall of the
critical lure.
By incorporating the four mechanisms of the CMF, the
ASON model is able to simulate the occurrence of false
memories in the DRM paradigm and the effects of MBAS
and output order on the probability of false recall of the
critical item. Furthermore, its architecture is compatible
with that of the hippocampus, the brain area that is widely
acknowledged as being involved in the storage and retrieval
of episodic memories. We conclude that this connectionist
operationalisation of the CMF is able to simulate and
explain the main findings on false memories.

References
Deese, J. (1959). On the prediction of occurrence of
particular verbal intrusions in immediate recall. Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 58, 17-22.
Gallo, D. A., & Roediger, H. L. (2002). Variability among
word lists in eliciting memory illusions: evidence for
associative activation and monitoring. Journal of Memory
and Language, 47, 469-497.
Haykin, S. (1999). Neural networks, a comprehensive
foundation (2nd ed.). Upper Saddle River: Prentice-Hall.
Johnson, M. K., Hashtroudi, S., & Lindsay, D. S. (1993).
Source Monitoring. Psychological Bulletin, 114, 3-28.
McLeod, P., Plunkett, K., & Rolls, E. T. (1998).
Introduction to connectionist modelling of cognitive
processes. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
O'Reilly, R. C., & Rudy, J. W. (2001). Conjunctive
representations in learning and memory: principles of
cortical and hippocampal function. Psychological Review,
108(2), 311-345.
Parkin, A. J. (1997). The neuropsychology of false memory.
Learning and Individual Differences, 9, 341-357.
Reyna, V. F., & Brainerd, C. J. (1995). Fuzzy-trace theory:
some foundational issues. Learning and Individual
Differences, 7, 145-162.
Roediger, H. L., & McDermott, K. B. (1995). Creating false
memories: Remembering words not presented in lists.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory
and Cognition, 21, 803-814.
Roediger, H. L., Watson, J. M., McDermott, K. B., & Gallo,
D. A. (2001). Factors that determine false recall: a
multiple regression analysis. Psychonomic Bulletin and
Review, 8, 385-407.
Rolls, E. T., & Treves, A. (1998). Neural networks and
brain function. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Schacter, D. L., Norman, K. A., & Koutstaal, W. (1998).
The cognitive neuroscience of constructive memory.
Annual Review of Psychology, 48, 289-318.
Schwartz, B. L., Fisher, R. P., & Hebert, K. (1998). The
relation of output order and commission errors in free
recall and eyewitness accounts. Memory, 6, 257-275.

1380

