UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Day in the Life of a Spoken Word

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0cq32170

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Dumay, Nicolas
Gaskell, M. Gareth
Feng, Xiaojia

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Day in the Life of a Spoken Word
Nicolas Dumay and M. Gareth Gaskell (n.dumay/g.gaskell@psych.york.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of York
York, YO10 5DD, UK

Xiaojia Feng (fengxj@yorku.ca)
Department of Psychology, York University
4700 Keele Street, Toronto, M3J 1P3, Canada

involved in the lexical competition process, or in our terms,
produce a "lexical footprint". Adults were familiarized with
made-up words that overlapped strongly with existing
words (such as "cathedruke" for "cathedral"), through
repeated presentation in a phoneme-monitoring task. In one
experiment, good explicit knowledge of the novel words
was obtained after only one training session (i.e., 12
presentations of each item), whereas the inhibitory influence
of these new competitors on the identification of existing
words in a lexical decision task (LD) required three
(successive) days of exposure to emerge.
In another experiment, we disentangled the roles of time
and level of exposure in the lexicalization process, using a
single training session at a high exposure rate (i.e., 36
presentations). We also swapped LD with a more implicit
test of lexical activity, the pause detection task. Here,
participants made speeded decisions as to whether a short
silence was present towards the offset of the existing words
(e.g., "cathedr_al"). As Mattys and Clark (2002) showed,
pause detection latencies are positively correlated with the
amount of lexical activity elicited by the portion of speech
preceding the pause. They hypothesized that the activation
of lexical candidates involves the use of processing
resources that would otherwise be allocated to pause
detection. Our experiment showed good explicit recognition
of the novel items right after exposure. In contrast, an
increase in lexical activity as indexed by longer pause
detection latencies when a new competitor had been learnt
was not immediately observed, but had emerged when retested a week later.
So, in contrast to phonological storage, lexicalization is
apparently not instantaneous and in fact may require a
substantial amount of time, possibly to allow the
consolidation of episodic traces (cf. O'Reilly & Norman,
2002). Nonetheless, on the basis of the above findings, it is
not possible to tell how long it takes after a sufficient level
of exposure has been reached for a newly learnt word to be
lexically operational.
Furthermore, in Gaskell and Dumay (2003) participants
had to learn only the sound-form of the novel words in quite
an artificial situation, i.e., phoneme monitoring. Therefore,
whether these data give us a good picture of what happens
in more normal circumstances when semantic and thematic
information are usually available must be addressed. In
particular, the delay observed in the emergence of lexical

Abstract
Two experiments tracked the emergence of lexical
competition effects for newly learnt spoken words (e.g.,
"cathedruke"). Experiment 1 compared form-only learning
with learning in semantically rich sentence contexts. In both
cases, although immediate explicit recognition of the novel
words was good, lexical competition effects (e.g.,
"cathedruke-cathedral") emerged only after a delay of at least
24 hours. Experiment 2 evaluated the timecourse of learning
in more detail and used embedding (rather than cohort) new
competitors (e.g., "shadowks"). Again results showed no
evidence of lexicalization immediately after exposure, but
clear lexical competition effects after 24 hours. Furthermore,
recognition and free recall improved over time. These results
are interpreted in terms of a consolidation process that
integrates words into the mental lexicon over a relatively
protracted period of time.

1. Introduction
Our knowledge about what information is relevant for
language acquisition has increased greatly in the last decade.
Factors such as statistical properties of the input (Saffran,
Aslin, & Newport, 1996) and current lexical knowledge
(Dahan & Brent, 1999) have been shown to influence
lexical development. However, less is known about exactly
how new vocabulary items are integrated into one's mental
lexicon, a process called "lexicalization". The main reason
for this state of affairs is that studies on word acquisition
have typically used only direct measures of learning, such as
the performance in familiarity judgment or recollection
tasks. Yet, such measures only tell us about the strength of
the traces left by exposure, not whether a new lexical entry
per se has been created.
A critical methodology for addressing the lexicalization
issue looks at whether newly learnt words influence how the
learner recognizes preexisting words. For models of spoken
word recognition, a key feature of a lexical entry is its
ability to be evoked when compatible with the input, and to
compete with similar-sounding entities for identification
(e.g., McClelland & Elman, 1986). Therefore, a strong test
of whether a speech sequence has been lexicalized is
whether it engages in lexical competition, and thereby
affects the activity within the mental lexicon.
In a recent study (Gaskell & Dumay, 2003), we began to
explore how and when newly learnt spoken words become

339

choice in a recognition test. Base words were
monomorphemic nouns that ranged in frequency between 2
and 19 occurrences per million and had their uniqueness
point (UP) located at or before the final vowel. Hence, if
exposure led to lexicalization of the novel word, the latter
was expected to become the main competitor of the base
word, shifting its UP towards its offset.
For the semantic exposure phase, each novel word was
assigned a meaning, based on a conceptual category
unrelated the base word (cf. Battig & Montague, 1969). For
example, "cathedruke" was associated with "vegetable".
Two sentences in which each novel word appeared were
then constructed. One explicitly conveyed information
about the category membership of the novel word, such as
"A cathedruke is a variety of vegetable"; the other provided
a more general semantic context, such as "The cook served
the boiled cathedruke with a steak and baked potatoes".
The test items were divided into three groups, as were the
participants. During exposure, a given group of participants
heard 12 novel words in a phoneme monitoring task and 12
others in a semantic verification task, the items being
assigned to a different exposure condition (phonological,
semantic or unexposed) across the three alternative versions
of the experiment. Participants were presented with all base
words during the LD lexicalization test. Thus, for any
participant, new competitors were potentially acquired for
2/3 of the existing words, and overall each item was equally
represented at the three levels of the factor "exposure".
Base words, novel words, alternative nonwords, category
names and sentences were produced in a soundproof booth
by a male native speaker of British English, recorded onto
CD, and stored as separate files using CoolEdit.

footprint could well result from the relatively impoverished
conditions in which the novel words were acquired. Word
learning, as measured by recognition and recall, is often
improved when a meaning is available to attach to the novel
phonological form (e.g., Rueckl & Olds, 1993; Whittlesea &
Cantwell, 1987). On these grounds, linking the form of the
novel words to some semantic representations during
encoding may give rise to a faster lexicalization and,
potentially, to a "deeper" lexical footprint.
Finally, so far the onset-matched competitors that have
been used to test for the emergence of lexical competition
were cohort competitors, i.e., novel and existing items that
mismatch towards their offset. Therefore, we do not know
whether these effects can be extended to a more general
view of lexical competition encompassing all words that
overlap to any degree (cf. McQueen, Norris, & Cutler,
1994). The following experiments address these issues.

2. Experiment 1
Experiment 1 examined whether providing some semantic
information along with the form of the novel words during
exposure would result in a deeper lexical footprint and/or
the faster emergence of this effect. On two successive days
of learning, novel words (e.g., "cathedruke" for "cathedral")
were heard 12 times either in isolation, as carriers in a
phoneme monitoring task, or in a sentential context during a
semantic verification task. Here, they were associated with
the name of a conceptual category (e.g., "vegetable"). The
effect of exposure to these new cohort competitors on
identification of the base words was evaluated immediately,
24 hours later (before the second exposure) and after a
week, using a LD task. In addition, whether the novel words
learnt under semantic exposure had acquired a meaning was
tested in two ways. First, during the LD task, we also
presented each novel word followed directly by their
category name, and measured the extent to which the former
could speed up responses to the latter (cf. Dagenbach, Horst,
& Carr, 1990). Second, we looked at how much the novel
words would elicit production of a word related to the
meaning of the category name in a free association task.

2.1.3. Procedure. On day 1, participants were exposed to
the novel words through the phoneme monitoring and
semantic verification tasks, with task order counterbalanced
across participants. Next, they were tested for lexicalization
effects in a LD task, followed by a two-alternative forced
choice (2-AFC) recognition test which assessed explicit
knowledge of the novel words, and, finally, a free
association task. On day 2, participants performed the LD
task, the 2-AFC recognition test and the free association
task before a second exposure phase took place. On day 8,
the procedure was the same as on day 2 except that there
was no further exposure.
The phoneme monitoring component of the exposure
phase involved 12 novel words and consisted of 12 blocks
in which each novel word occurred once. A target phoneme
was specified for each block, and in all 6 phonemes were
used (/n/, /d/, /t/, /s/, /p/ and /m/). Participants had to make
speeded decisions as to whether the target was present or
absent in the word, by pressing one of two buttons. The
semantic verification component used 12 other novel words,
each presented 6 times by way of their "category
membership" sentence, and 6 times by way of their
"semantic context" sentence. On each trial of a given block,
participants had to make a yes/no judgment about the

2.1. Method
2.1.1. Participants. Thirty native British English speakers
with no known auditory or language impairment were
tested. They were students at the University of York (UK)
or lived in the surrounding area, and were all paid for their
participation.
2.1.2. Materials and Design. The key materials contained
12 bisyllabic and 24 trisyllabic item triplets (based on
Gaskell & Dumay, 2003, Experiment 2). Each triplet
included a base word, such as "cathedral", and two
nonwords, such as "cathedruke" and "cathedruce". The
nonwords diverged from the base word at the final vowel
and from each other at the final consonant or consonant
cluster. One nonword (e.g., "cathedruke") was presented as
novel word, whereas the other one was used as alternative

340

and a day x exposure interaction (F1(2,58) = 5.1, p < .01;
F2(2,66) = 5.6, p < .01). As planned comparisons revealed,
the performance was better on day 8 than on days 1 and 2
(ps < .01), which did not differ from each other. More
interestingly, only on day 1 was the performance better for
phonological than semantic exposure (ps < .01).
880

8

93.6
86.4

91.9
91.7

97.5
95.8

.30
.38
.08
.24

.31
.47
.06
.16

.44
.38
.06
.11

Unprimed

855

Phonological exposure

850

Semantic exposure

845

Response time (ms)

860

835

880
860
840
820
800

Unprimed

780

Phonological exposure

760

Semantic exposure

740

830

1

2
Day

8

1

2

8

Day

Figure 1. (Exp. 1) Left: Mean lexical decision latency to the base
word. Right: Mean lexical decision latency to the category name.

In the LD lexicalization test (see Figure 1), latencies to
the base words revealed an interaction between day and
exposure (F1(4,108) = 2.6, p < .05; F2(4,132) = 3.0,
p < .05). Here, the important thing was to assess the
occurrence of reliable priming effects. Planned comparisons
examined the difference between the unprimed condition
and both the phonological and semantic conditions. No sign
of delayed recognition caused by competition with the novel
words was found right after exposure. However, 24 hours
later, a clear inhibitory effect had emerged for the novel
words trained phonologically (F1(1,28) = 5.0, p < .05;
F2(1,33) = 7.9, p < .01), but still no significant effect was
found in the semantic encoding condition. Finally, on day 8,
both phonologically and semantically trained novel words
induced inhibition of the base word recognition (F1(1,28) =
4.1, p = .052; F2(1,33) = 9.3, p < .01; F1(1,28) = 6.8,
p < .05; F2(1,33) = 7.4, p < .05). Analyses of errors (2.8%)
revealed no significant effect or interaction.
LD latencies to the category names also showed an
interaction between day and exposure to the preceding novel
word (i.e., untrained, phonologically trained vs.
semantically trained), although marginally significant by
participant (F1(4,108) = 2.1, p = .081; F2(4,132) = 3.7,
p < .01). Planned comparisons revealed no effect of
exposure on day 1. On day 2, an inhibitory effect was found
unexpectedly for the phonological condition (F1(1,28) =
4.3, p < .05; F2(1,33) = 8.3, p < .01), whereas there no
effect for the semantic condition. On day 8, the inhibitory
effect in the phonological condition had disappeared, and a
facilitatory effect only significant by item had emerged for
the semantically trained novel words (F1(1,28) = 2.3,
p < .15; F2(1,33) = 6.8, p < .05). Analyses of errors (2.2%)
revealed no significant effect or interaction.
Responses in the free association task were classified
using the taxonomy presented in Table 1. Base words and
words related to the meaning of the novel words represented
the majority of the responses (overall 76%). More
interestingly, response probability showed an interaction

Day
2

865

840

Table 1. Top: Correct response rate in 2-AFC recognition.
Bottom: Response probability in the free association task.

2-AFC recognition
Phonological exposure
Semantic exposure
Free association
Novel word meaning
Base word
Base word meaning
Other

900

870

2.2. Results and Discussion

1

920

875

Response time (ms)

meaning of the novel word. In all 6 questions were used,
asking whether the novel word referred to something that
was (1) man-made, (2) alive, (3) edible, (4) audible, (5)
touchable, or (6) liked by the participant.
The lexicalization test required making timed LD to all
the base words, the novel words and their associated
category names intermixed with a large set of fillers (i.e., 64
words, 102 nonwords). The order of stimulus presentation
was the same for each participant but varied every day. It
was pseudorandomized such that each base word (e.g.,
"cathedral") occurred at least 20 trials before its related
novel word (e.g., "cathedruke"), which was then
immediately followed by the associated category name (e.g.,
"vegetable"). The proportion of semantically related pairs,
i.e., a novel word followed by its category name, was 4.4%.
Participants were instructed to press "yes" only to the
existing real words, and had 3 s. from stimulus onset to
respond. The inter-trial interval was 1 s. The LD latencies to
the base words allowed us to estimate the amount of lexical
competition induced by prior exposure to the novel words
during the training phase. The LD latencies to the category
names allowed an estimate of the extent to which these
words were semantically associated with the immediately
preceding novel word (which could act as a prime).
In the 2-AFC recognition test, novel words and alternative
nonwords were presented in pairs (e.g., "cathedrukecathedruce"), and participants had to press a button to
indicate the item they had to learn. The acoustic exemplar of
the newly learnt words was the one presented at exposure.
Finally, in the free association task, only the novel words
presented during the semantic exposure phase were played.
After each item, participants had to write down the first
word that came to mind. This gave us a second measure of
how strongly the novel word was linked to the category
name or its meaning.

Performance in the 2-AFC recognition test was good, with a
rate of correct responses of at least 90% on each session (see
Table 1). Analyses of variance (ANOVAs) showed an effect
of day (F1(2,58) = 14.7, p < .01; F2(2,66) = 12.9, p < .01),
an effect of exposure, though marginally significant by
participant (F1(1,29) = 3.9, p < .06; F2(1,33) = 6.6, p < .05),

341

between day and response type (F1(8,232) = 5.3, p < .01;
F2(8,264) = 14.7, p < .01). From day 1 to day 2, the
probability of producing the base word increased with no
parallel reduction in that of producing the meaning of the
novel word. By contrast, from day 2 to day 8, there was an
increase in the probability of producing the meaning of the
novel word, clearly to the detriment of the probability of
producing the base word.
Taken together, these results suggest that exposure to a
novel word in a meaningful semantic context does not result
in faster or deeper lexicalization compared to simple
exposure to its phonological form. On day 2, only the
competitors learnt on the basis of just their sound-form were
able to delay recognition of the existing words, and on day
8, the two conditions of exposure did not differ in terms
their lexical footprint effects. Interestingly, the emergence
of competition effects on day 8 for the novel words learnt
through semantic exposure coincided with a significant
change in the ability of these words to prime their related
category name, both in the semantically primed LD and in
the free association task.

in Experiment 1, one nonword (e.g., "shadowks") was
presented as novel word, whereas the other one was used as
alternative choice in a recognition test.
Base words were stress-initial morphologically simple
nouns that ranged in frequency between 0 and 403
occurrences per million and had their UP located before or
at the final vowel. Here, in contrast to Experiment 1 which
used cohort competitors, the novel word, if lexicalized,
would be the only longer (embedding) competitor of the
base word. To have a better chance to index lexicalization of
this longer word, base words were therefore not presented in
isolation during the pause detection paradigm but in longer
carriers, such as "shadowk" or "shadow_k", derived from
the new competitor itself (e.g., "shadowks").
In addition, 12 other novel words along with their
alternative nonwords were devised, such as "trogist" and
"trogisk". They were used as fillers to increase the amount
of materials to be learnt, and potentially enhance the
sensitivity of the 2-AFC recognition test.
All speech materials were produced by the same speaker
and acquired using the same procedure as for Experiment 1.
The test items were divided into four groups, as were the
participants. In the lexicalization test (i.e., pause detection)
half of the carriers contained a short silence (e.g.,
"shadow_k"), whereas the other half did not, and within
each of these groups, half of the items had potentially a
longer competitor as a result of exposure, and the other did
not. Four versions of the experiment allowed each item to
be equally represented in the four (exposure x pause
occurrence) subcells of the design.

3. Experiment 2
The finding of a lexical footprint effect in the form-only
condition after only 24 hours and 12 exposures in
Experiment 1 stands in contrast with the late emergence of
this effect after three days of exposure under similar
conditions in Gaskell and Dumay's (2003) Experiment 2.
This new result suggests that lexicalization may take place
during the first 24 hours following exposure. To gain further
evidence that this really is the case, the present experiment
examined more closely the timecourse of lexicalization for
phonologically trained novel words using another paradigm
than LD as lexicalization test: pause detection. Contrary to
LD, this paradigm provides a measure of lexical activity
without requiring participants to make any judgment about
the lexical properties of the input. Examination of the
lexical footprint effect induced by a single massed exposure
phase was performed at three time points: immediately after
exposure, 24 hours later and a week later. To test whether
the lexical footprint would generalize to the level of
competition for segmentation, embedding rather than cohort
competitors (e.g., "shadowks") were used.

3.1.3. Procedure. On day 1 participants were exposed to the
novel words through a phoneme monitoring task. Then, the
immediate effect of exposure on lexical activity was
assessed using the pause detection paradigm. Finally,
explicit knowledge of the novel words was examined in a
free recall task and a 2-AFC recognition test. The effect of
exposure on lexical activity and explicit knowledge of the
novel words were re-tested on two subsequent occasions: 24
hours after exposure, and one week later. On each occasion,
the pause detection task was administered first, followed by
the free recall task and the 2-AFC recognition test.
The exposure phase was similar to the phoneme
monitoring component of Experiment 1. Here, the 36 test
novel words and the 12 lexically unrelated fillers were
involved. Each of them was presented 36 times over 12
blocks of trials. The 6 target phonemes were /n/, /d/, /k/, /l/,
/t/ and /s/.
The lexicalization test used the pause detection task. On
each trial, participants had to decide by pressing one of two
buttons whether a short silence (of 200 ms) was present in
any location within a bisyllabic spoken item. On the pausepresent trials, base word carriers had the silence inserted just
before the final consonant (e.g., "shadow_k"). Fillers were
144 bisyllabic words ending in a consonant or consonant
cluster, half of which contained a pause. The pause was
inserted just before or after the first or second vowel.

3.1. Method
3.1.1. Participants. Thirty-two native British English
speakers with no known auditory or language impairment
were tested. They were all students at the University of
York (UK), and none had taken part in Experiment 1. They
received course credits or were paid for their participation.
3.1.2. Materials and Design. The key materials consisted
of 72 bisyllabic item triplets. Each included a base word
ending in an unreduced vowel, such as "shadow", and two
nonwords such as "shadowks" and "shadowkt", derived
from the base word by adding a consonant cluster and which
differed from each other in one of the final consonants. As

342

25.0

92.0
570
560

Pause
88.0
86.0
84.0
82.0

550

No pause

558

Primed

20.0

Unprimed

540
532

530

526
520

520
510

510
505

500

80.0

Correct responses (%)

No pause
Response time (ms)

Correct responses (%)

90.0

Pause

15.0

10.0

5.0

490

0.0

480

78.0

1

2

8

2

1

Day

Day

8

1

2

8

Day

Figure 2. (Exp. 2) Left: Correct response rates in 2-AFC recognition. Middle: Mean pause detection latency (across pausepresent and pause absent trials) as a function of day and exposure. Right: Correct response rates in free recall.
In the free recall task, participants had 3 min. to recall
orally as many novel words as they could from the exposure
phase. Finally, the 2-AFC recognition test, similar to that of
Experiment 1, involved all the 48 novel words presented
during exposure, along with their choice (e.g., "shadowksshadowkt").

Whereas, on day 1, pause detection was facilitated by prior
exposure to a new longer competitor of the base word, on
day 2 (as on day 8), there was clear evidence that the new
competitor was now contributing to lexical activity.
Interestingly, the performance in direct recognition and free
recall gradually increased over time.

3.2. Results and Discussion

4. General Discussion

Performance in the 2-AFC recognition test was good, with a
rate of correct responses of at least 80% on each session (see
Figure 2). ANOVAs taking into account day and whether
the item had been disrupted by a pause during the
lexicalization test revealed that the main effects were
significant (day: F1(2,56) = 6.1, p < .01; F2(2,136) = 6.2,
p < .01; pause: F1(1,28) = 6.9, p < .05; F2(1,68) = 7.9,
p < .01), but did not interact with one another (Fs close to
1). As planned comparisons showed, performance increased
from day 1 to day 2 (ps < .05), but not from day 2 to day 8.
In the (pause detection) lexicalization test, latencies
revealed a clear-cut interaction between day and exposure
(F1(2,56) = 6.4, p < .01; F2(2,114) = 6.9, p < .01). On day
1, the immediate effect of exposure to a novel competitor
was to speed-up the pause detection performance, although
this effect was only marginally significant by participant
(F1(1,28) = 4.0, p < .06; F2(1,57) = 1.9, p < .2). In contrast,
24 hours after exposure as well as one week later, the
performance on the carriers for which a longer competitor
had been learnt was clearly inhibited (F1(1,28) = 5.7,
p < .05; F2(1,57) = 7.0, p = .01; F1(1,28) = 9.0, p < .01;
F2(1,57) = 14.0, p < .01). There was no effect of exposure
or interaction involving exposure and day on errors (7.4%).
In the free recall task, an ANOVA with day and presence
or absence of a pause during the lexicalization test only
revealed a significant effect of day (F1(2,56) = 27.8,
p < .01; F2(2,136) = 64.5, p < .01), with better performance
on day 2 than on day 1 (F1(1,28) = 18.7, p < .01; F2(1,68) =
21.7, p < .01), and better performance on day 8 than on day
2 (F1(1,28) = 21.3, p < .01; F2(1,68) = 51.1, p < .01).
On the basis of these results, it thus seems that following
a sufficient amount of exposure, lexicalization of the novel
word occurs within the next 24 hours, but not immediately.

The two experiments reported above allow us to make
substantial progress in understanding the full range of
factors involved in lexicalization of novel words. Gaskell
and Dumay (2003) showed that when words are learned on
the basis of only their phonological form, there is a delay
associated with their engagement in lexical competition.
Experiment 1 looked at whether this delay was eliminated
when a richer linguistic context was available during
learning. We found no evidence of any earlier or deeper
lexicalization using a richer learning environment; if
anything, the meaning and sentential context available at
encoding led to an increased delay in lexicalization. This
result suggests that exposure to a phonological form is both
necessary and sufficient for normal engagement in lexical
competition, supporting models of language acquisition that
have a similar focus on phonological form (e.g., Saffran,
Aslin, & Newport, 1996).
Experiment 1 also examined another hallmark of lexical
processing: semantic/associative priming. The results
suggest that this aspect of lexicalization emerges hand-inhand with engagement in lexical competition. As for the
lexical footprint in the semantic condition, a significant
priming effect was observed on day 8, but not at the two
preceding test points. We should be careful in interpreting
this effect, since the associate of the novel item was
repeatedly presented during the exposure session. It is
possible that this exposure induced a repetition priming
effect instead of, or in addition to, the associative
facilitation caused by the pairing of novel items and their
associates in LD (e.g., "cathedruke-vegetable). Yet, this
account would predict that priming should be just as
apparent on days 1 and 2 (cf. Tenpenny, 1995), whereas no
such effects were found. Thus, the data do seem to be best

343

We thank Graham Hitch for valuable comments and
discussions.

explained in terms of the emergence of a lexical link
between the novel items and their associated superordinates.
This link appears to rely on the establishment of a lexical
entry capable of engaging in competition rather than simply
a phonological trace.
Experiment 2 widened the domain of reference for our
lexical footprint test. Previously we had employed standard
“cohort” competitors, in which the novel and existing items
mismatch towards the end of the word. In Experiment 2 the
novel items had no segmental mismatch with the existing
items, but instead they were embedding competitors (e.g.,
"shadowks"). This experiment marks the beginning of an
extension of our research to lexical competition at the level
of lexical segmentation. These items appeared to behave in
a very similar way to standard cohort competitors,
strengthening the general conceptualization of lexical
competition as involving lexical items with any degree of
overlap (cf. McQueen et al., 1994).
Experiment 2 had the further advantage of involving a
larger set of stimuli with more sensitive measures of explicit
recall and recognition performance. The explicit measures
demonstrate that even in the absence of further exposure to
the novel sequences, recall and recognition performance
improves. One potential explanation of this finding is that
the processes that operate to engage the novel
representations in lexical competition also refine or focus
the phonological representations. This interpretation has
some support from developmental studies suggesting that
well-established lexical representations are more clearly
specified in terms of phonological form than newly learnt
ones (Stager & Werker, 1997; Swingley & Aslin, 2000).
Perhaps the most conspicuous finding relates to the
timecourse of lexicalization. In the phonological condition
of Experiment 1, and more crucially in Experiment 2, we
found a clear profile of lexical competition effects across the
three testing occasions. Immediately after learning, there
was no evidence that lexicalization had emerged, as defined
by engagement in lexical competition. However, without
further exposure, this lexical competition effect was
observed 24 hours later, and was essentially unchanged by
day 8. We can therefore narrow down the critical time
period for emergence of lexical competition to somewhere
between 1 and 24 hours after exposure. This suggests that
under normal circumstances, lexicalization will not be
hurried. This profile of learning fits in with the idea that
engagement in lexical competition requires the new
information to be interleaved with existing representation as
is the case for distributed connectionist networks (O’Reilly
& Norman, 2002). Our current research effort is focused on
whether lexicalization is reliant on the kind of memory
consolidation thought to occur during sleep (Walker, in
press).

References
Battig, W. F., & Montague, W. E. (1969). Category norms
for verbal items in 56 categories: A replication and
extension of the Connecticut category norms. Journal of
Experimental Psychology Monographs, 80, 1-46.
Dagenbach, D., Horst, S., & Carr, T. H. (1990). Adding new
information to semantic memory: How much learning is
enough to produce automatic priming? Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 16, 581-591.
Dahan, D., & Brent, M. R. (1999). On the discovery of
novel wordlike units from utterances: An artificiallanguage study with implications for native-language
acquisition. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 128, 165-185.
Gaskell, M. G., & Dumay, N. (2003). Lexical competition
and the acquisition of novel words. Cognition, 89, 105132.
Mattys, S. L., & Clark, J. H. (2002). Lexical activity in
speech processing: evidence from pause detection.
Journal of Memory and Language, 47, 343-359.
McClelland, J. L., & Elman, J. L. (1986). The Trace model
of speech perception. Cognitive Psychology, 18, 1-86.
McQueen, J. M., Norris, D., & Cutler, A. (1994).
Competition in spoken word recognition: spotting words
in other words. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning Memory and Cognition, 20, 621-638.
O'Reilly, R. C., & Norman, K. A. (2002). Hippocampal and
neocortical contributions to memory: Advances in the
complementary learning systems framework. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 6, 505-510.
Rueckl, J. G., & Olds, E. M. (1993). When pseudowords
acquire meaning: The effect of semantic associations on
pseudoword repetition priming. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 19, 515527.
Saffran, J. R., Aslin, R. N., & Newport, E. L. (1996).
Statistical learning by 8-month old infants. Science, 274,
1926-1928.
Stager, C. L., & Werker, J. F. (1997). Infants listen for more
phonetic detail in speech perception than in word-learning
tasks. Nature, 388, 381-382.
Swingley, D., & Aslin, R. N. (2000). Spoken word
recognition and lexical representation in very young
children. Cognition, 76, 147-166.
Tenpenny, P. L. (1995). Abstractionist versus episodic
theories of repetition priming and word identification.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 2, 339-363.
Walker, M. P. (in press). A refined model of sleep and the
time course of memory formation. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences.
Whittlesea, B., & Cantwell, A. (1987). Enduring influence
of the purpose of experiences: Encoding-retrieval
interactions in word and pseudoword identification.
Memory and Cognition, 15, 465-472.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a grant from the UK
Medical Research Council (G0000071) to Gareth Gaskell,
and Experiment 1 was part of Xiaojia Feng's MSc. thesis.

344

