UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Method for Studying Representation of Action and Cognitive Distance

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/59d3f0jb

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Bugmann, Davi Vann
Coventry, Kenny R.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Method for Studying Representation of Action and Cognitive Distance
Davi Vann Bugmann (dbugmann@plymouth.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, University of Plymouth
Devon, PL4 8AA England (UK)

Kenny R. Coventry (kcoventry@plymouth.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, University of Plymouth
Devon, PL4 8AA England (UK)

Abstract
Past studies examining the effects of action on memory for
route distance have overlooked the problem of the control of
visual information. A new methodology was developed to
investigate the involvement of action on the representation of
route distance information in two experiments which
eliminated the possible confounding effects of visual cues. In
both experiments the number of turns was manipulated.
Blindfolded participants learned new environments through
verbal descriptions by imagining themselves walking in
synchronization with metronome beats preset to match their
natural walking speed. During turns, they were carefully
moved. Following instructions, they performed an action at
mid-route. Upon reaching the destination, their memories for
the newly learned environments were tested through recall
and measured again (with metronome beats representing
footsteps). In Experiment 1 participants were exposed to the
environment only once, and in Experiment 2 they were
exposed to the environment twice. The results were consistent
across the experiments and showed the influence of number
of turns on remembered distances. Our data support the
segmentation hypothesis with regard to the perception of the
segment length and the influence of the number of turns on
path distance estimates. However, our data point to a more
parsimonious explanation in terms of body movement that
triggers attentional processes which signal memory for events.

Introduction
When asked how far it is from one place to another there is
much evidence that people do not give very accurate
distance estimations. Investigations into the relationship
between physical distance and cognitive distance have
shown that the two differ. Furthermore, the differences
between actual and cognitive distance are not random;
cognitive distance is systematically distorted from the
physical distance (Golledge, 1987).
The disparity in distance estimations has been explained
as a function of the hierarchical organization of memory
(e.g., Hirtle & Jonides, 1985; McNamara, 1986; Steven &
Coupe, 1978), the organization of reference points (e.g.,
Sadalla, Burroughs, & Staplin, 1980), the modes of
acquisition at learning (e.g., Thorndyke & Hayes-Roth,
1982), the contexts of learning (e.g., Gauvain & Rogoff,
1986; Taylor & Naylor, 2002), or the environment
complexity (e.g., Sadalla & Magel, 1980; Thorndyke,

1981). Hence there is a disparate range of explanations for
biases in distance estimation.
One possible explanation for bias in distance estimation,
which has not been explored in detail, is that it may be a
function of the actions we perform in the environment, and
how those actions are cued on retrieval. This may provide a
means of incorporating these multiple accounts of distance
bias within a single unified framework. The view that
cognition is grounded in the individual bodily interaction
with the environment (e.g., Barsalou, 1999; Glenberg, 1997)
is widely supported. Empirical evidence supporting the
embodiment framework can be found across a range of
domains. There is a tight coupling between visual
perception and action. It has been shown that the
representation of a visual stimulus generated from pictures
or from purely linguistic descriptions can activate motor
affordance, i.e., merely viewing an object, an image of an
object, or hearing a description of an object results in the
activation of the motor patterns necessary to interact with it
(e.g., Richardson, Spivey, & Cheung, 2001; Tucker & Ellis,
1998). In language comprehension, understanding a
sentence may call upon the same cognitive mechanisms as
those used in planning and executing actions (Glenberg &
Kaschak, 2002). It has also been shown that the
representation of action or motor representation shares the
same neural mechanisms as those that are responsible for
the preparation and programming of actual movements
(Decety, Jeannerod, & Prablanc, 1989). This evidence
indicates that motor activation can occur as part of a
cognitive process.
A number of studies have examined the effects of turning
during route navigation. Sadalla and Magel (1980) found
that paths containing several turns were perceived as being
longer than paths of equivalent objective length with fewer
turns, and the segmentation hypothesis has been used to
explain this effect. The segmentation hypothesis claims that
a right angle turn divides a pathway into segments and that
the perceived lengths of the segments are combined to
produce an estimate of total pathway length. Given two
pathways of the same length but differing in the number of
turns contained in each, the pathway with fewer turns will
necessary have longer segments. These segments will be
psychologically compressed to a greater extent than shorter
segments (longer segments are underestimated relative to
shorter segments). Therefore, the combination of a number

1381

of compressed segments will yield an underestimation of
total pathway length. This underestimation will be greater
for the pathway with fewer turns. However, this study does
not separate out a range of possible explanations for these
effects, such as visual cues, or the rate of motion (stepping
up or down, or turning) that influence the perception of
traversed distance (Hermann, Norton, & Klein, 1986;
Rieser, Pick, Ashmead, & Garing, 1995). For example,
Hermann et al. (1986) found that the size of the effect of
turns on memory for distance is affected by the number and
complexity of visual cues in the environment. Therefore, to
examine whether action is implicitly part of cognitive
processes, it is important to have strict control over the
visual information that participants could perceive and
extract from the environment during navigation, and the
performance of action (walking and turning). A new
methodology was developed that considered all these
factors in order to allow us to adequately measure whether
action exerts an effect on distance estimation during
navigation. In the present study, we manipulated the
influence of turns on traversed distances to assess more
precisely the mental mechanisms that mediate why complex
routes (with many turns) were estimated differently from
less complex ones (with fewer turns).

Experiment 1
The methodology was designed to control for the
confounding factors present in previous studies, while
maintaining realism for participants. In order to do this, a
blindfold methodology was developed where participants
heard linguistic descriptions describing environments over
headphones, and had to imagine themselves walking around
the environment in time with a series of metronome clicks
preset to control for speed of walk and size of step (number
of clicks heard). The aim was for participants to listen and
visualize the landmarks’ descriptions (thus minimizing the
risk of participants gauging distances by counting steps).
The environmental descriptions were formulated as guided
tours, and were read by a female colleague and tape
recorded for use in the experiments.
The linguistic descriptions used were controlled for
number of words and detail presented. Typically the
environments included five landmarks (e.g., a school, a
museum, a post-office, a bank, a library, etc.). Each
landmark was described by specifying its physical or
historical features. Following is an excerpt of a typical
description of an environment, used in the study (landmarks
are in bold): “You are in a place called Charlestown, a typical
New England town. Your starting place is Victoria Park. I am
going to take you on a walk from Victoria Park to St John's
Basilica. It is quite a nice walk with lots of things to look at on the
way. You are now standing at the gate of a place called Victoria
Park. Victoria Park is renowned for its formal and shrub gardens.
They are of interest and beauty in all seasons. During summer,
Victoria Park hosts a Folk Music Festival. … You are now at the
entrance of a place called the Central Library. Built of silverygrey stone, the front of the building has columns and triple arches
with elaborated decoration at the tops. Inside the Library, there is

an intricately carved oak staircase. You are standing directly in
front of the book return box. Now I will let you post the book in the
return box. You can actually feel the return box in front of you. So
feel the box and post the book. …”.

To encourage participants to visualize only the described
scenes, a blindfold was used in order to eliminate visual
information that they could have gathered from the test
laboratory. Furthermore, to examine the influence of action
the actual walking was replaced by mental walking. A
metronome pre-set to each participant’s natural walking
speed (stride length and frequency of stepping) emitted
beats to simulate their walking rhythm. So instead of
actually walking, participants heard a certain number of
metronome beats, which corresponded to the exact measure
of the distance to be traversed. When the distance was
mentally traversed the metronome beats ceased. However,
during the simulated navigation through the environment,
participants performed an action (e.g., put an object into a
box) which occurred at mid-route. This manipulation
allowed us to determine whether there was any difference in
the perception of distance before versus after performing the
action on the representation of distance. Participants also
experienced the change in angular displacement when
he/she arrived at 90-degree turn in the mental walk. In this
instance, they were rotated to face in the appropriate
direction. Once participants reached the destination
landmark, their memories for the newly learned
environments were measured through recall. Participants
were told that they were now at the starting landmark again
and had to “walk” on their own towards the destination (still
wearing the blindfold). They had to describe what they
“saw” on the way, and to instruct the experimenter to
engage/disengage the metronome to signal the start of the
mental walk or to stop walking. The dependent variables
were the remembered traversed distances, which were again
measured by metronome clicks. The experimental
arrangement is shown in Figure 1.

Figure 1: Arrangement during tests. The participant is on the
right, with the experimenter behind her.

1382

Environment Characteristics. Participants learned two
routes (Route A and Route B). They were not aware that
Route B was the mirror image of Route A.
As each route contained 5 landmarks, there were 4 paths
in each (denoted P1 to P4). Each path measured 64 meters
which meant the total route length measured (64 m x 4) 256
m. Ninety-degree turns divide a path into segments. Each
route contained 11 segments. The segment lengths were
fixed at 8, 12, 16, 24, 32, and 40 m. These distances were
combined to make up the length of 64 m for each path.
Figure 2 shows a schematic representation of one of the
environments used in the experiment. Note that in Route A,
P1, P2, and P3 contained 1 turn each followed by P4 with 4
turns; in Route B, P1 contained 4 turns followed by P2, P3,
and P4 with 1 turn each. The performance of action
occurred at mid-route (at the middle landmark); P1 and P4
were located at the outer positions of each route, while P2
and P3 were located at the inner positions of each route.

experimental design used was a 2 route (Route A vs. Route
B) x 2 position (inner vs. outer) x 2 action (before action vs.
after action) within-subjects design.
Participants. Twenty-nine undergraduate students agreed to
participate in the experiment in exchange for course credit.
They were between 18 and 35 years old (mean age = 20.50,
SD = 4.80). By agreeing to participant in the experiment,
they were aware that they would wear a blindfold during the
test.

Presentation. The study was presented to the participants as
an investigation into people’s memory for described places.
They were told that they were going to listen to descriptions
of imaginary walks through new environments, and were
told that during the simulated walks they had to visualize
the described landmarks. Additionally, they were asked to
return a book or a parcel at some point en-route. The
participants were not aware that their memory for distances
was being tested.

Procedure. Participants were tested individually in a
session lasting about 45 minutes. Initially, participants were
instructed to walk round the room (following a predesignated path) at their own natural walking speed so that
step length and speed of walk could be established. Next,
they were asked to put on the blindfold and headphones, and
to stand comfortably at the centre of a circle marked on the
floor. The experimenter familiarized the participants with
the turning procedure: she spun the participant around on
the spot, finishing by positioning him/her facing a box that
was sitting on a table. At this time, the experimenter gave
the participant the book or the parcel to carry with him/her.
Then the participants were instructed to visualize the
landmarks when they heard the descriptions, and to imagine
walking in synchronization with the metronome clicks, and
to stop imagining walking when the metronome ceased
clicking. The experimenter then started the tape player and
both listened to route descriptions through headphones. At
the appropriate times, the experimenter stopped the player
and engaged the metronome to implement the mental
walking. During turns, the experimenter intervened by
physically rotating the participants on the spot. Note that all
turns were 90 degrees turns. At mid-route, participants
performed the dispatch task as instructed, i.e., he/she
extended his/her arm to reach the box, touched it to find the
slot, and then dropped the objects into the box. Once the
destination was reached, the experimenter spun the
participant around again and positioned him/her in front of
the box. Still blindfold, the participant’s route memory was
tested through recall. After the recall of the first route, the
second route was immediately presented which was
followed straight away by the recall.
For the recall, participants were told that they were taken
back to the starting place from which they had to re-walk
the routes. They were asked to describe back as accurately
as possible what they “saw” en-route. They had to tell when
they wanted to walk away from the landmarks and when
they wanted to stop walking, so that the experimenter could
engage and disengage the metronome. At turns, they had to
rotate themselves on the spot and to indicate verbally the
direction of turns. Once it was established that participants
understood the recall instructions, the experimenter
switched on the recorder that participants carried with them.

Experimental Design. To examine the influence of action
and the effect of number of turns on traversed distances, the

Data Treatment. The participants’ recalls were transcribed.
Then we proceeded to check the order of landmarks recalled

Figure 2: Configuration of Route A, in Experiment 1
Pilot Study. Before we ran the study, we tested the
methodology on two pilot subjects in order to check
whether they felt any discomfort during the test given that
they had to wear a blindfold, and had to be physically turned
during the testing procedure. However, the subjects
commented that they were perfectly comfortable and
relaxed during the test. We then proceeded to the first
experiment using the new methodology.

1383

by the participants. In order to ensure that participants had a
good understanding of the environments they learned, only
responses with the correct sequence of landmarks were used
in the analyses.
Data were obtained by first translating the number of
metronome clicks (= steps) into traversed distances
expressed in meters. The accuracy of turns with regard to
amplitude and direction was not recorded in the present
experiment.

Results
Responses from 13 participants (45%) were excluded.
Twelve of these produced incorrect sequences of landmarks
for one or both routes, and the remaining participant was
eliminated because of poor English. Responses from 16
participants were used in the analysis (55%).
To check whether participants were not gauging distance
by counting the number of steps a correlation between the
total number of steps to walk Route A and Route B and the
re-walked distances of both routes across participants was
performed. The results showed no significant correlation,
indicating that participants were not counting clicks and
remembering the number of clicks on recall. As both Route
A and Route B contained 11 segments each, in total there
were 22 segments. For each segment, we averaged the
remembered distances across participants in order to
examine the correlation with the corresponding actual
distances. We found an overall significant correlation
between actual and remembered distances, r (22) = 0.68, p <
0.001 (1-tailed), which indicates that longer segments were
associated with remembering walking longer distances on
recall. To examine the influence of action and the effect of
number of turns on traversed distances, a 2 route (Route A
vs. Route B) x 2 position (inner vs. outer) x 2 action (before
action vs. after action) within-subjects ANOVA was
performed on path distances. The results of the 3-way
ANOVA are displayed in Table 1.
Table 1: Results of the 3-Way ANOVA on Path Distance
Estimation in Experiment 1.
Source
df and F value MS (error)
Route (R)
F (1, 15) = 1.89
442.53
Position (P)
F (1, 15) = 8.88
1922.00
Action (A)
F (1, 15) = 0.93
94.53
105.12
RxP
F (1, 15) = 0.90
195.03
RxA
F (1, 15) = 0.85
128.00
PxA
F (1, 15) = 0.30
RxPxA
F (1, 15) = 8.44
430.13
Note. ns: p > .05; *: p < .05; **: p < .01

Significance
ns
**
ns
ns
ns
ns
*

interaction between route, position, and action on
remembered path distances. Follow up analyses indicated
that in Route A, after the performance of action the outer
path (i.e., P4 contained 4 turns) was remembered as being
significantly longer than the inner path (P3 contained 1
turn), F (15) = 6.16, p < 0.05. In Route B, the reverse was the
case; before the performance of action the outer path (P1
contained 4 turns) was remembered as being significantly
longer than the inner path (P2 contained 1 turn), F (15) =
6.64, p < 0.05. This result confirmed that the influence of
number of turns was a robust effect on remembered
distances.

Discussion
We developed a new procedure in order to allow us to
adequately measure whether action exerts an effect on
distance estimation. During the experiment, none of the
participants expressed any discomfort during or after the
task, indicating that the methodology was appropriate.
That said, there was a large dropout rate (45%) due to
participants not being able to reproduce the landmarks in the
correct order (or to remember all the landmarks completely).
This may have been because the task was too difficult, or
because participants were exposed to the environment only
once.
Despite the high dropout rate, we found that within the
same routes, distance estimation was influenced by the
number of turns contained in a path; paths containing four
turns were remembered as being longer than paths with one
turn. This result is in line with evidence from other studies
(Sadalla & Magel, 1980), but with more control over visual
information and action. Our procedure allowed us to
observe the effect of number of turns on the same route
through auditory simulated navigation, while Sadalla and
Magel (1980)’s result was on separate paths, and involved
actual walking. However, taking together both studies
indicate that the influence of number of turns on memory
for distance is a robust effect.
The absence of the effect of performing an action may be
due to the salience of the action itself. The movement of
dispatching (dropping) an object into a box may be
perceived as a simple and routine activity therefore was not
salient enough to exert an effect on spatial representation. A
sequence of more pronounced movements to perform the
dispatch task may make the action more memorable. For the
moment, we were concerned by the high dropout rate. For
that reason, in Experiment 2 we exposed participants to the
same environments twice before their memories were tested
using exactly the same methodology as in Experiment 1.

Experiment 2

No main effects of route, or action were found. However,
there was a main effect of position on remembered path
distances. Overall, participants remembered walking
significantly longer distances on the outer paths (one of
which contained 4 turns) than on the inner paths (which
contained one turn). There was also a significant 3-way

Method
The method used was the same as in Experiment 1, except
that this time participants were exposed to each environment
twice before recalling routes.
As in Experiment 1, participants learned two different
routes (Route A and Route B), and then they had to

1384

reproduce each route trip in free recall. Route A and Route
B were presented to participants in counterbalanced order.

remembered distances; the inner paths (P2 and P3) were not
remembered significantly differently from one another.

Participants. Twenty-three undergraduate students agreed
to participate in the experiment in exchange for course
credit. Participants were between 18 and 46 years old (mean
age = 24.17, SD = 7.84). They were tested individually.

Discussion

Procedure. The procedure was exactly the same as in
Experiment 1, however here participants were guided
through each route twice before their memories for each
route were tested through free recall. The tests lasted about
one hour.

Results
As in Experiment 1, to be included in the analyses
participants’ responses must show the correct sequences of
landmarks in both routes. Responses from 18 out of 23
participants (78%) were used in the analyses. Responses
from 5 participants (22%) were eliminated (4 incorrect
sequences of landmarks, 1 poor quality recording). The
exposure to the environment twice seemed to work as the
rate of data inclusion has much improved, although there is
still quite a high rate of exclusion.
On average, we found that short distances were
overestimated,
whereas
longer
distances
were
underestimated. The overall correlation between actual and
remembered distances was highly significant, r (22) = 0.68, p
< 0.001 (1-tailed). This result indicates that if the actual
distances were longer, participants remembered walking
longer distances as well.
To examine the influence of the number of turns,
position, and action on path distance estimates, a 2 route
(Route A vs. Route B) x 2 position (inner vs. outer) x 2
action (before action vs. after action) within-subjects
analysis of variance was performed on path distance
estimates. There were no significant effects of route, or
action. However, there was a main effect of position on path
distance
estimates.
Overall,
participants
walked
significantly longer distances at the outer paths (one path
contained 4 turns) than the inner paths (1-turn paths). There
was a significant 2-way interaction between route and
action; before action, remembered distances were shorter in
Route A than in Route B; however after action, remembered
distances were larger in Route A than in Route B. This
effect was observed because of the influence of number of
turns. There was also a significant 3-way interaction
between route, position, and action. As in Experiment 1, the
follow up analyses indicated that in Route A, after the
performance of action the outer path (i.e., P4 contained 4
turns) was remembered as being significantly longer than
the inner path (P3 contained 1 turn), F (17) = 4.09, p = 0.05.
In Route B, the reverse was the case; before the
performance of action the outer path (P1 contained 4 turns)
was remembered as being significantly longer than the inner
path (P2 contained 1 turn), F (17) = 9.41, p < 0.01. This result
confirmed the robust effect of number of turns on

The fact that participants were exposed to the environments
twice in order to acquire route knowledge substantially
improved the data collection. Although the rate of exclusion
was still high (22%) suggesting that some participants’
memories for routes were imprecise, the majority of
participants produced the landmarks in the correct order,
and therefore distance estimates could be analyzed.
The results replicated those in Experiment 1. As
expected, the effect of number of turns was also observed in
this experiment; paths with more turns were remembered as
being longer than paths with fewer turns. The absence of the
influence of action may be due to the salience of the action
itself. A more pronounced sequence of movements to
perform the dispatch task may make the performance of
action more memorable thereby the prediction of a
difference between remembered distances before and after
the performance of action would stand more of a chance of
being found if present.

General Discussion
The new procedure was developed with the aim of
controlling confounding factors, such as visual cues and the
speed of walk in order to adequately investigate whether
action exerts an effect on distance estimation during
simulated navigation.
To begin with, in general during tests participants
claimed they felt comfortable and relaxed with the task,
which indicated that the methodology was an appropriate
and sensitive procedure, especially given that participants
had to wear a blindfold for the whole duration of the test
that lasted about one hour. However, despite the relatively
high dropout rate, the data we collected across both
experiments indicated nevertheless that the methodology
was successful. Future studies could present the
environment a third time, which might improve the
inclusion rate further.
Let us now consider how our data fit with current theories
of environmental knowledge. Our results are in line with the
segmentation hypothesis with regard to the perception of the
segment lengths and the influence of the number of turns on
path distance estimates. However, we found the same effect
of number of turns on remembered distances without
actually traversing any distance. Our data actually point to
an interpretation in terms of attention processes that signal
memory for events. Participants heard the metronome clicks
representing their footsteps during mental walks. It was
clear that they had internalized distance and direction as
well as turns information for use during recall that had
enabled them to get from the starting landmark towards the
final destination. As they were not walking any distance,
they seemed to have been encoding the action of turning. In
the absence of direct visual information, the body
movement triggers the retrieval process; i.e., the

1385

participants’ attention would focus on memory for events
(actual turning). However, this form of representation is
available for limited periods only; as time went on, memory
faded and decayed (Thompson, 1983). The attention process
then must be shifted in order to attend to the next event that
came to mind. To proceed still further, the attention process
had to be re-initialized. When walking naturally one average
footstep measures about 70 cm, and there are two footsteps
forward per second. Therefore, it will take 10 sec to walk 14
m. It is not surprising in terms of the attentional process that
people remember only a certain distance (14 m) given that
they can focus their attention only for the first 10 sec during
retrieval. The fact that participants remembered walking
longer distances in paths containing 3 turns than paths
containing 1 turn corresponded to the fact that they were
actually moving (turning) more often in paths with several
turns as well. Consequently, the more turns in a path the
more attention shifts were required and the longer the
perceived distance. The cognitive mechanism uncovered in
the present study is different from that of the segmentation
hypothesis. We attributed the fact that paths with more turns
were remembered as being longer than paths with fewer
turns to the attention shifts during the retrieval process, and
suggested that the function of body movement was to reinitialise the retrieval process.
Although the new procedure permits a more precise
examination of processes involved in spatial judgment,
work needs to be done regarding the large drop out rate.
Maybe repeating the simulated walk three times would
improve data collection. Additionally, the influence of
action at the midpoint would stand more of a chance to be
found if present by making the action more pronounced
(through more extensive turning or walking on the spot).
More importantly, further work needs to be done in order
to establish whether our results can be generalized. For
example a comparison between the present study and a
study where actual walking takes place is desirable.
Despite these limitations, the new procedure has allowed
control over action and visual information during testing,
and provides a means for future investigation of a range of
possible action manipulations that have hitherto evaded
controlled experimental procedures. It also provides
important indication that basic processes underlying mental
distance estimation seem to persist even in rather extreme
sensory deprivation conditions.

References
Barsalou, L.W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems.
Behavioral & Brain Sciences, 22, 577 - 609.
Decety, J., Jeannerod, M., and Prablanc, C. (1989). The
timing of mentally represented actions. Behavioural Brain
Research, 34, 35 - 42.
Gauvin, M., & Rogoff, B. (1986). Influence of the goal on
children’s exploration and memory of large-scale space.
Developmental Psychology, 22, 72 – 77.

Glenberg, A.M. (1997). What memory is for. Behavioral &
Brain Sciences, 20, 1 - 19.
Glenberg. A.M., & Kaschak, M.P. (2002). Grounding
language in action. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9,
558 – 565.
Golledge, R.G. (1987). Environmental cognition. In D.
Stokols, I. Altman (Eds). Handbook of Environmental
Psychology. John Wiley & Son.
Herman, J.F., Norton, L.M., & Klein. C.A. (1986).
Children’s distance estimates in a large-scale
environment. A search for the route angularity effect.
Environment & Behavior, 18, 533 – 558.
Hirtle, S.C., Jonides, J. (1985). Evidence of hierarchies in
cognitive maps. Memory & Cognition, 13, 208 – 217.
McNamara, T.P. (1986). Mental representations of spatial
relations. Cognitive Psychology, 18, 87-121.
Richardson. D.C., Spivey, M.J. & Cheung, J. (2001).
Proceedings of the Twenty-third Annual Meeting of the
Cognitive Science Society, 867 – 872. Erlbaum: Mawhah,
NJ.
Rieser, J.J., Pick, Jr., H.L., Ashmead, D.H. & Garing, A.E.
(1995). Calibration of human locomotion and models of
perceptual-motor organization. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 21,
480 – 497.
Sadalla, E.K., & Magel, S.G. (1980). The perception of
traversed distance. Environment and Behavior, 12, 65-79.
Sadalla, E.K., Burroughs, W.J., & Staplin, L.J. (1980).
Reference points in spatial cognition. Journal of
Experimental Psychology : Human Learning and
Memory, 6, 516-528.
Steven, A., & Coupe, P. (1978). Distortion in judged spatial
relations. Cognitive Psychology, 10, 422 - 437.
Taylor, H. A. & Naylor, S. J. (2002). Goal-directed effects
on processing a spatial environment. Indications from
memory and language. In: Coventry, K. R. & Olivier, P.
(Eds.). Spatial Language: Computational and Cognitive
Perspectives. Kluwer, Dordrecht.
Thompson, J.A. (1983). Is continuous visual monitoring
necessary in visually guided locomotion? Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 9, 427 - 443.
Thorndyke, P.W. (1981). Distance estimation from
cognitive maps. Cognitive Psychology, 13, 526 – 550.
Thorndyke, P.W., & Hayes-Roth, B. (1982). Differences in
spatial knowledge acquired from maps and navigation.
Cognitive Psychology, 14, 560-589.
Tucker, M., & Ellis, R. (1998). On the relations between
seen objects and components of potential actions. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 24, 830 – 846.

1386

