UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Theoretical Framework to Understand and Engineer Persuasive Interruptions

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/64v1s8t2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Walji, Muhammad
Brixe, Juliana
Johnson-Throop, Kathy
et al.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Theoretical Framework to Understand and Engineer Persuasive Interruptions
Muhammad Walji (Muhammad.F.Walji@uth.tmc.edu)
University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, School of Health Information Sciences,
7000 Fannin, Houston, TX 77030 USA

Juliana Brixey (Juliana.J.Brixey@uth.tmc.edu)
University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, School of Health Information Sciences,
7000 Fannin, Houston, TX 77030 USA

Kathy Johnson-Throop (Kathy.A.Johnson@jsc.nasa.gov)
NASA Johnson Space Center,
Houston, TX 77058 USA

Jiajie Zhang (Jiajie.Zhang@uth.tmc.edu)
University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, School of Health Information Sciences,
7000 Fannin, Houston, TX 77030 USA

positive outcomes, while at the same time minimizing some
of their most disruptive properties. After all, interruptions
are constantly used to help manage and complete important
everyday tasks. Such interruptions also have the ability to
influence and change behavior. In order to better understand
and explain how interruptions can be engineered to be
positive and persuasive we propose a theoretical framework
and conceptualization. The theoretical framework may also
guide designers on discovering factors to help develop
appropriate interruptions.

Abstract
Interruptions are often seen as distracting or sometimes
devastating elements that need to be minimized or eliminated.
However, interruptions are also used to increase efficiency,
productivity, prevent errors, and even influence behavior.
Existing theories and taxonomies of interruptions fail to
account for the helpful aspects of interruptions. Therefore we
propose a theoretical framework to help explain the positive
aspects of interruptions. Warnings & alerts, reminders,
suggestions and notifications are examples of interruptions
that have beneficial outcomes by changing and influencing
behavior. We propose a cognitive theory of interruptions
based on the properties of the users, their tasks, and best
presentations depending on the desired effectiveness of the
interruption. Norman’s 7-stage action model serves to explain
how and why an interruption is accepted, and potential
mismatches between the goal of the interruption and the user.
Potential applications of this model include better
understanding the effects of interruptions, and guidance to
design effective and persuasive warnings and alerts,
reminders, suggestions and notifications.

Effects of Interruptions
Detrimental Effects of Interruptions

Introduction
Interruption has been an active area in human-computer
interaction research for some time. A comprehensive review
was provided by McFarlane and Latorella (2002).
Interruptions are typically defined as a change or
disturbance in a process or in people’s activities.(Cooper &
Franks, 1993; McFarlane & Latorella, 2002) Interruptions
are categorized along different dimensions by different
researchers, such as source, effect, content, applicability,
and duration by Cooper & Franks (1993) and individual
properties, methods, meaning, source, channel, change, and
effect by McFarlane and Latorella (2002).
Significant research has been expelled in determining
how to classify, prevent, minimize, and provide tools to help
users deal with interruptions. However, there is little
understanding how interruptions can be exploited for

The effects of interruptions are generally described as
negative Users perceive an interrupted task as being more
difficult to complete than an uninterrupted task (Bailey,
Konstan, & Carlis, 2000). An interruption is also thought to
take longer to process and return back to task when it is
unrelated to the task at hand (Cutrell, Czerwinski, &
Horvitz, 2001). The added memory load seems to make it
difficult for a task to be resumed. It also becomes difficult to
remember what task was being processed before the
interruption. (Burmistrov & Leonova, 1996; Dix, Ramduny,
& Wilkinson, 1995). Further, the complexity of the task
being interrupted effects the disruptiveness of an
interruption.
Interrupting
complex
tasks
inhibits
performance, and has no effect on simpler tasks (Burmistrov
& Leonova, 1996). Interestingly, people can recall details
about interrupted tasks better than uninterrupted
tasks.(McFarlane & Latorella, 2002)
People also have individual differences in their ability to
respond and manage interruptions (McFarlane & Latorella,
2002). Interruptions also affect performance. Users are
thought in general to perform slower on interrupted tasks
(Bailey et al., 2000), although some evidence exist that an
interruption may actually speed up task completion (Zijlstra,

1417

Roe, Leonara, & Krediet, 1999). However, the actual effect
of an interruption will likely depend on the actual tasks
being performed, and the interruption itself. There is
conflicting evidence if similarity between the interrupted
and interrupting tasks has any effect on performance (Bailey
et al., 2000; Gillie & Broadbent, 1989).
Timing of interruptions may also have an effect.
Interruptions coming early during a search task are
described as likely to result in the user forgetting the
primary task goal than an interruption arriving later on
(Cutrell et al., 2001). The presentation of the interruption
are also important. For example aurally presented
interruptions are thought to be acknowledged more quickly
than visual stimuli. Auditory ongoing tasks are more
resistant to interruptions than visual ones (Latorella, 1996)
Thermal interruptions have larger detrimental effect than
light on disruptiveness and performance (Arroyo, Selker, &
Stouffs, 2002). Motion as a notification system is effective
compared with static items (Bartram, Ware, & Calvert,
2001). Traveling motions as a visual stimuli are more
disruptive than anchored motions (Bartram et al., 2001)
Therefore much effort has been expended to determine
the negative effects of various interruptions and their
modalities. However there are also different perspectives
from which the effects of interruptions may be viewed.
Indeed an interruption may be devastating to the task in
progress. But when looking at the individual performing
various tasks, the interruption may not have a detrimental
impact on the whole. Most research has focused on the task
level, which may be an inappropriate level of analysis in
some cases.

Beneficial Effects of Interruptions
Types of interruptions that may serve beneficial purposes
include warnings and alerts, reminders, notifications and
suggestions. Of course warnings and alerts etc., may not
always be interruptions. We define a warning and alert etc.
as an interruption when it causes a change or disturbance in
a person’s activity or behavior. Table 1 summarizes the
characteristics of these interruptions. We provide examples
in a healthcare context, although these types of interruptions
would also exist in other domains. Our examples are also
technologically focused and include persuasive interruptions
embedded into computer systems, mobile devices, and
medical equipment which are increasingly being used in
healthcare.
Warnings & Alerts are usually a sign or signal of
something negative occurring, or a notice to be careful.
They are intended to make people aware of an impending
danger or difficulty. For example, drug interaction warnings
embedded into drug prescribing systems warn doctors and
pharmacists about dangerous drug-drug interactions when
prescribing or filling a prescription. These warnings are
designed to interrupt the current task, and alert the clinician
to a potential adverse event. Although such warnings may
be critical in preventing errors, it is found that in practice

such warnings are often ignored or overridden (Wilson,
2003), suggesting the need for better designed warnings.
Hospitals are increasingly ‘buzzing’ with auditory alerts
from a variety of medical equipment (Meredith &
Edworthy, 1995). The purpose of such devices are to
monitor patients and alert physicians or nurses when they
need to take action. However, there is rarely any
synchronization or awareness between the large number of
standalone medical equipment emanating various alerts and
tones; resulting in many ignored warnings.
Warnings and alerts are often urgent and need to be
handled quickly. Warnings and alerts may either have an
explicit or implicit action associated with them. For
example a drug interaction warning may indicate explicitly
that there is a potential interaction with a drug and provide a
list of medications that may be suitable replacements. An
audible alert may be more implicit, simply indicating an off
nominal state, without providing any explicit instructions or
actions.
Reminders are a form of interruption that cause an
individual to remember or recall an event. Clinical decision
support systems often remind physicians of standard tests or
procedures that conform to clinical practice guidelines.
(Bates et al., 2003) Such reminders are deemed important as
they provide a mechanism to foster uniformity in treatment
and to assist in managing the burgeoning costs of
healthcare. These reminders often occur while the
physicians is documenting or ordering the tests and
procedures. Medication reminders may also assist patients
in adhering and complying with their medication regimens
(Bennett & Glasziou, 2003). Although the urgency or
importance of reminders may vary, many will include an
explicit associated action. For example a medication
reminder may announce the time, dose and route for the
drug.
Suggestions are ideas or proposals that are propagated to
individuals. Patients often receive suggestions and
recommendations from their care-givers. For example
diabetics are urged to exercise more and eat healthier.
Physicians may be informed that their patient may be
eligible for a particular clinical trial. Pharmaceutical
companies also engage in suggestive practices to prescribers
when they promote their particular brand of medication.
Such suggestive interruptions can be from face-to-face
encounters with a pharmaceutical sales representative or
through the use of sponsored drug reference databases.
Suggestions are unlikely to be of high urgency or
importance. But effective suggestions may explicitly state
associated actions that are recommended.
Notifications are usually described as the process of
informing. Notifications are defined as the most generic
type of interruption, with the least degree of importance or
urgency. A notification may purely be informational in
purpose with no explicit instruction for action. For example

1418

a notice stating the availability of a patient’s lab results
informs a physician that their requested order is ready.
However, notifications may lead to actions implicitly
without specific instructions. For example the lab test may
indicate that a particular patient needs an immediate surgical
procedure. Therefore notifications may lead to implicit
actions.

Task Properties

Table 1: Beneficial Interruptions and their Characteristics
Interruption Type

Importance /
Urgency

Action

Warnings & Alerts

High

Implicit or Explicit

Reminders

High-Low

Explicit

Suggestions

Medium – Low

Explicit

Notifications

Low

Implicit

location, environment, time of day (or week or year), or
schedule (in Outlook for example) may be exploited to
establish if they can be interrupted. Horvitz et al have
explored the use of subtle clues in design of attentive user
interfaces to discover the attention of users combined with
user preferences in design of notification platform to
intelligently route messages (Horvitz, 1999).

Persuasive Interruptions
Fogg (1998) suggests computers and technology can be
persuasive (change attitudes or behavior) as tools, social
actors and/or media. We suggest that technology-based
interruptions can be designed so they too can influence
behavior and attitudes in order to achieve positive
outcomes. In fact beneficial interruptions described earlier
as warnings and alerts, reminders and suggestions disrupt a
person’s current task, and may cause them to change their
behavior. Of course not all positive interruptions need to
change or influence behavior. The persuasiveness of
interruptions may be directly linked to the interruption type
and their corresponding importance to deliver a particular
message. For example warnings may be high in importance,
and need to influence a change in behavior immediately and
therefore very persuasive. While a notification, which is just
informational in content, may not influence behavior and
therefore may not be particularly persuasive.

Theoretical Framework
We propose a theoretical framework for interruptions
(figure 1) to help explain the different dimensions that are
involved in making an interruption persuasive and
beneficial. Table 2 shows the details of the framework in a
form of taxonomy.

User Properties
Individuals or users that are affected by interruptions are
likely to have unique characteristics and properties.
Therefore it is important to identify key features that may
impact the effectiveness of interruptions and how they
respond and deal with them. For example a physician has
different characteristics than a nurse. A challenge in
producing effective interruption are to deliver them when
most opportune and least detrimental. Therefore a users

In addition to determining user characteristics, it is also
important to determine properties of the interrupted and
interrupting tasks. Certain tasks may be particularly
susceptible to the detrimental effects of interruptions.
However, determining a user’s current task is challenging.
Computer based tasks may be more amenable to discovering
current task or workload. But in more complex, dynamic or
distributed domains, it is likely that the users will interact
with a multitude of (unlinked) devices including phones,
pagers, PDA’s, among others.
Various methods to determine user interrupt-ability have
been explored. Instant messaging applications allow users to
indicate their current availability. Alternatively, task
complexity may be automatically measured. The number
and type of applications the user has open, or number of key
strokes, or mouse clicks within a certain time period may
indicate the user’s workload. The user’s contextual
information may also be exploited, such as time of day or
week. A user may conduct certain tasks at certain times of a
week. However, many users do not follow a rigid schedule
and may elect to make changes. Another approach has been
to discover “activity awareness” between groups which take
into account situational, group, task and tool factors and
subsequently provide a notification system to indicate
availability. (Carroll, Neale, Isenhour, Rosson, &
McCrickard, 2003) However, further work is needed to
discover how best to determine current task properties in
order to present an interruption at the most optimal time.

Presentation
In addition to user and task properties, the presentation of an
interruption may be critical. The presentation of an
interruption involves two stages. First, the interruption must
alert the user of its presence. Heat, light, sound, vibration,
and motion may capture attention differently with different
efficiencies. Second, a message representation must be
delivered. Analysis of the user, task and priority of the
interruption context will help determine the appropriate
mode of interruption. The presentation may also differ
depending on type of interruption and on the device used to
interrupt. A visual pop-up may effectively capture a users
attention while using a computer, but may be ineffective on
a cell phone stowed in coat pocket.
In addition to being effective and minimally disruptive,
the message of the interruption can also be engineered to be
persuasive. In a multi-tasked environment, users are
presented with a multitude of interruptions and are
constantly deciding whether to act upon the interruption. If

1419

Figure 1: Cognitive theory of persuasive interruptions
different interruptions (such as a warning or notification) are
presented with the same degree of persuasiveness they may
be handled in the same manner. However, persuasive
elements such as positive reinforcement, personalization,
and social cues amongst others can also be used to enhance
the persuasiveness of an interruption when appropriate.
Currently there is little research on how modifying the
persuasiveness of a message of an interruption effects its
acceptance.

Individual Action Cycle
Norman’s 7-stage action model has been incorporated into
the cognitive theory in order to help explain at the
individual action level why an interruption is accepted and
acted upon (Norman, 1988). The seven stages are divided
into three categories, one for goals, 3 for stages of
executions and 3 for evaluation. The goal stage may be
particularly important because an individual’s perceptions
or intentions may need to be related to intention of the
interruption itself as personified by its presentation. The
stages of execution are also useful in determining if the
suggested interruption can be acted upon. The evaluation
stage where the individual perceives the state of the world
after executing an action may also assist in determining the
success of an interruption. Therefore the 7-stage action
model provides a useful perspective in helping to explain
how modifying the presentation of an interruption impacts
discrete stages of individual action.

Interruption Effectiveness
The effectiveness of an interruption will largely depend
upon the original goal and perspective used. A drug
interaction warning that interrupts a physician while
inputting order entry may be effective if it results in a

change of medication; as it may avoid a hospitalization for
the patient. However, it may also cause the physician to lose
focus and forget the original task. Therefore it is important
to clarify the perspective from which effectiveness is
judged. In our model we propose cognitive, perceived value
and performance based measures to evaluate and engineer
interruptions once the perspective has been defined.
Cognitive factors may include loss of memory or
disruptiveness of interruptions. Perceived value factors such
as annoyance and anxiety are often associated with
interruptions. Interruptions affect performance, by changing
time to complete tasks, providing opportunities for errors,
and forgetting to resume previous tasks.
Similarly they may effect financial performance or result
in a more favorable outcome (such as prevention of
hospitalization) In our model, information from the context
of the user, tasks and presentation can be exploited in order
to find an optimal balance between cognitive, perceived
value and performance measures depending on the
perspective and desired outcomes.

Assessing Context
The surrounding conditions or circumstances that make up
the environment around an individual may provide
important information in order to successfully deliver an
interruption. The dynamics of interruptions in team
environments are different than those of single individuals.
In team environments, a team member can intercept an
interrupting activity for another team member who is
already engaged in a previous task. An audible interruption
targeted to one team member may interrupt the work of
colleagues nearby. Or an interruption for one individual
may result in a cascade of interruptions for others.

1420

Table 2: Taxonomy of Persuasive Interruptions
Examples
User Properties
Context

Characteristics
Task Properties
Interruption Type
Interrupted
Task
Type
Task Interrupt Scale
Stage of Interruption

Broadcast or Single
Interruption
Presentation
Customization
Mode of
Interruption
Display type
Device
Persuasive elements
Interruption
frequency
Resumption method
Interruption
Effectiveness
Perspective

Individual characteristics of users, their contextual
situations and preferences
Where is the individual? Where can an individual
be interrupted? Is an interruption more
appropriate at a certain location or time
What are the individual characteristics of users?
What are their strengths and limitations?
The properties of the interruption itself and the
task it will interrupt
What is the intent of the interruption?
What task will be interrupted?
How important is the task to be interrupted?
What is the stage of the current task?

Is the interruption in the context of team or
collaborative environment, or individual
environment?
Factors addressing how the interruption can be
presented to the user
To what degree is the presentation customized?
How will the user be alerted of the presence of the
interruption?
How will the message be communicated?
What device will be used to convey the message of
the interruption
What types of persuasive techniques are
incorporated into the interruption?
How often will the interruption be presented?
How will the individual be assisted to resume their
original task?
Assessing the effectiveness of the interruption

Hospital, Emergency Room (ER), Attending to
critical patient, etc.
Expertise, skills, knowledgebase, age, education,
cognitive capacities and limitation

Warning, alert, reminder, suggestion or
notification
Work related (computer based, meeting etc.),
Social (lunch, sleep etc.)
Low, Medium, High
Goals, Intention to Act, Sequence of actions,
Execution of action sequence, Perceiving state
of the world, Interpreting the perception,
Evaluation of interpretations
Individual, small team, large team, etc.

Generic, Personalized, Targeted or Tailored
Heat, lights, sound, vibration, and motion
Prompt, pop-up, voice alert
Personal Computer (PC), Personal Digital
Assistant (PDA), Telephone, Cell phone, Pager
Media, Tool, Social Actor, Positive reinforcement,
personalization, credibility etc.
Once only, more than once, every hour etc.
Log of previous tasks, reminder of previous task,
screenshot of previous state etc.

Who is the intended beneficiary of the Physician being interrupted, Patient, Healthcare
interruption? What is the net benefit?
system
Cognitive
What is the cognitive impact of the interruption on Loss of memory, disruptiveness, number of errors
the individual?
Perceived value
What are the individual perceptions of the Annoyance, anxiety, interest, boredom, curiosity
interruption?
Performance
How does the interruption effect the performance Completion of tasks, time to complete task,
of the interrupted task? To what degree is the
number of errors, dollars saved
task associated with the interruption completed?
detailed description of how people may manage an
interruption and how it effects a current task in terms of
Benefits of Persuasive Interruption Model
detection, distraction, disturbance and disruption. The model
Other models of interruptions have been developed in an
of persuasive interruptions is more concerned with
attempt to eliminate, minimize or manage the detrimental
dimensions of the user, task and presentation properties and
effects of interruptions. However, these models fail to
how that influences the effectiveness of the interruption.
describe the positive effects of interruptions. Latorella’s
We suggest Norman’s 7-stage action model can explain how
(1996) Stage Model of interruption management is a
and why an individual receives an interruption. McFarlane
1421

(2002) has also proposed a taxonomy of human
interruptions that includes elements such as source,
individual characteristics, method of coordination etc. Our
model incorporates features of McFarlane’s taxonomy but is
more operationalized and detailed. For example McFarlane
suggests looking at the individual characteristics of users,
while we expand this view to also consider other relevant
contextual features, such as time, location and environment.

Conclusion
In this work we identify and discuss four types of beneficial
interruptions: warnings and alerts, reminders, suggestions
and notifications. We then propose a theoretical framework
and taxonomy in order lay the foundation to develop
guidelines for persuasive interruption design.
Future work will improve the framework by
experimentally testing and validating the model of
persuasive interruptions. We are particular interested in
discovering the effects of various persuasive techniques
when applied to the message of an interruption. Potential
applications of this model include better understanding the
effects of interruptions, and guidance to better design
effective and persuasive interruptions.

Acknowledgments
Supported by a training fellowship from the Keck Center for
Computational and Structural Biology of the Gulf Coast
Consortia (NLM Grant No. 5T15LM07093), and supported
in part by grant No. NCC 2-1234 from NASA’s HumanCentered Computing and Intelligent Systems Program.

References
Arroyo, E., Selker, T., & Stouffs, A. (2002). Interruptions
as multimodal outputs: Which are the less disruptive?
Paper presented at the 4th IEEE International Conference
on Multimodal Interfaces (ICMI'02). Institute of Electrical
and Electronics Engineers.
Bailey, B. P., Konstan, J. A., & Carlis, J. V. (2000).
Measuring the Effects of Interruptions on Task
Performance in the User Interface. Paper presented at the
IEEE Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics,
Nashville, TN.
Bartram, L., Ware, C., & Calvert, T. (2001). Moving icons,
detection and distraction. Paper presented at the HumanComputer Interaction – INTERACT 2001.
Bates, D. W., Kuperman, G. J., Wang, S., Gandhi, T.,
Kittler, A., Volk, L., et al. (2003). Ten commandments for
effective clinical decision support: making the practice of
evidence-based medicine a reality. J Am Med Inform
Assoc, 10(6), 523-530.
Bennett, J., & Glasziou, P. (2003). Computerised reminders
and feedback in medication management: a systematic
review of randomised controlled trials. Med J Aust.,
178(5), 217-222.
Burmistrov, I., & Leonova, A. (1996). Interruption in the
Computer Aided Office Work: Implications to User

Interface Design. Paper presented at the Human-Computer
Interaction: Human Aspects of Business Computing.
Proceedings of EWHCI'96, Moscow.
Carroll, J. M., Neale, D. C., Isenhour, P. L., Rosson, M. B.,
& McCrickard, D. S. (2003). Notification and awareness:
synchronizing task-oriented collaborative activity.
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 58(5),
605-632.
Cooper, R., & Franks, B. (1993). Interruptibility as a
Constraint on Hybrid Systems. Mind and Machines, 3, 7396.
Cutrell, E., Czerwinski, M., & Horvitz, E. (2001).
Notification, Disruption, and Memory: Effects of
Messaging Interruptions on Memory and Performance.
Paper presented at the Human-Computer Interaction-Interact '01.
Dix, A., Ramduny, D., & Wilkinson, J. (1995). Deadlines
and Reminders: Investigations into the Flow of
Cooperative Work. (No. Technical Report RR9509):
University of Huddersfield.
Fogg, B. (1998). Persuasive computers: perspectives and
research directions. Paper presented at the Proceedings of
the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing
systems.
Gillie, T., & Broadbent, D. (1989). What makes
interruptions disruptive? A study of length, similiarity, and
complexity. Psychological Research, 50(4), 243-250.
Horvitz, E., Jacobs, A., & Hovel, D. (1999, July 1999).
Attention-Sensitive Alerting. Paper presented at the
Proceedings of UAI '99, Conference on Uncertainty and
Artificial Intelligence, Stockholm, Sweden.
Latorella, K. A. (1996). Investigating Interruptions:
Implications for Flightdeck Performance. Unpublished
Doctoral Dissertation, State University of New York at
Buffalo, Buffalo.
McFarlane, D. C., & Latorella, K. A. (2002). The Scope and
Importance of Human Interruption in HCI Design.
Human-Computer Interraction, 17(3), 1-62.
Meredith, C., & Edworthy, J. (1995). Are there too many
alarms in the intensive care unit? An overview of the
problems. J Adv Nurs., 21(1), 15-20.
Norman, D. A. (1988). The Design of Everyday Things.
New York: Doubleday.
Wilson, J. (2003). Crying wolf! Why computerised drug
interaction alerts need an overhaul. The Pharmaceutical
Journal, 271(7276), 708.
Zijlstra, F. R. H., Roe, R. A., Leonara, A. B., & Krediet, I.
(1999). Temporal factors in mental work: Effects of
interrupted activities. Journal of Occupational and
Organizational Psychology, 72, 163-185.

1422

