UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
ACT-R Tutorial

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2fp4d5mf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Author
Taatgen, Niels A.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

ACT-R Tutorial
Niels A. Taatgen (taatgen@cmu.edu)
Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Av., Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA
ACT-R (Anderson, Bothell, Byrne, Douglass, Lebiere &
Qin, in press) is a cognitive theory and simulation system
for developing cognitive models. It assumes cognition
emerges through the interaction of a procedural memory of
productions with a declarative memory of chunks and
independent modules for external perception and actions.
Since its release in 1997, ACT-R has supported the
development of over 100 cognitive models, published in the
literature by many different researchers. These models
cover topics as diverse as driving behavior, implicit
memory, learning backgammon, metaphor processing, and
emotion. We have recently developed a new version, ACTR 5.0 that is more interruptible, achieves greater across-task
parameter consistency, has better mechanisms of production
learning, and is more in correspondence with our knowledge
of brain function. The tutorial has no prerequisite
knowledge, and is intended to on the one hand give an
overview of the theory, and on the other hand offer some
direct demonstration of ACT-R models. Although a half day
is not sufficient to cover all material, it can wet the appetite
for the full ACT-R tutorial that is available on http://actr.psy.cmu.edu/. This website also provides for the necessary
software, and overview of researchers using ACT-R, and it
has a list of ACT-R publications (many of them
downloadable).
During the tutorial, following Taatgen, Lebiere and
Anderson (submitted) five popular research paradigms
within ACT-R will be used as a vehicle to explain the
architecture:

Rule learning
Models in which new production rules are learned on the
basis of combination of old rules and substitution of
declarative knowledge.
Although these individual research paradigms have
produced interesting models by themselves, the full
potential of the architecture can only be seen when they
work together in models of complex cognition.

Instance learning
Figure 1: Overview of the architecture

Learning by retrieving old experiences from memory,
similar to Logan’s instance theory.

References

Utility learning

Anderson, J. R., Bothell, D., Byrne, M.D., Douglass, S.,
Lebiere, C., Qin, Y. (in press) An integrated theory of
Mind. Psychological Review. Available online: http://actr.psy.cmu.edu/papers/403/IntegratedTheory.pdf
Taatgen, N.A., Lebiere, C. & Anderson, J.R. (submitted).
Modeling paradigms in ACT-R. In R. Sun (ed.),
Cognition and Multi-Agent Interaction: From Cognitive
Modeling to Social Simulation. Cambridge University
Press.
Available
online:
http://www.ai.rug.nl/~niels/publications/taatgenLebiereA
nderson.pdf

Learning which of several available strategies is optimal by
keeping track of costs and probability of success.

Working Memory Capacity
Models in which the amount of spreading activation is
varied, which can explaining individual differences in
working memory capacity

Perceptual/Motor constrained processing
Models in which the main factor in explaining human
performance lies in the limitations of their perceptual and
motor systems.

4

