UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
ACT-R as a Unified Architecture of Cognition: A Symposium in Honor of John R. Anderson

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2jv184g7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Gluck, Kevin
Gray, Wayne D.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

ACT-R as a Unified Architecture of Cognition:
A Symposium in Honor of John R. Anderson
Organizers:

Kevin Gluck (kevin.gluck@mesa.afmc.af.mil) Air Force Research Laboratory
Wayne D. Gray (grayw@rpi.edu) Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute

have been developed to model human-information foraging
theory. The information foraging approach will be
illustrated by recent models of interaction with the Web.

This symposium highlights the utility of the ACT-R theory
as a tool for basic and applied cognitive science research.
Four colleagues of this year’s Rumelhart Prize winner, John
R. Anderson, will describe how his ACT-R theory has
enabled and inspired their research.

ACT-R and Driving
Dario D. Salvucci (salvucci@cs.drexel.edu)
Drexel University

An Activation-Based Model Of Sentence
Processing As Skilled Memory Retrieval

As a complex but ubiquitous task, driving serves as an
excellent domain for both testing and applying cognitive
architectures such as ACT-R. For several years we have
worked to model driver behavior in ACT-R with two main
branches of research. First, we have developed a
computational integrated driver model that navigates
realistic highway environments, accounting for various
aspects of driver behavior including eye movements
between regions of the visual environment and steering
profiles through curves and lane changes. Second, we have
worked to predict the potential for driver distraction from
secondary tasks such as dialing cellular phones or even
primarily cognitive tasks. Both lines of research are helping
to shape a more general theoretical account of human
multitasking within the ACT-R architecture, and at the same
time, demonstrating how such architectures can facilitate the
development of practical tools that infer driver intentions
and predict driver distraction for new in-vehicle devices.

Richard Lewis (rickl@umich.edu)
University of Michigan
This talk presents a theory and ACT-R-based model of
human sentence comprehension that embodies the following
claim: Sentence comprehension consists of a series of cuebased retrievals from short-term (and long-term) memory,
subject to similarity-based interference and activation decay.
ACT-R does not merely serve as an implementation
language for the theory; rather it serves as the vehicle for
bringing sentence processing into detailed contact with
general and independently established principles of memory
and skilled behavior. These principles, together with some
representational assumptions from linguistic theory, provide
explanatory accounts of many parsing phenomena (such as
difficulty on embeddings and locality and recency effects),
and generate novel predictions which can be empirically
tested. Experimental work on several languages is
summarized. The work includes experiments that examine
the effects of interference and decay on distinct components
of sentence processing, experiments that distinguish
activation decay and distance-based accounts, and
experiments that begin to answer one of the basic questions
motivated by the theoretical framework: exactly what kinds
of similarity (syntactic, semantic, phonological, positional)
matters in sentence processing?
This is joint work with Shravan Vasishth, Julie Van Dyke,
and JJ Nakayama. No linguistic or psycholinguistic
background will be assumed.

Embedded Cognition through Production
Compilation
Niels A. Taatgen (taatgen@cmu.edu)
Carnegie Mellon University
Embedded cognition refers to the fact that our reasoning
processes are not only driven by plans and goals in our
heads, but also, or maybe even mainly, by interacting with
the environment. The challenge is to develop a cognitive
system that strikes the right balance between being driven
by its internal goals and by opportunities in the
environment. In order to explore this challenge, we have
looked at a particular subdomain: following instructions. In
experimental tasks participants typically are given
instructions in a list-like fashion. For many tasks, strictly
following the instructions will lead to brittle and rigid
behavior. We will look at two examples that represent two
ends of the spectrum of complexity: a basic dual-task and a
complex real-time dynamic task. Both tasks have been
modeled in the ACT-R cognitive architecture using the
production compilation mechanism to achieve
embeddedness.

Information Foraging Theory And The
Rational Analysis Of Human-Information
Interaction
Peter Pirolli (pirolli@parc.xerox.com)
Xerox PARC
Information foraging theory has been developed to provide
rational analyses of how people adapt to the task of
obtaining useful information to meet their ongoing goals,
and how technology can be better designed to improve
human-information interaction. Several ACT-R models

9

