UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Alignment of Reference Frames in Dialogue

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9t95b48d

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Watson, Matthew E.
Pickering, Martin J.
Branigan, Holly P.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Alignment of Reference Frames in Dialogue
Matthew E. Watson (s0129081@sms.ed.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, 7 George Square
Edinburgh, EH8 9JZ, UK

Martin J. Pickering (Martin.Pickering@ed.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, 7 George Square
Edinburgh, EH8 9JZ, UK

Holly P. Branigan (holly.branigan@ed.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, 7 George Square
Edinburgh, EH8 9JZ, UK

Abstract
Previous research has shown that interlocutors in a dialogue
align their utterances at several levels of representation. This
paper reports two experiments that use a confederate-priming
paradigm to examine whether interlocutors also align their
spatial representations during dialogue. Experiment 1 showed
a significant reference frame priming effect: Speakers tended
to use the same reference frame to locate an object in a scene
as the frame that they had just heard their interlocutor use.
Experiment 2 demonstrated the same pattern even when the
speaker’s description and their partner’s previous description
involved different prepositions. Hence the effect cannot be
explained in terms of lexical priming of a particular
preposition. Our results are strong evidence that interlocutors
in a dialogue align non-linguistic as well as linguistic
representations.

Research on dialogue has suggested that the traditional
methods employed in psycholinguistics may not give a true,
or at least complete, account of human language. The
traditional approach focuses largely on monologue and
involves investigating single word utterances in isolated
controlled circumstances, e.g. the picture naming paradigm,
or the lexical decision task. However, Clark (1996) pointed
out that the natural setting for language is dialogue, and that
language does not normally occur in these isolated
circumstances, thus questioning the ecological validity of
traditional methods. The realization of this has led to a
research program into how language is used in dialogue
(e.g., Clark & Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986; Horton & Keysar, 1996;
Garrod & Anderson, 1987). Research in this framework has
shown that interlocutors in a dialogue tend to align their
utterances: Over the course of a conversation participants
will come to communicate in a similar fashion to each other.
This occurs at several levels of communication, including
the conceptual (Garrod & Anderson, 1987), lexical (Clarke
& Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986) and syntactic (Branigan, Pickering,
& Cleland, 2000) levels. In these experiments, participants
usually achieved alignment without resorting to overt

negotiation. In the case of syntactic alignment at least, many
subjects were not aware that they were aligning.
Pickering and Garrod (in press) proposed a mechanism for
how alignment is achieved between interlocutors. According
to this theory, alignment is the basis for successful dialogue;
misunderstanding occurs when alignment is not achieved.
Alignment occurs when the two interlocutors employ
equivalent representations at different levels, and arises
from an automatic priming mechanism. This allows
alignment to be achieved quickly and efficiently without
reliance upon time-consuming strategies of open
negotiation. Indeed, such strategies are only employed when
the primitive mechanisms fail. To prevent unnecessary
negotiation Pickering and Garrod suggest a second primitive
mechanism that allows repair of representations when
misalignment occurs; see Garrod and Pickering (2004) for a
summary.
Dialogue research has shown alignment of linguistic
representations, but alignment is hypothesized also to occur
for conceptual representations, such as those associated with
object location. A speaker’s conceptual representation of
where objects are located is reliant upon an overall spatial
representation, which underpins the use of spatial language.
In order to describe object locations effectively it is
important that both interlocutors take the same perspective
(Levelt, 1989) concerning the objects they are locating. For
example, an addressee must understand whose left a speaker
is talking about. In the same way that interlocutors align on
which lexical terms should be used to describe a scene, it
would be advantageous for interlocutors to align on which
perspective a scene should be described from.
The perspective that is taken depends upon the reference
frame that is applied to a spatial representation of a scene. A
reference frame is an axial co-ordinate system that defines
regions extending from the origin, whose axes are labelled
with directional terms. The object to be located (figure
object) can then be located in relation to another object
(reference object) based upon the directional axes of the
reference frame. However, there are three different types of
reference frame (at least in English; other languages use

1434

only two or even one; Levinson 2003) that a speaker can
employ in order to locate an object: absolute, relative, and
intrinsic. It is important that the addressee knows which of
these the speaker is using in order to successfully
understand an utterance.
The absolute reference frame locates an object based upon
salient, stable features of the environment, for example, the
cardinal directions. The dot in Figure 1 can be described as
west of the chair if the page is held horizontally with the top
of the page facing north.
The intrinsic reference frame locates an object based upon
the directional features of the reference object. The dot in
Figure 1 can be described as above the chair because it is in
alignment with the top of the chair.

Figure 1. The dot can be described as west using an absolute
reference frame, above using an intrinsic reference frame or
left using a relative reference frame.
The relative reference frame locates an object in relation
to the viewpoint of an observer. The axes of the reference
frame are labelled based upon the features of the person
upon whose viewpoint the location is based. In Figure 1 the
dot would be described as left of the chair using a relative
reference frame. (In many cases the relative reference frame
is used from the viewpoint of a speaker or an addressee, but
it can also be from a third person perspective.)
The above tripartite classification of reference frames
follows that proposed by Levinson (1996, 2003), and is
distinct from the classification traditionally employed in the
psycholinguistic literature, which identified absolute,
deictic, and intrinsic reference frames, all defined on the
basis of their origin. (Deictic reference frames are all
reference frames with an egocentric origin.) Levinson
pointed out that this traditional system is not an appropriate
way to categorize reference systems because it is possible to
have a non-deictic relative reference frame, such as The ball
is to the right of the tree as you look at it, and a deictic
intrinsic reference frame such as The ball is in front of me.
When describing an object’s location, an individual has to
select one of these reference frames to use in preference to
either of the other two reference frames. Carlson-Radvansky

and Jiang (1998) showed that reference-frame selection is
achieved via inhibition of non-selected reference frames.
When participants used a relative reference frame to identify
an object’s location, they were slower to describe an
object’s location using an intrinsic reference frame
immediately afterwards. Inhibition operates not only on the
endpoint of an axis, but on at least the entire axis, e.g. if left
(intrinsic) is inhibited then using right or left (intrinsic) in
the subsequent description will take longer than using a
relative reference frame.
The findings of Carlson-Radvansky and Jiang (1998)
suggest that reference frames are influenced by low-level
priming. However, the results do not establish whether or
not this occurs during dialogue: Reaction time was used as a
measure of cognitive effort in trials whereas in dialogue any
effect of priming must manifest itself by a change in the
person’s linguistic behaviour. Furthermore, CarlsonRadvansky and Jiang’s (1998) experiment only investigated
inhibition of the endpoint of an axis and the inhibition of the
axis itself. If interlocutors align reference frames, we would
expect them to align the entire reference frame rather than
just part of it. Therefore it is unclear whether this kind of
priming is enough to cause the alignment of reference
frames between interlocutors in the manner described by
Pickering and Garrod (in press).
In two series of experiments Schober (1993, 1995) showed
that the reference frame which an individual selects is
affected by their partner in a conversation. Individuals who
described the location of an object to a partner who viewed
the scene from a different perspective were more likely to
describe the location from their partner’s perspective. When
the partner queried such descriptions, they used their own
perspective to describe object location. Schober concluded
that interlocutors use conscious strategies to collaborate in
ways of describing object location.
Schober’s results suggest that interlocutors may align
reference frames. However, it is not clear that this is
necessarily the case. In his experiments, two participants
interacted freely, allowing little control over what was said
by each pair. This means that pairs of participants may be
reverting to default reference frames. Furthermore, in a
large proportion of trials participants located objects using
terms that required no reference frames (e.g. next to,
between and so on).
The present work is an experimental investigation to
discover whether or not interlocutors align reference frames.
The investigation uses a confederate-priming paradigm (e.g.
Branigan et al., 2000) where a naïve participant and a
participant who is - unknown to the naïve participant - a
confederate of the experimenter and who is following a
script, communicate during the experiment. If interlocutors
do align reference frames then they will use a reference
frame significantly more when they have just heard an
utterance using that reference frame than when they have
just heard an utterance using an alternative reference frame.
Alternatively interlocutors may select a reference frame
based solely upon the perceptual properties of the spatial

1435

array, in which case they should be unaffected by the
reference frame just used by their partner. Our experiments
also set out to separate priming for reference frames from
lexical priming. If priming of reference frames exists
separately from lexical priming, we can expect subjects to
use a reference frame significantly more if they have just
heard an utterance using that reference frame even if the
same spatial term is not applicable to both utterances.

fully randomized order, which was different for each
participant.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants 12 students of the University of Edinburgh
were paid volunteers in the experiment, which lasted 20
minutes. All were native English speakers.
Materials The experiment was run on two computers
positioned back to back, using E-prime software. One
program was created for the confederate and consisted of
sentences positioned in the centre of the screen of the form
“The dot above the chair”. This formed the script for the
experiment. The second program was for the participant and
displayed pictures for the match and describe phases of the
experiment.
12 monochrome objects were used as reference objects, all
fitting into a rectangle 93 pixels high and 121 pixels wide.
Two versions of each object were used, one rotated 90°
clockwise and one rotated 90°anti-clockwise.
The figure object was an 11x11 pixel square rotated so
that its vertices were the top, bottom, leftmost, and
rightmost points. The figure object was located above,
below, left, or right (in a relative reference frame) of the
reference object. The centre of the figure object was
positioned between 125 and 130 pixels from the centre of
the reference object.
Design There were 3 within-participants and within-items
factors: Prime Reference Frame (Relative vs. Intrinsic);
Preposition (Same Preposition vs. Different Preposition);
and Target Plane (Vertical vs. Horizontal). These are
exemplified in Figure 2. The prime scene in Figure 2 can
either be described as The dot above the camera (relative
reference frame) or The dot right of the camera (intrinsic
reference frame). In the top diagram of Figure 2, alignment
requires using the same preposition (either above or right
of); in the bottom diagram, alignment require using a
different preposition (either left or below). Finally, the top
target scene is aligned vertically whilst the bottom target
scene is aligned horizontally.
Two lists of 96 trials were constructed, with each trial
consisting of a match phase and a describe phase. The
reference objects in each list were rotated clockwise and
anti-clockwise on half of the trials each. Reference frame
was counterbalanced across list and rotation. Preposition
overlap was counterbalanced across rotation in each list.
Participants saw 12 trials in each of the 8 conditions formed
by crossing the three factors. The trials were presented in a

Figure 2: The top diagram shows the ‘same preposition’
condition. The bottom diagram shows the different
preposition condition.
Procedure The two participants were introduced to each
other (throughout the experiment, the experimenter treated
the confederate as if she was a naïve participant).
The participant and confederate each sat at a computer
each. The computers were situated back to back so that
neither could see each other, or the other’s screen. After
hearing instructions, participants pressed the space bar to
begin a practice session of 8 trials, one trial corresponding
to each of the 8 conditions. Instructions then appeared on
the screen signalling the end of the practice session and the
start of the experiment. Each trial proceeded as follows:
After participants pressed <space> to begin, the match
screen appeared. The match screen contained two examples
of a reference object (both the same, with one on the left and
one on the right) and a dot located above, below, left or
right of each one. The confederate gave a description of the
location of the dot in relation to the object. The participant
then chose which of the two examples on the screen
matched the confederate’s description of the dot location
accurately, pressing the M key if it was the right-hand
example and the Z key if it was the left-hand example.
Participants were told that if they were not sure which
picture matched their partner’s description to pick the one
they thought matched most closely.
After selection the match scenes disappeared (no feedback
was given) and a fixation cross appeared in the centre of the
screen. This remained on screen for 1000ms. The fixation
cross was then replaced by a reference object in the centre
of the screen with a dot above, below, left, or right of it.
Participants then described the location of the dot in relation
to the object. After describing this they pressed space and
the scene disappeared. It was replaced by a fixation cross in

1436

the centre of the screen for 500ms. This then disappeared
and the next trial began with a match task.

Results
For the analysis participants’ first responses were used. The
percentage of intrinsic responses were then analyzed using
two 2x2x2 repeated measures ANOVAs (by participants
(F1) and by items (F2)), with Prime reference frame
(intrinsic or relative), preposition (same or different), and
Target plane (horizontal or vertical) as factors.
Table 1 shows the mean number of intrinsic responses
used by subjects in each of the 8 conditions. There was a
significant main effect of Prime reference frame (62.9% vs.
53.3%; F1(1,11) = 26.86, p < .01; F2(1,11) = 9.35, p < .05).
That is, participants were significantly more likely to use an
intrinsic reference frame after the confederate had used an
intrinsic reference frame, compared to when the confederate
had used a relative reference frame.
Table 1:
Mean percentage of intrinsic responses in Experiment 1.
Relative Prime

Intrinsic Prime

Same

Diff

Same

Diff

Vertical

32.3

52.8

54.9

52.3

Horizontal

63.6

64.4

73.3

70.9

When the figure and reference objects were aligned
vertically, participants used an intrinsic reference frame
48% of the time compared to 68% when the alignment was
horizontal. This difference was significant (F1(1,11) = 8.07;
p < .05; F2(1,11) = 101.17; p < .01), showing that
participants were significantly more likely to use an intrinsic
reference frame when the objects were aligned horizontally
than when they were aligned vertically.
As expected there was no effect of preposition (p > .05):
Participants used an intrinsic reference frame as much when
the prepositions were the same as when they were different.
This is regardless of which reference frame the confederate
used.
There was a significant two-way interaction between
Prime Reference Frame and Preposition (F1(1,11) = 13.07;
p < .01; F2(1,11) = 6.19; p < .05). All other two-way
interactions were non-significant (p >.05). Post-hoc analyses
showed that these interactions occurred because of a
difference between two of the eight conditions, relative,
same, vertical and relative, different, vertical: The former
yielded 32.3% intrinsic responses whereas the latter yielded
52.8% intrinsic responses (t(23) = -2.91; p = .01).This
means that participants were more likely to use a relative
reference frame when the reference and figure object were
aligned vertically (i.e. they would use above and below to
describe the dots’ location) following the confederate using
a relative reference frame when there was preposition
overlap (i.e. the confederate used above or below) than
when there was no preposition overlap (i.e. the confederate
used left or right).

Discussion
The results of Experiment 1 show an effect of alignment of
reference frames. Participants were more likely to use an
intrinsic reference frame after the confederate had used an
intrinsic reference frame.
The significant effect of Target Plane indicates that
participants preferred to use the lexical terms above or
below to left or right, regardless of reference frame. This
was expected because the top/bottom axis is easier to
identify (than the left/right axis) due to asymmetries of the
reference objects along this axis (Bryant & Wright, 1999).
One of the important goals of the experiment was to
distinguish lexical priming effects from reference-frame
priming effects. A sole effect of reference frame priming
would have meant that participants aligned reference frames
as much when the prime and target scenes were the same
(represented in the upper portion of Figure 2) as when the
prime and target scenes were different (represented in the
lower portion of Figure 2). However, the presence of a
significant interaction between Prime reference frame and
preposition condition meant that this was not the case. This
interaction was caused by two of the conditions; the other
three pairs of same/different conditions yielded no
significant differences between them. This indicates that the
apparent lexical priming effect was evident only when the
relative reference frame was used and the figure and
reference objects were aligned vertically. Such a situation
would seem unusual, because it should be the case that
lexical priming is evident for all same/different pairs of
conditions.
However, there is an alternative explanation for this
pattern of data that does not rely upon lexical priming. We
noted that participants used intrinsic left and right
differently (in fact, inversely) to the confederate. Thus,
participants would describe the prime scenes in Figure 2 as
the dot left of the camera, whereas the confederate described
them as the dot right of the camera. Therefore for half of the
match tasks in the relative, vertical, different condition, the
non-matching scene also provided a match to the
confederate’s description if an intrinsic reference frame was
applied (according to the participant’s interpretation). This
would be the only condition in which potential confusion
could arise. Therefore, for this condition, if participants
chose the non-matching scene in the match task they would
effectively be primed to use the intrinsic reference frame
rather than the intended relative reference frame.
In Experiment 2, we therefore made the confederate
describe intrinsic left and right in the way that participants
had done in Experiment 1, in order to see whether the
observed interaction was due to lexical priming, or was
instead an artefact of the participants’ misinterpretation of
what the confederate was describing as intrinsically left and
right.

1437

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 was a replication of Experiment 1, with the
exception that what was described as left and right intrinsic
was reversed in accordance with participants’ interpretations
from Experiment 1. 16 further students from the University
of Edinburgh were paid volunteers in the experiment, which
lasted 20 minutes.

Results
The analyses were conducted in the same fashion as
Experiment 1. Table 2 shows the mean number of intrinsic
responses used by subjects in each of the 8 conditions. As in
Experiment 1, there was a significant main effect of Prime
Reference Frame (F1(1,15) = 6.79; p < .05; F2(1,11) =
24.36; p < .01): Participants used an intrinsic reference
frame more often following an intrinsic description by the
confederate than following a relative description by the
confederate.
Table 2:
Mean percentage intrinsic responses in Experiment 2.
Relative Prime

Intrinsic Prime

Same

Diff

Same

Diff

Vertical

32.1

26.6

41.2

39.1

Horizontal

39.6

38.1

52.1

48.9

However, the interaction between Prime Reference Frame
and Preposition did not reach significance, indicating that
there was no effect of using the same lexical item for the
prime and target (F1(1,15) = .018; p > .05; F2(1,11) = 3.02;
p > .05). All other interactions were non-significant (all p >
.05).

General Discussion
The results of this study show that interlocutors align
reference frames when describing objects’ locations.
Importantly, the results indicate that alignment is not due to
lexical priming caused by the experimental participant
repeating the preposition just used by the confederate.
The apparent lexical priming effect shown in Experiment
1 was due to the participants interpreting left and right
intrinsic differently to what was intended by the
confederate. When the source of this difficulty was
addressed in Experiment 2, this effect was not evident. The
results showed no difference in the proportion of referenceframe alignment when the naïve participant used the same
preposition as the confederate, as when a different
preposition was used.
Our results support the hypothesis that interlocutors align
at many levels of representation when conversing (Pickering
& Garrod, in press). Furthermore, it extends this alignment
beyond linguistic representations and into an aspect of
conceptual representation, i.e., the spatial domain. These
results, however, do not precisely determine the mechanism

by which alignment is achieved. In particular it is not clear
whether participants make some use of a deliberate strategy
to make the task easier for their partner. For example, it is
possible that participants may be partly aware of the
importance of aligning without realizing exactly what they
are aligning on.
What is surprising about these results is that there was no
cumulative effect of lexical priming and reference frame
priming. Other studies have shown a larger alignment effect
when more factors are common between the prime and the
target (e.g. Branigan et al., 2000; Cleland & Pickering,
2003). The lack of a cumulative effect may be due to the
nature of the lexical items used in this experiment. The
prepositions were used to refer to both their intrinsic relation
and relative relation, and so held little meaning independent
of the reference frame.
The results also support the work of Carlson-Radvansky
and Jiang (1998) who showed that reference frames were
subject to negative priming. Their investigation only
focused upon inhibition along a single axis of a
representation. The results of this study extend these
findings and show that activation of one axis of a reference
frame activates the whole reference frame (at least in 2
dimensions), indicating that reference frames are a holistic
representation.
Previous work (Schober, 1993, 1995) has shown that
interlocutors will co-ordinate the reference object and origin
of a reference frame to the matcher in a match-and-describe
task. However, this did not show that interlocutors were
aligning reference frames; as Levinson (2003) has argued, it
is possible to have a non-egocentric relative reference frame
and an egocentric intrinsic reference frame. The results
presented here provide strong evidence that interlocutors do
align reference frames. Ongoing work is investigating the
predictions made by Levinson’s definitions of reference
frames that an egocentric/intrinsic description (e.g. the ball
in front of me) can prime the use of an allocentric/intrinsic
description (e.g. the ball in front of the car).
Previous work (Branigan et al., 2000; Clark & WilkesGibbs, 1986; Garrod & Anderson, 1987) has shown that
interlocutors align representations during dialogue. The
results of these experiments extend this body of evidence to
show that independent of lexical priming, alignment extends
beyond the language faculty and that interlocutors also align
reference frames to describe objects’ locations in a scene.

References
Branigan, H. P., Pickering, M. J., & Cleland, A. A. (2000)
Syntactic co-ordination in dialogue. Cognition, 75, B13B25.
Bryant, D. J., & Wright, W. G. (1999). How bodily
asymmetries
determine
accessibility
in
spatial
frameworks. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 52A, 487-508.

1438

Carlson-Radvansky, L. A., & Jiang, Y. (1998). Inhibition
accompanies reference frame selection. Psychological
Science, 9, 386-391.
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using language. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Clark, H. H., & Wilkes-Gibbs, D. (1986). Referring as a
collaborative process. Cognition, 22, 1-39.
Cleland, A. A., & Pickering, M. J. (2003). The use of
lexical and syntactic information in language production:
Evidence from the priming of noun phrase structure.
Journal of Memory and Language, 49, 214-230.
Garrod, S., & Anderson, A. (1987). Saying what you mean
in dialogue: A study in conceptual and semantic coordination. Cognition, 27, 181-218.
Garrod, S., & Pickering, M. J. (2004). Why is conversation
so easy? Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8, 8-11.
Horton, W. S., & Keysar, B. (1996). When do speakers take
into account common ground? Cognition, 59, 91-117.
Levelt, W. J. M. (1989). Speaking: From intention to
articulation. Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Levinson, S. C. (1996). Frames of reference and
Molyneux’s question: Cross-linguistic evidence. In P.
Bloom, M. Peterson, L. Nadel, & M. Garrett (Eds.),
Language and space, pp. 109-169. Cambridge MA: MIT
Press.
Levinson, S. C. (2003). Space in language and cognition:
Explorations in cognitive diversity. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Pickering, M. J., & Garrod, S. (in press). Towards a
mechanistic theory of dialogue. Behavioural and Brain
Sciences.
Schober, M. F. (1993). Spatial perspective-taking in
conversation. Cognition, 47, 1-24.
Schober, M. F. (1995). Speakers, Addressees, and frames of
reference: Whose effort is minimized in conversations
about locations? Discourse Processes, 20, 219-247

1439

