UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
An activation-based model of agreement errors in production and Comprehension

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9tm0x7wx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Konieczny, Lars
Schimke, Sarah
Hemforth, Barbara

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

An activation-based model of agreement errors in production and
comprehension
Lars Konieczny (lars@cognition.uni-freiburg.de)
Center for Cognitive Science, IIG, Univ. Freiburg
Friedrichstr. 50, 79098 Freiburg

Sarah Schimke (sarah@cognition.uni-freiburg.de)
Center for Cognitive Science, IIG, Univ. Freiburg
Friedrichstr. 50, 79098 Freiburg

Barbara Hemforth (barbara.hemforth@lpl.univ-aix.fr)
Laboratoire Parole et Langage, UMR 6057, Univ. de Aix en Provence
29, av. Robert Schuman, 13621 Aix en Provence, France
the classical attraction error at least partially and at least
in English is caused by number marking on a close
interfering noun.

Abstract
With this paper, we introduce the agreement production
error (APE) model. APE is a model of comprehension
and production performance that applies a theory of
memory and cognition (ACT-R 5.0) to the task of
linguistic processing embedded in a variety of
psycholinguistic experimental paradigms.
With its roots in the ACT-R theory, agreement errors are
modeled as a combination of symbolic processing and
chunk activation dynamics. Whether a plural or a
singular verb is produced depends on the accessibility of
the Subject’s plural marking. The activation of pluralmarking chunks decays, so that it might not be found
when its retrieval is attempted at the verb, resulting in a
general singular error (Hemforth and Konieczny, 2003).
This effect is then modulated by task and construction
specific variations.

(2)

a. The hat or the gloves is/are red.
b. Is/are the hat or the gloves red?

In a series of five written production experiments,
Hemforth and Konieczny (2003) tested the proposed
mechanisms in German.
In this paper, we follow up on this work and present a
new model, APE, that accounts for the written
production data in the experiments reported. The paper
is organized as follows. We will start by summarizing
the two most important experiments from Hemforth and
Konieczny (2003). After that, the model will be
outlined. Since APE is based on ACT-R 5.0, a short
introduction to this theory is provided beforehand. The
paper ends with a general discussion and conclusion.

Introduction
When people speak or write they occasionally produce
verbs not agreeing in number with the subject. This
happens particularly often when the singular subject is
followed by a plural modifier in constructions like (1;
quoted form Bock & Miller, 1991).
(1) The readiness of our conventional forces are at an
all-time low.
The mechanism underlying this error is attributed to the
marked plural feature percolating up the tree too far
(Vigliocco & Nicol, 1998). This account is
substantiated by the fact that no comparable
singular/plural mismatch effect for constructions with
marked plural heads has been established so far.
Very recently, Haskell and MacDonald (2002) proposed
the principle of proximity as an alternative explanation.
They showed that in disjunctions like (2), subjects have
a strong preference to match the number marking on the
verb with the more local noun. In addition to
distributional evidence, this was taken to indicate that

726

Error patterns in written production
The first experiments replicated the classical results on
subject-modifier-verb constructions. Two factors were
varied in the first experiment: The factor “Match”:
matching (1,4) or mismatching (2,3) number marking
on head noun and local noun, and the factors “Number
of the head noun”: singular (1,2) or plural (3,4) head
noun.
(1)Die Farbe auf der Leinwand __________ trocken.
The color on the canvas __________ dry.
(2) Die Farbe auf den Leinwänden _________ trocken.
The color on the canvasses _________ dry.
(3) Die Farben auf der Leinwand _________ trocken.
The colors on the canvas _________ dry.
(4)Die Farben auf den Leinwänden _________ trocken.
The colors on the canvasses _________ dry..
Hemforth and Konieczny (2003) found a clear effect of
the number of the head noun on the percentage of
agreement errors. Neither the factor “Match” nor the

16,0
14,0
12,0
10,0
8,0
6,0
4,0
2,0
0,0

12,0

mismatch

10,0

head pl

Figure 1: Agreement errors for NP-PP-V constructions
In line with earlier experiments on written production
(e.g., Branigan et al., 1995; Hölscher & Hemforth,
2000), we found a considerably high number of
agreement errors for plural marked head nouns,
reflecting a general tendency to produce singular verbs.
Nevertheless, the result for singular heads is compatible
with both the feature percolation hypothesis and
proximity. Hemforth and Konieczny (2003) therefore
ran a series of experiments on Subject-Object-Verb
(SOV) constructions. An object attraction effect for
singular subjects would rule out feature percolation,
because the object is not embedded within the subject.

Object attraction?
The experimental factors varied in three further
experiments were “Match”: matching (9,12) or
mismatching (10,11) number marking on Subject NP
and local object NP, and “Number of Subject”: singular
(9,10) or plural (11,12) Subject NP.

(10)

(11)

Ich habe gehört, dass die Frauen die Männer
besucht _________.
I have heard that the men the women visited
_________.
In all three experiments, the number marking on the
Subject had a strong effect on the number of agreement
errors: more errors were produced following a plural
Subject. However, less errors were produced when the
local Object-NP was also plural marked.
The lack of an object attraction effect for singular
subjects is consistent with the feature percolation
hypothesis and contradicts proximity.

match

head sg

(9)

(12)

Errors in %

Errors in %

number x match interaction reached significance.
However, whereas no difference in matching versus
mismatching local nouns could be established for
sentences with plural marked head nouns, planned
comparisons showed an effect with singular marked
head nouns. This result replicates the well-known
modifier attraction effect (e.g. Vigliocco & Nicol, 1998,
Bock & Miller, 1991).

Ich habe gehört, dass der Mann die Frau
besucht _________.
I have heard that the man(masc,nom) the
woman visited _________.
Ich habe gehört, dass der Mann die Frauen
besucht _________.
I have heard that the man(masc,nom) the
women visited _________.
Ich habe gehört, dass die Frauen den Mann
besucht _________.
I have heard that the women the man (masc,
acc) visited _________.

727

8,0

match

6,0

mismatch

4,0
2,0
0,0
subsg

subpl

Figure 2: Agreement errors in SOV-constructions
The mismatch effect for plural subjects, however, is not
predicted by feature percolation. Hemforth and
Konieczny (2003) proposed feature reactivation as an
explanation. According to that hypothesis, the plural
feature of the subject (head) is subject to activation
decay so that activation can be below the retrieval
threshold when the verb must be produced. This
mechanism would account for the general tendency to
produce singular verbs. In SOV constructions, however,
the subject plural feature can be reactivated by an object
plural feature, because both subject and object are
arguments of the verb.

APE: A hybrid model of agreement errors
The data so far suggest that both syntactic constraints
and proximity affect agreement errors. For one, there
are certain effects restricted to certain syntactic
constructions (“feature percolation”), and second, there
are effects of locality and interference best dubbed in
terms of decay and reactivation. The Agreement
Production Error (APE) model is built atop the ACT-R
architecture, which provides us with mechanisms for i.
declarative chunk activation and decay, embedded in a
ii. symbolic processing architecture with iii. costdependent rule selection, and iv. task-specific
modelling.

An informal introduction to ACT-R 5

Basic modelling decisions

ACT-R (Anderson and Lebiere, 1998; Anderson et al.,
submitted) is both a theory of cognition and a modelling
framework, where scientists can build their specific
models using well defined and empirically justified
concepts that serve as the model’s building blocks.
ACT-R distinguishes declarative from procedural
knowledge. Both employ advanced sub-symbolic
mechanisms.
Chunks are the elements of declarative memory. They
bundle information in a collection of attribute value
pairs, by which chunks get linked to other chunks to
form networks of declarative knowledge. When chunks
are created, they start out with a certain base level
activation that decays over time, following the power
law of forgetting. If their activation falls below a certain
threshold, their chance for being retrieved by a
production approaches zero.
When a chunk is retrieved from declarative memory, its
base level activation is permanently pushed a bit
upwards. The more often it is used, the higher it will be
activated (power law of learning). In addition to base
level activation, a chunk can temporarily receive
additional activation spreading from associated chunks
stored in the goal of the current production rule. The
rationale is that chunks relevant for the problem stated
in the current goal should benefit from being within the
current focus of attention.
Production rules interact with declarative memory via
retrieval of chunks. A retrieval request may succeed or
fail, depending on whether or not a matching chunk
exists, and on that chunk’s activation. Among several
matching chunks, the one that is activated highest has
the highest probability of being retrieved. A retrieved
chunk is stored in the retrieval buffer, where the next
production can use it. Given a certain constellation of
chunks in the available modality specific buffers (goal,
retrieval, visual, audio, etc.), multiple production rules
might apply to this state, but only one will be picked for
firing. In ACT-R, conflict resolution in the case of
multiple potential production instantiations is
determined by the utility value of each rule in the
conflict set. The utility is in turn a function of the past
history of success and the cost associated with solving
the problem by picking this rule.
If there are two productions in the conflict set, one of
which has a high probability of being successful but
which takes a while for getting there, and the other is
quick but has only a mediocre success history, the
choice will depend on the amount of time the user
devotes to the problem. If the focus is on accuracy,
plenty of time can be spent solving the problem so that
the more successful rule will be picked. If the focus is
on speed, the faster rule will be picked even though it’s
not unlikely that it will fail.

While ACT-R provides only limited means of
representing and processing declarative and procedural
knowledge, there are still many alternative ways in
which knowledge can be modelled. We settled on the
following modelling decisions before we actually
started:
• Restricted use of direct storage. We do not store
linguistic elements in slots of goals unless it is
required for declarative reasons. Newly created
chunks are released into declarative memory and
retrieved when needed. Binding a chunk to a slot in
the goal for procedural reasons is too strong a
computational assumption, since stored chunks are
excluded from activation decay.
• As a consequence of this, syntactic nodes have to
be retrieved from memory in order to become
integrated with other nodes. For instance, when the
verb is processed, all its complements and adjuncts
must be retrieved from memory to form an
integrated interpretation.
• The cost of integrating a word is hence a function
of the accessibility of its dependents in memory.
Integration will be the easier, the more locally its
dependents have been processed beforehand (cf.
Gibson, 1998)
• The restricted use of direct storage has also
consequences for the agreement mechanism,
because NPs have to be retrieved all the time to get
attached to modifiers or for incremental
interpretation. The continuous retrieval of NPs
influences their activation, so that some will be
more accessible than others when the plural feature
is to be assigned.

728

The sentence processing mechanism
The current model version performs the completion task
as used in Hemforth and Konieczny (2003). First, a
series of noun phrases are processed before the model
produces a verb.
Processing starts with a goal that represents the current
processing state during the assembly of the sentence
elements. Each word read from the screen triggers the
retrieval of a lexical element and is integrated into the
currently processed phrase marker. The first NP is
marked as the subject of the clause. When a modifier is
processed, its host will be retrieved for attachment.
At each top level element of the sentence, a
propositional interpretation is sought that matches the
concepts associated with the processed phrases to a
long term proposition (cf. Budiu & Anderson, 2000). If
such an interpretation can be found, the concepts are
hooked to that proposition.
In verb-final constructions, multiple arguments might
precede the verb. In the absence of thematic

information of the verb, APE anticipates the verb by
retrieving a proposition in the background knowledge
that integrates the arguments processed so far. The
more arguments have been read, the more likely will
the interpretation match the right one when the verb is
read, so that actually integrating the verb will become
easier (Konieczny and Döring, 2003). In this view,
anticipation is at the conceptual rather than the syntactic
level.

Modelling agreement
Representation of number. Singular is the default
number of nouns, whereas plural has to be assigned
explicitly. A noun phrase is hence considered singular
unless it is marked plural.
The plural feature is modelled as a chunk that links the
plural attribute to a noun phrase, rather than as a slot in
an NP chunk. As a chunk, a plural feature is subject to
ACT-R’s activation dynamics.
Producing number. Verb production is modelled by
distinct production rules for singular and plural forms.
The plural rule attempts to retrieve the plural feature of
a noun phrase marked as subject of the sentence. If it
succeeds, the plural form is generated from the base
form. If it fails, the singular rule produces the singular
base form.
The plural rule has higher utility, due to its better
accuracy in actually producing the right verb when the
subject is plural. The singular rule is less specific and
therefore error prone, but less cost intensive.
Where syntax matters. The German production data
suggest that plural attraction is construction specific:
While there is a robust modifier attraction effect for
singular subjects in SMV constructions, there is none in
SOV. This result has been predicted by the feature
percolation hypothesis.
Feature percolation is an encoding error by nature, in
which the plural feature is erroneously assigned to the
head noun instead of the embedded noun.
ACT-R, however, lacks a direct mechanism for
encoding errors (i.e. the creation and release of false
chunks). The only place where errors can occur in
ACT-R is during retrieval of chunks.
Modelling “Feature percolation”. In APE, the
construction specific encoding error is modelled as a
retrieval error during the search for an NP that the
plural feature is to be assigned to. That is, during plural
assignment, the newly created plural feature requires a
root NP that has to be retrieved from memory. At the
modifier in a complex-NP construction, the head NP at
that point is highly activated due to the fact that is had
been retrieved for modifier attachment shortly before
plural assignment. Since both the head NP and the
modifier NP are about equally strongly activated, there
is a certain chance that the head NP, not the modifier
NP is retrieved for plural marking. If that happens, the

729

subject has inherited the plural marking from the
embedded NP.
In SOV constructions, no attachment takes place
between the Subject and the Object-NP. Therefore the
Subject NP is not going to be retrieved before the plural
assignment of the Object. Retrieving the root NP for the
object plural feature is hence less error prone.
On the other hand, the subject NP will be retrieved after
the object has been assigned to the new plural feature,
because subject and object are both needed for
incremental interpretation, i.e. the anticipation of a
matching relationship between both. The interpretation
depends upon the number of the entities to be
integrated, as the examples () and () illustrate.
(8) Gestern haben die Professoren den Studenten …
Yesterday have the professorsnom the studentacc
“Yesterday, the professors have … the student.”
(9) Gestern hat der Professor die Studenten …
Yesterday has the professornom the studentsacc …
“Yesterday, the professor has … the students.”
Things that multiple professors are likely to do to a
single student (examined, rejected, etc.) can be different
from things that a single professor is likely to do to
multiple students (taught, etc.). Number is hence an
important feature at the conceptual level and useful for
interpretation anticipation.
Differential plural re-activation in SOV constructions.
During the process of incremental interpretation of each
new verb-complement, each previous concept participating in the proposition, and, importantly, its plural
feature - if it exists - will be retrieved and hence its
activation will be pushed a bit. That is, when the object
in SOV constructions is processed, the plural marking
of the subject will be re-activated. This will only
happen, however, if it can be successfully retrieved
when the object is interpreted. There is a slight chance
that the plural feature cannot be found here because its
activation has already decayed too strongly. This
chance, however, will be lower, if the plural feature
receives additional activation from the goal, which is
the case if the object is marked for plural. The
additional amount of source level activation results in a
higher retrieval probability for the subject plural
marking if the object is plural. Therefore, the subject
plural will be reactivated more often, so that it can be
retrieved better and more often when the verb is
produced.

Implications
Whether a plural or a singular verb is produced depends
on the accessibility of the Subject’s plural marking. The
activation of plural-marking chunks decays, so that it
might not be found when its retrieval is attempted at the
verb, resulting in a general singular error (Hemforth and
Konieczny, 2003). This effect is then modulated by task
and construction specific variations. The model will

come in variants for different experimental paradigms,
which are nevertheless based on the same core for verbproduction. The first model variant presented here
performs the completion task for written production and
is hence a combined sentence processing and
production model. It first reads two NPs, embedded in a
variety of constructions, and then produces a verb.
Modifier attraction errors (cf. Bock & Miller, 1991;
Vigliocco & Nicol, 1998 ) are due to encoding errors
during plural marking (feature percolation). The plural
feature of the modifier-NP sometimes gets wrongly
assigned to the Subject-NP. This effect is due to the
necessity of reactivating the Subject-NP in processing
the modifier-NP and is therefore restricted to modifierNPs (Hemforth & Konieczny, 2003). In SOV
constructions on the other hand, at each new NP, all
verb arguments get reactivated to allow incremental
interpretation and verb-anticipation (Konieczny and
Döring, 2003). During this process the plural feature of
an Object-NP can reactivate a plural feature of the
Subject, reducing the singular error in S-O-V
constructions (Hemforth & Konieczny, 2003).
The model is currently extended to other types of tasks
to be able to account for task-specific-differences.
Aural repetition and completion. In this task, the
participants are first presented with a preamble and then
have to repeat and complete it with a verb in order to
form a full sentence. This type of task has been used in
the majority of experiments on agreement errors (e.g.
Bock and Miller, 1991, Franck, Lassi, Frauenfelder and
Rizzi, 2003, Bock and Cutting, 1992, Hartsuiker,
Antón-Méndez and van Zee, 2001, Vigliocco and
Nicol, 1998) and is generally claimed to test “pure”
production, because subjects actually utter the whole
sentence and not just the verb as in a completion task.
Nevertheless, there is an inevitable comprehension
component in this task as well, as the preamble has to
be presented to the participants in some form. Instead of
accounting for only the production part, we model the
entire task, including reading and memorizing the
preamble, repeating and completing it. Processing the
preamble entails forming declarative representations for
phonological and syntactic/conceptual information as in
the completion task. To repeat the preamble, the model
will have to retrieve either its phonological or syntactic
representation. After repetition of the preamble, the
verb should than be produced in the same way as in the
present model. The difference between this task and the
written completion task is in the higher activation of all
elements of the preamble, as it is not only read once,
but than (partly) retrieved and repeated. This should
have no influence on the encoding error, but should
make the general singular error much less frequent,
which is in fact what has been observed in the
experiments above. Moreover, the model predicts a
floor effect for length variations of the intervening

730

material in this paradigm, which is in fact was has been
found (e.g. Bock and Miller, 1991, Bock and Cutting,
1992).
Time pressure. In the experiments reported by
Hartsuiker, Antón-Méndez and van Zee, 2001,
participants had to perform the production task under
time pressure. The model predicts the observed effects:
Under time pressure, productions that consume too
much time are more likely to be ignored in favor of
faster but less accurate productions. In particular, the
plural-feature will sometimes be left underspecified for
its root. Under-specified plural-features will then
erroneously be retrieved at the moment of the
production of the verb. This would happen even with
plural-features of intervening object noun phrases,
hence accounting for the object-attraction-effect
obtained by Hartsuiker et al. Moreover, time pressure
should increase the general singular error due to a
change in the utilities of the productions which
determine the number of the verb: the more accurate,
but also more time consuming plural rule will have a
lower utility than in other paradigms. This will lead to
the singular rule firing more often, which produces the
singular base form without checking for the plural
feature.
Dual task paradigms. Finally, the model can also be
extended to dual-task-paradigms, as applied by Fayol,
Largy and Lemaire, 1994, and Hemforth, Konieczny
and Schimke 2003, in which participants have to
perform a second working-memory consuming task in
addition to the sentence completion or production task.
The cognitive load created by this second task will lead
to less attention, i.e. source activation, being devoted to
relevant chunks during the processing of the preamble.
This will make both the encoding error and the singular
error more likely, because they are both due to retrieval
errors that become more likely if decay is stronger or
starts from a lower level. As predicted, a higher overall
number of errors was found in the experiments cited
above.
The influence of a specific experimental paradigm may
further interact with properties of the language which is
investigated. Such an interaction may eventually
explain a cross-linguistic difference which has been
observed in SOV-constructions: In contrast to the
German results reported above, several studies
conducted on French SOV-construction found a
mismatch effect in the SP-condition (“object
attraction”, see for example Fayol , Largy, Lemaire,
1994; Franck, Lassi, Frauenfelder, und Rizzi, 2003). In
French, if there is an object in preverbal position, it
always has to be a clitic pronoun. As these pronouns are
very short, they have to be processed in less time than a
full NP. Under such conditions, the model would
predict the same effect as under time pressure: the
plural-feature may be left underspecified for its root and

might then be retrieved when the verb has to be Franck, J., Lassi, G., Frauenfelder, U. und Rizzi, L.
(submitted). Agreement and movement: a syntactic
produced, leading to a plural-error.
analysis of attraction.
Gibson,
E. (1998). Linguistic complexity: Locality of
Conclusion
syntactic dependencies. Cognition, 68, 1-76.
We have introduced APE, an activation-based model of Hartsuiker, R., Antón-Mendéz, I., & van Zee, M. (2001).
agreement errors in production. The model emphasizes
Object-attraction
in
subject-verb
agreement
the activation dynamics of the plural feature as the
construction. Journal of Memory and Language, 45,
major source of variability in the data. Syntax effects
546-572.
are accounted for via operations that some constructions Haskell, T., & MacDonald, M. (2002). Proximity does
require that others do not. For instance, while modifiers
matter. Paper presented at the 15th annual CUNY
have to be attached to their hosts, objects are not
conference on human sentence processing, New York,
attached to subjects. On the other hand, objects, like
March 2002.
other arguments, participate in anticipating the verb, Hemforth, B., & Konieczny, L. (2003). Proximity in
while modifiers to NPs do not (to same extent, at least).
agreement errors. Proceedings of the 25th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, August
These construction-specific operations interact with the
2003, Boston, MA.
activation dynamics of the plural feature in systematic
ways that have been demonstrated to cover a wide Hemforth, Konieczny, & Schimke (2003). Modifier
attraction and object attraction. Poster presented at the
variety of agreement phenomena discussed in the
conference on architectures and Mechanisms of
literature. The model predicts that time and feature reLanguage Processing (AMLaP), August 2003,
use are crucial variables in production. Unlike purely
Glasgow.
linguistic production models of agreement errors, it can
Hölscher,
C., & Hemforth, B. (2000). Subject-verb
account for differences in task demands and nonagreement
in German. In B. Hemforth & L. Konieczny,
linguistic factors of agreement performance.
German sentence processing (279-310). Dordrecht:
Kluwer Academic publishers.
Acknowledgments
Konieczny, L., & Döring, P. (2003). Anticipation of
We would like to thank Rob Hartsuiker, Michel Fayol,
clause-final heads. Evidence from eye-tracking and
Julie Franck, Gerhard Strube and two anonymous
SRNs. In: P. P. Slezak (ed.): Proceedings of the 4th
reviewers for their helpful comments on earlier versions
International Conference on Cognitive Science, July
of this work.
13-17, 2003, University of New South Wales, Sydney,
Australia. 330-335
Schriefers, H., & van Kempen (1993). Syntaktische
References
Prozesse bei der Sprachproduktion: Zur NumerusKongruenz zwischen Subjekt und Verb. Sprache und
Anderson, J. R., Lebiere, C. (1998). The atomic
Kognition, 12, 205-216.
components of thought. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates
Vigliocco,
G., & Nicol, J. (1998). Separating hierarchical
Anderson, J. R., Bothell, D., Byrne, M. D., & Lebiere, C.
relations and word order in language production: Is
(submitted). An integrated theory of the mind.
proximity
concord
syntactic
or
linear?
Psychological Review.
Cognition,68,B13-B29.
Bock, K., & Miller, C.A. (1991). Broken agreement.
Cognitive Psychology, 23, 45-93.
Bock, K. und Cutting, J.C. (1992). Regulating mental
energy: Performance units in language production.
Journal of Memory and Language, 31, 99-127.
Branigan, H. (1995). Language processing and the mental
representation of syntactic structure. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, Edinburgh University.
Budiu, R. & Anderson, J. R. (2000). Integration of
background knowledge in sentence processing: A
unified theory of metaphor understanding, semantic
illusions, and text memory. In Proceedings of the Third
International Conference on Cognitive Modeling, pp.
50-57. Groningen, Netherlands: Universal Press.
Fayol, M., Largy, P. und Lemaire, P. (1994). Cognitive
Overload and Orthographic Errors : When Cognitive
Overload Enhances Subject-Verb-Agreement errors. A
Study in French Written Language. In: The quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 47A (2), 437-464.

731

