UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Analogical Encoding: Facilitating Knowledge Transfer and Integration

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/75d3z32s

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Gentner, Dedre
Loewenstein, Jeffrey
Thompson, Leigh

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Analogical Encoding: Facilitating Knowledge Transfer and Integration
Dedre Gentner (gentner@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, 2029 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208 USA

Jeffrey Loewenstein (jeffrey.loewenstein@columbia.edu)
Columbia Business School, 3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10023 USA

Leigh Thompson (leighthompson@kellogg.northwestern.edu)
Kellogg School of Management, 2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208 USA

examples to inform current problems, they perform well
(e.g., Pirolli & Andersen, 1985). The importance of prior
cases in current reasoning has been argued persuasively in
the case-based reasoning literature (Kolodner, 1993; Schank
& Riesbeck, 1981). However, people often fail to access
prior cases that would be useful, even when they can be
shown to have retained the material in me mory (Gentner,
Rattermann & Forbus, 1993; Gick & Holyoak, 1980).
Indeed, people are often unable to solve a problem after
having just solved an analogous problem (see Reeves &
Weisberg, 1994 for a review).
One way to promote structural transfer is by comparing
two initial examples (Gick & Holyoak, 1983). This process
capitalizes on the fact that comparison between two
exemplars tends to make common relational structure more
salient (Gentner & Markman, 1997). We call this analogical
encoding, to emphasize that one can compare two partly
understood examples to derive a common interpretation
(Kurtz, Miao & Gentner, 2001). As Gick & Holyoak (1983)
demonstrated, comparing two initial examples can facilitate
deriving a schema, which in turn facilitates transfer to a
structurally-similar problem (Catrambone & Holyoak,
1989). In contrast, people learning from a single case tend
to encode it in a context -specific manner, with the result that
later remindings are often based on more obvious surface
aspects (Gentner & Rattermann, 1991).
We are investigating analogical transfer in the domain of
negotiation (Loewenstein, Thompson & Gentner, 2003;
Thompson, Gentner & Loewenstein, 2000). Negotiation is a
particularly apt arena, for several reasons. Negotiation
principles must be applied across many different contexts,
making transferability essential. Further, the learning must
be applied in real time, often in stressful, competitive
situations with the potential for considerable gain or loss.
Finally, our participants are highly motivated; they are
studying negotiation with a direct interest in raising their job
effectiveness.
In a typical negotiation situation, there is a set of issues in
which two parties have different preferences, and to which
they assign different levels of importance. The goal is to
achieve an agreement, with each participant trying to
optimize their gain. The negotiation principle we focus on

Abstract
People’s ability to recall and use prior experience when faced
with current problems is surprisingly limited. We suggest that
one reason is that information is often encoded in a situationspecific manner, so that subsequent remindings are limited to
situations that are similar to the original both in content and in
context. Analogical encoding—the explicit comparison of
two partially understood situations—can foster the discovery
of common principles and allow transfer to new structurally
similar situations. This paper addresses two new questions:
(1) whether comparison can also improve people’s ability to
retrieve examples from long term memory; and (2) whether
simply providing the common principle would suffice to
promote transfer. The results show (1) that not only does
comparing examples facilitate transfer forward to a new
problem, it can also facilitate transfer backwards to retrieve
an example from memory; and (2) providing a common
principle is not sufficient: comparison is still beneficial.

Introduction
The ability to transfer relational knowledge across contexts
is of central importance in human cognition. (Gentner,
2003). Yet people do not acquire relational abstractions
effortlessly (Chi, Feltovitch & Glaser, 1981; Chase &
Simon, 1973), nor do they always apply them when they
would be helpful (Gick & Holyoak, 1980). Drawing
analogies during learning can address both of these
challenges (Catrambone & Holyoak, 1989; Gentner,
Loewenstein & Thompson, 2003). We will also examine
another role of analogy in learning. Our findings indicate
that comparing two structurally similar examples
(analogical encoding) not only facilitates transfer to future
structurally similar cases, but also the retrieval of prior
structurally similar examples from memory.
An important means of learning is analogical transfer—
the use of a prior fami liar situation (the base) to solve a
novel situation (the target) by mapping the solution from the
base problem to the target problem. This kind of transfer has
been shown to occur in reasoning and problem-solving
(Bassok, 1990; Novick, 1988; Reed, 1987; Ross, 1987).
Research on analogical transfer also reveals an Achilles’
heel. When people succeed in accessing appropriate prior

452

here is the idea of constructing contingent contracts:
agreements whose terms depend on the outcome of a future
event (Bazerman & Gillespie, 1999). These contracts allow
people to reach agreement despite differences in opinion.
Despite their usefulness, untrained negotiators tend not to
form contingent contracts. Instead, most negotiators form
inefficient compro mises (Thompson & Hastie, 1990).
In our studies, the basic method is as follows. We provide
highly motivated students (typically MBA students or
executives) with materials to prepare for a face-to-face
negotiation. Before negotiating, all participants read two
brief cases that illustrate a negotiation principle (e.g., a
contingent contract) that would be advantageous to use in
their face-to-face negotiation. Half the participants (the
comparison group) are told to compare the two cases and
write out their commonalities; the other half (the separatecases group) is told to read each case and write out what is
important about it. Participants are then paired with
someone in the same condition to conduct the negotiation,
which is set in a different context than the study cases. We
have found that participants who compared the two cases
are two to three times as likely to use the negotiation
strategy in their subsequent face-to-face negotiations as
those who analyzed the same cases one at a time (e.g.,
Thompson, Gentner and Loewenstein, 2000).
Comparing analogous cases promotes forward transfer.
That is, it increases the likelihood that the common principle
will be retrieved when an analogous situation occurs in the
future. One route that has been proposed for this increased
transfer may be that schema-abstraction leads to increased
matching (Ross, 1989). This possibility follows directly
from the assumptions of schema-abstraction. Comparison
invites an alignment and re-representation of examples,
yielding a commo n representation that is less context specific than the initial ones (Gick & Holyoak, 1983;
Loewenstein, Thompson & Gentner, 1999). Because this
new representation has more general
relational
representations and fewer potentially conflicting object
matches than the initial cases, the match with subsequent
cases will be better, making remindings more likely (Forbus
et al, 1995; Ross, 1989). However, there is another possible
reason for the increase in forward transfer, namely,
learning-to-encode.
Having
derived
a
common
representation, people may encode future cases in the
domain in a similar manner. (Medin & Ross, 1989). The
learning-to-encode account predicts that future cases are
likely to match the schema that resulted from the
comparison, because they will be encoded in the same way.
Using retrieval to clarify the transfer process. Although
most researchers have assumed that both increased matching
and learning-to-encode are part of the story, the forwardtransfer improvement could be explained solely by learningto-encode. However, the learning-to-encode account cannot
predict any effect on retrieval of cases acquired prior to the
schema abstraction. Thus, if learning-to-encode is the main
reason for improved transfer, then the effects of comparison
should be unidirectional: better learning today will help

performance tomorrow, but will be of little help in
retrieving examples that were learned yesterday. In contrast,
if schema abstraction per se is an important force here, then
we will see bi-directional effects: abstracting a schema
should aid in retrieval whether it is forwards or backwards.

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, we tested whether analogical encoding
facilitates both forward transfer and backwards retrieval. If
so, this would suggest a degree of symmetry in the memory
retrieval process. That is, it would suggest that an abstract
relational structure is better retrieved by future cases and
also serves as a better probe for prior cases than a specific
case.
We gave all participants two analogous examples. We
asked half to compare them, and half to study the examples
one at a time. Next, to test whether comparison aids
memory retrieval, we asked people to recall an example
from their own experience that illustrated the same principle
as the initial examples. Finally, to test for transfer, we asked
whether people would use the principle to form better
agreements in a subsequent face-to-face negotiation (as in
our prior studies).
Our participants were management consultants in a
negotiation training program. Given the amount of money
and time devoted to this training, there is no question that
they were highly motivated to learn. They should also be
professionally predisposed to value learning and
generalization.

Method
Participants A total of 124 participants aged approximately
25 to 45 years, all full-time professional management
consultants working at the same organization, participated
through a negotiation training seminar. There were 64 in the
comparison condition and 60 in the separate cases
condition.
Materials and procedure. Participants read role materials
to prepare to be either the buyer or seller in a negotiation
role-playing scenario. Just prior to engaging in the role play,
participants received a training packet. The first page
concerned details about their upcoming negotiation. The
next pages contained two cases exemplifying the contingent
contract principle. The Comparison group read both cases
and then was asked “What is going on in these negotiations?
Think about the similarities between these two cases. What
are the key parallels in the two negotiations? Please describe
the solution and say how successful you think it is.” The
Separate case group received the following question after
each case: “What is going on in this negotiation? Please
describe the solution and say how successful you think it
is.”
For both groups, the next page of the training packet
asked participants to recall an example like those they had
just read: “Please think of an example, preferably from your
own exp erience, that embodies the same principle as that on

453

the previous page.” We then asked participants to state the
source of their examples. Participants were not limited as to
time and typically spent 45-60 minutes on these three pages
(an indication of their motivation to learn). We saw no timeon-task differences by condition. Then they were paired
with someone from the same condition to negotiate. The
negotiation case was set in a different context than the
training cases, and was designed to afford creating a
mutually beneficial contingent contract.

upon examples from the popular press. The examples were
mainly from the business domain (as expected—they were
in a business training classroom), with the remainder being
daily life examples such as betting on sports teams,
uncertainty about the weather affecting a vacation activity,
arranging a home mortgage, and so forth.
One source of participants’ examples had a name within
their organization—value billing. Value billing is a
particular type of contingent contract wherein a consulting
firm bills clients a low base fee, with a generous bonus
structure based on the outcome of the work. Given that
every participant probably knew about value billing, it is
striking that most of those who used this example were in
the Comparison condition.

Scoring The negotiated agreements were scored by blind
raters as to whether they contained a contingent contract
(which was, by design, the optimal solution to the
negotiation dilemma ). Coders also rated the quality of the
participants’ initial responses concerning the two cases—
that is, the degree to which the contingent contract schema
was described—using a 3-point scale: 0 = no elements of
the schema were present, 1 = some elements, and 2 = all
elements. They also rated whether participants linked the
case and principle in any way (as a manipulation check on
the condition difference). Finally, coders also rated whether
the examples participants recalled were contingent
contracts , using the same scale as above, and categorized the
source domains in which participants’ examples were set.
Overall, there was high agreement (87%); disagreements
were resolved through discussion.

Cross-measure associations As expected, schema
understanding predicted retrieval performance. The
association between articulating the schema and retrieving a
match was reliable, ?2 (1, N=124) = 8.68, p < .01. In the
transfer measure there was only a modest trend for the sum
of a pair’s schema ratings to be associated with their transfer
?2 (1, N=62) = 1.70, p = .19. However, “high performance
pairs” (pairs in which at least one person articulated the
schema and retrieved a matching example, and the pair
formed a contingent contract—i.e., transferred) were
marginally more likely to be in the Comparison condition
(47%) than the Separate cases condition (23% ), ?2 (1,
N=62) = 3.75, p = .05.

Results
As predicted, the comparison group was superior to the
separate cases group on all three measures: schema quality,
likelihood of transfer, and quality of remindings. Making
comparisons led to grasping the contingency contract
schema from the original examples, which in turn facilitated
both linking it to prior examples in memory and using it in a
new negotiation situation.

Distinguishing retrieval from invention. To conclude that
there is a comparison advantage for retrieval, it is important
to assess whether participants were simply fabricating
examples rather than retrieving them. That is, the retrieval
advantage for the comparison group could stem simply from
their using the derived schema to invent examples, rather
than from recalling them. But in this case, we should see the
highest proportion of structurally correct “retrievals” from
participants who failed to state a source. In fact, the 32
people who did not state the source produced the lowest
proportion of structural remindings (31%). The proportion
was higher for those who stated non-verifiable sources
(45%), and highest for those whose source was verifiable
(and verified) (68%). The opposite would have been
expected on the ‘fabricating’ account, and hence it seems
reasonable to take the participants at their word.

Schema understanding Co mparison participants (M =
1.45) articulated the schema better than Separate case
participants (M = 0.98), t(122) = 2.97, p < .01. Another
striking finding was that fewer than one in five Separate
cases participants linked the two cases in any way, despite
the fact that they occurred contiguously and were analogous.
Transfer In their face-to-face negotiations, Comparison
participants (59%) were nearly twice as likely to make
contingent agreements than Separate case participants
(33%), ?2 (1, N=62) = 4.22, p < .05. As in our previous
research, this suggests that comparison facilitates transfer.

Discussion
Comparing cases yielded consistent advantages for schema
abstraction, retrieving a matching example from memory,
and transferring to solve a new problem. Although our
participants were consultants whose jobs depend on their
ability to apply their knowledge in new situations, and who
spent considerable time with the training materials , we saw
little spontaneous comparison across examples in the group
not explicitly told to compare. Nonetheless, a brief
instruction to compare was sufficient to advance the

Remindings Participants in the Comparison condition (M =
1.25) retrieved better examples of contingency agreements
than did participants in the Separate cases condition (M =
0.82), t(122) = 2.65, p < .01. This suggests that comparison
aided people’s understanding of the initial cases, thereby
better guiding participants’ retrievals.
Participants retrieved examples from their own business
experience or that of a colleague, and less frequently drew

454

performance of their peers across all three measures of
learning.
Another striking pattern is that despite the participants’
considerable experience in the business world, over half of
them did not recall any examples that were contingent
contracts (or structural analogs). In fact, 11% failed to write
down any case at all. Our results underscore that (1)
transferring from analogous examples can be challenging
even for sophisticated and motivated learners (Novick,
1988) (2) analogical encoding can dramatically increase
transfer; (3) the benefits of analogical encoding derive in
part from inducing a clearer schema for the common
principle (Catrambone & Holyoak, 1989; Gick & Holyoak,
1983) and (4) analogical encoding can lead to increased
retrieval of prior analogous examples.
Finally, the fact that analogical encoding aids in memory
retrieval indicates that the effect of schema abstraction in
memory access is bidirectional. The representations that
resulted from comparison were both more readily retrieved
by future analogs than were the separate cases and more
effective as probes for prior analogs stored in memory.
Thus, although we suspect that the transfer benefits of
comparison derive in part from learning-to-encode—i.e.,
from encoding future examples in a structurally clear
manner consistent with the schema—our results indicate
that ease of matching must also play a role. The relatively
abstract schemas that result from analogical encoding match
better with prior examples just as they do with future
examples.

ask for memory retrievals, and instead of two cases
presented people with one case and an abstract description
of contingent contracts. Participants in the comparison
group were asked to compare the case and principle and
specify commonalities, and then describe implications for
negotiation. Those in the separate group were asked to read
the case and the abstract principle separately, and were
asked after each to state its implications for negotiation.
Both groups received case and principle on consecutive
pages. Participants then engaged in the negotiation with
someone else in the same condition.
Scoring As before, coders rated the quality of the
contingent contract schemas. They also rated whether
participants had paraphrased the case ni their responses,
whether their responses contained generic advice about
negotiation that was unrelated to contingent contracts, and
whether they linked the case and principle in any way. They
agreed on 93% of their judgments, and disagreements were
resolved through discussion.

Results
In their initial descriptions, Comparison participants were
more likely than Separate cases participants to articulate the
full schema (74% versus 56%) and they less often failed to
articulate any of the schema (12% versus 35%), ?2 (N=97,
2) = 7.36, p < .05. In their face-to-face negotiations,
participants who compared the case and principle (44%)
were over twice as likely to form contingent contracts as
were participants who analyzed the case and principle
separately (19%), ?2 (N=53, 1) = 3.87, p < .05.
The additional ratings of people’s individual responses to
the training materials showed a further surprising and
consistent pattern. Despite the fact that all participants had
read and discussed the case and the principle on consecutive
pages, almost none of the Separate participants noticed the
link between them. Thus, the Separate participants did not
appear to notice that the principle was the general statement
of what the case exemplified. Comparison participants
(88%) were also more likely than Separate participants
(34/47, or 71%) to paraphrase the case as they discussed it,
?2 (N=97, 1) = 4.24, p < .05. Participants in the Separate
cases condition were also more likely to give general
panaceas as advice (e.g., “it helps to have a good
relationship when you’re negotiating” or “you want to reach
win-win deals”) (77%) than comparison participants (31%),
?2 (N=97, 1) = 21.06, p < .001.

Why not just give them the principle? The results of this
study and prior work on analogical encoding lead naturally
to a further question. If the advantage of mutual alignment
is simply that comparing the two examples leads learners to
derive the principle, then would learners not fare even better
if the principle—in this case, the contingent contract
principle —were simply given to them explicitly? We
examine this directly in Experiment 2.

Experiment 2
In Experiment 2 we asked Masters of Business
Administration (MBA) students to read a case and an
abstract principle. If analyzing the principle and elaborating
upon it is sufficient for transfer, we should find high rates of
transfer in all groups. However, if principles need to be
grounded in examples to be comprehensible and
generalizable, then those asked to compare the case and
principle should show a transfer advantage relative to those
who study the example independently of the principle.

Discussion
Our results lead to something of a paradox. We find that
learners who derive a schema through analogical
encoding—either by comparing cases, or by comparing a
principle with an example—can readily transfer the schema
to new cases. Yet learners who are explicitly given the same
schema—even along with an example case—cannot. Why?
Can we say anything more specific that that “active learning
is good”? We suspect that abstract principles are ineffective

Method
Participants A total of 106 MBA students participated in
the study, resulting in 27 pairs in the Comparison condition,
and 26 pairs in the Separate condition.
Materials and Procedure The materials and procedure
were similar to Experiment 1. The training packet did not

455

because they are less well understood than specific cases
(Forbus & Gentner, 1986; Regehr & Brooks, 1993). Indeed,
in our study, some people had difficulty re-stating the
principles. This is partly because learners may fail to
understand the specific terms used, or how they are meant to
combine. This is consistent with Ross & Kilbane’s (1997)
finding that if given an example followed by a principle,
people remember the example but forget the principle.
Another difficulty in understanding principles is that there
are typically many different interpretations of a given
relational abstraction. Thus, people may encode the
principle in ways that are incompatible with the later
example. The joint interpretation of an example and a
principle helps overcome these limitations. People better
understand the principle if they apply it to an example.

educators can improve their understanding and gain
relational insight.
Implications for memory retrieval. That analogical
encoding can facilitate retrieval is consistent with the point
that the match between a specific case and a general
abstraction (which has few or no concrete features and
therefore few mismatches) is better than the match between
two specific cases (unless, of course, the cases are closely
similar, with many matches and few mismatches) (Tversky,
1977). Further, it indicates that this advantage holds whether
the schema is in the memory bank (as in prior studies of
analogical transfer) or in the probe position.
The retrieval effect suggests that people can use a wellarticulated principle to retrieve prior examples and
reinterpret them as examples of this new abstract structure.
This implies a clear mechanism by which reflection can
reorganize knowledge. A major question in both child
development and the field of expertise is whether and how
people’s existing knowledge changes as they understand a
domain in new depth. To the extent that abstractions can
call forth matching cases from memory, the learner may
gain a richer understanding of the new abstraction and a rerepresentation of the prior example in light of the new
abstraction. This suggests a means by which new
knowledge can connect to existing knowledge and can
reorganize that knowledge along more expert lines.
One encouraging implication of our findings is that
examples people learn prior to understanding key abstract
principles in a domain are not necessarily lost or wasted.
Given the increasing demands for adults to learn, this is
encouraging news. Teachers can capitalize on people’s prior
knowledge by encouraging people to recall familiar
examples of new principles. We may well rely on learned
cases every bit as much as researchers on analogy,
categorization and case-based reasoning suggest, but we
nonetheless may benefit considerably from interventions in
how we encode them.
In conclusion, analogical encoding appears to be a
powerful starting point for learning. The resulting
understandings may radiate both backwards and forwards.

General Discussion
These studies show three learning advantages of analogical
encoding. First, drawing comparisons facilitates acquiring
an abstract schema. As Experiment 2 showed, it can do so
better than studying a statement of the abstraction itself.
Second, both studies replicated prior research showing that
comparison facilitates applying derived abstractions to solve
new problems. Third, analogical encoding of two current
cases —that is, analogical encoding of a probe—leads to a
retrieval advantage in accessing structurally matching cases
from long-term memory. Our findings suggest that the
second and third of these stem from the first: that it is the
possession of clear schemas that facilitates both transfer and
retrieval.
Implications for learning and transfer. Our findings
have several implications for complex learning. On the dark
side, the results of Experiment 1 suggest limitations on even
experts’ analogical thinking. Over half the participants
failed to recall any structurally similar example from their
own experience, despite the fact that they had considerable
experience including specific experience in a particular kind
of contingent contract (value billing) that would have
qualified nicely. Prior studies suggest that people show
more relational transfer in domains that are familiar or in
which they possess expertise (Blanchette & Dunbar, 2001;
Dunbar, 2001; Novick, 1988). However, as our results
show, even for experts relational retrieval can be
problematic.
A second rather gloomy finding is the failure of our
(highly motivated) participants to spontaneously compare
the two cases (Experiment 1) or the case and principle
(Experiment 2). Here, as in our prior studies, participants in
the Separate cases group almost never noticed the link
between the two, despite the fact that they were on
consecutive pages. The huge advantage found for the
Comparison group, which did compare the two, makes this
failure to notice the link all the more telling. It raises the
question of how many potentially illuminating comparisons
are missed in the course of learning. On the positive side,
the relational fluency shown by the Comparison group
offers a relatively simple technique whereby learners and

Acknowledgments
The research was supported by the Office of Naval
Research, award number N00014-02-10078, to the first
author, a fellowship from the Dispute Resolution Research
Center to the second author, and a grant from the National
Science Foundation, SES -9870892, to the third author.

References
Bassok, M. (1990). Transfer of domain -specific problemsolving procedures. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 16, 522-533
Bazerman, M. H., & Gillespie, J. J. (1999). Betting on the
future: The virtues of contingent contracts. Harvard
Business Review, 77(5), 155–160.

456

Blanchette, I., & Dunbar, K. (2001). Analogy use in
naturalistic settings: The influence of audience, emotion,
and goals. Memory & Cognition, 29(5), 730-735.
Brooks, L. R, Norman, G. R., & Allen, S. W. (1991). Role
of specific similarity in a medical diagnostic task. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General. 120(3), 278-287.
Catrambone, R., & Holyoak, K. J. (1989). Overcoming
contextual limitations on problem-solving transfer.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory
and Cognition, 15(6), 1147-1156.
Chase, W. G., & Simon, H. A. (1973). Perception in chess.
Cognitive Psychology, 4, 55-81.
Chi, M. T. H., Feltovitch, P. J., Glaser, R. (1981).
Categorization and representation of physics problems by
experts and novices. Cognitive Science, 5, 121-152.
Dunbar, K. (2001). The analogical paradox: Why analogy is
so easy in naturalistic settings yet so difficult in the
psychological laboratory. In Gentner, D., Holyoak, K. J.,
& Kokinov, B. N. (Eds.), The analogical mind:
Perspectives from cognitive science (pp. 313-334).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Forbus, K. D., & Gentner, D. (1986). Learning physical
domains: Toward a theoretical framework. In R. S.
Michalski, J. G. Carbonell, & T. M. Mitchell (Eds.),
Machine learning: An artificial intelligence approach
(Vol. 2, pp. 311-348). Los Altos, CA: Kaufmann.
Forbus, K. D., Gentner, D., & Law, K. (1995). MAC/FAC:
A model of similarity-based retrieval. Cognitive Science,
19(2), 141-205.
Gentner, D. (2003). Why we’re so smart. In D. Gentner and
S. Goldin -Meadow (Eds.), Language in mind: Advances
in the study of language and thought. (pp. 195-235)
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gentner, D., Loewenstein, J., & Thompson L. (2003).
Learning and transfer: A general role for analogical
encoding. Journal of Educational Psychology, 95(2) 393–
408.
Gentner, D., & Rattermann, M. J. (1991). Language and the
career of simila rity. In S. A. Gelman & J. P. Byrnes
(Eds.), Perspective on thought and language:
Interrelations in development (pp. 225-277). New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Gentner, D., Rattermann, M. J., & Forbus, K. D. (1993).
The roles of similarity in transfer: Separating
retrievability and inferential soundness. Cognitive
Psychology, 25, 524-575.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1980). Analogical problem
solving. Cognitive Psychology, 12, 306-355.
Gick, M. L., & Holyoak, K. J. (1983). Schema induction
and analogical transfer. Cognitive Psychology, 15, 1-38.
Hummel, J. E., & Holyoak, K. J. (1997). Distributed
representations of structure: A theory of analogical access
and mapping. Psychological Review, 104(3), 427-466.
Kolodner, J. L. (1993). Case-Based reasoning. San Mateo,
CA: Morgan Kaufmann.
Kurtz, K. J., Miao, C., & Gentner, D. (2001). Learning by
analogical bootstrapping. Journal of the Learning
Sciences, 10(4), 417-446.
Loewenstein, J., Thompson L., & Gentner, D. (2003). An
examination of analogical learning in negotiation teams.

Academy of Management Learning and Education, 2(2),
119-127.
Loewenstein, J., Thompson, L., & Gentner, D. (1999).
Analogical encoding facilitates knowledge transfer in
negotiation. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 6(4), 586597.
Medin, D. L., & Ross, B. H. (1989). The specific character
of abstract thought: Categorization, problem-solving, and
induction. In R. J. Sternberg (Ed.), Advances in the
psychology of human intelligence (Vol. 5, pp. 189-223).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Novick, L. (1988). Analogical transfer, problem similarity,
and expertise. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 14, 510-520.
Pirolli, P. L., & Anderson, J. R. (1985). The role of learning
from examples in the acquisition of recursive
programming skills. Canadian Journal of Psychology, 39,
240-272.
Reed, S. K. (1987). A structure-mapping model for word
problems. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 13, 124-139.
Reeves, L. M., & Weisberg, R. W. (1994). The role of
content and abstract information in analogical transfer.
Psychological Bulletin, 115 (3), 381-400.
Regehr, G., & Brooks, L. R. (1993). Perceptual
manifestations of an analytic structure: The priority of
holistic individuation. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 122(1), 92-114.
Ross, B. H. (1987). This is like that: The use of earlier
problems and the separation of similarity effects. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory &
Cognition, 13(4), 629-639.
Ross, B. H. (1989). Distinguishing types of superficial
similarities: Different effects on the access and use of
earlier problems. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 15(3), 456-468.
Ross, B. H., & Kilbane, M. C. (1997). Effects of principle
explanation and superficial similarity on analogical
mapping in problem solving. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, & Cognition 23(2), 427440.
Schank, R. C., & Riesbeck, C. K. (1981). Inside computer
understanding: Five programs plus miniatures. Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Thompson, L., Gentner, D., & Loewenstein, J. (2000).
Avoiding missed opportunities in managerial life:
Analogical learning improves case-based transfer.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes,
82(1), 60-75.
Thompson, L., & Hastie, R. (1990). Social perception in
negotiation. Organizational Behavior & Human Decision
Processes, 47, 98-123.
Tversky, A. (1977). Features of similarity. Psychological
Review, 84(4), 327-352.

457

