UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Are natural kinds psychologically distinct from nominal kinds? Evidence from Learning and
Development

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6m96z519

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Kloos, Heidi
Sloutsky, Vladimir

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Are natural kinds psychologically distinct from nominal kinds?
Evidence from Learning and Development
Heidi Kloos (kloos.6@osu.edu)
The Ohio State University, Center for Cognitive Science
208C Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place
Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Vladimir Sloutsky (sloutsky.1@osu.edu)
The Ohio State University, Center for Cognitive Science
208C Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place
Columbus, OH 43210, USA
the gradedness of category membership. (Mervis & Rosch,
1981; see also Murphy, 2002, Smith & Medin, 1981, for
extensive reviews).
With the demise of the classical view, two theoretical
approaches to conceptual development have emerged: the
naïve-theory approach and the similarity-based approach.
The naïve-theory approach argues that even if there are no
truly defining features, features differ in their conceptual
centrality, this centrality being often determined by a
feature’s causal status (Medin, 1989; Gelman & Coley,
1991; Keil, Smith, Simons, & Levin, 1998). For example,
apples and basketballs are round, but the feature
“roundness” is more central for basketballs than it is for
apples.
On the contrary, the similarity-based approach suggests
that categorization decisions are made on the basis of
similarity between a to-be-categorized entity and existing
categories (see Murphy, 2002; Sloutsky, 2003, for reviews).
Categories could be represented as best examples or
prototypes (Posner & Keele, 1968, Rosch & Mervis, 1975)
or as sets of encountered exemplars (e.g., Nosofsky, 1986,
1992). In the former case, an entity is categorized as A if it
is similar to A’s prototype, whereas in the latter case an
entity is categorized as A if it is similar to individual
exemplars of A encountered previously.
Despite the differences among these theoretical
approaches, there is an important commonality – they
implicitly assume that all (or at least most the concepts)
concepts are fundamentally the same, and therefore, that
concepts have to be learned and represented in the same or a
similar way.
However, it is possible that there are different classes of
concepts that give rise to different types of representation.
The particular distinction considered here can be mapped
onto the normative distinction between natural kinds and
nominal kinds (Kripke, 1972; see also Keil, 1989, for a
review). Natural kinds refer to classes of entities that exist
in nature (e.g., bird), and nominal kinds refer to more
arbitrary groupings based on a small set of necessary and
sufficient properties (e.g., triangle, acceleration).
Natural kinds may differ in several ways from nominal
kinds. However, the difference highlighted in the current
experiments pertains to the difference in their statistical

Abstract
Known theories of categorization operate under the
assumption that most concepts are fundamentally similar. The
current research argues that this assumption is unwarranted:
Different types of concepts may differ in how they are
represented and learned. We specifically focus on naturalkind and nominal-kind concepts, concepts that differ in their
statistical structure. Natural kinds consist of highly redundant
and intercorrelated features, whereas nominal kinds consist of
isolated rules that do not correlate with other features. If these
types of concepts are fundamentally different, they should
exhibit important dissociations in how they are learned. Two
learning regimes were contrasted: one in which participants
were shown instances of the concept without being given a
definition of the concept (implicit learning regime), and one
in which participant were given a definition of the concept
without being shown individual instances (explicit learning
regime). Preschoolers and adults participated. The results
show a strong dissociation between the two kinds of concepts
in terms of acquisition, indicating that existing theories of
categorization are incomplete.

Introduction
The ability to form categories by overlooking differences
for the sake of generality is a critically important component
of cognition. While the importance of concepts and
categories is widely accepted, a number of puzzling
questions remain unanswered. How do categories arise?
Which processes underlie categorization? And how are
categories represented in the cognitive system?
Several influential approaches have emerged in an
attempt to answer these questions. According to the
“classical view,” categories are represented by sets of
features that are individually necessary and jointly sufficient
to determine category membership (Bruner, Goodnow, &
Austin, 1956; Vygotsky, 1986/1934; for a review see Smith
& Medin, 1981). For example, the concept prime number
includes two features: an integer, and no remainder when
divided by one or by itself. Each feature is necessary and
they are jointly sufficient to determine whether or not a
number is a prime.
By the 1980s, the classical view came under severe attack
for its inability to predict and account for several key
phenomena in the study of concepts, such as, for example,
1
702

structure. Natural kinds have a rich correlational structure,
meaning that the relevant features correlate among each
other. For example, creatures that lay eggs also have
feathers and fly. Nominal kinds, on the other hand, lack
such correlations among relevant features. They are based
instead on an isolated rule. For example, accelerated motion
does not have any common features with other motions
except the change in velocity or the change in vector of the
moving body.
It seems that the classical view of categorization
considered nominal kinds as most representative concepts,
whereas the similarity-based positions considered natural
kinds as the most representative ones. The current study
asks whether the normative distinction between natural and
nominal kinds is accompanied by a psychological
distinction between these two types of concepts. If true,
such psychological distinction should manifest itself in how
natural kinds and nominal kinds are represented and learned.
The goal of this research is to examine dissociations in
learning of natural and nominal kinds.

ratio). There are few reasons to believe that mere exposure
to a limited set of instances would result in an acquisition of
a relational concept. On the contrary, even feedback-based
learning of relational concepts proved to be a challenge
(e.g., Bruner, et al., 1956).
Based on these considerations, we hypothesize that there
might be an acquisitional dissociation between natural and
nominal kinds, with the former requiring unsupervised
exposure (i.e., implicit learning regime), and the latter
requiring an explicit instruction about the relevant rule (i.e.,
an explicit learning regime).

Overview of Experiments
In the three reported experiments, we systematically
manipulated two factors: the type of the concept to be
learned (“natural kind” vs. “nominal kind”) and the learning
regime (implicit learning regime vs. explicit learning
regime). Preschool children (Experiment 1) and adults
(Experiment 2 and 3) participated in the four resulting
conditions: implicit or explicit learning of a concept that
mimics natural kinds, and implicit or explicit learning of a
concept that mimics a nominal kind.
For both kinds of concepts, the same animal-like artificial
stimuli were created, such that none of the single features
were predictive of the category membership. Only the
relations between features mattered. Similar to natural kinds
in the real world, the natural kind of the current experiment
was based on multiple correlations among features (e.g.,
creatures that had a dark body also had a long tail and lots
of wings). Conversely, in the nominal kind of the current
experiment only one, arbitrary selected, relation was
predictive of category membership.
In the implicit learning regime, the learners were
presented with instances of the target category without
being told the defining rule of the category. Conversely, in
the explicit learning regime, the learners were given the
defining rule of the category without being shown specific
instances.
We predicted an interaction between learning regime and
kind of concept. The concept that is based on redundant
relations (i.e., “natural kind”) should be best learned in the
implicit learning regime, and the concept that is based on an
isolated relation (i.e., “nominal kind”) should be best
learned in the explicit learning regime.

Statistical Structure of Concepts
To reiterate, natural-kind concepts often have multiple
correlations among features of category members. Nominal
kinds, on the other hand, are typically based on a small set
of features uncorrelated with other features. It could be said
then that natural kinds are statistically dense, embedded in
multiple redundancies, whereas nominal kinds are
statistically sparse, that is based on a single rule embedded
in irrelevant variance.
Because natural kinds are statistically dense, it is possible
that natural kinds are acquired spontaneously and do not
require explicit training. Even infants are sensitive to
multiple correlations and can spontaneously acquire
categories based on multiple correlations. (e.g., Younger,
1993). Therefore, is likely that the mere exposure to
instances of a natural kind could suffice for the acquisition
of the concept. For example, infants may learn to group
dogs together after seeing a variety of dogs (Quinn, Eimas,
& Rosenkrantz, 1993). The basis for this learning is
extraction of statistical information from a set of exemplars
(Mareschal & Quinn, 2001). In fact, explicit training of a
natural-kind category may hurt the acquisition of the natural
kind. Billman and Knuston (1996) showed that in an
unsupervised-learning setting, adults could learn the concept
that was based on redundant relations, while failing to learn
the concept when it was based on an isolated or orthogonal
relation.
Nominal kinds are statistically sparse, meaning that they
lack redundancy, and that only a limited set of features or
feature relations is relevant. Because only a small portion
of total information is relevant for the membership in a
concept, it might be difficulty for the learner to
spontaneously determine what is relevant, without having
explicit instruction. This might be especially true for
relational concepts, those that are based on a relation among
features, not the features themselves (e.g., the concept of

Experiment 1
The goal of the first experiment was to examine the
acquisition of natural-type and nominal-type concepts under
different learning regimes by young children.

Method
Participants Participants were 61 5-year-olds (32 girls and
29 boys), recruited from suburban middleclass preschools.
The mean age in each condition (natural/implicit, natural/
explicit, nominal/implicit, nominal/ implicit) in months was
58.1 (SD = 4.6), 61.9 (SD = 2.7), 60.4 (SD = 5.2), and 60.3
(SD = 4.7), respectively. Additional 28 children were tested
2
703

but with very salient changes. They had a diamond shaped
body, no buttons, and no horizontal wings.

(n = 8, 5, 7, and 8 in the respective conditions) and omitted
from the sample because their performance in the catch
trials did not meet the criterion (see Procedure).

Table 1: Structure of Exemplar Items Used in
Experiments 1 and 2

Stimuli The stimuli were colorful drawings of unfamiliar
animals presented on a computer screen. Each instance had
the following six parts: a body, antennas, horizontal and
vertical wings, a tail, and buttons on the body (Figure 1).
These six parts could vary in at least one characteristic.
They could vary in size (e.g., long or small tail), in shade
(e.g., dark or light body), or in number (e.g., few or lots of
buttons).

Target Cat.
Item 1 Item 2

Figure 1: Example of the stimuli.

Contrasting Cat.
Item 1 Item 2

Natural Kind
Parts
Body
Antennas
Horiz. wings
Tails
Vert. wings
Buttons

light
light
short
short
few
few

dark
dark
long
long
many
many

light
dark
short
long
few
many

dark
light
long
short
many
few

Nominal Kind
Parts
Tails
Vert. wings
Buttons

1
4
7

3
2
9

3
4
5

5
6
9

Note. For the nominal kind, the numbers refer to the
actual number of a particular part for the nominal kind (e.g.,
1 = one tail).

Two types of categories were created, one that included
multiple correlations of features (i.e., they approximated a
natural kind), and the other that were based on a single
arbitrary selected relation (i.e., they approximated a nominal
kind). Each type of category consisted of a target category
and a contrasting category. Table 1 shows examples of
items to illustrate how stimuli differed between natural and
nominal kinds, and between target category and contrasting
category.
For the natural kind, the sizes, shades, and number of
parts correlated systematically. In the target category, a light
body had light antennas, short horizontal wings, a short tail,
few vertical wings, and few buttons. And a dark body had
dark antennas, long horizontal wings, a long tail, many
vertical wings, and many buttons. In the contrasting
category the correlations were reversed. For example, a light
body went with dark antennas, short horizontal wings, a
long tail, few vertical wings, and many buttons. No single
feature was predictive of the category.
For the nominal kind, only the number of parts mattered,
while the correlations among sizes and shades were varied
randomly. In the target category, there were more buttons
than tails and vertical wings together, and in the contrasting
category, there were fewer buttons than tails and vertical
wings together. The numbers of buttons, tails, and vertical
wings were chosen in such a way that neither the number of
a single part nor the correlation between two of the parts
were predictive. This ensured that no other information
(e.g., difference in quantity) was redundant with the rule.
An additional set of stimuli was created that functioned as
catch items. These items were from the contrasting category

Procedure The cover story presented to children involved
the creature Fritz who lives on planet Elbee and who would
like to get a pet. Pets on planet Elbee are called Ziblets and
come from a magical store that carries both pets and
dangerous wild animals. Children’s task was to determine
whether or not an animal from this magical store is a Ziblet.
The procedure had two phases: a training phase and a
testing phase. In the training phase, children were given
information about Ziblets (target category in Table 1). In the
implicit learning regime, they were shown 24 pictures of
Ziblets, presented one by one. They were told: “I will show
you the Ziblets that other families on planet Elbee have as
pets. Can you look at them and try to remember them?” In
the explicit learning regime, children were presented with
the defining rule. They were either told (for the natural kind)
“A Ziblet with a dark body has dark antennas, long
horizontal wings, a long tail, one or two short vertical wings
and two or three light buttons; and a Ziblet with a light body
has light antennas, short horizontal wings, a short tail, four
or five long vertical wings and five or six dark buttons”, or
they were told (for the nominal kind) “For a Ziblet, the
number of buttons is smaller than the number of tails and
vertical wings together”. Each separate part mentioned in
the rule (e.g., a long tail) was depicted on the computer
screen.
The testing phase was identical in both learning regimes.
Sixteen testing trials were presented in random order, half of
them being instances of the target category (Ziblets) and
half of them being instances of the contrasting category
(Non-Ziblets). Children’s task was to determine whether an
3
704

instance is a Ziblet or not. Six catch trials followed
intermixed with instances of the target category. To be
included in the study, children had to reject four of the
catcher trials.

These results reveal an important dissociation: while the
implicit learning regime favored acquisition of concepts
resembling natural kinds, the explicit learning regime
favored acquisition of concepts resembling nominal kinds,
thus supporting the contention that there is a psychological
distinction between natural kinds and nominal kinds.

Results and Discussion
Accuracy scores were calculated for each participant by
subtracting the number of correctly accepted Ziblets from
the number of incorrectly accepted Non-Ziblets and
transforming the difference into a proportion. An accuracy
score of zero (i.e., no difference between proportion of hits
and proportion of false alarms) would be expected by
chance.
Figure 2 shows the mean accuracy scores for each
condition. A 2 (concept: natural, nominal) by 2 (learning
regime: implicit, explicit) between-subjects ANOVA
revealed a significant interaction (F(1,53) = 14.46, p <
.001), with the mean accuracy scores being above chance in
the conditions natural/implicit (t (15) = 4.07, p < .01) and
nominal/explicit (t(15) = 3.2, p < .01) but not in the
conditions natural/ explicit and nominal/implicit.
An analysis of individual pattern of responses
corroborated this trend. Eleven children in the
natural/implicit condition (69%) and 12 children in the
nominal/explicit condition (75%) had an accuracy score
above 0.20. Conversely, only 5 children in the
natural/explicit condition (31%) and only 3 children in the
nominal/implicit condition (23%) had an accuracy score
above 0.20.

Experiment 2
The goal of this experiment was to extend the findings of
Experiment 1 to adult participants. Adults participated in the
same four conditions that were used for children in
Experiment 1: natural/implicit, natural/explicit, nominal/
implicit, and nominal/explicit.

Method
Participants Participants were 54 introductory psychology
students at a large mid-western university who participated
for class credit. Additional nine adults (two or three in each
condition) were tested and omitted from the sample because
their performance in the catch trials did not meet the
criterion (see Procedure).
Stimuli The stimuli were identical to the ones used in
Experiment 1.
Procedure Adults were asked to learn about creatures
called Ziblets in order to distinguish them from creatures
that are not Ziblets. In the implicit learning regime, they
were presented with 24 instances and asked to remember
them. In the explicit learning regime, they were given the
same defining rule that was presented to children. Again, no
instances were presented; only pictures of the parts
accompanied the rule.
Thirty-two testing trials followed in which instances were
presented on the screen, and adults had to determine
whether they see a Ziblet or not. Half of the instances were
from the target category (Ziblets) and half of them were
from the contrasting category (Non-Ziblets).
Eight catch trials followed intermixed with three trials
from the target category. To be included in the study, adults
had to respond correctly in at least 6 catch trials. At the end
of the procedure, adults were asked to give a verbal
description of the difference between Ziblets and other
animals presented on the screen.

Implicit Learning Regime

Accuracy

0.5

Explicit Learning Regime

0.25

0
Natural Kind

Nominal Kind

Figure 2: Accuracy Scores for Children.
Error bars represent standard errors.

Results and Discussion

In short, as predicted, children could learn the naturaltype concept in the implicit learning regime, but not in the
explicit learning regime; and they could learn the nominaltype concept in the explicit learning regime but not in the
implicit learning regime. These findings cannot be due to
differences in stimuli, as the same cartoon animals were
used for both natural and nominal kinds. Furthermore, the
findings cannot be due to differences in procedure, given
that the learning regime for the natural kind (either implicit
or explicit) was closely matched with the learning regime
for the nominal kind.

Mean accuracy scores are presented in Figure 3 (with
standard error as error bars). A 2 (concept: natural, nominal)
by 2 (learning regime: implicit, explicit) between-subjects
ANOVA revealed a significant effect of learning regime
(F(1,50) = 13.15, p < .01) with accuracy scores being higher
in the explicit learning regime (M = 0.57, SD = .45) than in
the implicit learning regime (M = 0.23, SD = .34), and a
significant interaction (F(1,50) = 11.9, p < .01). When
presented with the natural kind, participants performed
above chance in both learning regimes (timplicit(13) = 5.3, p <
.001; texplicit(13) = 3.68, p < .01), but when presented with
4
705

the nominal kind, they performed above chance only in the
explicit learning regime (t(10) = 6.12, p < .001).
1

the natural concept was rather lengthy, involving statements
about the characteristics of six parts. We content that real
natural kinds involve more than six simple correlations, thus
making explicit learning of real natural kinds more difficult
than explicit learning of current categories. This contention,
however, remains speculative, and it will be examined in
future research.

Implicit Learning Regime
Explicit Learning Regime

Accuracy

0.75

Experiment 3

0.5

The goal of this experiment was to document that the
dissociation found in Experiments 1 and 2 is not limited to
the particular nominal kind used in those experiments.
Recall that the nominal kind used in Experiments 1 and 2
was based on a mathematical relation – a relation that may
differ considerably from the correlations relevant for the
natural kind. This difference was minimized in Experiment
3 by using the same target category that was used for the
“natural kind” in the previous experiments. The contrasting
category was new. It was constructed in such a way that
only one correlation – rather than multiple correlations –
was violated. To distinguish between target category and
contrasting category, adults had to keep in mind all
correlations. Therefore, the category to be learned was
statistically sparse (all correlation mattered, no redundancy
was present) without differing in content form the
correlations of the “natural kind”.

0.25

0
Natural Kind

Nominal Kind

Figure 3: Accuracy Scores for Adults.
Error bars represent standard errors.
Adults’ verbal responses were analyzed in terms of
whether or not they contained the defining rule. For the
natural kind, a response was coded as correct when the
statement included at least one of the correlations. For the
nominal kind, a response was coded as correct when the
statement included the numerical relation. Table 2 shows
the pattern of results. As expected, adults could verbalize
the defining rule of the nominal kind in the explicit but not
in the implicit learning regime. For the natural kind, even
though adults’ categorization accuracy did not differ as a
function of learning regime, their verbal responses did. Only
three the adults could verbalize the rule of natural kinds in
the implicit learning regime whereas seven adults could
verbalize the rule in the explicit learning regime1.

Method
Participants A new group of 28 students participated in this
experiment (14 in the implicit learning regime, and 14 in the
explicit learning regime). Additional 3 adults were tested
and omitted from the sample because their performance in
the catch trials did not meet the criterion.
Stimuli The stimuli of the target category were identical to
the ones used in Experiments 1 and 2. Table 3 shows in
abstract notation the characteristics of the contrasting
category (Non-Ziblets) used in this experiment. These items
differ from the Ziblets in only one of the correlations, rather
than in all three correlations.

Table 2: Number of Correct Verbal Statements
(Percentage correct in parentheses).
Learning Regime
Implicit
Explicit

Concept
Natural
Nominal
3
0
(21%)
7
8
(50%)
(73%)

Table 3: Exemplar Items of the Contrasting Category
used in Experiment 3
Contrasting Category
Item Item Item Item Item Item
Parts
1
2
3
4
5
6
Body
0
1
1
1
1
1
Antennas
1
0
1
1
1
1
Horiz. wings
1
1
0
1
1
1
Tails
1
1
1
0
1
1
Vert. wings
1
1
1
1
0
1
Buttons
1
1
1
1
1
0

Overall, learning of nominal kinds in adults exhibited
tendencies similar to those in young children: participants
ably learned the concept when presented with the defining
rule of the concept, and they performed poorly when they
were presented with instances of the category.
At the same time, unlike young children for the naturalkind concept, adults performed equally well under different
learning regimes. This was surprising, given that the rule of

Note. The numbers refer to the values of the respective
characteristics (1 = light, small, or few; 0 = dark, large, or
many). The target category is the same as in Experiment 2
(shown in Table 1)

1

The finding that some adults failed to verbalize the correct rule
even in the explicit learning regime may be an artifact of the
procedure. Instead of describing the difference between Ziblets and
Non-Ziblets, a large majority of the adults described the difference
between test items and catch items.

5
706

Bruner, J. S., Goodnow, J. J., & Austin, G. A. (1956). A
study of thinking. Wiley.
Gelman, S. A., & Coley, J. (1991). Language and
categorization: The acquisition of natural kind terms. In S.
A. Gelman, & J. P. Byrnes (Eds.), Perspectives on
language and thought: Interrelations in development.
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Keil, F. C. (1989). Concepts, kinds, and cognitive
development. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Keil, F. C., Smith, W. C., Simons, D. J., & Levin, D. T.
(1998). Two dogmas of conceptual empiricism:
Implications for hybrid models of the structure of
knowledge. Cognition, 65, 103-135.
Kripke, S. (1972). Naming and necessity. In D. Davidson
& G. Harman (Eds.), Semantics of natural language.
Dordrecht, Holland: Reider.
Mareschal, D., & Quinn, P. C. (2001). Categorization in
infancy. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 5, 443-450.
Medin, D. L., (1989). Concepts and conceptual structure.
American Psychologist, 44, 1469-1481.
Mervis, C. G., & Rosch, E. (1981). Categorization of natural
objects. Annual Review of Psychology, 32, 89-116.
Murphy, G. L. (2002). The big book of concepts. MIT Press.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1986). Attention, similarity, and the
identification-categorization relationship. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 115, 39-57.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1992) Similarity scaling and cognitive
process models. Annual Review of Psychology, 43, 25-53
1992
Posner, M. I., & Keele, S. W. (1968). On the genesis of
abstract ideas. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 77,
353-363.,
Quinn, P. C., Eimas, P. D., & Rosenkrantz, S. L. (1993).
Evidence for representations of perceptually similar
natural categories by 3-month-old and 4-month-old
infants. Perception, 22, 463-475.
Rosch, E., & Mervis, C. B. (1975). Family resemblance:
Studies in the internal structure of categories. Cognitive
Psychology, 7, 573-605.
Sloutsky, V. M. (2003). The role of similarity in the
development of categorization. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 7, 246-251.
Smith, E. E., & Medin, D, L. (1981). Categories and
concepts. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1986/1934). Thought and language. MIT
Press.
Younger, B. (1993). Understanding category members as
“the same sort of thing”: Explicit categorization in tenmonth infants. Child Development, 64, 309-320.

Procedure The procedure was identical to the procedure
used for the natural-kind concept in Experiment 2.
Participants were presented either with the implicit or the
explicit learning regime.

Results and Discussion
Mean accuracy scores were calculated for each learning
condition. A significant difference was found (t(31) = 3.76,
p < .001), with adults in the implicit-learning condition
performing worse than adults in the explicit-learning
condition (implicit: M = 0.17, SE = .05; explicit: M = 0.44,
SE = .06). These results further indicate that the dissociation
between natural kinds and nominal kinds reflects the
structure of the to-be-learned categories rather than the
property of the particular relation used in Experiments 1 and
2.

General Discussion
The results reported here support a psychological distinction
between concepts that differ in their statistical structure.
Concepts that are based on highly redundant features were
best learned through an implicit learning regime (especially
for children); and concepts that are based on non-redundant
features were best learned through an explicit learning
regime. The latter findings applied whether the concept was
based on a mathematical relation (Experiment 2) or on a set
of correlations between two features (Experiment 3). This
suggests that the dissociation in acquisition reflects the
statistical structure of the category rather than the particular
relation.
Though not directly investigated in these sets of
experiments, we argue that statistically dense concepts
resemble natural kinds, while statistically sparse concepts
resemble nominal kinds. It is likely then that natural kinds
(e.g., the concept of bird) require a different learning
environment than nominal kinds (e.g., the concept of
acceleration). Furthermore, it is possible that this learning
dissociation reflects itself in the way the concepts are
represented. For example, it is possible that effects of
gradedness are more likely to be found with natural kinds
than with nominal kinds.
Finding dissociation in learning between different types
of concepts indicates that a theory of categorization is
incomplete if it pertains only to one kind of concept. A more
complete account would address the processes of
categorization for both natural and nominal kinds.

Acknowledgments
This research is supported by a grant from the National
Science Foundation (REC # 0208103) to Vladimir M.
Sloutsky.

References
Billman, A. J., & Knutson, D. (1996). Unsupervised concept
learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 22(2),
458-487.
6
707

