UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Artefacts as Mediators of Distributed Social Cognition: A Case Study

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0z70v8sm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Rambusch, Jana
Susi, Tarja
Ziemke, Tom

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Artefacts as Mediators of Distributed Social Cognition: A Case Study
Jana Rambusch (a00janra@ida.his.se)

University of Skövde, School of Humanities and Informatics
Box 408, 54128 Skövde, Sweden

Tarja Susi (tarja@ida.his.se)

University of Skövde, School of Humanities and Informatics
Box 408, 54128 Skövde, Sweden

Tom Ziemke (tom@ida.his.se)

University of Skövde, School of Humanities and Informatics
Box 408, 54128 Skövde, Sweden

particularly well defined, even though there are numerous
definitions, resulting from differing focuses in different
areas (see, e.g., Gibson & Ingold, 1993; Neuman &
Bekerman, 2000; Preston, 1998). In this paper, artefact and
tool are used, in accordance with much of the literature,
more or less interchangeably.
Despite an increasing interest in cognition and artefacts
(see, e.g., Norman, 1993), there is so far a limited
understanding of the way artefacts affect the individual
within a social context. The present paper aims to contribute
to the understanding of the way people are affected by
artefacts, and the role artefacts can have in a certain social
context. A field study was conducted in a Swedish hospital,
at the children’s admission, where artefacts (as it turned out)
constitute an important part of work tasks. The results
indicate that artefacts play an important role in the social
context, in a manner different from their role when
considered in relation to an individual.
The next section elaborates in some more detail work on
situated, distributed and social cognition that constitutes the
background for the work of the present paper. Then
methods, analysis, and results are described, followed by a
discussion.

Abstract
Traditionally, cognition has been regarded as the outcome of
internal
cognitive
processes
manipulating
mental
representations. More recently, however, it has become clear
that cognition cannot be separated from the social and
material environment in which people live and act, and that in
many cases cognition is distributed among individuals and
environmental properties. One important aspect has turned out
to be artefacts and their use, and there is growing interest in
understanding how tool use affects cognition. However, even
with this increased awareness of the role of artefacts, the
focus has mainly been on the cognitive processes and
representations of individuals, while the social role of
artefacts has received less attention. An ethnographically
inspired field study, observing a hospital’s children admission
unit, was conducted to investigate the way individual and
collaborative work are affected by the use of artefacts within a
given social context. The results indicate that the use of
artefacts is closely coupled to the social environment, that to
some degree social interactions are transformed into more
indirect, individual processes, and that artefacts are crucial for
high-level processes such as memory and coordination.

Introduction
Most work in cognitive science has for a long time been
based on a general consensus that cognition is best
described and analysed in terms of internal, often symbolic,
representations and computational processes manipulating
them. Thus, cognition has been considered to take place
largely within the individual mind, with a focus on mental
representations and processes, while the environment
largely has been reduced to inputs and outputs (e.g.,
Pylyshyn, 1990). However, since the mid-1980s there has
been a growing awareness that individuals are socially and
culturally situated and that the environment needs to be
considered in order to understand cognition (Clancey, 1997;
Clark, 1997; Hendriks-Jansen, 1996; Hutchins, 1995;
Suchman, 1987). Humans are, for instance, very proficient
in using environmental properties as cognitive aids (Clark,
1997; Kirsh, 1995, 1996), and there is growing interest in
finding out how artefacts/tools affect cognition (e.g.,
Preston, 1998). The terms artefact, tool, and tool use are not

Situated, Distributed, and Social Cognition
Situated cognition has become an influential approach in
many different areas, such as artificial intelligence (e.g.,
Brooks, 1999), cognitive anthropology (Hutchins, 1995),
cognitive psychology (e.g., Barsalou, 1999), and
developmental psychology (e.g., Thelen & Smith, 1994).
Although there is not yet any universally accepted notion or
definition of ‘situatedness’ (cf. Clancey, 1997; Wilson,
2003; Ziemke, 2002), generally speaking there is an
agreement that cognition is a continuous process (e.g.,
perception-action-loops) with changing boundaries, and that
cognition is more than what takes place within the
individual mind (e.g., Clark & Chalmers, 1998; Clark, 1999;
Susi et al., 2003). The context in which human activities
take place is equally important. Hence, there is a growing
interest in understanding the role of scaffolds or ‘wideware’,
i.e., external structures such as artefacts, in cognition (e.g.,
Clark, A., 1997, 1999, 2003; Hutchins, 1995). In itself an

1113

artefact may not be much, but coupled with human
cognitive abilities artefacts can become powerful tools, and
it has been argued that they extend cognitive abilities such
that ‘thinking’ cannot be reduced to internal cognitive
processing (Chalmers & Clark, 1998). Hence, the use of
scaffolds or (cognitive) artefacts amplifies cognition.
However, it has been pointed out that artefacts actually do
not amplify cognition as such (Cole & Griffin, 1980;
Hutchins, 1995). Even though a tool may appear to amplify
cognition, it is really a coordination of different cognitive
processes, which can be aided by using appropriate tools,
but no cognitive ability, or process, has been amplified.
Other considerations on the topic of artefacts and cognition
concern, for instance, that tool use extends the body and a
person’s body schema (Bateson, 1972; Berti & Frassinettis,
2000; Maravita et al. 2001; Maravita & Iriki, 2004). We are
also spatial beings, and, subsequently, all actions are taken
in relation to the environment (Kirsh, 1995). People
continuously organise and reorganise, for instance, their
work environments to reduce the cognitive effort needed.
For a long time tool use and technology were degraded to
‘by-products’ of cognitive evolution (Saito, 1996), but with
increased knowledge it has become clear that artefacts and
their use have a considerable effect on cognitive processes.
This issue received much attention already by Vygotsky and
his followers (see, e.g., Gal’perin, 1969; Haenen, 1996;
Vygotsky, 1978, 1981). However, in order to understand
this relation further research is needed concerning questions
such as what makes an object become a tool, and the
development of tool use behaviour (Preston, 1998).
The fact that artefacts, for a long time, have received
relatively little attention in cognitive science is somewhat
surprising. Nowadays they are commonly described as the
“the other major form of cognitive mediation between
individual and world” (Preston, 1998, p. 514), besides
language, but obviously language has always played a much
more central role in cognitive science. Artefacts also played
a crucial role, as controlling behaviour from the outside, in
the cultural-historical school in psychology, in particular the
work of Vygotsky (1978, 1981), but with the advent of
cognitive science attention, for the abovementioned reasons,
for a long time shifted towards internal, individual processes
and representations.
Recent work on distributed cognition (Hutchins, 1995)
has in some sense rediscovered the integral role that
artefacts play in both individual and collaborative cognitive
processes that are distributed over people and the material
resources they use. This view takes an interest in the way
information is represented, transformed, and propagated in
the material and social environment. That way, cognitive
processes can be described in terms of functional
relationships between brains, other people, and external
objects. The role of artefacts as mediators of social
cognition, however, is far from being fully understood. The
present paper considers cognition from a situated and
distributed perspective, i.e., it views high-level cognition as
resulting from a close interplay between brain, body, and

the social and material environment in which humans live
and act.
Like most of cognitive science, research in social
cognition has traditionally focused on individual cognitive
processes involving social information, such as attention,
perception, and memory, and the internal representations
they generate or manipulate (e.g., Augoustinos & Walker,
1995; Fiske & Taylor, 1984; Gilbert, Fiske & Lindzey,
1998). Hence, few studies have taken a situated perspective
(Semin & Smith, 2002). However, people are also socially
situated, which means, one the hand, social interaction
between individuals, and, on the other hand, that cognition
is situated within a wider social and cultural context (Lave,
1988; Wertsch, 1993; Semin & Smith, 2002). Hence,
besides interactional aspects, cognition is also affected by
(cultural) artefacts (Levine & Resnick, 1993). Due to the
fact that they constitute part of a culture’s intellectual
history, their use actually turns even seemingly individual
activities into a social process as artefacts are affected by
social aspects (Resnick, 1993). As pointed out by Hutchins
(1995, p. xiv), “human cognition is not just influenced by
culture and society, but ... is in a very fundamental sense a
cultural and social process”.

Case study
Most research on cognition and artefacts has to a large
extent focused on the individual (e.g., Norman, 1991, 1993)
while contextual and environmental aspects largely have
been disregarded, with some notable exceptions (e.g.
Hutchins, 1995). Subsequently there is a limited
understanding as to how artefacts affect the individual
within a social context. Further research is needed that
considers both social interactions and tool use to gain
further understanding of the relation between artefacts,
individual, and social cognition. Accordingly, the
underlying question for the present study was “how does
tool use affect individual cognitive processes within a social
context”? The term ‘artefacts’ in this case refers to objects
that are significant for everyday work tasks, while
’cognitive processes’ here refer to high-level processes such
as attention, memory, and coordination.

Method and Setting
In order to investigate the above questions, a field study was
conducted at the children’s admission in a Swedish hospital.
Such work places are indeed highly social work places: well
functioning daily work requires well-organised cooperation
between the members of the staff, as well as between
different wards. The work tasks at the children’s admission
are individual in the sense that most work is carried out
individually. For example, parents and children arriving at
the admission would usually first meet an administrator who
registers their arrival, then a nurse who, for example, might
draw a blood sample, and eventually a doctor. At the same
time though, all these individual activities are, of course,
socially situated and have a strong coupling to the social and
environmental context.
In the children’s admission, we chose (a part of) the
central office (which functions as a communication,

1114

coordination, and administrative centre), as the setting for
the study. The office has three units: a reception, an
administrative unit, and a unit where all incoming phone
calls are handled. The study was limited to the
administrative unit (see Figure 1), since it is a central place
for much of the daily activities, and nurses frequently visit
this unit. There are always three to four nurses working at
the same time, and the study focused mainly on their work.
However, other people also visit the administrative unit
during the day, e.g., doctors who come by to collect patient
records. The main part of the nurses’ work consists of taking
care of patients that have an appointment, as well as urgent
cases that appear during the day. They also handle
administrative tasks, phone counselling, and patient-related
tasks, e.g. drawing blood samples. Each member of the staff
is responsible for certain tasks, but must also be aware of
the others’ tasks and responsibilities in order to coordinate
their work. On an overall level, the daily routine consists of
registering patients on their arrival, and getting each
patient’s medical record from the archive. Patients that are
expected during the day are listed on a patient list. A nurse
carries out an initial examination (weight, etc.), and if the
patient has a doctor’s appointment, he or she is shown into a
consultation room. In cases where some kind of a sample
needs to be drawn or collected, the doctor notifies a nurse.
The study was inspired by cognitive ethnography (Hollan
et al. (2000), with observations (moderate participation;
DeWalt & DeWalt, 2002), video recordings, and interviews.
The combination of such techniques provides a means for
gaining insight into the interactions between people and
their use of artefacts, and subsequently cognitive processes.
The staff was informed that the office was the subject of a
study, and the time when it was to take place. Initial
interviews were conducted to gain information about the
staff, their work tasks, and the setup of the office.
Observations were made during two days, and when
necessary, questions were asked during the observation.
During the observations the office was also videotaped.
When all material had been analysed, another interview took
place to verify that, e.g., work tasks had been correctly
understood.

Analysis and Results
The videotaped material (three hours in total) and notes
taken during the observations were analysed from the
perspective of the staff’s work tasks and activities, and the
function of artefacts used in relation to the identified
activities.
A highly social work setting, such as the observed
children’s admission, requires well functioning cooperation,
interaction, communication, shared knowledge about
routines, others’ tasks, etc. In this particular setting the staff
uses various artefacts with varying functions, which requires
an additional interpersonal understanding of their different
functions. In the present study a number of artefacts turned
out to be crucial with respect to processes such as
coordination of the ongoing work. However, due to space
limitations, only a few artefacts are discussed here in some
detail.

Most activities in the administrative unit take place
around a small table, on which various items are kept and
placed (cf. Figure 1). The structure of the office unit also
provides structure to the work tasks since the artefacts draw
attention to what is going on and what needs to be done.
Patient’s record One of the most important artefacts in this
particular setting is the patient’s medical record. Basically,
it is a folder containing a collection of documents with
information about a patient. All the documents are sorted in
a specific manner in order to reduce the effort of finding the
right information (a document out of its proper placement
causes disturbances in the work-flow), and when a patient
visits the children’s admission new information is added.
The patient record has several functions, besides the obvious
one of storing information about patients. Clearly, no single
person could keep all the information in the head, and there
is no need to either, as the patient record provides an
external memory (on some rare occasion a patient’s medical
record has been displaced, which caused serious problems).
As different people handle the patient record, more
information is added to it, and its contents (the
representations) become transformed. Commonly, patients
do not meet the same nurses and/or doctors each time they
come to the children’s admission, but information
concerning the patient is transferred between staff members
through the patient record, which functions as a
‘communicator’ between different people. That way the
contents of a patient’s record transform intrapersonal
knowledge to interpersonal knowledge shared by several
people. The patient records also contribute to an overall
coordination of work processes since, depending on where a
patient record is placed, it causes different people to take
different actions. Placed in the reception’s tray, it triggers a
nurse to take the patient record into the administrative unit,
while placed in a tray labelled with a doctor’s name it
informs the doctor that a patient is waiting, etc.
The patient list Another highly crucial artefact is the
patient list placed on the wall above the small table (cf.
Figure 1) (another list is in the reception, but that was not
included in the study). The list actually consists of nine
smaller lists (together referred to as the patient list), each
corresponding to a consultation room (each doctor uses the
same consultation room throughout the day). Thus the list
tells, not only who is coming when, but also in which room
the patient will be received and by whom. The list also
contains information about each patient and the measures to
be taken. The list is computer-generated, and during the day
the nurses make additional markings by hand. The markings
consist of symbols that are typically understood only by the
staff. For instance, a certain symbol next to a name on the
list means that the patient is waiting in the consultation
room (which the list concerns), another symbol means that a
doctor has been delayed, and yet another one means that the
patient has left the admission. All markings are made in red
so that they are highly visible and easy to perceive. During
the observation it became clear that the nurses had no
difficulties in understanding the added markings, and hence
the list provides a means for communication and

1115

Figure 1. The observed administrative unit. In the upper corner is the small table with a tray
(follow-up instructions), and with labelled trays on the shelf below. On the left wall above the table
is the patient list(s). On the bench to the lower left is the (orange) tray for filled in sample
documents. The cameras indicate the two placements of the (one) camera during the observation.

coordination between people, even when they do not
interact directly.
Another function of the list is that it provides a (shared)
external memory, providing everyone with the same
necessary information. No one needs to memorise the
information, as it is ‘there’ all the time, visible to those who
need it, as they need it. As symbols are added to the list, the
information becomes transformed and it is propagated from
one individual to another when needed. The list also
provides an overview and a visualisation of the consultation
rooms, and each doctor only needs to pay attention to that
part of the list that is related to their room, which in turn
delimits the amount of information that needs to be attended
to.
Paper trays There are a number of trays 1 in the office, each
with its own function(s) and assigned meaning. As patients
are registered on their arrival, their medical records are
withdrawn and placed in a paper tray in the reception. A
patient’s record in the tray is a signal to the nurses that a
patient has arrived. The patient records are brought by the
nurses to the administrative unit, and, eventually, they are
placed in trays labelled with the name of the doctor that the
patient is going to see. Usually there are four to five doctors
working at the same time, and their (labelled) trays are
placed on a shelf under the small table (cf. Figure 1). Trays
belonging to doctors who are not on duty are placed
somewhere else (top shelf to the left of the small table, cf.
Figure 1). During the day each doctor collects the patient
records that are placed in their tray. When a sample needs to
be drawn or collected, the doctor notifies it by leaving
1

The items containing documents that are discussed in this
paragraph are not all paper trays in the real sense of the word, but
are here, for simplicity sake, collected under the label of ‘trays’.

follow-up instructions in a blue tray (to the right on the
small table in Figure 1). When a nurse has performed the
procedure, a filled-in document concerning the sample is
placed in an orange tray (on the bench to the lower left in
Figure 1). Thus, the spatial arrangement of the trays (and
other artefacts) contributes greatly to structuring the
ongoing work.
Besides containing documents, the trays have several
other functions. For instance, rather than having to keep
each ongoing process of the work place in memory, the
trays, and their contents, provide information about what is
going on and matters that need to be taken care of, thereby
providing an external memory. The trays also serve as a
means of indirect communication between individuals. The
nurses, for instance, do not have to tell a doctor, in person,
that a patient is waiting. Instead that information is mediated
through the contents of the labelled tray. That way each
person can attend his or her own individual work tasks,
while at the same time, on an overall level, the indirect
communication contributes to a well-functioning operation.
The trays also limit the amount of information that needs to
considered. A doctor, for instance, only needs to pay
attention to one labelled tray (or one part of the patient list).
Other artefacts There are also a number of other artefacts,
equally important but taken for granted to the extent that
they become ‘invisible’ (Gauvain, 2001). One such artefact
that should be mentioned here is the small table (Figure 1),
which plays a crucial role in the organisation of the daily
work. Such a common artefact might seem trivial to discuss,
but in this case it is an important part of the spatial
arrangement that contributes to the overall structure of work
tasks (cf. Kirsh, 1995). People know that it is the place
where things that are used or needed often, are kept, and that
it is a place for important information. Thus it provides, e.g.,

1116

an external memory, and people often take a glance at the
table before leaving the room, to see if they left anything
there as they entered the room (as is often done), or if there
is something they need to take care of. The table is also used
as a message board, where people leave notes for others.

Discussion
The question guiding our study was “how does tool use
affect individual cognitive processes within a social
context?”. One perspective of interest in the present analysis
is the ecological perspective (Gibson, 1986), since an
artefact’s function is closely related to its appearance
(affordance). However, due to space limitations that
discussion has been left out in this paper.
Obviously, a two-day study has its limitations, and can
only provide a rough understanding of the complexities of a
work setting, artefacts, the relations between individuals and
social contexts, etc. Nevertheless, despite possible
shortcomings, this study is an important step in what we
consider an important research direction. Even limited
studies can provide valuable insights, and this particular
study illustrates some aspects of the relation between
artefacts, individuals, and social context.
On a general level, the study shows the importance of the
artefacts used in this particular setting, and the way they
contribute to a well-functioning operation where much of
the activities are coordinated in an implicit manner. It can
also be argued that just how powerful artefacts are becomes
evident only when considered within the social context in
which they are used. Some artefacts, such as a patient list,
only make sense to and are understood by those who use
them (cf. Levine & Moreland, 1993). As it turned out, it is
not only the way an artefact is used that is important for
cognition, but also where it is used (cf. Kirsh, 1995). The
environmental structure and spatial arrangements partly
determine the function and the meaning of an artefact. For
instance, the labelled trays have different meanings
depending on where (on which shelf) they are placed, and
patient records trigger different activities depending on
where they are placed (cf. also Clark, H., 2003). Artefacts
also provide a scaffold for different cognitive processes
depending on who the user is, i.e., the user’s role in the
overall social arrangement. Artefacts play an important role
as organisers: the state of an artefact (e.g., a tray that is
empty, or not) helps the individuals to organise their work,
and on the social level they contribute to coordination,
cooperation and structure. Some artefacts make information
available and visible, and contribute to the propagation of
information between people and artefacts.
As discussed by Hollan et al. (2000), the activities of a
group cannot be fully understood from the individual’s
perspective, rather the functional relationships of people and
artefacts need to be considered. Thus, individual actions
cannot be explained without considering what others are
doing, the interpersonal codes, knowledge, and shared
understanding of the functions of all the artefacts they use
(e.g., Leont’ev, 1978; Thompson & Fine, 1999). Another
important aspect is the way artefacts transform individual
processes into social processes, and vice versa. For instance,
when a nurse adds a marking to the patient list the

information becomes part of a social activity and individual
knowledge becomes shared knowledge (in a sense
propagated ‘on demand’ only). Likewise, social or shared
activities may become individual activities, e.g., when the
nurse attends to information added by others.
To summarise, the artefacts analysed in this study
function as mediators of distributed social cognition, i.e.,
they constitute or facilitate shared memory, coordination,
communication, and sharing of information. Many artefacts
have the same, or similar, functions¸ which however vary
depending on who is using them, where (spatially) they are
used, their functional coupling to other artefacts, and the
social context. As illustrated in this paper, artefacts in many
cases transform social interactions into individual processes,
but at the same time they also mediate the indirect
interaction of these processes¸ and thus maintain their social
nature (cf. Susi & Ziemke, 2001).
This study has illustrated that, in order to understand
artefacts and their role in individual and social cognitive
processes, we need to consider artefacts, individuals, the
social context, and their functional interrelations. Much of
the work addressing these issues, including this paper, has
been presented in the form of examples, anecdotal evidence,
case studies, etc. Future work will have to further address
the development of a more systematic, principled
understanding of the role that artefacts play in distributed
social cognitive processes.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the employees of the
children’s admission at the hospital in Skövde
(Kärnsjukhuset) for participating in the case study.

References
Augoustinos, M. & Walker, I. (1995). Social cognition: An
integrated introduction. London: SAGE Publications.
Barsalou, L.W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 577-609.
Bateson, G. (1972). Steps to an ecology of mind. Northwale,
New Jersey: Jason Aronson Inc.
Berti, A. & Frassinetti, F. (2000). When far becomes near:
remapping of space by tool use. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, 12(3), 415-420.
Brooks, R. (1999). Cambrian Intelligence. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Clancey, W. J. (1997). Situated Cognition. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Clark, A. (1997). Being there: Putting brain, body, and
world together again. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Clark, A. (1999). Where brain, body, and world collide.
Cognitive Systems Research, 1, 5-17.
Clark, A. (2003). Natural born cyborgs: Minds,
technologies, and the future of human intelligence.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Clark, A. & Chalmers, D. (1998). The extended mind.
Analysis, 56, 10-23.
Clark, H.H. (2003). Pointing and placing. In: S. Kita (Ed.),
Pointing - Where language, culture, and cognition meet.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

1117

DeWalt, K.M. & DeWalt, B.R. (2002). Participant
observation: A guide for field-workers. Walnut Creek:
Altamira Press.
Fiske, S.T. & Taylor, S.E. (1991). Social cognition.
McGraw-Hill, New York:
Gal’perin, P.Y. (1969). Stages in the development of mental
acts. In: M. Cole & I. Maltzman (Eds.), A handbook of
contemporary Soviet psychology. New York: Basic
Books, Inc,. Publishers.
Gauvain, M. (2001). Cultural tools, social interaction and
the development of thinking. Human Development, 44,
126-144.
Gibson, J.J. (1986). The ecological approach to visual
perception. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Gibson, K.R. (1993). General introduction: Animal minds,
human minds. In: K.R. Gibson & T. Ingold (Eds.), Tools,
language and cognition in human evolution. Cambridge,
MA: Cambridge University Press.
Gibson K.R. & Ingold, T. (Eds.) (1993). Tools, language
and cognition in human evolution. Cambridge, MA:
Cambridge University Press.
Gilbert, D.T., Fiske, S.T. & Lindzey, G. (1998). The
handbook of social psychology, Vol. 1 & 2. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Haenen, J. (1996). Piotr Gal’perin: Psychologist in
Vygotsky’s footsteps. New York: Nova Science
Publishers, Inc.
Hendriks-Jansen, H. (1996). Catching ourselves in the act:
Situated activity, interactive emergence, evolution, and
human thought. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Hollan, J., Hutchins, E. & Kirsh, D. (2000). Distributed
cognition: Toward a new foundation for human-computer
interaction research. ACM Transactions on ComputerHuman Interaction, 7(2), 174-196.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Kirsh, D. (1995). The intelligent use of space. Artificial
Intelligence, 73, 31-68.
Kirsh, D. (1996). Adapting the environment instead of
oneself. Adaptive Behavior, 4(3/4), 415-452.
Lave, L.B. (1988). Cognition in practice: Mind,
mathematics and culture in everyday life. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Leont’ev, A.N. (1978). Activity, Consciousness, and
personality. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Levine, J.M. & Moreland, R.L. (1993). Culture and
socialization in work groups. In: L.B. Resnick, J.M.
Levine & S.D. Teasley (Eds.), Perspectives on socially
shared cognition. Washington: American Psychological
Association.
Levine, J. M., Resnick, L. B. & Higgins, E. T. (1993).
Social foundations of cognition. Annual Review of
Psychology, 44, 585-612.
Maravita, A. & Iriki, A. (2004). Tools for the body
(schema). Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8(2), 79-86.
Maravita, A., Husain, M., Clarke, K. & Driver, J. (2001).
Reaching with a tool extends visual-tactile interactions
into far space: Evidence from cross-modal extinction.
Neuropsychologia, 39, 580-585.

Neuman, Y. & Bekerman, Z. (2000). Where a blind man
ends: Five comments on context, artifacts and the
boundaries of the mind. Systems Research and Behavioral
Science, 17, 315-319.
Norman, D. (1991). Cognitive artifacts. In: J.M. Carroll
(Ed.), Designing interaction: Psychology at the humancomputer interface (reprinted edition, 1993). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Norman, D. (1993). Things that make us smart: Defending
human attributes in the age of the machine. Reading, MA:
Addison-Wesley.
Preston, B. (1998). Cognition and tool use. Mind &
Language, 13(4), 513-547.
Pylyshyn, Z.W. (1990). Computation and cognition. In: J.L.
Garfield (Ed.), Foundations of cognitive science. New
York: Paragon House.
Resnick, L. B. (1993). Shared cognition: Thinking as social
practice. In: L.B. Resnick, J.M. Levine & S.D. Teasley
(Eds.), Perspectives on socially shared cognition.
Washington: American Psychological Association.
Saito, A. (1996). Social origins of cognition: Bartlett,
evolutionary perspective and embodied mind approach.
Journal for the Theory of Social Behavior, 26(4).
Semin, G.R. & Smith, E.R. (2002). Interfaces of social
psychology with situated and embodied cognition.
Cognitive Systems Research, 3(3), 385-396.
Suchman, L.A. (1987). Plans and situated actions: The
problem of human machine communication. Cambridge,
MA: Cambridge University Press.
Susi, T., Lindblom, J. & Ziemke, T. (2003). Beyond the
bounds of cognition. In: Proceedings of the 25th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Susi, T. & Ziemke, T. (2001). Social Cognition, Artefacts,
and Stigmergy. Cognitive Systems Research, 2(4), 273290.
Thelen, E. & Smith, L. (1994). A dynamic systems approach
to the development of cognition and action. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Vygotsky, L.S. (1978). Mind in society. The development of
higher psychological processes. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press. Original work published 1932.
Vygotsky, L.S. (1981). The instrumental method in
psychology. In: J.V. Wertsch (Ed.), The concept of
activity in Soviet psychology. Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe,
Inc. Original work published 1960.
Wertsch, J.V. (1993). A sociocultural approach. In: L.B.
Resnick, J.M. Levine & S.D. Teasley (Eds.), Perspectives
on socially shared cognition. Washington: American
Psychological Association.
Wilson, M. (2003). Six views of embodied cognition.
Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 9(4), 625-636.
Wynn, T. (1993). Layers of thinking in tool behavior. In:
K.R. Gibson & T. Ingold (Eds.), Tools, language and
cognition in human evolution. Cambridge, MA:
Cambridge University Press.
Ziemke, T. (2002). Introduction to the special issue on
situated and embodied cognition. Cognitive Systems
Research, 3(3), 271-274.

1118

