UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Cognitive processes of artistic creation: A field study of a traditional Chinese ink painter’s
drawing process

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3x59k24j

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Yokochi, Sawako
Okada, Takeshi

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Cognitive processes of artistic creation: A field study of a traditional Chinese ink painter’s
drawing process
Sawako Yokochi (b031214d@mbox.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Education and Human Development
Nagoya University, Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku
Nagoya, Japan 464-8601

Takeshi Okada (j46006a@nucc.cc.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
Institute for Advanced Research and
Graduate School of Education and Human Development

Abstract
How are art works created by artists? In this study, we
focused on the drawing processes of a Chinese ink painter
through a field study and a field experiment. In the field
study, we observed processes of fusuma drawing in a
temple, and in the field experiment, we asked the painter to
draw sixteen pictures (eight drawings in BLANK condition
and eight drawings LINES condition). We analyzed those
drawing processes and found that: (1) this artist seems to
gradually form a global image of the drawing as he draws
each part one by one; (2) lines that the audience drew seem
to create new constraints for his drawing and force him to
create new patterns; and (3) moving his brush in the air
before actually drawing lines on the paper seems to serve
one of the following functions: Positioning (where to draw),
rehearsal (how to draw), and image generation (what to
draw).

Suibokuga (Chinese ink painting) painter.

Method

Subject: Mr. K. is a Suibokuga painter in his early 60’s
with about 18 years of experience of painting in that style.
He usually draws Sansuiga, which are traditional Chinese
landscapes of mountains and valleys, on fusuma
(Japanese sliding doors) or folding screens in temples and
shrines. He has also exhibited his works at museums in
the USA and France in addition to many places in Japan.
He has a special style of drawing. He improvises his
drawing in front of audiences by incorporating random
lines that the audience drew onto blank paper.
Period of observation: This field study was conducted
from 1998 to 2001, with a follow-up interview conducted
in 2003. We observed his drawing processes and
collected substantial on-line data about his drawing. Also,
Introduction
we investigated his drawing processes through
conducting a field experiment.
It is widely believed that only talented people can create
Data described in this paper: In this paper, we focus on
great works of art. Despite this, the psychology of
the following two data sets in this field study: (1) process
creativity has demonstrated that ordinary cognitive
data of a fusuma drawing in temple X; and (2) data from
processes underlie the emergence of images or concepts
a field experiment.
(Weisberg, 1993). Although cognitive psychology ought
In the temple, spending about one and a half-hour, the
to be interested in such creative cognitive processes, few
painter
drew a picture of mountain and river across four
empirical studies on the artistic creative process have
fusuma
sliding doors. We set up two video cameras from
been conducted (Getzels & Csikszentmihalyi, 1976).
both sides of the fusuma doors to capture his drawing
Among the few studies that have been conducted, some
process. After he finished his drawing, we interviewed
are relatively old and pre-date the information processing
him about his drawing process. In this case, he did not ask
revolution that has occurred in the field (e.g., Eindhoven
the audience to draw random lines because the master of
& Vinack, 1952). More recently, studies have used
the temple asked him not to do so.
techniques such as interviewing in order to understand the
In the field experiment, we asked him to draw eight
creative process but have neglected on line methods (e.g.,
pictures
created from fifteen random lines drawn by two
Mace & Ward, 2002; Cawelti, Rappaport & Wood, 1992).
experimenters (we call this the LINES condition) and
Despite these efforts, creative cognitive processes are not
eight pictures created on blank paper (we call this the
yet well understood. At this early stage of cognitive study
BLANK condition). The themes of the paintings are the
on artistic creation, it seems that multi-method
four seasons. We asked him to draw two pictures of each
approaches are most appropriate. For example, Getzels &
season in each condition: spring; summer; fall; and winter.
Csikszentmihalyi (1976) have approached creativity from
The order of task presentation was counter-balanced by
several perspectives by using several test batteries, such
condition. The order of the season for each task was
as IQ tests, creativity tests, personality tests, and
randomized. We recorded the processes of his drawing
observations and interviews of art-making processes.
with two video cameras. He drew three or four pictures in
Viewing the state of creative study, in the present study,
his studio in a day. It took a total five days between June
we try to answer the question, “How does a painter create
and December to complete the field experiment. Usually
his/her works?” We offer a case study based on
it took about 20 to 30 minutes for him to finish a picture.
observations, interviews, and a field experiment with
In the third day of the experiment, he reported that he
1488
detailed cognitive analyses of the drawing processes of a

could not concentrate on drawing and drew just one
picture. In the second day of the experiment he thought a
picture in the BLANK condition was not good enough.
Therefore he drew another picture with the same theme
once more in the final day.
Goal of this study: This study describes the drawing
process of a Suibokuga painter through a field study.
Unlike laboratory experiments, field studies can be
problematic with regarding to variable control. In
addition, since this is a single case study, we also cannot
generalize our findings to all artists. However, through
field studies such as this, we can propose new hypotheses
or offer useful insights with high levels of ecological
validity. Especially, in domains where few previous
studies exist, starting from field studies can be very useful
in order to find important questions and hypotheses and to
lead to further research projects that follow realistic and
meaningful directions.

Results and Discussion
The following three main features were identified through
our field study;
(1) The painter seems to form a global image of the
drawing gradually as he draws each part one by
one;
(2) The painter draws pictures in fairly patterned ways.
Lines that the audience drew, however, seem to
create new constraints for his drawing and force
him to create new patterns;
(3) The painter often moves his brush in the air before
actually drawing lines on the paper. Based on our
data analyses, we describe three possible functions
of these movements.

Processes of Drawing Images
Mr. K draws his paintings very smoothly and quickly.
Although it might look as if he had already formed an
image of the entire picture before starting to draw, our
analyses of the drawing process and an interview with
him revealed that he starts drawing with a local image of
the picture. Then, he gradually forms a global image as he
draws each part one by one.
When we interviewed him just after he finished
drawing fusuma doors in the temple, he said, “ Not the
entire picture. Starting from here, the pine tree that I first
drew, then there and this bridge and here, then the cedar
trees above the stairway. Then the roof of the hat. I had an
image of only those parts at the beginning”(See Figure 1).
It seems that he does not form the entire image before he
starts drawing. How can he draw so smoothly without

forming the whole image or complete plans in his mind
before starting to draw? We analyzed his drawing
processes in detail to answer this question.
Figure 2 shows the process of his drawing on the
fusuma doors of the temple. The circled numbers on the
fusuma doors indicate where and in what order he drew.
The circled numbers on the tatami mats indicate where
and in what order he moved. We divided the process into
five sections based on his movements. The first four
sections were segmented when he moved backward to
survey the entire picture for more than one minute. The
rest of his drawing processes were combined into one
section, because he moved backward and forward very
often without long pauses. In the first section, he sat on a
tatami mat and started drawing a tree on the left-most part
of the fusuma door. After he drew the central part of the
left fusuma doors for about 22 minutes, he stepped back
in order to see the entire picture. Then he started drawing
on the second door from the right and paused to observe
what he drew many times. When this part of the picture
became more formed, he moved backward and looked at
the picture occasionally. At almost the end of his drawing
in the last section, he moved back and forth frequently,
adding a few lines here and there. This analysis of his
drawing processes and his interview in the temple
suggests that he gradually formed his plans for the
painting while he was drawing. Although this is a single
case analysis, we observed that he drew the fusuma doors
in this way on many other occasions.
Mr. K cannot look at the entire picture without
stepping backward when he draws on such big fusuma
doors. Although he can take in the entire picture when he
draws on a small-sized paper, he still has to spend a
certain amount of time planning and monitoring when he
draws, even though he can see the entire picture at a
glance. Therefore, we measured the duration and timing
of pauses in the data from the field experiment in order to
infer his planning and monitoring process as while
drawing. We divided drawing processes into small cycles.
One cycle consisted of the period from his soaking the
brush in the sumi ink plate, lifting up, drawing on the
paper, and soaking it in the ink plate again. We counted
the distribution of pauses by length and found that the
frequency drastically dropped above nine seconds. This
suggests that there might be some functional difference in
pauses shorter than nine seconds and those longer than
nine seconds. The frequent occurrence of the shorter
pauses probably indicates that he moves the brush from
one place to another or ink plate, etc. And, the less
frequent occurrence of the pauses longer than nine

Figure 1: Picture on fusuma doors at temple X
1489

seconds would mean that he spent time thinking about the
Fusuma doors

22
17

14
7 8 13 12
64 11
3 910
1
2 5
14 813 10 12
6
712345 9 11

Table 1: Mean number of pauses (nine or more
seconds) during drawing
Whole
drawing

16

20
21 1819

161718
19
222120

Tatami mats

1. Drew 22mins ， then moved
back.

26
2524
2625
2724
look

3.Drew 5mins ， then moved
back.

2.Drew 8mins, then moved back.

343031
33
3736
35
35
39
29
3433 30 37
29 31 35
38 36 32
39 look
look

4. After intermission ， drew
11mins，then moved back.

BLANK
condition
LINES
condition

First half: Before drawing
Second half
with lines

5.0

1.4 : 2.4

11.4

5.6 : 5.8

4.5

drawing in each condition, t (7) = -2.37, p = .050, t (7) = 1.80, p = .862 (See Table 1).
This suggests that he plans and monitors his drawing
through the entire process of drawing. There were more
pauses in the LINES condition than in the BLANK
condition, F (1, 7) = 19.166, p = .003. When we focused
on the frequency of pauses just before he drew from
random lines, we saw about the same frequency of the
pauses as a difference between each condition, F (1,7) =
3.163, p = .119. This probably means that he needs to
think about local drawing plans in order to incorporate
those random lines into his picture when he creates
pictures from random lines.
In summary, it appears that the painter plans and
monitors through the entire process of drawing. He first
forms a mental image of a small area (creates a local
drawing plan), and gradually forms the entire mental
image of the picture as he draws each object.

Lines as Constraints

Analyses of the contents and patterns of Mr. K’s drawing
suggest that he drew pictures in a fairly patterned way.
42 44
46
43
Through our observation, we found that he drew objects
50
48
one by one. In the field experiment, he started to draw his
paintings from a tree in fifteen out of the sixteen pictures.
Then rocks, houses, people and mountains followed. We
observed in many other occasions that he drew pictures in
48 46
50
42 50 44
the same way. It suggests that he uses some strategies in
order to draw certain objects in a relatively stable order in
43
51
various situations. However, when we interviewed him,
look
he said, “All of the pictures that I created from random
41 47
lines are more unique and nicer than those created in a
look
traditional way.” What kind of difference is there between
5.Moved
back
and
forth
both conditions? We investigated the differences in time
（5mins.）.
of drawing and the number of drawing cycles between
Figure2: Processes of drawing on the fusuma doors in
pictures in the LINES condition and pictures in the
temple X
BLANK condition (See Figure 3 and Table 2).
First, the mean time of drawing (except for the time of
pictures, planning and monitoring his drawing processes1.
painting shadows or shading ink lines which always
Table 1 shows the data from the field experiment.
occurs at the end of his drawings) was calculated in each
When counting pauses equal to or longer than nine
condition. In the BLANK condition, the mean time of
seconds, we found that there was about the almost same
drawing was about ten minutes (M = 640.13 sec, SD =
number of pauses in the first and the second half of his
170.91 sec), and, in the LINES condition, it was about
eighteen minutes (M = 1050.38 sec, SD = 199.40 sec).
1
The time of drawing in the LINES condition was
Our criterion gains plausibility from experiments in previous
significantly longer than the time of drawing in the
studies. For example, Chase & Simon (1973), with perception
and memory tasks in chess, presumed the long time interval
BLANK condition, t (14) = 3.87, p < .01. We also
while glancing chess pieces placed on the board was needed to
counted the number of drawing cycles in each condition
combine several chunks, and the short time interval to access to
and calculated the mean number. The mean number of
a single chunk. Thus, it is also reasonable to think that the
drawing cycles in the LINES condition was significantly
difference of time interval reflects upon the processes of
1490 higher than that in the BLANK condition, t (14) = 3.91, p
thinking during drawing.

Table2: Differences between the BLANK condition and
the LINES condition

Measures
Time of
drawing(sec)
Number of
drawing cycles
Time of one
cycle(sec)

BLANK
condition
Means and
(SDs)
640.13
(170.91)
30.0
(8.80)
23.3
(7.50)

LINES
condition
Means and
(SDs)
1050.38
(199.40)
43.5
(4.92)
25.5
(6.85)

p of t
Tests
< .01
< .01
n.s.

< .01. These results indicate that it takes more time and
more drawing cycles to create new pictures from random
lines.
This result suggests that these lines somehow
influenced drawing. Therefore, we investigated how these
lines were used in his drawing. There were fifteen random
lines drawn by the experimenters on each paper in the
LINES condition. With an average of 9.3 out of fifteen
lines, he would create new object starting from others
lines. In the other 5.7 instances he incorporated the
other’s line into an existing object. Thus, the random lines
triggered his drawing process and created new constraints
on his drawing.
There seemed to be some differences in terms of
quality between pictures in the LINES and BLANK
conditions. To check this possibility, we asked twenty
undergraduate students to rate their impressions of the
paintings using a semantic differential method.
The procedure is as follows: Twenty undergraduates
who did not major in art were presented pictures
randomly with twelve word pairs of opposite meaning as
a paper and pencil task. All words were adapted from
adjectives used in the study of emotions when
appreciating pictures (Ichihara, 1968) and interviews of
the painter. Subjects were asked to rate the pictures based
on a seven-point scale for each word pair.
Factor analysis with a principal factor solution was
used to create scales across the word pair items. The three
distinct factors with an eigenvalue above 1.0 were
recovered and the ratio of variance contribution was 65%.
These factors were rotated with Varimax and the factor
loading was calculated (See Table3).
Four items are strongly correlated with the first factor,
which we term good composition: modulated / nonmodulated; well composed / poorly composed; focused /
unfocused; and well-balanced / ill-balanced (alpha = .82).
The second factor, which we term liveliness, is strongly
correlated with the items: lively / dull; static / dynamic;
energetic / non-energetic; and powerful / power less
(alpha = .77). The final factor, which we term simplicity,
strongly correlated with the items: clear cut / mixed up;
simple / complex; relaxed / crowded; and light / heavy
(alpha = .73).
We conducted a single-sample version of Hotelling’s
T2 to compare their rating scores of paintings from the
two conditions (See Figure4).

Figure 3: Picture in the BLANK condition (top) and
picture in the LINES condition (bottom)
The mean scores of good composition and simplicity in
the BLANK condition were significantly higher than
those in the LINES condition, Fs (1, 159) = 93.838 and
28.479, respectively, ps < .001. This result indicates that
pictures in the BLANK condition are well composed.
Also, because there is fair amount of white space in these
pictures, it creates the impression of simple picture. The
painter draws the BLANK pictures with the style of
traditional Sansuiga paintings. On the other hand, the
mean score of liveliness in the LINES condition was
higher than that in the BLANK condition, F (1, 159) =
4.153, p < .05. This result indicates that pictures in the
LINES condition were characterized by liveliness and
were dynamic. Thus, the character of LINES pictures is
different from traditional Sansuiga paintings.
Mr. K also thinks that this way of drawing is more
exciting than the traditional way. When we interviewed
him asking why he wanted to draw from random lines, he
answered:
“Creating from random lines, I have to
incorporate the others’ world into my world... I
have to use them with my lines…Seriousness! I
enjoy playing this game in earnest. There is not
just myself. I get serious about drawing in this
way. Yes. I am highly motivated with this way.”
Thus, these lines seem to create new constraints for his
drawing and force him to create new patterns.

Roles of Hand Movements in Drawing Processes
From our observations in the field studies, we noticed that
the painter moved his brush in the air very often before he
actually drew lines on paper. We wondered why he did so.
This kind of hand movement is not unique to this
painter. For example, Henry Matisse moved his brush in a
similar way in the video, “Matisse: Voyage”. When we
talked with researchers in architectural design and in art
education, they agreed with us that painters or designers
often draw in the air before they draw on paper. This kind
of hand movement is not even unique to painters. Sasaki
& Watanabe (1983) also found that when writing Kanji
characters, Japanese people often moved their fingers in
1491 the air. They interpreted this phenomenon to mean that

Table3: Result of Factor Analysis
(Varimax rotated factor pattern)

25

LINES condition

BLANK condition

**

*

**

liveliness

simplicity

Liveliness

Good
composition

Score: ７------１
Modulated-Non-modulated
Focused--Unfocused
Well-balanced-Ill-balanced
Well-composed-Poorly-composed
Lively--Dull
Static--Dynamic
Energetic-Non-energetic
Powerful-Power less
Clear cut-Mixed up
Simple--Complex

Ⅰ

Ⅱ

Ⅲ

SMC

.70

.27

.05

.57

.80

.11

.13

.67

.80

.11

.16

.67

.79

.07

.15

.66

.13

.86

-.03

.75

.06

-.65

.28

.50

total score

20

15

10

5

0

good
composition

* < .05
** < .01

Figure4: Mean scores of three factors in each
condition. Error bars represent 1SD.

simplicity

the percentage of the drawing in each section is about the
same between the two conditions. In the beginning
section, the percentage of the drawing in the BLANK
.42
.62 -.31 .65
condition was 60% and that in the LINES condition was
56%. In the middle section, the percentage of drawing in
.56 -.15 .63
.72
the BLANK condition was 35% and that in the LINES
.29 -.16 .62
.49
was 36%. This indicated that Mr. K often draws in the air
at the beginning and middle of drawing cycles. Thus, it
Relaxed--Crowded
.37
.20
.70
.67
would be reasonable for us to assume that drawing in the
Light--Heavy
-.15 -.18 .75
.62
air has some important functions in drawing processes
since they occur before the painter actually draws on
Contributions
.410 .319 .271
paper.
Next, we focused on the relationship between pauses
people use their body to remember Kanji Characters.
and drawing in the air. The percentage of pauses with
Thus, it would be reasonable to hypothesize that moving
drawing in the air in the BLANK condition was 59% and
in the air would have some important function not only
that in the LINES condition was 86%. This suggests that
when writing Kanji characters but also when drawing
he often moves the brush in the air in order to think about
pictures.
drawing plans to incorporate lines into his picture.
We identified the timing of when he moved his brush in
Furthermore, in the LINES condition, the percentage of
the air to investigate the role of the movement in his
pauses with drawing in the air, when he added on to
drawing. The cycles of drawing that we mentioned above
others’ lines, was 97% and when he drew without adding
were divided into three sections in order to identify the
lines to others’ lines was 59%. These results suggest that
timing of his brush movement in the air. The first section,
by moving the brush in the air, he generates a mental
beginning section, was from his soaking the brush in the
image to facilitate incorporating others’ lines.
sumi ink plate until just before putting it on paper. The
In order to further investigate the function of the
second section, middle section, was from his starting to
drawing in the air, we interviewed him about his drawing
draw until finishing to draw. The final section, end
process while showing a video record of his drawing a
section, was from his lifting up the brush from the paper
Sansuiga picture. While watching a part of the videotape
until just before soaking it in the ink plate. Then, we
in which he was drawing in the air, he said to us,
counted the number of brush movements in the air for
“I might be checking how I feel when I touch the
brush. Umm… Is this my habit? I always do this,
each section.
don’t I...I may move my hand in the air to rehearse
The following coding scheme was used to identify brush
my brush stroke…I always draw in the air before
movements. If the painter moved his brush more than
starting to draw on the paper. This seems to be my
once in a circle in the air, except for changing the posture
habit, doesn’t it? Although I do not draw any
of holding his brush or moving the brush from one place
actual objects on the paper, through drawing the
to another, we identify the movement as drawing in the
form in the air, I can judge if the balance of the
air. A main coder coded the drawing processes of all
objects is OK. I have never realized my habit
before you pointed it out. But, now I noticed it…”
sixteen pictures. After being taught this scheme and
This quote tells us that he probably moves his hands in
practicing coding independently, another coder coded one
order to plan how to use his brush and actually draw the
picture. The consistency between two coders was 90%.
image of objects in his mind. This is a quite reasonable
The percentage of intra-coder consistency of the main
candidate function of this hand movement. But, we need
coder was 96%. Thus, the scheme was considered reliable.
to be careful before making any conclusions on this issue
Table 4 shows the mean number of drawing in the air
based on the data from this field study. It would be,
and the percentage in each section in each condition.
however, worth proposing some plausible hypotheses for
Although the frequency of drawing in the air in the
LINES condition is higher than in the BLANK condition, 1492 future research. At this moment we propose the following
.20

.85

.13

.77

Table 4: Percentage of drawing in the air in three
different sections

BLANK
condition
LINES
condition

Beginning
section
19.1
（60％）
29.0
（56％）

Middle
section
11.0
（35％）
18.5
（36％）

End
section
1.5
（5％）
4.0
（8％）

three functions as good candidates. First, by drawing in
the air, the painter decides where to put the brush on the
paper. We call this positioning. Second, the painter
rehearses his brush movement so that he can draw
smoothly. This is related to how to draw. We call this
rehearsal. Third, by drawing an object in the air, the
painter generates a mental image of what he plans to draw
next. We call this image generation.
We could not confirm these hypotheses with this field
study, because we could not control variables
systematically. Further studies are needed to investigate
the roles of drawing in the air.

embodied representation, Barsalou (1999) has argued that
sensorimotor processes, such as body movement, could
affect the cognitive processes. Similarly, body movement
in artistic creation, such as moving a brush in the air, also
seems to play an important role in creative processes. In
this way, artistic creation is a highly embodied process.
We could not make strong conclusions with this field
study, since we could not control variables systematically.
In addition, because this is a single case study, we also
cannot generalize our findings to artists. However, we
believe that our findings offer an essential first step
towards future studies of the process of artistic creation
from cognitive perspectives. We are currently conducting
other studies regarding the creative process of Japanese
contemporary artists in order to uncover potential
similarities and differences between traditional and
contemporary arts in an effort to generalize our
hypotheses.

References

Barsalou, L. W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 577-660.
Cawelti, S., Rappaport, A., & Wood, B. (1992). Modeling
artistic creativity: An empirical study. Journal of
General Discussion
Creative Behavior, 26 (2), 83-94.
This study focused on a traditional art, Chinese ink
Chase, W. G., & Simon, H. A. (1973). Perception in
painting. Mr. K has an enormous amount of knowledge of
chess. Cognitive Psychology, 4, 55-81.
the painting style and draws pictures using this
Csikszentmihalyi, M. & Getzels, J. W. (1971). Discoveryknowledge. However, knowledge is not enough to create
oriented behavior and the originality of creative
new pictures improvisationally and smoothly. When he
products: A study with artists. Journal of Personality
drew the picture in temple X, he went backward to look at
and Social Psychology, 19 (1), 47-52.
the entire picture. Also he occasionally covered this
Eindhoven, J. E., & Vinacke, W. E. (1952). Creative
picture in progress with his hands to narrow down the
processes in painting. The Journal of General
space of focus. That is, he limited the drawing space to
Psychology, 47, 139-164.
make planning or monitoring the picture easier. Thus, he
Getzels, J. W., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1976). The
could gradually form a mental image of a picture as the
creative vision: A longitudinal study of problem
actual drawing on the paper progresses.
finding in art. New York: Wiley.
Knowledge and skills accumulated in years of
Ichihara,Y. (1968). Kaigakansho no sinrigakutekikenkyu
expertise enable an artist to create artworks fairly quickly
(1): Semantic differential shakudo ni kansuru kenkyu
and smoothly. It seems that each brush of drawing evokes
[Psychological study of the appreciation pictures (I):
a local image of Suibokuga in Mr. K’s memory. He
on semantic differential scales]. The journal of social
creates his pictures combining those images based on
sciences and humanities. (Jimbungaku-ho), 62, 79-90.
certain rules that he learned from books or his experience.
Mace, M. A., & Ward, T. (2002). Modeling the creative
This process is highly effective when producing certain
process: A grounded theory analysis of creativity in the
kinds of artwork.
domain of art making. Creativity Research Journal, 14
On the other hand, artists often become bored while
(2), 179-192.
producing similar works too many times. When bored,
RM Arts, Le Centre Georges Pompidou, & La Sept.
artists want to try something new to stimulate their artistic
(Producer), & Baussy-Oulianoff, D. (Writer &
motivation. In this Suibokuga painter’s case, the method
Director). (1987). Matisse: Voyage [Video]. Chicago:
of asking the audience to draw random lines and
Home Vision Entertainment.
incorporating them into his own picture is one such
Sasaki, M., & Watanabe, A. (1983). “Kusho” kodo no
example. Creation of new patterns in artistic works seems
shutsugen to kino: Hyosho no undokankakuteki na
to emerge through artists’ intentional manipulation of
seibun ni tuite [An experimental study of spontaneous
constraints in a creation process. We found that even in a
writinglike behaviour ("Kusho") in Japanese].
case of traditional art, artists sometimes conduct this kind
Japanese Journal of Educational Psychology, 31 (4),
of manipulation intentionally.
273-282.
Artistic creation requires hands-on activities. Just
Suwa, M., & Tversky, B. (1997). What do architects and
having an image or a concept is not enough. In order to
students perceive in their design sketches? Design
implement an image or a concept into an actual artwork,
Studies, 18 (4), 385-403.
an artist needs to use his/her body. Sasaki et al. (1983)
Weisberg, R. W. (1993). Creativity: Beyond the myth of
suggested that people would imagine the figure of Kanji
genius. New York: W.H. Freeman.
characters by moving their hands. In the study of1493

