UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Constructing and Revising Mental Models of a Mechanical System: The role of domain
knowledge in understanding external visualizations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1b2463j5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Kriz, Sarah
Hegarty, Mary

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Constructing and Revising Mental Models of a Mechanical System:
The role of domain knowledge in understanding external visualizations
Sarah Kriz (kriz@psych.ucsb.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California
Santa Barbara, CA 93106 USA

Mary Hegarty (hegarty@psych.ucsb.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California
Santa Barbara, CA 93106 USA

Kalyuga, Chandler, & Sweller, 1998). These studies also
suggest that as a person becomes more familiar with a
domain, the reliance on textual explanations decreases.
However they have not specifically addressed which types
of information are best understood from diagrams and
animations by people with different amounts of background
knowledge.
The purpose of the present study is to examine how
understanding a mechanical system is achieved when visual
materials such as diagrams and animations are presented
without accompanying textual or verbal explanations. As
part of a larger research objective, we analyze how purely
visual materials are understood by both high and low
physics knowledge participants. By examining how people
with varying degrees of domain knowledge interpret visual
materials, we can design future materials containing verbal
descriptions that supplement informational gaps in the
visual displays. We assume that these informational gaps
will differ for low and high domain knowledge individuals,
therefore, this study focuses on how domain knowledge
contributes to the comprehension of visual materials
conveying a complex mechanical system.

Abstract
External visualizations such as diagrams and animations are
frequently used to teach people about the workings of
mechanical systems. The present study considers the types of
mental models that can be constructed from visual-spatial
(non-verbal) materials alone, and the extent to which people
revise their incorrect mental models. Comparing 10 high
physics knowledge participants to nine low physics
knowledge participants, we assessed how these two groups
constructed and revised mental models of a flushing cistern.
High domain knowledge participants extracted more
meaningful information from the materials, although their
initial models of the system were not as accurate as expected.
However, after answering comprehension questions and
viewing the learning materials again, high domain knowledge
participants were more likely to revise their mental models
into correct representations of the system, whereas the
participants with low domain knowledge continued to rely on
incorrect models. The discussion of these findings focuses on
how prior knowledge may contribute to understanding visual
instructional materials.

External visualizations (e.g., diagrams and computer
animations) are often used to inform people about how a
complex system behaves. Physical systems such as
machines are causally and temporally complex, and
understanding these systems depends on an appreciation of
the spatial relations between their components and how
these change over time. The spatial and temporal aspects of
mechanical movements can be illustrated directly via visualspatial representations, while the same information
presented in a verbal format might be more difficult to
understand.
It seems plausible that the design of external
visualizations could greatly affect one’s success at
extracting relevant information from the display. For
example, adding accompanying text that describes aspects
of phenomena presented in the visualizations may help in
providing additional information that a diagram alone could
not provide. Previous studies researching the integration of
text and diagrams have shown that people with low domain
knowledge or low spatial ability rely heavily on
accompanying textual descriptions (Hegarty & Just, 1993;

Constructing Mental Models
Creating a mental model of a complex system requires that a
person identify the parts involved, understand their causal
relationships, and relate the causal steps to the larger
functions of the system. Our cognitive model of how people
come to construct mental models from multimedia materials
follows that outlined by Narayanan & Hegarty (2002). To
summarize, there are five steps that a person must take to
understand a machine from multimedia presentations. First,
the system must be decomposed into individual
components. Second, the learner must make representational
connections to prior knowledge. Third, if verbal information
is present, a person is required to make further referential
connections between the visual media and the verbal
explanations. Then, she must determine the causal chain of
events. Finally, a dynamic mental model is constructed. In
the present experiment, we are particularly interested in the
second step-- how prior domain-related knowledge affects
the construction and revision of mental models.
738

We predict that, in accordance with previous studies
(Spilich et al., 1979; Chiesi, Spilich, & Voss, 1979; Lowe,
1994; 1999), high domain knowledge individuals will be
more likely to construct initial mental models that
incorporate high-level functional understanding, whereas
people lacking domain-related knowledge will focus on the
movements of the parts on a local level. Additionally, we
expect the level of domain knowledge to influence the
extent to which models are revised. Assuming that learning
is an iterative process of understanding (Miyake, 1986),
how people move from a state of understanding to a state of
non-understanding may depend on their level of domainrelated knowledge. As previous studies have shown (Chi,
2000; Chi et al., 1994), it is when conflicts between internal
models and external information occur that people are more
likely to revise their internal mental models. We propose
that conflicts are more likely to be perceived by people with
high domain knowledge because they are at an
informational advantage for meaningfully evaluating their
models.

(physically correct) model works according to the physical
process of siphoning. As explained above, a siphon occurs
when liquid in an enclosed system moves, via a pressure
differential, from a point of high pressure to a point of lower
pressure. In the case of the British toilet tank shown in
Figure 1, a siphon enables water to continuously flow up
and back down the large pipe in the middle in order to exit
the tank. The siphon is broken when air, which is lighter
than water, enters the enclosed system. This breaks the
pressure differential, and the water flow out of the pipe
stops.
The incorrect model of this system involves the disks as
the main stopping agents. Participants with incorrect models
may or may not understand the initialization of the siphon
process. Their model is characterized, however, by the
function of the disks. The incorrect model assumes that the
water stops flowing out of the tank because the upper disk
falls on the lower disk and creates a water-tight barrier, or
seal. As Figure 1 illustrates, the two disks do not touch
when the lower disk falls. If they did, air would not be able
to enter. Therefore, the visual materials that participants
view are in direct conflict with this model.
Many participants do not offer an explanation for how
water starts and stops flowing from the tank to the bowl. A
possible reason for this omission is that they have an
informational “gap” (Chi, 2000) in their mental model. In
other words, they are missing the knowledge necessary to
explain the causal relationship between activity in the tank
and the stopping of exiting water. However, it is quite
possible that this process is, in fact, represented in their
mental models but was simply not explained during the
protocol. Because there was no method for empirically
differentiating between these two possibilities, these cases
were not considered in analyses.

Three Types of Mental Models
The stimulus used in this experiment was a British model of
a toilet tank. While the purpose of the system is the same as
an American model (i.e., to flush water into the toilet bowl),
the mechanism used to accomplish this function differs
vastly from its American counterpart. Thus, we assume that
the participants in our experiment (American college
students) did not have prior knowledge of the mechanism
that they studied in this experiment.
Specifically, the main difference is the manner in which
water exits the tank into the bowl. In the British model,
water exits the tank through a siphon process. The siphon
process begins when two disks (located at the bottom of the
bell in the middle of the diagram) are pushed together (by
pulling the handle) and push water up through the main
siphon pipe. As water flows up the siphon pipe and down
into the toilet bowl, the siphon process begins. This enables
water to flow through the siphon pipe without the aid of the
disks. The process ends when the water level in the tank
falls below the siphon bell, and air enters the siphon pipe.
This is reflected in Figure 1.

Method
Participants
Nineteen adults (10 high domain knowledge, 9 low domain
knowledge) volunteered for the study as paid participants.
The high domain knowledge (HDK) participants were
UCSB graduate students from Mechanical Engineering or
Material Science, with the exception of one participant, who
was the staff lab manager of the undergraduate Mechanical
Engineering lab. All experts held Bachelors degrees in
engineering or physics and had been studying physics and
engineering for a mean of 6.4 years (range 5-8 years). It was
assumed that the HDK group had knowledge of pressure
differentials and siphoning, as these topics are covered in
undergraduate physics and engineering courses.
The low domain knowledge (LDK) participants were
UCSB graduate students from Social Sciences, Art,
Humanities, or Biology, and all considered themselves
physics novices. Four had taken introductory physics in
high school and one had taken freshman physics in college.
None had taken engineering courses.

Figure 1: Air enters and stops the siphon process.
Data from this and previous experiments (e.g., Hegarty,
Kriz, & Cate, 2003), indicate that people construct one of
two types of mental models of the flushing cistern. The first
739

was not predefined by the researcher, and participants were
allowed as much time as they needed to formulate their
answers before reporting. When they were ready,
participants reported what they saw as “events.” This
portion of the session was video taped for later analysis.

Materials and Apparatus
Participants viewed a variety of visual displays depicting a
toilet tank either in a resting state or in motion. The labeled
static diagram showed a color picture of the toilet tank in its
resting state and included labels naming the mechanical
parts. The unlabeled static diagram was identical to the
labeled version, but without the labels. The four phases
static diagram was a series of four diagrams displayed
together. Each diagram showed a different phase of the
flushing process. The labeled, unlabeled, and four phases
diagrams were all viewed as PowerPoint slides.
Three animations were also available to the participants.
All of the animations consisted of a series of 134 bitmap
images. The computer-controlled animation was displayed
in Macromedia Flash MX and played at a rate of 6 frames
per second. The participant pressed a button with the mouse
in order to begin playing, but otherwise had no control over
the speed or the direction of the animation. The participantcontrolled animation with arrows was run in a Quicktime
player, which allows one to control the speed and direction
in which a video file plays. In both animations, arrows
appeared at various points to indicate a part’s direction of
movement or to signal an important event. The participantcontrolled animation without arrows was identical to the
other participant-controlled animation except it did not
contain arrows.
All materials were displayed on a 17” desktop monitor at
1024x768 resolution.

Results
Constructing Initial Mental Models
In order to assess participants’ initial mental models of the
system, we evaluated the first written question, in which
participants described the step-by-step process of a flush.
The two groups’ responses showed both quantitative and
qualitative differences. As Figure 2 shows, the HDK
participants reported on average four more steps than the
LDK participants, and this difference reached significance:
M = 16.8 v. M = 12.8; t(17) = 3.176, p < .05. This difference
indicates that the HDK individuals were able to extract
more information from the visual materials.
20

Steps

16
12
8
4

Procedure

0

Participants sat in front of the computer and were told, “You
are going to view diagrams and animations that illustrate a
toilet tank, but note that this is not an American model.
Please view the materials and learn how the system works.
You have as much time as you need to study the materials.”
They were then shown the six visual learning aids. The
researcher briefly explained each learning aid, without
mentioning the presence or absence of arrows in the
animations, and demonstrated how to manipulate the
controls of the Quicktime Player.
After viewing the material, the monitor was turned off
and participants were given a booklet of comprehension
questions. The first question asked to explain step-by-step
what happens in the toilet tank after the handle is pushed.
The next four questions were troubleshooting questions, in
which novel breakdown scenarios were described. The
participants were required to generate as many responses as
possible that would account for the breakdown of the
system. The final four questions were function questions
that asked about the function of specific parts of the
mechanical system. Participants were asked to provide
written answers at their own pace.
Upon finishing the written portion of the experiment, the
participants were then asked to view the visual materials
again. The participant-controlled animation without arrows
was displayed and participants were asked to orally report to
the researcher where events began and ended. An “event”

High Domain Knowledge Low Domain Knowledge

Figure 2: Mean number of steps in written responses.
Furthermore, the types of events that were mentioned by
each group differed. The majority of participants (i.e., seven
participants or more) in both groups reported eight common
steps. However, the HDK participants tended to mention
steps that the LDK students did not mention. (See Table 1.)
Of note, the HDK participants tended to focus on the rising
and falling of the water level, and that focus was not evident
in the majority of the LDK participants’ written reports.
To evaluate the accuracy of participants’ initial mental
models, the step-by-step written reports were evaluated for
steps that reflected correct, incorrect, or unstated models of
the siphon process. If participants mentioned the siphon
process beginning when the disks pushed the water up the
siphon pipe and ending when air entered the system, their
models were considered correct. Incorrect models were
those in which the disks were reported as stopping the water
from leaving the tank. Finally, a mental model was coded as
“not stated” if participants made no mention of the how the
water stopped flowing out of the tank. As Table 2 shows,
the distribution of initial model types did not differ at all
between the two groups.
740

In their oral reports, the majority of participants in each
group (at least 7) mentioned three steps that were not in
their written reports. For the LDK participants, these
included: (1) the lower disk moves up, (2) the lower disk
falls down, and (3) water stops flowing into the siphon pipe.
The three events that the majority of HDK participants
mentioned in their oral reports but not in their written
response were: (1) water flows into the toilet bowl, (2) the
siphoning process begins, and (3) the siphoning process is
broken. The striking difference between the two groups is in
the perceptibility of the added steps. The three steps
commonly added by the LDK participants are directly
perceptible from the animation, which they were allowed to
view while giving their reports. On the other hand, the HDK
group added steps that were not directly perceptible from
the animation, but instead involved higher-level processes
and functions.
The number of participants in each group who changed
from one model to another is shown in Table 2. As is
evidenced in this table, the majority of the HDK participants
moved from an incorrect or unstated model to a correct
model. Whereas two HDK participants began the study with
a physically correct model, eight of the ten finished the
study with this model. That is, they orally reported that the
siphon phenomenon, not the disks, ends the outflow
process. Contrary to this, the LDK participants show no
clear pattern of model revision. Many of their final models
remain incorrect. In sum, the steps reported in the written
response compared to the oral response clearly showed
signs of model revision in the HDK sample, whereas no
pattern was evident in the LDK data.

Table 1: Steps mentioned by at least 7 participants in their
step-by-step written responses.
Steps
Push down on the handle
The upper disk moves up
The lower disk moves up
Water enters siphon pipe
The upper disk moves down
The lower disk moves down
Water level falls below siphon bell
Water level lowers in tank
Float lowers
Inlet valve opens
Water flows from inlet pipe to tank
Water level rises
Float rises
Inlet valve closes

HDK
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x

LDK
x
x
x
x

x
x
x
x
x

Data from the troubleshooting and function question
responses reveal, however, that high and low knowledge
participants did differ on how strongly they relied on
incorrect models in later comprehension questions. Figure 3
reflects the mean number of troubleshooting and function
question answers that contained the incorrect model. The
data indicate that the LDK participants used incorrect
mental models significantly more often than the HDK
participants to account for system breakdowns and overall
functions of the tank: M= 3.4 v. M=1.6; t(17)=2.535, p<.05.

Discussion

Responses

6
5

Initial Models

4

The results of this study indicate that HDK participants
were able to extract more information about the flushing
cistern system from the visual materials provided. They not
only reported more initial steps than the LDK individuals,
but were also better at integrating higher-level causal
changes, such the rising and falling of the water level, into
their initial reports. As predicted, and following previous
findings on reasoning with external visualizations (Lowe,
1994; 1999), the LDK participants’ step-by-step reports
revolved around small mechanistic movements and did not
indicate a functional understanding of the system.
A comparison of HDK and LDK participants’ written
protocols revealed that the types of models constructed
initially were similarly distributed across the two groups.
This result was rather surprising, given that we expected the
engineers to fully comprehend the siphon process upon
viewing the materials. Additionally, we expected reading
the label “siphon pipe” to prime this siphon schema. Our
findings conflict with previous accounts of experts solving
physics problems (Chi, Feltovich, & Glaser, 1981), as well
as lay beliefs that people trained in a certain domain are able

3
2
1
0
High Domain Knowledge Low Domain Knowledge

Figure 3: Mean number of troubleshooting and function
responses conveying incorrect model.

Revising Mental Models
Although the written step-by-step responses and the orally
presented event structure responses resulted from slightly
different tasks, a paired samples t-test yielded no significant
differences for either group in the number of steps
mentioned between the two tasks. Thus, we were able to
compare the written and oral reports in order to assess
model revisions.

741

Table 2: Summary of Initial and Final Models.
HDK
E01
E02
E03
E04
E05
E06
E07
E08
E09
E10

Initial Model
Correct
Incorrect
Not Stated
Not Stated
Correct
Incorrect
Incorrect
Not Stated
Incorrect
Incorrect

Final Model
Correct
Incorrect
Correct
Correct
Correct
Incorrect
Integrated1
Correct
Correct
Correct

LDK
N02
N03
N04
N05
N06
N07
N08
N09
N10

to understand domain-related phenomena quickly and
easily. As evidenced by their later oral reports, the engineers
were able to spontaneously report the siphon process,
indicating that they had the relevant domain-knowledge, yet
they did not grasp the process in their initial viewing of the
materials.
Here we offer a possible explanation for why many of the
HDK participants did not incorporate the siphon process
into their initial mental models. In the initial viewing phase
of the experiment, participants were trying to integrate their
prior domain-related knowledge with the external
visualizations in order to create a cohesive causal model of
the system. Because the HDK individuals have a larger
body of prior knowledge than the LDK participants, they
have more explanations in competition. Two sources of
knowledge that may contribute to the understanding or
misunderstanding of how water stops exiting the tank are:
(1) domain-specific knowledge about a siphon process and
pressure differential, as described previously, and (2)
domain-general knowledge of “damming.” From experience
with the real world, we know that flowing liquid can be
stopped by solid objects. Integrating the damming principle
with the external visualizations leads to the incorrect model
of the disks blocking the outgoing water. This integration of
domain-general information seems to be how LDK
individuals reason about the flushing cistern. Although both
explanations were available to the HDK participants, the
domain-specific explanation may not have been adequately
cued by the visual materials. Thus, the HDK relied on their
domain-general knowledge until they had reason to switch
to using domain-specific understanding. This explanation is
purely speculative, and further studies exploring these issues
need to be conducted.

Initial Model
Incorrect
Incorrect
Not Stated
Correct
Incorrect
Incorrect
Incorrect
Not Stated
Not Stated

Final Model
Not Stated
Incorrect
Incorrect
Not Stated
Incorrect
Incorrect
Incorrect
Not Stated
Incorrect

differed across the groups. Although both groups did, on
average, add three steps that were not present in the majority
of the initial models, the steps differed qualitatively across
the groups. The LDK participants seemed to perform
“model addition” after answering the comprehension
questions and reviewing the visual materials. They added
visually salient information that was left out of their initial
models. However, the LDK participants did not change their
model to the correct model. Moreover, the sealing of the
disks continued to be the dominant view of how the water
stopped exiting the tank, even though this explanation was
in direct conflict with what was shown in the visual
materials. These findings are consistent with previous
findings that LDK individuals do not integrate functional
information into their mental models (Spilich et al., 1979;
Chiesi, Spilich, & Voss, 1979; Lowe, 1994; 1999) and that
they tend to stay at a kinematic/behavioral level of
explanation, even after spending additional time with the
learning materials (Hale & Barsalou, 1995).
The HDK participants in this study can be described as
truly revising their mental models. Rather than simply
adding perceptually salient steps to their final models, the
majority of HDK participants changed their models to
include the beginning siphon process and the correct
explanation for the ending of the siphon process. The HDK
participants did not tend to rely as heavily on their initial
incorrect model while answering the troubleshooting and
function questions. This indicates that the HDK group was
more flexible in generating other responses to the questions,
possibly because they had more prior knowledge available
to them.
There are many possible explanations of how the revision
process occurred. Because a variety of activities took place
between the initial written step-by-step explanations and the
final oral reports, we can only speculate on the possible
causes of revision. One possibility is that the
troubleshooting and function questions lead the HDK group
to internal conflicts within their models. Troubleshooting

Model Revision
While the distribution of both groups’ initial model types
were found to be relatively similar, analyses of their final
oral reports revealed that the model revision process
1

The participant incorporated both the correct and incorrect models
into his final model.

742

questions can be used to induce causal knowledge of a
system (Hale & Barsalou, 1995), and can also be used to
judge deep comprehension (Graesser & Olde, 2003). While
providing responses to these questions, HDK participants
might have become aware of conflicts between their initial
mental model and the possible explanations for the
breakdown scenarios presented in the troubleshooting
questions. Alternatively, viewing the visual materials a
second time may have contributed to model revision. As the
HDK participants were able to compare their mental models
to the information presented in the visual tools, they may
have realized inconsistencies in their models.
The LDK group, on the other hand, did not seem to
experience conflicts between their models and their
troubleshooting and function responses, nor between their
models and the external representations. Although their
models conflicted with what was shown in the learning
materials, none of the participants explicitly identified a
conflict. These participants may have refrained from
revising their mental models even after re-viewing the
materials because they began to rely on their mental models
as perceptual evidence (Rozenblit & Keil, 2002). The HDK
group, on the other hand, seemed to be more sensitive to
conflicts between their mental models and information that
did not match.

References
Chi, M. (2000). Self-explaining expository texts: The dual
process of generating inferences and repairing mental
models. In R. Glaser (Ed.), Advances in Instructional
Psychology: Vol 5. Educational Design and Cognitive
Science (pp. 161-238). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Chi, M. de Leeuw, N., Chiu, M., LaVancher, C. (1994).
Eliciting self-explanations improves understanding.
Cognitive Science, 18, 439-477.
Chi, M., Feltovich, P., & Glaser, R. (1981). Categorization
and representation of physics problems by experts and
novices. Cognitive Science, 5, 121-152.
Chiesi, H., Spilich, G., Voss, J. (1979). Acquisition of
domain-related information in relation to high and low
domain knowledge. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 18, 257-273.
Graesser, A. & Olde, B. (2003). How does one know
whether a person understands a device? The quality of the
questions the person asks when the device breaks down.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 95(3), 524-536.
Hale, C. & Barsalou, L. (1995). Explanation content and
construction during system learning and troubleshooting.
Journal of the Learning Sciences, 4(4), 385-436.
Hegarty, M. & Just, M. (1993). Constructing mental models
of machines from text and diagrams. Journal of Memory
and Language, 32, 717-742.
Hegarty, M., Kriz, S., & Cate, C. (2003). The roles of
mental animations and external animations in
understanding mechanical systems. Cognition and
Instruction, 21(4), 325-360.
Kalyuga, S., Chandler, P., & Sweller, J. (1998). Levels of
expertise and instructional design. Human Factors, 40(1),
1-17.
Lowe, R. (1994). Selectivity in diagrams: Reading beyond
the lines. Educational Psychology, 14(4), 467-491.
Lowe, R. (1999). Extracting information from an animation
during complex visual learning. European Journal of
Psychology of Education, 14(2), 225-244.
Miyake, N. (1986). Constructive interaction and the iterative
process of understanding. Cognitive Science, 10, 151-177.
Narayanan, N. H. & Hegarty, M. (2002). Multimedia design
for communication of dynamic information. International
Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 57(4), 279-315.
Rozenblit, L. & Kiel, F. (2002). The misunderstood limits of
folk science: An illusion of explanatory depth. Cognitive
Science, 26, 521-562.
Spilich, G., Vesonder, G., Chiesi, H., Voss, J. (1979). Text
processing of domain-related information for individuals
with high and low domain knowledge. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 18, 275-290.

Conclusion
This study demonstrates the limitations of visual materials
such as diagrams and animations for communicating about
how machines work. Although the animations showed how
the parts of the mechanism move when it is in operation,
LDK individuals were unable to construct an accurate
mental model from the visual materials, and tended to
construct erroneous mental models that were in fact
inconsistent with what they viewed. Most HDK individuals
were able to construct the correct mental model eventually,
but this took some time and occurred only after engaging in
other activities such as answering troubleshooting and
function questions.
The results of this study suggest that materials designed
for low domain knowledge participants must explicitly
describe the siphon process (e.g., through language), while
materials targeting learners with adequate domain
knowledge may need to merely induce these learners to
access the relevant domain information they already
possess. Thus, examining the mental models constructed
from visual materials alone can provide insights into the
design of instructional materials for individuals with
different amounts of background knowledge, and suggest
when and how visual-spatial instruction materials should be
supplemented by verbal instruction.

Acknowledgments
This research is supported by the Office of Naval Research
grant number N00014-03-1-0119.
743

