UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Coordination of Component Mental Operations in Sequences of Discrete Responses

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4406d3tf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Wu, Schu-Chieh
Remington, Roger W.
Pashler, Harold

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Coordination of Component Mental Operations
in Sequences of Discrete Responses
Shu-Chieh Wu (scwu@mail.arc.nasa.gov )
Roger W. Remington (roger.w.remington@nasa.gov)
NASA Ames Research Center, Mail Stop 262-4
Moffett Field, CA 94035 USA

Harold Pashler (hpashler@ucsd.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093 USA
Abstract
In daily life we often perform sequences of actions, which
with practice are accomplished by overlapping mental
operations for successive actions. Is it possible to derive
performance predictions for such sequences from a
characterization of the mental operations for a single
stimulus-response pair? We explore this by examining the
joint timing of eye movements and manual responses in a
typing-like task following Pashler (1994). Participants made
separate choice responses to a series of five stimuli spread
over a wide viewing area. Replicating Pashler’s results,
responses to the first stimulus (RT1) were elevated, with
inter-response intervals (IRI) for subsequent items rapid and
flat across items. The eyes moved toward the next letter about
800 ms before the corresponding manual response (eye-hand
span). Analyses of manual responses show multiple
components to the RT1 elevation. Analyses of dwell times
show that the eyes move to the next stimulus before the
completion of all central processing.

Introduction
Current frameworks of human performance modeling often
follow traditional theories of human cognition, treating
human behavior as a succession of stages composed from a
limited number of component mental operations, such as
perceptual, cognitive and motor processes. The nature and
duration of these mental operations are derived from studies
of response time in discrete tasks, which often last less than
one second. In the real world, however, tasks are rarely
completed with a single discrete action. Rather, they often
require the performance of a series of discrete actions
integrated into a fluid behavior sequence in response to
multiple stimuli during an extended period of time. In the
transition from discrete to continuous new behaviors
emerge, not previously observed, such as coordination and
overlapping among component mental operations. It is an
important question for human performance modeling
whether models of single-task performance, described at the
level of elementary mental operations, are sufficient to
characterize behavior in extended, fluid sequences.
The successes of current human performance modeling
suggest the answer is yes, at least for highly skilled behavior
(e.g., Gray et al., 1991; Matessa et al., 2002). Coordination
and overlapping among component operations are simulated
by enforcing logical dependencies among operations

distributed across different resources, interleaving upcoming
operations in the slack time created by queued bottleneck
processes, and allowing operations from different resources
to proceed concurrently. The success of this approach
depends on the underlying assumption that component
mental operations inferred from discrete task performance
do not function differently in extended task environments.
This assumption has yet to be tested. Also, success has been
achieved for tasks that are largely perceptual-motor, with
good fits obtaining after about 100 contiguous trials (e.g.,
John et al., 2002).
The goal of the present research is to investigate the
coordination of component mental operations in extended
task sequences that require a sequence of simple choice
responses. To better contrast the coordination among
component operations that may arise in extended task
performance with the simple progression through set stages
thought to underlie discrete task performance, we choose an
extended task that consists of a monotonic sequence of
identical discrete tasks. This approach helps place the
emphasis on the coordination among component operations
of different instances of the same task rather than among
different tasks. Of all possible cases of coordination, we are
especially interested in how movements of the eyes are
coordinated with other underlying mental operations. Eye
movements are an integral part of most cognitive activities.
Their effortless and seamless integration with other
components of task performance provides possibly the best
example of coordination and the most challenging task for
human performance modelers. Yet in existing frameworks
the implementation of eye movements (or gaze resources)
tends to be greatly simplified. In addition, the way by which
eye movements are used is usually based on empirical
findings from task conditions where eye movements are
specifically made to meet instructions rather than generated
naturally in accord with task goals. Little has been known
on how task-driven eye movements are coordinated with the
succession of stages and processes thought to characterize
the underlying mental operations.
In this paper, we present our recent work on how eye
movements are integrated with underlying component
mental operations in extended tasks. We begin by reviewing
existing literature on extended task performance with eye
movement measures. Then we present the results of two
earlier extended task experiments, followed by a new

1476

experiment designed to address specific issues raised by the
previous work. In the end, we discuss the implications of
our results with an emphasis on how they inform us on
modeling human performance in extended tasks.

Eye movements in extended tasks
Although eye movements occur naturally in almost all daily
activities, to characterize the patterns of eye movements
researchers in the past have focused activities with a clear
script. Examples of such activities range from golf putting
(Vickers, 1992), driving (Land & Lee, 1994), to tea making
(Land & Hayhoe, 2001), and block-copying (Pelz et al.,
2001). A common finding in such observations is that the
eyes move in anticipation of upcoming actions during
activities that involve scripted behavior.
The existence of preview in extended task performance
characterizes the proactive nature of eye movement control.
In tasks that require mostly non-visually based decisions, it
seems intuitive that the eyes could move away prior to the
response as soon as information acquisition is completed.
But, when can the eyes move and what determines it?
Answers to these questions are critical to understanding the
coordination between eye movements and other mental
operations. As typical fixation durations generally range
from 200 to 400 ms, exceeding the time needed for
perceptual registration, which can be estimated at around
100 to 150 ms (Salthouse & Ellis, 1980), this suggests that
certainly other variables are involved.

Previous Research
Previously, we (Wu & Remington, 2004) examined the
coordination between ongoing mental processing and the
generation of eye movements in a task requiring multiple
manual responses to multiple stimuli on each trial.
Specifically, we were interested in two empirical questions.
First, in an extended task with multiple stimuli to be
responded to, when do the eyes move away from a
stimulus? Second, in such an extended task how is the
processing sequence affected by difficulty manipulations at
separate stages? By independently varying the difficulty of
perceptual and central stages we can determine which is on
the critical path for the sequence of responses.
We adopted a typing-like task introduced by Pashler
(1994). Participants viewed a series of five letters
sequentially and responded to each individually in different
preview conditions. Pashler manipulated preview to test
how the mental processing of two or more stimuli were
overlapped in time. He measured the reaction time (RT) to
the first stimulus (RT1) and computed the inter-response
intervals (IRIs) for subsequent responses. With no preview,
RT1 and subsequent IRIs were roughly equivalent and
constant across the stimulus sequence. With preview, RT1
was elevated, compare to no preview, while IRIs were
constantly low. The same effects were observed regardless
of whether 1 or 4 preview items were presented. Pashler
interpreted the constant IRIs as an indication of a bottleneck
central processing stage of response selection, which would
only allow the selection of one response at a time. The fact
that IRIs reflected the duration of response selection is
further supported by the findings that varying the duration

of stimulus recognition and response production had little to
modest effect on the durations of IRIs.
Pashler’s (1994) task presents a simple example of the
operations of three critical mental components (perception,
response selection, and response production) and a clear
theoretical account for the coordination among them. In this
case, characterization of a single task was sufficient to
account for the IRI results without further assumptions. The
model, however, did not predict the elevated RT1. The
experimental paradigm represents a good compromise
between the simplicity of typical discrete trial experiments,
and real-world behavior.
In our previous work, we adopted Pashler’s complete
preview condition and incorporated an eye movement
component by reducing the size of stimulus letters and
increasing the separation between them. Identification of
stimulus letters thus required successive saccades and
fixations. In two separate experiments, we examined
response time, dwell time (fixation duration), and eye-hand
span associated with manipulation of the duration of
perception and response selection stages.
Our first experiment examined the effect of perceptual
difficulty on dwell time. Perceptual difficulty was
manipulated by having two luminance conditions for the
stimuli, Dim and Bright (5.2 and 46.2 cd/m2, respectively).
Participants made sequential fixations to each of the five
stimulus characters randomly drawn from the set T, D, and
Z, and made choice responses accordingly. Those three
letters were mapped to three response keys (V, B, and N) on
a PC keyboard and assigned to the first three digits of the
right hand. We measured the manual RT to each of the five
stimuli and the IRIs. In addition, we derived three eye
movement related measures: 1) eye-hand spans, which
represent the elapsed time between the initial fixation on a
particular stimulus to the moment when the corresponding
manual response is generated; 2) dwell time, which
represents the duration for which fixation is maintain on a
particular stimulus; and 3) release-hand spans, which
represent the elapsed time between the end of fixation on a
particular stimulus to the moment when the manual
response is generated. In fact, dwell times and release-hand
spans make up eye-hand spans.
Figure 1 shows mean manual RTs, eye-hand spans, and
dwell times as a function of stimulus in our first experiment.
The pattern of manual RT results resembled what Pashler
(1994) found in conditions with preview; specifically, the
elevation of RT1 and constantly short IRIs of subsequent
responses. The effect of perceptual difficulty was minimal
on RT1/IRIs and appeared to be restricted to S1. Dwell time
was lengthened in the Dim condition, though the amount of
increase did not reach statistical significance. Results of this
experiment confirmed that dwell time encompasses
perceptual processes.
Our second experiment examined the effect of response
selection difficulty on dwell time. The difficulty of response
selection was manipulated by using two sets of stimuli to
create two mapping conditions. One set included four
alphabets T, D, Z, and Q mapped in this arbitrary order onto
keys V, B, N, and M, and assigned to the four digits of the
right hand; another set included digits 1, 2, 3, and 4 mapped
in this natural order to the same four keys and fingers.

1477

1400

Dim
Bright
Dim
Bright

Dim
Bright

Time (ms)

1200

Eye-hand span

1000
800
RT1/IRIs
600
400

Dwell time
S1 S2 S3 S4 S5

S1 S2 S3 S4 S5

Figure 1. Results of Wu & Remington (2004), Experiment 1
Figure 2 shows mean manual RTs, eye-hand spans, and
dwell times as a function of stimulus in our second
experiment. Again, the manual RT results replicated the
general pattern observed in our first experiment and in
Pashler’s (1994) study; RT1 was elevated, and IRIs were
constant and rapid. In addition, mapping difficulty had a
strong effect on manual as well as oculomotor responses.
Difficult response mapping resulted in increases in IRIs. It
also significantly increased dwell times. Results from this
experiment suggest that fixation durations appear to include
response selection related processes as well.

Present Experiment
Results from our previous work (Wu & Remington, 2004)
provided some answers to the questions posed earlier. In an
extended task such as this, the eyes move away at some
point during the response selection stage but definitely after
completion of the perceptual stage. Results from our

1400
1200

Apparatus The experiment was conducted using a PC with
a 21-inch monitor. Participants were seated in a comfortable
chair with their head secured on a head-and-chin rest placed
53.5 cm in front of the monitor. Eye movements were
recorded with an infra-red video-based eye tracking system
(ISCAN), which outputs data at a temporal resolution of 120
Hz and a spatial resolution of approximately 0.5˚ visual
angle.

Time (ms)

Eye-hand span
1000
800
RT1/IRIs
600
400

Dwell time
S1 S2 S3 S4 S5

S1 S2 S3 S4 S5

previous work also featured some unexpected patterns of
coordination between the eyes and the hand. One in
particular is the interrelated temporal constraint among
Figure 2. Results of Wu & Remington (2004), Experiment 2

Method
Participants Fourteen undergraduate students recruited
from local colleges near NASA Ames Research Center
participated in the experiment for course credits.

Easy
Hard
Easy
Hard

Easy
Hard

dwell times, IRIs and eye-hand spans. Except for the Hard
mapping conditions in the second experiment, dwell times
were mostly constant across stimuli, as were IRIs. In other
words, the eyes dwell for a constant duration, and the hand
releases responses also at a constant but faster rate. This
leads to the observed decrease in eye-hand span across
stimuli.
The response of RT1 to the Easy and Hard mapping
conditions was also unexpected. Though we always see an
elevated RT1, its increase of approximately 400 ms in the
hard condition was about twice the increase in IRI and dwell
time, which were both about 200 ms. This means that the
dwell time did not fully accommodate the increase in RT1.
Certainly, this is difficult to account for in a model that
assumes that eye movements are triggered at a fixed point in
processing. It is difficult to speculate about the reasons for
the greater increase without more information about the
source of the general elevation of RT1 seen in all our
experiments. Thus, the present experiment was designed in
part to investigate variables responsible for elevated RT1. In
particular we examine the role of planning for a sequence of
responses or fixations.
We also attempt to vary the central difficulty within a
trial. One explanation for constant IRIs is that the earlier
responses are delayed in order to be coordinated with stages
in the processing of the subsequent response. It follows that,
if no subsequent response is required, eye-hand spans
should not be elevated. In the present experiment, we vary
central difficulty using a Go/No-Go procedure. On each
trial, only 2 or 3 positions contained target characters
mapped with a key response. The rest were filled with
dummy characters and participants were asked to skip them.
We compare dwell time on Go and No-Go responses, and
eye-hand spans on Go responses that are preceded and/or
followed by No-Go responses to evaluate the impact of
central difficulty.

Stimuli and Display The primary stimulus display
consisted of a row of five small characters (letters or
symbols) spread over a wide viewing area. The characters
were spaced equally (5.5˚ apart) and centered on the middle
of the display. Each character subtended 0.34˚ in height and
was presented at 11.7 cd/m2.
Design and Procedure Each trial began with the
presentation of a white fixation cross (0.3˚) in the center of
the display. After the participant had maintained fixation

1478

Results and Discussion
Figure 3 presents mean manual RTs and eye-hand spans as a
function of stimulus. Cases where RT1 occurred to S1 (S1RT1) are plotted separately from cases where RT1 occurred
to S2 (S2-RT1). We discuss manual responses and eye
fixations separately.

Eye-hand spans

RT1/IRIs
TXXTT
TTXXT
TTTXX
XTXXT
XTTXX
XTTTX

1200
1000

Time (ms)

within a 6˚ radius around the fixation for 500 ms, the
fixation was erased and a small filled square (0.34˚)
appeared at the leftmost stimulus position. Participants were
instructed to move their eyes to fixate the small square when
it appeared and maintain fixation at that location. The small
square remained for 1 sec, followed by a blank interval of
500 ms. Then the five stimulus characters appeared
simultaneously. Participants were asked to look at the
characters one at a time, decide what they are, and make
responses accordingly. Participants then pressed the
spacebar to proceed to the next trial, which began following
an inter-trial-interval of 250 ms.
There were six experimental conditions and two control
conditions. Trials of different experimental conditions
differed in the number of required successive responses in a
sequence (one, two, and three), and in the stimulus position
on which these sequences occurred (first and second). The
six types of trials can be represented as the following:
TXXTT, TTXXT, TTTXX, XTXXT, XTTXX, and
XTTTX, with T denoting letter stimuli that required a key
response (Go stimuli) and X denoting letter stimuli that
required no response (No-Go stimuli). Go stimuli were
randomly drawn from the letter set T, D, and Z, with the
constraint that no letter was repeated in two adjacent
positions. This constraint however does not prevent
repetition of responses; the same letter could occur in two
positions interposed by Xs. Five participants had 40 trials of
each type administered in 2 blocks of 120 trials. Nine
participants had 60 trials of each type administered in 3
blocks of 120 trials.
Trials in both of the two control conditions consisted of a
single target (Go) stimulus in the first position (i.e.,
TXXXX), though different instructions were given for each.
In the first condition, called Respond-Then-Scan (i.e.,
TXXXX), participants were asked to respond to the first
letter stimulus, as before, and fixate each of the rest. In the
second condition, called Respond-Only (i.e., T____), they
were asked to respond as quickly as possible to the first
stimulus only. There were 40 trials in each control
condition. The two control conditions were administered
after the experimental conditions and in the same order
(Respond-Then-Scan first, Respond-Only second) to each
participant.
No single aspect of task performance (e.g., manual or
oculomotor, speed or accuracy, etc) was emphasized. The
only specific instruction given to the participants was to
treat each character independently and not group responses.
In all experiments eye movements were monitored and
recorded. The recording of eye movements began at the
moment when the small square appeared, and ended after
the participant had responded to the rightmost stimulus. A
calibration procedure was administered before each block of
trials to maintain accuracy of recordings.

800
600

TXXTT
TTXXT
TTTXX
XTXXT
XTTXX
XTTTX
TXXXX
T____

400
200
S1

S2

S3

S4

S1

S2

S3

S4

Figure 3. RT1/IRIs and eye-hand span results from the
present experiment
Manual Responses The general pattern of elevated RT1
followed by rapid, flat IRIs is apparent in Figure 3. It is
striking how closely aligned the curves for all stimulus
conditions are. The only significant effect of the
arrangement of stimulus was that RT1 was significantly
slower when made to S1 (S1-RT1) than to S2 (S2-RT1).
The general elevation of RT1 for both S1-RT1 and S2-RT1
suggests that cost is incurred for the first response in a
sequence, not just to the first possible stimulus position.
These similarities in patterns and magnitudes strongly
suggest that the RT1/IRIs patterns are related closely to the
production of sequences of responses. Indeed, the fact that
RT1s for sequences such as “TTTXX” are equivalent to
those for “TXXTT” is a strong indication that the difficulty
of the next item has no effect on the current response. In
other words, difficulty does not propagate backwards.
There are at least two possible explanations for the
difference in RT1 between S1-RT1 and S2-RT1. It is
consistent with at least some of the RT1 elevation being due
to retrieval of stimulus-response mappings. If one assumes
that the No-Go stimulus can elicit retrieval of response
mapping for Go stimuli then that retrieval would have been
done during S1 processing. This account is similar to
accounts of first-trial cost in task switching studies (Logan
& Bundesen, 2003). Alternatively, there is more uncertainty
associated with S1 targets. If S1 is a non-target then S2 will
always be a target. This reduction in uncertainty is a
possible confound, though it is difficult to see how it would
produce a speed up since the identity of S2 is not known
until it is fixated.
Comparisons with the two control conditions provided
evidence of sources contributing to the general RT1
elevation. RT1 was fastest (575 ms) in the Respond-Only
condition, where participants were instructed to respond
only to the first item and ignore the rest. RT1 was 72 ms
slower (647 ms) in the Respond-Then-Scan condition,
where participants were instructed to respond to the first
item and fixate the others in turn. A plausible explanation
for this overhead is that the elevated RT1 in the RespondThen-Scan condition reflects a dual-task cost (cf. Pashler,

1479

Carrie, & Hoffman, 1993), where the response task and the
fixation task compete for a limited-capacity resource. There
were no instructions as to how to perform manual and eye
movement components; participants were free to do them
concurrently or in sequence. We cannot say at present
whether this overhead in combining the two behaviors,
respond and fixate, arises from trying to do the two
concurrently or would also be present with a strictly serial
strategy. Some evidence suggests that trying to do the
manual response concurrently with the fixation scan would
cause interference. Pashler et al. observed interference
between manual responses and voluntary eye movements in
dual-task conditions, where participants were instructed to
do both task as rapidly as they could. However, in their
experiments substantial cost occurred only for anti-saccades,
where subjects had to move away from a newly presented
stimulus. A small cost obtained when moving to a specified
color. Note that in both conditions the cost could reasonably
be ascribed to a decision on the stimulus to determine where
to move. In the present experiment the scan is fixed, making
it difficult to see how stimulus decision processes could
account for cost in the Respond-Then-Scan condition.
It is also hard to see why there should be a dual-task cost
unless participants attempted to do the two tasks
concurrently. Since there were no constraints or instructions
on how to perform the task, any attempt to do them
concurrently would have arisen naturally.
Another explanation might be that the Respond-ThenScan condition forces participants to switch between tasks,
resulting in a task-switching cost. However, task-switching
costs are generally thought to arise from the retrieval of
task-relevant knowledge, usually stimulus-response
mappings. It is hard to explain how a switch cost would
appear on S1 rather than on S2.
We prefer at present a more general explanation in terms
of increased preparation time for the more complex
behavior of Respond-Then-Scan. This account also helps
explain why RT1 is further elevated in the full-response
condition, with 2-3 targets. Here the preparation involves
not only the sequencing of an initial response with a
subsequent pattern of fixations, but of interleaving the
responses.
There was one other significant RT1 effect whose
meaning is not clear. S2-RT1 decreased significantly (from
837, 784, to 761 ms, ps < .05 based on pairwise t tests) as
the number of required subsequent responses went up. This
decrease was not observed for S1-RT1. It is hard to see how
subsequent targets could facilitate a response to a current
target. One argument is that the presence of a subsequent
target could induce participants to rapidly complete the first
item. The eyes fixated the next item prior to responding to
the current one. If the next item is not a target they might
decide to delay responding, and continue moving the eyes.
If it is a target they know they must respond quickly and
deal with the new item.
Dwell Time and Eye-Hand Span As in previous
experiments, fixation durations remained relatively constant
across stimuli. Not surprisingly, fixation durations on target
(Go) stimuli were always longer than No-Go stimuli. More
interesting comparisons arise when one regards fixation
durations as a consequence of the previous stimulus (Figure

4). Here the dwell times suggest that the attempt to
interleave the mental operations for successive stimuli
pushes cost on to the subsequent stimulus. When the fixated
stimulus is a target (a Go stimulus) dwell times were shorter
by ~60 ms for targets that were preceded by dummy stimuli
(i.e., XT) than by target stimuli (i.e., TT). When the fixated
stimulus was a dummy stimulus this difference (TX
compared to XX) was ~30 ms. This effect was found in
several individual comparisons as well as in an analysis
grouping all occurrences of each.
Condition
TXXTT
TTXXT
TTTXX
XTXXT
XTTXX
XTTTX
TXXXX

s1
450.4
467.6
460.6
339.9
332.7
336.6
534.3

s2
c
a
a
b
b
b

324.6
478.8
484.8
394.4
409.5
395.7
451.9

s3
d
c
a
c
a
a

300.1
315.1
443.1
344.0
445.5
433.3
362.5

b
d
c
d
c
a

s4

s5

415.9
307.9
349.5
329.9
370.5
473.3
334.3

838.6
768.9
439.5
776.8
527.7
581.8
425.6

T preceded by
T or X
a TT
b XT
X preceded by
T or X
c TX
d XX

Figure 4. Dwell times for S1-S5 in all conditions
Lengthened dwell times for stimuli preceded by targets
suggest that the demand of making manual responses
interfered with eye movement related processes. The eyes
leave a stimulus prior to the completion of all the
processing, such that the remaining processing for the
previously fixated item delays one or more operations on the
subsequent stimulus. A more detailed explanation rests on
assumptions about the underlying resource architecture,
which specifies the operations that can occur in parallel and
those that must be done sequentially. The effect can be
explained by adopting the common assumption that
perceptual, cognitive, and motor operations execute in
parallel, constrained only by logical or data dependencies.
By this account, dwell times for the second stimulus are
lengthened because cognitive resources required for
stimulus-response mapping for the first stimulus postpone
central processes on the second. Since central cognitive
operations logically require data from perception, the
inference is that this time is shorter by ~70 than that
required for response selection. With continued explorations
of similar factors it should be possible to obtain parameter
estimates for processing operations that would permit a full
model of extended task performance based on individual
trial data.
Other aspects of the eye-hand span results resembled
those found in previous experiments. As before, eye-hand
spans decreased across the stimulus/response sequence.
Figure 5 shows the results of the two constituents of eyehand spans, dwell times and release-hand spans. There are
several notable findings. First, it is evident that the
difference among RT1s in cases where RT1 occurred to S2
was mainly due to the difference in release-hand spans. If
one assumes that release-hand spans represent the time
taken to complete remaining processes after fixation is
terminated, it is foreseeable that release-hand spans may
also include processes necessary for programming and
coordinating response sequences. The fact that eye-hand
spans decreased at a constant rate suggests that the
coordination may not be restricted to each pair of responses.
In the present set of experiments the maximal number of
responses is set at five. It is possible that participants could

1480

Dwell time

1000

Time (ms)

Release-hand span

TXXTT
TTXXT
TTTXX
XTXXT
XTTXX
XTTTX

1200

Dwell times indicate that there is imperfect time sharing of
the processing and response to successive stimuli. Mental
operations on the previously fixated stimulus result in
delays in processing the subsequent stimulus. These data
can provide numeric estimates of internal processing times
required to fully model these results.

TXXTT
TTXXT
TTTXX
XTXXT
XTTXX
XTTTX

800

Acknowledgements

600

This research was supported by funding from the Airspace
Operations Systems (AOS) Project of NASA's Airspace
Systems Program.

400

References
200
S1

S2

S3

S4

S1

S2

S3

S4

Figure5. Mean dwell time and release-hand span results
plan for five responses. Whether the trend will hold for
longer sequences has yet to be tested.

General Discussion
The conditions of the experiment were designed to identify
variables contributing to the elevation of RT1, and provide
insight into the relationship of eye movements to manual
responses by examining the effects of stimuli that required
no manual response. Our previous experiments showed
large eye-hand spans indicating that substantial processing
remained on previous item after the eyes had moved.
Analyses of dwell time responses to manipulations of
stimulus-response compatibility suggested that dwell times
encompassed central processes associated with response
selection. Here dwell times for targets were elevated by ~70
ms when the preceding stimulus required a response. A
straightforward account in terms of stage processing might
estimate that the processing remaining after the eye
movement is ~70 ms + the time for perceptual processing on
the next task. Given a reasonable estimate of perceptual
processing time of ~150 ms, it would seem that ~220 ms of
central processing remain after the eyes move.
However, this explanation has difficulty accounting for
the smaller increase (~30 ms) found on No-Go fixations in
the same condition. That there is any effect of previous
target at all is evidence that central processing is required to
decide whether or not to respond to the No-Go stimulus. It
might be assumed that the smaller effect for No-Go dwell
times indicates more than postponement. That is, there may
be interference between response-related processes on the
two adjacent target stimuli. Since evidence for
postponement is well known in dual-task studies, more
evidence will be required to determine whether interference
is acting here, rather than a more complicated postponement
process.

Conclusions

Gray, W. D., John, B. E., & Atwood, M. E. (1993). Project
Ernestine: Validating a GOMS analysis for predicting and
explaining real-world task performance. HumanComputer Interaction, 8, 237-309.
John, B., Vera, A., Matessa, M., Freed, M., & Remington,
R.W. 2002. Automating CPM-GOMS. In Proceedings of
the ACM SIGCHI 2002 Conference on Human Factors in
Computing System: Changing Our World, Changing
Ourselves (pp.147-154). New York: ACM.
Land, M. F., & Hayhoe, M. 2001. In what ways do eye
movements contribute to everyday activities? Vision
Research, 41, 3559-3565.
Land, M. F., & Lee, D. N. 1994. Where we look when we
steer. Nature, 369, 742-744.
Logan, G. D., & Bundesen, C. (2003). Clever homunculus:
Is there an endogenous act of control in the explicit task
cuing procedure? Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 29, 575-599.
Matessa, M., Vera, A., John, B., Remington, R. W., &
Freed, M. (2002). Reusable templates in human
performance modeling. In W. Gray & C. Schunn (Eds.),
Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society.
Pashler, H. 1994. Overlapping task operations in serial
performance with preview. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental
Psychology
Section
A-Human
Experimental Psychology 47, 161-191.
Pashler, H., Carrie, M. & Hoffman, J. (1993). Saccadic eye
movements and dual-task interference. The Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 46A, 51-82.
Pelz, J., Hayhoe, M., & Loeber, R. 2001. The coordination
of eye, head, and hand movements in natural task.
Experimental Brain Research, 139, 266-277.
Salthouse, T. A., & Ellis, C. L. 1980. Determinants of eyefixation duration. American Journal of Psychology, 93,
207-234.
Vickers, J. N. 1992. Gaze control in putting. Perception, 21,
117-132.
Wu, S.-C., & Remington, R. W. (2004). Coordination of
component mental operations in a multiple-response task.
In S. N. Spencer (Ed.), Proceedings of the Eye Tracking
Research and Applications Symposium 2004. New York,
NY: ACM SIGGRAPH.

We have evidence that RT1 elevation is due to a
combination of factors including preparation for eye
movement sequences, preparation for hand response
sequences, and retrieval of stimulus-response mappings.
1481

