UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Creative strategies in problem solving

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6896941q

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Lee, N. Y. Louise
Johnson-Laird, P. N.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Creative strategies in problem solving
N. Y. Louis Lee (ngarlee@princeton.edu)
Department of Psychology, Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1010 USA

P. N. Johnson-Laird (phil@princeton.edu)
Department of Psychology, Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1010 USA

remain, but not how they are arranged.
Likewise,
individuals cannot always tell if a tactical step in a shape
problem makes progress towards the goal. The discovery of
the tactical steps in shape problems is accordingly a
discovery of the problem space. There are, in fact, seven
distinct tactical steps for removing pieces, which are
summarized in Figure 2.

Abstract
Three experiments investigated how individuals solve “shape”
problems. These problems are not susceptible to a meansends strategy. They consist of a configuration of squares,
whose sides consist of separate pieces; and the task is to
remove a given number of pieces to leave behind a given
number of squares. The paper presents a theory of how
individuals develop strategies for these problems. Experiment
1 explored the constraints of symmetry and visual saliency in
shape problems. Experiment 2 corroborated the theory’s
prediction of a major shift in which knowledge acquired
during the evaluation of tactical steps comes to govern the
generation of these steps. Experiment 3 showed that
participants could be biased to adopt strategies making use of
specific tactical steps.

________________________________________________
1. To remove 1 piece & 0 squares, remove loose end
2. To remove 1 piece & 0 squares, remove join
3. To remove 1 piece & 1 square, remove outer
4. To remove 1 piece & 2 squares, remove middle
5. To remove 2 pieces & 1 square, remove corner
6. To remove 3 pieces & 1 square, remove U-shape
7. To remove 4 pieces & 1 square, remove isolated-square

Introduction
How do individuals develop strategies to solve problems?
The question arises crucially for those problems that come
in a series of different instances (e.g. Luchins’s, 1942, water
jug problems). Our aim was to answer this question for
problems that do not have a unique solution and for which
individuals cannot develop a simple deterministic strategy
guaranteeing an error-free solution. We therefore studied
what we refer to as “shape” problems (see Katona, 1940).
Figure 1 presents an example of such a problem. There is
an initial shape made out of separate pieces (matchsticks)
and the goal is to remove a given number of pieces to leave
a given number of squares. There are two constraints: the
resulting squares should be of the same size as the initial
squares, and the solution should not have any loose ends
(pieces with an end not connected to any other piece).

_____________________________________________________________________

Figure 2: The seven tactical steps for shape problems.
In what follows, we outline a theory of how individuals
explore these tactical steps, and how they use these
explorations to develop strategies. We then report three
experiments that test the predictions of this theory.

The theory
Problem solving is a creative process, and we distinguish
three main sorts of algorithm for creativity (e.g., JohnsonLaird, 1993). First, a neo-Darwinian algorithm consists of a
stage in which ideas are generated followed by a stage in
which they are evaluated. Generation depends on arbitrary
combinations and modifications of existing elements;
evaluation depends on the use of knowledge as constraints
to filter out useless results. Any ideas that survive can be
recycled recursively through the generative stage again, and
so on. Second, in a neo-Lamarckian algorithm, all the
knowledge acquired from experience constrains the
generation of ideas. If alternatives are created, then choice
amongst them can only be arbitrary, because all the

Figure 1: On the left is a shape problem in which the task is
to remove five matches so that only ten squares remain. A
solution is shown on the right.
An important feature of shape problems is that naïve
individuals cannot use a means-ends strategy in which they
work backwards from the desired goal (Newell & Simon,
1972). The goal merely specifies how many squares should

813

should be possible to bias the development of strategies by
giving individuals only a limited experience of tactical steps
in an initial set of problems.

constraints have already been used in their creation. When
individuals have the requisite knowledge, the algorithm is
highly efficient, because there is no need for recursion.
Third, in a multi-stage algorithm, some knowledge is used
to constrain the creation of ideas and some knowledge is
used to evaluate the results – with the option of recursion. In
sum, according to this account, constraints govern the
evaluation of ideas, or their generation, or both.
The algorithm that individuals use to solve shape
problems should depend on their experience. Naïve
individuals are likely to tackle their initial problems using a
strategy that is close to neo-Darwinian. They should be
constrained solely by the statement of the problem, the
problem shape itself, and their existing perceptual and
cognitive processes. As they try out the various possible
tactical steps, they learn their consequences, which are
summarized in Figure 2. Learning occurs whether or not a
tactical step turns out to be useful in solving a problem.
Any problem allows only a limited set of tactical options,
and so individuals should gradually narrow down the steps
that are left to explore. Likewise, granted that the problem
is within their competence, they should at length hit upon a
sequence of steps that leads to a solution. In addition, some
pieces in the problem shape are visually salient, and they
may bias participants to attempt certain tactical steps first.
Saliency is likely to depend on the perimeter of the shape.
Any piece in the perimeter should be visually salient if it
has at least one adjacent piece that is also in the perimeter
and is at right angles to it. In addition, a piece should be
more salient if both adjacent pieces are at right angles. A
visually salient component comprises a group of such
visually salient pieces that are adjacent to each other. These
principles are probably special cases of broader factors
governing visual salience. The acquisition of tactical
knowledge depends on perceptual abilities, e.g., subitizing a
small number of squares, and conceptual and inferential
abilities, e.g., a grasp of the concepts of squares and pieces,
and relevant arithmetical operations.
According to the theory, as tactical knowledge is
acquired, it shifts from the evaluative stage of the creative
process to the generative stage. Individuals accordingly
shift from using a neo-Darwinian algorithm to a multi-stage
algorithm, and may even converge on a neo-Lamarckian
algorithm. This strategic shift enables them to avoid useless
tactical steps and thereby to make more efficient progress
towards solutions. They may proceed at once to correct
tactical steps. A central component of an efficient strategy
for shape problems is the ratio of the number of pieces to
remove to the number of squares to remove (henceforth, the
“p/s” ratio). It constrains the appropriate tactical steps from
those afforded by the current configuration of the problem
(see Figure 2). But, its optimal use depends on knowledge
of the full variety of tactical steps. Conversely, a limited
knowledge of these steps yields limited strategies for coping
with the problems. Yet, the shift of tactical knowledge to
the generative stage of problem solving should still occur,
albeit with a restricted repertoire of tactical steps. Hence, it

Experiment 1
This experiment explored two factors that should affect
shape problem solving: whether the initial shape is
symmetrical or asymmetrical, and whether the solution is
salient or not in the shape.

Figure 3: The eight problems used in Experiment 1. We
manipulated symmetry and the presence of a salient
solution.

Method and procedure
Twenty Princeton University students carried out eight
problems, which manipulated symmetry and the presence or
absence of salient solutions. Figure 3 presents the eight
problems used in the experiment.
In order to
counterbalance the manipulation, one set of four problems
(see Figure 3a) called for the same number of pieces and
squares to be removed. This condition is feasible only by
changing the shapes from the cases in which the solution is
salient to the cases in which it is not. Hence, a second set of
four problems (see Figure 3b) used the same shapes in these
two cases but changed the number of pieces and squares that
had to be removed. The experiment employed a block
design: half of the participants carried out the four problems
in Figure 3a first, and the other half carried out the four
problems in Figure 3b first. The assignment of block

814

removing two squares. The experimental procedure was the
same as that in Experiment 1. However, there was an
additional requirement: participants had to think aloud as
they solved the problems. We video-recorded what they did
and what they said.

presentation, as well as the order of problems within each
block, was random.
On each trial, the participants constructed the shape in a
given diagram using matchsticks. They then tried to solve
the problem. They were told that they should not leave any
loose ends, and that each square must consist of four pieces.
They had to say “done” at the end of each trial to the
experimenter, who recorded the latencies.

Results and discussion

140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0

Figure 5: The 12 problem shapes used in Experiment 2.
Salient
solution

Results and discussion

No salient
solution

M ean latency

Latency (sec)

Symmetric
Asymmetric
Symmetry of initial shape

Figure 4: Experiment 1: Mean latencies as a function of
symmetry and the presence of salient solution.

Experiment 2

Mean no. of false steps

160

8

140

7

120

6

100

5

80

4

60

3

40

2

20

1

0

This experiment tested the key prediction of a shift in
strategy from a neo-Darwinian exploration of steps to their
use in constraining the generation of steps. As a corollary,
there should be a reduction in the number of steps that
individuals take to solve problems.

False steps

Latency (sec)

Figure 4 presents the mean latencies to solve the eight
problems. The two blocks did not differ reliably (z = 1.61,
n.s.), and therefore we collapsed their latencies for analysis.
Participants solved problems with a salient solution reliably
faster than those without a salient solution (Wilcoxon
signed-rank test, z = 3.85, p<.001). In addition, they also
solved problems with a symmetric initial shape reliably
faster than those with an asymmetrical initial shape
(Wilcoxon signed-rank test, z = 2.09, p<.05). The two
variables did not interact. These results demonstrate that
existing factors in the problems can constrain problem
solving strategies. To investigate how people develop
strategies to cope with shape problems, however,
participants would need to solve a series of problems calling
for the removal of different numbers of pieces, and to think
aloud as they solve the problems. Experiment 2 employed
this procedure.

0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10 11 12

Trial number

Figure 6: Experiment 2: Mean latencies and numbers of
false steps across trials.

Method and procedure

Figure 6 presents the mean latencies to solve the problems,
and the mean numbers of false steps, over the 12 trials. A
false step was one that the participants subsequently undid.
As predicted, the participants were able, with experience, to
solve the problems faster (Page’s L = 7882.5, z = 4.86, p <<

Fourteen Princeton University students carried out 12
problems presented in a random order. The problems (see
Figure 5) varied in terms of symmetry, number of matches
to be removed, and tactical steps, but they all called for

815

subsequent trials, e.g., with problem 5, she proceeded at
once to the correct solution with no false steps. The
protocol is typical in that it appears to reflect the use, not of
a simple deterministic strategy, but one in which various
steps are tried out in a way that appears to be nondeterministic.
One participant used a quite different sort of strategy.
During the first stage of tackling a problem, the participant
removed some pieces – often the required number – in an
apparently arbitrary way, sometimes leaving several loose
ends. The participant then carried out one of three actions:
removing a new piece, replacing a piece removed earlier, or
moving a piece from one position in the shape to fill the
position of a piece that had been removed. The participant
persisted in these steps until the solution emerged. The
strategy was inefficient, yielding many more false steps than
other participants. Yet, the participant gradually acquired
some tactical knowledge, which became evident in both a
more judicious initial removal of pieces and in more
efficient steps in the second stage.
Another participant used a strategy that depended on the
initial shape. The participant used the statement of the
problem to divide the initial shape into two or three
conceptual parts. For example, for Problem 2 (remove five
pieces to remove two squares), the participant identified the
number of squares to remain in the solution (eight), and then
partitioned this number into two parts (three squares plus
five squares). The participant then searched for ways to
eliminate all but these configurations. Unfortunately, the
attempt ignored the number of pieces to be removed. The
strategy was inefficient, and yielded little tactical
knowledge.
All three strategies stabilized as instances of the multistage algorithm outlined earlier. No-one developed a neoLamarckian strategy that guaranteed that they could proceed
directly to the solution of a problem without any false steps.

.001), and to make fewer false steps (Page’s L = 6750.0, z =
2.16, p <.05). These two variables correlated reliably for all
but two of the problems (Pearson’s r ranged from .65 to .95,
with p <.05 to p <.001). In addition, in a post-experimental
questionnaire, the participants were most likely to identify
those tactical steps that they had used during the
experiment: they all mentioned the outer and the U-shape,
but none identified all seven tactical steps (see Figure 2).
The transcriptions of the video-recordings showed that the
participants relied mainly on a single strategy, but there
were other two strikingly different strategies. The main
strategy has two stages. The first stage is exploratory: the
participants try out various tactical steps, which they usually
subsequently undo. They are acquiring knowledge of these
steps, including steps irrelevant to the present problem.
They are also acquiring knowledge of the p/s ratio, i.e., the
ratio of pieces and squares to be removed (see the previous
section). They grasped its relevance, but rarely in a
complete way. The duration of this stage depends on the
participants’ experience with the problems. It accordingly
shrinks in proportion over the problems as the participants
acquire knowledge. The second stage of the strategy is the
application of tactical knowledge. The participants consider
the p/s ratio, often mentioning it explicitly, and use their
tactical knowledge to select an appropriate tactical step.
The shift has occurred from a neo-Darwinian strategy to a
multi-stage strategy. Hence, the participants are able to
make rapid progress to the solution. For some problems,
they make no false steps. Likewise, they can combine
tactical steps into a single step that solves the problem at a
stroke.
In other cases, they apply their knowledge
recursively, removing a correct piece, re-assessing the
number of pieces and the number of squares to be removed,
and, as result, selecting a further tactical step, and so on,
until they solve the problem. They are converging on a neoLamarckian strategy for solving shape problems.

Experiment 3
When individuals acquire a deterministic strategy, it
transfers to new problems (see, e.g., Luchins, 1942). With
shape problems, however, individuals do not acquire a
deterministic strategy guaranteed to lead to solution, but
instead acquire a tactical knowledge that constrains the
generation of steps. Their resulting strategy does not appear
to be deterministic (see Figure 7). Nevertheless, it should
be possible to bias the development of strategies by giving
participants an experience of only certain tactical steps in
the initial problems. Experiment 3 tested this prediction.
The participants first encountered a series of four
problems that could be solved only by using certain tactical
steps. These tactics differed between two groups of
participants. Both groups then tackled two “ambiguous”
problems that could be solved using either set of tactics. A
final unambiguous problem could be solved only with novel
tactics, i.e., a problem used to train the participants in the
other group. Such a problem should force the participants

Figure 7: An example of the main strategy in a nondeterministic finite-state automaton. On the right, is the
shape problem in which the goal is to remove 2 pieces and 2
squares (Problem 7).
Figure 7 shows an example of the main strategy. The
participant started in an exploratory state (state 0) and tried
various steps, which she immediately undid. She then
correctly removed an outer (shifting to state 1), and then
removed another outer to solve the problem. On some

816

back to a greater use of the exploratory stage of their
strategy.

solve than the last training problem (Wilcoxon test, z =
2.61, p < .01).

Method
U-shape & Outer

ni
ng

A
m

Tr
ai

ni
ng

2
Tr
ai

ni
ng

Tr
ai

ni
ng
Tr
ai

3

140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0

1

Mean latency (sec)

2 Corners

4
bi
gu
ou
A
s1
m
bi
gu
ou
s2
Co
nt
ro
l

Twenty Princeton undergraduates were assigned at random
to one of two groups: both carried out seven problems
calling for the removal of four pieces to eliminate two
squares. In Group 1, participants tackled four problems that
could be solved only by removing two corners; in Group 2,
they tackled four problems that could be solved only by
removing a U-shape and an outer. Each participant carried
out these trials in a different random order. Both groups
then attempted two ambiguous problems, and finally a
problem chosen randomly from the first four problems
given to the other group. Figure 8 shows the complete set
of problems. The experimental procedure was the same as
that in Experiment 1.

Problems
Figure 9: Mean latencies of the two groups in Experiment
3.
The results show that even when individuals have not
acquired a deterministic strategy, their knowledge of tactics
transfers to new problems. The training trials sufficed for
the participants to develop tactical knowledge, and this
knowledge constrained their search for solutions to the
subsequent problems. With ambiguous problems, they
readily succeeded though there was a marginal tendency for
them to be slightly slower. In the case of the final problem,
the tactics were inappropriate, and so they had to revert to a
longer exploratory stage, which slowed them down.

General Discussion
Problem solving calls for creativity, because it calls for the
generation of ideas that are novel (at least for the
individual). In the case of, say, Duncker’s X-ray problem
(Duncker, 1945), psychologists can study only how
individuals solve the problem for the first time. Hence, in
order to investigate the development of strategies for
solving problems, it is necessary to use problems that can be
presented in a series that call for distinct solutions. In the
past, such problems have been open to solution by a simple
deterministic strategy of one sort or another (see, e.g.,
Luchins, 1942). In contrast, our goal was to examine the
development of strategies for coping with problems that lie
outside the bounds of a deterministic strategy – at least for
our participants. We therefore studied problems that come
in a series, just as many problems in daily life do – from the
writing of computer programs to the search for a job.
Experiment 1 explored two constraints in shape problems,
and found that symmetry of the initial problem shape, and
the presence of salient solutions in the shape, facilitated
problem solving. Experiment 2 showed that individuals do
indeed normally begin to tackle such problems by exploring

Figure 8: The problems used in Experiment 3. Each
problem called for the removal of four pieces and two
squares.

Results
Figure 9 presents the mean latencies of the two groups to
solve the problems. The participants took progressively less
time to solve the problems over the seven trials (Page’s L =
1618.0, z = 4.23, p <<.001). The ambiguous problems took
slightly longer than the last training problem, though the
difference was only marginally significant (Wilcoxon test, z
= 1.64, p >.05). However, the choice of pieces to be
removed showed that both groups persevered with the same
tactics that they had used in training: overall, 92% of
solutions were based on the same tactics; 14 out of the 20
participants used these tactics on both ambiguous problems,
and the remaining participants were ties (Binomial test, p <<
.001). The final control problem took significantly longer to

817

the consequences of various tactical steps in a way akin to a
neo-Darwinian procedure. They choose a step arbitrarily,
and then evaluate its consequences in relation to the solution
of the problem. More importantly, however, they acquire
knowledge of the number of squares that the step removes.
They pick up this knowledge whether or not the step is
useful in the solution of the problem. And, as the thinkaloud protocols also showed, they acquire some
understanding of the importance of the p/s ratio in
determining appropriate steps for a given problem. This
ratio, between the number of pieces to be removed and the
number of squares to be removed, constrains the set of
useful steps at any point in solving a shape problem. As the
theory postulates, a strategic shift then occurs. Individuals
start to use their knowledge of tactical steps and the ratio to
govern the generation of tactical steps. In this way, they are
able to avoid useless false steps in the solution of problems.
No participant, however, was able to converge completely
on a neo-Lamarckian strategy that guaranteed a solution to
any problem without false steps. Indeed, it is an open
question whether such a strategy is possible for shape
problems of any degree of complexity.
Experiment 3 corroborated the prediction that constraints
in the form of tactical knowledge do transfer to new
problems. Participants acquired tactical knowledge during
training trials, and they continued to use these tactics for
problems that could be solved in other ways. When the
tactics were inappropriate, they were slowed down because
they had to revert to a longer exploratory stage to find the
right tactics. Luchins (1942) discovered that deterministic
strategies transfer in this way. Our results generalize his
findings to show that even when experience leads at best to
a strategy that is not deterministic, the strategy nevertheless
transfers.
Is the strategic shift an instance of insight? The answer
depends on what one takes insight to be (cf. Weisberg,
1986; Kaplan & Simon, 1990; Isaak & Just, 1995; Ormerod,
MacGregor, & Chronicle, 2002).
When the current
constraints fail to yield a solution, the shift yields new
constraints on the generation of tactical steps. This change,
in turn, can yield the solution of a problem. The
development of strategies for shape problems accordingly
reflects a series of small insights in which constraints are
changed as a result of strategic shifts.

Isaak, M.I., & Just, M.A. (1995). Constraints on thinking in
insight and invention. In Sternberg, R.J., & Davidson,
J.E. (Eds.), The Nature of Insight. (p.281-325).
Cambridge MA: Bradford books, MIT Press.
Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1993). Human and Machine Thinking.
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Katona, G. (1940). Organizing and Memorizing. New
York: Columbia University Press.
Kaplan, C.A., & Simon, H.A. (1990) In search of insight.
Cognitive Psychology, 22, 374-419.
Luchins, A.S. (1942). Mechanization in problem-solving:
the effect of Einstellung. Psychological Monographs,
54(6): 95.
Newell, A., & Simon, H.A. (1972). Human Problem
Solving. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Ormerod, T.C., MacGregor, J.N., & Chronicle, E.P. (2002).
Dynamics and constraints in insight problem solving.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 28(4), 791-799.
Weisberg, R.W. (1986) Creativity: Genius and Other
Myths. New York: Freeman.

Ackowledgments
This research was supported by a grant from the National
Science Foundation to the second author to study strategies
in reasoning (BCS-0076287). We thank Sam Glucksberg,
Geoffrey Goodwin, Uri Hasson, Cathy Haught, Sanna
Reynolds, and three anonymous reviewers for helpful
comments.

References
Duncker, K. (1945). On problem solving. Psychological
Monographs, 58(5), Whole number 270.

818

