UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Design, Adaptation and Convention: The Emergence of Higher Order Graphical
Representations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2jp9v94k

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Fay, Nicolas
Garrod, Simon
MacLeod, Tracy
et al.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Design, Adaptation and Convention: The Emergence of Higher Order
Graphical Representations
Nicolas Fay (nfay@atr.jp)
ATR Media Information Science Labs, 2-2-2 Hikaridai, Keihanna Science City,
Kyoto 619-0228, Japan

Simon Garrod (simon@psy.gla.ac.uk)
Tracy MacLeod (tracym@psy.gla.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, University of Glasgow,
Glasgow, G12 8QB, Scotland

John Lee (j.lee@ed.ac.uk)
Jon Oberlander (j.oberlander@ed.ac.uk)
HCRC, University of Edinburgh, 2 Buccleuch Place,
Edinburgh, EH8 9LW, Scotland
Abstract

example (Figure 1), we argue that conventions are
culturally evolved higher order cognitions.
Over several thousand years the original
Chinese character that represents mountain (left) has
evolved into its current, less complex, form (right). We
argue that this change is not arbitrary; it is a result of
global coordination that took place over time and space,
culminating in a refined, conventional form that
promotes rapid communication with reduced effort.
This is an example of an evolutionary process where the
whole is greater than the sum of its parts.

To study the development of graphical conventions we
had members of a simulated community play a series of
graphical interaction games with partners drawn from the
same pool (Experiment 1). Once the community was
established, a conventional graphical referring scheme
emerged that facilitated high levels of semantic
coordination, with reduced communicative effort. Next,
a forced choice reaction time study (Experiment 2)
demonstrated that the graphical conventions developed
in the simulated community offer distinct processing
advantages when compared with those developed by
isolated pairs (i.e. participants who always interact with
the same partner). This is interpreted as evidence that
the graphical conventions that evolve within a closed
community constitute higher order cognitions, the whole
being greater than the sum of its parts.

Figure 1. The changing form of the Chinese character
that represents mountain (Vacarri & Vacarri, 1961;
cited in Arbib, in press)

Background
Vygotsky (1981) claims that higher order cognition is a
product of social interaction, that novel structures
emerge as a consequence of interpersonal, as opposed
to intrapersonal, communication. Hutchins (1995)
shares this view, arguing that higher order cognition is a
cultural product, a consequence of interaction (humanenvironment and human-human) that is distributed
across time and space. According to Hutchins, higher
order cognitions emerge from “an adaptive process that
accumulates partial solutions to frequently encountered
problems” (p.354). Lewis (1969, 1975) defines
conventions in a related way, as arising from situations
where a community faces the recurrent problem of
coordination.
If we agree that conventions are cultural
products, should we accept that they represent higher
order cognitions? Using Chinese characters as an

363

Having partners collaborate on a graphical referential
communication task, Fay, Garrod, Lee and Oberlander
(2003) studied the influence of interaction upon
representational form. The task requires pairs of
participants to graphically communicate a series of
recurring concepts. Figure 2 illustrates the changing
representation of the concept ‘Clint Eastwood’ over 6
games, where partners’ drawing and identifying roles
alternated from game to game.
What is initially a designed, iconic
representation of Clint Eastwood, develops, through a
process of adaptation and entrainment, into a simplified,
symbolic form (an arrow pointing East). Although
there are obvious similarities between this process and
the evolution of Chinese characters, the derived
representation of Clint Eastwood does not constitute a
convention in Lewis’ terms. According to Lewis, a
convention must be common knowledge within the

wider community. At best, Figure 2 illustrates the
development of a ‘local’ convention.

Figure 2. Partners’ changing representation of the
concept ‘Clint Eastwood’ over 6 games
Garrod & Doherty (1994) distinguish this ‘local’
process from the ‘global’ coordination process that
produces conventions. To study the development of
linguistic conventions, Garrod et. al. had members of a
simulated community play a series of computerized
maze games with partners drawn from the same pool.
After several games, community members
demonstrated higher maze description scheme
convergence and more closely coordinated linguistic
entrainment when compared with interacting pairs, or
participants drawn from a non-community (i.e.
interacting partners not drawn from the same pool).
This effect was interpreted as indicating the
establishment of the community, and the development
of a robust referring convention. Garrod et. al. argue
that referring conventions emerge on account of a
global coordination constraint based upon two factors;
pressure to converge upon the most popular description
scheme with each new partner, and the consequent
polarization of this scheme throughout the community.
This is contrasted with the local coordination process
evident among pair and non-community members, a
process based upon the less stable heuristics of salience
(pressure to choose the most salient description scheme)
and precedence (pressure to choose the previously used
scheme).
In much the same way that Garrod et. al.
studied the development of linguistic conventions, we
investigate the development of graphical conventions
(Experiment 1). Furthermore, we demonstrate that
these cultural products represent higher order
cognitions (Experiment 2).

to contain a set of graphically confusable concepts
(theatre, art gallery, museum, parliament, Robert De
Niro, Arnold Schwarzenegger, Clint Eastwood, drama,
soap opera, cartoon, television, computer monitor,
microwave, loud, homesick, poverty).
Participants played six consecutive games,
using the same item set, with their partner. On each
game the director, or drawer, depicted the first 12 items
from an ordered list (12 items plus 4 distracters) such
that their partner, the matcher, could identify each
drawing from their unordered list. Item order was
randomized on each game. Partners’ roles, as drawer or
matcher, alternated from game to game, although
participants were permitted to draw in either role.
Drawing took place on a standard whiteboard. The
completed drawings were recorded on digital camera
for later analysis.

Subjects
The community was composed of 8 undergraduate
students who were paid to participate in the study.

Community Design
A simulated community was created through a series of
one-to-one interactions among partners drawn from the
same pool. Over 7 rounds, each participant interacted
with the other members of the community. As
discussed, participants completed a series of 6
consecutive graphical interaction games with each
partner. The structure of the community is illustrated in
Figure 3.
It was so designed that community could first
establish itself at Round 4. This was the earliest point
the community could converge upon a conventional
graphical description scheme. For example, if person 1
influences person 2 (Round 1), person 2 influences
person 3 (Round 2), and person 3 influences person 8
(Round 3), person 1 and 8 will share some interactive
history upon meeting in Round 4. Thus, Rounds 1-3
represent pre convergence games, whereas Rounds 4-7
represent post convergence games.

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 investigates the development of graphical
conventions within a simulated community of drawers.

Task and Procedure

Figure 3. Structure of the simulated community

Fay et. al.’s (2003) graphical referential communication
task was employed. This task requires pairs of
participants to communicate a series of concepts using
only graphical means. Like the game ‘Pictionary’,
participants are not allowed to speak or use text in their
drawings. Concepts are drawn from a list of 16 items
that are known to both partners. The list was designed

Three independent measures were employed to
determine the establishment of a conventional graphical
referring scheme: identification accuracy (i.e.
participants’ ability to more successfully identify
conventional graphical representations), graphical
complexity (i.e. the reduced effort required to negotiate

364

the meaning of conventional graphical representations)
and graphical convergence (i.e. the greater uniformity
of a conventional graphical description scheme).

Results
Identification Accuracy.
Figure 4 details the
identification rate (proportion of items correctly
identified by matchers) of pre convergence (Rounds 13) and post convergence representations (Rounds 4-7)
over the six games played by each pair. In pre
convergence rounds there is a steady improvement in
identification accuracy from games 1 to 3. After this
identification rates reach ceiling level. In contrast, post
convergence identification rates begin from, and are
maintained at, ceiling level across games. Analysis of
Variance (ANOVA) confirms these observations.

salient properties of the image (Fay et. al., 2003). As a
result, what is initially an iconic representation becomes
increasingly symbolic (see Figure 2). Comparable
graphical refinement was evident in the community
members’ drawings.
Drawing complexity was measured using the
Perimetric Complexity formula developed by Pelli,
Burns, Farrell and Moore (accepted with minor
revisions) to measure the visual complexity of letters,
Complexity = Perimeter2/Ink. This measure compares
favorably with human judgments of drawing
complexity (Fay et. al., 2003).
Figure 5 illustrates the mean complexity of
drawings made in games 1 to 6 during Rounds 1-3 and
4-7. Mean complexity scores were calculated after the
removal of scores 2.5 standard deviations (SD) from the
condition mean. Extreme values were replaced with
values corresponding to the mean plus or minus 2.5
SDs. Such cases accounted for 2.4% of the data.
In both the pre and post convergence rounds
(Rounds 1-3 and 4-7 respectively) the complexity of
community members’ drawings is reduced across
games. However, this effect is more marked in the
early, pre convergence rounds. This observation is
corroborated by ANOVA.

Figure 4. Mean proportion of items correctly identified
by matchers in games 1 to 6 during Rounds 1-3 (pre
convergence) and 4-7 (post convergence)
Proportion scores were entered into a 2 x 6 ANOVA.
Analyses were conducted by subject (F1) and by item
(F2). By subject tests used a mixed design, treating
Game (1 to 6) as a within subject factor and Round (1-3
and 4-7) as between. Item tests used a within subject
design. A main effect of Game F1(5, 130) = 6.78, F2(5,
55) = 4.51, and Round F1(1, 26) = 8.69, F2(1, 11) =
5.97, p<.05, was qualified by their interaction F1(5,
130) = 7.14, F2(5, 55) = 6.68 (for all results reported
p<.01 unless otherwise stated). Tests of simple effects
corroborate the observations made above; identification
accuracy improves in the pre convergence rounds (1-3),
F1(5, 130) = 11.07, F2(5, 55) = 8.17, but not in the later
post convergence rounds (4-7) where identification rate
is maintained at ceiling from game 1 onwards, Fs<1.48.
The consistently high identification rate in
Rounds 4 to 7 indicates the establishment of the
community and the emergence of a robust referring
scheme.
Graphical Refinement. Through interaction partners
minimize their collaborative effort, stripping away
unnecessary graphical information, leaving only the

365

Figure 5. Mean Complexity (Perimeter2/Ink) of pre
and post convergence drawings (Rounds 1-3 and 4-7
respectively) in games 1 to 6
As before, complexity scores were entered into a 2 x 6
ANOVA. This returned a main effect of Game F1(5,
130) = 58.57, F2(5, 55) = 34.48, and Round F1(1, 26) =
13.01, F2(1, 11) = 39.11, that was qualified by their
interaction F1(5, 130) = 15.35, F2(5, 55) = 12.43. Tests
of simple effects show that graphical complexity is
reduced across games in both the pre convergence
rounds F1(5, 130) = 58.33, F2(5, 55) = 39.34, and post
convergence rounds F1(5, 130) = 8.48, F2(5, 55) = 4.24,
(Rounds 1-3 and 4-7 respectively). Between condition
differences in drawing complexity in games 1 to 4,
ps<.05, and the comparable complexity of drawings at
games 5 and 6, Fs<1.07, explain the interaction.
Results support Garrod and Doherty’s (1994)
distinction between local and global coordination

processes, signaled by the emergence of a conventional
graphical referring scheme during Rounds 4-7. Unlike
the initial exchanges in Rounds 1-3, where partners
must negotiate a common description scheme, the
establishment of a conventional referring scheme from
Round 4 requires considerably less local negotiation.
Graphical Convergence. Graphical convergence
concerns the degree to which community members’
drawings converge, or become more similar, as a
consequence of their interaction. To investigate the
emergence of a common referring scheme, the
similarity of the first drawings of each concept
produced by community members at Rounds 1, 4 and 7
(i.e. pre convergence, convergence and post
convergence rounds) was compared.
Figures 6, 7 and 8 illustrate the 8 community
members’ changing representation of the concept
‘cartoon’ at Rounds 1, 4 and 7 respectively. In addition
to the reduction in graphical complexity across rounds,
observe the community members’ convergence upon a
conventional description scheme for cartoon, in this
case a Mickey Mouse-like depiction, characterized two
large circular ears above the head.

Figure 6. Community members’ drawings of the
concept ‘cartoon’ at Round 1

Figure 7. Community members’ drawings of the
concept ‘cartoon’ at Round 4

Figure 8. Community members’ drawings of the
concept ‘cartoon’ at Round 7
Graphical convergence was analyzed by having 12
subjects, who had no experience of the graphical
communication task, rank sets of images in terms of
similarity. Each subject individually ranked three sets
of 8 images (e.g. Round 1, 4 and 7 drawings of the
concept ‘cartoon’ produced by each of the 8 community
members) in terms of similarity. This was done for
each of the 12 target items drawn by community
members. The set of images thought to be most similar
was given a rank of 1; those deemed least similar a rank
of 3. The presentation order of item type (e.g.
television, cartoon etc.) and round (Rounds 1, 4 or 7)
was randomized.

366

Graphical convergence was measured by calculating the
proportion of Round 1, 4 and 7 images ranked as most
similar. As can be seen from Figure 9, graphical
convergence increased across Rounds. A substantially
higher proportion of Round 4 images were ranked as
most similar when compared with Round 1 images. In
addition, more Round 7 images were ranked as most
similar when compared with Round 4 images.

Figure 9. Mean proportion of drawings ranked most
similar in Rounds 1, 4 and 7 (pre convergence,
convergence and post convergence rounds respectively)
Proportion scores were entered into two repeated
measures t-tests. Results were as predicted; Round 4
images were ranked as most similar more often than
Round 1 images t1(11) = 5.82, t2(11) = 2.91, p<.05.
This effect was less clear when Round 4 and Round 7
images were compared; by subject tests revealed a
marginal effect t1(11) = 1.84, p<.10, whereas there was
no effect of round when tested by item, p>.10.
Consistent with the previous identification and
complexity analyses, convergence tests indicate the
emergence of a conventional referring scheme at Round
4. Tests show a large jump in drawing convergence
from Rounds 1 to 4 and a smaller, marginally
significant, increase in graphical convergence from
Rounds 4 to 7. This indicates the establishment of a
conventional graphical referring scheme at Round 4,
and its continued development in the later rounds.

Experiment 2
Having detailed the emergence of a conventional
graphical description scheme in Experiment 1,
Experiment 2 demonstrates that these graphical
productions constitute higher order cognitions.
Experiment 2 contrasts representations that
emerge as a product of design, local coordination and
global coordination processes. Pre interaction drawings
(i.e. subjects’ first drawing of each item) represent pure
design, an intrapersonal process whereby the drawer
designs a representation to meet the needs of his/her
partner. This is consistent with the notion of ‘audience

design’ (Isaacs & Clark, 1987). Local coordination, or
adaptation, is illustrated in the interacting pair’s final
drawing of Clint Eastwood in Figure 2. In this example
partners’ drawings serve their local needs. Global
coordination, or evolution, is exemplified by the
development of a conventional referring scheme that
meets the needs of the wider community (see Figure 8).
A forced choice reaction time (RT) experiment
was designed to compare the processing efficiency of
graphical representations that are a product of design,
local coordination and global coordination processes. If
graphical conventions constitute higher order cognitions
they will provide a processing advantage when
compared with designed or locally developed
representations.

Task and Procedure
The RT experiment required subjects to make binary
judgments regarding a set of learnt images. Community
(Experiment 1) and isolated pair images (from Fay et.
al., 2003) were used as stimuli, presented on a computer
screen using PsyScope (Cohen, MacWhinney, Flatt &
Provost, 1993).
24 undergraduate students, who were
unfamiliar with the graphical communication
experiment, were paid to act as subjects. Prior to taking
part in the RT experiment, subjects learnt the identity of
48 images (50% community generated and 50% pair
generated). Each image set (community and pair) was
composed of 50% pre interaction images (i.e. the first
drawing of each item) and 50% post interaction images
(i.e. the last drawing of each item). Pre and post
interaction drawings (matched by drawer) were
sampled quasi-randomly from the community and
isolated pair conditions. Although pre interaction
drawings were more complex than post interaction
drawings, there was no difference between community
and isolated pair drawings (Community, M pre = 1796,
M post = 906; Pair, M pre = 1669, M post = 932).
Participants were judged to have learnt the images
when each drawing could be identified on three
consecutive presentations of the set.
Each experimental trial consisted of the
following sequence; a fixation point (a small cross
presented in the middle of the screen for 25 msecs), the
learnt image (50 msecs), a mask (the screen was
blacked out for 25 msecs) and a forced choice (text that
either matched or mismatched the presented image, e.g.
a cartoon image followed by the text ‘drama’). The
time required to make a match/mismatch judgment, by
key press, was recorded. Subjects completed 384 trials,
with each drawing appearing 4 times in each condition.

Results
There was a 4.8% error rate on match/mismatch

367

questions, suggesting that participants had adequately
learnt the task materials. Mean RTs were calculated
after the removal of times 2.5 SDs from the population
mean. These extremes were replaced with values
corresponding to the mean plus or minus 2.5 SDs. This
accounted for 2.5% of the data.
Mean RTs for matching image and text
judgments are shown in Figure 10. As predicted, the
community generated graphical conventions (post
interaction) were processed more rapidly than the
designed (pre interaction) or locally developed pair
representations (post interaction). The same pattern is
evident in the mismatching text condition, but at a
slower response rate (M match = 781 msecs; M
mismatch = 884 msecs).
RTs were entered into a 2 x 2 x 2 ANOVA,
treating Communication (Community or Pair), Image
(Pre and Post) and Text (Match or Mismatch) as within
subject factors. Analyses returned a main effect of Text
F1(1, 23) = 43.79, F2(1, 11) = 65.26, indicating subjects’
faster response times when the image and text stimuli
matched. There was also a reliable interaction between
Communication and Image F1(1, 23) = 10.08, F2(1, 11)
= 3.16, p = .10. Tests of simple effects confirmed that
community generated representations were processed
more rapidly than those developed in isolated pairs
F1(1, 23) = 5.63, p<.05, F2(1, 11) = 6.34, p<.05. Pre
interaction images and post interaction pair
representations were processed at a comparable rate,
Fs<1.
The RT experiment distinguishes between
representations that emerge as a product of design, local
coordination and global coordination processes. The
graphical conventions that evolved within the simulated
community, a society composed of the pairwise
interactions of its members, outperformed those
produced by pairs who interacted in isolation. These
graphical productions provide a clear example of higher
order cognition, where the whole is greater than the
sum of its parts.

Figure 10. Mean time required to process pre and post
interaction community and pair representations in the
matching text condition (image and text match)

Discussion

Acknowledgments

Experiment 1 details the emergence of a conventional
graphical description scheme within a simulated
community of drawers. Once established, community
members exhibit near perfect semantic coordination
(identification accuracy) with reduced communicative
effort (graphical complexity). This is a consequence of
the development of a conventional graphical description
scheme (convergence). Experiment 2 distinguishes
between graphical productions that develop as a product
of design, local coordination and global coordination.
The graphical productions that evolved within the
simulated community offer substantial processing
advantages when compared with designed or locally
developed representations. Thus, conventional
graphical representations constitute higher order
cognitions, the whole being greater than the sum of its
parts.
However, there are two potentially
confounding factors in Experiment 2. Community
members played more games with more partners (42
games; 6 games with each of 7 partners) than pair
members (6 games with 1 partner), exposing them to a
greater variety of description schemes. Number of
games played can be discounted for the simple reason
that isolated pairs rapidly negotiate and maintain a
locally stable description scheme (Fay et. al., 2003;
Garrod & Doherty, 1994). Community members’
exposure to a greater number of exemplars is likely to
have a profound effect, as people are better able to learn
a prototype when exposed to its variants (Posner &
Keele, 1968). However, number of exemplars alone is
not enough; global coordination is necessary to derive a
stable underlying representation (Garrod & Doherty,
1994).
So what is ‘better’ about the graphical
conventions developed in the simulated community?
We believe there are two factors at play; iconicity and
systematicity. Like the present day Chinese character
for mountain (Figure 1), community representations
retain a degree of iconicity, i.e. once told what a
drawing represents it can be ‘seen’ as such. Again, like
Chinese characters, community drawings exhibit a
degree of systematicity that makes them easily
differentiable. We believe these factors explain the RT
advantage for graphical conventions found in
Experiment 2. At present this is pure conjecture.
Further testing is required.
As the saying goes, ‘A picture is worth a
thousand words’. That pictures have advantages over
words is supported by research showing that meaning is
extracted more quickly from pictures than from text
(Smith & McGee, 1980).
The current study
demonstrates that some pictures do this better than
others.

This research was supported in part by the National
Institute of Information and Communications
Technology, Japan, and the ESRC and EPSRC (grant
L323253003). We are grateful to Yasuhiro Katagiri
and three anonymous reviewers for their helpful
comments on an earlier draft of this paper.

368

References
Arbib, M. A. (in press). From Monkey-like Action
Recognition to Human Language: An Evolutionary
Framework for Neurolinguistics. To appear in
Behavioral Brain Sciences.
Cohen, J., MacWhinney, B., Flatt, M., & Provost, J.
(1993). PsyScope: An interactive graphic system for
designing and controlling experiments in the
psychology laboratory using Macintosh computers.
Behavior Research Methods, Instruments &
Computers, 25, 257-271.
Fay, N., Garrod, S., Lee, J., & Oberlander., J. (2003).
Understanding interactive graphical communication.
Proceedings of the 25th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, 2003, pp. 384-389.
Garrod, S., & Doherty, G. (1994). Conversation, coordination and convention: an empirical investigation
of how groups establish linguistic conventions.
Cognition, 53, 181-215.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the Wild. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Isaacs, E. A., & H. H. Clark. (1987). References in
conversations between experts and novices. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 116, 26-37.
Lewis, D. K. (1969). Convention: a philosophical
study. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Lewis, D. K. (1975). Language and languages. In K
Gunderson (Ed.), Language Mind and Knowledge
Minnesota studies in the Philosophy of Science (Vol.
7). Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Pelli, D. G., Burns, C. W., Farrell, B., & Moore, D.C.
(accepted with minor revisions). Identifying letters.
Vision Research.
Posner, M. I., & Keele, S. W. (1968). On the genesis of
abstract ideas. Journal of Experimental Psychology,
77, 353-363.
Smith, M.C. & McGee L.E. (1980). Tracing the time
course of picture-word processing. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 109, 373-392.
Vaccari, O., & Vaccari, E. E. (1961). Pictorial
Chinese-Japanese Characters. Fourth Edition, Tokyo:
Charles E. Tuttle Co.
Vygotsky. L. S. (1981). Mind in Society: The
Development of Higher Psychological Processes.
Harvard University Press.

