UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Development of Executable Cognitive Agents Using the COGNET Architecture and iGENTM
Toolset

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/7gj5d0n6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Zachary, Wayne
Szczepkowski, Michael A.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Development of Executable Cognitive Agents Using the COGNET
Architecture and iGENTM Toolset
Wayne Zachary (wzachary@chisystems.com)
CHI Systems, Inc.
1035 Virginia Drive, Fort Washington, PA 19034-3701

Michael A. Szczepkowski (mszczepkowski@chisystems.com)
CHI Systems, Inc.
1035 Virginia Drive, Fort Washington, PA 19034-3701
COGNET/iGENTM is a set of software tools (i.e., a
workbench) that enables human performance specialists to
develop, test and deploy cognitive agents -- software
components that exhibit a level of intelligence that mimic
human thought processes. Cognitive agents represent the
logical transition of research on human information
processing to practical application. Cognitive agents also
represent a new and growing paradigm for research in
decision support, intelligent human-computer interfaces,
intelligent tutoring, etc. From an application perspective,
cognitive agents empower the user by combining the speed,
efficiency and accuracy of the computer with the decisionmaking capacity, experience and expertise of human
experts. From a research perspective, they allow cognitive
models to be applied to problems of enhancing the
interaction between people and information technology in
complex work environments.
COGNET/ iGENTM incorporates computational models of
human cognitive processes as a basis for designing and
building software agents. At the same time, COGNET/
iGENTM incorporates many practical approaches from
software and systems engineering to maximize its ability to
meet real-world cognitive agent application needs. This
makes it fundamentally different from cognitive
architectures, which have been developed as vehicles to test
cognitive theories (e.g., ACT-R and theories of memory;
EPIC and theories of dual tasking and task performance).
This workshop introduces participants to the concepts of
cognitive agents and to the COGNET/ iGENTM method and
tools for cognitive agent development and prepares them to
undertake the development of cognitive agents applications.
This tutorial provides COGSCI attendees with a view of the
COGNET/ iGENTM cognitive architecture that emphasizes
the unique properties of COGNET/ iGENTM. It also
provides an introduction to the concepts and methods
involved in cognitive agents and their development,
providing participants with an important perspective linking
theory and practice.
The workshop begins with an examination of three major
uses for cognitive agents:
• Intelligent training and tutoring – specifically, the use
of cognitive agents to provide:

o embedded models of the student/trainee to track
student progress against the knowledge required
for the skill being trained;
o an embedded instructor/tutor that can manage
presentation of information, sequence
instruction, and provide feedback/remediation;
and/or
o synthetic teammates to facilitate practice and
teamwork in a simulated work environment.
• decision support and electronic performance support,
in the form of work-centered intelligent interfaces that
assist a worker or decision maker in such functions as
attention management, situation awareness, and/or
contextualizing decision strategies;
• human performance simulation, in the form of
simulations of system users to aid design engineering
and design evaluation, and/or synthetic players for
mission simulations and/or interactive games.
Examples of each type are provided.
The workshop then covers COGNET as a cognitive-agent
architecture based on cognitive theory. COGNET is
compared to other computational architectures that embody
theories of human thought and reasoning, and the features of
COGNET that support cognitive agent development are
identified. Particular focus is given to the features unique to
COGNET/ iGENTM – including metacognition, flexible
granularity, and expert-level knowledge structures – and to
the constructs that specifically focus on cognitive agent
requirements – temporal management, micromodels,
parallel execution threads, and external application
interfaces. The modeling strategies by which the system
can be used to represent complex behaviors such as
teamwork, coaching, and cognitive workload self-reporting
are discussed, as are the development tools available to
support modeling and the integration of models into larger
simulations, federations, or other applications.
For more information on the COGNET methodology and
iGENTM toolset, go to http://www.cognitiveagent.com.

5

