UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Discovering and Supporting Temporal Cognition in Complex Environments

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/82d5m4jt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Nemeth, Christopher
Cook, Richard

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Discovering and Supporting Temporal Cognition in Complex Environments
Christopher Nemeth (cnemeth@uchicago.edu)
Cognitive Technologies Laboratory, The University of Chicago MC4028,
5841 S. Maryland Avenue, Chicago, IL 60637 USA

Richard Cook (ri-cook@uchicago.edu)
Cognitive Technologies Laboratory, The University of Chicago MC4028,
5841 S. Maryland Avenue, Chicago, IL 60637 USA
Abstract
Building new information tools to support cognitive work
requires research at a level that, within the constraints of time
and resources, will reveal higher-order cognition among
practitioners. Practitioners develop cognitive artifacts in order
to perform technical work. As densely encoded representations
of work domains, their artifacts embody the most meaningful
information in the task setting. The study of cognitive artifact
development and use makes it possible to study individual and
team cognition. This approach reveals what information is
important, and how practitioners capture and use it. As replicas
of physical artifacts, digital cognitive artifacts often amount to
only meager representations of what matters in the work
environment. This clumsy automation imposes a burden on
practitioners by forcing them to cope with its shortcomings. In
this setting, user-centered automation must support reasoning
through time. The study of physical artifacts indicates ways that
digital artifacts might better support temporal reasoning.

Use of Cognitive Artifacts
to Understand Technical Work
The coordination of anesthesia assignments at a major urban
teaching hospital spans 50 to 80 cases a day and requires the
orchestration of multiple departments including anesthesia,
surgery, nuclear medicine, obstetrics and gynecology,
gastrointestinal endoscopy, diagnostic and interventional
radiology, and psychiatry. This activity involves a distributed
cognition (Hutchins, 1995), that is comprised of the shared
awareness of goals, plans, and details that no single individual
grasps. Through socially distributed cognition (Perry, 1999),
individuals cultivate the mutual awareness and understanding
that is needed to collectively accomplish shared goals.
Surgeons, anesthesiologists and the others at the hospital
work to a Standard of Medical Expertise (SME). Resources
among care settings, patient populations and system are
constrained and must be allocated prudently in order to meet a
Standard of Resource Use (SRU). (Sharpe and Faden, 1998). A
few of the senior anesthesiologists serve in the role of daily
coordinator, assigning staff to perform a full schedule of
anesthesia, sedation or pain management procedures each
weekday. To do this, the coordinator must evaluate the number
and types of procedures, determine the number and types of
1005

staff available, assign staff to perform procedures, and
evaluate the balance between the two. The coordinator
typically manages the execution of that schedule on the
following day. Management of this process involves the
synchronization of complex, changing activities through
time. This requires an accurate grasp of the number and
nature of available staff as well as an accurate, up-to-theminute account of procedures that have been performed so
far, are underway, and have yet to be performed within work
setting constraints.
Research into cognitive activity in this setting is
challenging for a number of reasons. Healthcare practitioners
may have little insight into how their work is organized.
Information and interaction at the sharp (operator) end is
dense, complex, varies widely, and changes rapidly. (Cook
and Woods, 1994)
In order to understand cognition in this environment, the
researcher needs to employ a number of methods. Woods
and Roth’s (1988) cognitive engineering approach studies
behavior in actual environments in order to change behavior
and to improve performance. Klein’s (2000) naturalistic
decision making (NDM) approach accounts for the
performance of decision makers in actual settings. Hutchins’
(1995) ethnomethodology describes how distributed
cognition includes artifacts that make it possible for a group
to accomplish shared goals.
The development and use of cognitive artifacts makes it
possible to perform the otherwise impossible process of
assignment coordination. Cognitive artifacts are an efficient
representation of what matters here because they represent
only the information that is critical in this work domain.
Previous work (Nemeth 2002, 2003a) describes the use of
observational studies to discover how the acute care team
uses cognitive artifacts to make the plan for the day’s work.
It also explains how controlled study of artifact creation
reveals the strategies that coordinators employ in order to
create a feasible future for the next day of procedures. Two
artifacts are essential to the coordinator while developing a
plan. The Daily Availabilities sheet is used to account for
the status of each of the members in the department who are
available for assignment. The preliminary copy of the Master
Schedule lists all procedures that are scheduled to be

performed the following day that will require anesthesia,
sedation or pain management. These two artifacts are the tools
that are used to create the Master Schedule.
An example shows how one coordinator uses the Daily
Availabilities sheet and the preliminary copy of the Master
Schedule to build a final version of the Master Schedule. Figure
1, from Nemeth (2003b), represents the schedule development
process in three ways. The left column shows the verbatim
transcript of how the coordinator describes his deliberations
using Verbal Protocol Analysis (VPA). The Daily Availabilities

and Preliminary Copy that he refers to are shown at center,
along with indications of where he is paying attention. A
diagram and comments at right show the analysis of his
cognitive activity as he assigns available attending and
resident anesthesiologists to cover procedures in eight
outpatient clinic rooms. After scoping the supply of staff
resources and evaluating the type and number of procedures,
the coordinator assigns staff to particular procedures and then
assesses the assignments. In eleven minutes, he has assigned
attending and resident anesthesia staff to perform a day’s

Copyright (c) 2004 Christopher Nemeth. All rights reserved.

Figure 1:Anesthesia Coordinator Schemata Analysis (selected portion)
1006

IOR

OR Time

End Time

Cls/Rr

Patient Name

Age

Primary Surgeon Anesthes Anes Procedures

Progress St

IOR1

07:30

11:30

SDA

Smith, Christine

17yrs Barnes

Connor
Watts

GEN Resection of Subaortic Membr In OR

IOR1

12:15

16:15

SDA

Delano, Ashley

4mos Barnes

Connor
Watts

GEN Left Upper Lobectomy

IOR3

07:30

09:30

SDA

Malone, Anna

77yrs Potter

Ellenson
Morey

GEN Left Total Knee Replacement In OR

IOR3

10:15

11:45

SDA

Perry, Helen

62yrs Potter

Ellenson GEN Hip Total Arthroplasty, Cement R-325
Morey

Event

R-404

IOR2

Copyright (c) 2004 Christopher Nemeth All rights reserved

Figure 2: Master Schedule Physical Artifact (upper) and OpAssign format (lower)
All names are fictitious

outpatient procedures. This planning process requires deep
domain knowledge and deft diplomacy. It also requires the
ability to exploit opportunities, to create trial solutions and to
.
assess their possible consequences. No two coordinators
approach the process in the same way. Until recently, the
coordinator would use only hard copies of the artifacts to
develop the Master Schedule. During the day the coordinator
would track and update case status by making marks on the
Master Schedule hard copy that was posted at the Inpatient
Operating Rooms (IOR) coordinator station. Team members
also used the OR Board, a white marker board with magnetic
plaques, as a platform to discuss assignments, negotiate tradeoff decisions, plan and re-plan assignments, speculate about
how to re-balance changes in demand and staff.

Digital Artifact Concerns
Hard copies of the Master Schedule have recently been replaced
by a computer-based system, OpAssign. The Daily Availabilities
remains a hard copy report that the coordinator refers to while
composing the Master Schedule.
The OpAssign display is an alphanumeric table that is
1007

shown on a flat screen monitor. As a mimic of the physical
Master Schedule, OpAssign shows surgical procedures that
are organized by room and by time of day within the room.
All procedures are represented by alphanumeric characters
and each procedure occupies the same amount of space in
the layout. Colored bars are intended to indicate case status
such as called for, arrived on unit, in OR, in-progress,
delayed, and concluded. Procedures appear identical on the
display even though they differ as markedly in criticality and
duration as a circumcision and a coronary artery bypass graft
(CABG).
A number of changes have occurred as a result of the
transition from physical to digital cognitive artifact.
The physical artifact had previously made it possible for
the coordinator to control the accuracy of information that
was used to make decisions. Only the coordinator would
make marks on the one original hard copy that was posted at
the coordinator station. The physical artifact also allowed
for the coordinator to make margin notes to keep track of
unofficial, yet important information such as the name and
extension of a staff member who had called with information

that pertained to a case. Now that the Master Schedule is no
longer a physical artifact, neither the coordinator nor the acute
care team can annotate it.
Data field limitations force certain compromises in the
information that can be shown. Many elements of information
are truncated on the OpAssign display. Details can only be found
by drilling down through multiple levels of the interface.
Information on case status was traditionally written onto the
Master Schedule hard copy by the coordinator as a patient was
wheeled past the coordinator station toward an IOR room. Now,
case status must be entered via laptop from a very busy IOR
room. This means that information on the Master Schedule
display can lag actual events by 30 minutes or more. The lag
causes the coordinator to second guess the display and to do
additional cognitive work to check on case status. It also erodes
the coordinator’s ability to manage decisively.
Case location on the original hard copy remained the same.
Team members could use the fixed location for each case to
find and refer to it. As case status changes through the day on
OpAssign, their location on the screens also changes and team
members have to search to find them.
These and other shortcomings have caused team members
to do additional cognitive work to cope with limitations of the
digital display, impeding team performance. Figure 3 shows
OpAssign in use at the coordinator station.

environment. Figure 4 illustrates a conceptual prototype for
a digital version of the Master Schedule information that
draws on the findings from research into coordinator schedule
development and team schedule use. Six of the IOR rooms
are shown in the figure. Information on each case is shown
in a horizontal bar that is aligned next to the label of the
operating room to which it is assigned. A shaded segment
follows each procedure to indicate the 45 minute period that
is required to clean-up and restock the room. The arrow at
top of the display indicates that the time is 0800 on the day
of procedures that are being conducted in the Inpatient
Operating Room (IOR) unit.
IOR1 shows that a half hour is open after the first
procedure and clean-up have been completed. The procedure
that is scheduled for 0730 to 1330 in IOR2 has just been
cancelled and the display indicates that the room is scheduled
and prepared for use. IOR3 shows that cases are scheduled
efficiently. IOR4 is available for any general surgery to be
added on after 1215. Somehow, the second procedure
scheduled for IOR6 has been slated to start before the
technicians would be able to finish clean-up. The solid bar
can be used to display more information on the cases by
choosing it with an input device such as a mouse or touching
the screen.
Certain information is crucial in order to optimize
assignments. This includes knowing when procedures are
likely to finish, which procedures can be moved into another
room, and which opportunities (such as Medicare payment)
might be exploited. Such information can be made available
by polling the database of scheduled cases to see what
opportunities may exist.
The example in Figure 4 is based on research into the
work domain in which it would be used. Because of this, it
avoids many of the shortcomings that the OpAssign display
encountered. It may also improve on the OpAssign design in
a number of respects.
The visual organization of the display remains the same as
it evolves. By using a graphic representation of time, the
team can understand and evaluate relationships among events
through time.
Relevant variables such as age are shown within each case
window, which saves the need to locate and assemble
information that is related but is displayed separately.
Cases that were performed remain on the display in
sequence, making it possible to review the entire day’s
activities while they are still underway.

Figure 3: OpAssign Display at Coordinator Workstation

Opportunities to Improve Displays
Interestingly, both the hard copy of the Master Schedule and
the OpAssign display list scheduled start and end times.
However, neither of these two reflect the time-related
demandsand complexity that are the primary drivers in this
1008

Aspects of schedule management that were previously
hidden are made evident. These include requirements that
are the objects of coordinator cognitive work such as showing
conflicts and gaps in timing, and constraints on schedule
management such as room clean-up and restocking.

IOR1
CARDIAC

S

0730

0800

0900

1000

1100

1200

1300

Smith, Christine 17yr

Delano,Ashley

Resection of Subaortic Membrane (pump)
Loc: SDA, Sur: Barnes, An:Connor, AnRes: Watts

Left Upper Lobectomy
Loc: SDA, Sur:.. 1615 X

IOR2
CARDIAC

1330 X

IOR3

Malone, Anna 77yr

Perry, Helen 62yr

Spinner, Ruth 70yr

ORTHO

Left Total Knee Replacement
Loc: SDA, Sur: Potter, An:Ellen, AnRes: Mo...

Hip Total Arthroplasty, Cemented
Loc: SDA, Sur: Potter, An:Ellen...

Left Knee Total...
Loc: SDA ...1430 X

IOR4

Morrow, Billy 53yr

GENERAL

IOR5
GENERAL

IOR6
GENERAL

Kidney Transplant Live Donor
Loc: SDA, Sur: Harney, An:Rupert, AnRes:

Norcross, Anette 59yr

Pullman, Katherine 53yr

Laparascopic Cholesystectomy Poss Open
Loc: 23, Sur: Alberta, An:Calumet, AnRes: Palevsky

Laparoscopic Roux-en-y Gastric Bypass
Loc: SDA, Sur: Alberta, An:Calumet, AnRes: Pal... 1345 X

Miller, Edwin 82yr

Timmerman, Bruce 7yr

Bronchoscopy, Mediastinoscopy
Loc: SDA, Sur: Formosa, An:Colem..

Right Thorachotomy, Sleeve Lobectomy (double lumen tube)
Loc: SDA, Sur: Potter, An:Ellen, AnRes: More

Copyright (c) 2004 Christopher Nemeth. All rights reserved.

Figure 4: Prototype Digital Display of the Master Schedule
All names are fictitious

Adding Value to Cognitive Tools
Any tools that are created to assist these complex and highly
sensitive interactions need to reflect the underlying complexity
of the work that is to be performed. A digital version of the
Master Schedule might improve team performance by
supporting work in ways that the research that was described
earlier in this paper demonstrated.
The flexibility that digital representation offers is powerful
and can be used to support cognitive work. However, this does
not happen automatically. The digital artifact’s design must
represent constraints and opportunities that are relevant in this
domain. Because time is the key aspect here, organizing display
design according to time allows users to easily track changes,
to anticipate future events, and to respond to emerging
situations.
Further features such displays might provide include:
Prompting—Digital artifacts might survey information in
the distributed cognition for gaps and inconsistencies that go
unnoticed and unaccounted for. Nominating the item(s) for
consideration would enrich and improve the cognition.
1009

Speculation—Digital artifacts can enable coordinators
to speculate about and choose among possible courses of
action. For example, speculation about plans for the afternoon
staff is currently limited to the OR Board. Developing
potential courses of action would make it possible to evaluate
how desirable they might be.
Consequences—Applying evaluation criteria to potential
courses of action could make it possible to display the
consequences of choices. One example is to show how billing
might be increased, or costs might be minimized, by opening
one operating room or closing another.
Value-based decisions—Digital artifacts can be used to
develop templates of schedule planning strategies.
Coordinators could review and use the template that best
matches their values and preferences. Such templates can
capture scheduling expertise and make it available beyond a
single individual. Study of template use through time might
open the way to insights about coordinator training and the
development of further schedule models that might ease
coordinator workloads.

Conclusion
This paper has described a detailed study of the operational
aspects in a complex, high hazard work setting, assessed the
role and effect of physical and digital cognitive artifacts on
cognitive work, and presented a display concept that embodies
the task demands that workers confront. Support for the cognitive
work of those who labor in this setting is the hallmark of usercentered automation. (Billings, 1997)
As a readily available source of information, cognitive
artifacts make it possible to study cognition in complex
environments. Because those who work in the environment have
created them, artifacts are highly encoded representations of
what matters most in complex settings. The creation and use of
cognitive artifacts also provide the researcher with a means to
understand deeper structure of behavior in the work domain.
Findings from such research can be used to identify the
functions of computer-supported displays that are needed to not
only support but to improve performance. Validation of those
findings and related display designs will come from operator
acceptance in actual use. Improving work efficiency and
reliability can make it possible for work teams to be more
effective, thereby improving medical safety.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by a grant from the National Library
of Medicine.

References
Billings, C. (1997). Aviation Automation: The Search for
a Human Centered Approach. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Cook, R.I. and Woods, D. (1994). Operating at the Sharp
End: The Complexity of Human Error. In Bogner, M.
S. (Ed.). Human Error in Medicine. (pp.255-310).
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the Wild. Cambridge,
MA: The MIT Press.
Klein, G. (2000). Sources of Power. Cambridge, MA: The
MIT Press.
Nemeth, C. (2003a). How Cognitive Artifacts Support Acute
Care Distributed Cognition, In Cook, R. and Woods, D.,
Insights From Technical Work Studies in Healthcare,
Symposium at Human Factors and Ergonomics Society
National Conference, Denver.
Nemeth, C. (2003b). The Master Schedule: How Cognitive
Artifacts Affect Distributed Cognition in Acute Care.
Dissertation Abstracts International 64/08, 3990,
(UMI No. AAT 3101124).

1010

Nemeth, C., Cook, R.I., O’Connor, M., and Klock, P.A.
(2003, October) Using Cognitive Artifacts to Understand
Distributed Cognition. In Xiao, Y., Special Session on
Distributed Planning. IEEE International Conference on
Systems, Man & Cybernetics, Washington, D.C.
Nemeth, C., Klock, P.A., Daves, S., and Cook. R.I. (2002,
October). A Study of How Cognitive Artifacts Affect
Distributed Cognition in Operating Room Management.
Proceedings of the American Society of Anesthesiologists
Annual Meeting. Orlando.
Perry, M. (1999). The Application of Individually and
Socially Distributed Cognition in Workplace Studies:
Two Peas in a Pod? Proceedings of European Conference
on Cognitive Science, pp.87-92, Sienna, Italy.
Sharpe, V. and Faden, A. (1998) Medical Harm. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Weiner, E. (1985). Beyond the Sterile Cockpit. Human
Factors, 27: 1,75-90.
Woods D., and Roth E. (1988). Cognitive Systems
Engineering. In Helander, M. (Ed.) Handbook of HumanComputer Interaction. pp. 3-43. Amsterdam: NorthHolland.

