UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Do eye movements go with fictive motion?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6470q99t

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Matlock, Teenie
Richardson, Daniel C.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Do eye movements go with fictive motion?
Teenie Matlock (tmatlock@psych.stanford.edu)
Department of Psychology, Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305 USA

Daniel C. Richardson (richardson@psych.stanford.edu)
Department of Psychology, Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305 USA

Language is also full of sentences such as (2a) and (2b).

Abstract
Cognitive scientists interested in the link between language and
visual experience have shown that linguistic input influences eye
movements. Research in this area, however, tends to focus on
literal language alone. In the current study, we investigate
whether figurative language influences eye movements. In our
experiment, participants viewed two-dimensional depictions of
static spatial scenes while they heard either fictive motion
sentences, such as The palm trees run along the highway, or
non-fictive motion sentences, such as The palm trees are next to
the highway. Overall, sentence type influenced participants’ eye
movements. Specifically, gaze duration on the figure (e.g., palm
trees) was longer with fictive motion sentences than with nonfictive motion sentences. Our results demonstrate that figurative
language influences visual experience. They provide further
evidence that fictive motion processing includes mentally
simulated motion.

(2a) The road goes through the desert
(2b) The fence follows the coastline
These sentences are figurative because they contain a
motion verb (e.g., goes, follows) but express no actual
motion (Matlock, 2001).1 They contrast with literal
sentences with motion verbs, such as The bus goes through
the desert, or The herd of sheep follows the coastline, which
feature mobile agents that move from one point in space and
time to another (Talmy, 1975; Miller & Johnson-Laird,
1976).
Despite the absence of actual movement with sentences
such as (2a) and (2b), they have been claimed to involve
fictive motion, an implicit mental simulation of “movement”
through a construed scene (Talmy, 1983, 1996, 2000). On
this view, the conceptualizer subjectively “scans” from one
part of the scene to another, most notably, along the figure
(i.e., prominent entity, subject noun phrase referent). For
(2a), this means “moving” along the road, and for (2b), it
means “moving” along the fence. According to the
argument, fictive motion is a way to impose motion on what
is otherwise a static scene. It enables the language user to
compute information about the layout of a scene, for
instance, a road in a desert in (2a), or a fence aligned with a
coastline in (2b). Importantly, Talmy (1996) and other
cognitive linguists do not maintain that fictive motion
involves vivid imagery whereby the conceptualizer “sees”
himself or herself (or any other animate entity) moving
point by point along the figure in the scene being described.
Instead, they take the motion to be relatively fleeting and
tacit. (See also Langacker’s abstract motion, 1986, 2000,
and Matsumoto’s subjective motion, 1996).2
At first, the claim that people simulate motion while
processing descriptions of static scenes seems bizarre. Why
would motion be processed, for instance, with sentences
such as (2a) and (2b) when neither the road nor the fence is

Introduction
Imagine that you and a friend are sitting in a courtyard
chatting. During the course of the conversation, you
occasionally glance over at a long, thin stationary object on
the ground. You assume the object is a tree branch or a
walking stick until your friend says, “Oh! Look what
slithered onto the courtyard.” At that point, your perceptions
and conceptions of the object dramatically change. The
object goes from a piece of wood to a snake.
Situations like these––in which language influences the
interpretation of objects and actions––are ubiquitous. The
question addressed here is whether this influence is limited
to literal language, or whether it also includes figurative
language. We are especially interested in whether sentences
such as The road goes through the desert or The fence
follows the coastline (figurative because they include a
motion verb but express no motion) affect eye movements.
Our results suggest they do.

What We Know about Fictive Motion
Everyday language is replete with sentences such as (1a)
and (1b). These are literal descriptions of static scenes.

1

Like Rumelhart (1979) and Gibbs (1994), we do not maintain a
hard and fast distinction between “literal” and “figurative”. We
simply use these terms here to operationalize two types of motion
verb constructions: those that express motion and those that do not.
2
Our study looks at just one type of fictive motion, Talmy’s
(2000) co-extension path fictive motion. There are many others.

(1a) The road is in the desert
(1b) The fence is on the coastline
909

capable of movement? Perhaps it is more reasonable to
assume that such sentences are yoked to a purely static
representation, as proposed by Jackendoff (2002). On this
view, the representation underlying sentences such as (2a)
and (2b) is static and atemporal. It is not unlike the
representation underlying the literal sentences shown in (1a)
and (1b), in which all points along the figure are activated
simultaneously rather than incrementally.
Recent experimental work suggests that mental
simulation, a fundamental part of cognition (e.g., Schwartz
& Black, 1999; Freyd, 1983; Barsalou, 1999) generalizes to
fictive motion. In several reading studies, Matlock (in
press) investigated whether thinking about motion would
affect fictive motion processing. In one study, participants
read vignettes about fast or slow travel through a large-scale
spatial region (e.g., driving in a desert), and then a fictive
motion critical sentence, such as The road goes through the
desert. Participants were quicker to read the critical
sentences after reading about fast motion than they were
after reading about slow motion. The same effects were also
observed with easy versus difficult terrains, and with short
versus long distances. Critically, the effect was not obtained
with non-fictive motion test sentences at the end of the same
stories, such as The road is in the desert. In sum, the results
show that thinking about motion influences the processing
of fictive motion sentences, but not the processing of
comparable non-fictive motion sentences. They provide
evidence that simulating motion is part of fictive motion
understanding.
Matlock, Ramscar, and Boroditsky (2003a, 2003b)
investigated whether engaging in thought about fictive
motion would influence metaphoric construal of time in the
way that engaging in thought about real motion has been
shown to do (see Boroditsky, 2000; Boroditsky & Ramscar,
2002). In one experiment, participants were primed with
fictive motion sentences or non-fictive motion sentences
(e.g., The tattoo runs along his spine versus The tattoo is
next to his spine) before reading this ambiguous question:
“Next Wednesday’s meeting has been moved forward two
days. When is the meeting now that it has been
rescheduled?”3 When primed with fictive motion (congruent
with an ego-moving construal), people were more likely to
say, “Friday”, suggesting they viewed themselves “moving”
forward in time. When primed with non-fictive motion
(congruent with a time-moving construal), people were more
likely to say, “Monday”, suggesting they viewed time as
“moving” toward them. Another experiment issued this
same question with one of two primes: The road goes all the
way to New York (fictive motion away from conceptualizer),
The road comes all the way to New York (fictive motion
toward conceptualizer). The results indicated that people
were more likely to respond “Friday” after the away prime
and more likely to respond “Monday” with the toward

prime. They suggest that people take a perspective and
simulate motion when thinking about fictive motion, and
that that in turn affects the way they perform abstract
reasoning, such as reasoning about temporal movement.
Hence, people simulate motion when processing
figurative sentences such as The road runs along the coast,
and this naturally affects conceptual representation. Given
this, we would like to know whether fictive motion also
influences perceptual processing.

What Eye Movements Can Tell Us
Eye movements have been measured during a range of
cognitive and perceptual activities (for review, see
Richardson & Spivey, 2004). Scene perception has been
studied in terms of the "bottom up" statistical properties of
the image that attracts eye fixations, and in terms of the "top
down" knowledge, beliefs or expertise that might affect how
one person inspects a scene differently from another (for
review, see Henderson, 2003). In a separate research
tradition, eye tracking has been used to investigate reading,
which engages both linguistic and perceptual processing
(Rayner, 1998; Tinker, 1946).
Until recently the intersection between language and
visual perception––looking at a scene and listening to a
voice––had not been studied. The advent of head-mounted
and remote eye tracking devices has allowed researchers to
place participants in relatively rich, natural visual contexts
and record how the eyes respond to spoken instructions and
descriptions. Such experiments have yielded a surprisingly
close integration between incremental linguistic processing
and visual perception, demonstrating that eye movements to
possible referents in the world are used to resolve temporary
ambiguities in word recognition and syntactic structure
(Tanenhaus, Spivey-Knowlton, Eberhard, & Sedivy, 1995),
and to predict upcoming agents based on thematic role
information (Altmann & Kamide, 2004).
Language has also been shown to modulate eye
movements even when there is nothing to look at. In studies
by Spivey and colleagues (Spivey & Geng, 2001; Spivey,
Tyler, Richardson, & Young, 2000), people stared at a blank
screen or closed their eyes and listened to a story that was
spatially extended along an axis, for example, a story about
a train going past, or a sequence of activities occurring on
successive floors of a tall apartment block. While listening,
participants’ saccades tended to be extended along the
horizontal or vertical axes that were consistent with those
communicated in the story.
Whether it is in the presence of temporary ambiguity, or
in the absence of visual input, linguistic input has been
shown to influence eye movements. However, with the
current surge of interest in language and vision (e.g.,
Henderson & Ferreira, 2004) one question has been left
behind. What about figurative language? Does it influence
eye movements? If so, how? This is an important question,
for figurative language is not restricted to poetic or literary
works. It is at least as pervasive in every day talk as literal

3
The question is ambiguous because people are just as apt to
answer Friday as they are Monday when the question is posed
without any prime. (See Boroditsky, 2000; Boroditsky & Ramscar,
2002 for discussion.)

910

sentences that described the filler pictures were also
recorded.
We conducted three norming studies on our sentences
and pictures. In the first, 57 Stanford undergraduates judged
all FM- and NFM-sentences on a scale of 1 to 7, in which 1
indicated “makes no sense at all” and 7 indicated “makes
good sense”. The mean for all FM-sentences was 5.85 and
the mean for all NFM-sentences was 6.02. A t-test showed
no reliable difference between the two, t(31) = 1.16, p > .1.
In the second norming study, 28 undergraduates rated pairs
of FM- and NFM-sentences on how similar they were in
meaning. They used a scale of 1 to 7, in which 1 indicated
“not at all similar” and 7 indicated “very similar”. The
mean for all sentence pairs across all subjects was 6.04, with
the highest average at 7 and the lowest average at 5.25. In a
third norming study, 12 undergraduates judged our pictures
and sentences on how well they went together. Overall, the
sentence-picture combinations were judged as wellmatched. The means were 6.63 FM-horizontal, 6.58 FMhorizontal, 6.53 NFM-horizontal, and 6.34 NFM-vertical. A
one-way ANOVA yielded no difference, F(3, 63) = .04, p >
.1, showing that they were equally good descriptions.
Together, the norming studies indicate that (a) all FMand NFM-sentences were equally sensible in meaning, (b)
all FM- and NFM-sentences described comparable
information, and (c) all FM- and NFM-sentences were
equally good descriptions of the pictures.

language, if not more pervasive (see Gibbs, 1994; Katz,
Cacciari, Gibbs, & Turner, 1998; Lakoff, 1987).

Experiment
In the current study, participants viewed static depictions of
scenes while they heard fictive motion and non-fictive
motion sentences. Of interest was whether there would be
differences between the eye movements that accompanied
fictive motion sentences, such as The palm trees run along
the highway, and those that accompanied non-fictive motion
sentences, such as The palm trees are next to the highway.
On the surface, the sentences convey similar information:
Both include a linearly extended subject noun phrase
reference (e.g., palm trees) and both describe a static spatial
scene. However, the former has been argued to involve
mentally simulated motion or scanning along the figure, but
the latter has not. Would participants spend more time
inspecting figures with fictive motion sentences than figures
with non-fictive motion sentences? Longer gaze durations
on regions of interest with fictive motion sentences would
suggest mentally simulated motion or scanning.

Method
Participants
A total of 24 Stanford University psychology students
participated for course credit. All had normal or correctedto-normal vision.

Horizontal landmark
FM
The books run along the wall
NFM The books are on the wall

Design
Gaze durations were recorded along the axis referred to by
the subject of the sentence (the compatible region) and
along the axis not referred to by the subject of the sentence
(the incompatible region). Half the sentences included
fictive motion language and half did not. Therefore, the
experiment was a 2 x 2 design, with compatibility as one
factor and sentence type as the other.

Vertical landmark
FM The cord runs along the wall
NFM The cord is on the wall

Stimuli
Sixteen pictures served as the primary visual stimuli. Each
depicted a simple spatial scene and featured both a
horizontally extended figure and a vertically extended
figure, for example, a river extending from top to bottom,
and a fence extending left to right. A further 16 pictures
were used as filler items. All pictures were matched on level
of color luminance.
Sixteen blocks of recorded English sentences served as
primary stimuli. Each block contained two sentence pairs.
Each pair included a FM-sentence (fictive motion sentence)
and a comparable NFM-sentence (non-fictive motion
sentence), for example, The cord runs along the wall, and
The cord is on the wall. One sentence pair referred to the
vertical object in a picture and the other referred to the
horizontal object in that same picture. Figure 1 displays an
example picture and its block of sentences. Sixteen

Figure 1. Example of picture with vertical and
horizontal fictive motion and non-fictive motion
sentences.

911

Apparatus
An ASL 504 remote eye tracking camera was positioned at
the base of a 17” LCD stimulus display. Participants were
unrestrained, and sat approximately 30” from the screen.
The camera detected pupil and corneal reflection position
from the right eye, and the eye tracking PC calculated pointof-gaze in terms of coordinates on the stimulus display. This
information was passed every 33ms to a PowerMac G4
which controlled the stimulus presentation and collected
gaze duration data. Prior to the experimental session,
participants went through a 9 point calibration routine,
which typically took between 2 and 5 minutes.

Results and Discussion
For a quantitative analysis, we compared total gaze
durations to the vertical region of the picture (regions 2 to 7)
and the horizontal region of the picture (regions 8 to 13).
Each accompanying sentence described either the horizontal
or vertical element in the picture. Thus our data could be
expressed in terms of gaze durations to the compatible and
the incompatible regions. 4
We conducted a 2 (compatibility) x 2 (sentence)
ANOVA. There was a main effect of compatibility,
indicating that our participants spent more time inspecting
the compatible portion of the grid containing the figure
described in the sentences, F(1,23) = 5.51 , p < .03. There
was also a main effect of sentence, revealing a reliable
difference between inspection time for FM-sentences (M=
995) and inspection time for NFM-sentences (M=827),
F(1,23) = 10.18, p < .001. Most importantly, there was a
reliable interaction between these factors, F(1,23) = 6.00, p
< .03, shown in Figure 3. Tukey’s HSD revealed that the
only cell that differed from all others was gaze duration to
the compatible region with fictive motion sentences (p <
.01).

Procedure
Once a successful eye track was established, participants
were told to “Look at the pictures and listen to the
sentences.” On each trial, a picture appeared 1000ms before
the sentence began, and then remained in view for 2000ms
after the sentence finished. There was a 2000ms interstimulus interval, during which participants saw a gray
screen, roughly isoluminant with the pictures.
Following 4 practice trials, each participant was
presented with a random sequence of 16 experimental and
16 filler trials. Each experimental picture was accompanied
by one of four sentences that described the picture (e.g.,
vertical FM-sentence). Sentence presentation varied such
that each participant heard 4 vertical FM-sentences, 4
horizontal FM-sentences, 4 vertical NFM-sentences, and 4
horizontal NFM-sentences.

Compatible
Incompatible

1200

Coding
The screen was partitioned into 17 non-overlapping regions
of interest, corresponding to a central square, six squares
spanning the horizontal axis, six squares spanning the
vertical axis, and four squares in each corner (see Figure 2).
During the period that the experimental picture was
onscreen, total gaze durations in each region were recorded.

1100
msec

1000
900
800
700
600

Fictive

Non-Fictive

Figure 3. Gaze durations to compatible and
incompatible picture regions only differed when the
sentence employed fictive motion.
As predicted, people spent more time gazing at the region of
a picture associated with the figure in fictive motion input
than with the figure in non-fictive motion input, especially
when the figure in the picture was compatible with the
Figure 2. Grid defining relevant
superimposed on grayed example picture.

regions

4

Example recordings of eye tracks can be seen at
http://psychology.stanford.edu/~richardson/ficmot.
912

figure in the sentence. Taken together, our results show that
fictive motion sentences had a consistent and dramatic
effect on eye movements, most notably on the compatible
region of interest.

Acknowledgements
We thank Elsie Wang and Teresa-Bulygo for helping with
our norming studies. We also thank Michael Spivey,
Herbert Clark, Paul Maglio, Daniel Casasanto, and Gordon
Bower for insightful comments.

General Discussion

References

Participants in our preliminary study spent more time
inspecting the compatible region of interest in spatial scenes
when they heard fictive motion sentences than when they
heard non-fictive sentences. The results demonstrate that
figurative language influences eye movements in consistent
and predictable ways. The results are in line with other
work on fictive motion (Matlock, in press; Matlock,
Ramscar, & Boroditsky, 2003a, 2003b), and they suggest a
dynamic mental representation that mirrors perception or
enactment of motion (e.g., Barsalou, 1999, Glenberg, 1999).
One explanation for the results obtained here is that
when our participants were presented with fictive motion
input, they mentally simulated motion along the figure, and
then their eye movements mirrored that internal simulation.
For example, on hearing the sentence The road runs through
the desert, participants conceptually “moved” along a road
and then their eye movements enacted a congruent
simulation. Another not incompatible explanation assigns a
more active role to eye movements. It might be that
participants’ eye movements were central to simulation and
building an appropriate representation of the figure. For
example, on hearing the sentence The road runs through the
desert and seeing a depiction of that scene, participants’ eye
movements allowed them to incrementally construct an
appropriate model of the road. If this is the case, then
perhaps eye movements allowed participants to simulate and
compute some information about the scene externally (for
related views, see Spivey, Richardson, & Fitneva, in press;
Spivey, et al 2000).
Are there other explanations for longer gaze durations
with fictive motion sentences? For instance, could it be that
people activated the literal meaning of the motion verb in
fictive motion sentences, and that that literal interpretation
led to longer inspection times? Based on the results
reported here, we cannot rule out this possibility entirely.
But we would argue that our compatibility results suggest
that this is not likely. Namely, if the verb alone –
independent of the figurative meaning of the fictive motion
sentence – brought on longer gaze durations, we would not
have seen selective differences in the axis of orientation
(vertical versus horizontal). After all, the motion verb alone
provided no information about direction.
Our data show that figurative language, like literal
language, influences eye movements. We argue that this is
because fictive language evokes a dynamic mental
simulation, and that this simulation determines how the
visual system interprets and inspects the world. Further
research will reveal how these simulations occur and the
extent to which they mirror perception or enactment of
physical motion in the world.

Altmann, G. T. M., & Kamide, Y. (2004). Now you see it,
now you don’t: mediating the mapping between language
and the visual world. In J. M. Henderson & F. Ferreira
(Eds.), Interfacing Language, Vision, and Action. San
Diego: Academic Press.
Barsalou, L.W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems.
Behavioral & Brain Sciences, 22 , 577-660.
Boroditsky,
L.
(2000).
Metaphoric
Structuring:
Understanding time through spatial metaphors. Cognition,
75, 1-28.
Boroditsky, L. & Ramscar, M. (2002). The Roles of Body
and Mind in Abstract Thought. Psychological Science,
13(2), 185-188.
Freyd, J.J. (1983). The mental representation of movement
when static stimuli are viewed.
Perception &
Psychophysics, 33, 575-581.
Gibbs, R. W., Jr. (1994). The Poetics of Mind : Figurative
Thought, Language, and Understanding. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Glenberg, A. M. (1999). Why mental models must be
embodied. In G. Rickheit, & C. Habel (Eds.), Mental
models in discourse processing and reasoning. New
York, NY: North-Holland.
Henderson, J. M. (2003). Human gaze control in real-world
scene perception. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7, 498504.
Henderson, J. M., & Ferreira, F. (Eds.). (2004). The
integration of language, vision, and action: Eye
movements and the visual world. New York: Psychology
Press.
Jackendoff, R (2002). Foundations of language. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Katz, A.N., Cacciari, C., Gibbs, R.W., & Turner, M. (Eds.)
(1998). Figurative language and thought. New York,
NY: Oxford University Press.
Lakoff, G. (1987). Women, Fire, and Dangerous Things:
What Categories Reveal about the Mind. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.

913

Spivey, M.J., Tyler, M.J., Richardson, D.C., & Young, E.E.
(2000). Eye movements during comprehension of spoken
scene descriptions. The Proceedings of the Twentysecond Annual Cognitive Science Society Meeting, 487492.

Langacker, R.W. (1986). Abstract motion. Proceedings of
the Twelfth Annual Meeting of the Berkeley Linguistics
Society, 455–471.
Langacker, R. W. (2000). Virtual reality. Studies in the
Linguistic Sciences, 29, 77-103

Talmy, L. (1975). Semantics and syntax of motion. In J. P.
Kimball (Ed.), Syntax and Semantics, Volume 4 (pp.181–
238). New York, NY: Academic Press.

Matlock, T. (in press). Fictive motion as cognitive
simulation. Memory & Cognition.
Matlock, T. (2001). Fictive motion is real motion.
Presentation at Seventh International Cognitive
Linguistics Conference (ICLC), Santa Barbara.

Talmy, L. (1983). How language structures space. In H.
Pick, & L.P. Acredolo (Eds.), Spatial orientation: Theory,
research, and application (pp. 225-282). New York:
Plenum Press.

Matlock, T., Ramscar, M., & Boroditsky, L. (2003a). The
experiential basis of meaning. Proceedings of the 25th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.

Talmy, L.
(1996). Fictive motion in language and
“ception”. In P. Bloom, M.A. Peterson, L. Nadel, & M.F.
Garrett (Eds.), Language and space (pp. 211-276).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Matlock, T., Ramscar, M., & Boroditsky, L. (2003b). The
experiential basis of motion language. Proceedings of
Language, Culture, and Cognition: An International
Conference on Cognitive Linguistics. Braga, Portugal.

Talmy, L. (2000). Toward a Cognitive Semantics, Volume
I: Conceptual Structuring Systems. Cambridge: MIT
Press.

Matsumoto, Y. (1996). Subjective motion and English and
Japanese verbs. Cognitive Linguistics, 7, 183-226.

Tanenhaus, M. K., Spivey Knowlton, M. J., Eberhard, K.
M., & Sedivy, J. C. (1995). Integration of visual and
linguistic information in spoken language comprehension.
Science, 268(5217), 1632-1634.

Miller, G. & Johnson-Laird, P. (1976). Language and
perception. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Rayner, K. (1998). Eye movements in reading and
information processing: 20 years of research.
Psychological Bulletin, 124(3), 372-422.

Tinker, M. A. (1946). The study of eye movements in
reading. Psychological Bulletin.

Richardson, D. C., & Spivey, M. J. (2004). Eye Movements.
In Wenk. G. & Bowlin, G. (Eds.) Encyclopedia of
Biomaterials and Biomedical Engineering. Marcel
Dekker, Inc.
Rumelhart, D.E. (1979). Some problems with the notion of
literal meaning. In A. Ortony (ed). Metaphor and Thought.
Cambridge University Press.
Schwartz, D. L., & Black, T. (1999). Inferences through
imagined actions: Knowing by simulated doing. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 25, 116–136.
Spivey, M.J., & Geng, J.J. (2001). Oculomotor mechanisms
activated by imagery and memory: Eye movements to
absent objects. Psychological Research/Psychologische
Forschung, 65, 235-241.
Spivey, M.J., Richardson, D.C., & Fitneva, S.A. (in press).
Thinking outside the brain: Spatial indices to visual and
linguistics information. In J. Henderson & F. Ferreira
(Eds.), Interfacing Language, Vision, and Action. San
Diego, CA: Academic Press.

914

