UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Enhancing Simulation-Based Learning through Active External Integration of
Representations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/56q471j6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Author
Bodemer, Daniel

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Enhancing Simulation-Based Learning through
Active External Integration of Representations
Daniel Bodemer (d.bodemer@iwm-kmrc.de)
Knowledge Media Research Center, Konrad-Adenauer-Str. 40
72072 Tuebingen, Germany

oriented way and therefore interact with the simulations
rather randomly (e.g., de Jong & van Joolingen, 1998;
Schauble, Glaser, Raghavan, & Reiner, 1991).
Additional problems may be caused by the dynamic
visualization of the simulated concepts. On the one hand the
externalization of dynamic processes may prevent learners
from performing cognitive processes relevant to learning on
their own (e.g., Schnotz et al., 1999). On the other hand
dynamic visualizations may overburden the learners’
cognitive capabilities due to large amounts of continuously
changing information, particularly if the output variables are
represented as non-interactive animations that do not
provide learners with the possibility to adjust the playback
speed or to watch single frames (e.g., Lowe, 1999). In order
to cope with these requirements, learners frequently make
use of a strategy that limits their processing to selected
aspects of a dynamic visualization, which are often not the
most relevant aspects of the visualization, but rather those
that are most perceptually compelling (cf. Lowe, 2003).
In order to support simulation-based discovery learning it
has been suggested to structure the learners’ interactions
with the learning environment (e.g., van Joolingen & de
Jong, 1991). Typically, these support methods guide
learners to focus on specific variables of the underlying
model, to generate hypotheses about relationships between
these variables, to conduct experiments in order to test the
hypotheses, and to evaluate the hypotheses in light of the
observed results. Furthermore, various instructional support
methods have been developed to facilitate specific processes
of discovery learning, such as offering predefined hypotheses or providing experimentation hints (e.g., Leutner, 1993;
Njoo & de Jong, 1993; Swaak, van Joolingen & de Jong,
1998). However, empirical results regarding these methods
of instructional guidance are ambiguous (cf. de Jong & van
Joolingen, 1998). Learners frequently did not make
sufficient use of the instructional support to increase their
learning outcomes.
One way to explain these findings is that learners lack
prior knowledge necessary to benefit from complex visualizations. Learners who do not know enough about the
domain of the visualized and simulated concept have
problems processing complex dynamic visualizations and to
interact with them in a goal-oriented way, even if they have
enough information about useful learning behavior (cf.
Leutner, 1993; Lowe, 1999; Schauble et al., 1991). Another
reason – which is not independent from prior knowledge –
is the difficulty of interconnecting multiple representations.
Usually, simulations are embedded in multimedia learning

Abstract
Discovery learning with computer simulations is a demanding
task for many learners. Frequently, even fostering systematic
and goal-oriented learning behavior does not lead to better
learning outcomes. This can be due to missing prerequisites
such as the coherent mental integration of different types of
representations comprised in the simulations and in the
surrounding learning environment. Prior studies indicated that
learning performances can be enhanced by encouraging
learners to interactively and externally relate different static
sources of information to each other before exploring
dynamic and interactive visualizations. In an experimental
study addressing the domain of mechanics it was largely
confirmed that the active external integration of representations can improve simulation-based learning outcomes.

Introduction
Computer-based learning environments increasingly
comprise simulations in terms of dynamic and interactive
visualizations to illustrate complex processes and abstract
concepts. These simulations may be highly interactive in
that they allow learners to change input variables by
entering data or by manipulating visual objects and to
observe the consequences of these changes in the dynamic
visualizations as well as in additional representations such
as numeric displays, formulas or text labels.
The conceptual model underlying the simulations has
frequently to be inferred by the learners in processes of
discovery learning, which correspond to the steps of scientific reasoning: defining a problem, stating a hypothesis
about the problem, designing an experiment to test the
hypothesis, carrying out the experiment and collecting data,
evaluating the data, and (re-)formulate a hypothesis. The use
of simulations frequently aims at inducing active learner
behavior and constructive learning processes (e.g., de Jong
& van Joolingen, 1998; Rieber, Tzeng & Tribble, in press).
Learners have to self-regulate their learning behavior in
order to discover the underlying conceptual model, which is
assumed to lead to the acquisition of deeper domain
knowledge (e.g., Schnotz, Boeckheler, & Grzondziel, 1999).
However, it has shown that learners encounter difficulties in
all phases of the discovery learning process. For example,
learners have problems formulating useful hypotheses,
designing appropriate experiments, and evaluating the
output variables adequately (e.g., de Jong & van Joolingen,
1998; Njoo & de Jong, 1993; Reigeluth & Schwartz, 1989;
Reimann, 1991). Moreover, many learners have difficulties
in planning their experiments in a systematic and goal-

138

This external process corresponds largely to the mental
process of structure mapping as described by Gentner
(1983; Gentner & Markman, 1997) and Schnotz and
Bannert (1999). While (inter-)actively relating different
sources of information is intended to directly support
coherence formation, the simultaneous construction of an
integrated format is supposed to gradually reduce unnecessary cognitive load (e.g., Chandler & Sweller, 1991, 1992).
Bodemer et al. (in press) were able to demonstrate that –
compared to the presentation of information in a preintegrated or in a split-source format – learning outcomes
can be improved significantly when learners actively
integrate static information before interacting with dynamic
visualizations

environments and presented in combination with symbolic
external representations such as text and formulas. These
different kinds of representations may complement each
other, resulting in a more complete representation of the
illustrated concept (e.g., Ainsworth, 1999; Larkin & Simon,
1987). Both Mayer (1997, 2001) in his theory of multimedia
learning and Schnotz and Bannert (1999, 2003) in their
integrative model of text and picture comprehension place
emphasis on the importance of integrating textual and
pictorial information into coherent mental representations
during multimedia learning. However, learners are frequently not able to systematically relate multiple external
representations to each other. As a consequence, these
learners fail to integrate the different external representations into coherent mental representations, resulting in
fragmentary and disjointed knowledge structures (e.g.,
Ainsworth, Bibby, & Wood, 2002; Seufert, 2003). Accordingly, to facilitate simulation-based learning it seems to be
important not only to support learners in dealing with the
dynamics and the interactivity of the simulations, but also to
help them in relating the dynamically visualized information
to corresponding information of other external representations.
To facilitate learning with multiple external representations it has been repeatedly suggested to present textual and
pictorial information in a spatially integrated format instead
of presenting them separately from each other in a “splitsource” format (e.g., Chandler & Sweller, 1991, 1992;
Mayer, 1997, 2001; Tarmizi & Sweller, 1988). According to
cognitive load theory (Sweller, 1988; Sweller, van Merriënboer, & Paas, 1998) this can reduce unnecessary visual
search resulting in a decrease of cognitive load and thus
better learning. Another suggested method to support
learners in making connections between different sources of
information is to link the features of multiple representations by various symbolic conventions such as using the
same color for corresponding entities in different representations (e.g., Kalyuga, Chandler, & Sweller, 1999; Kozma,
2003; Kozma, Russell, Jones, Marx, & Davis, 1996). While
these instructional suggestions have the potential to reduce
cognitive load, they do not directly support learners in
constructing meaningful knowledge. Learners may nevertheless remain rather passive, concentrating on surface
features of the visualizations and they may still be unable to
mentally process and integrate the represented information
in an adequate way (cf. Ploetzner, Bodemer & Feuerlein,
2001; Seufert, 2003).
Bodemer, Ploetzner, Feuerlein & Spada (in press) tried to
initiate more active processes of coherence formation by
encouraging learners to systematically and interactively
integrate different multiple representations in the external
environment. Learners were provided with spatially separated pictorial and symbolic representations on the screen and
were asked to relate components of familiar representations
to components of unfamiliar representations by dragging the
symbolic represented elements and dropping them within
the visualizations (see Figure 1).

Figure 1: Active integration of information while learning
statistics (cf. Bodemer et al., in press).
Bodemer et al. (in press) found the largest benefit of
active integration when teaching extremely complex
statistics concepts. In this paper an experimental study will
be described which investigates possible benefits of active
integration in another application domain with a slightly
lower degree of complexity. It is hypothesized that also in
less complex domains learners who actively integrate
multiple representations will outperform those learning with
a pre-integrated format. However, the advantage of active
integration should rise with the degree of complexity of the
learning material.
In order to avoid influences of assessment on the processes of discovery learning, Bodemer and his colleagues
assessed the learning outcomes only after the learners had
interacted with the dynamic visualizations. Thus they could
not identify if knowledge has been acquired already during
the process of active integration or afterwards during the
process of discovery learning or both. In the study described
below the learners’ knowledge has been assessed both after
integrating static representations and after interacting with
dynamic visualizations. It is hypothesized that already the
active integration of static representations can lead to better

139

pre-integrated format and (2) active integration of information. In the first condition the learners had to deal with
visualizations that were already labeled while in the second
condition the learners had to establish a relationship
between the symbolic representation and the visualizations
by dragging and dropping the symbolic representations onto
the visualizations. The within-subjects factor was time of
assessment: After the integration of multiple representations
(test 1) and after the exploration of dynamic and interactive
visualizations (test 2).

learning outcomes. Additionally, learners who integrate
multiple representations actively should improve comparatively more during simulation-based discovery learning.

Method
In this experimental study the participants learned various
mechanics concepts in two consecutive learning phases. In
the first learning phase they were provided with symbolic
representations and static versions of dynamic and interactive visualizations. In the second learning phase they
explored dynamic and interactive visualizations in a selfguided way.

Participants
Forty-eight students (22 males and 26 females, aged 19 to
31) of the University of Tuebingen were randomly assigned
to each of the two experimental conditions. They were paid
for their participation. To prevent a high level of prior
knowledge students of Mathematics and Physics were
excluded as participants.

Design
The experiment used a 2 x 2 factorial design with repeated
measures on the second factor. The first factor addressed
two levels of information integration, which was varied in
learning phase 1: (1) presentation of the information in a

Figure 2: Active integration of information about mechanics concepts (learning phase 1).

140

The test material consisted of a knowledge test, given to
the learners prior to the first learning phase, and two tests,
which assessed the knowledge after each of the two learning
phases. The tests were made up of different types of
questions, which all required reasoning and transfer, and
contained graphical elements in either the question or the
answer or both: (1) questions which addressed transformations from textual to graphical representations, (2) questions
which addressed transformations from graphical to textual
representations, and (3) questions which addressed transformations within graphical representations. The pre-test
and the first post-test consisted of six questions (two of each
type); the second post-test consisted of 12 questions (four of
each type). The participants’ answers were scored by two
independent raters.

Material
The application domain was comprised of various mechanics concepts, such as uniform and accelerated motion in
one dimension. The instructional material consisted of two
parts corresponding to the two learning phases:
(1) an instructional text accompanied by static visualizations, presented in the first learning phase on a computer
(cf. Figure 2). The instructional text covered the left side of
the screen and comprised three pages between which the
learners could switch back and forth. The right half of the
screen showed static versions of dynamic and interactive
visualizations comprising the sketch of a moving car with
corresponding velocity and acceleration vectors, a positiontime graph, a velocity-time graph, and an acceleration-time
graph. The presentation differed according to the two
experimental groups of the first factor. In the group with
pre-integrated information components of the visualizations
were labeled with textual and algebraic information;
whereas in the active integration group the learners interactively related the textual and algebraical information from
the instructional text to the visualizations and thus created
an integrated format on their own.
(2) dynamic and interactive visualizations, which were
presented in the second learning phase (cf. Fig. 4). The
visualizations were taken from the interactive learning
environment PAKMA (Blaschke & Heuer, 2000). They
correspond to the graphs of learning phase 1 with the
addition that they could be modified by interactively
changing variables and by running animated motion
sequences.

Procedure
At the beginning of the experiment, all participants took the
pre-test (20 minutes). Thereafter, learners of the condition
active integration of information could train dragging and
dropping of objects in a neutral domain (2 minutes). In
learning phase 1 the participants were provided with the
static versions of the dynamic and interactive visualizations
accompanied by the instructional text (30 minutes). The
information was either provided in a pre-integrated format
or required learners to actively integrate it on their own.
Then the learners took post-test 1 (20 minutes), followed by
learning phase 2, in which the participants explored the
dynamic and interactive visualizations without instructional
guidance (15 minutes). Finally, the learners took post-test 2
(40 minutes). All participants had to spend the same time on
the tasks.

Results
With regard to the pre-test there were no statistically
significant differences between the groups for any of the test
categories. The results of the post-tests are presented in the
following. Table 1 shows the means and the standard
deviations for the three types of questions: textual-graphical,
graphical-textual, and graphical-graphical. Table 2 shows
the results of a multivariate (Wilks-Lambda) and univariate
two-way analyses of variance with repeated measures on the
factor time of assessment.
The analyses of variance revealed a significant effect of
information integration for those test questions which
addressed transformations from graphical to textual
representations. Learners with active integration performed
better than with pre-integrated information in all categories
of both tests; however, with regard to the two other types of
questions the comparisons failed to reach statistical
significance. The factor time of assessment had a significant
effect on the test categories graphical-textual and graphicalgraphical as well as across all types of questions. However,
there were no interaction effects indicating that learners of
both groups improved their knowledge during the exploration of the dynamic and interactive visualizations to
approximately the same degree.

Figure 3: Dynamic simulation displaying motion in one
dimension (learning phase 2).

141

shows that active integration of information – compared to
the presentation of information in a pre-integrated format –
can lead to the acquisition of knowledge already during
learning with static symbolic and pictorial representations,
and not only in combination with dynamic and interactive
visualizations.
Contrary to expectations learners who actively integrated
different representations were not able to improve comparatively more during simulation-based discovery learning.
This may be due to the relatively low amount of additional
information provided by the dynamic and interactive
visualizations compared to their static versions. The static
graphs already contained dynamic information by representing time on one axis. Ainsworth and van Labeke (2003)
state that dynamic representations that express the relation
between a variable and time do not contain more information than the same representation in a static form. Except for
the illustration of the car with the corresponding velocity
and acceleration vectors this applies to the dynamics of the
simulation used in this study. However, the simulations
contained additional information by providing the possibility to change variables interactively. But the number of
changing options was very limited compared to the dynamic
and interactive visualizations used by Bodemer et al. (in
press).
The results differed with respect to the codalities of the
test items. It appeared, that not only the retrieval cue
codalities have to be considered (cf. Brünken, Steinbacher,
Schnotz & Leutner, 2001); but also the codality of the
learners’ response effects the test result. Active integration
of information was particularly helpful for answering
questions that required transformations from graphical to
textual representations.
Future research should consider the different codalities of
test items as well as differences of visualizations and
simulations with respect to the dynamics and the interactivity. Moreover, the learners’ prior knowledge and the
complexity of the learning task have to be accurately
analyzed in further studies because they seem to significantly affect the use of actively integrating multiple
representations.

Additionally performed t-tests revealed that, on average,
learners with active integration already achieved better
learning outcomes after the first learning phase. Against the
expectations, these differences between the groups slightly
diminished in the second assessment after learning phase 2.
Table 1: Relative solution frequencies and standard
deviations in both post-tests for the different questions.
Information
integration
PreM
integrated SD
Actively M
integrated SD
M
Overall
SD

textual-graphical graphical-textual graphical-graphic.
Test 1
.74
.26
.84
.24
.79
.25

Test 2
.71
.28
.78
.26
.74
.27

Test 1
.21
.28
.37
.26
.29
.28

Test 2
.40
.26
.52
.23
.46
.25

Test 1
.55
.26
.67
.29
.61
.28

Test 2
.66
.28
.69
.22
.67
.25

Table 2: The results of the multivariate and univariate
two-way analyses of variance.
Source of variance

Dependent variable

df

F

Information integration

Across all types of questions
textual-graphical
graphical-textual
graphical-graphical

3, 44
1, 46
1, 46
1, 46

1.48
1.83
4.32*
1.07

Time of assessment

Across all types of questions
textual-graphical
graphical-textual
graphical-graphical

3, 44
1, 46
1, 46
1, 46

10.05**
1.48
27.91**
4.05*

Time of assessment x
Information integration

Across all types of questions
textual-graphical
graphical-textual
graphical-graphical

3, 44
1, 46
1, 46
1, 46

.56
.13
.39
1.51

Between subjects

Within subjects

Note: * p < .05, ** p < .01

Discussion
This paper investigated the benefit of an instructional
support method to support learning with dynamic simulations in multimedia learning environments. Learners were
encouraged to interactively and externally relate different
static sources of information to each other before exploring
dynamic simulations. In an experimental study the active
integration of multiple representations was compared to the
presentation of information in a pre-integrated format as
suggested by Chandler and Sweller (1991, 1992) and Mayer
(1997, 2001). The application domain was mechanics. It
was hypothesized that learners who initially integrate
multiple representations actively achieve better learning
outcomes as found by Bodemer et al. (in press) for the
domain of statistics.
The results largely confirmed that encouraging learners to
actively integrate symbolic and static representations during
multimedia learning can improve learning. Moreover, it

Acknowledgements
The work reported in this paper was supported by the
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG).

References
Ainsworth, S. (1999). The functions of multiple representations. Computers and Education, 33, 131-152.
Ainsworth, S., Bibby, P. A., & Wood, D. J. (2002).
Examining the effects of different multiple representational systems in learning primary mathematics. Journal
of the Learning Sciences, 11(1), 25-62.
Ainsworth, S. & van Labeke, N. (in press). Multiple forms
of dynamic representation. Learning and Instruction.

142

Njoo, M., & de Jong, T. (1993). Supporting exploratory
learning by offering structured overviews of hypotheses.
In D. M. Towne & T. de Jong & H. Spada (Eds.), Simulation-based experiential learning (pp. 207-223). Berlin:
Springer Publishers.
Ploetzner, R., Bodemer, D., & Feuerlein, I. (2001).
Facilitating the mental integration of multiple sources of
information in multimedia learning environments. In C.
Montgomerie & J. Viteli (Eds.), Proceedings of the World
Conference on Educational Multimedia, Hypermedia &
Telecommunications (pp. 1501-1506). Norfolk, VA:
Association for the Advancement of Computing in Education.
Reigeluth, C. M., & Schwartz, E. (1989). An instructional
theory for the design of computer-based simulations.
Journal of Computer-Based Instruction, 16(1), 1-10.
Reimann, P. (1991). Detecting functional relations in a
computerized discovery environment. Learning and
Instruction, 1, 45-65.
Rieber, L. P., Tzeng, S.-C. & Tribble, K. (in press).
Discovery learning, representation, and explanation
within a computer-based simulation: Finding the right
mix. Learning and Instruction.
Schauble, L., Glaser, R., Raghavan, K., & Reiner, M.
(1991). Causal models and experimentation strategies in
scientific reasoning. The Journal of the Learning Sciences, 1, 201-239.
Schnotz, W., & Bannert, M. (1999). Einflüsse der Visualisierungsform auf die Konstruktion mentaler Modelle beim
Text- und Bildverstehen [Influence of the type of
visualization on the construction of mental models during
picture and text comprehension]. Zeitschrift für
Experimentelle Psychologie, 46(3), 217-236.
Schnotz, W., & Bannert, M. (2003). Construction and
interference in learning from multiple representation.
Learning and Instruction, 13(2), 141-156.
Schnotz, W., Boeckheler, J., & Grzondziel, H. (1999).
Individual and co-operative learning with interactive
animated pictures. European Journal of Psychology of
Education, 14(2), 245-265.
Seufert, T. (2003). Supporting coherence formation in
learning from multiple representations. Learning and
Instruction, 13(2), 227-237.
Swaak, J., van Joolingen, W. R., & de Jong, T. (1998).
Supporting simulation-based learning: The effects of
model progression and assignments on definitional and
intuitive knowledge. Learning and Instruction, 8(3), 235252.
Sweller, J. (1988). Cognitive load during problem solving:
Effects on learning. Cognitive Science, 12, 257-285.
Sweller, J., van Merriënboer, J. J. G., & Paas, F. G. W. C.
(1998). Cognitive architecture and instructional design.
Educational Psychology Review, 10(3), 251-296.
Tarmizi, R. A., & Sweller, J. (1988). Guidance during
mathematical problem solving. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 80(4), 424-436.
van Joolingen, W. R. & de Jong, T. (1991). Supporting
hypothesis generation by learners exploring an interactive
computer simulation. Instructional Science, 20(5-6), 389404.

Blaschke, K., & Heuer, D. (2000). Dynamik-Lernen mit
multimedial-experimentell
unterstütztem
WerkstattUnterricht [Learning dynamics in multimedia projects].
Physik in der Schule, 38(2), 1-6.
Bodemer, D., Ploetzner, R. Feuerlein, I. & Spada, H. (in
press). The active integration of information during
learning with dynamic and interactive visualizations.
Learning and Instruction.
Brünken, R., Steinbacher, S., Schnotz, W., & Leutner, D.
(2001). Mentale Modelle und Effekte der Präsentationsund Abrufkodalität beim Lernen mit Multimedia [Mental
models and the effects of presentation and retrieval mode
in multimedia learning]. Zeitschrift für Pädagogische
Psychologie, 15, 15-27.
Chandler, P., & Sweller, J. (1991). Cognitive load theory
and the format of instruction. Cognition and Instruction,
8(4), 293-332.
Chandler, P., & Sweller, J. (1992). The split-attention effect
as a factor in the design of instruction. British Journal of
Educational Psychology, 62, 233-246.
de Jong, T., & van Joolingen, W. R. (1998). Scientific
discovery learning with computer simulations of conceptual domains. Review of Educational Research, 68(2),
179-201.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.
Gentner, D., & Markman, A. B. (1997). Structure mapping
in analogy and similarity. American Psychologist, 52(1),
45-56.
Kalyuga, S., Chandler, P., & Sweller, J. (1999). Managing
split-attention and redundancy in multimedia instruction.
Applied Cognitive Psychology, 13, 351-371.
Kozma, R. (2003). The material features of multiple
representations and their cognitive and social affordances
for science understanding. Learning and Instruction,
13(2), 205-226.
Kozma, R.B., Russell, J., Jones, T., Marx, N., & Davis, J.
(1996). The use of multiple, linked representations to
facilitate science understanding. In S. Vosniadou, E. De
Corte, R. Glaser & H. Mandl (Eds.), International perspectives on the design of technology supported learning
environments (pp. 41-61). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Larkin, J.H., & Simon, H.A. (1987). Why a diagram is
(sometimes) worth ten thousands words. Cognitive Science, 11, 65-99.
Leutner, D. (1993). Guided discovery learning with
computer-based simulation games: effects of adaptive and
non-adaptive instructional support. Learning and Instruction, 3, 113-132.
Lowe, R. K. (1999). Extracting information from an
animation during complex visual learning. European
Journal of Psychology of Education, 14(2), 225-244.
Lowe, R. K. (2003). Animation and learning: Selective
processing of information in dynamic graphics. Learning
and Instruction, 13(2), 157-176.
Mayer, R. E. (1997). Multimedia learning: Are we asking
the right questions? Educational Psychologist, 32(1),
1-19.
Mayer, R. E. (2001). Multimedia learning. New York, NY:
Cambridge University Press.

143

