UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Error-Reduction and Simplicity: Opposing Goals in Classification Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1f43j7z9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Author
Blair, Mark

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Error-Reduction and Simplicity: Opposing Goals in Classification Learning
Mark Blair (mrblair@indiana.edu)
Indiana University, Department of Psychology
1101 E. Tenth Street, Bloomington, IN 47405 USA
Abstract

which the categories separate, can be expensive to represent.
Completely altering the dimensions used for categorization
can require more energy than using unique stimulus-level
elements to classify exceptions. This leads to the
memorization of exceptions, rather than a refining of the cue
set. It is clear that category learning is influenced by
opposing forces; one to enlarge, and one to reduce the
dimensionality of the cue set.
The present research examines the complementary
processes of the expansion and reduction of the cue set
toward effective and efficient representation. The goal of the
present study is to verify that participants can and do
optimize their cue sets using both expansion and reduction
when learning categories with subtle dimensions. Previous
research has demonstrated these complimentary processes
by manipulating the stimulus set to provide a new
dimension (Blair & Homa, 2003b). These studies produced
wide individual differences, with many participants
incorporating new dimensions to eliminate category
exceptions, and many others choosing to rely on simple cue
sets which result in many exceptions and significant error.
The Blair and Homa (2003b) studies also showed that
participants can shift to optimal spaces if they are less
complex. Overall, in these studies participants demonstrated
both the flexibility found in studies of expertise and the
insistence on simplicity found in studies of knowledge
restructuring.
Many real world category learning problems do not
involve learning new information never experienced before,
but rather involve learning to be sensitive to stimulus
features that have existed all along, but may have been
overlooked for more salient dimensions. For example in
bird identification, color is an obvious perceptual cue, used
by experts and novices alike. To tell the difference between
a Hepatic Tanager and a Summer Tanager, both of which
are predominantly red, one must notice the color of the bill
and whether the bird has a gray ear patch or not. These are
features that novices are prone to miss. The present studies
use two obvious dimensions as well as a subtle third
dimension as a direct analogy to those cases.

Studies of real world experts show that they use different and
subtler regularities than novices to make effective
classifications. In laboratory studies of learning however,
participants have a strong preference for simple cue sets, even
at the expense of accuracy. The present experiments
investigate participants’ ability to use subtle stimulus
dimensions in order to eliminate category exceptions. Results
show that some participants were able to use the optimal 3cue set, but many could not. When there were two optimal
cue sets, one with 2 dimensions and one with 3, participants
favored the simpler set, even though it meant ignoring an
obvious and diagnostic cue. Overall there were wide
individual differences, with almost every cue set adopted by
some participants. Current theories of attention that posit
rapid shifts of learned attention offer promise in accounting
for the results.

For any organism to adapt successfully it must become
sensitive to meaningful regularities in the environment.
Humans have developed flexible learning systems, allowing
them to rapidly adjust to changing environments. Learning
concepts, representations of classes of stimuli that 4require
an equivalent response, conserves resources by reducing the
amount of information that needs to be processed from the
environment, and also allows for generalization to related,
novel circumstances. Representing a complex environment,
with abundant interdependencies and subtle regularities
requires a rich set of concepts.
To perform this function, the human perceptual system
can attend selectively, become sensitized to highly complex
stimulus dimensions, and even create novel functional
features. These processes affect the perception of a stimulus
and therefore alter the representation of that stimulus.
Differences in cue use and representation across experts and
novices appear in many areas such as biology (Boster &
Johnson, 1989), physics (Chi, Feltovich, & Glaser, 1981),
computer programming (Davies, 1994), wine tasting
(Solomon, 1997), bird identification (Johnson & Mervis,
1997) and pocket billiards (Blair & McBeath, 2001).
Despite an abundance of differences between expert and
novice differences in cue use, laboratory studies of learning
(specifically “knowledge restructuring”) have shown that
participants have had a strong resistance to using new
information and more complicated cue sets, even though
they would afford better performance (Lewandowsky,
Kalish & Griffiths, 2000).
To the extent that learning is error driven, exceptions in
the cue set provide a powerful motivator to incorporate new
dimensions, however, there is also a pressure toward
simplicity. Additional dimensions, which may a space in

Experiment 1
In Experiment 1, a sequential presentation same-different
task was employed to examine the discriminability of the
three dimensions used in the remaining experiments, and an
additional dimension (color) used in a related set of studies
(Blair & Homa, 2003b). If the stimuli are to be used in later
experiments, they should be of roughly equal
discriminability, with the exception of tail bumpiness,
which should be significantly less discriminable than the
other three dimensions.

126

consequential dimensions should elicit a ‘different’
response, any other variations were to be ignored. On each
trial, the first stimulus was shown for 2000 msec, and then
the screen went blank for 1000 msec. Finally, the second
stimulus appeared, and remained on screen until the
participant responded. There were 144 trials and of the 144
stimulus pairs, 72 were ‘same’ pairs and 72 were ‘different’.
Of the 72 ‘same’ trials, 36 were pairs showing exactly the
same stimulus and 36 were pairs of stimuli that had the
same values on the consequential dimensions, but were
created separately. Of the 72 ‘different’ pairs, there were
three stimuli from each of three levels of variation (1, 2 and
4 units) from each of the four main dimensions (head
diameter, tail angle, color, and tail bumpiness). The lower,
upper and middle parts of the range of variation were used
for each trio of stimuli associated with a level of variation.
For example, for 1 unit variations on head diameter, the
three stimulus pairs might include a pair with 25 and 32pixel heads, a pair with 93 and 86-pixel heads and a pair
with 48 and 54-pixel heads. The values of the remaining
three dimensions, which did not vary between members of a
stimulus pair, were randomly assigned. They were
approximately equally distributed across the possible range
of values.

Figure 1: Two Example Stimuli. Tail angle, head diameter,
and bumpiness of the tail are the three primary dimensions
of variation. Stimuli could take on any one of 11 values on
or between the two extremes shown here.

Method
Participants Participants were 26 undergraduates from
Arizona State University who participated for course credit.
All participants were naïve as to the purpose of the test.

Results and Discussion

Stimuli Examples of the stimuli are shown in Figure 1.
These stimuli were created in the graphics program Adobe
Photoshop. Designed to look like something seen under a
microscope, these fictitious microorganisms offer a ready
analogy to expertise domains such as medical diagnostics.
Stimuli varied in one of four different dimensions: head
diameter, tail angle, color, and tail bumpiness. Head
diameter varied from 25 to 100 pixels. Tail angle varied
from 0 to 90 degrees. Color, in RGB values, ranged from
65-75-230 to 139-75-30. These colors were set so that they
were of equivalent luminosity, that is, they look the same
shade of gray if viewed as a black and white image. The tail
bumpiness was created by using brushes with “spacing” set
from 60 to 90. The full range of the variation was broken up
into 11 equal sized steps, thus dimensions were always one
of those 11 values. In addition to possible variations in the
four principle dimensions, the tail of each microorganism
was hand drawn on top of a line of the correct angle and
thus represented a source of stimulus-specific variation. A
Gaussian noise filter (30-unit) was also applied to each
stimulus. Afterward, a “crystallization” filter (3-pixel) was
applied to the stimulus area around, but not including, the
microorganism.

To establish that the three primary dimensions are of
roughly equal discriminability and that they are all more
discriminable than the subtle dimension, a single-factor
repeated measures ANOVA was run, using change type
(diameter, angle, color, bumpiness, values and same).
Results, depicted in Figure 2, showed a significant main
effect of change type, F(5,120)=104.80, p<.0001. Scheffe
post-hoc tests revealed that color was not significantly
different from either angle or diameter, but that performance
on differences in angle were detected significantly more
often than differences in diameter, showing that these three
dimensions are roughly, but not perfectly equal. The
Proportion of 'different' responses

0.90

P r o c e d u r e The entire experimental task, including
instructions, was displayed on computer. The experimental
task was a sequential same-different task in which
participants were shown two stimuli, one at a time, and
asked to judge whether they were the same or different.
Participants were shown two example stimuli and the four
main dimensions of variation were indicated. Participants
were instructed that only variations on the four

0.80

1
1,2

0.70

2

0.60
0.50

3

0.40
0.30

3
4

0.20
0.10
0.00
Angle

Color

Head

Bumpiness

Values

Same

Figure 2: Data from Experiment 1. Groups with different
numbers above the bar are significantly different from one
another. The striped bars indicate trial blocks where a
‘different’ was incorrect.

127

proportions of ‘different’ responses for each of these three
dimensions were significantly higher than for ‘same’ trials,
establishing that participants have the ability to detect these
changes. Performance on these three dimensions was also
significantly better than on bumpiness, thus, supporting its
classification as a subtle dimension. Despite worse
performance on the subtle dimension, participants
responded ‘different’ significantly more frequently on trials
with changes on this dimension, than on ‘same’ trials.
Finally, performance on ‘bumpiness’ trials did not differ
significantly from performance on ‘values’ trials, where
changes in the way the stimuli were drawn preserved the
values of the four key dimensions. Because participants
were instructed to ignore the kinds of changes that occur on
‘values’ trials, they were likely responding without being
aware of what kind of changes they saw. The equivalence of
performance on these two trial types suggests that
participants may be responding with an equivalent lack of
awareness on ‘bumpiness’ trials. This further supports the
classification of the bumpiness dimension as subtle.

Figure 3: The stimulus space used in Experiment 2,
plotted for stimuli with and without the subtle
bumpiness dimension.
Procedure The experiment had two stages with each stage
consisting of a learning phase and a transfer phase. The
learning phase included four blocks of 56 trials. Within a
trial block every stimulus in the learning set was presented
once. The presentation order was randomized for each trial
block, and for each participant. On each trial, the participant
was shown a stimulus and asked to classify it as ‘normal’ or
‘deviant’. Once the participants indicated their choice by
pressing the appropriate key (‘n’ or ‘d’) on the keyboard, the
correct answer was presented next to the stimulus for 2000
msec. If the participant answered incorrectly, the feedback
was red instead of black. After the learning phase,
participants performed a transfer task in which they
classified two cycles of 16 novel stimuli. The transfer set
presented after the three-dimensional stimulus set consisted
of 8 stimuli on either side of the best three-dimensional
linear decision boundary at a range of values. These values
were such that if participants were using the best
combination of angle and diameter dimensions, or any one
of the three dimensions alone, they would achieve 50%
correct. Participants were not given feedback during the
transfer task. Stage 2 was a repetition of Stage 1, except for
the instructions, as determined by the condition. For all
conditions, the instructions encouraged participants to
achieve perfect classification for both Stage 1 and Stage 2.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 used the subtle dimension of tail bumpiness.
This procedure makes this experiment an apt analog to real
world categories that experts must master. The effect of
pointing out the subtle dimension to participants was
investigated using three between-subjects conditions: Help,
No-Help (NH) and No-Help/Help (NH-H). In the Help
condition participants were told in the instructions at the
beginning of the experiment that tail bumpiness is an
important cue in helping to classify the stimuli correctly. In
the NH condition, participants were never told about tail
bumpiness. In the NH-H condition, participants were given
this information at the beginning of Stage 2.

Method
Participants Participants were 83 Arizona State University
undergraduates enrolled in an introductory psychology
course. They participated for course credit. They were
randomly assigned to one of three conditions: Help (n=33),
NH (n=24), NH-H (n=26).

Results and Discussion
Overall performance was equally good whether or not
participants were told about the usefulness of the subtle
dimension (Help, M=87%; NH, M=88%; NH-H, M=88%).
The dimension of primary interest is tail bumpiness. Single
group t-tests against zero revealed that NH-H condition
showed significant increase in the use of tail bumpiness in
the second stage, t(25)=2.34, p<.05, but the other conditions
showed no significant change in tail bumpiness from Stage
1 to Stage 2. The instructions clearly increased the use of
tail bumpiness. The NH group had the lowest use of tail
bumpiness, with the NH-H group significantly increasing
their use of tail bumpiness, after being instructed to do so.

Stimuli The stimuli had three principal dimensions of
variation: head size, tail angle and tail bumpiness as
described in Experiment 1.
Structure The two categories used were linearly separable
only in three dimensions; therefore the best lower
dimensional bounds always had exceptions. The best twodimensional linear decision boundary left 14% of the
exemplars as exceptions and the best single dimension
linear decision boundary left 30% as exceptions. Figure 3
shows the training stimuli plotted in the angle/diameter
space and also bumpiness/angle/diameter space.

128

Table 1: Percentages of participants for which each cue set
accounts for most of the transfer test responses from
Experiment 2.
Condition
NH
NH-H
H
NH
NH-H
H

Stage Bump Angle
1
36% 11%
1
29% 14%
1
43% 14%
2
16% 32%
2
56% 11%
2
32% 22%

Diam
18%
14%
6%
13%
11%
7%

which participants are able find the most efficient cue set if
it required using fewer dimensions.
The instruction manipulation was dropped for this
experiment; all participants were in the equivalent of the NH
condition. Also, individual differences in this experiment
were expected to be more important because there were
multiple effective strategies. Accordingly, a larger number
of participants were tested.

D/A B/D/A
29% 7%
32% 11%
26% 11%
26% 13%
4% 19%
15% 24%

Method
Participants Participants were 96 Arizona State University
undergraduates enrolled in an introductory psychology
course. They participated in the experiment to fulfill a
course requirement.

Individual differences in the adoption of the various cue
sets were assessed by the transfer test. Participants were
sorted according to the cue set that best matched their
responses. Because all dimensions were present in the
transfer stimuli, it was possible for a participant’s responses
to fit two different cue sets equally well. In such cases both
cue sets were counted and the percentage reported was
calculated across all preferences not all participants. That
said, the large majority of participants preferred only one
cue set. The percentages of preferences for each cue set are
reported in Table 1.
Overall, many participants seemed to make use of the
subtle dimension of tail bumpiness early in training; even
without having it brought to their attention. Use of the
subtle dimension was increased by instructions however,
and though participants in the NH condition showed no
performance deficit by the end of Stage 2, the transfer test
reveals that they used tail bumpiness least. The general
findings of this experiment mirror the Blair & Homa
(2003b) studies using an obvious 3rd dimension, instead of
the subtle one, namely some participants incorporated the
3rd dimension while others stuck with one or two suboptimal dimensions. One question still open is whether or
not more participants would adopt a cue set which separates
the categories if it had fewer dimensions. This question is
addressed in Experiment 3.

Structure In order to detect the use of the various possible
2-D spaces during transfer, the stimulus values for the
training and transfer stimulus spaces were altered from
Experiment 2. As in the Experiment 2 space, individually,
diameter and angle were 70% predictive. The bumpiness
dimension was 73% predictive. In 2-D space (head diameter
and tail angle) this stimulus space is identical to the
Experiment 2 space, that is, 8 of the 56 stimuli (14%) were
exceptions. In 3-D space, the two categories were linearly
separable. Also, in the 2-D space defined by head diameter
and tail bumpiness the categories were linearly separable.
The two spaces where the categories are linearly separable
are shown in Figure 4. The category structure (mean withincategory distance divided by mean between-category
distance) was .60 for the categories represented in the
diameter/bumpiness space and .66 for the categories when
represented in the 3-D space.
Procedure The procedure was identical to Experiment 2
except the transfer tasks, which involved 2 cycles through a
transfer set with 12 stimuli.

Bumpiness

In Experiment 2, it was shown that many participants
rapidly detected and used diagnostic information, even
though it was subtle. Some participants can readily use a
three-dimensional cue set if the categories are made
separable. For Experiment 3, a new stimulus space was
created by changing the values on the subtle dimension.
Like the space in Experiment 2, this space was not linearly
separable using the two regular dimensions (head diameter
and tail angle) but was separable by also considering the
subtle dimension (tail bumpiness). Unlike the space for
Experiment 2, this space was also separable when
considering only head diameter and tail bumpiness. The
separable 2-D and 3-D spaces are shown in Figure 4. These
categories allow participants to collapse their cue set to only
two dimensions with no loss of accuracy. The primary
objective of this experiment was to assess the degree to

Bumpiness

Experiment 3

Figure 4: This stimulus space used for Experiment 3. This
space was modified from the space for Experiment 2 so
that the categories are separable in both the B/A/D space
(plotted on the left) and the B/D space (plotted on the
right).

129

Results and Discussion

for two different cue sets. In these cases, each cue was given
credit, so the total number of endorsements is 108, even
though there were only 96 participants. The percentage of
the total number of preferences is shown for each cue in
Table 2.
This tabulation reveals that 30% of the participants used a
space in which the categories were separable, with nearly
three times as many preferring the simpler B/D space to the
B/D/A space by the end of training. This more than the 13%
in the equivalent condition from Experiment 2. The
reduction in angle use that is equivalent to the adoption of
the B/D cue set is made more dramatic in that the angle
dimension yielded the most accurate discriminations in
Experiment 1. Further, both tail angle and tail bumpiness are
features of the same component of the stimulus. On the
other hand, there were still two thirds of the participants
who used only obvious dimensions and failed to adopt a cue
set which separates the categories. The preference for
simplicity may extend to the discriminability of the cues as
well as their number.

Overall, performance improved across trial blocks and
participants averaged 83% correct on the final trial block. In
the transfer task, the measures of the three single dimension
cues (bumpiness, angle and head diameter) and three two
dimension cue sets (bumpiness/angle, bumpiness/diameter
and diameter/angle) are not independent and require some
explanation. Dimension use, as in Experiment 2, is
measured as the proportion of trials that would be supported
by that dimension or pair of dimensions. For each of the six
cues, 8 of the 12 transfer trials present a stimulus on which
the values of the cues suggest one category over another,
and 4 of the 12 transfer trials present a stimulus for which
the cue is neutral. Each single dimension and its dualdimension opposite (e.g., diameter and bumpiness/angle)
use the identical eight trials, and so are perfectly negatively
correlated. This means that if a participant chose according
to the value of tail bumpiness on .88 proportion of the trials,
then they must also have chosen according to head/angle on
the remaining .12 proportion of the trials. The other cues are
only partially correlated. The overall attention use is forced
to sum to 1.5 for the three single dimension cues and to 3.0
for all six dimensions. As an example, a participant might
have a balanced attentional profile, equally distributing
attention to all dimensions in combination (the 3-D
solution). This profile would conform to each cue set on .50
proportion of the trials. A different participant might not use
the subtle tail bumpiness cue at all. This profile would yield
a 1.0 proportion for D/A (and 0 for bumpiness) and,
assuming equal weight to the remaining dimensions, .25 for
B/A and B/D (and therefore .75 for diameter and angle
individually).
In the first transfer task, the use of the head dimension is
consistent with the highest proportion of trials (.63) with
D/A (.61) and B/D (.52) the next two highest. The emphasis
on these three dimensions increased after the second stage
of training (.70, .62 and .58 respectively). Both the increase
in head and the increase in B/D (or, alternatively, the
decrease in use of angle) were significantly different than
chance, t(95)=2.89, p<.01 and t(95)=3.20, p<.01.
Participants seem to increasingly ignore the information
given by angle in favor of reliance on head diameter, even
though angle provides easier discriminations (Experiment
1).
As in Experiment 2, a table summarizing individual data
was created. The number of participants for which a cue or
cue set received the highest use during the final transfer test
was recorded. Twelve participants had equal endorsement

General Discussion
The experiments reported here investigated participants’
ability to use subtle perceptual cues to disambiguate
overlapping categories. In Experiment 1, it was established
that the primary dimensions of variation, head diameter and
tail angle, were roughly equated for discriminability, and the
subtle dimension of tail bumpiness was much less
discriminable. Experiment 2 demonstrated that some, but
not all participants were able to use the subtle dimension in
conjunction with the other dimensions to eliminate
exceptions to the obvious dimensions. Experiment 3 showed
that participants favored using a 2-cue optimal cue set over
a 3-cue one.
There are two aspects of the present data that are
challenging from a modeling perspective. The first is the
widespread disregard for diagnostic cues. In some
participants, this shows up as an inability to use the
bumpiness cue or perhaps even a total reliance on just one
obvious cue. These expedient cue sets could not yield
enough information to result in perfect performance without
additional memorization of exceptions. Even for participants
who chose one of the cue sets that separated the categories,
there was a strong preference for the simpler (2-d) set. Use
of the angle dimension, which was part of the optimal 3d
cue set, and which was independently diagnostic, decreased
with training. The second aspect of the data that is
challenging is the broad individual differences. Nearly every
possible cue set was used in all phases of the reported
experiments. Category learning models which adjust
attention weights based on gradient descent on error (i.e.,
the backprop algorithm) will tend to converge on a set of
optimal weights, rather than showing dramatic differences
in predicted performance (see discussion in Kruschke,
2001). These optimal weights will also be positive for any
informative dimensions. More recent models of attention in
associative learning that incorporate rapid shifts of attention

Table 2: Percentages of participants for which each cue set
accounts for most of the transfer test responses from
Experiment 3.
Stage Bump Angle Diam D/A
1
6% 16% 29% 24%
2
1%
6% 38% 23%

B/D
17%
23%

B/A B/D/A
4%
5%
1%
8%

130

Acknowledgments

in conjunction with annealed learning rates show more
promise of fitting our data. The rapid shifts of attention can
lead to shifts away from dimensions before associations can
form, and the annealed learning results in a progressive
discounting of error, leading to participants getting frozen in
a sub-optimal space. Kruschke and Johansen’s (1999)
RASHNL model has fit similar data in probabilistic
category learning task.
The present study is related to recent work on human
concept learning that is based on a simplicity principle
(Feldman, 2003). This principle suggests that the ease with
which categories can be learned is related to how
incompressible or complex the categories are, that is, the
length of its minimum description. Maximally complex
categories, for example one consisting of a mailman, a
speedboat, and a jelly doughnut, have no regularities at all,
and the minimum description is simply a list of its members.
Simpler categories, for example: big blue triangle, big red
circle, and big yellow square, can be compressed down to
exclude some of the data from the examples, leaving a
smaller description, in this case “big” things. In the context
of the current work, it could be said that incorporating the
information from the bumpiness dimension, while
increasing the number of dimensions, decreases the overall
category description length, because the exceptions do not
have to be explicitly encoded. Participants in Experiment 2,
some of who showed increasing use of the bumpiness
dimension, but also decreasing use of the angle dimension,
also seemed to use a simplicity principle. Angle use
decreased not because it was uninformative, but because it
was not part of the minimal description. In addition to
reworking their description of their overall category
regularities, participants can and do augment their category
representation by identifying and memorizing specific
exception stimuli. In other words, simply adding any
exceptions to the representation they have already formed.
Several results, including the present data, suggest that this
strategy is not uncommon in some typical category learning
paradigms (Blair & Homa, 2001). This focus on individuals
rather than on category level regularities seems to occur
even in some separable categories if they are small and
weakly structured (Blair & Homa, 2003). These results
highlight the potential disparity between mathematical
complexity and psychological complexity, and emphasize
the importance of understanding how the cognitive system
implements complexity minimization. A precise account of
the relative costs of adding or shifting dimensions versus
memorizing exceptions will certainly involve a better
understanding of how attentional, perceptual, and memorial
processes interact as classification expertise develops.

This work was completed in partial fulfillment of the Ph.D.
requirements in psychology at Arizona State University. I
would like to thank Steve Goldinger, Mike McBeath and
Sue Somerville who comprised my excellent dissertation
committee, and especially Don Homa, my mentor and
committee chair. I would also like to thank Jacqueline Blair
for helpful comments on an earlier draft of this paper and
Chris Summers for help in conducting these experiments.

References
Blair, M. & Homa, D. (2001). Expanding the search for a
linear separability constraint on category learning.
Memory & Cognition 29. 1153-1164.
Blair, M. & Homa, D. (2003). As easy to memorize as they
are to categorize: The 5-4 categories and the category
advantage. Memory & Cognition 31. 1293-1301.
Blair, M. & Homa, D. (2003b). Integrating Novel
Dimensions to Eliminate Category Exceptions: When
More Is Less. Manuscript submitted for publication.
Blair, M. & McBeath, M. K. (2002). Bangers in billiards expert/novice differences in shot force. Manuscript in
preparation.
Boster, J. S., & Johnson, J. C. (1989). Form or function: A
comparison of expert and novice judgments of similarity
among fish. American Anthropologist, 91(4), 866-889.
Chi, M. T. H., Feltovich, P. J., & Glaser, R. (1981).
Categorization and representation of physics problems by
experts and novices. Cognitive Science, 5(2), 121-152.
Davies, S. P. (1994). Knowledge restructuring and the
acquisition of programming expertise. International
Journal of Human Computer Studies, 40(4), 703-726.
Feldman, J. (2003). The simplicity principle in human
concept learning. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 12, 227-232.
Johnson, K. E., & Mervis, C. B. (1997). Effects of varying
levels of expertise on the basic level of categorization.
Journal of Experimental Psychology-General, 126(3),
248-277.
Kruschke, J. K. (2001). Toward a unified model of attention
in associative learning. Journal of Mathematical
Psychology, 45(6), 812-863.
Kruschke, J. K., & Johansen, M. K. (1999). A model of
probabilistic category learning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 25(5),
1083-1119.
Lewandowsky, S., Kalish, M., & Griffiths, T. L. (2000).
Competing strategies in categorization: Expediency and
resistance to knowledge restructuring. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 26(6), 1666-1684.
Medin, D. L., Lynch, E. B., Coley, J. D., & Atran, S.
(1997). Categorization and reasoning among tree experts:
Do all roads lead to Rome? Cognitive Psychology, 32(1),
49-96.
Solomon, G. E. A. (1997). Conceptual change and wine
expertise. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 6(1), 41-60.

131

