UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Event categorization: A cross-linguistic perspective

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4bb4w5jm

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Majid, Asifa
Staden, Miriam van
Boster, James S.
et al.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Event categorization: A cross-linguistic perspective
Asifa Majid (asifa.majid@mpi.nl)
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Postbus 310 Nijmegen, 6500 AH The Netherlands

Miriam van Staden (m.vanstaden@uva.nl)
Department of Theoretical Linguistics, Spuistraat 210, 1012 VT Amsterdam, The Netherlands

James S. Boster (james.boster@uconn.edu )
Department of Anthropology, 354 Mansfield Road Storrs, CT 06269-2176 USA

Melissa Bowerman (melissa.bowerman@mpi.nl)
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Postbus 310 Nijmegen, 6500 AH The Netherlands

Abstract
Many studies in cognitive science address how people
categorize objects, but there has been comparatively little
research on event categorization. This study investigated
the categorization of events involving material destruction,
such as “cutting” and “breaking”. Speakers of 28
typologically, genetically, and areally diverse languages
described events shown in a set of video-clips. There was
considerable cross-linguistic agreement in the dimensions
along which the events were distinguished, but there was
variation in the number of categories and the placement of
their boundaries.

Introduction
Categorization research in cognitive science has focused
overwhelmingly on the mental representation of objects.
Behavioral studies with adults, neuropsychological studies
with patient populations, cross-cultural comparisons, and
acquisition evidence provide converging evidence about
how objects are represented. For example, objects are
stored according to semantic domains, with natural kinds
represented distinctly from artifacts. Within these
categories there are subdivisions: animals are stored
separately from fruits, while musical instruments are
stored separately from furniture (Shallice, 1988). Objects
are organized not only by semantic domain but also
hierarchically, with categories at the superordinate, basic,
and subordinate levels (Rosch, 1978). Basic level
categories are cognitively privileged, in the sense that they
are labeled with shorter words, they constitute the
preferred level of naming, they can be verified faster than
superordinate and subordinate categories in judgment
tasks, and they are acquired earlier by children (Brown,
1958; Rosch et al., 1976). There also appears to be
considerable cross-cultural consensus in the organization
of object representations (Berlin, 1992; Malt, 1995).
In contrast to all the work on objects, relatively little has
been done on the mental representation of events. One
line of research, with roots in social psychology, has
investigated how people segment events (Newtson &
Engquist, 1976; Newtson, Engquist, & Bois, 1977; Zacks
et al., 2001). Another important line of work on event
representation, originating in cognitive psychology and

artificial intelligence, has examined the organization of
event knowledge in scripts, frames, and schemas (Minsky,
1975; Schank & Abelson, 1977).
Neither of these approaches to event representation has
examined how everyday activity types are categorized.
Studies of event segmentation do not ask which event
segments are regarded as being “of the same kind”. Script
and frame research concentrates on scenarios like “going
to the movies”, “going to a restaurant”, “sports”, or
“housework” (Morris & Murphy, 1990; Rifkin, 1985).
These scenarios are often culture-specific, and so do not
lend themselves to cross-cultural research. They are also
complex, consisting of sequences of finer-grained events
such as “walking into the restaurant”, “sitting down”,
“ordering”, “eating”, and “paying the bill”. Little is
known about how uniformly people categorize such finergrained units, but it has been widely assumed – certainly
by developmentalists – that there is a universal core set of
everyday event types and that children learn basic verbs
such as have, hit, move, put, and give by linking them
directly to these concepts (Gleitman, 1990; Pinker, 1989).
In the present study, we focus on the linguistic
categorization of a set of everyday events of “cutting and
breaking” – more formally known as events involving a
“separation in the material integrity” of objects (Hale &
Keyser, 1987).1 This domain was chosen because such
events are universal and do not rely on specialized
knowledge; they are accessible to everyone. The
manufacture and use of tools for purposes of cutting and
breaking has been dated back to at least 2.5 million years
ago in the East African Rift area. Modern humans (homo
sapiens sapiens) appear to be distinctive for making and
using particular tools for “cutting”, such as pressureflaked knives (Toth & Schick, 1993). “Cutting” and
“breaking” can, then, be taken as human activities that are
central to human language and cognition.
We examine the categorization of “cutting and
breaking” events by looking at how speakers of
1

The terms “cutting” and “breaking”, with quotes, designate
actions of the type that speakers of English typically label with
verbs like cut and break; other languages may or may not have
words with closely similar meanings. Throughout this paper,
885 words in quotation marks point to actions of a certain general
type, and words in italics designate linguistic forms.

responsible for the collection and coding of the data are
given in Table 1.

genetically, typologically, and areally diverse languages
describe a set of actions shown in video-clips. Do
speakers of all languages make the same distinctions
when they are talking about such events?
The verbs cut and break have been widely discussed in
the linguistics literature. One influential approach has
suggested that “cutting”-type verbs and “breaking”-type
verbs can be universally distinguished on the basis of their
semantic and syntactic behavior (Guerssel et al., 1985).
This suggests that speakers of different languages should
recognize similar distinctions.
Other work, however, suggests that there may be
significant differences in the way languages categorize
“cutting” and “breaking” events; for example, English
speakers use break for actions on a wide range of objects
(e.g., a plate, a stick, a rope), while speakers of K’iche’
Maya must choose from among a set of “breaking” verbs
on the basis of properties of the object; e.g., -paxi:j ‘break
a rock, glass, or clay thing’ (e.g., a plate); -q’upi:j ‘break
(other kinds of) hard thing’ (e.g., a stick); -tóqopi’j ‘break
a long flexible thing’ (e.g., a rope) (Pye, 1996; Pye, Loeb,
& Pao, 1995). Differences in the categorization of
“cutting and breaking” events might also be expected due
to variation in cultural tools and techniques; for example,
Americans and Europeans chop vegetables by holding
them still and bringing a knife down on them from above,
whereas Punjabi speakers in rural Pakistan and India often
move the vegetables against a stationary curved knife.
In studying the categorization of “cutting and breaking”
events, it is not obvious a priori what the domain of
investigation should be taken to encompass. Whereas
speakers of English do not use cut and break for actions
like peeling a banana or pulling paper cups apart, and they
do not use open for events like breaking the stem off an
apple, perhaps such categorizations occur in other
languages. Children learning English in fact make such
overextensions (Bowerman, in press; Schaefer, 1979),
which suggests that the boundaries of the “cutting and
breaking” domain may not be cognitively obvious, and
therefore not universally shared. One important goal for
the present study, then, is not only to examine the
categorization of “cutting and breaking” events by
speakers of different languages, but also to discover the
extent to which “cutting and breaking” events hang
together in the first place as a relatively coherent semantic
domain, as distinct from events involving other kinds of
separations.

Materials
The data were collected using a set of 61 video-clips that
depicted a wide range of events (Bohnemeyer, Bowerman,
& Brown 2001). The majority of these clips showed an
event in which an actor brought about a change of state in
an object – specifically, some kind of destruction of the
object’s material integrity. Some clips depicted statechange events that involved separation but not material
destruction, such as opening a pot or pulling paper cups
apart. Still others depicted “peeling” events, which share
properties with events of both material destruction and
simple separation. Stimuli were constructed by varying
the agent, the instrument used, the object acted upon, the
manner of the destruction, and the prototypicality of the
event (see Figure 1).

Figure 1: Example stills from video clips

Procedure
Consultants saw one video-clip at a time on a laptop. The
clips were presented in a fixed order. The consultants’
task was to describe what the agent did. After free
description they were asked what other descriptions could
be applied felicitously to each clip. They were also asked
whether other descriptions would be infelicitous.

Method
Participants
Event descriptions were collected from speakers of 28
typologically, genetically and areally diverse languages.
For each language there were between one and seven
consultants. Twenty researchers collaborated in this effort,
all of them experts on the language they worked on – a
critical point for the validity of the coding of the data (see
Results section). Data collection was carried out in the
language being studied, not a contact language. Details of
the languages, language affiliations, and researchers

Results
Coding
We defined the target event we were interested in as the
change in an object from a state of integrity to a state of
separation or material destruction. For each of the
languages, the researcher who collected the data identified
those constituent(s) of a speaker’s description which
886

Table 1: Language details and associated researchers
Language
Biak
Chontal
Dutch
English
Ewe
German
Hindi
Jalonke
Japanese
Kilivila
Lao
Likpe
Mandarin
Miraña
Otomi
Punjabi
Spanish
Sranan
Swedish
Tamil
Kuuk Thaayorre
Tidore
Tiriyó
Touo
Turkish
Tzeltal
Yélî Dyne
Yukatek

Language affiliation
Austronesian
Isolate
Indo-European
Indo-European
Niger-Congo
Indo-European
Indo-European
Niger-Congo
Isolate
Austronesian
Tai
Niger-Congo
Sino-Tibetan
Witotoan
Otomanguean
Indo-European
Indo-European
Creole
Indo-European
Dravidian
Pama-Nyungan
West Papuan Phylum
Cariban
Papuan Isolate
Altaic
Mayan
Papuan Isolate
Mayan

Country
Indonesia
Mexico
Netherlands
UK, USA
Ghana
Germany
India
Guinea
Japan
Papua New Guinea
Laos
Ghana
China
Colombia
Mexico
Pakistan
Spain, Mexico
Surinam
Sweden
India
Australia
Indonesia
Brazil
Solomon Islands
Turkey
Mexico
Rossel Island
Mexico

encoded the event. For example, the event of “a boy
cutting a carrot”, at the top left of Figure 1, can be
expressed in English as The boy cut the carrot. Here the
caused state-change event is expressed solely by the
transitive verb cut.
Languages differ in whether information about the state
change is typically located in a single verb or is spread out
across a number of constituents, such as additional verbs
or particles. For example, speakers of Mandarin use verb
compounds to describe many of the events; e.g., qie1duan4 ‘cut-break.long.thin.object’ for the scene of
someone karate-chopping a carrot shown in the lower left
corner of Figure 1. For purposes of the present study, we
concentrated on how the stimuli were categorized by the
verbs of a language. Every verb in the data that described
the target event was input to the analysis.

Analysis
Speakers’ event descriptions can be treated as analogous
to the data obtained in sorting tasks designed to study
categorization. In a typical sorting task, a subject might
receive a set of cards, each depicting a different stimulus,
and be asked to sort them into piles of objects that are
similar. Speakers in the present study received no
metalinguistic instructions; they were simply asked to
describe what they saw in the video-clips. But each

Researcher
W. van de Heuvel
L. O’Connor
M. van Staden
M. Bowerman, A. Majid, C. Wortmann
F. Ameka
M. van Staden
B. Narasimhan
F. Lüpke
S. Kita
G. Senft
N. Enfield
F. Ameka
J. Chen
F. Seifart
E. Palancar
A. Majid
M. Bowerman, E. Palancar
J. Essegbey
M. Gullberg
B. Narasimhan
A. Gaby
M. van Staden
S. Meira
M. Dunn, A. Terrill
A. Özyürek
P. Brown
S. Levinson
J. Bohnemeyer

different verb they applied to the target events was taken
to define a category (“pile”). Across languages (and of
course also within individuals or across individuals within
the same language), stimuli that are often described with
the same verb (“are sorted into the same pile”) can be
taken to be more similar to each other than stimuli that
typically fall under different verbs (Bowerman, 1996).
Multivariate statistics can then be used to explore the
similarity structure of the data set as a whole.
To extract the most important dimensions organizing
the similarity space of our stimuli, we used
correspondence analysis (Greenacre, 1984). Correspondence analysis provides a dual factoring of a rectangular
matrix in which the column scores and row scores are
projected into the same low dimensional space. To
perform the correspondence analysis, we first transformed
the linguistic data for each language into a similarity
matrix. This was done by determining, for all scenes taken
pairwise, whether each member of the pair was ever
described by the same verb. If so, the pair was assigned a
similarity score of one; if not, zero.2

2

This technique was adopted rather than a more graded
approach to similarity based on the number of speakers within
each language who used the same description, so as not to bias
the results toward the categorizations favored by languages for
887 which we happened to have more speakers.

The first and most important dimension of this analysis
distinguishes among events on the basis of how precisely
the agent controls the locus of the separation in the object.
The events are distributed continuously on this dimension.
(See Figure 1 for the placement of the scenes along
Dimension 1. Each scene is represented by a number.)
Events involving relatively precise control (e.g., cutting a
carrot with a knife, scene 10) is positioned to the left,
events with imprecise control (e.g., breaking a stick with
the hands, scene 19) to the right, and events with
intermediate degrees of control (e.g., karate-chopping a
carrot, scene 32) in between. Events intermediate on this
dimension are treated variably across languages, with
some languages grouping them with the “precise control”
events positioned to the left, others with the “imprecise
control” events positioned to the right, and still others
assigning them to categories of their own.
Dimension 2 distinguishes just two scenes from the rest
– those showing an agent tearing a piece of cloth (a twodimensional flexible object) partially (scene 36) or
completely (scene 1) with the hands. These events were
labeled tear in English, as distinct from cut and break.
Nineteen out of the 28 languages have a verb that was
used to categorise these and only these scenes. The
remaining 9 languages did not distinguish these scenes,
but grouped them in various ways with other scenes.
Within the group of scenes pulled out on Dimension 1
as lacking precise control over the locus of separation,
Dimension 3 makes a further distinction between
“snapping” and “smashing” events (see Figure 2a). The
“snapping” cluster comprises events in which a onedimensional rigid object is separated into two pieces by
applying pressure to both ends (scenes 25, 19, 57, 5),
while the “smashing” cluster is made up of events in
which a rigid object is fragmented into many pieces by
applying a blow, e.g., with a hammer (40, 39, 21, 31). The
Dimension 3 distinction between “snapping” and
“smashing”, like the Dimension 2 distinction between
“tearing” and separations of other kinds, is respected by
speakers of many languages – cf. the distinction in Likpe
between events described with f3s3 (the snapping scenes)
and those described with ba (the smashing scenes) (see
Figure 2b). But this distinction is not made in all
languages; colloquial Tamil, for example, collapses these
two categories (along with a few additional scenes) into a
single event type, denoted by the verb oDai (see Figure
2c).

The similarity matrices from all the languages were
then stacked one on top of another to build a matrix with
61 columns (the stimuli) and 28*61 (language*stimuli)
rows. This matrix was submitted to correspondence
analysis to find the dimensions that are cross-linguistically
the most important in structuring the similarity space of
the stimulus set. The analysis extracts first the dimension
that accounts for the most variance, then the dimension
that accounts for the next most variance, and so on. Each
stimulus scene is positioned in this multidimensional
space in such a way that the distance between any two
scenes reflects the degree to which, across languages,
people described them with the same verbs. Scenes often
described with the same verb are positioned close
together, while scenes that are rarely or never described
with the same verb are positioned far apart.

The major dimensions
The first and most important dimensions extracted in our
analysis distinguished between events of material
destruction and other events involving separation. There
was widespread consensus across languages that events of
“taking apart” (e.g., separating paper cups), “opening”
(e.g., opening a box) and “peeling” (fruit) should be
described with different verbs than events of “cutting and
breaking”. “Cutting and breaking” events are
distinguished as a group from other kinds of separation,
and so form a coherent semantic domain.
Leaving aside the events of “taking apart”, “opening”,
and “peeling”, we next focused specifically on the
similarity structure of the remaining 46 events. These
stimuli were analyzed with the same procedure outlined in
the previous section.

Dimension 3

1.0
0

.35
..
.3638
42
1527
..
13. .6 2.54. .1
. ..49
.
.
24
56.10
. 43.50...32
. 61
.4. 48
.
.
26
20
18 28. 3 . 51
23 53
14 9 . 37 .34
12
.45

. 57
.5

19. .
25

. 31
21 . .40
.39

-1.0

Discussion

-1.5

0
Dimension
Dimension 1 1

Speakers of a variety of typologically, genetically and
areally diverse languages agree to a surprising extent in
their linguistic categorization of events of material
destruction of objects (“cutting and breaking” events).
First, they agree on treating such events as a relatively
coherent semantic domain. A priori, it is not obvious that
languages will distinguish “cutting and breaking” events
as a group from events involving other kinds of
separations of objects or object parts, such as “taking
apart”, “opening”, and “peeling”; after all, learners of
English make a number of errors suggesting that the

1.5

Figure 1: Plot of scenes, based on all languages, along
Dimensions 1 and 3. Dimension 1 distinguishes events
with precise control over the locus of separation (cutting a
carrot with a knife) from scenes with intermediate control
(karate-chopping a carrot) and imprecise control (breaking
a stick with the hands).
888

Dimension 3

1.0
0

.35
..
.
1527
..49
2.54 36. 38 42
13
6
.
.
1
.
24
56.10
. .50...32
. 43
. 61
.4. .48
. ..20
.
.
26
18 28. 3 . 51
23 53
14 9 . 37 .34
12
.45

. 57
.5

. 31
21 . .40
.39

-1.0

-1.5

19. .
25

0
Dimension 1 1
Dimension

1.5

Figure 2a: Plot of scenes, based on all languages, along
Dimensions 1 and 3, showing the distinction between
“snapping” and “smashing” events.

Dimension 3

1.0
0

.35
..
.
1527
..49
2.54 36. 38 42
13
6
.
.
1
. .. . 43
.
.
24
56.10
.
.
.
.
4
.
.
32
.
50
.
18 2826
. 20 . . 4861 23.53
14 93. 3751.34
12
.45

. 57
.5

f3s3
. 31
21 . .40
.39

-1.0

-1.5

19. .
25

0
Dimension
Dimension 1 1

ba

1.5

Figure 2b: Likpe is a good example of a language which
distinguishes “snapping” from “smashing” events.

Dimension 3

1.0
0

.35
..
.3638
42
1527
..
13. .6 2.54. .1
. ..49
.
.
24
56.10
.
.
.
.
.
.
4
. 26 20.. . 48614350.32
18 28
.
23 53
14 93. 3751.34
12
.45

. 57
.5

oDai
. 31
21 . .40
.39

-1.0

-1.5

19. .
25

0
Dimension 1

1.5

Dimension 1
Figure 2c: Tamil collapses the “snap-smash” distinction.
889

boundaries of these event types are not obvious. For this
reason our set of events to be described included not only
scenes of “cutting and breaking”, but also of various other
kinds of separations. But these other separations were
rarely described with the same verbs that were applied to
the core set of “cutting and breaking” events. The “cutting
and breaking” events were treated as far more similar to
each other than they were to the other kinds of
separations, in the sense that they were much more often
described by the same verbs.
Second, speakers of different languages also showed
considerable agreement in the kinds of distinctions they
drew within the domain of “cutting and breaking” events.
Although their societies ranged from industrial urbandwelling to rainforest-dwelling swidden agriculturist, and
they varied in their tools and techniques for cutting and
breaking things in their daily lives, they converged on a
shared similarity space for events of “cutting and
breaking”. The most important dimension for the set of 28
languages taken as a group distinguishes events featuring
precise control over the locus of separation from those
with imprecise control (roughly, “cutting” events vs.
“breaking” events). Further, “tearing” events are very
often distinguished from among other events with an
intermediate degree of control (Dimension 2), while
“snapping” and “smashing” events are often distinguished
among the events involving imprecise control (Dimension
3).
Despite this cross-linguistic agreement there were also
many differences – language-learners clearly have
something to learn. Speakers of different languages varied
in the number of categories of “cutting and breaking” they
recognized and in where they placed the category
boundaries. For example, speakers of most of the
languages respected the distinction between “tearing” and
other actions of material destruction, but some did not;
speakers of many languages rigorously distinguished
between actions of “snapping” and “smashing”, but some
did not (see Figures 2a-c); and languages differed in
where they placed the boundary between “precisely” and
“imprecisely” controlled acts of separation. These
differences respected the overall structure of the semantic
space; for example, no speakers described events at the far
left of Dimension 1 with the same verb(s) as events at the
far right, while describing the events falling between them
with different verbs.
One topic we have not yet mentioned is how a
language’s semantic categories of “cutting and breaking”
are related to one another. For instance, English clearly
organizes its “cutting and breaking” terms hierarchically,
with the high-frequency verbs break and cut each
encompassing a number of more specific subtypes, such
as snapping and smashing for break, and slicing and
chopping for cut. This kind of organization is less
apparent in many of the other languages in our sample.
For example, Dutch has no verbs for “cutting and
breaking” with as wide an application as English cut and
break. “Cutting” events are obligatorily subdivided
according to whether they involve a single-bladed tool
like a knife or a double-bladed tool like scissors (snijden
vs. knippen), and there is also no cover term for a wide
range of “breaking” events; e.g., breken – cognate with
English break – is used only for “snapping” events. It is
unclear, then, whether the hierarchical organization found

across languages in words for objects will also be
characteristic of words for events.
A final topic that we also leave to future work is the
intriguing question of how the categorization of events
imposed by language is related to categorization as
studied with nonlinguistic techniques such as similarity
ratings. For the object domain of “containers”, speakers of
different languages classified nonlinguistically more
similarly than they classified linguistically (Malt et al.,
1999). Whether the same will be true for event categories
remains to be seen.

Acknowledgments
This study of “cutting and breaking” took place in the
Event Representation project at the Max Planck Institute
for Psycholinguistics. We thank all our colleagues who
contributed their insights, data, and analysis to the study.
The research was supported by the Max Planck
Gesellschaft, as well as by a European Union Marie Curie
Fellowship awarded to the first author, and a NWO grant
to the second author. The authors are solely responsible
for information communicated and the European
Commission is not responsible for any views or results
expressed.

References
Berlin, B. (1992). Ethnobiological classification:
Principles of categorization of plants and animals in
traditional societies. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Bohnemeyer, J., Bowerman, M., & Brown, P. (2001). Cut
and break clips, version 3. In S. C. Levinson & N.
Enfield (Eds.), Field Manual 2001. Language &
Cognition Group, Max Planck Institute for
Psycholinguistics.
Brown, R. (1958). How shall a thing be called?
Psychological Review, 65, 14-21.
Bowerman, M. (1996). Learning how to structure space
for language: A crosslinguistic perspective. In P.
Bloom, M. Peterson, L. Nadel, & M. Garrett (Eds.)
Language and Space. Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Bowerman, M. (in press). Why can’t you ‘open’ a nut or
‘break’ a cooked noodle? Learning covert object
categories in action word meanings. In L. GershkoffStowe & D. Rakison (Eds.), Building object categories
in developmental time. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Gleitman, L. (1990). The structural sources of verb
meanings. Language acquisition 1, 3-55.
Greenacre, M. J. (1984). Theory and applications of
correspondence analysis. Academic Press: London.
Guerssel, M., Hale, K., Laughren, M., Levin, B., White
Eagle, J. (1985). A cross-linguistic study of transitivity
alternations. In W. H. Eilfort, P. D. Kroeber, & K. L.
Peterson (Eds.), Papers from the Parasession on
Causatives and Agentivity at the Twenty-First Regional
Meeting. Chicago, IL: Chicago Linguistics Society.
Hale, K., & Keyser, S. J. (1987). A view from the middle.
Lexicon Project Working Papers 10. Cambridge, MA:
MIT, Center for Cognitive Science.
890

Malt, B. C. (1995). Category coherence in cross-cultural
perspective. Cognitive psychology, 29, 85-148.
Malt, B. C., Sloman, S. A., Gennari, S., Shi, M. Y., &
Wang, Y. (1999). Knowing versus naming: Similarity
and the linguistic categorization of artifacts. Journal of
Memory and Language, 40, 230-262.
Minsky, M. (1975). A framework for representing
knowledge. In P. Winston (Ed.), The psychology of
computer vision. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Morris, M. W., & Murphy, G. L. (1990). Converging
operations on a basic level in event taxonomies.
Memory & Cognition, 18, 407-418.
Newtson, D., & Engquist, G. (1976). The perceptual
organization of ongoing behavior. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 12, 436-450.
Newtson, D. & Engquist, G., & Bois, J. (1977). The
objective basis of behavior units. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 35, 847-862.
Pinker, S. (1989). Learnability and cognition: The
acquisition of argument structure. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Pye, C. (1996). K’iche’ Maya verbs of breaking and
cutting. Kansas Working Papers in Linguistics, 21 (part
II).
Pye, C., Loeb, D. F., & Pao, Y.-Y. (1995). The acquisition
of breaking and cutting. In E. Clark (ed.), Proceedings
of the Twenty-seventh Annual Child Language Research
Forum. Stanford: CSLI Publications.
Rifkin, A. (1985). Evidence for basic level in event
taxonomies. Memory & Cognition, 13, 538-556.
Rosch, E. (1978). Principles of categorization. In E. Rosch
& B.B. Lloyd (Eds.) Semantic factors in cognition.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Rosch, E., Mervis, C. B., Gray, W. D., Johnson, D. M., &
Boyes-Braem, P. (1976). Basic objects in natural
categories. Cognitive Psychology, 7, 573-605.
Schaefer, R. (1979). Child and adult verb categories.
Kansas Working Papers in Linguistics, 4, 61-76.
Shallice, T. (1988). From neuropsychology to mental
structure. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Schank, R. C. & Abelson, R. P. (1977). Scripts, plans,
goals, and understanding: An inquiry into human
knowledge structures. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Toth, N. & Schick, K. (1993). Early stone industries and
inferences regarding language and cognition. In K. R.
Gibson & T. Ingold (Eds.) Tools, language and
cognition in human evolution. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Zacks, J. M., Braver, T. S., Sheridan, M. A., Donaldson,
D. I., Snyder, A. Z., Ollinger, J. M., Buckner, R. L. &
Raichle, M. E. (2001). Human brain activity timelocked to perceptual event boundaries. Nature
Neuroscience, 4, 651-655.

