UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Fodor’s ‘Guilty Passions’: Representation as Hume’s Ideas

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3kb5k2b1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Author
Slezak, Peter

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Fodor’s ‘Guilty Passions’: Representation as Hume’s Ideas.
Peter Slezak (p.slezak@unsw.edu.au)
Program in Cognitive Science, School of History & Philosophy of Science
University of New South Wales, NSW 2052 AUSTRALIA

Abstract
Jerry Fodor (1985) has joked that philosophers have always
been prone to eccentric worries such as an anxiety about the
existence of tables and chairs, but with the issue of mental
representation they have found a problem that is real and crucial
for progress in the cognitive sciences. However, given Fodor’s
‘methodological solipsism’ of computational symbols and their
‘formality condition’, Jackendoff (1992) has facetiously asked
“Why, if our understanding has no direct access to the real
world, aren’t we always bumping into things?” It is no accident
that Jackendoff’s parody recalls Samuel Johnson’s famous retort
to Berkeley’s “ingenious sophistry” by kicking a stone. There is
an acute irony in the fact that cognitive science has simply
rediscovered the philosophers’ traditional worry about tables
and chairs. Accordingly, it is not surprising that Fodor’s latest
book Hume Variations endorses the classical Empiricist ‘idea’
idea of Locke, Berkeley and Hume. The paper explores Fodor’s
concept of ideas as mental objects in relation to its historical
antecedents.

Precursors
For some time, Fodor (1978, 1998) has been making hints
en passant comparing his favored theory of mind with that
of early modern Empiricist philosophers. For example, in
his Concepts, he said “To a first approximation ... the idea
that there are mental representations is the idea that there are
Ideas minus the idea that Ideas are images.” “Hume taught
that mental states are relations to mental representations,
and so too does RTM” (Fodor 1998, p. 8,9). In this light, it
is hardly surprising that modern problems might be simply
the reinvention of old problems in a new guise. Now, with
his Hume Variations (2003), Fodor has come out of the
closet, admitting to having harbored something like a
“guilty passion” for Hume’s Treatise of Human Nature.
Fodor’s enthusiasm for Hume is based on his view that
Hume’s account of the mind “seems, in a number of
respects, to anticipate the one that informs current work in
cognitive science” (p. 2). Indeed, Fodor suggests “Hume’s
Treatise is the foundational document of cognitive science:
it made explicit, for the first time, the project of constructing
an empirical psychology on the basis of a representational
theory of the mind; in effect, on the basis of the Theory of
Ideas” (p. 134). More specifically, Fodor says, “it remains
fully plausible that cognitive processes are constituted by
causal interactions among mental representations, that is,
among semantically evaluable mental particulars” (p. 135).
Translated, this means an ‘atomistic’ account of concepts, of
which he says, “To be sure, on this view, we’re not after all
so far from billiard balls” (p. 137). Fodor adds, “Either that,
or we really are entirely in the dark”. Indeed, there are

ample grounds to wonder about both the degree of current
illumination and also Fodor’s history.
Independently of his earlier obiter dicta, Fodor’s
formulations have always been evocative of traditional
accounts of ‘ideas’ as the ‘direct objects’ of perception and
understanding. This is the compelling conception according
to which we don’t perceive the objects of the world directly,
but only indirectly as mediated by our mental
representations or ideas of them. Fodor’s analysis of
‘propositional attitudes’ as “relations between organisms
and internal representations” has always suggested a tripartite, ‘object’ conception of concepts common to
traditional and contemporary representative theories
(Bechtel 1998, Slezak 2002):
world ↔ representation ↔ mind
Fodor protests that his view is a minority opinion but the
problematic tripartite structure has always been dominant
(see von Eckardt 1993, Slezak 2002), despite the periodic
complaints of ‘pragmatists’, and ‘direct perception’
advocates such as Hume’s critic Thomas Reid and his more
recent counterparts such as Hilary Putnam (2000).
Fodor suggests that Hume’s account not only anticipates
current work in cognitive science but “thinking seriously
about our theory of mind in relation to Hume’s might help
with the project” (p.2). Thus, Fodor’s small book may be
seen as an extended historical footnote or appendix to earlier
work, particularly his Concepts (1998). By ‘outing’ himself
as adherent of the classical ‘idea’ idea, Fodor illustrates an
important approach to theorizing in cognitive science.
With some important differences, Fodor’s enterprise
shares its approach and purpose with Chomsky’s (1966)
neglected Cartesian Linguistics which sought to understand
the body of theoretical insight of the premodern period, to
appraise their contemporary relevance and to find ways to
exploit them for advancing contemporary inquiry. For his
part, Chomsky offered no explicit analysis of the relation of
Cartesian linguistics to current work on the grounds that the
modern reader should have little difficulty in drawing these
connections for himself (1966, p. 2). Chomsky was
undoubtedly too optimistic in this regard, perhaps
contributing to the neglect of this important contribution to
both classical scholarship and contemporary cognitive
science. By contrast, Fodor’s book is weighted in the
opposite direction with primary focus upon current theories
of the mind.
As Fodor points out, Hume has suffered from a
procrustean hindsight according to which most of what he

1255

took to be important about his own philosophy has been
dismissed as not philosophy at all, but empirical psychology
(p. 5). As Fodor notes wryly, “Mastering the science of
human nature doesn’t sound a lot like analyzing concepts”
(p. 5). The changed philosophical climate today has more or
less effaced the distinction between philosophical inquiry
and science, thereby permitting us to see Hume in a clearer
light.
Of course, Fodor chooses Hume for this exercise because
Hume “holds a fairly rudimentary and straightforward
version of the sort of cognitive psychology that interests
me” (p. 2). That is, Fodor has a partisan rather than purely
exegetical purpose - namely, to use Hume as a vehicle for
advertising the virtues of his own theory of mental
representation. As far as it goes, this is an important and
interesting exercise - not least, because the parallels and
divergences help us to get a clearer picture of Fodor’s own
significant position on issues central to cognitive science
today.
Fodor’s book reveals something of the mutually
illuminating connections between the disjoint literatures of
cognitive science and the history of early modern
philosophy. However, Fodor is not vindicated simply
because he was anticipated by Hume. The ‘Whig’ approach
to history cuts both ways, and Hume’s neglected critic Reid
derives a renewed interest precisely because of Fodor’s
project and its partisanship. Reid gets short shrift from
Fodor, relegated with other ‘pragmatists’, direct-realists and
Wittgensteinians to dismissive footnotes. However, a Reid
Variations would tell a more compelling alternative story
than Fodor allows.
As Fodor notes, Hume’s representative Theory of Ideas
(TOI) was itself derived from Descartes. Consequently,
throughout the book Fodor refers to the doctrine he defends
as ‘Cartesian’ though in this case the adjective is intended to
modify ‘representationalism’ and not the more usual
‘dualism’. However, Hume’s conception of this
representationalism was, in fact, closer to Malebranche’s
version than Descartes’s own. Though a follower of
Descartes, Malebranche held a distinctive and highly
problematic conception of ideas as objects in the mind of
God. Indeed, Descartes shared the ‘pragmatism’ and ‘direct
realism’ of Malebranche’s critic Arnauld and later Reid - the
very doctrine that Fodor combats as “a main concern
throughout this book” (p. 12). Fodor characterizes this
pragmatist doctrine as “the defining catastrophe of analytic
philosophy of language and philosophy of mind in the last
half of the twentieth century” (p. 73,4). Accordingly,
insisting on such issues of provenance and tracing the
genealogy of ideas is no mere antiquarian pedantry or
exegetical nicety. If we take Fodor’s enterprise seriously, on
his own account and example, the historical parallels can be
very instructive about our current theoretical problems. In
particular, the celebrated Malebranche-Arnauld debate and
its subsequent re-enactments were anticipations of Fodor’s
polemic with his critics today. By focusing on Hume alone,
Fodor obscures this broader picture, but the pattern of

recurrence is a striking fact whose significance deserves to
be understood.

Curious & Melancholy Fact?
Despite Fodor’s unfailing optimism, there is a kind of
recurrence which deserves attention because it is a
manifestation of deeper, and therefore specially
illuminating, causes, - a chronic malaise that is symptomatic
of deep pathology. Thus, Yolton (1984, p. 6) has noted that
the burning question among philosophers in the seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries is that of “objects present to the
mind” - precisely Fodor’s question of “concept possession”
central to the recent book and his earlier Concepts (1998).
Fodor suggests that in the intervening period since Hume
the theory of ideas “seems to have made some modest
progress” while acknowledging that it is, “to be sure, more
modest than some have advertised” (p. 157). Although
relegated to footnotes in Fodor’s book, modern counterparts
of Hume’s critics are also prominent among leading
theorists today. This looks alot less like progress, however
modest, than Fodor suggests. Thus, Putnam (2000) has
recently defended Reid’s “natural realism” and he also cites
John Austin who, significantly, invokes yet earlier writers
saying: “It is a curious and in some ways rather melancholy
fact that the relative positions of Price and Ayer at this point
turn out to be exactly the same as the relative positions of
Locke and Berkeley, or Hume and Kant.” (Austin 1962, p.
61)
In a riposte to Putnam (2000), Fodor (2000) asserts
bluntly, “In fact, there is no direct realist theory of
perception (or of anything else that’s mental)”. However,
Fodor ignores Putnam’s concern about representations as
“interface” between mind and world, though this has been
the classical source of discomfort about the ‘veil of ideas’
central to the Humean conception. Thus, Putnam and Reid
are grouped with Gibson and McDowell as among those
who “reject RTM entirely” in the sense that they hold
“perception isn’t mediated by mental representations.”
Fodor adds that this flies in the face of the evidence from
the success of modern psychology. Referring specifically to
Reid, Fodor suggests “but for the notion of mental
representation, much of what the mind does would be
miraculous. The miracle theory of mind is the natural
alternative to the representational theory of mind” (Fodor
2000). Fodor’s extravagant humour makes it hard to tell
whether he is just exaggerating for effect or plain wrong in
this characterization of the Reid/Putnam view. Of course,
there have been accounts purporting to deny representations
altogether (Brooks 1991, Freeman and Skarda 1990, Clark
and Toribio 1994, Greeno 1989, van Gelder, 1998).
However, even these views are not plausibly seen as a return
to something like behaviorism since, strictly speaking, they
do not reject internal representations at all (see Markman
and Dietrich 2000). For his part, Putnam makes the point
explicitly, seeking “to distinguish carefully between the
activity of “representation” (as something in which we
engage) and the idea of a “representation” as an interface
between ourselves and what we think about, and to

1256

understand that giving up the idea of representations as
interfaces requiring a “semantics” is not the same thing as
giving up on the whole idea of representation” (Putnam
2000, p. 59). Thus, Fodor’s appears to miss the more subtle
views (not to mention explicit texts) which do not deny
representations as such but only a certain notoriously
problematic conception of them as mental objects with truth
values. Futhermore, as Greco (1995) notes, “it is clear that
Reid does not deny the existence of ideas if ideas are
thought of as operations or acts of thought. Rather, Reid
objects only to ideas as mental entities distinct from any
operation or act” (1995, p. 283).

Jerry-mandering?
Fodor reproaches Putnam and cites Marr’s (1982) research
as exemplary proof of the representational pudding.
However, Marr’s differential equations, zero crossings and
other formalisms are not obviously the widely individuated,
semantically evaluable mental particulars that Fodor takes to
be characteristic of representations. Marr is undoubtedly a
counter-example to any theory that would deny
representations altogether, but fails to address the concern
with ‘object’ theories of Hume and Fodor. Thus, Fodor’s
animadversions against miraculous theories are beside the
point since the “direct” theories of interest are also
“indirect” in Fodor’s uncontroversial sense, namely, in
positing some internal, causal processes which are
responsible for, and in this sense ‘mediate’, perception,
belief and action. This way of putting the point will be
agreed on all sides. Neither Putnam nor Reid would demur
from this way of ‘jerry-mandering’ the issue since everyone
is an indirect representationalist in this sense.

Granny & the Golden Mountain
Fodor’s hard-core Malebranchisme is further confirmed and
illuminated by his un-selfconscious use of the most
venerable argument for ideas as mediating objects of
perception: Fodor asks how he could think about his Granny
if he is in New York and she is in Ohio. Or, “How can I be
in an unmediated relation to Ebbets Field (alas long since
demolished); or to my erstwhile dentist, who passed away a
year ago in August?” (Fodor 2000). This is, of course, just
the notorious Argument from Illusion, and the rhetorical
force of Fodor’s question relies upon the remoteness or nonexistence of things we are supposed to be in a problematic
“direct” relation to. Malebranche, too, remarks “it often
happens that we perceive things that do not exist, and that
even have never existed - thus our mind often has real ideas
of things that have never existed. When, for example, a man
imagines a golden mountain, it is absolutely necessary that
the idea of this mountain really be present to his mind”
(1712, p. 217). The classical conclusion, of course, is that
we must be in a direct relation with something else namely, an image, sense datum or ‘idea’. However, the
“directness” of veridical perception (or memory) is not so
easily defeated in this manner, since it need not rely on
some occult relation to its objects as Fodor suggests. Of
course, it is not obvious that Fodor’s causal theory is any
better able to deal with distant or non-existent objects of

thought, as Putnam has pointed out. Conceptual or
inferential role theories offer an alternative conception in
the spirit of Arnauld and Reid. Moreover, as just noted, both
direct and indirect theories of perception are equally
committed to causal intermediaries which will explain
Fodor’s relation to Ebbets Field, his granny and his late
dentist.
Fodor’s deployment of what is in effect the Argument
from Illusion suggests that he may be open to the kind of
charge Putnam makes against Dummett, namely, “that his
picture ... is closer to the ‘cognitive science’ version of the
Cartesian cum materialist picture than he himself may
realize” (Putnam 2000, p. 58). By this Putnam means the
‘Cartesian Theatre’ conception minus dualism that Dennett,
too, has characterized as ‘Cartesian Materialism’. Despite its
centrality in the tradition of ideas, Fodor nowhere attempts
to escape or even address this potential difficulty, perhaps
on the grounds that modern computational, symbolic
accounts of representation are automatically immune from
the objection. On the contrary, however, statements by
Newell (1986, p.33) and others articulating the foundational
symbol-system paradigm characteristically assimilate
external and internal symbols in such a way as to encourage
just such suspicions (see also Bechtel 1998, Lloyd 2003). It
is striking that the earliest complaints in the 17th century
were precisely about taking things outside the mind as a
model for the things inside (Slezak 2002).

Why God Bothered
There is particular irony in the fact that the problem for
resembling ideas may be, at a deeper level, the problem
shared by Fodor’s RTM as well. It is not only resemblance
that creates difficulties for ideas or representations. Another
manifestation of the same problem may be an ‘externalist’
conception of representations as semantically evaluable - the
claim that mental processes tend to preserve semantic
properties like truth. Fodor (1994, p. 9) has said that this is
“the most important fact we know about minds; no doubt
it’s why God bothered to give us any” (1994, p. 9).
However, Fodor has seen a dilemma arising from the fact
that mental content doesn’t appear to supervene on mental
processes and, therefore, perhaps “semantics isn’t part of
psychology” (Fodor 1994, p. 38). This dilemma seems to
arise from the fact that semantic evaluability of
representations, or old-fashioned ‘veridicality’ of ideas, like
resemblance, depends on being able to make a comparison
between ideas and what they purportedly refer to. In
Berkeley’s idealist response to this problem we can see the
precursor and analog to Fodor’s (1980) methodological
solipsism. In view of these parallels, it is striking, though
perhaps not surprising, that Fodor (1994) sees a deep puzzle
about how misrepresentation could arise if any causal or
correlational theory were true. I have suggested (Slezak
2002, 2004) that the modern problem of misrepresentation
is a unnoticed variant of the classical ‘Argument from
Illusion’ and so it should not be surprising that we saw
Fodor give an explicit endorsement to just this form of

1257

argument. Fodor argues that if ideas are caused directly by
external objects, we can’t have misrepresentations (i.e.
illusions), whereas the classical argument concludes from
the fact that we have illusions, our ideas can’t be directly
caused by external objects.
In this regard, Fodor’s latest discussions raise questions
that were central to his seminal book The Language of
Thought (1975). Dennett (1977) noted:
Hume wisely shunned the notion of an inner self that would
intelligently manipulate the ideas and impressions, but this left
him with the necessity of getting the ideas to ‘think for
themselves’. ... Fodor’s analogous problem is to get the internal
representations to ‘understand themselves’ ... If there is any
future for internal systems of representation it will not be for
languages of thought that ‘represent our beliefs to us’, except in
the most strained sense. (Dennett 1977, p. 274, 5)

Fodor acknowledges that Putnam is aware that nowadays
representational theories are formulated so that there is no
“user” or exempt agent as undischarged homunculus, but
suggests that he fails to acknowledge that perception is
direct under these accounts. Fodor asserts that, like
telephone conversations with his wife, perception is
mediated in all sorts of ways, but “still, it is my wife that I
talk to”. However, it is here that we see where the debate
seems to have become derailed. Direct realists would
entirely agree with Fodor’s way of making this last point. It
is emphatically not the “mediation” of causal processes in
all sorts of ways that constitutes the potential problem for
representational theories. The problem arises only from
some of the ways that the mediating causal processes may
be conceived. For example, it is not their mediation as such
that makes pictures problematic as internal representations
subserving imagery. Fodor’s account of what makes
perception (or talking on the telephone) “direct” is exactly
the kind that Putnam, Austin and Reid, inter alia, would
endorse.

Gallstones or Headaches?
Fodor suggests that until recently it was generally supposed
that explaining having a concept is dependent on explaining
what a concept is. That is, the explanation of concept
possession should be parasitic on the explanation of concept
individuation (Fodor 1998, p. 2). Fodor laments the reversal
of this assumption about priority and the direction of
explanatory dependence. Fodor’s particular target in Hume
Variations is the one identified in Concepts, namely,
pragmatists and dispositionalists who hold that having a
concept is a matter of some kind of capacity, a matter of
what you are able to do as a kind of epistemic ‘know how’
(Fodor 1998, p. 3). Of particular concern for Fodor, and the
reason for Hume’s appeal, is their shared opposition to such
theories:
... an account that renders having concepts as having
capacities is intended to preclude and account that renders
concepts as species of mental particulars: capacities aren’t kinds

of things; a fortiori, they aren’t kinds of mental things. (Fodor
1998, p. 3)

Thus, Fodor insisted that “understanding what a thing is, is
invariably prior to understanding how we know what it is”
(1998, p. 5). He says “epistemic capacities don’t constitute
concepts, but merely presuppose them.” (p. 20).
It is worth remarking that Yolton (2000) notes that the
“pervasive notion” throughout the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries has been that of “presence to the mind”
- precisely Fodor’s question of concept possession.
Thus, Fodor takes it to be a truism about the possession
conditions for concepts that “If concept tokens are mental
particulars, then having a concept is being in a relation to a
mental particular” (1998, p. 3 fn 1). However, such talk of
“possession conditions” is a framework that biases our
theory towards an object-account of concepts since
“possession” is itself, like “mental object” a metaphor with
misleading connotations when we are concerned with states
of the mind-brain. The old-fashioned term ‘presence to the
mind’ is preferable in this regard. Colloquially, we may
speak of “having a headache”, or “having little patience”,
but talk of “possession conditions” in such cases is not
obviously as appropriate as for tables and chairs. For
example, having a headache is more like having indigestion
or being sunburnt than owning something. By contrast,
having gallstones is undeniably object possession but likely
to be a poor model for psychological states. Less
figuratively, the question is whether we should adopt a
Malebranchean-Lockean-Humean object theory or an
Arnauldian-Cartesian-Reidian process, act theory. At the
very least, object implications of colloquial idioms in folkpsychology propositional attitude talk should not prejudge
the issue.
These foregoing remarks have a distinctly Rylean flavour,
and it is perhaps not surprising that Ryle is among the
culprits in Fodor’s plot. Fodor suggests that “Mid-century
philosophy of mind consisted largely of confusing these
issues by endorsing pragmatism as a remedy for dualism”
(p. 24) and Fodor regards Ryle’s (1949) Concept of Mind is
the locus classicus for this confusion.
However, this analysis is to misread Ryle in a revealing
manner. Ryle was concerned, in the first instance, to give a
remedy for certain spurious views about our mental life.
That is, the conceptual confusions of interest may encourage
dualism but are independent of it. For Ryle, dualism is a
consequence of holding certain mistaken views about our
mental life and not identical with these views. Thus, Ryle’s
criticism of the “intellectualist legend” and the distinction
between ‘knowing how’ and ‘knowing that’ have nothing to
do with dualism. Further, Ryle’s criticism of the doctrine of
the ‘mind’s eye’ anticipates Pylyshyn’s polemic against
pictorial theories concluding that “imaging occurs, but
images are not seen” (1949, p. 247). Exactly as Pylyshyn
would argue a generation later, Ryle said that someone
imagining a scene “is not being a spectator of resemblance
... but he is resembling a spectator” (1949, p. 248). Thus, for
Ryle pragmatism was primarily a remedy for certain

1258

doctrines that may lead to dualism, but may equally lead to
bad theories within a purely physicalist framework.
In Fodor we see the preference for a conception of
representation which reverses the trend discernable in the
seventeenth century. Yolton points out:
... in the writings of the main figures (Descartes, Arnauld,
Malebranche, Locke, Berkeley, Hume and Kant), we can follow
a gradual emergence of a clear translation or transformation of
the old ontological language of presence to the mind into an
epistemic presence. (Yolton 2000)

Propositional attitudes are explicated in a now-standard
fashion by means of the inner box metaphor. In case anyone
had doubts, Fodor (1998, p. 8) makes it clear that talk of
belief boxes is a little joke which can be translated into
harmless functional terms. However, even when stripped of
its whimsical features, the metaphor and its implications are
by no means so innocent as generally assumed. Specifically,
the locution encourages Fodor’s objectified ontological
analysis and the priority he gives to questions of what
concepts are as opposed to how they might be “possessed”
or known. Arnauld’s book On True and False Ideas was
precisely a response to this conception in Malebranche’s
The Search for Truth. Given such a conception, it is not
surprising that Fodor prefers an atomistic rather than holistic
account of meaning, though he notes that the two issues are
strictly distinct, since he says current fashion “tends to favor
mental objects that are defined by (perhaps all) of their
interrelations (p. 12). Nevertheless, propositions conceived
as mental atoms are more readily seen as objects having
their meanings individually and a holism of a more radical
variety would dispense with mental objects altogether in
favour of acts, processes or dispositions. It is perhaps not
implausible to see a relevant parallel with Locke’s project in
his Essay which Jolley (1999, p. 39) suggests is “selfconsciously modeled on the corpuscularian theory of
matter”. It may be helpful to see that Fodor is true to his
avowed Empiricist progenitors even to the extent of such
analogous commitments. Remarkably and more directly
relevant, Reid, too, captures Fodor’s corpuscularism in his
attack on Hume’s ‘ideas’ “which, like Epicurus’s atoms,
dance about in emptiness” (Reid 1985/1997, p. 22).
Fodor considers Stroud’s (1977) criticism of Hume’s
mental atomism and quotes the following passage:
The Theory of Ideas restricts [Hume] because it represents
thinking of having an idea as fundamentally a matter of
contemplating or viewing an ‘object’ - a mental atom that can
come and go in the mind ... (Stroud 1977, p. 225,6; quoted in
Fodor 2003, p. 11).

that the causal mediation of representational theories doesn’t
mean that we perceive the representations themselves, but
this is only to identify the problem and not to show that
particular accounts actually avoid it. In his new book,
Fodor’s off-hand treatment of critics of representationalism
suggests an insensitivity to this concern explicitly raised by
Stroud which, like Putnam’s concern, arises from the
inherent features of a classical tri-partite conception of
ideas. Rorty (1980) too was centrally concerned with what
he describes as “the original sin of epistemology” (1980, p.
60), namely, the kind of representationalism originating
with Descartes. Rorty describes this as “the Cartesian image
of the Eye of the Mind - the very image which has often
been accused of leading to the ‘veil of ideas’ and to
solipsism” (1980, p. 94). Fodor’s new book does not address
such concerns although, of course, he appreciates the way
that traditional scepticism arose for the reasons just noted,
and he says with mild sarcasm that it led “either to the view
that ‘strictly speaking’ nobody ever saw a piano, or to the
view that ‘strictly speaking’ pianos are mental” (Fodor
2000). With this oblique allusion to Berkeleyan idealism,
Fodor suggests that, by contrast, the representational theory
“doesn’t need to say anything like that now” since it has
abandoned its pretensions to being epistemology, content
with being only a psychology of perception. In this form
representational theories hold that “Causal processes
involving mental representations mediate these perceptual
relations, but you don’t (typically) perceive the
representations themselves either directly or otherwise”
(Fodor 2000).
First, it is undeniable that an explanatory scientific
psychology “doesn’t need to say anything like that now”,
but requiring mental particulars to be semantically evaluable
seems to invoke precisely the sorts of problems of
veridicality arising for an epistemology concerned with
knowledge as true belief. However, be that as it may, the
problems of concern do not arise only if the enterprise is
conceived as epistemology, as the imagery debate has amply
demonstrated. The problem may arise as an unnoticed
consequence of certain ways of conceiving the
representations, typically when they are modeled too closely
on externally perceivable objects. Thus, in a frequently cited
overview of the traditional theory of ideas, McRae (1965)
pointed to the central notion of an idea as the immediate
object of perception or thought that can be traced back to
Descartes. McRae suggests that ideas make their appearance
in Descartes as immediately present objects for looking at or
“contemplating”.
What remains basic for the earlier Descartes, for the later
Descartes, for Malebranche and for Locke, is that ideas are the
immediate objects of perception, that all knowing reduces to
seeing, and that seeing (however intellectual it may be) is the
sole operation of which the understanding is capable. It is of
secondary importance for their conceptions of what knowing is
whether these immediate objects or ideas are in the brain, in the
mind, or in God. (McRae 1965, p. 179)

What is remarkable about this passage is what Fodor fails to
comment upon (though the same remarks are quoted again
at p. 21), namely, Stroud’s concern with having an idea as
contemplating or viewing an object. Fodor’s complete
neglect of this point is especially surprising because, as
already noted, it has been central to the long tradition of
criticism of the ‘idea’ idea. Of course, Fodor (2000) is right

1259

We may add that it is of secondary importance whether
these immediate objects are pictures, propositions or other
mental particulars à la Fodor. He writes:
... the questions with which theories of meaning are primarily
concerned are metaphysical rather than epistemic. This is as it
should be; understanding what a thing is, is invariably prior to
understanding how we know what it is. (1998, p. 5)

However, Fodor’s impeccable principle giving priority to
the question of “what a thing is” rather than “how we know
what it is” does not obviously apply as well to knowledge as
to tables and chairs. Arguably, it is exactly in the case of
forms of knowledge that the epistemic questions must take
precedence. Take the case of grammar which Chomsky
insists has no other reality than the knowledge of a speakerhearer: Here the question of “what a thing is” collapses into
the question of “how we know what it is”. Grammar is
constituted by being a form of knowledge and, therefore,
how we know it counts as an answer to the question of what
it is. Similarly, in the case of meanings and concepts, unlike
the case of tables and chairs, the question of “what a thing
is” is plausibly construed as the question of what we know.
These critics represent the various pragmatic or
dispositional views that Fodor excoriates. It is no accident
that Gibson’s similarly motivated ‘ecological’ approach
dismissed by Fodor, like the closely related ‘situated
cognition’, are theories of direct realism which have been
proposed as alternatives to the representationalism of
modern computational theories. This is merely one form in
which the Malebranche-Arnauld (or Hume-Reid) debate is
being rehearsed today.

Le plus séduisant cartésien?
We may better understand Fodor and Hume through their
antecedents and their critics. Thus, I have emphasized
Malebranche here in part to correct Fodor’s misleading
allusions to ‘Cartesianism’ as the provenance of Humean
views of representation. Fodor’s reference to Hume’s
Cartesianism needs to be qualified to reflect these nuances
and is correct only if we understand it as reference to
Malebranche’s version of la pensée cartésienne and not that
of Arnauld or Descartes himself who shared precisely the
pragmatism that Fodor is battling. If the interest and
relevance of Malebranche’s theory today is surprising, this
is because its theological trappings and overtones of
mysticism have, in Nicolas Jolley’s words, “so effectively
concealed the seventeenth-century debate from the view of
contemporary philosophers” (Jolley 1990, p. 201).
Nevertheless, it is not without reason that Malebranche was
characterised by a 17th Century author, as we might say of
Fodor too, En un mot, c’est le plus séduisant cartésien que
je connaisse - in a word, the most seductive Cartesian that I
know (quoted in Moreau 1999, p.9).

References
Arnauld, A. (1683/1990). On True and False Ideas. Trans. Stephen
Gaukroger. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Austin, J. (1962). (1962). Sense and Sensibilia. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Bechtel, W. (1998). Representations and Cognitive Explanations.
Cognitive Science, 22, 3, 295-318.
Brooks, R. A. (1991). Intelligence Without Representation.
Artificial Intelligence, 47, 139-159.
Chomsky, N. (1966). Cartesian Linguistics. New York: Harpers.
Clark, A., Toribio, J. (1994). Doing Without Representing?
Synthese, 101, 3, 401-431.
Dennett (1978). A Cure for the Common Code, in Brainstorms,
Montgomery, Vermont: Bradford Books, 90-108.
Fodor, J.A. (1975). The Language of Thought. New York: Crowell.
Fodor, J.A. (1978). Propositional Attitudes, Representation.
Cambridge, Mass.: Bradford/MIT Press, 177-203.
Fodor, J.A. (1985). Presentation. B.H. Partee, S. Peters and R.
Thomason (Eds). Report of Workshop on Information and
Representation, Washington, D.C.: NSF System Development
Foundation, 106-117.
Fodor, J.A. (1998). Concepts: Where Cognitive Science Went
Wrong. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Fodor, J.A. (2003). Hume Variations, Oxford: Oxford Univ Press.
Freeman, W.J. & Skarda, C.A. (1990). Representations: Who
Needs Them? In J. L. McGaugh, N. Weinberger & G. Lynch
(Eds). Brain Organization and Memory Cells, Systems and
Circuits. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Greco, J. (1995). Reid’s Critique of Berkeley & Hume, Philosophy
& Phenomenological Research, 55, 2, 279-296.
Jackendoff, R. (1992). Languages of the Mind, Cambridge, Mass.:
Bradford/MIT.
Jolley, N. (1990). The Light of the Soul, Oxford: Clarendon.
Lloyd, D. (2003). Representation. Macmillan Encyclopedia of
Cognitive Science. London: Macmillan.
Malebranche, N. (1712/1997). The Search After Truth. Trans. T.M.
Lennon & P.J. Olscamp. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ Press.
Marr, D. (1982). Vision. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Moreau, D. (1999). Deux Cartésiens: La Polémique Entre Antoine
Arnauld et Nicolas Malebranche. Paris: Vrin.
McRae, R. (1965). Idea as a Philosophical Term in the 17th
Century, Journal of History of Ideas, 26, 2, 175-190.
Newell, A. (1986). The Symbol Level and the Knowledge Level.
In Z. Pylyshyn and W. Demopoulos (Eds.) Meaning and
Cognitive Structure. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Putnam, H. (2000). The Threefold Cord. New York: Columbia
University Press.
Rorty, R. (1979). Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
Ryle, G. (1949). The Concept of Mind, Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Slezak, P. (2002). The Tripartite Model of Representation,
Philosophical Psychology, Vol. 13, No. 3, 2002, 239-270.
Stroud, B. (1977). Hume. London: Routledge.
Van Gelder, T. (1998). The Dynamical Hypothesis in Cognitive
Science. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 21, 615-665.
Von Eckardt, B. (1993). What is Cognitive Science, Cambridge,
Mass: MIT Press.
Yolton, J. (1984). Perceptual Acquaintance from Descartes to
Reid. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

1260

