UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Fuzzy Cognitive Quantification

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9qh8g6vf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Laurent, Anne
Tijus, Charles
Bouchon-Meunier, Bernadette

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Fuzzy Cognitive Quantification
Anne Laurent (laurent@lirmm.fr)
CNRS - UMR 5506 LIRMM - Université Montpellier II
France-34392 Montpellier Cedex 5

Charles Tijus (Tijus@idf.ext.jussieu.fr)
CNRS - FRE 2627 Université Paris VIII
2, rue de la Liberté France-93526 Saint-Denis Cedex

Bernadette Bouchon-Meunier (Bernadette.Bouchon-Meunier@lip6.fr)
CNRS - UMR 7606 LIP6 - Université Paris VI
8, rue du Capitaine Scott - France-75015 Paris
Abstract

Holyoak & Glass, (1978) is based on the idea that there is a
direct correspondence between terms and a numerical scale.
They showed that confusion arises when the quantifiers are
very close in scale, as did Anderson (1981). Furthermore,
with their approach it is not possible to evaluate the question
when maximum values are unknown (the maximum amount
of bottles of soda, for example). The adverbs "generally"
and "usually" can be accepted as covering almost all the
people or things in consideration. The adverb "often" refers
to either the majority of the individuals ("children are often
bright") or the majority of occurrences and can thus convey
repetition ("demonstrations are often violent"). Continuing
in this vein, Hörmann, Cascio & Bass O' Connor, (1974)
sought to define how quantifiers would be spread on a scale
with class intervals. Unfortunately quantifiers denoted
values that varied in relation to what was being quantified.
For example "frequently" corresponded to 70% (on
average), when referring to how often Miss Sweden was
judged attractive, but only to 30% when used to refer to the
frequency of airplane crashes (Newstead, 1988). In natural
language semantics, where quantifiers denote relations
between groups (Geurst, 2003), "a lot" corresponds to the
majority. Thus "a lot of A's are B's" can mean that there a
more A's that are B's than there are A's that are not B's. This
interpretation nevertheless is not valid for the statement "in
the last elections a lot of (A: electors) were (B: electors that
didn't vote)" which actually refers to the number of nonvoters (Barwise & Cooper, 1981). The adverbs "sometimes"'
and "rarely" appear to designate respectively a small, but
non-negligible frequency, and a quite negligible frequency.
Still, it is difficult to say what is "small" or "negligible", as
in (1) and (2) where "sometimes" probably is not the same.
What a quantifier denotes is therefore dependant on the
various elements of the situation being described.
(1) Sometimes I watch the evening news.
(2) Sometimes I go to the movies.
The vast majority of studies have confined themselves to
the quantifiers "all", "none" and "some", but even with these
most simple cases the process which generates inferences
from their meanings remains unclear. In function of given
statements 49 to 75% of respondents infer from "all A's are
B's" that "all B's are A's" (Newstead, 1988; Chater &
Oaksford, 1999). Applying pragmatic linguistics theory,

This article presents the results of a two stage investigation
about how linguistic quantifiers are used to summarize
expressions of quantity. In the first step subjects were asked
to give verbal descriptions of arrays of percentages. Then a
second group of subjects was asked to reproduce the original
array from the verbal description. The second group produced
quantities extremely similar to the original percentages even
though the verbal descriptions they used did not describe all
categories within the arrays. We shall show that quantifiers
have implied meaning (e.g., between a large number and
most) and that similar linguistic constructions may refer to
amounts that are noticeably different (e.g., the principal vs.
principally). Finally we highlight the importance of the
implicit, topic-related meaning in the choice of spoken
complements by showing how the concept of fuzzy
quantifiers can be applied not only to their modeling, but also
to their use in multi-dimensional data searches.

Cognitive semantic approaches of Quantifiers
For Cognitive semantic approaches of Quantifyers have also
been quite rare. Just, (1974) defined cognitive traits within
three dimensions (Universal-Specific, Large-Small,
Negative, Positive) which serve to categorize and give
meaning to quantifiers. Quantifiers also project a
representation of quantity which influences how information
is perceived. The statement " few dots are blue (or red)"
with a visual image of two dots of one color and 12 dots of
another, will result in attention being focussed on the two
dots. If the statement were "a lot of dots are blue (or red)",
attention would be focussed on the group of 12 dots (Just &
Carpenter, 1971). Quantifiers also carry implied meaning
and lead to making inferences about other quantities. This is
the case for distinctions based on the positive ("a few of") or
negative ("few of") polarity of quantifiers (Paterson,
Sanford, Moxey & Dawydiak, 1998). The statement, "there
are a few people in the train" designates the amount of
people in relation to an empty train, whereas "there are few
people in the train" refers to the number of people missing
in relation to how many the train should carry.
How much meaning can be inferred from quantifiers?
How many bottles of soda should you buy when a friend
asks you to pick up "a few"? The analogous approach of

791

Grice (1975) similarly found that while "all" should
logically encompass "some", it is possible for "some" to be
restrictive and exclude "all". Interestingly enough, it has
been observed that children do not have the same
understanding of quantifiers as adults. Although at 3 years
of age children do not differentiate between "all" and
"some" (Hollander, Gelman & Star, 2002), by the time they
are seven and even though they have not learned all rules of
conversation, their answers are logically more valid than
adults' are (Smith, 1980).
A question remains as to the information the adult is using
to make an inference. Are they saying "some" because they
know they cannot include "all" the objects (3), in which case
the restrictive interpretation is pragmatically valid, or, are
they saying "some" because they have no more information
about the other objects (4), in which case a non-restrictive
interpretation is more accurate.
(3) There are some broken eggs in this carton
(4) I took some eggs from this carton and they weren't fresh
In contrast to studies which have used ad hoc statements,
in this article we have sought to potentially include all the
values and expressions that "some - not all" can have in
relation to a real situation (results of the 1998 French high
school graduation standardized examination, the
"baccalauréat"). There were 1,277,282 students in the class
of '98. The data from this group are multidimensional; they
can be arranged according to many factors: pass rate,
gender, age, nationality, region, type of school, presence
during the exam, which specialized baccalauréat was taken,
which foreign languages were studied, etc.
From the 18 independent dimensions used (each
containing 2 to 13 terms), more than 300 million relations
are possible when only considering the intersection of the
dimensions' terms, because relations may also derive from
the fusion of exclusive terms. Our objective was to
investigate quantifiers both in terms of their production and
their interpretation.
The first step was to observe an initial group of students
producing quantifiers (experiment 1). In step two a second
group of students was given the opposite task of assigning
numerical percentages to the verbal descriptions which were
summarized by group 1.

previouslySecond-level headings should be 11 point, initial
caps, bold, and flush left. Leave one line space above and
1/4 line space below the heading.
Questionnaires. 18 percentage distributions generated
from a database concerning the 1998 baccalauréat,
constituted the basic information in the questionnaires. The
distributions were selected to include the largest range
possible of cases in terms of dimensions, number of
variables (from 2 to 13) and values. They were as follows:
D-1: very close values all around a half,
D-2: very different values; one very large, one very small,
D-3: many values; one very large, one small and all others very
close and very small,
D-4: many values, but none large (i.e. near a half) and all others
very small but not as close as in D-3,
D-5: five not very high values; two quite close, one not very
distant and two others quite close and very low,
D-6: three values close to a third and two other very weak ones
(almost null),
D-7: data in absolute values (to compare with the first
distribution),
D-8: one very strong value, one very weak,
D-9: two strong proportions (above 50%), neither very, nor too
distant,
D-10: on two lines, a strong imbalance between columns with a
rather large difference between lines with intersections as well,
D-11: two rather close proportions near 50%, but one was 10
points over and the other 10 points below,
D-12 : many very small and close values with two other values
close to 20% and a third near 40%,
D-13: two close values, both quite average,
D-14: two high and close values,
D-15: two very weak, close values,
D-16: five values; one near a half, two others near 20%, and two
very weak others
D-17: three very weak and close values (two almost equal and the
third a little higher)
D-18: two strong, very close values (in comparison to D-14).

Procedure.The instructions on page one of booklet one were
as follows: "Without using any of the figures in the tables,
in a few lines, write what you can say about the table. You
have 20 minutes for this task." The second booklet had the
same instructions with the constraint to use words from the
quantifiers list given: "Without using any of the figures in
the tables, in a few lines, use words from the list below to
say what you can about the table. If a non-included term
seems absolutely necessary you may add it to the list. You
have 20 minutes for this task”.

Experiments
In order to assess the wide range of quantifiers used, in
experiment 1 we allowed the free production of verbal
descriptions for the percentage distributions. In order to
assess how often certain quantifiers were used for each
distribution, participants then selected terms from a list

Results and Discussion
Quantifier production. The participants' responses fell into
two contrasting types of verbal statements summarizing the
given distributions. The first type consisted mostly of
describing the dominant term(s) and its(their) impact by
using quantifiers, like "half". Modifiers like "very" were
used extensively. These kinds of responses were particularly
common when the distribution table had only two variables
and/or when the table had one very high level, very different
from the other levels.

Experiment 1: production and choice of quantifiers
Method
Participants. 83 university students in psychology and
computer sciences responded to the questionnaires either in
writing or via the Internet. In the later case students had to
access the research lab's site. All the participants had passed
their b a c c a l a u r é a t examination one or two years

792

The other type of verbal summary was used when there
were many variables and when no one term was prominent.
The statements first purpose was to organize and structure
the data, that is, to make comparisons (especially of near
equality) between the different terms, for example by
contrasting the girls' results to the boys'. This process can be
seen as a relative analysis of the results. Sequencing terms
like "first" and "then" were prevalent and no indication in
either quantitative or qualitative terms was given for
evaluating proportions. When statements of this type set
hierarchical relations between variables, they did not on the
other hand, establish orders of magnitude. For D-13 and D14 for example, all the respondents ordered the success
rates, but only one gave an indication of the actual values of
the scores.

disparate choice of quantifiers. For the majority of the other
cases, three groups of quantifiers stand out; the first being
simply "almost all", the second being proportional ("about
half", "about a quarter", "about a third", etc.), and the third
being composed of quantifiers that describe either the
general case ("most of"") or particular cases ("few").
The option "If a non-included term seems absolutely
necessary you may add it to the list" was chosen most often
to differentiate (and provide a substitute for) descriptions
that used the terms "as many/much as", "equals", "similar",
"almost equal", "more than", etc., found with test booklet
version 1
Items (D-1) and (D-7) presented the same information in
numerical values and as a proportion, respectively. For D-7
the participants massively chose the same quantifiers as in
the distribution, whereas for the absolute values there was a
much greater diversity in the quantifiers selected.
Items (D-14) and (D-18) represent approximately the same
numerical data (strong proportions near 75%), but with
different dimensions. The temporal dimension is more
salient with quantifiers like "constant over time" or "rose
by" for D-18, (which described baccaulareat rates by years),
than for D-14 (pass rates vs. gender), even though for
version 2 the results were quite similar.
Finally, it was noted that although version 2 had different
quantifiers added to its list which did not necessarily appear
on version 1, the answers concerning the same subject were
often very close, for both versions of the questionnaire.

The principal terms found fall into four categories:
Ordering numerical values
More ___ than ___ and less ___ than ____
first ... next/then ... the rest ...
best/better than ...
many ... few
Quantifiers
principally, in general, the majority, frequently, often,
almost/almost all, a good part
(very) few of, a minority of
a third, (nearly) half, more than a million
about x%
Relations (fuzzy
about the same, (a little) more often, almost as much, no major
difference, lower, raise, constantly, bigger, below, above, …
Modifiers (fuzzy)
just about, almost, lightly, clearly, noticeably, approximately,
(very) (low) minority, large majority, …

Experiment 2: understanding quantifiers
The objective of this second investigation was to determine
whether respondents would be able to reconstruct tables of
numerical data from the series of verbal summaries
containing quantifiers which the subjects in experiment 1
defined.

It quickly appeared that certain quantifiers were not used
as often as would have been assumed. This was the case for
the expressions of proportion other than "about half" (i.e.
"about a quarter", "about a third") and it was also true for
"most of" which wasn't often produced spontaneously, but
was chosen when included on the list (see next section). In
general the respondents preferred the expression "a lot of".
Comparisons and ordering seemed of primary interest and
thus, the term "more" was used extensively.
Finally, we observed in most cases that the verbal
summary descriptions were incomplete: the respondents
only focussed on certain variables in each distribution. It is
true that for inter-dimensional variables, orders of
magnitude cannot be deduced. However, our distributions
were for the most part intra-dimensional. For this reason it
was often possible to infer and reconstruct the numerical
values of the proportions in the tables (all proportions
summed to 100%), from the verbal summaries.
The choice of quantifiers. The quantifiers the respondents
chose for summarizing the data are as follows. When more
than 75% of the participants chose a certain quantifier, it
was then associated with the distribution
If we consider only the data compiled from the Internet
questionnaires, only distributions 4 and 10 generated a

Method
Participants. As with the first test, the participants were
university students in psychology or computer sciences
(N=116), who all had passed their baccalauréat one or two
years previously. All students used printed questionnaires
(none responded via the Internet).
Questionnaires. The questionnaire used in experiment 2
contained nine (D-1, D-2, D-3, D-4, D-11, D-13, D-15, D16 and D-17) of the original 18 distribution tables, without
their numeric values. Hereafter they will be designated as
D-1 through D-9. Each distribution is associated with a
verbal description containing the quantifiers that the
majority of the subjects in test one chose. The descriptions
are as follows:
D-1: "There are a few more girls than boys",
D-2: "There are very few foreigners enrolled",
D-3: "The test candidates mainly came from public schools, if not,
they came principally from state accredited private schools",
D-4: "About half the candidates have no possible area of
specialization. Most of the others chose mathematics or a modern
foreign language",
D-5: "The majority of test passers were girls",

793

0.89 (p<0.0001) and the medians correlate at 0.875
(p<0.0001). The greatest differences occurred with items D6 and D-9. In D-6 as in D-7, the participants produced
complementary percentages that totaled to 100%. In D-9,
they greatly overestimated the percentage of excellent
honors.

D-6: "The pass rate was higher (quantifier=more) for the French
than for the foreigners and represents the majority",
D-7: "The pass rate was higher (quantifier=more) for the girls than
the boys",
D-8: "A quarter of the test takers fail. Half receive no honors. 1/5
receive the honorable mention - good. Very few receive the highest
distinction - excellent".
D-9: "The excellent honors rate was very weak for the
baccalauréats specialized in economics and social sciences. It is 3
times higher (quantifier=more) for the literary baccalauréats (a
little less than double) and it is 4 times higher (quantifier=more)
for the scientific baccalauréats".

General Discussion
Despite the variances in D-6, D-7 and D-9, the students
were able to produce a very good approximation of the
initial quantitative data and the question remains as to how
they managed this using just the quantifiers in the verbal
descriptions.

The tables and their descriptions were on one sheet of
paper. On the top of the paper the following instructions
appeared: "Use the corresponding summaries to reconstruct
tables of numerical data (percentages)".

References

Procedure. Each participant received the questionnaire sheet
with the nine distributions to fill in according to its
corresponding verbal summary. They were allotted a
maximum of 30 minutes to complete the task.
Some of the tables submitted did not present a total of
100, so they were proportionally corrected to reach 100. In
this manner the quantitative values obtained in experiment 2
could be compared to the initial numeric information the
subjects used in experiment 1.

Anderson, J.R. (1981). Memory for logical quantifiers.
Journal of verbal learning and verbal behavior, 20, 306321.
Barwise, J., & Cooper, R. (1981). Generalized quantifiers
and natural language. Linguistics and Philosophy, 4, 159219.
Chater, N., & Oaksford, M. (1999). The probability
heuristics model of syllogistic reasoning. Cognitive
Psychology, 28, 191-258
Cordier F. & Tijus C. (2001). - Object properties: A
Typology. Current Psychology of Cognition, 20, 445-472.
Geurst, B. (2003).Reasoning with quantifiers. Cognition, 86,
223-251.
Grice, H.P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole and
J.L. Morgan (Eds), Syntax and semantics, vol. 3: Speech
acts. New York : Seminar Press.
Hollander, M.A., Gelman, S.A., & Star, J. (2002).
Children's interpretation of generic noun phrases.
Developmental Psychology, 38, 883-894.
Holyoak, K. J., & Glass, A. L. (1978). Recognition
confusions among quantifiers. Journal of verbal learning
and verbal behavior, 17, 249-264.
Hörmann, Bass, B/M., Cascio, W.F., & O'Connor, E.J.
(1974). Journal of applied psychology, 59, 313-320.
Just, M. (1974). Comprehending quantified sentences: The
relation between sentence-picture and semantic memory
verification. Cognitive psychology, 6, 216-236.
Just, M., & Carpenter, P. (1971). Comprehension of
negation with quantification. Journal of Verbal Learning
and Verbal Behavior, 10, 244-253.
Newstead, S.E. (1988). Quantifiers as fuzzy concepts. In T.
Zetenyi (Ed.). Fuzzy sets in psychology. Amsterdam :
Elsevier Science Publishers.
Paterson, K.B., Sanford, A.J., Moxey, L.M. & Dawydiak,
E.J. (1998). Quantifier Polarity and Referential Focus
during reading, Journal of Memory and Language, 39,
290-306.
Poitrenaud, S. (1995). The Procope Semantic Network: an
alternative to action grammars. International Journal of
Human-Computer Studies, 42, 31-69.
Smith, C.L. (1980). Quantifiers and question ansérine in
young children. Journal of Experimental Child
Psychology, 30, 191-205.

Results and Discussion
Item D-7 introduced a comparison with a conditional
frequency. The number of boys receiving highest honors
was 7.6%; for girls it was 7.8%. This relationship was
interpreted by the respondents as being complementary and
thus, they furnished values that summed to 100%. Setting
aside this distribution, the results demonstrate that the
subjects were able to reconstruct numeric tables from the
textual summaries. Variation around the average response
was quite low in the majority of answers (Figure 1).
100,00
90,00

Valeurs initiales

80,00

Médianes

70,00
60,00
50,00
40,00
30,00
20,00

D-4.9

D-4.7

D-4.8

D-4.5

D-4.6

D-4.3

D-4.4

D-4.2

D-4.1

D-3.6

D-3.7

D-3.4

D-3.5

D-3.2

D-3.3

D-3.1

D-2.2

D-2.1

D-1.1

0,00

D-1.2

10,00

Figure 1: Comparison of the initial values and the
reconstructed values.
It is clear that although the verbal descriptions were
often incomplete, the participants were capable of filling in
the distribution tables with values quite similar to the
original ones. Aside from D-7, the averages of the quantities
generated by the respondents correlate to the initial values at

794

