UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Help-seeking with a computer coach in problem-based learning: Its interaction with the
knowledge structure of the learning domain and the tasks’ cognitive demands

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/60w895cx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Mercier, Julien
Frederiksen, Carl H.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Help-seeking with a computer coach in problem-based learning :
Its interaction with the knowledge structure of the learning domain
and the tasks’ cognitive demands
Julien Mercier (jmercier@cgocable.ca)
Applied Cognitive Science Laboratory, McGill University
3700 McTavish St., Montreal, Canada, H3A 1Y2

Carl H. Frederiksen (carl.frederiksen@mcgill.ca)
Applied Cognitive Science Laboratory, McGill University
3700 McTavish St., Montreal, Canada, H3A 1Y2
process were elaborated. Statistical analyses were also
performed..

The Problem and its Context
Research on tutoring has shown that the student’s
interaction with the tutor heavily determines the learning
outcomes. In human tutoring, the responsibility of the
interaction is shared between the tutor and the student (Chi,
2001). In the case of a computer coach such as the McGill
Statistics Tutor, the control of the interaction is put entirely
in the hands of the learners. Learners’ ability to interact with
the system productively therefore represents a critical aspect
affecting the learning outcomes. This ability of help seeking
(Nelson-LeGall, 1981) has not been well researched from a
cognitive science point of view in the context of computersupported learning (Aleven et al., 2003).
The aims of the present work are to elaborate a cognitive
model of help seeking and to examine its interaction with
critical aspects of the learning situation. Two studies using
discourse analysis methodology are conducted using a
formal model of the learning domain.

Results and Discussion
Results show that a help seeking model based on
information processing theory is reflected in the data. The
components of the model are (1) recognize an impasse, (2)
diagnose the impasse, (3) establish a specific need for help,
(4) find appropriate help, (5) comprehend help, and (6)
evaluate help.
Help seeking interacts with the performance of the task and
with the structure of the domain knowledge. Help seeking is
intertwined with problem solving ; help is sought to fill gaps
in students’ knowledge in order to solve the problem.
However, student’s use of the computer coach is not optimal
since they tend to select help at higher levels in the
hierarchical knowledge structure while they tend to problem
solve at lower levels.

Conclusion
These results have implications for the design of computer
coaches and instructional situations. These results help
characterize the contribution of the learners to the
emergence of more or less contingent tutorial interactions.
In addition, identifying key skills that students use in
problem-based learning situations is a first step in training
and assessing those skills.

Methodology
First-level Participants are 20 graduate students from a
faculty of Education of a Canadian university. The sevenhour experiment involves working in pairs to solve a very
challenging statistics problem (a two-way analysis of
variance) for which students don’t have sufficient
background. A computer coach based on human tutoring,
the McGill Statistics Tutor, is available to provide help with
every aspect of the task.
Data consist of three complementary sources. The
dialogue between the pair of participants as they work on
the statistics problem using the computer coach. The
interaction with the computer coach is also recorded, in two
forms. First, the display of the computer is recorded using a
special device. Second, the computer coach keeps a log of
some characteristics of every help request made by the
students. The students solutions to the problem are also
integrated in the database.
Data analysis consists of complementary strategies.
Trace analyses of the task performance and the help seeking

References
Aleven, V., Stahl, E., Schworm, S., Fisher, F., & Wallace,
R. (2003). Help Seeking and Help Design in Interactive
Learning Environments. Review of Educational Research
73, 3, 277-320.
Chi, M.T.H., Siler, S.A., Jeong, H., Yamauchi, T., &
Hausmann, R.G. (2001). Learning from Human Tutoring.
Cognitive Science, 25, 471-533.
Nelson – Le gall, S. (1981). Help seeking : An understudied
problem-solving skill in children. Developmental Review,
1, 224-246.

962

