UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Hierarchical Skills and Cognitive Architectures

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3fx4w5v9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Langley, Pat
Cummings, Kirstin
Shapiro, Daniel

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Hierarchical Skills and Cognitive Architectures
Pat Langley (langley@csli.stanford.edu)
Kirstin Cummings (kirstinc@ccrma.stanford.edu)
Daniel Shapiro (dgs@stanford.edu)
Computational Learning Laboratory, CSLI
Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305

Abstract

Previous Research on Hierarchical Skills

In this paper, we examine approaches to representing
and utilizing hierarchical skills within the context of
a cognitive architecture. We review responses to this
issue by three established frameworks – ACT-R, Soar,
and Prodigy – then present an alternative we have developed within Icarus, another candidate architecture.
Unlike most earlier systems, Icarus lets skills refer directly to their subskills and communicate within a single
recognize-act cycle. This assumption has implications
for the number of cycles required to complete complex
tasks. We illustrate our approach with the domain of
multi-column subtraction, then discuss related methods
and directions for future work in this area.

A cognitive architecture (Newell, 1990) specifies the infrastructure for an intelligent system, indicating those
aspects of a cognitive agent that remain unchanged over
time and across different application domains. Many
proposals for the human cognitive architecture take the
form of a production system, which stores long-term
knowledge as a set of condition-action rules, encodes
short-term elements as declarative list structures, and
relies on a recognize-act cycle that matches against,
and executes rules that alter, the contents of short-term
memory. Soar, ACT-R, and EPIC are all examples of
the production-system paradigm, although other architectural frameworks are also possible.
Despite the general agreement that cognitive skills are
organized hierarchically, there exist different ways to implement this basic idea. Within a production-system architecture, the most natural scheme involves communication between skills and their subskills through the addition of elements to short-term memory. For instance,
ACT-R achieves this effect using production rules that
match against a generalized goal structure in their condition sides, such as the desire to prove that two triangles
are congruent, and, upon firing, create new subgoals,
such as the desire to prove that two lines have the same
length. This approach requires the explicit addition of
goal elements to short-term memory, since this is the
only mechanism through which other production rules
can be accessed.
Soar takes a somewhat different approach to encoding
hierarchical skills that relies on multiple problem spaces.
For instance, Jones and Laird (1997) report a detailed
model of ying an aircraft in combat training scenarios.
This system organizes its capabilities in a hierarchical
manner, with each node implemented as a Soar problem
space with associated states, operators, and goals. To
invoke a lower-level problem space, the system adds a
new element to short-term memory that refers to that
space, and it must take similar action in order to exit.
The details differ from those in ACT, but the passing of
messages through short-term memory is similar.
The Prodigy architecture (Minton et al., 1989) produces cognitive behavior in yet another manner. The
system represents knowledge about actions as Stripslike operators, and the central module utilizes meansends analysis to decompose problems into subproblems.
This gives Prodigy the ability to generate hierarchical

Introduction and Overview
Human skills are organized in a hierarchical fashion.
There seems to be general agreement with this claim,
as it is consistent not only with experimental findings
about the execution and acquisition of skills, but also
with introspection about our everyday behavior. Upon
request, most people can describe their complex skills
at successive levels of aggregation, whether these involve
how they drive to work each day, how they cook a meal,
or how they write a technical article.
What remains an open question is how we should
model such skill hierarchies in computational terms. Alternative approaches to modeling cognition encode the
notion of hierarchy in distinct ways that have different
implications for performance and learning. The most
interesting positions are those which are embedded in
theories of the human cognitive architecture, such as
Soar (Laird et al., 1987), ACT-R (Anderson, 1993), and
EPIC (Kieras & Meyer, 1997). These frameworks make
strong commitments to both the mental representations
of knowledge and to the processes that operate on them.
In the pages that follow, we consider the challenge of
modeling hierarchical skills within a unified theory of
cognition. We begin with a brief review of three such architectures and their responses to this issue, then turn to
Icarus, an alternative framework that approaches hierarchical skills from a different perspective. The key issue
involves whether one can traverse levels of a hierarchy
within a single cognitive cycle. Our illustrative example
comes from a familiar cognitive skill that has a hierarchical organization – multi-column subtraction – but we
also consider other models that incorporate multi-level
skills. We conclude by discussing related work and our
plans to extend the architecture’s capabilities.

779

structures dynamically for each problem it encounters,
and it can use control rules to select among candidate
operators, states, and goals that determine the decompositions. However, these hierarchical structures do not
remain in memory after a problem has been solved; instead, the system stores its experience in generalized control rules that let it reconstruct them for new problems.
Again, this requires adding explicit elements to shortterm memory that serve as mediators.
Thus, despite their diversity, these three frameworks
share a basic assumption about how communication occurs among skills and subskills. This tenet has implications for the cognitive behavior of systems cast within
them, including whether intermediate results are available, the time required to execute complex skills, and the
effects of learning on hierarchical structure. We will see
shortly that another response to this issue is possible.

Icarus skills bear a strong resemblance to production
rules, but they have an even closer kinship to the operators in Prodigy and Strips. Each skill has a name,
arguments, and some optional fields. These include:
 a :start field, which encodes the situation that must
hold to initiate the skill;
 a :requires field, which must be satisfied throughout
the skill’s execution across multiple cycles; and
 an :effects field, which specifies the desired situation the skill is intended to achieve.
For example, Table 1 shows a complete set of Icarus
skills for the domain of multi-column subtraction, including borrow, which has the objective of getting ?digit1
to be greater than ?digit2. This skill can start only if
?digit2 is greater than ?digit1 and if a third element,
?digit3, is nonzero. Moreover, its execution requires that
?digit1 be above ?digit2, that ?digit3 be in the top row,
and that ?digit3 be left of ?digit1.
In addition, each Icarus skill includes another field
that specifies how to decompose it into subskills or actions. This may be either:

Hierarchical Skills in Icarus
Icarus (Choi et al., in press) is a cognitive architecture
that shares some central features with its predecessors.
For instance, it relies on symbolic list structures to encode information, and it makes a clear distinction between long-term and short-term memories, with the former storing generic knowledge and the latter containing
specific beliefs. Moreover, Icarus assumes a recognizeact cycle, which relies on matching patterns in long-term
memory against elements in the short-term store, to determine behavior over time. The framework also comes
with a programming formalism for building knowledgebased systems.
However, Icarus has other characteristics that distinguish it from earlier frameworks in significant ways. One
such feature is its commitment to embodied cognition,
which requires that all symbols in Icarus programs be
grounded in sensori-motor primitives.1 A second key assumption is that each long-term memory structure may
have not only a symbolic description but also an associated numeric function that computes its value as a
function of sensory attributes. A third novel feature is
that Icarus contains distinct long-term memories for
skills, which store its knowledge about action, and for
concepts, which specify its knowledge about states and
relations. Yet another contribution lies in the strong correspondence between long-term and short-term memory,
specifically that every element in the latter must be an
instance of some structure in the former.
A fifth important assumption, which is our focus here,
is that hierarchical structures play a central role in cognition. Although production systems and related architectures allow hierarchies, many do not encourage them,
and we maintain that Icarus supports them in a sense
that is stronger and more plausible psychologically than
do frameworks like ACT and Soar. To understand this
claim, we must first examine the architecture’s representation for skills and the relations among them.

 an :ordered field, which indicates the agent should
consider the components in a specific order;
 an :unordered field, which identifies a choice among
skill components; or
 an :actions field, in which a primitive skill specifies
one or more actions that are directly executable.
For example, borrow states that one should invoke decrement on one digit and call add-ten on another, in that
order. These are both primitive skills that play the same
role as Strips operators in a traditional planning system, with their :start fields serving as preconditions
and their :effects fields specifying the desired results
of execution.
The table also clarifies that Icarus can specify multiple ways to decompose each skill in this manner, much
as a Prolog program can include more than one Horn
clause with the same head. Different decompositions of
a given skill must have the same name, number of arguments, and effects. However, they can differ in their
start conditions, requirements, and subskills. The skill
borrow has two such expansions, one for borrowing from
nonzero elements and another for borrowing across zero,
which involves a recursive call to itself.
Each skill decomposition may also include a numeric
function that encodes the utility expected if it executes this decomposition. This function is specified by a
:percepts field that matches against the values of objects’ attributes and a :value field that states an arithmetic combination of these quantities. The expected
utility for a skill decomposition is a linear function of the
numeric descriptors matched by that skill. Such functions are not required when the available skills specify
deterministic behavior, as do those in the table, but we
have used them in other domains and we mention them
here for completeness.
We should note that Icarus also organizes its longterm conceptual memory in a hierarchy, with higher-level
concepts being defined in terms of lower-level ones, which

1

Some recent architectural variants, like ACT-R/PM and
EPIC-Soar, incorporate sensori-motor modules, but these
were grafted onto systems based on theories of human problem solving, whereas Icarus included them from the outset.

780

ecute. The elements in these memories are simple literals
but, because their predicates correspond to hierarchical
structures in long-term memory, they encode substantial
information about the agent’s beliefs and intentions.

Table 1: Icarus skills for multi-column subtraction.
(subtract ()
:percepts ((digit ?digit))
:requires ((top-row ?digit) (right-col ?digit))
:unordered ((process ?digit))
(subtract ()
:requires ((processed ?digit1) (top-row ?digit2)
(left-of ?digit2 ?digit1))
:unordered ((process ?digit2))
(process (?digit)
:ordered ((borrow ?digit)
(find-difference ?digit))
:effects ((processed ?digit)))
(borrow (?digit1)
:percepts ((digit ?digit2) (digit ?digit3))
:start
((greater ?digit2 ?digit1)
(nonzero ?digit3))
:requires ((above ?digit1 ?digit2)
(top-row ?digit3)
(left-of ?digit3 ?digit1))
:ordered ((decrement ?digit3)
(add-ten ?digit1))
:effects ((greater ?digit1 ?digit2)))
(borrow (?digit1)
:percepts ((digit ?digit2) (digit ?digit3))
:start
((greater ?digit2 ?digit1)
(zero ?digit3))
:requires ((above ?digit1 ?digit2)
(top-row ?digit3)
(left-of ?digit3 ?digit1))
:ordered ((borrow ?digit3))
:effects ((greater ?digit1 ?digit2)))
(decrement (?digit)
:percepts ((digit ?digit val ?val))
:start
((nonzero ?digit))
:actions ((*cross-out ?digit)
(*decrement ?digit ?val))
:effects ((crossed-out ?digit)))
(add-ten (?digit1)
:percepts ((digit ?digit1 val ?val1)
(digit ?digit2) (digit ?digit3))
:start
((above ?digit1 ?digit2)
(top-row ?digit3)
(left-of ?digit3 ?digit1)
(crossed-out ?digit3))
:actions ((*add-ten ?digit1 ?val1))
:effects ((greater ?digit1 ?digit2)))
(find-difference (?digit1)
:percepts ((digit ?digit1 col ?col val ?val1)
(digit ?digit2 col ?col val ?val2))
:start
((above ?digit1 ?digit2)
(greater-or-equal ?digit1 ?digit2))
:actions ((*add-difference ?col ?val1 ?val2))
:effects ((processed ?digit1)))

Distinctive Aspects of Icarus Hierarchies
From the preceding discussion, it should be clear that
Icarus utilizes a more structured representation of
knowledge than traditional cognitive architectures, but
the implications of this structure depend directly on the
processes that operate over them. Together, they enable
cognitive processing that exhibits important differences
from that in older frameworks.
One such characteristic involves the ability of Icarus’
skills to reference subskills by their names, rather than
through the indirect references used in Soar, ACT, and
Prodigy. For example, the borrow skill in Table 1 calls
directly on decrement and add-ten. Icarus’ approach
has some aspects of subroutine calls in procedural programming languages but, when combined with multiple
expansions for each skill (such as two variants for borrow), effectively embeds these calls within an AND/OR
search. This makes our formalism a close relative of
logic programming languages like Prolog, which uses a
very similar syntax to support logical reasoning. But like
other cognitive architectures, Icarus is concerned with
agents that exist over time, so it situates these computations within a recognize-act cycle.
As a result, Icarus retains the overall avor of a production system but gains the ability to invoke subskills
directly, rather than through the creation of short-term
memory elements. This lets it execute complex skills in
a top-down manner without having to descend through
the hierarchy one step at a time. Icarus can take advantage of this hierarchical organization without requiring
the generation of explicit intermediate goal structures
that are needed by production systems.
Recall that Icarus includes a short-term memory that
contains skill instances the agent considers worth executing. On each cycle, for each skill instance, the architecture retrieves all decompositions of the general skill and
checks whether they are applicable. A skill is applicable if, for its current variable bindings, its :effects field
does not match, the :requires field matches, and, if the
system has not yet started executing it, the :start field
matches the current situation. Moreover, at least one of
its subskills must also be applicable. Since this test is
recursive, a skill is only applicable if there exists at least
one acceptable path downward to executable actions.
For each such path, the architecture computes the expected value and selects the candidate with the highest
utility for execution. For a given path, it uses the value
function stored with each skill and the numeric values
matched in that skill’s :percepts field to calculate the
expected value at each level, summing the results along
the path to compute the overall score. For instance, for
the path ((subtract), (process digit11), (borrow digit11),
(decrement digit21)), the system would sum the expected value for all four levels to determine the utility
of decrementing. This means that the same action can

ultimately connect to perceptual elements. The literals
that appear in the :start, :requires, and :effects
fields must be defined concepts, thus linking the skill and
conceptual memories in an interleaved manner. The architecture also incorporates three short-term memories.
These include a perceptual buffer, updated on each cycle,
that contains descriptions of perceived objects, a conceptual short-term memory that contains inferences derived
from the perceptual buffer, and an intention memory
that contains instances of skills the system intends to ex-

781

this ordering, are not. Because decrement is a primitive
skill, it becomes the terminal node for an acceptable path
through the skill hierarchy. Also, because this is the only
such path Icarus finds, it executes the instantiated actions (*cross-out digit31) and (*decrement digit31 3).
These actions alters the environment and lead to another execution cycle. This time Icarus again finds a
single acceptable path that shares all but the last skill
instance with that from the first round. The difference
is that digit31 has been crossed out, making (decrement
digit31) inapplicable but enabling the skill instance (addten digit21). Again this is the only acceptable path
through the hierarchy, so Icarus executes the action
associated with this primitive skill, thus altering the simulated display so that digit21’s value is increased by ten.
On the third cycle, the architecture again finds only
one path, in this case ((subtract), (process digit11), (borrow digit11), (decrement digit21)), since the top number
in the second column is no longer zero and can be safely
decremented. This action enables execution of the path
((subtract), (process digit11), (borrow digit11), (add-ten
digit11)) on the fourth cycle, after which (on the fifth
cycle) the model selects the path ((subtract), (process
digit11), (find-difference digit11)), which writes the two
digits’ difference in the rightmost column.
This altered situation leads Icarus to add the inference (processed digit11), which on the sixth cycle causes
it to select the second expansion of subtract; this invokes the skill instance (process digit21) on the revised
top digit in the second row. Because this digit has already been incremented by ten, it is greater than the one
below it, so the skill instance (find-difference digit21) is
now applicable. Execution of this path produces an answer in the second column, which leads on the next cycle
to processing of the third column and to an answer there
as well. No paths are satisfied on additional cycles, so the
system idles thereafter, waiting for new developments.

have different values on a given cycle depending on which
higher-level skill invokes it, providing a natural way for
the hierarchy to incorporate the effect of context.
The architecture treats a skill expansion differently
depending on whether its components appear in an
:unordered set or an :ordered list. If they are unordered, the module considers each of the subskills and
selects the one that yields the highest scoring subpath.
If they are ordered, it instead treats the list as a reactive
program that considers each subskill in reverse order. If
the final subskill is applicable, then it expands further
only down paths that include that subskill. Otherwise,
it considers the penultimate skill, the one before that,
and so forth. The intuition is that the subskills are ordered because later ones are closer to the parent skill’s
objective, and thus should be preferred when applicable.
We should clarify that Icarus’ consideration of alternative paths through its skill hierarchy does not involve
generative planning. On each cycle, the architecture
finds the best pathway through a set of exible but constrained structures. The process is much closer to the execution of a hierarchical task network (e.g., Myers, 1999)
than to the construction of a plan from primitive operators. Such computation can be done efficiently within
a single recognize-act cycle, at least for well-structured
skill hierarchies. One can craft Icarus programs that
are expensive to evaluate, but the same holds for production systems with complex conditions on their rules.

An Illustrative Example
We can best clarify Icarus’ operation with an example that uses the skills from Table 1 on the subtraction
problem 305 147. The system interacts with a simulated environment that, on each cycle, deposits perceptual elements such as (digit digit11 col 1 row 1 val 5)
and (digit digit12 col 1 row 2 val 7) into the perceptual buffer. A conceptual recognition process draws inferences from these elements, such as (greater digit12
digit11) and (above digit11 digit12), which it adds to
conceptual short-term memory.
The model also begins with the single top-level intention (subtract), which focuses cognitive behavior on
the skills in the table even if others are present in longterm memory. On the first cycle, the system would
consider both expansions of subtract, selecting the first
one and binding ?digit to digit11, the object in the top
row and right column. This skill instance would in turn
invoke (process digit11), which would consider its subskills find-difference and borrow. Only the latter skill has
its :start and :requires fields met, specifically by its
second expansion, which handles situations that require
borrowing from zero.
This skill instance, (borrow digit11), then invokes
itself recursively, producing the call (borrow digit21),
where the argument denotes the digit 0 in the top row
and second column. Because the digit to its left is
nonzero, this instantiation can only utilize the first expansion of borrow, which in turn calls on (decrement
digit31) in its :ordered field, since its preconditions are
satisfied, but those for add-ten, which occurs later in

General Implications
The sample trace above does not illustrate all of Icarus’
capabilities, since it ignores details about the conceptual
inference process and it does not utilize value functions.
However, it should make clear that Icarus operates over
its skill hierarchy in a different manner than frameworks
like Soar and ACT-R. They can model behavior on complex tasks in two distinct ways. One scheme assumes
hierarchical rules or problem spaces, which require additional cycles for stepping downward through each level of
the hierarchy. Another assumes that learning has produced compiled rules that eliminate the hierarchy and
thus the need for intermediate goal structures. Such
compilation methods have been used to explain both the
power law of learning and reduced access to subgoals
(e.g., Neves & Anderson, 1981).
However, it seems unlikely that the hierarchical structure of skills disappears entirely with practice, and
Icarus offers an account that avoids the above dichotomy. An architecture that traverses levels in a skill
hierarchy within a single recognize-act cycle also predicts
that intermediate structures will be inacessible, and the

782

Related Efforts and Future Research

power law follows from the construction of the hierarchy
itself, which we discuss later. This account also makes
different predictions than traditional schemes about the
number of cycles, and thus the time, required to accomplish tasks with hierarchical and recursive structures.
Again, we can use multi-column subtraction to illustrate this point. A standard production-system model
for this domain, like that described by Langley and Ohlsson (1984), finds the difference between two numbers in
a column when the top one is larger but otherwise adds
a goal to process or borrow from the adjacent column.
Analysis reveals that such a model will take 5 · b + 2 · n
cycles to complete a problem with b columns that require
borrowing and n columns that do not. In contrast, the
Icarus model in Table 1 requires 3·b+2·n cycles on the
same problems. The two frameworks both indicate that
solution time will increase with the number of borrow
columns, but they predict quite different slopes.
Experiments with human subjects should reveal which
alternative offers a better explanation of skilled behavior
in this arena. We have not yet carried out such studies, but to test our framework’s generality, we have developed Icarus models for behavior in other domains
that appear to have hierarchical organizations. One involves the well-known Tower of Hanoi puzzle, which can
be solved using a hierarchical strategy. Our model for
behavior on this task includes three primitive skills for
lifting, lowering, and moving a disk sideways, along with
one high-level skill for moving a disk to a target peg that,
in two expansions, calls itself recursively. However, the
Tower of Hanoi is like subtraction in that the environment changes only when the agent takes some action.
To ensure that Icarus can also support behavior in
more dynamic domains, we have developed two additional models. One involves hierarchical skills for balancing an upright pole by moving its lower end back
and forth. This system includes two high-level skills with
knowledge about the order in which the four primitive
skills should be invoked. As described elsewhere (Choi
et al., in press), we have also constructed a system that
drives a vehicle and delivers packages in a simulated incity environment. This model includes 46 skills that are
organized in a hierarchy five levels deep. The high-level
skills let the agent drive straight in lanes, get into rightmost lanes, slow for intersections, drive through intersections, turn at intersections, and make U turns. These
terminate in actions for changing speed and altering the
wheel angle. Another 13 skills support the delivery of
packages to target addresses.
We have not attempted to compare the details of these
systems’ operations to human behaviors on the same
tasks. Nor have we attempted to show that Icarus produces more robust behavior than programs cast in earlier
frameworks like Soar and ACT-R. Rather, our goal has
been to demonstrate the same broad functionality as we
observe in humans, including their apparent organization
of complex skills into hierarchies. We have also aimed to
show that Icarus constitutes a viable point in the space
of cognitive architectures, which we believe has been too
thinly explored to date.

Although Icarus incorporates a number of features that
distinguish it from typical cognitive architectures, some
related ideas have appeared elsewhere under different
guises. For instance, our framework has much in common with the ‘reactive planning’ movement, which often
utilizes hierarchical procedures that combine cognition,
perception, and action in physical domains.2 Examples
include PRS (Georgeoff et al., 1985), teleoreactive programs (Nilsson, 1994), and the 3T robotic architecture
(Bonasso et al., 1997), and some case-based planners
(e.g., Hammond, 1993) embody similar notions.
However, within this paradigm, only Freed’s (1998)
APEX has been proposed as a candidate architecture for
human cognition. This framework shares Icarus’ commitment to hierarchical skills, but it has a more procedural avor and it does not incorporate a separate conceptual memory or enforce a correspondence between longterm and short-term structures. Another kindred spirit
is Albus and Meystel’s (2001) RCS architecture, which
organizes knowledge hierarchically and makes a clear distinction between logical structures and value judgments.
Icarus and RCS share many common features, but they
also retain many differences due to their origins in cognitive modeling and control theory, respectively.
We should clarify that, as a cognitive architecture,
Icarus still requires some development. The framework
lacks many processing assumptions that would make it
more plausible as a general theory of human behavior.
For instance, it lacks any limits on perceptual bandwidth
that require attention, which arises even on routine tasks
like subtraction. We intend to model such behavior by
introducing an action that focuses the agent’s attention
on an object and deposits its description in the perceptual buffer, with Icarus being able to apply this action
to only one visible object per cycle. This should produce
longer subtraction runs that require additional steps for
attentional events, much as in Anderson, Matessa, and
Lebiere’s (1997) ACT-R model of visual attention.
We should also extend our models for subtraction
and other domains to handle lower levels of behavior
more faithfully. The skills in Table 1 terminate with actions for decrementing, adding ten, and finding a difference, but these can be further decomposed into subskills
for writing specific digits and even drawing individual
lines. Our claim to model embodied cognition would be
stronger if we extended the skill hierarchy downward in
this fashion. We should also extend the hierarchy upward to model choices about which problem to tackle
when many are present on the page. Such an expanded
system would model subtraction behavior in a more complete way than do most accounts.
However, a more important omission concerns the origin of Icarus’ hierarchical skills. To handle this, we
hypothesize a mechanism that is related to chunking in
Soar and production composition in earlier versions of
ACT. Although humans prefer to use routine behaviors when possible, they can, within limits, combine
2
Our model of subtraction skills also has similarities to
VanLehn’s (1990) hierarchical treatment of this domain.

783

Choi, D., Kaufman, M., Langley, P., Nejati, N., &
Shapiro, D. (in press). An architecture for persistent
reactive behavior. Proceedings of the Third International Joint Conference on Autonomous Agents and
Multi-Agent Systems. New York: ACM Press.
Freed, M. (1998). Managing multiple tasks in complex,
dynamic environments. Proceedings of the National
Conference on Arti cial Intelligence (pp. 921–927).
Madison, WI: AAAI Press.
Georgeff, M., Lansky, A., & Bessiere, P. (1985). A procedural logic. Proceedings of the Ninth International
Joint Conference on Arti cial Intelligence. Los Angeles: Morgan Kaufmann.
Hammond, K. (1993). Toward a theory of agency. In S.
Minton (Ed.) Machine learning methods for planning.
San Francisco: Morgan Kaufmann.
Jones, R. M., & Laird, J. E. (1997). Constraints on
the design of a high-level model of cognition. Proceedings of the Nineteenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 358–363). Stanford, CA:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Kieras, D., & Meyer, D. E. (1997). An overview of the
EPIC architecture for cognition and performance with
application to human-computer interaction. HumanComputer Interaction, 12 , 391–438.
Laird, J. E., Newell, A., & Rosenbloom, P. S. (1987).
Soar: An architecture for general intelligence. Arti cial Intelligence, 33 , 1–64.
Minton, S., Carbonell, J. G., Knoblock, C. A., Kuokka,
D., Etzioni, O., & Gil, Y. (1989). Explanation-based
learning: A problem solving perspective. Arti cial
Intelligence, 40 , 63–118.
Myers, K. L. (1999). CPEF: A continuous planning and
execution framework. AI Magazine, 20 , 63–70.
Newell, A. (1990). Uni ed theories of cognition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Nilsson, N. (1994). Teleoreactive programs for agent
control. Journal of Arti cial Intelligence Research,
1 , 139–158.
Neves, D. M., & Anderson, J. R. (1981). Knowledge
compilation: Mechanisms for the automatization of
cognitive skills. In J. R. Anderson (Ed.), Cognitive
skills and their acquisition. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Langley, P., & Ohlsson, S. (1984). Automated cognitive
modeling. Proceedings of the Fourth National Conference on Arti cial Intelligence (pp. 193–197). Austin,
TX: Morgan Kaufmann.
Shapiro, D., Langley, P., & Shachter, R. (2001). Using
background knowledge to speed reinforcement learning in physical agents. Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Autonomous Agents (pp.
254–261). Montreal: ACM Press.
VanLehn, K. (1990). Mind bugs: The origins of procedural misconceptions. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

knowledge elements when needed to solve novel problems. Means-ends analysis has been implicated in such
situations, so we plan to incorporate this method into
future versions of the architecture. The generalized results of means-ends problem solving would be cached
as a new skill. However, unlike chunking and composition, which produce at rules that eliminate structure,
Icarus would store a new hierarchical skill that refers
to the original ones as components. This method should
lead to the construction of skill hierarchies in a gradual,
bottom-up manner as an agent learns about a domain.

Concluding Remarks
In closing, we should review the main claims we have
made about hierarchical skills and their treatment within
various cognitive architectures. There seems to be general agreement that skills are organized in some hierarchical fashion, but most existing models implement the
invocation of subskills through goal structures that are
deposited in short-term memory. In contrast, Icarus
produces hierarchical behavior by letting skills communicate directly with their subskills, as in procedural languages and logic programming formalisms.
We illustrated this idea by presenting an Icarus
model for multi-column subtraction and tracing its behavior on a specific problem. We saw that this system
takes the same basic steps as a production-system model,
but that steps involved in traversing the skill hierarchy occur within a single recognize-act cycle rather than
across successive cycles. This theoretical difference leads
to different predictions about the time required to execute complex skills. Future research should test these
predictions and extend Icarus to incorporate mechanisms for attention and construction of skill hierarchies.

Acknowledgements
This research was funded in part by Grant IIS-0335353
from the National Science Foundation, by Grant NCC
2-1220 from NASA Ames Research Center, and by Grant
HR0011-04-1-0008 from Rome Labs. Discussions with
Stephanie Sage, David Nicholas, and Seth Rogers contributed to many of the ideas presented in this paper.

References
Albus, J. S., & Meystel, A. M. (2001). Engineering of
mind: An introduction to the science of intelligent systems. New York: John Wiley.
Anderson, J. R. (1993). Rules of the mind . Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Anderson, J. R. Matessa, M., & Lebiere, C. (1997).
ACT-R: A theory of higher level cognition and its application to visual attention. Human-Computer Interaction, 12 , 439–462.
Bonasso, R. P., Firby, R. J., Gat, E., Kortenkamp, D.,
Miller, D., & Slack, M. (1997). Experiences with an
architecture for intelligent, reactive agents. Journal
of Experimental and Theoretical Arti cial Intelligence,
9 , 237–256.

784

