UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How expert dealers make profits and reduce the risk of loss in a foreign exchange
market?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6883n6s2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Ueda, Kazuhiro
Uchida, Yusuke
Izumi, Kiyoshi
et al.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

How expert dealers make profits and reduce the risk of loss
in a foreign exchange market?
Kazuhiro Ueda (ueda@gregorio.c.u-tokyo.ac.jp)
Yusuke Uchida (uchi-fcs@poppy.ocn.ne.jp)

Department of General System Studies, University of Tokyo, 3-8-1 Komaba, Meguro-ku
Tokyo, 153-8902 JAPAN

Kiyoshi Izumi (kiyoshi@ni.aist.go.jp)

Cyber Assist Research Center, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, 2-41-6 Aomi, Koto-ku
Tokyo, 135-0064 JAPAN

Yusuke Ito (itoy@simplexinst.com)

Simplex Institute, Inc., Shuwa Kamiyacho Building, 6th Floor, 4-3-13, Toranomon, Minato-ku
Tokyo, 105-0001 JAPAN
Abstract
The paper clarified how actual expert dealers made profits
and reduced the risk of loss in a virtual foreign exchange
market, by comparing the way novice or general investors
showed. As a result, we could find that the experts were riskaverse for losses and risk-seeking for profits while the novices
showed the opposite behavioral tendency. This result was
analyzed in terms of the prospect theory: It was found that the
expert could be (partially) free from deposition effect and
sunk-cost effect while the novices were not. It was also
suggested that the experts’ strategy of dumping losing
currencies could be socially transmitted by the dealers’
managers.

Introduction
How people make decision and learn in dispersed complex
social systems has recently been considered important to be
investigated. Here a dispersed complex social system is
defined as a system without a centralized information
resource and mechanism for deciding its behavior and, at
the same time, with rapidly changing environments which
provide their decision makers with information that
continually changes. In this paper, we will focus on the
(spot) foreign exchange market as a typical example of the
complex social systems. This is because (1) the foreign
exchange market have, as their constituents, a lot of market
players (such as banks, investors, governments, and so on)
who are different from one another in investment motivation,
speculation, and stake etc., (2) it is not a centralized market,
as the stock market, so that its market players have to
fathom out market consensus based on limited information,
and (3) it has rapidly changing environments which provide
its decision makers with information on the order of seconds
– the rate of change is typically faster than the decision
makers can respond. So it is considered a good target of
cognitive research to clarify how expert or skilled dealers
make decisions, especially make profits and reduce the risk
of loss, in the exchange market.

How can we investigate the process of expert dealers’
decision making? For this purpose, experimental market (or
economics) approach (for instance, Friedman & Sunder,
1994) seems useful: Experimental market is the field that
attempts to understand the behaviors of the markets and
their players by conducting experiments using real human
subjects. From a cognitive perspective, the experimental
market approach can be used to clarify the way of human
biased decision making, by analyzing how market players
actually make decisions in their conducting transactions on
a virtual financial market that simulates the corresponding
real market (Smith, 1996; Ueda, Taniguchi & Nakajima
2003). Namely, from the result of such a cognitive
experiment on the markets, it is considered to understand
how people or market players make decisions, in the real
markets, under some biases such as representativeness
(Kahneman & Tversky, 1972). This paper also adopts this
cognitive experimental market approach, as its research
methodology, in order to clarify what kind of biases
influence expert dealers’ decision making (profit making
and risk hedge) in a virtual exchange market. We will
pursue this research target, specifically by comparing the
performance of expert or skilled dealers with that of novice
or general investors.
There are some previous studies using the cognitive
experimental market approach. For example, the U-Mart
project aims to analyze the behaviors of the market,
especially the conditions under which bumpy ride occurs,
using a virtual future stock market (Kita, Sato, Mori & Ono
2003; Ueda, Taniguchi & Nakajima 2003). Because human
players, as well as computer agents, participated in a series
of experiments, it is possible to analyze the relation between
the macroscopic behaviors, such as price fluctuation, of the
market and the microscopic features of human players,
which has not been realized yet.
Smith (1996 & 1997) analyzed, using three trained
dealers as his subjects, how they reduced risks in dealing on
a virtual spot currency market and proposed a feedbackcontrol model of their risk management. Because he did not

1357

compare the performance of his skilled subjects with that of
novice or general investors, he did not clarify what kind of
biases the skilled dealers had or were free from. In addition,
it is a question that his subjects were actually expert dealers.
In the experimental environment used in (Smith 1996;
Smith 1997), each skilled subject was asked to make deals
with a pre-installed computer dealer while, in that used in
(Izumi, Nakamura & Ueda 2002), subjects were asked, in
pairs, to make deals with one another through computer
network, which virtually realized human-human dealing. In
this sense, the latter environment can be said to be closer to
the real dealing situation than the former. However, it is also
a question that all of their subjects were actually expert
dealers.
So, in this paper, we will ask real expert dealers to
participate in our experiments and compare their
performance with novice or general investors’ one. Here,
“expert” dealers mean those who had engaged in currency
dealing or stock trading for more than five years, since this
business field is a competitive jungle so that “engaging for
five years” can be an index of being expert or skilled. On
the other hand, we will ask graduate students majoring in
economics to participate, as novice or general investors, in
our experiments. Under this circumstance, we made two
experiments in order to clarify how and under what kind of
biases the expert dealers make profits and reduce the risk of
loss in a virtual foreign exchange market. In this virtual
market, only dollars and yen will be dealt.
This paper will be constructed as follows: In the second
section, necessary terminology will be introduced. In the
third and fourth section, the method of two experiments,
which were made to clarify dealers’ decision making, and
their results will be explained. In the fifth section, the results
obtained will be discussed from the perspective of the
prospect theory (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979). In the final
section, this paper will be concluded.

Terminology
Before we will explain our experiments, technical terms
necessary for understanding dealers’ trading behavior
should be introduced.
Position: We will use this term from the point of the
amount of dollars that each dealer has. “Long” means
owning or holding dollars (i.e., the amount of dollars bought
exceeds that of dollars sold). “Short” is the opposite of a
long position. “Square” means the situation that the amount
of dollars bought is equal to that of dollars sold. In our
experiments, all the subjects were asked to start from the
square position and to go back to the square at the end of the
experiments.
Unrealized profits and losses (UPL): An increase/decrease
in the value of dollars that is not “real” or “unrealized”
because the dollars have not been sold. Once dollars are sold
by a dealer, the profits/losses are “realized” by the dealer. If
a dealer started from the square and bought one dollar at the
rate of $1=Y100 and, after that, the rate has changed to
$1=Y110, the dealer has Y10 as UPL, which will be

Figure 1: The user display of VDS (stand-alone type).
realized when he/she sells the dollar to get back to the
square. In our experiments, the performance of each dealer
will be estimated in terms of UPL.
Lengthening vs. liquidation, profit-taking vs. loss cut: In
this paper, such a dealing that the absolute amount of
position increases is called “lengthening” while such a
dealing that the absolute amount of position decreases is
called “liquidation”. Because it is related to dealers’ risk
management, the latter will be analyzed in detail. Moreover,
liquidation can be divided into two sub-categories: profittaking and loss cut.

Experimental Environment
The virtual dealing system (for abbrev., VDS; see Figure 1)1,
which we originally developed using Java language, was
used in our experiments. The VDS was constructed so that
users (subjects) could make dealings with one another
through computer network; it simulates the functions and
display of the actual dealing systems, such as Reuter 2000,
so that users can get various fundamental information, such
as interest rates and balance of trade, news and trends to buy
and sell dollar/yen with other users or a broker2.
The VDS is available both as a server-client system, in
which multiple users make dealing with one another, all at
once, through computer network, as is actual dealings, and
as a stand-alone system, in which only one user makes
dealing with the system’s broker, as was in the experiment
by Smith (1996 & 1997). In Experiment 1, it was used as
the server-client system while, in Experiment 2, it was as
the stand-alone system.
The VDS is designed so that we can get various users’
dealing logs: For example, logs about what type and amount
of dealing a user made at which time, and those about what
type of information, news or trends a user referred to in
his/her dealing. Therefore, by using the VDS, we can
1

Because it was so built that the Japanese dealers would use, this
VDS has Japanese signage, as denoted in Figure 1.
2
Only one broker is assumed to exist in this VDS.

1358

analyze what type of decision a user made referring to what
kind of information.

The data collected were the logs of each subject’s
positions, orders, referred economic information and
messages of chatting, through the VDS, with other subjects.

Experiment 1
Chance to lengthen ⊿RC
his/her position

Purpose
The purpose was to make a hypothesis about how expert
dealers made profits and reduced the risk of loss in a virtual
foreign exchange market, by comparing the performance of
the expert dealers with that of novice or general investors.
The target was a dollar-yen exchange market, as already
explained. Because this experiment aimed to explore a
hypothesis about the way experts made decision, the serverclient system was used so that it could provide the subjects
with a dealing environment similar to the actual one.

Subjects
Eleven dealers, who had engaged in actual dealing or
trading for more than five years, participated as “expert”
dealers (we call this group of subjects expert group) while
ten graduate students, who majored in economics,
participated as “novice” or “general” investors (we call this
group of subjects novice group).

Procedure
All the subjects of each group were gathered together, at a
time, into one meeting room; the experiment of the expert
group and that of the novice one were made independently.
The news and fundamental information given to the two
groups were the same actual data during August, 1997; in
the first half of this period, the rate was gradually moving
up while, in the latter half, it rapidly and sharply declined,
which was caused both by a decline in U.S. stock prices and
by Japan's current account surplus. The rate change during
the experiment was not calculated endogenously, i.e. as a
result of dealings in the VDS, but given exogenously, i.e.
the same as the actual change during this period: This was
because the rate would have fluctuated quickly if the rate
change had been endogenously calculated in such a dealing
environment only with small number of market players. All
the subjects were, in fact, given such an instruction that
exchange rates were calculated by the orders of participating
players, since the dealing environment of the experiment
needed to be as close to the actual one as possible.
The subjects of each group were first explained about how
they could use the VDS interface and make dealings
through the VDS for 30 minutes. They were then given the
information about the economic situation and fundamentals
just before August, 1997 3 . After that, they were asked to
make dealings through the VDS for 20 minutes4.
3
Because all the names of the currencies dealt, the target nations,
and the proper names that came on were renamed, all the subjects
did not notice that the rate and data given were the actual ones in
the past. Of course, during the experiment, news was, from time to
time, given to the subjects while the data of economic
fundamentals and the trends of rate were always available.
4
The events occurred in August, 1997 was compressed in the time
frame of 20 minutes.

It is idealistic to
take a profit here
UPL

Cut loss is needed

Liquidation is needed
as soon as possible

Figure 2: The risk space.

Method of analysis
The main purpose of the experiment was to make a
hypothesis about how the respective groups made profits
and reduced the risk of loss. So, for each subject, we plotted
every log of dealing on the risk space (Smith, 1996): The
risk space5, which has an x-axis that denotes the value of
UPL6 for each dealing and has a y-axis that denotes the rateof-change (RC) of exchange rates whose sign shows the
increase in the absolute value of UPL7, visualizes how each
subject managed the risks caused by taking his/her positions
(see Figure 2). By comparing the risk spaces of the expert
group with those of the novice one, we can analyze how the
expert dealers made decisions, especially reduced the risk of
loss.

Result
Typical examples of the risk spaces plotted for the expert
and the novice group are shown respectively in Figure 3 and
4; in these figures, a circle denotes buying dollars, a upsidedown triangle does selling dollars, blue color does
lengthening and red color does liquidation. From the nature
of the figures, the lines of the graphs will extend towards
high positive values of the x-axis if a subject waits to lock in
profits after enough profits are made; in the same way, the
lines will extend towards high negative value of the x-axis if
he/she is so slow in cutting losses. Therefore, the higher the
average profit is, the slower a subject tends to be in taking
profits; the higher the average loss is, the slower he/she
tends to be in cutting losses.
From these figures, we can find a tendency that the
novices cut losses later than the experts. So, to statistically
confirm the above, we calculated the average loss and profit
respectively for the two groups in order to compare the
average loss (or profit) of the expert group with that of the
novice one. As a result, as for the average loss, we could
5

The risk space used in this study was a little different from that
used in (Smith 1996).
6
The value of UPL was normalized, being divided by the amount
of the maximum position of the subject.
7
When a subject’s position is long, ⊿RC>0 if dollar appreciation
occurs while ⊿RC<0 if yen appreciation does.

1359

find significant difference between the two groups (expert =
-0.02854 (SD = 0.00035), novice = - 0.12315 (SD =
0.01124); p = 0.041<0.05, one-sided) while, as for the
average profit, we could find no significant difference
between the two groups (expert = 0.46511 (SD = 0.03293),
novice = 0.37609 (SD = 0.02344); p = 0.190, one-sided).
From the above result, it is possible that experts can cut
losses so fast that they may prevent the losses from
increasing and, at the same time, can take profits at the right
time while novices cannot: This is, however, considered to
be little better than a hypothesis. It is because, as for the
average profit, the number of dealings was so scarce that we
could find no significant difference and because this result
may be specific to a set of the exchange rate and news given
to the subjects (hereafter, we call this set “scenario”). We
therefore need to make an additional experiment to confirm
the hypothesis obtained, with augmenting the number of
dealings: The reason the number was small is considered to
be attributed to the experimental environment of face-toface dealing because almost all the expert subjects were
acquainted with each other so that they, for a while,
hesitated to make dealings. So we will make an experiment,
as Experiment 2, by using a stand-alone type of VDS.

Experiment 2
Purpose
The purpose was to confirm the hypothesis derived from the
result of Experiment 1: The hypothesis was that expert
dealers could cut losses so fast that they might prevent the
losses from increasing and, at the same time, could take
profits at the right time while novices could not. Because of
the reasons explained above, a stand-alone type of VDS
was used in this experiment.

Subjects
Ten dealers, who had experienced more than five years’
dealing, participated as “expert” dealers (expert group)
while ten graduate students, who majored in economics,
participated as “novice” investors (novice group).

Procedure
In this experiment, a stand-alone type of VDS was used so
that all the subjects needed not to be gathered together at a
time; each subject participated in this experiment
independently. They were asked to make dealings with a
computer dealer (computer-driven trading program) of the
VDS.
The scenario (news and fundamental information) given
to the two groups were the same actual data during
September, 2000; through this period, the exchange rate
showed a box or range rate, i.e. the rate fluctuated within the
expected range. The rate change during the experiment was
given exogenously, as was the same in Experiment 18.
All the subjects were first explained about how they could
use the VDS interface and make dealings through the VDS
for 40 minutes. They were then given the information about
the economic situation and fundamentals just before
September, 2000. After that, they were asked to make
dealings through the VDS for 50 minutes.
The procedures other than the above were the same as
those in Experiment 1.

Method of analysis
Figure 3: An example of the risk space of expert.

The same as that in Experiment 1.

Result
We calculated the average loss and profit respectively for
the two groups in order to compare the average loss (or
profit) of the expert group with that of the novice one. As a
result, we could find significant difference between the two
groups, both as for the average loss (expert = -0.01849 (SD
= 0.00010), novice = - 0.031 (SD = 0.00005); p = 0.029 <
0.05, one-sided) and as for the average profit (expert =
0.09915 (SD = 0.00086), novice = 0.03619 (SD = 0.00013);
p = 0.003 < 0.01, one-sided).
So our hypothesis was confirmed: We can say that the
experts could cut losses so fast that they might prevent the
losses from increasing and, at the same time, could take
Figure 4: An example of the risk space of novice.

8

1360

All the subjects were, in advance, informed of it.

profits (or lock in profits) after enough profits were made,
whereas the novices could not.

said that even the expert dealers were not wholly free from
the biases.

Discussions
Analysis in terms of the prospect theory
From the results of the two experiments, we can say as
follows: Expert dealers can cut losses so fast that they may
prevent the losses from increasing and, at the same time, can
take profits (or lock in profits) after enough profits are made.
On the other hand, novices seem to be reluctant to sell
currencies that lose value while they are inclined to lock in
profits no sooner than the currencies they hold are profitable.
Why is there a sharp contrast between the way experts make
decision and that the novice do?
To answer this research question, we will introduce the
prospect theory by Kahneman & Tversky (1979): The
theory shows, based on the results of a laboratory
experiment, that people's attitudes toward risks concerning
profits may be quite different from their attitudes toward
risks concerning losses. Namely the theory claims that
people are, in general, risk-averse for profits and riskseeking for losses.
By using the theory, the tendency that people are
reluctant to lock in profits even when the losses increase
while they are willing to do no sooner than their holdings
become profitable can be explained by “deposition effect”
(Shefrin & Statman 1985; Weber & Camerer 1998) and
“sunk-cost effect” (Kahneman & Tversky 1979): The
former means that people prefer certainty to uncertainty
over a reference point while they show the opposite
preference under a reference point. And the latter means that
people tend to overestimate the cost needed for making a
position; decision-makers are unduly influenced by
resources that have already been spent and are therefore
more likely to continue pursuing a previously chosen course
of action.
This theoretical explanation seems to be true of the
dealing behaviors of our novice subjects, because they sold
promising currencies or winners too early and rode
unpromising currencies or losers too long. That is, our
novice subjects were considered not to be free from the
biases of deposition effect and sunk-cost effect. On the other
hand, our expert dealers seemed to avoid being distorted by
these biases, because they could cut losses early and wait to
lock in profits after enough profits were made.
Then the next question arises about whether expert
dealers can be completely free from the biases. To clarify
this point, we analyzed the dealing data in more detail. As a
result, we could find that some expert dealers sometimes
showed stepwise profit taking (see Figure 5). This stepwise
way of profit-taking can be interpreted in two ways: One is
that this indicates partial irrationality, which is subject to the
biases, of their dealing behaviors and the other is that they
were forced to take profits stepwise and to hedge risks
caused by rapid price fluctuation because they could not
fully predict the future exchange rate. Anyway, it can be

Stepwise
profit taking
Figure 5: An example of the stepwise profit taking
that some of the experts showed.
We also asked two investment managers why expert
dealers can be free from the biases. Both of the managers
said that dealers were taught, by their managers, to sell
losers as early as possible because riding losers too long
would only compound their losses, which might develop
into a major management issue. On the other hand, the
managers did not explicitly teach how to make profits. If
this holds of dealers in general, it is possible that expert
dealers have socially learned to be free from the biases. The
investment managers added that a lot of dealers in the
making had to drop out because it was quite difficult to
learn to be free from the biases, which seemed easy on the
surface.
To sum up, expert dealers can be (partially) free from the
biases, in their decision making, that a lot of people are
considered to have (Kahneman & Tversky 1979). This
clarification, by using actual expert dealers as subjects, is
the main contribution of this paper.

Conclusion
How people make decision and learn in dispersed complex
social systems has recently been one of the important
research issues. Especially the way of decision making
needs to be investigated in real situations or settings. So, in
this paper, we focused on the (spot) foreign exchange
market as a typical example of the complex social systems
and clarified how and under what kind of biases the expert
dealers make profits and reduce the risk of loss in a virtual
foreign exchange market. For this purpose, we asked real
expert dealers to participate in our experiments and
compared their performance with novice or general
investors’ one.
Our two experiments showed that the expert dealers could
cut losses so fast that they might prevent the losses from
increasing and, at the same time, could take profits (or lock

1361

in profits) after enough profits were made. On the other
hand, novices were reluctant to sell currencies that lost
value while they were inclined to lock in profits no sooner
than the currencies they held were profitable.
We analyzed this result in terms of the prospect theory
(Kahneman & Tversky 1979). The prospect theory claims
that people tend to sell promising currencies or winners too
early and ride unpromising currencies or losers too long,
under the influence of deposition effect and sunk-cost effect.
This theoretical explanation was clarified to be true of the
dealing behaviors of our novice subjects. On the other hand,
it was also clarified that our expert dealers could avoid
being distorted by the biases. In addition, it was possible
that even the expert dealers were not wholly free from the
biases because some of them showed stepwise way of
profit-taking, which was considered not fully rational.
“Artificial market” research (Arthur, 1991) attracts
attention of many researchers in recent years. In the
artificial market research, computer programs as virtual
market participants are built and simulated, where these
computer programs mutually trade, for understanding the
phenomena and features of real markets. The key is to build
an artificial market with the appropriate features of the
actual markets and their participants. The result of this paper
is considered to be applicable to this artificial market
research, especially to the construction of agents with the
way of risk management in the artificial market model by
Izumi & Ueda (2001). In this way, the result of this research
is also of practical use.

Kita, H., Sato, H., Mori, N. & Ono, I. (2003). U-Mart
system, software for open experiments of artificial market.
CIRA IEEE 2003 Computational Intelligence in Robotics
and Automation (CD-ROM).
Shefrin, H. & Statman, M. (1985). The deposition to sell
winners too early and ride losers too long: Theory and
evidence, Journal of Finance, 40, 777-792.
Smith, K. C. S. (1996). Decision making in rapidly
changing environments: Trading in the spot currency
market. Ph. D Thesis, Department of Information and
Decision Science, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis.
Smith, K. C. S. (1997). How currency traders think about
the spot market’s thinking. Proceedings of the Nineteenth
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 703708. Mahwah, NJ: Laurence Erlbaum Associates.
Ueda, T., Taniguchi, K. & Nakajima, Y. (2003). An analysis
of U-Mart experiments by machine and human agents.
CIRA IEEE 2003 Computational Intelligence in Robotics
and Automation (CD-ROM).
Weber, M. & Camerer, C. (1998). The decomposition effect
in securities trading: An experimental analysis. Journal of
Economic Behavior and organization, 33, 167-184.

Acknowledgments
We thank to all the subjects for kindly participating in our
experiments. This research is partially supported by grant
(Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research, Scientific Research
in Priority Areas 2003, No.A06-14) from Japan Society for
the Promotion of Science.

References
Arthur, B. W. (1991). Designing economic agents that act
like human agents: A behavioral approach to bounded
rationality. The American Economic Review, 81, 353-359.
Friedman, D. & Sunder, S. (1994). Experimental methods:
A primer for economists. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Izumi, K., Nakamura, S. & Ueda, K. (2002). Identification
of agents’ strategy making process by an experimental
market. Proceedings of the 6th Joint Conference on
Information Sciences, 1081-1084.
Izumi, K. & Ueda, K. (2001). Phase transition in a foreign
exchange market: Analysis based on an artificial market
Approach. IEEE Transaction on
Evolutionary
Computation, 5, 456-470.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1972). Subjective
probability: A judgment of representativeness. Cognitive
Psychology, 3, 430-454.
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An
analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica, 47, 263291.

1362

