UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
How Copying Artwork Affects Students’ Artistic Creativity

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8bq69315

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Ishibashi, Kentaro
Okada, Takeshi

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

How Copying Artwork Affects Students’ Artistic Creativity
Kentaro Ishibashi (k.ishibashi@cc.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Education and Human Development,
Nagoya University, Nagoya 464-8601, Japan

Takeshi Okada (j46006a@cc.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Education and Human Development and
Institute for Advanced Research,
Nagoya University, Nagoya 464-8601, Japan

world on paper (Kozawa, 2001). In other cultures, it is
also reported that people prefer realistic paintings to
abstract or other types (Cupchik & Gebotys, 1988;
O’Hare, 1976). Such beliefs might limit the range of
students’ means of expression. It is predicted that
subjects would create new drawing styles if their
constraints become relaxed. Therefore, we focused on
copying others’ work as a candidate for an intervention
that could relax constraints and investigated its effect
on creative drawing.

Abstract
30 undergraduates participated individually in a threeday-drawing experiment. It was explored whether an
experience copying others’ drawing facilitated subjects’
artistic creativity. Results showed that drawings by
subjects who previously had copied others’ drawings
were rated more creative than the drawings of subjects
who had not copied. Two further analyses revealed how
subjects could produce creative drawings. First, in the
examination of constraint relaxation processes, subjects
were initially constrained by a belief that they should
draw things realistically. Then, they relaxed this
constraint by means of copying abstract pictures. Second,
according to protocols of the copying process, copying
forced subjects to explore their original expression
through a comparison with other artwork. It seemed that
copying enabled them to generate new drawing ideas.

Method
Subjects. 30 undergraduates participated in this study.
None of them had special training in drawing since at
least middle school.

Introduction
It is often said that people cannot produce original
works through the imitation of others. In the domain of
art, many art educators believe that copying others’
work inhibits people’s, particularly children’s, artistic
creativity. They claim that artistic expression should be
as free as possible from copying (Lowenfeld, 1957). It
is well known, however, that artists of impressionism
created their original paintings by means of imitating
Japanese prints, Ukiyoe. In addition, some famous
painters, e.g., van Gogh and Picasso, created their
original paintings through copying the work of old
masters (Galassi, 1996; Homburg, 1996). The question
of whether copying inhibits or facilitates creative art
has been controversial among artists, art researchers,
and art educators (Duncum, 1988).
In some modern cultures, including Japanese culture,
many art lay people (i.e., nonartists) seem to think that
representational and realistic paintings have higher
value than other forms of painting. That may be due to
the content and methods of art education in school
settings. Especially in Japanese elementary and middle
schools, students spend the majority of their time in art
class sketching. This may lead them to believe that
drawing is primarily to represent objects in the real

618

Experimental Design. A three-day-experiment (pretreatment-post design) was conducted. All of the
subjects were initially required to create two original
drawings in the pretest phase. In the treatment and
posttest phases, subjects were divided into three groups.
In the Experimental Group (EG), subjects were asked to
copy two pieces of an artist’s drawings, then to create
their own original drawing. In the Reproduction Group
(RG), subjects were also asked to copy, then to draw a
new picture using the artist’s style. In the Control
Group (CG), subjects were asked to draw their own
original drawings in every session.
Materials. Subjects were required to draw pictures
using as subject matter the materials displayed in Table
1. A4-sized Kent paper and a black ballpoint pen were
offered to subjects for each drawing. The pictures
copied by subjects in the two groups were abstract
paintings by a Japanese modern artist (Figure 1).
Procedure. Each subject participated individually in a
three-day-experiment; one session per day, each lasting
approximately 90 minutes. Subjects were asked to draw
two pictures in each of the pretest and treatment phases.
The second picture in each phase was presented three
minutes after the first one was completed. In the
posttest, subjects drew a picture and then were asked to

Table 1: Materials presented to subjects.
Experimental Phases
Treatment

Pretest
1st drawing

a cocktail glass

a shell (Venus Comb Murex)*

2nd drawing

a paprika and a pinecone**

a potted plant*

Posttest
an orange and a shell (Common
Spider Conch)**
-

* For EG and RG, the pictures to copy were drawn with each of these materials by an artist and presented alongside the materials.
** These sets of materials were counterbalanced among subjects.

complete a questionnaire (described later in detail) and
were interviewed about their drawings. Thus, each
subject drew five pictures in total during three days.
Subjects in CG were instructed as follows in all
phases: “Draw your own ORIGINAL picture using this
(these) material(s) as subject matter.” Subjects in EG
were instructed in the same way in the pre and posttest
phases. But, they were told in the treatment phase: “A
painter drew this picture using this material as subject
matter. Please copy the picture onto a blank piece of
paper while imagining the painter’s intention.” Subjects
in RG were instructed in the same way as EG in the
pretest and treatment phases. However, they were told
in the posttest phase: “Recall the previous day’s
experience of copying a painter’s picture and then draw
a picture with these materials in the painter’s style.
How would you represent the subject matter if you were
the painter?”
We asked subjects to talk aloud while drawing, and
recorded their verbal protocols and behavior with three
videocassette recorders. Except for this procedure, we
placed upon the subjects’ activities as few restrictions
as possible in order to promote maximum spontaneity
(e.g., They were not told explicitly that there was a time
limit on their drawing).

mean number of elements in a drawing was
significantly greater in RG (23.8) than in EG and CG
(10.2 and 5.4, respectively) [for group by phase
interaction, F(2,27)=5.05, p<.05]. All drawings by
subjects in RG consisted of much repetition of simple
geometrical elements, but those by subjects in EG had
no such characteristics. Thus, although subjects in EG

Results and Discussion
Preliminary Analysis
In the posttest phase, drawings in RG were quite
different from those in EG and CG in terms of content
and number of elements in each picture (Figure 2). The

Figure 2: Examples of drawings in the posttest phase
(EG; CG; RG, respectively from the top).

Figure 1: Example of the artist’s drawings that
subjects in the EG and RG saw.

619

and RG copied pictures in the same manner, subjects in
EG did not reproduce the artist’s style of pictures, but
created their own styles.

Analysis of Products: Rating Creativity of the
Drawings
In order to compare the creativity of drawings in EG
with that in CG, a new scale was constructed that
included three aspects of artistic creativity: six items of
aesthetic attractiveness (e.g., “vitality of expression”);
nine items of originality (e.g., “originality of her or his
view or sense of value”); and two items of technical
skills (e.g., “technical skill in picture composition”).
Thus, in total, 17 items were included in the scale with
all items ranging from 1 to 5. Because our critical
question was to reveal whether or not the artistic
creativity of subjects who copied others’ art works was
superior to that of subjects who did not copy, the
comparison of the two groups would be sufficient to
answer the question. Thus, we excluded the drawings
by subjects in RG from this analysis.
Two professional modern artists separately rated
subjects’ pre and posttest drawings using the scale.
They were not informed of which drawings belonged to
which condition. A result of factor analysis with
Principal Component Analysis showed that the scale
has one factor construction and was adequate for the
evaluating creativity of drawings (eigenvalues for the
first three factor were 10.58, 2.06, and 1.05, and the
first factor accounted for 62.2% of the total variance).
Since the coefficient alpha for internal coherence
was .96 for all 17 items, we regarded the simple sum of
the 17 items as the creativity score for each drawing.
A three-way ANOVA (two experimental groups X
two raters X two expositional ordering of drawing
materials) was performed for post-pre subtracted scores.

Mean Subtractive Scores (Post-Pre)

30

EG

CG

20

10

0

-10

Rater A

Drawings by subjects in EG were rated significantly
higher than those in CG (Figure 3) [F(1,16)=5.54,
p<.05]. The fact that scores were significantly different
between the two raters suggested that norms of artistic
creativity would vary among artists [F(1,16)=4.65,
p<.05]. However, it was important to note that the two
raters evaluated the posttest drawings by EG subjects in
the same way. There was no interaction among the
three factors. Findings suggest that copying other’s
drawings provided the subjects opportunities for
creating new styles of drawing.

Analysis of Process 1: Relaxation of Students’
Constraints
Why could subjects who had copied other’s works
produce more creative drawings? Note that the pictures
the subjects had to copy (abstract style) were fairly
different from typical pictures that subjects normally
encounter (representational style). If subjects were
constrained by their beliefs that drawing must follow a
representational expression style, copying drawings in
an abstract style might relax the constraint by making
them aware of other stylistic possibilities.
In order to conduct further analyses of the process of
creation, we focused on the following three aspects: (1)
number of pictures that included realistic contents; (2)
strength of the subjects’ realistic intention; (3) number
of subjects who reported a failure of creative drawing.
Number of Pictures that Included Realistic Contents.
If subjects were constrained by their beliefs that
drawing had to be realistic, such beliefs would affect
the content of their drawings. In this study, we coded a
drawing as constrained by such beliefs if it contained at
least one of the following aspects: (1) drawings that
designate a specific scene made up of either realistic
elements or stylized ones (e.g., one similar to an
illustration of a storybook); and (2) drawings in which
subjects sketched only the materials presented (example
of drawing from CG condition in Figure 2). We took
these two types of drawings to indicate that subjects
drew without their own figurative interpretations.
The numbers of drawing which contained the
contents described above were approximately equal in
the pretest phase in both conditions (70% in EG and
80% in CG) [p=1.00 with Fisher’s exact test]. The
frequency of that in EG, however, significantly
decreased compared to that in CG in the posttest phase
(20% and 90%, respectively) [z=-2.21, p<.05 with test
by standardized scores].
Strength of Subjects’ Realistic Intention. Did
subjects actually intend to draw pictures so
realistically? In order to capture their intention, we
investigated how much they paid attention to technical
viewpoints related to realistic sketch-like drawing. We
assumed that the more subjects thought they had to
draw realistic and photo-like pictures, the more strongly

Rater B

(Error bar means Standard Error)

Figure 3: Comparison of creativity rating between
subjects in EG and in CG

620

they would attend to such technical viewpoints. If
copying pictures in an abstract style relaxes such a
constraint, then the degree of EG subjects’ attention to
such technical aspects would decrease in the posttest.
After posttest drawing, subjects were asked to answer
a questionnaire intended to measure their realistic
intention during both the post and pretest drawing. This
questionnaire consisted of 11 items on five-point scale
(ranged from 1 to 5, including two inverse items) that
covered a variety of aspects of realistic intention (e.g.,
“I paid attention to capturing the materials’ form
exactly”; “I tried to express the quality of the materials’
surface”). For the 11 items, the coefficient alpha
was .86.
A two-way ANOVA (three experimental groups X
two phases) for the sum of item scores revealed a
significant interaction [F(2,27)=9.82, p<.001]. Further
analysis revealed that, while there was no significant
difference on groups in pretest phase [F(1,54)=0.01,
n.s.], in posttest phase, scores in EG and RG
significantly decreased compared to scores in CG
(Figure 4) [F(1,54)=7.93, p<.001; p<.05 with Steel’s
multiple comparison for difference scores of post-pre
test]. In addition, subjects’ scores in the pretest phase
were on average about 70 % or more of the maximum
score and thus seemed to show their strict intention to
use a realistic drawing style. Hence, we can conclude
that the subjects did, in fact, have representational
constraints in the beginning of the study and that the
constraints were then relaxed by means of copying
pictures with an abstract style.
Number of Subjects Who Reported a Failure of
Creative Drawing. We asked subjects to report what
they devised in the posttest drawings. Their answers
were divided into categories and the contents and the
number of responses were analyzed.
Characteristically, half of the subjects in CG reported

Mean Subtractive Scores (Post-Pre)

5
0
-5
-10
-15

EG

CG

Analysis of Process 2: Generation of New Ideas
The previous section revealed that copying relaxes
subjects’ constraint. However, even if their constraints
are relaxed, it is insufficient for production of a new
style of drawing. Because, in order to create a new style
of drawing, subjects need to generate concrete ideas for
drawing. In order to reveal how subjects in EG came up
with new ideas when their constraints were relaxed, we
focused on subjects’ copying process in the treatment
phase.
We presumed that thought processes during copying
include two aspects: (1) understanding others (in this
case, a creator who produced the artwork) and (2)
understanding oneself. The former aspect is an effective
one in order to reproduce others’ artworks. The
knowledge about the pictures would be deepened by
means of inferring the creator’s art making process. In
this point of view, however, copying can be risky since
people may lose their own originality. Thus, many
people have claimed that copying might be harmful to
creation. As we pointed out, this is a well known
argument.
In contrast, the second aspect, understanding oneself,
is not so well known. In this aspect of thought processes,
the copiers’ own expression may become clarified by
means of comparisons with others’ artworks. Thus,
people’s generation of new ideas might be facilitated
through their searching for originality. This aspect may
be particularly important for creativity, because it might
promote the copier’s ability to produce her/his own
original artworks.
It is hypothesized that subjects in EG experienced
these two aspects of thought processes when copying
and were able to generate new ideas to draw. In the rest
of this section, we will focus on the protocols by EG
and RG subjects during copying an artist’s artworks and
describe whether or not the protocols include evidence
of these two aspects. Of course, these aspects are
double-faced, and one cannot work without the other. In
this study, however, we will pragmatically separate
them into two aspects and examine each.
Copying to Understand Others. In this aspect, getting
to know the processes by copying could deepen
knowledge of the products. For example, F. Natsume
(cartoon artist; 1992) copied a famous Japanese
cartoonist’s work. He found that the lines of this
cartoon give a very round and centripetal impression.
This characteristic of the lines has an important role in

-20
-25

that they could not come up with any new ideas and just
sketched what they saw (e.g., “I thought that I could not
draw well if I pay too much attention to originality. So,
I decided to draw the materials as they are”). In EG,
however, no subject reported such a comment [p<.05
with Fisher’s exact test]. This result implies that
subjects in CG were kept constrained by their beliefs
and could not produce new ways of drawing.

RG

(Error bar means Standard Error)

Figure 4: Subjects’ intention to draw realistically.

621

creating this cartoonist’s characters’ special features
such as bravery and cuteness. The case shows that he
deepened his knowledge about the cartoon through
copying its lines.
In addition, understanding others’ works requires
changing one’s standpoint. In order to really copy, it is
necessary for us to understand the other’s underlying
intention of the procedure. When copying, we are
forced to infer the underlying intention of the other’s
works. This process makes us switch our standpoint
from an observer to a creator.
Thus, copying facilitates understanding a creator. Did
actual copying processes include this aspect? We
focused on subjects’ protocols during the copying phase
(treatment phase in EG and RG) and analyzed whether
or not their protocols exemplify understanding others.
In copying, subjects noticed concrete features of
elements/parts in the artist’s drawings.
- Why did he draw this horizontal line? (subject
=ID3)
- He doesn’t draw outlines, does he? (ID3)
- I copy it paying attention to the distance with
other parts. (ID14)
- I must use stronger lines. My lines were not clear
at all. (ID19)
Subjects also tried to understand the artist’s intention.
- I think, the thick parts of the leaves indicate this
plant’s vitality. (ID16)
- Each element in the picture may not represent
each leaf of the real plant. (ID7)
In this way, copying process did have an aspect of
understanding others. Subjects in RG could reproduce
the new picture in the artist’s style because they would
engage such a process and deepen their knowledge
about the artist.
Copying to Understand Oneself. It seems that
understanding others also facilitates understanding
oneself. Consider the following case. Even if you had
no opinion about an issue at first, you may often form
your own opinion while listening to others’. In the
domain of art, there would exist such a case that the
deeper you understand someone’s artworks, the more
you become aware of your originality.
There are many such examples in art history. For
example, Picasso and van Gogh copied old masters’
artworks, exploring their own original style rather than
keeping the styles of the artworks exactly (Galassi,
1996; Homburg, 1996). Picasso talked about his
copying (Sabartés, 1959):

622

Suppose one were to make a copy of The Maids
of Honor (Las Meninas); if it were I, the moment
would come when I would say to myself: suppose
I moved this figure a little to the right or a little
to the left? At that point I would try it without
giving a thought to Velázquez. Almost certainly, I
would be tempted to modify the light or to
arrange it differently in view of the changed
position of the figure. Gradually I would create a
painting of The Maids of Honor sure to horrify
the specialist in the copying old masters. It
would not be The Maids of Honor he saw when
he looked at Velázquez’s picture; it would be my
Maids of Honor.
This case shows that Picasso actively explored his own
expression through copying Velázquez’s work. It is a
different aspect from the one that focuses on learning
particular techniques or expressions (i.e. understanding
other’s works).
Why does copying facilitate self understanding? We
propose the following two reasons. At first, when
copying other’s works, you constantly compare other’s
expression with your own. This “comparison” process
forces you to actively interpret the differences between
the other’s works and your own. This is the first step in
searching for your own original expressions. Secondly,
particularly in copying artworks, you can externally
compare a model with your copy. This encourages you
to notice differences between the two.
Our protocol data show subjects’ self understanding.
First, subjects’ own visions emerged. They interpreted
the figures in their own way as well as inferred the
artist’s intention.
- It looks like fossil fishes are swimming. (ID7)
- It looks like insects are flying. (ID12)
- They look like ribs or fish bones. (ID3)
Some subjects felt uncomfortable with the other’s
works. It seemed that such feelings prompted them to
explore their comfortable expressions.
- Why did he/she draw such cross marks? I cannot
find them in this material [= a shell]. I don’t
understand it. (ID19)
- I don’t like patterned figures like this. Because
it’s monotonous. (ID1)
Some subjects became aware of their own expression
by means of the comparisons with other’s work.
- His lines end smoothly, but mine stopped tightly.
(ID1)
- In the previous copy, I failed to draw pictures
well, because I drew the elements too big and
lost balance. (ID14)

- This picture reminds me of previous day’s
paintings [Subject’s own drawings in the last
session]. I now understand that mine were not
so original. (ID1)
These findings enable subjects to understand what
kinds of expressions they usually use and what kinds of
expressions they want to create.

General Discussion
This study revealed that an experience copying others’
drawings facilitated subjects’ artistic creativity. It was
also showed that at least two underlying processes
affected this performance. First, constraint relaxation
processes enabled subjects in the EG to explore
drawing styles beyond the familiar realistic and
representative style. Second, generating new ideas
through comparison with other’s works prompted
subjects to notice their own original expression. Based
upon these findings, we propose a model about copying
to creation (Figure 5). It is suggested that constraint
relaxation and generation of new ideas (including two
aspects of copying) together can facilitate a new style of
drawing.
Some recent studies investigated the effect of
experimenter-presented examples on a creative
generation task. For instance, Smith, Ward, &
Schumacher (1993) found that people unconsciously
tend to incorporate features of the examples in their
creation (conformity effect). This effect varied with
conditions; for example, the effect was enhanced with a
delay between exemplar presentation and creation test
(Marsh, Landau, & Hicks, 1996). In addition, it was
related to inadvertent plagiarism because people fail to
monitor their source of novel knowledge appropriately.
These studies suggest that examples may negatively
affect creation. However, it is well known that no idea
is completely original; all forms of creation are strongly
affected by already existing things. Thus, the question
that we want to answer here is how people create new
ideas even if they have a tendency to be heavily
influenced by old ideas, as previous studies suggest.
Although this research is still in an early stage, we
propose that the process of understanding oneself in
comparison with others works is a key mechanism of
creation.
One reason why previous studies did not focus on
this aspect is perhaps that the subjects in these
investigations saw exemplars for only a few minutes
and thus did not have enough time to involve
themselves in the process of understanding. In contrast,
in our experiment, the subjects spent about forty
minutes copying pictures. This long, active exposure to
examples may have forced them to engage in the
process of understanding themselves.
Despite this, copying others’ works may not be the
only means of making people more creative. If they
were just told verbally to consider other forms of

623

Constraint Relaxation
Creative
Drawing

Copying

Generation of New Ideas

Figure 5: Interactive processes in copying.
drawing or presented others’ works as exemplars
without copying, then they might also be able to draw
more creatively. We are currently conducting another
experiment to test these possibilities.

Acknowledgments
This study was supported by a Grant-in-Aid of
Scientific Research #C-14510135 from the Japan
Society for the Promotion of Science to the second
author.
Since the experiment was carried out over summer
vacation, we indeed want to show gratitude to all
subjects for their participation. We also want to
acknowledge three modern artists for their generous
support and suggestions.

References
Cupchik, G. C. & Gebotys, R. J. (1988). The search for
meaning in art: Interpretive styles and judgments of
quality. Visual Arts Research, 14, 38-50.
Duncum, P. (1988). To copy or not to copy: A review.
Studies in Art Education, 29, 203-210.
Galassi, S. G. (1996). Picasso’s variations on the
masters. New York: H. N. Abrams.
Homburg, C. (1996). The copy turns original: Vincent
van Gogh and a new approach to traditional art
practice. Amsterdam; Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Kozawa, M. (2001). Kaiga no seisaku: Jiko hakken no
tabi. [Art making: The journey to discover oneself.]
Tokyo: Kaden-sha.
Lowenfeld, V. (1957). Creative and mental growth (3rd
ed.). New York: Macmillan.
Marsh, R. L., Landau, J. D., & Hicks, J. L. (1996). How
examples may (and may not) constrain creativity.
Memory & Cognition, 24, 669-680.
Natsume, F. (1992). Natsume Fusanosuke no Mangagaku. [A Theory of Cartoon by Fusanosuke
Natsume.] Tokyo: Chikuma-shobo.
O’Hare, D. (1976). Individual differences in perceived
similarity and preference for visual art: A multi
dimensional scaling analysis. Perception and
Psychophisics, 20, 445-452.
Sabartés, J. (1959). Picasso: variations on Velázquez’
painting “The maids of honor”. New York: H. N.
Abrams.
Smith, S. M., Ward, T. B., & Schumacher, J. S. (1993).
Constraining effects of examples in a creative
generation task. Memory & Cognition, 21, 837-845.

