UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Imagistic Processes in Analogical Reasoning: Conserving Transformations and Dual
Simulations

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6x36s7vk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Author
Clement, John J.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Imagistic Processes in Analogical Reasoning:
Conserving Transformations and Dual Simulations
John J. Clement (clement@srri.umass.edu)
Scientific Reasoning Research Institute
College of Natural Sciences and Mathematics
and School of Education
Lederle GRT 434
University of Massachusetts
Amherst, MA 01003 USA

Abstract

One expert subject proposed the analogy that the wheel
acts like a heavy lever perpendicular to the slope, with its
fulcrum at the point of contact. Intuitively, the lever would
be easier to move by pushing at X, suggesting that the same
would be true for the wheel. But in the wheel the point of
contact is moving, and ordinarily lever fulcrums do not
move. In addition some subjects assume that the fulcrum
should instead be at the wheel’s center. Therefore the
evaluation of the validity of the analogy relation (shown as
the dotted line between A and B in Figure 1) was in
question. This is distinguished from the subject’s confidence
in his understanding of the analogous case B itself, which
was quite high in this case.

The classical theory of analogical reasoning focuses on mappings
between discrete symbols as the mechanism of analogy evaluation
and transfer. This paper introduces several other analogy
evaluation strategies discovered in expert reasoning protocols:
bridging analogies, conserving transformations, dual simulations
used to detect perceptual-motor similarity, and overlay
simulations. These findings provide evidence for the hypothesis
that certain analogical reasoning processes can be imagery based.

Earlier work on higher order reasoning has indicated that
expert subjects use various methods to generate analogies
spontaneously when solving difficult problems (Clement,
1988), and that evaluating the validity of such analogies is
essential to using them (Clement, 1989). That is, even if one
has generated a confidently understood analogous case, one
must evaluate one’s confidence in the validity of the
analogy relation to have confidence in transferring results to
the target. The classical theory of analogical reasoning
(Gentner, 1983; Holyoke and Thagard, 1989; Forbus, et al,
1997) focuses on mappings between discrete symbols as the
mechanism of analogy evaluation and transfer. This paper
examines several other analogy evaluation strategies
observed in expert think aloud protocols. The data base for
the study comes from professors and advanced graduate
students in scientific fields who were asked to think aloud
about a variety of problems. This paper focuses on two
mathematicians solving physics problems they found
difficult. By focusing on problems with which they were
unfamiliar (i.e., a problem on the frontier of their own
personal knowledge). it is plausible that the thought
processes analyzed will share some characteristics with
hypothesis formation and model construction processes used
on the frontiers of science.
An example of a problem where analogy evaluation is
important is the “Sisyphus problem” in Figure 1A: “You are
given the task of rolling a heavy wheel up a hill. Does it
take more, less, or the same amount of force to roll the
wheel when you push at x, rather than at y? Assume that
you apply a force parallel to the slope at one of the two
points shown, and that there are no problems with
positioning or gripping the wheel. Assume that the wheel
can be rolled without slipping by pushing it at either point.”

3

X
Y

1C

.
1

2

X
Y
1B

1A

Figure 1: S2’s lever analogy for the wheel

Bridging Analogies
One method for evaluating this analogy used by this subject
was the bridging analogy shown in Figure 1C of a spoked
wheel without a rim. By breaking the problem of confirming
a “farther” analogy into the problem of confirming two
“closer” analogies. such a bridge can make it easier to
develop confidence that the wheel does work like the lever
in Figure 1B (a correct analysis). Bridging analogies are
defined as occurring when the subject finds or generates an
intermediate case which shares features with both the target
and source analog. Their value has been documented
previously in a number of expert problem contexts and in
instructional applications (Clement, 1986). While it can be
very helpful to subjects, bridging in itself is an incomplete
strategy for analogy evaluation, since each half of the bridge
must itself be evaluated. Therefore bridging is most useful
in conjunction with other evaluation methods and it adds to,
rather than reduces, the number of tasks to be performed.

233

Although the drawing can be an external support for a static
visual representation, it does not depict movements, so it is
reasonable to hypothesize that the subject is performing a
mental imagistic simulation of the wheel slipping down on
the cliff. The change in slope simplifies the problem by
changing it to one in which forces act mostly along only one
dimension.: upward and downward. Since the problem
already specified no slipping, the gear teeth do not add new
information but may help in imagistically simulating what
will happen in the analogous case. Thus they may be an
example of what I have called an “imagery enhancement”
strategy (Clement, 1994, 2003).
The transformations appear in this case to be a means of
both generating and evaluating the new analogy. Clement
(1988) found that of a collection of 31 spontaneous
analogies generated by ten experts, a greater number of
analogies were generated via such transformations than
those generated via an association to another case already in
memory. However, the present paper focuses on the
possible analogy evaluation function of transformations
rather than on their analogy generation function.

This raises the problem of why experts bother to consider
bridging cases at all, since they seem to create more work.

Conserving Transformations
In this section I present examples of a second evaluation
strategy called conserving transformations and argue that it
is distinctly different from the commonly cited method of
matching discrete features for evaluating an analogical
relationship. A paradigmatic case of a conserving
transformation (although he did not identify it as such) is
Wertheimer's method for determining the area of a
parallelogram by cutting one end off and moving it to the
other end to form a rectangle. A transformation is an action
that changes a system 1 to system 2. If 2 is the same as 1
with respect to a feature or relationship R, then the
transformation conserves R. An example of a conserving
transformation in the Sisyphus problem occurred when
subject S7 changed the problem to an analogous one
involving an almost-vertical cliff with gear teeth:

x
y

.

.

x

p
y

2A Push on Wheel

2B Steep Slope,
Gear Teeth

x

Spring problem. A more substantial transformation is
illustrated by the passage below from S2's solution to the
following spring problem: “A weight is hung on a spring.
The original spring is replaced with a spring made of the
same kind of wire, with the same number of coils, but with
coils that are twice as wide in diameter. Will the spring
stretch from its natural length more, less, or the same
amount under the same weight? (Assume the mass of the
spring is negligible.) Why do you think so?” Earlier this
subject has considered long and short horizontal bending
rods made of the same wire as the spring and bent by
hanging the same amount of weight on one end as an
analogy for the spring problem (Figure 3B). Knowing that
the longer rod will bend more suggests to him that the wider
spring stretches more. In the following passage he evaluates
that analogy by speaking of rolling up the bending rod into a
spring (Figure 3C is discussed later):

.
y

2C Pull on Wheel,
Like a Pulley

Figure 2: Wheel analogy series of S7
(Brackets in transcripts denote interpretations from viewing
tape, while parentheses denote observed actions.)
01 S: “Suppose it were tilted steeply and you did that; so
steep as to be almost vertical. (Draws Figure 2B). It
seems like it [the wheel] would skid out from under you
the other way [down along the cliff]. This (moves hands
as if turning an object clockwise) would get away from
you here [at point p]. Let's assume it's gear toothed [gear
teeth on the wheel and the cliff] and that it won't slip. “
The change from situation A to B in Figure 2 appears to be
a double transformation consisting of: the change of slope,
and the addition of gear teeth. One can define the "targeted
relationship" as the one for which an explanation or
prediction is sought in the target situation (e.g. the relation
between the force required and its location on the wheel). In
his further work on the problem S7 never questions the
validity of these transformations, and assumes that the
targeted relationship in the problem situation is not affected
by them. One can surmise that this occurs because the gear
teeth transformation is a standardized one in physics and
both are intuited to be irrelevant to the relationship of
interest in the problem, i.e. they are conserving
transformations. The origins of this kind of intuition have
been studied since Piaget’s early conservation experiments
but are still poorly understood. (Case 2C will be discussed
later.)
The hand motions over the drawing here provide one
source of evidence on the use of dynamic imagery.

3

2
3C

1
3A

3B

Figure 3: Rod analogy and zigzag bridge of S2
102 S: “You can imagine a spring...and you
know...there's no difference between the top and the
bottom. It's a symmetric situation…
105 S: You take your [straight, horizontal] wire, you say
'OK, you think it's the bending that does it. Well, then

234

let's bend it [by pulling down on one end of the straight
wire]. And then let's roll it up [around a vertical axis] to
make the spring. And you get a spring which stretches
more and more at the bottom. The loops are wider apart!
107 S: Stretch it [a normal spring]: you don't get this
increase of the distance between the loops toward the
bottom. You just get a uniform stretching. And therefore
the stretched spring cannot be understood as a rolled up
bent spring.”
This argues against bending as the source of stretching.
Here the subject describes a very explicit spatial
transformation between the spring and the rod. The
sequence is: he generates the rod analogy; he simulates
bending in the rod; he evaluates the analogy by transforming
it back into a spring; there is a conflict with a known
property of the spring, and he discounts the rod analogy.
This evaluation is extremely valuable in that it gives him
information arguing that the conjectured mechanism of
bending is invalid. (In fact springs stretch primarily via
twisting in the wire, not bending. ) Note the imagery report
in line 102. These passages suggest the attempt to use a
visual transformation to evaluate the validity of a tentative
analogy. The evaluation is influential in that it leads to
discounting the validity of the analogy. Griffith, Nersessian,
and A. Goel (2000) have also designed and investigated a
computer program which successfully accounts for a
number of features of this protocol and others collected for
the spring problem. Transformations played an important
role in modifying and improving faulty analogies or models
in their program. However, they did not examine the role of
conserving transformations as a means for analogy
evaluation.
Prior to these sequences the subject had generated not
only the analogous rod case, but what appeared to be a
complete mapping of symbolic features between the rod
case and the spring case. Bending, length, and slope, in the
rod were mapped onto stretching, width, and slope in the
spring. The relation of <greater length causes greater
bending in the rod> had been mapped to the sought-after
relation of <greater width causes greater stretch in the
spring>. Therefore the transformations above do not appear
to be adding any new elements to the mappings. Rather,
they seem to be increasing the subject's confidence that he
has found an important visual mismatch in the slope feature.
They are new ways to arrive at the same mappings. That is,
the transformations are a means to determining a match or a
mismatch as the outcome, not just the notation for a
mismatch as read off from two different lists. The notion
that the transformation should be conserving is quite
plausible. If the main mechanism is bending, this "winding
up" transformation is locally perpendicular to the bending,
therefore it could very well be a conserving transformation.
Instead of transferring the “result” from the base to the
target by using an explicit set of correspondences, in the
present model this can be simply “read off” from an image
derived from the imagistic results simulated in the base
being transformed back to the target. Thus the conserving

transformation strategy is a process that can work
independently from an explicit feature matching process.
A traditional approach to analogy evaluation focuses on
determining that multiple similarities between the base and
target are sufficiently important. In contrast, a conserving
transformation strategy need only focus on determining that
a single transformation from base to target is sufficiently
unimportant (irrelevant to the targeted relationship). This
may mean that confirmation of an analogy via a conserving
transformation can require considerably less work than
confirmation via mapping.

Dual Simulation
Case 1. There is evidence in the protocols for a very direct
strategy for analogy relation evaluation termed "dual
simulation". A brief example that hints at this possibility
follows where S2 says:
(Line 23) "Surely you could coil a spring in squares,
let's say, and it would behave more or less the same".
There is not very much data in this statement, but it is
plausible that the subject created an image of a square
spring, simulated the effect of hanging a weight on it, and
found this to be similar to the image of hanging a weight on
a normal spring. However, the resolution of the perceived
similarity appears to be at a low level of detail.
It is doubtful that his conclusion here is from "looking up
a fact in memory", because of the novelty of the square
case. (Later simulations by S2 with the square coil lead to
imagining one side acting like a wrench to twist the next
side. This produces an Aha episode with the insight that
torsion is a major mechanism of stretching in the spring, and
predicts correctly that the wider spring will stretch more, but
that is the topic of another study (Clement, 1989)).
Dual simulation depends upon the process of imagistic
simulation discussed in Clement (2003). That article found
evidence for such an internal process from several
observation categories for external behavior: personal
action projections (spontaneously redescribing a system
action in terms of a human action, consistent with the use of
kinesthetic imagery), depictive hand motions, and imagery
reports. The latter occurs when a subject spontaneously
uses terms like "imagining," "picturing," a situation, or
"feeling what it's like to manipulate" a situation. In several
of the present cases one sees dynamic imagery reports
(involving movement or forces). None of these observations
are infallible indicators on their own, but as multiple
instances accumulate, they can be taken as evidence for
imagery. Taken together with the subject’s new predictions,
the observations above can be explained via imagistic
simulations wherein a somewhat general perceptual motor
schema assimilates the image of a particular object and
produces expectations about its behavior in a subsequent
dynamic image, or simulation.
The process of dual simulation can be summarized as
follows. Imagistic simulations of the target and the
analogous case are each run in as much detail as possible.
The dynamic images of the behavior of each system are then

235

compared; and they may be inspected for certain aspects. If
their behavior "appears" to be the same, the analogy relation
receives some support, depending on the level of certainty
in the comparison.

overlay simulation as a special type of dual simulation.
Presumably the alignment of key features made it easier for
him to compare the expected movements and resistances of
the wheel and the lever as he simulated each of them.

Case 2. More data is present in the following episode of an
analogy to a two-dimensional spring made of zig-zagging
wire that lies in a single vertical plane, shown in Figure 3C.
23 S2: “I wonder if I can make the spring..which is a 2
dimensional spring..but where the action ..isn't at the
angles...it's distributed along the length… I have a
visualization... Here's a .. a bendable bar, and then we
have a rigid connector...(draws more bars connected in a
zig zag, two dimensional shape). And when we do this
what bends...is the bendable bars...and that would behave
like a spring. I can imagine that it would.... it would
stretch, and you let it go and it bounces up and down. It
does all the things.”
Here the conjunction of the dynamic imagery reports and
the comparison of the two systems gives more support to the
hypothesis that a dual simulation is occurring to compare
the target and the zig zag cases. The dual simulation appears
to establish the analogous case as being relevant and
plausibly analogous in that its behavior is similar, at least at
a gross level of qualitative behavior, to the target. But this
does not tell the subject whether the two systems exhibit the
same relationship between width and stretch. Thus in the
above cases dual simulation appeared to serve only as a
check on the initial plausibility of the analogy.
One then needs to be clear that dual simulation as an
analogy evaluation strategy does not necessarily mean
confidently simulating the targeted relationship in both base
and target. In that case there would be no need for an
analogy because the target could have been directly
simulated on its own. However, the examples presented
indicate that dual simulation can still help one determine
whether the target and base are similar with respect to other
important behaviors, thereby increasing one's confidence
that the analogy is sound (or eliminating the analogy from
consideration).

Spokes case: Overlay simulation may also be responsible
for the power of S2’s "spoked wheel without a rim"
bridging analogy shown in Figure 1C. For the spoke that is
touching the ground, the spoke can be seen as a lever with
its fulcrum at the ground. This means that the entire wheel
of spokes can be seen at any one time as equivalent to a
single lever, supporting the analogy on the right hand side
of the bridge BC in Figure 1. This subject spoke of a
tireless, rimless wheel. Again this is shown separately in
figure 1C for clarity, but in fact the spokes were inscribed
within the rim of a circular wheel in the subject’s drawing.
So on the other side of the bridge AC, the spokes are
envisioned at the same size as the original wheel, and this
may make it easy to sense via dual simulation that they
behave in the same way as the wheel when a force is
applied. In particular, the way the rimless spoked wheel
"rocks" on each spoke over a short distance can be seen as
similar to the way the original wheel rolls. That is, it
appears, especially with many spokes, to have the same kind
of motion in a mental simulation and therefore be amenable
to the same type of analysis with respect to the causes of
motion. Although such arguments must be bolstered
mathematically to make them rigorous, as a form of
heuristic reasoning, this type of qualitative argument can be
quite compelling.
Pulley case: As a third example the case of the pulley
analogy in Figure 2C was also used by S7 in the Sisyphus
problem. He believes that perhaps the push needed at X on
the wheel is smaller than at Y, similar to a pulley where the
force applied to the end of the rope need only be half of the
weight of the wheel. As part of an attempt to evaluate that
analogy, S7 speaks and gestures as if alternating between
seeing the same drawing (Figure 2C) as a wheel and a
pulley, referring to it differently as one or the other in
alternate fashion. Continuing from segment 01 above:
05 S7: What it feels like is the weight of it [wheel in
Figure 2B]-; is pretty close to parallel with what you’ve
got if you go roll it with a complete vertical. It now
begins to feel like a pulley...(Draws Figure 2C) What the
vertical is over here no longer matters perhaps but we'll
say it's er, gear toothed again.
06 S: ...And you're over here pulling like this [at x]. That
feels like you're on the outside of a pulley pulling up.
07 S: And since you say it doesn't slip, then this thing
over here (points to line in upper right of Figure 2C and
adds upward pointing arrowhead to it) must be providing
the other half of it, something it feels, in which case it's a
classic pulley; no, it can't be classic pulley. But it's, like a
classic pulley in which now you only need half of the
force. If the weight of the thing is 10 lbs. here, it feels
like 5 would work here (writes 5 on upper left of C) and 5

Overlay Simulation
Lever case: There is evidence for the existence of a more
precise type of dual simulation that I term "overlay
simulation" where the image of one simulation takes place
“on top of” a second image. Although I have separated them
in Figure 1 for clarity, S2 actually drew his lever analogy
(Figure 1B) directly on top of the wheel (Figure 1A) and
compared the movement of the wheel and the lever. This
meant that the arrow symbolizing the application of a force
by pointing to the top of the wheel was also pointing to the
top of the lever. When two separate systems are represented
as overlapping in the same external diagram with salient
features aligned I term this an overlay diagram. This
supports the interpretation that internal dynamic images of
the two systems and their actions were overlapping in the
same way. I call this hypothesized internal aspect here an

236

Figure 4C shows how a rope attached to the edge of the
wheel at X can be seen as an intermediate bridging case
between the original problem and the pulley case in 4B.
Although I have drawn three cases in Figure 4 for clarity, in
fact S7 used only Figure 4A while talking about the three
cases: the pushed wheel, the pulley, and the rope attached to
the tooth at X on the wheel. One can hypothesize that the
internal overlay simulations create a context whereby the
alignment between trajectories and forces in imagistic
simulations of different cases, as well as the evaluation of
the validity of the analogies between the cases, can be more
easily made.
163 S7: Seems a lot easier than getting down here behind
it [at "Y" in Figure 4A] and pushing. Why? because of
that coupling pulley effect. It seems like it would be a lot
easier to hold it here [at "X"] for a few minutes (Holds
hands in “pulling” position) than it would be to get
behind it… yeah, my confidence here is much higher
now, that it's right… [easier to push at X] And so the
pull--it just felt right with the pulley feeling. Now
pushing (lays extended finger on paper pointing up slope
at X in Figure 4A and moves it toward X) uh,.. it’s got to
be the same problem…
178 I: Do you have a sense of where your increased
confidence is coming from?
179 S: It’s the pulley analogy starting to feel right.
The subject’s thinking here appears to determine whether
the forces on the edge of the wheel and on the rope from the
pulley “feel” the same as he performs an imagistic
simulation of each case. The bridging case in Figure 4C of
a rope tied to the wheel at point X appears to serve the
purpose of setting up two pairs of cases (base:bridge B:C
and bridge:target C:A ) that are “closer” to each other than
AB. In other words the bridging case creates two analogy
pairs that are more perceptually similar. This may be an
important advantage if the evaluation of each pair is being
done via a dual simulation of the cases. This provides one
answer to the earlier question of why bridging can be useful
to a subject even though it seems to add more work in
creating additional analogy relations.
In fact the underlined references to feeling forces,
personal action projections, and hand motions in the above
passages provide evidence for the involvement of
kinesthetic imagery and for dual imagistic simulations when
he is comparing two cases. One can hypothesize that Figure
4A is acting as an overlay diagram for an overlay
simulation. The use of an overlay diagram and references
that the wheel problem solution “felt right with the pulley
feeling.” supports the hypothesis that dual simulations are
being used to evaluate these analogies. Thus this last
example illustrates the combined use of overlay simulation
(as a special kind of dual simulation) and bridging as
analogy evaluation strategies.

over here (writes 5 on upper right) as though it were a
pulley… So let's imagine it is a pulley.
08 S: [In] this new point of view, it feels like working at
X [on the edge of the wheel] is better [than at the center].
The personal action projections and alternating references to
both the wheel and the pulley systems while staring at the
same diagram 2C provide initial evidence for an overlay
simulation here that compares the system of rolling the
wheel straight up a vertical cliff to the pulley system.
Presumably it is easy in an overlay simulation to switch
rapidly between simulations of the two cases, (which
happens at least five times above). Again, although the
imagery is probably assisted in this case by the drawings,
the drawing cannot be providing perceptions of forces or
motions involved, and so I hypothesize that these are
imagined via imagistic simulations. Some evidence for
kinesthetic imagery is indicated by personal action
projection phrases like “feels like you’re on the outside of a
pulley pulling up” and “you’re over here pulling” in the
transcript, and such imagery is clearly not already enacted in
the static drawings.
Later he expresses some reservations about the pulley
analogy however: “This rope wrapping around here..doesn’t
feel to me necessarily like...pushing (moves hand . to r.) on
the outside of a wheel.” But in the passage below he appears
to reevaluate the analogy positively by (1) generating a
bridging analogy; and (2) using overlay simulations by
simulating different systems in alternating fashion using the
original wheel drawing. Therefore this final example is
more complicated because it combines these two strategies.
x
y
x
y

.
x

4C Bridging Analogy of
Rope Pulling Wheel

.

y

4A Push on Wheel

.

4BPulley Rope
Around Wheel

Figure 4: Second analogy series of S7
162 S7: (Looking at Figure 4A) I’ve got my full (holds
both hands out as if pulling a rope and shakes them
slightly) power available- and where would I apply that?
My instinct tells me [it is easier to apply force at] X again
but that er, but again it's in terms of a pull and not a push.
I'd have to get a grip.(closes eyes) Assuming that’s not a
problem, then pulling should be the same as pushing..
Seems clear that- (silently holds both hands out as if
pulling a rope for 4 sec.)...So we attach a rope to one of
the teeth [as in 4C but staring at the same Figure 4A],
now it becomes more like the pulley problem (holds r.
hand out as if pulling a rope for 3 sec)…the teeth at the
bottom are playing the role of-; the pulley doesn't look so
bad after all. And you hang on for all you’re worth up
there, to keep it from rolling; to keep it balanced.

Conclusion
In summary, rather than a single process for mapping
elements in a discrete symbolic representation, a number of

237

additional processes for evaluating an analogy relation have
been identified, namely: bridging analogies, conserving
transformations, dual simulations to detect dynamic
similarity, and overlay simulations. Roughly, conserving
transformations work by allowing the subject to detect the
causal, perceptual motor irrelevance to a targeted
relationship, of making a transformation on a case. Dual
simulations work by allowing the subject to detect a causal,
perceptual motor similarity between base and target.
Overlay simulations are a special type of dual simulation in
which the image of one case is overlaid and aligned on top
of the other case to make comparisons more precise. An
intermediate bridging case is a higher order strategy that can
facilitate making one of the above processes easier to
perform. The relationship of these strategies to discrete
feature mappings is still unclear, but when subjects can
articulate such mappings, that may add another important
kind of precision to the process of analogy evaluation.

Science, 12: 563-586.
Clement, J. (1989). Learning via model construction and
criticism: Protocol evidence on sources of creativity in
science. Glover, J., Ronning, R., and Reynolds, C. (Eds.),
Handbook of creativity: Assessment, theory and research.
NY: Plenum, 341-381.
Clement, J. (1994). Use of physical intuition and imagistic
simulation in expert problem solving. In Tirosh, D. (Eds.),
Implicit and explicit knowledge. Norwood, NJ: Ablex
Publishing Corp.
Clement, J. (2002). Protocol evidence on thought
experiments used by experts. In Wayne Gray and
Christian Schunn, Eds., Proceedings of the TwentyFourth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society 22, 32. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Clement J. (2003). Imagistic simulation in scientific model
construction. In Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Craig, D. L., Nersessian, N. J., & Catrambone, R. (2002).
Perceptual simulation in analogical problem solving. In:
Model-Based Reasoning: Science, Technology, & Values.
(pp. 167--191). Kluwer Academic / Plenum Publishers,
New York.
Croft, D., & Thagard, P. (2002). Dynamic imagery: A
computational model of motion and visual analogy. In L.
Magnani and N. Nersessian (Eds.), Model-based
reasoning: Science, technology, values. New York:
Kluwer/Plenum, 259-274.
Forbus, K., Gentner, D., Everett, J., and Wu, M. 1997.
Towards a computational model of evaluating and using
analogical inferences. Proceedings of the 19 th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, pp 229-234,
LEA, Inc.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping a theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive science, 7, 155-170.
Griffith, T. W., N. J. Nersessian, and A. Goel (2000).
Function-follows-form transformations in scientific
problem solving. In Proceedings of the Cognitive Science
Society 22, 196-201. Mahwah, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum
Hegarty, M. (2002). Mental visualizations and external
visualizations. In Wayne Gray and Christian Schunn,
Eds., Proceedings of the Twenty-Fourth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society 22, 40.
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Holyoak, K. J., & Thagard, P. R. (1989). A computational
model of analogical problem solving. In S. Vosniadou &
A. Ortony (Eds.), Similarity and analogical reasoning
(pp. 242-266). New-York: Cambridge University Press.
Trickett, S. and Trafton, J. G. (2002) The instantiation and
use of conceptual simulations in evaluating hypotheses:
Movies-in-the-mind in scientific reasoning. In Wayne
Gray and Christian Schunn, Eds., Proceedings of the
Twenty-Fourth Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society 22, 878-883. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Wertheimer, M. (1959). Productive thinking. New York:
Harper & Row.

Implications. These findings add to previous evidence
(Casakin and Goldschmidt 1999; Clement 1994, 2003:
Craig, Nersessian and Catrambone, 2002; Croft and
Thagard, 2002; Trickett and Trafton, 2002) for formulating
the general hypothesis that many analogical reasoning
processes can be imagery based. Also, the wheel problem
transcript provides evidence that imagery and runnability
are transferred from base to target. Clement (2003) extended
this theme by examining evidence for the transfer of
imagery and runnability from source analogues to
explanatory models and hypothesized that this may be an
important source of model flexibility, providing an
argument for the importance of such processes. The
importance of bridging analogies as an instructional
technique has been documented previously (Clement, 1989),
and the same may very well be true for conserving
transformations (Wertheimer, 1959), and overlay
simulations/animations. Thus much work remains to be
done in this area.

Acknowledgments
This material is based upon work supported by the National
Science Foundation under Grants RED-9453084 and REC0231808. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or
recommendations expressed in this paper are those of the
author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Science Foundation.

References
Casakin, H, & Goldschmidt, G. (1999). Expertise and the
use of visual analogy: Implications for design education.
Design Studies, 20:153--175.
Clement, J. (1986). Methods used to evaluate the validity of
hypothesized analogies. Proceedings of the Ninth Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society. Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Clement, J. (1988). Observed methods for generating
analogies in scientific problem solving. Cognitive

238

