UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Incremental Construction of an Associative Network from a Corpus

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3k98b25s

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Lemaire, Benoit
Denhiere, Guy

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Incremental Construction of an Associative Network from a Corpus
Benoît Lemaire (Benoit.Lemaire@upmf­grenoble.fr)
L.S.E., University of Grenoble 2, BP 47
38040 Grenoble Cedex 9, France

Guy Denhière (denhiere@up.univ­mrs.fr)
L.P.C & C.N.R.S. Université de Provence
Case 66, 3 place Victor Hugo
13331 Marseille Cedex, France

Abstract

6. compositionality: the way the meaning of a text can be
inferred from the meaning of its words.

This paper presents a computational model of the incremental
construction of an associative network from a corpus. It is
aimed at modeling the development of the human semantic
memory. It is not based on a vector representation, which
does not well reproduce the asymmetrical property of word
similarity, but rather on a network representation. Compared
to Latent Semantic Analysis, it is incremental which is
cognitively more plausible. It is also an attempt to take into
account higher­order co­occurrences in the construction of
word similarities. This model was compared to children
association norms. A good correlation as well as a similar
gradient of similarity were found.

After a description of existing models, we will discuss these
features, present our model and describe an experiment that
aims at comparing our model to human data.

Existing computational models of the
construction of semantic representations
Latent Semantic Analysis
LSA (Landauer, 2002) takes as input a corpus of free texts.
The unit of context is the paragraph. The analysis of the
occurrences of each word within all paragraphs leads to a
representation of the meaning of words as vectors, which is
well suited for drawing semantic comparisons between
words. The underlying mechanism (singular value
decomposition of the word­paragraph occurrence matrix)
implicitly takes into account higher­order co­occurrences
(Kontostathis & Pottenger, 2002). Compositionality in this
model is straightforward: the meaning of a text is a linear
combination of the meaning of its words. There is however
no way of updating the semantic space with a new unit of
context without redoing the whole process. LSA'ssemantic
representations have been largely tested in the literature
(Foltz, 1996 ; Wolfe et al., 1998). This model can account
for some mechanisms of the construction of knowledge
(Landauer & Dumais, 1997).

Introduction
A computational model of the human semantic memory
may be valuable for its ability to mimic the human semantic
representations, but also for its ability to mimic the
construction of these representations over a long period of
time. Not all models possess both features. For instance,
symbolic formalisms like semantic networks had proven to
be interesting for representing human knowledge but they
do not tell us how human beings build such representations
over their life. Several computational models of both the
representation and construction of the human semantic
memory have been proposed in the recent years. Some of
them are based on a general common mechanism that rely
on a huge input, composed of examples of associations
between words. The statistical analysis of the occurrences of
each word within well­defined units of context leads to a
computational representation of association links between
words. The representation of word meanings per se is not of
significant interest, it is rather their association links which
combined will form a model of the long­term semantic
memory.
These models can be distinguished along six features:

Hyperspace Analogue to Language
HAL (Burgess, 1998) is also a model of the semantic
memory. It is similar to LSA except that (1) it does not take
into account higher­order co­occurrences since vectors are
just direct co­occurrence vectors; (2) the unit of context is a
sliding window of a few words which takes into account the
lexical distance between words and (3) updating the
semantic space with a new paragraph can be done easily.

1. the kind of input they are based on (either a corpus or
word association norms);
2. the knowledge representation formalism (either vector­
based or network­based);
3. the way a new context is added to the long­term
semantic memory (incrementally or not);
4. the unit of context in which co­occurrence information
is considered (either a paragraph or a sliding window);
5. the use or not of higher­order co­occurrences;

Sparse Random Context Representation
SRCR (Sahlgren, 2001, 2002) is also based on the use of a
sliding window applied to a large corpus. Words have an
initial random vector representation (1,800 dimensions),
which is updated with the vectors of the co­occurring
words: they are all added to the current word, but with a
multiplying factor which depends on their distance to the
current word within the window. The way the initial
825

representation is computed is important: all 1,800 values are
set to 0 except eight which are randomly selected and set to
1. This method is intrinsically incremental. It has better
results than LSA on the famous TOEFL test. However, it
does not take into account higher­order co­occurrences.

and its associates should exist in a plausible model of the
semantic memory.
Another problem with the vector representation is that
similarity is symmetrical: similarity(A,B)=similarity(B,A).
This is not coherent with psycholinguistic findings showing
that semantic similarity is not a symmetrical relation
(Tversky, 1977). For instance, bird is a very close neighbor
of swallow, but the opposite is not so obvious.
A network of words with simple numerical oriented links
between nodes (what is called an oriented graph in graph
theory) would be better for that purpose. Numerical links
would represent semantic similarities. Such a basic network
would offer a direct connection between a word and its
neighbors and represent differently similarity(A,B) and
similarity(B,A).

Word Association Space
WAS (Steyvers, Shiffrin & Nelson, in press) is not based on
a corpus but on association norms providing associates for
5,000 words. The authors applied scaling methods to these
data in order to assign a high­dimensional representation to
each word. In particular, they relied on singular value
decomposition, the mathematical procedure also used by
LSA. The idea is similar to LSA: words that appear within
similar contexts (i.e. words with similar associative
relationships) are placed in similar regions in the space.
WAS appeared to be a better predictor of memory
performance than LSA.

Memory updating
A model of the construction of the semantic memory should
describe the way processing a new piece of written data
affects the representation of the long­term memory. Some
models like Latent Semantic Analysis are not incremental,
which means that the whole process needs to be restarted in
order to take into account a new context. Actually, a new
paragraph can easily be represented by a vector in this
model, by a simple linear combination of its words, but this
operation does not affect at all the semantic space.
Incremental models are much more cognitively plausible:
processing new texts should modify, even slightly, the
semantic memory.

Features
We will now discuss the six previous features in order to
sketch out a model of construction and representation of the
long­term semantic memory that would attempt to
overcome existing limits.

Input
A corpus of free texts as input is cognitively more plausible
than association norms or even a sublanguage of a few
propositions (Frank et al. 2003). As humans, we do not
obviously construct our semantic representations solely
from written data (Glenberg & Robertson, 2000), but there
is currently no formalism able to model all perceptual data
such that they can be processed by a computational model.
In addition, written data, although it is not perfect, seems to
cover a large part of our semantic representations
(Landauer, 2002).

Unit of context
The semantic relations between words are constructed from
the occurrences of words within contexts. The size of such
contexts plays an important role. Psychological experiments
as well as computer simulations (Burgess, 1998) tend to
consider that a context composed of a few words before and
after the current word is reasonable. However,
computational constraints have led some models to consider
a whole paragraph as a unit of context, which is probably a
too large unit. Latent Semantic Analysis is such a model.
The use of a sliding window allows models like HAL or
SRCR to take into account the distance between words
within the window, whereas approaches based on
paragraphs deal with bags of words.

Representation
Most models are based on a vector representation of word
meaning. Dimensions of the semantic space can be the
result of a statistical analysis which keeps hundreds of
dimensions like in LSA or SCRC (they are therefore
unlabelled), the most variant words as in HAL, the most
frequent ones (Levy & Bullinaria, 2001) or even a
predefined subset of words, either taken from a thesaurus
(Prince & Lafourcade, 2002) or selected as being the most
reliable across various sub­corpora (Lowe & McDonald,
2000).
One major interest of the vector representation is that it
offers a simple way to measure the similarity between
words. The angle between the corresponding vectors or its
cosine are generally used.
One drawback of the vector representation however is the
difficulty to determine the words that are similar to a given
word or, say differently, the words that are activated in
memory. It requires the scanning of all vectors in order to
find the closest ones, which is both computationally and
cognitively not satisfactory. A direct link between a word

Higher­order co­occurrences
It has been shown that higher­order co­occurrences play an
important role (Kontostathis & Pottenger, 2002) in the
latent structure of word usage. Two words should be
considered associated although they never co­occur in
context units, provided that they occur within similar
contexts. A is said to be a second­order co­occurrence of B
if it co­occurs with C which also co­occurs with B. If C
were a second­order co­occurrence of B, A would be
considered as a third­order co­occurrence of B, etc.
By means of the singular value decomposition procedure,
LSA semantic similarity indeed involves higher­order co­
occurrences (Lemaire & Denhière, submitted). Other
approaches such as SCRC or HAL do not.
826

Table 1: Features of different models

LSA
HAL
SCRC
WAIS
ICAN

Input

Representation

Memory updating

Unit of context

corpus
corpus
corpus
association norms
corpus

vectors
vectors
vectors
vectors
network

not incremental
incremental
incremental
not incremental
incremental

paragraph
sliding window
sliding window
N/A
sliding window

Compositionality

higher­order co­ Compositionality
occurrences
yes
easy
no
easy
no
easy
no
easy
yes
hard

respect to its preceding and following contexts. The size of
the window can be modified. For the sake of simplicity, we
will not use the third­order co­occurrence effect. The
algorithm is the following:

Compositionality is the ability of a representation to go
from words to texts. The vector representation is very
convenient for that purpose because the linear combination
of vectors still produces a vector, which means that the
same representation is used for both words and texts. This
might be a reason why vector representations are so
popular. On the contrary, symbolic representations of word
meaning like semantic networks do not offer such a feature:
it is not straightforward to build the representation of a
group of words from the individual representations of
words, especially if the representation is rich, for instance
with labelled links.

For each word W, its preceding context C1..Ck and its
following context Ck+1..C2k (the sliding window therefore
being [C1 C2 ... Ck W Ck+1 Ck+2... C2k]):
Direct co­occurrence effect: reinforce the link W­Ci (if
this link does not exist, create it with a weight of 0.5,
otherwise increase the weight p by setting it to p+(1­p)/2;
Second­order co­occurrence effect: let p be the weight
of the W­Ci link. For each M linked to Ci with weight m,
reinforce the link W­M (if such a link does not exist,
create it with a weigth of p.m, otherwise, increases the
weight q by setting it to q+A(1­q)(p.m), A being a
parameter;

Summary
Table 1 describes some of the existing models along the
previous six features. We present ICAN, our proposal, at
then end of the next section.

Occurrence without co­occurrence effect: reduce the
links between W and its other neighbors (if the weights
were p, set them to a fraction of p, e.g., 0.9p). If some of
them fall under a threshold (e.g., .1), then remove these
links.

ICAN
Basic mechanisms
Like others, this model takes as input a corpus of free texts
and produces a computational representation of word
meanings. This model is based on a network representation,
which we believe is more accurate in modeling the process
of semantic activation in memory. The idea is to associate to
each word a set of neighbors as well as their association
weights in [0..1], exactly as in rough semantic network. The
model is incremental which means that the set of connected
words for each word evolves while processing new texts. In
particular, new words can be added according to the co­
occurrence information and other words can be ruled out if
their association strengths with the current word become too
low.
Links between words are updated by taking into account
the results of a previous simulation on 13,637 paragraphs of
a corpus (Lemaire & Denhière, submitted), which showed
that:

Example
As an example, consider the following association network,
which is the result of processing several texts:

wire

.2 .4
rope

electric
.7 .5
.7 cable
.3

.5

.6
.4

plug
.4
connector

network

The new text being analyzed is:
... if you have such a device, connect the cable to the
network connector then switch...
We now describe how this text will modify the association
network, according to the previous rules. Suppose a window
of size 5 (2 preceding words, 1 current word, 2 following
words). Since functional words are not taken into account,
the current window is then [device, connect, cable, network,
connector], cable being the current word. The direct co­
occurrence effect leads to reinforce the links between cable
and the four co­occurring words. Two of them are new
links, while others are existing links whose weights are
simply increased. The network becomes:

co­occurrence of W1 and W2 tends to strongly increase
the W1­W2 similarity;
– occurrence of W1 without W2 or W2 without W1 tends to
decrease the W1­W2 similarity;
– second and third­order co­occurrence of W1 and W2
tends to slightly increase the W1­W2 similarity.
–

In our model, a sliding window is used as a unit of context.
Therefore, each word of the corpus is considered with
827

in these norms is the percentage of subjects who provided
the associate. For instance, the six associates to abeille(bee)
are:

plug
electric
connect
.5 .7 .5 .5
.4
.7 cable .8 connector
wire
.7
.2 .4
.3
.5
network
rope

device

The second­order co­occurrence effect reinforces the links
between cable and all words connected to one of its four co­
occurring word. In this small example, this is only the case
for the word plug. Finally, the occurrence without co­
occurrence effect leads to a decrease of the links between
cable and its other neighbors. The network is then:

–
–
–

miel(honey): 19%
insecte(insect): 14%
ruche(hive): 9%

–
–
–

animal(animal): 1%
oiseau(bird): 1%
vole(fly): 1%

Actually, 16 words were not part of the corpus. Only 1184
pairs of words were therefore used.
We then compared these values to the similarity values
provided by the model. We had two hypotheses. First, the
model should distinguish betwen the three first associates
and the last ones and there should be a gradient of similarity
from the first one to the last ones. Second, there should be a
good correlation between human data and model data.
Several parameters have to be set in the model. The best
correlation with the human data was obtained with the
following parameters (see the algorithm presented earlier):

plug
electric connect
.5 .7 .4 .5
.3
.4
.6 cable .8 connector
wire
.7
.2 .4
.2
.5 network
rope

device

The next current word is network, the window is [connect,
cable, network, connector, switch] and the process repeats
again.

–
–
–
–

Measure of similarity
Similarity between words W1 and W2 is the combination
(i.e. the product) of the links of the shortest path between
W1 and W2. If W2 is connected to W1, it is just the weight of
the link; if W1 is connected to Z which is connected to W2, it
is the combination of the two weights. If W2 does not
belong to the neighbors of W1'
s neighbors it is probably
sufficient to set the semantic similarity to 0. Since the graph
is oriented (the link weight between A and B might be
different from the link weight between B and A), this way
of measuring the similarity mimics the asymmetrical
property of the human judgment of similarity better than the
cosine between vectors.

window size = 11 (5 preceding and 5 following words);
co­occurrence effect: p ­­> p+(1­p)/2;
2nd­order co­occurrence effect : p ­­> q+.02(1­q)(p.m);
occurrence without co­occurrence effect : p ­­> .9p.

Using these parameters, the average similarity values
between stem words and associates, as well as the children
data, are the following:
1st
2nd
3rd
Last
associates associates associates associates
ICAN

.415

.269

.236

.098

Norms

30.5

13.5

8.2

1

All model values are highly significantly different, except
for the 2nd and 3rd associates which differ only at the 10%
level. Our model reproduces quite well the human gradient
of association.
We also calculated the coefficient of correlation between
human data and model data. We found an interesting
significant correlation: r(1184)=.50.
The exact same test from the same corpus was also
applied to Latent Semantic Analysis. Results are the
following:

Tests
Comparison to association norms
In order to test this model, we compared the association
links it provides to human association norms. The corpus
we relied on is a 3.2 million word French child corpus
composed of texts that are supposed to reproduce the kind
of texts children are exposed to: stories and tales for
children (~1,6 million words), children productions
(~800,000 words), reading textbooks (~400,000 words) and
children encyclopedia (~400,000 words). All functional
words were ruled out. Words whose frequency was less than
3 were not taken into account. The program is written in C,
it is available on demand. Processing the whole corpus takes
a few hours on a standard computer, depending on the
window size.
Once the association network was built, we measured the
similarity between 200 words and 6 of their associates (the
first three and the last three), as provided by the de la Haye
(2003) norms for 9 year­old children. The association value

1st
2nd
3rd
Last
associates associates associates associates
LSA

.26

.23

.19

.11

Similarities between the stem word and the first associates
appear stronger in the ICAN model. LSA'scorrelation with
human data is r(1184)=.39, which is worse than our
correlation.

828

Similarity as direct co­occurrence

be expected. A final reason could be that higher­order co­
occurrence does not play any role. But, how then could we
explain the high similarity between words that almost never
co­occur? More experiments and simulations need to be
carried out to investigate this issue.

One can wonder whether the similarity could be mainly due
to the direct co­occurrence effect. Similarity between words
is indeed often operationalized in psycholinguistic
researches by their frequency of co­occurrence in huge
corpus. Experiments have indeed revealed the correlation
between both factors (Spence & Owens, 1990). However,
this shortcut is questionable. In particular, there are words
that are strongly associated although they never co­occur.
Burgess & Lund (1998) mentioned the two words road and
street that almost never cooccur in their huge corpus
although they are almost synonyms. In a 24­million words
French corpus from the daily newspaper Le Monde in 1999,
we found 131 occurrences of internet, 94 occurrences of
web, but no co­occurrences at all. However, both words are
strongly associated. Edmonds (1997) showed that selecting
the best typical synonym requires that at least second­order
co­occurrence is taken into account. There is clearly a
debate: is the frequency of co­occurrence a good model of
word similarity?
In order to test that hypothesis, we modified our model so
that only direct co­occurrences are taken into account: the
2nd order co­occurrence effect as well as the occurrence
without co­occurrence effect were inhibited. Results are the
following:

Window size
We also modified the model in order to shed light on the
role of the window size. Results are as follows:

.781

.731

.439

Another test consisted in measuring the effect of second­
order co­occurrences. This time, we only inhibited this
effect in order to see whether the loss would be significant.
Results are presented in the next table:
1st
2nd
3rd
Last
assoc. assoc. assoc. assoc.
.225

.191

.34

5 (2+1+2)

.38

7 (3+1+3)

.44

9 (4+1+4)

.48

11 (5+1+5)

.50

13 (6+1+6)

.49

15 (7+1+7)

.47

Conclusion

Effect of second­order co­occurrence

.371

3 (1+1+1)

This model could be improved in many ways. However,
preliminary results are encouraging: the model produces
better results than the outstanding Latent Semantic Analysis
model on a word association test. In addition, it adresses
two major LSA drawbacks. The first one has to do with the
representation itself: the fact that LSA'
s associations are
symmetrical is not satisfactory. A network representation
seems better for that purpose than a vector representation.
The second limitation of LSA concerns the way the
semantic space is built. LSA is not incremental: adding a
new piece of text requires that the whole process is run
again. Like HAL or SCRC, ICAN has the advantage of
being incremental.
ICAN'
s main limitation is related to compositionality. The
construction of a text'
s representation is not straightforward,
given the representation of its words. Representing every
text as a simple function of its words, and in the same
formalism, as in the vector representation, is very
convenient since text comparisons are then easy to perform.
Compared to other approaches, LSA is for instance very
good at simulating the human judgment of text comparisons
(Foltz, 1996). However, the cognitive plausibility of such a
representation can be questioned. Do we really need the
exact same representation for words and texts? Is it
cognitively reasonable to go directly without any effort
from words to texts? Why having two ways of processing
texts: one which would be computationally costly (singular

The gradient of similarity is still there but the correlation
with human data is worse (r(1184)=.39). This is in
accordance with our previous findings (Lemaire &
Denhière, submitted) which show that the frequency of co­
occurrence tends to overestimate semantic similarity.

ICAN (no 2nd­order
co­occurrences)

Correlation with human data

We found that the best window size is 11 (5 preceding
words and 5 following words). This is in agreement with the
literature: Burgess (1998) as well as Lowe and McDonald
(2000) use a window of size 10, Levy and Bullinaria (1998)
found best performance for a window size from 8 to 14,
according to the similarity measure they relied on.

1st
2nd
3rd
Last
assoc. assoc. assoc. assoc.
ICAN
.903
(only direct co­occurrences)

Window size

.056

Correlation with human data was not significantly different
from the full model. It only decreased from .50 to .48. This
means that second­order co­occurrences do not seem to
have much effect in this simulation. One reason might be
due to the mathematical formula we used to model higher­
order co­occurrences. It might not be the right one. Another
reason could be that we only implemented second­order co­
occurrence effects. Third and higher­order co­occurrence
effects might play a much more significant role than could
829

value decomposition in LSA) and another one very quick
(adding its words)?
A solution could be to process each new text by the
mechanism described in this paper: a text would then be
represented by a subgraph, that is by a small subset of the
huge semantic network, composed of the text words, their
neighbors and their links. An information reduction
mechanism like the integration step of the construction­
integration model (Kintsch, 1998) could then be used to
condense this subgraph in order to retain the main
information. This smaller subgraph would constitute the text
representation. This way, there would be a single
mechanism used to process a text, construct its
representation and update the long­term semantic memory.
However, much work remains to be done in that direction.
Once a corpus was processed, it would be interesting to
study the resulting network structure. In particular, this
structure could be compared to existing semantic networks,
in terms of connectivity or average path­lengths between
words, much like Steyvers & Tenenbaum (submitted) did
recently.

(Ed.), The psychology of Learning and Motivation, 41,
43­84.
Landauer, T. K. & Dumais, S. T. (1997). A solution to
Plato'
s problem : the Latent Semantic Analysis theory of
acquisition, induction and representation of knowledge.
Psychological Review, 104, 211­240.
Lemaire, B. & Denhière, G. (submitted). Effects of higher­
order co­occurrences on semantic similarity of words.
Levy, J.P., Bullinaria, J.A. & Patel, M. (1998). Explorations
in the derivation of semantic representations from word
co­occurrence statistics. South Pacific Journal of
Psychology, 10, 99­111.
Levy, J.P., Bullinaria, J.A. (2001). Learning lexical
properties from word usage patterns: which context words
should be used? In R. French & J.P. Sougne (Eds)
Connectionist Models of Learning, Development and
Evolution: Proceedings of the Sixth Neural Computation
and Psychology Workshop, 273­282. London:Springer.
Lowe, W. & McDonald, S. (2000). The direct route:
mediated priming in semantic space. In Gernsbacher, M.
A. and Derry, S. D., editors, Proceedings of the 22nd
Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 675­
680, New Jersey. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Prince, V. & Lafourcade, M. (2003). Mixing semantic
networks and conceptual vectors: the case of
hyperonymy. In Proc. of ICCI­2003 (2nd IEEE
International Conference on Cognitive Informatics),
South Bank University, London, UK, August 18 ­ 20,
121­128.
Sahlgren, M. (2001). Vector­based semantic analysis:
representing word meaning based on random labels.
Semantic Knowledge Acquisition and Categorisation
Workshop at ESSLLI '
01, Helsinki, Finland.
Sahlgren, M. (2002). Towards a flexible model of word
meaning. AAAI Spring Symposium 2002. March 25­27,
Stanford University, Palo Alto.
Spence, D.P. & Owens K.C. (1990). Lexical co­occurrence
and association strength. Journal of Psycholinguistic
Research 19, 317­330.
Steyvers, M., Shiffrin R.M., & Nelson, D.L. (in press).
Word Association Spaces for predicting semantic
similarity effects in episodic memory. In A. Healy (Ed.),
Cognitive Psychology and its Applications: Festschrift in
Honor of Lyle Bourne, Walter Kintsch, and Thomas
Landauer. Washington DC: American Psychological
Association.
Steyvers, M., & Tenenbaum, J. (submitted). Graph theoretic
analyses of semantic networks: small worlds in semantic
networks.
Tversky, A. (1977). Features of similarity. Psychological
Review, 84(4), 327­352.
Wolfe, M. B. W., Schreiner, M. E., Rehder, B., Laham, D.,
Foltz, P. W., Kintsch & W., Landauer, T. K. (1998).
Learning from text: Matching readers and texts by Latent
Semantic Analysis. Discourse Processes, 25, 309­336.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Maryse Bianco, Philippe Dessus
and Sonia Mandin for their valuable comments on this
model, as well as Emmanuelle Billier, Valérie Dupont and
Graham Rickson for the proofreading .

References
Burgess, C. (1998). From simple associations to the
building blocks of language: modeling meaning in
memory with the HAL model. Behavior Research
Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 30, 188­198.
Burgess, C., Livesay, K & Lund, K. (1998). Explorations in
context space: words, sentences, discourse. Discourse
Processes, 25, 211­257.
de la Haye, F. (2003). Normes d'as
sociations verbales chez
des enfants de 9, 10 et 11 ans et des adultes. L'Ann
ée
Psychologique, 103, 109­130.
Edmonds, P. (1997). Choosing the word most typical in
context using a lexical co­occurrence network. Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics, 507­509.
Foltz, P. W. (1996). Latent Semantic Analysis for text­
based research. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments
and Computers, 28­2, 197­202.
Frank, S.L., Koppen, M., Noordman, L.G.M. & Vonk, W.
(2003). Modeling knowledge­based inferences in story
comprehension. Cognitive Science 27(6), 875­910.
Glenberg, A. M. & Robertson, D. A., (2000). Grounding
symbols and computing meaning: a supplement to
Glenberg & Robertson. Journal of Memory and
Language, 43, 379­401.
Kintsch, W. (1998). Comprehension: A Paradigm for
Cognition. Cambridge University Press.
Kontostathis, A. & Pottenger, W.M. (2002). Detecting
patterns in the LSI term­term matrix. Workshop on the
Foundation of Data Mining and Discovery, IEEE
International Conference on Data Mining.
Landauer T.K. (2002). On the computational basis of
learning and cognition: Arguments from LSA. In N. Ross
830

