UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Inference Suppression and Working Memory Capacity: Inhibition of the Disabler Search

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1v95d3dg

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Neys, Wim De
Diessaert, Kristien
Schaeken, Walter
et al.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Inference Suppression and Working Memory Capacity: Inhibition of the
Disabler Search
Wim De Neys (Wim.Deneys@psy.kuleuven.ac.be)
Kristien Dieussaert (Kristien.Dieussaert@psy.kuleuven.ac.be)
Walter Schaeken (Walter.Schaeken@psy.kuleuven.ac.be)
Géry d’Ydewalle (Géry.dYdewalle@psy.kuleuven.ac.be)
Department of Psychology, K.U.Leuven, Tiensestraat 102
B-3000 Leuven, Belgium
about the consequent (e.g., feeling cool or the Q
part). In the introductory example a broken air
conditioner or Jenny having a fever will both
function as disablers.
In a pioneering study Byrne (1989) showed that
when a possible disabler was explicitly presented to
participants (e.g., If she has an essay to write, then
she will study late in the library. If the library is
open, then she will study late in the library. She has
an essay to write. Thus, she will study late in the
library?) the MP inference was less frequently
accepted compared to the standard MP condition
without presented disabler. Further studies
established that during conditional reasoning people
spontaneously search their long-term memory for
stored disablers. Cummins (1995) used causal
conditionals for which a pilot group could retrieve
many (e.g., If you put fertilizer on plants, then they
grow well) or only few (e.g., If Tom grasps the glass
with his bare hands, then his fingerprints are on it)
disablers. Cummins reasoned that for conditionals
with many (vs. few) disablers spontaneous retrieval
of a disabler would be more likely. Although no
specific disablers were explicitly presented, the
results indeed showed that MP inferences based on
conditionals with many disablers were rejected more
frequently. Numerous studies confirmed these
findings (e.g., Bonnefon & Hilton, 2002; Byrne,
Espino, & Santamaria, 1999; Thompson, 1994; De
Neys, Schaeken, & d’Ydewalle, 2002; Stevenson &
Over, 1995; George, 1997; see Politzer &
Bourmaud, 2002 for a review). Thus, it is well
established that finding a disabler (either
spontaneously or presented by the experimenter)
will result in a decreased MP acceptance. This
impact of disablers on the MP inference acceptance
is known as the suppression effect.
In the present study we present the first
experiments that look at individual differences in the
suppression impact. More precisely, we will
examine whether differences in working memory
(WM) capacity affect the acceptance of MP
problems when a possible disabler is explicitly
presented. Such WM-mediation could be expected
on the basis of recent findings pointing to the role of
WM in the retrieval and inhibition of stored
disablers (e.g., De Neys, Schaeken, & d’Ydewalle,
2003a, 2003b; Markovits, Doyon, & Simoneau,

Abstract
We examined whether individual differences in
WM-capacity affected the acceptance of an extended
MP problem that explicitly mentioned a possible
disabler. The explicit disabler presentation was
assumed to stimulate the spontaneous disabler search
process. Two experiments showed that the
acceptance ratings of the extended MP problems
followed a U-shaped, quadratic trend with low and
high spans showing the highest MP acceptance.
Contrasting performance with extended and standard
MP problems indicated that all span groups showed
the standard suppression effect. Findings support the
claim that high spans manage to inhibit the
spontaneous disabler search and underline the
generality and robustness of this inhibition
phenomenon.

Introduction
Suppose that on a hot, summer day you hear
someone claiming “If Jenny turns on the air
conditioner, then she will feel cool”. Next, you hear
that Jenny did turn the air conditioner on. It is likely
that you will conclude that Jenny will feel cool. This
inference (‘If P then Q. P. Therefore, Q’) is known
as the Modus Ponens (MP). The MP inference is
considered valid in standard logic. Now, suppose
that you would also have been reminded of the fact
that the air conditioner might be broken or that
Jenny might have a fever. In this case you would
probably have been rather reluctant to accept the
standard MP inference that turning on the air
conditioner will make Jenny feeling cool. Thereby,
the additional information would have tempted you
to commit a fallacy.
Cognitive scientists have spent a great deal of
research to establish how people reason with ‘if,
then’ sentences or conditionals. One of the main
findings is that additional, ‘background’ knowledge
about the conditional relation affects the inferences
people are willing to draw (Evans, Newstead, &
Byrne, 1993; Manktelow, 1999). The crucial kind of
background knowledge for the evaluation of the MP
inference is referred to as ‘disabling conditions’. A
disabling condition (also ‘disabler’ or ‘additional
requirement’) is a condition that prevents the
antecedent specified in the conditional (e.g., turning
on the air conditioner or the P part) from bringing
291

2002; Simoneau & Markovits, 2003; Verschueren,
De Neys, Schaeken, & d’Ydewalle, 2002).
De Neys et al. (2003a) and Verschueren et al.
(2002) established that the efficiency of the disabler
retrieval process is mediated by WM-capacity. In a
task where people were asked to generate disablers
for a set of conditionals in limited time, participants
higher in WM-capacity retrieved more disablers.
Putting a load on WM also reduced the efficiency of
the retrieval process. In a further experiment, De
Neys et al. (2003b) tested a group of low, medium,
and high spans (participants in the bottom, middle
and top quintile of first-year psychology students’
WM-capacity distribution, respectively) in an
everyday conditional reasoning task. Consistent with
the more efficient disabler retrieval, medium spans
were more likely to reject the MP inference than low
spans. On the other hand, despite the intrinsic
superior retrieval capacity high spans showed
nevertheless higher MP acceptance ratings than the
medium spans (see also Markovits et al., 2002).
Based on findings of Stanovich and West (2000),
it was assumed that a basic decontextualization
ability would allow high spans to put background
knowledge aside when it conflicts with the logical
standards. Remember that in standard logic MP is a
valid inference. Since disabler retrieval will result in
the rejection of MP, a basic validity notion will
conflict with the disabler retrieval process. De Neys
et al. reasoned that high spans would therefore use
their WM-resources for an active inhibition of the
disabler search.
Simoneau and Markovits (2003) showed that more
efficient inhibitory processing (as measured by a
negative priming task) was indeed linked with
higher MP acceptance. In a related dual-task study
De Neys et al. found additional support for the
inhibition hypothesis. The basic assumption states
that lower spans allocate WM-capacity to the
disabler retrieval, while high spans allocate WMcapacity primordially to the retrieval inhibition.
Consistent with the hypothesis, the dual-task study
showed that a less efficient disabler retrieval under
WM-load resulted in higher MP acceptance ratings
under load (vs. no load) for low spans, while the less
efficient inhibition resulted in lower MP ratings
under load (vs. no load) for high spans.
In sum, there is evidence for the claim that high
spans are inhibiting the disabler retrieval process
during conditional reasoning. Inhibition of cognitive
processes deemed inappropriate is indeed one of the
key executive working memory functions (e.g.,
Baddeley, 1996; Levy & Anderson, 2002; Miyake &
Shah, 1999).
The present study will allow a further test of the
disabler inhibition hypothesis. Presenting extended
MP problems where a possible disabler is explicitly
mentioned will push the inhibition demands to the
limit. The explicit disabler presentation will
stimulate the search process. Note that one of the

difficulties of retrieving disablers in a reasoning task
is that there is no explicit retrieval cue (e.g.,
Markovits & Barrouillet, 2002; Markovits & Quinn,
2002). The standard MP premises do not tell you
what kind of information you should look for. If a
possible disabler is added, it will be incorporated in
the elementary mental representation of the
inference problem. It is assumed that this
representation is held in working memory. As
suggested by many authors, activation will
automatically start to spread from the information
stored in WM (or “the focus of attention” see
Cowan, 1995) to related long-term memory elements
(Anderson, 1993; Cowan, 1995; see also Markovits
& Barrouillet, 2002 for an integrated account).
Therefore, stored disablers will receive more
activation by the explicit presentation of a possible
disabler with the MP inference. Consequently, it will
be more likely that additional stored disablers will
be automatically retrieved.
In Experiment 1 participants were given a measure
of WM-capacity and extended MP problems that
mentioned a possible disabler. If the high spans still
manage to inhibit the stimulated disabler search we
expect to see a U-shaped, quadratic trend in the
acceptance ratings in function of WM-capacity. Low
spans were expected to show high MP acceptance
ratings because of the inefficient disabler retrieval.
Medium spans should show lower MP ratings
because the search will be more efficient. If high
spans still manage to inhibit the disabler retrieval,
acceptance ratings should increase again for the high
spans.
In Experiment 2 we compared the acceptance
ratings of standard and extended MP problems for
different WM-span groups.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants
A total of 105 first-year psychology students from
the University of Leuven (Belgium) participated in
the experiment in return for course credit. None of
the students had had any training in formal logic.
Material
Working memory task. Participants’ working
memory capacity was measured using a version of
the Operation span task (Ospan, La Pointe & Engle,
1990) adapted for group testing (Gospan, for details
see De Neys, d’Ydewalle, Schaeken, & Vos, 2002).
In the Ospan-task participants solve series of simple
mathematical operations while attempting to
remember a list of unrelated words The main
adaptation in the Gospan is that the operation from
an operation-word pair is first presented separately
on screen (e.g., ‘IS (4/2) – 1 = 5 ?’). Participants
read the operation silently and press a key to indicate
whether the answer is correct or not. Responses and
292

that follow necessarily. Instead participants were
told they could evaluate the conclusions by the
criteria they personally judged relevant (see
Cummins, 1995).

response latencies are recorded. After the participant
has typed down the response, the corresponding
word (e.g., ‘BALL’) from the operation-word string
is presented for 800 ms. As in the standard Ospan
three sets of each length (from two to six operationword pairs) are tested and set size varies in the same
randomly chosen order for each participant. The
Gospan-score is the sum of the recalled words for all
sets recalled completely and in correct order.
Participants were tested in groups of 21 to 48 at
the same time. Participants who made more than
15% math errors or whose mean operation response
latencies deviated by more than 2.5 standard
deviations of the sample mean were discarded
(participants already in the bottom quartile of the
Gospan-score distribution were not discarded based
on the latency criterion). De Neys, d’Ydewalle et al.
(2002) reported an internal reliability coefficient
alpha of .74 for the Gospan. The corrected
correlation between standard Ospan and Gospanscore reached .70.

Results and discussion
Rejection probability for all reported statistical
analyses was .05. For completeness, we always
report the individual estimated p-values.
Three participants were discarded because they
did not meet the operation correctness or latency
requirements of the WM-task (see De Neys,
d’Ydewalle et al., 2002). The remaining 102
participants were split in three span groups of equal
n based on the boundaries of the Gospan-score
distribution. Mean Gospan-score for the three
successive span groups was 23.27 (SD = 4.34, low
span), 35.15 (SD = 2.79, medium span), and 45.89
(SD = 4.97, high span).
For every participant we calculated the mean
acceptance rating for the three extended MP
problems. The means were subjected to an ANOVA
with span group as between-subject variable. There
was a significant effect of span group, F(2, 99) =
5.55, MSE = 1.23, p < .01. The acceptance rating
showed the expected pattern: Medium spans (M =
3.84, SD = 4.67) showed lower MP acceptance
ratings than the low (M = 4.56, SD = 1.11) and high
spans (M = 4.67, SD = .99). A trend analysis
confirmed that there was a significant U-shaped,
quadratic trend, F(1, 99) = 10.85, MSE = 1.23, p <
.005 without mediation of a linear trend, F(1, 99) <
1.
Thus, even when the disabler search was
specifically stimulated high spans showed the
highest levels of MP acceptance. This is consistent
with the claim that high spans are inhibiting the
disabler search and underlines the generality and
robustness of the inhibition phenomenon.

Reasoning task. Participants received three extended
MP problems. These were Dutch translations of the
three Byrne (1989) MP problems (see Dieussaert,
Schaeken, Schroyens, & d’Ydewalle, 2000). The
following item format was used:
Rule: If she has an essay to write, then she will stay
late in the library.
If the library stays open, then she will stay late in
the library.
Fact: She has an essay to write
Conclusion: She will stay late in the library.

All three MP problems were presented on a separate
page of a booklet together with a 7-point rating scale
ranging from 1 (Very certain that I cannot draw this
conclusion) to 7 (Very certain that I can draw this
conclusion) with 4 representing can’t tell.
Participants placed a mark on the number of the
scale that best reflected their evaluation of the
conclusion.

Experiment 2
The first experiment showed that the acceptance
ratings for the extended MP problems differed for
participants of different WM-capacity. In
Experiment 2 we compare the acceptance ratings of
standard vs. extended MP problems in function of
WM-span. This allows us to establish the impact of
the explicit disabler presentation per se. For the
validity of our framework it is crucial that the
acceptance ratings decrease when a disabler is
explicitly presented.
First, for low spans it is assumed that the disabler
search with standard MP problems will not be very
successful. Although low spans’ limited resources
will restrict the impact of the extra search
stimulation, the extended disabler manipulation does
present low spans a disabler they will probably not
retrieve in the standard condition. Therefore, low
spans’ inference acceptance should decrease for the

Procedure
Participants were tested in groups of 21 to 42 at the
same time in a large computer room with an
individual booth for every participant. All
participants started with the Gospan task that was
run on computer. After all participants of a group
had finished the Gospan-task the extended MP
evaluation task was presented. The three items were
presented on separate pages of a booklet. The first
page of the booklet included the task instructions.
They showed an example item that explained the
specific task format. Participants were told that the
task was to decide whether or not they could accept
the conclusions. Care was taken to make sure
participants understood the precise nature of the
rating scale. The task instructions did not mention to
accept the premises as true or to endorse conclusions
293

Reasoning tasks. All conditionals were selected from
the generation studies of De Neys et al. (2002) and
Verschueren et al. (2002). Eight causal conditionals
were used for the standard condition and six causal
conditionals for the extended condition. Half of the
conditionals in each condition were previously
classified as having many possible disablers, while
the other half had only few possible disablers. The
number of possible alternative causes (see Cummins,
1995) of the selected conditionals with few and
many disablers was kept constant. The item format
for the extended and standard task was similar to the
format used in Experiment 1, except that for the
extended items a possible disabler was mentioned.
We always presented the disabler that was most
frequently generated for that conditional in the
generation task (e.g., see De Neys et al., 2002). As
in Byrne (1989) the disablers (e.g., engine broken)
were always presented as an additional requirement,
embedded in a conditional (e.g., If the engine works,
then the car starts). This resulted in the following
format:

extended MP problems. Second, because of the more
efficient retrieval, medium spans in the standard
condition will probably retrieve the disabler
presented in the extended MP condition themselves.
Hence, the mere presentation of the disabler should
not affect medium spans. Nevertheless, if we are
right that the search process is stimulated by the
disabler presentation one should expect that
additional disablers will be retrieved in the extended
condition and this should further decrease the MP
acceptance (see De Neys, Schaeken, & d’Ydewalle,
2003c, for a study on the effect of the number of
retrieved disablers on MP acceptance). High spans
are expected to inhibit the search both for the
standard and extended problems. However, it is
explicitly assumed that the inhibition is not
automatic, but draws on WM-resources. Therefore,
the inhibition should be less successful when the
process is more demanding. De Neys et al. (2003a)
already observed that the increasing inhibition
demands caused by an increasing number of
available disablers resulted in a less efficient
disabler inhibition. Hence, although the high spans
should overall show a high MP acceptance, their
acceptance level should nevertheless be affected by
the stimulated disabler search.
In sum, we expected a standard suppression effect
for all span groups: Acceptance ratings should be
lower for the extended (vs. standard) MP problems.
In addition, overall MP acceptance ratings should
be affected by WM-span: Extended and standard MP
acceptance in the successive span groups should
follow the U-shaped trend observed in Experiment
1.

Rule: If the ignition key is turned, then the car starts.
If the engine works, then the car starts.
Fact: The ignition key is turned.
Conclusion: The car starts.

It should be noted that the set of conditionals in
the standard and extended condition was not
completely similar. Although both conditions used
causal conditionals with a comparable number of
possible disablers, the standard condition should
therefore not be conceived as a control condition per
se. Rather, the standard condition serves as a
baseline against which the performance of the
different WM-span groups can be compared.

Method
Design
As standard condition or baseline we used the MP
evaluations of the 282 participants in the study of De
Neys et al. (2003b). In this study participants were
presented a standard conditional inference task with
causal conditionals and a measure of WM-capacity.
We calculated the mean MP acceptance for different
span groups and used this as a baseline to compare
the MP acceptance of matched span groups with
similar extended causal MP problems.

Procedure
Participants were tested in groups of 21 to 48 at the
same time in a large computer room with an
individual booth for every participant. All
participants started with the Gospan task that was
run on computer. After all participants of the group
had finished the Gospan-task the extended MP
evaluation task or the standard conditional inference
task was presented. The standard task was run on
computer. Participants evaluated eight standard MP
inferences mixed with other conditional inferences.
The six items of the extended MP task were
presented on separate pages of a booklet. This
booklet was presented before the booklet with the
items of Experiment 1. Task instructions for the
standard and extended MP task were similar to the
instructions given in Experiment 1.

Participants
All 105 participants of Experiment 1 evaluated the
extended MP inferences in the present experiment.
The data for the standard MP condition were taken
from the study of De Neys et al. (2003b) where 282
first-year psychology students evaluated standard
conditional inferences.
Material
Working memory task. All participants’ working
memory capacity was measured with the Gospantask (see De Neys, d’Ydewalle et al., 2002).

Results and discussion
In order to match the span groups in the extended
and standard conditions as closely as possible we
decided to split both samples up in five span groups
294

each, based on the quintile boundaries of the
Gospan-score distribution of the 282 participants in
the standard condition. A 5 (span group, betweensubjects) x 2 (MP task, between-subjects) ANOVA
on the Gospan-scores established that there were no
WM-capacity differences for participants in both
task conditions [effect of MP task, F(1, 374) < 1;
interaction MP task x Span-group, F(4, 374) = 1.84,
MSE = 10.91].
Each participant evaluated eight or six MP
evaluations. The mean of these ratings was
calculated and subjected to a 5 (WM-span, betweensubjects) x 2 (MP task, between-subjects) ANOVA.

impact of this factor on the manipulations. For
completeness, the variable was entered as a withinsubjects factor in the ANOVA. We replicated the
traditional (e.g., Cummins, 1995) main effect of the
number factor: MP acceptance was always lower for
conditionals with many disablers than for
conditionals with few disablers, F(1, 374) = 139.40,
MSE = .51, p < .0001. However, none of the
interactions with the other factors reached
significance. Thus, the crucial effects of span group
and the explicit disabler presentation were not
affected by the number factor.

General Discussion
Acceptance rating

6,5
6
standard

5,5

extended

5

p

1-

bo

5-

to

4

3

2

tto

m

4,5

WM-quintile

Figure 1. Mean MP acceptance rating in function of
WM-capacity with (extended) and without
(standard) explicitly presented disabler. The rating
scale ranged from 1 (very sure cannot draw this
conclusion) to 7 (very sure can draw this
conclusion).
Explicitly presenting a disabler clearly decreased
the MP acceptance, F(4, 374) = 37.56, MSE = .72, p
< .0001. Figure 1 shows that, as expected, this effect
was present for all WM-span groups, span group x
MP task interaction, F(4, 374) < 1. There was also a
marginal main effect of WM-span, F(4, 374) = 2.28,
MSE = .72, p < .06. As Figure 1 indicates, a trend
analysis clearly established that the MP ratings
followed a U-shaped, quadratic trend in function of
WM-span, F(1, 374) = 6.77, MSE = .72, p < .01.
There was no sign of a linear trend, F(1, 374) < 1,
and the quadratic trend did not differ for the standard
and extended MP problems, F(1, 374) = 1.07, MSE
= .71, p > .35. Thus, as expected, all span groups
showed an impact of the explicit disabler
presentation, but both on the standard and extended
problems the MP acceptance ratings were affected
by WM-capacity.
Finally, one might note that the number of
disablers of the adopted conditionals in the present
experiment varied systematically (e.g., half of the
conditionals had few vs. many possible disablers).
We had no specific hypotheses concerning the
295

The two experiments clearly established that even
when a disabler is explicitly presented MP
acceptance ratings of the successive working
memory (WM)-span groups follow a U-shaped
trend. Previous studies already suggested that the
higher MP acceptance ratings of high vs. medium
spans, despite high spans’ superior retrieval
capacities, result from an active inhibition of the
disabler search. The fact that in the present study the
same pattern is found under conditions that can be
assumed to stimulate the search process points to the
robustness and generality of the inhibition
phenomenon.
As De Neys et al. (2003a, 2003b) we hypothesized
that the disabler inhibition is not occurring in a
cognitive vacuum but draws on working memory
resources. Therefore, higher inhibition requirements
were expected to result in a less efficient inhibition
process. The goal of the search stimulation by the
explicit disabler presentation was precisely to
increase the inhibition demands. Disablers that
would be inhibited under less demanding inhibition
conditions could ‘slip through’ the filter and
decrease the MP acceptance. Consistent with these
hypotheses Experiment 2 clearly showed that even
high spans’ MP acceptance decreased for the
extended MP problems.
The present findings have implications for
traditional suppression studies. The results indicate
that Byrne’s (1989) findings can be generalized over
the whole WM-capacity distribution: For all WMspan groups MP acceptance decreased when a
possible disabler was explicitly presented. Thus, all
WM-span groups show the basic suppression effect.
However, it is important to note that the final
acceptance level is systematically affected by WMcapacity: Reasoners with an inefficient disabler
retrieval and reasoners that inhibit the retrieval show
the highest levels of MP acceptance. These people
will be typically situated in the bottom and top levels
of the WM-capacity distribution, respectively.
Reasoner that can allocate sufficient resources to the
retrieval and do not inhibit the search process,
typically people with medium sized WM-span, will
be most likely to reject MP. These findings further

conditional inferences. Thinking & Reasoning, 6,
125-160.
Evans, J. St. B. T., Newstead, S. E., & Byrne, R. M.
J. (1993). Human reasoning: The psychology of
deduction. Hove, UK: Erlbaum.
George, C. (1997). Reasoning from uncertain
premises. Thinking & Reasoning, 3, 161-189.
La Pointe, L. B., & Engle, R. W. (1990). Simple and
complex word spans as measures of working
memory capacity. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
16, 1118-1133.
Levy, B. J., & Anderson, M. C. (2002). Inhibitory
processes and the control of memory retrieval.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 6, 299-305.
Manktelow, K. I. (1999). Reasoning and thinking.
Hove, UK: Psychology Press.
Markovits, H., & Barrouillet, P. (2002). The
development of conditional reasoning: A mental
model account. Developmental Review, 22, 5-36.
Markovits, H., Doyon, C., & Simoneau, M. (2002).
Individual differences in working memory and
conditional reasoning with concrete and abstract
content. Thinking & Reasoning, 8, 97-107.
Markovits, H., & Quinn, S. (2002). Efficiency of
retrieval correlates with logical reasoning from
causal conditional premises. Memory & Cognition,
30, 696-706.
Miyake, A., & Shah, P. (Eds.). (1999). Models of
working memory: Mechanisms of active
maintenance and executive control. Cambridge,
MA: Cambridge University Press.
Politzer, G., & Bourmaud, G. (2002). Deductive
reasoning from uncertain conditionals. British
Journal of Psychology, 93, 345-381.
Simoneau, M., & Markovits, H. (2003). Reasoning
with premises that are not empirically true :
Evidence for the role of inhibition and retrieval.
Developmental Psychology, 39, 964-975.
Stanovich, K. E., & West, R. F. (2000). Individual
differences in reasoning: Implications for the
rationality debate. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
23, 645-726.
Stevenson, R. J., & Over, D. E. (1995). Deduction
from uncertain premises. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 48A, 613-643.
Thompson, V. A. (1994). Interpretational factors in
conditional reasoning. Memory and Cognition, 22,
742-758.
Verschueren, N., De Neys, W., Schaeken, W., &
d’Ydewalle, G. (2002). Working memory capacity
and the nature of generated counterexamples.
Paper presented at the Twenty-Fourth Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, Fairfax,
VA.

emphasize the role of WM-capacity in the retrieval
and inhibition of disablers during conditional
reasoning.

Acknowledgements
Preparation of this manuscript was supported by
grants from the Fund for Scientific ResearchFlanders (FWO).

References
Anderson, J. R. (1993). Rules of the mind. Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Baddeley, A. D. (1996). Exploring the central
executive. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 49A, 5-28.
Bonnefon, J.-F., & Hilton D. J. (2002). The
suppression of modus ponens as a case of
pragmatic preconditional reasoning. Thinking &
Reasoning, 8, 21-40.
Byrne, R. M. J. (1989). Suppressing valid inferences
with conditionals. Cognition, 31, 61-83.
Byrne, R. M. J., Espino, O., & Santamaria, C.
(1999). Counterexamples and the suppression of
inferences. Journal of Memory and Language, 40,
347-373.
Cowan, N. (1995). Attention and memory: An
integrated framework. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Cummins, D. D. (1995). Naive theories and causal
deduction. Memory and Cognition, 23, 646-658.
De Neys, W., d’Ydewalle, G., Schaeken, W., & Vos,
G. (2002). A Dutch, computerized, and group
administrable adaptation of the operation span test.
Psychologica Belgica, 42, 177-190.
De Neys, W., Schaeken, W., & d’Ydewalle, G.
(2002). Causal conditional reasoning and semantic
memory retrieval: A test of the semantic memory
framework. Memory & Cognition, 30, 908-920.
De Neys, W., Schaeken, W., & d’Ydewalle, G.
(2003a). Working memory and everyday
conditional reasoning: Retrieval and inhibition of
stored counterexamples. (Tech. Rep. No. 295).
Leuven, Belgium: University of Leuven,
Laboratory of Experimental Psychology.
De Neys, W., Schaeken, W., & d’Ydewalle, G.
(2003b). Working memory span and everyday
conditional reasoning: A trend analysis. Paper
presented at the Twenty-Fifth Annual Meeting of
the Cognitive Science Society, Boston, MA.
De Neys, W., Schaeken, W., & d’Ydewalle, G.
(2003c). Inference suppression and semantic
memory retrieval: Every counterexample counts.
Memory & Cognition, 31, 581-595.
Dieussaert, K., Schaeken, W., Schroyens, W., &
d’Ydewalle, G. (2000). Strategies during complex

296

