UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Integrating Spatial Language and Spatial Memory: A Dynamical Systems Approach

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6r24w1p9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Lipinski, John
Spencer, John P.
Samuelson, Larissa K.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Integrating Spatial Language and Spatial Memory:
A Dynamical Systems Approach
John Lipinski (john-lipinski@uiowa.edu)
John P. Spencer (john-spencer@uiowa.edu)
Larissa K. Samuelson (larissa-samuelson@uiowa.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Iowa
Iowa City, IA 52242 USA
other available information (Talmy, 1983; Hayward & Tarr,
1995). Thus, in the sentence “The bike stood near the
house”, all of the specific information about the bike (e.g.
size, shape, orientation) is disregarded and the bike is
instead treated as a dimensionless point (Hayward & Tarr,
1995). As a result of this schematization, linguistic
representations of relational states can be extended to a
variety of visual scenes and objects with little regard to the
individual object characteristics.
In contrast to transduction and the amodal approach,
Barsalou’s Perceptual Symbol Systems (1999) posits
perceptual symbols: “records of neural states that underlie
perception” (p.583) that are both inherently grounded in the
given sensory modality and capable of replicating the
flexible, productive, and hierarchical capacities of amodal
symbolic systems. These perceptual symbols are
implemented when top-down processes partially reactivate
sensory-motor areas and organize the perceptual
components around a common frame. Ultimately,
perceptual components implement a simulator that captures
both perceptual memories and core symbolic behaviors (e.g.
type-token distinctions, hierarchies). Because these symbols
are grounded in sensory-motor processes, they do not
require pointers or transduction to become “meaningful”.
A growing empirical literature supports Barsalou’s
(1999) PSS as well. For example, Stanfield and Zwaan
(2001) argued that if symbolic, linguistic representations are
integrated with perceptual symbol systems, people should
be faster to recognize visual objects described in a sentence
as the similarity between the perceived object and the
description increase. Consistent with this prediction, they
found that people were faster to recognize an object (e.g. a
vertically oriented pencil) as part of a previous sentence
when that sentence matched the orientation (e.g. He placed
the pencil in the cup) than when it conflicted (e.g. He placed
the pencil in the drawer). Visual information has also been
shown to facilitate real-time resolution of temporarily
syntactically ambiguous sentences (Tanenhaus, SpiveyKnowlton, Eberhard, & Sedivy, 1995), further evidence
against a hard separation between linguistic and sensory
systems. Finally, recent work by Richardson et al. (2003)
shows that verbal stimuli interact with visual discrimination
performance, additional evidence that linguistic processing
can directly impact the processing of visual space.
In summary, the contrasting amodal and modal
perspectives both appear to be substantially supported.

Abstract
The domain of spatial language is an ideal testing ground for
proposals addressing the representational gap between
perceptual-motor and language systems precisely because it is
an unambiguous case of these systems coming together. To
date, however, efforts addressing this representational gap
within the domain of spatial language have generated
conflicting results. Focusing on an “above” ratings task, we
provide here a dynamical systems approach to spatial
language performance and supporting empirical results that
address this impasse. The development of a dynamical
systems model linking spatial language and spatial memory is
also discussed.

Representation and Spatial Language
A current focus in cognitive science is understanding
how the sensory-motor and linguistic systems interact.
Because spatial language brings words and physical space
together so directly, it is the ideal vehicle for exploring this
interaction. To date, two general approaches to
representation speak to this issue of interaction in spatial
language (Barsalou, 1999): amodal symbolic systems and
perceptual symbol systems.
Amodal symbolic systems presume representational
independence between symbolic processes like language
and sensory-motor systems (Harnad, 1990; Anderson,
2000). The amodal view thus requires a transduction
process that permits “communication” between linguistic
and non-linguistic systems. This transduction process is best
described by Jackendoff’s representational interface (1992;
1996; 2002) in which communication between different
types of representations (e.g. auditory and visual) is
achieved through a process of schematization─ the
simplifying and filtering out of information within one
representational format for use in another representational
system (Talmy, 1983). The representational interface
approach ultimately permits abstract conceptual structures
that can encode spatial representations but still capture the
core characteristics of the symbolic view (e.g. pointers to
sensory modalities, type-token distinctions, taxonomies).
There is significant empirical support for this
perspective. Talmy (1983), for example, showed that
language uses closed-class prepositions (such as “above”,
“below”, or “near”) to provide an abstracted, skeletal
structure of a scene that narrows the listener’s attention to a
particular relationship between two objects by disregarding
831

iven the clear contrast between the two theories, however,
both cannot be correct. Thus, despite a vigorous debate and
valuable empirical data on both sides, the fundamental
question of how linguistic and non-linguistic systems relate
remains unanswered.

language use around the vertical and horizontal axes. For
instance, “above” ratings were highest along the vertical
axis and systematically decreased as the target object’s
position deviated from the vertical axis. Hayward and Tarr
concluded that this ratings gradient across spatial positions
reflected the use of prototypical vertical and horizontal
reference axes.
To compare the representational prototypes of spatial
language with visual representations of space, Hayward and
Tarr compared these findings with performance on location
memory and same-different discrimination tasks.
Importantly, the areas of highest spatial recall accuracy were
vertically aligned with the reference axes used as prototypes
in the ratings task. Performance in the same-different
location task yielded similar findings, showing that
discrimination was best along the vertical and horizontal
axes. Collectively, data from these four experiments point to
a shared representational spatial structure between linguistic
and sensory-motor systems, a result consistent with
Barsalou’s PSS approach.

Limits of the Current Approaches
Further consideration suggests two critical limits of the
proposals and empirical support discussed above. First, they
rely on descriptive, conceptual accounts of representational
structure. Though critical at initial stages of theory
development, the flexibility of conceptual accounts makes
them ultimately difficult to critically test and falsify.
Consequently, data collected in support of one view can be
reinterpreted by the other view. Jackendoff (2002), for
example, incorporated the resolution of syntactic ambiguity
through visual processing (Tanenhaus, et al., 1995) using
characteristics of a syntax-semantics interface.
The second, related limit of the current literature is
treatment of representational structure in the abstract. In
particular, with the exception of recent tests of the PSS
theory (e.g. Richardson et al., 2003), spatial language
studies have tended to focus on the nature of
representational structure without considering the secondto-second processes that give rise to those structures. This
can lead to an impasse because representations are not
strongly
grounded
in
task-specific
performance.
Consideration of an ongoing debate within spatial language
illustrates this point. Because this debate is central to our
empirical work, it is considered in some detail.

Evidence Against Shared Representations
Follow-up results from Crawford, Regier, &
Huttenlocher (2000) present a different picture. To probe
both linguistic and visual representations of space, they
analyzed “above” ratings as well as spatial memory
performance. Although results showed an “above” ratings
gradient aligned with the vertical axis similar to that of
Hayward and Tarr (1995), Crawford et. al. also found
location memory bias away from the vertical axis when
participants had to recall the locations of targets to the left
and right of this axis. These researchers proposed that the
cardinal axes that appear to function as prototypes in the
linguistic task instead serve as category boundaries in the
spatial memory task. Thus, while both linguistic and
sensory-motor spatial representations use the same cardinal
axes, these axes serve functionally distinct representational
roles in the two tasks. It therefore appears that the linguistic
and sensory-motor representations of space differ in critical
ways, a conclusion consistent with an amodal
representational interface perspective.
Considered together, these results illustrate the limits of
dealing with representation in the abstract: both sets of
researchers used similar experimental tasks and reported
largely similar findings, yet they draw starkly different
conclusions, conclusions that depend critically on abstract
definitions of representational structure. Because we do not
yet know the process that selects, creates, and encodes
spatial prototypes nor the process used to create a spatial
rating, we cannot go beyond abstract representational
descriptions to make predictions about the similarities and
differences across tasks. Notably, the failure to resolve this
particular debate within spatial language mirrors the larger
failure to resolve the modal-amodal conflict. In most
general terms, the empirical support offered in both cases
fails to delineate between the proposed accounts.

Evidence for Shared Representations
In order to explore the possible correspondence
between the linguistic and sensory-motor representations of
space, Hayward and Tarr (1995) conducted a series of
experiments designed to compare how object relations are
linguistically and visually encoded. In the first experiment,
participants were presented with a visual scene depicting a
referent object and a target object and asked to generate a
preposition describing the relationship. Results suggested
that the prototypical spatial positions for “above” and
“below” lie along a vertical reference axis and prototypical
spatial positions for “left” and “right” lie along a horizontal
axis. In addition, use of these terms declines as target
positions deviate from the horizontal and vertical reference
axes.
Next, Hayward and Tarr built on these findings by
using a preposition ratings task. In the ratings task,
participants were asked to rate on a scale of 1 (least
applicable) to 7 (most applicable) the applicability of a
given spatial term (e.g. above) to a relationship between two
objects. This ratings task is particularly valuable because it
permits quantification and metric manipulation of an
otherwise gross measure of linguistic output (e.g. above/not
above). As such, this task provides a means of empirically
bridging the continuity of sensory-motor representations
with the discreteness of linguistic representations. Results
from this ratings task showed strong metric effects of spatial

A Process Approach to Spatial Language
832

midline reported by Huttenlocher and colleagues. The focus
of the DFT is to explain this performance through activation
in the SWM
field.
Figure
1 shows the
structure of
the
DFT
model. The
large
box
shows the
C
excitatory
and
inhibitory
layers
of
neurons that
Figure 1 Dynamic Field Theory of spatial working
together
memory
form the SWM field. Each layer has a collection of spatially
tuned neurons that respond selectively to a specific location.
Spatial location is indicated by position along the x-axis,
where 0˚ is the center of the space; positive locations are
rightward, and negative locations are leftward. The y-axis
represents time which is moving away as a particular
experimental trial proceeds from start to finish. The z-axis
captures the activation of each neuron in the field.

The theory and data discussed so far appear to be at
an impasse, due in part to an emphasis on descriptive
accounts of representational systems and a focus on
representation in the abstract. To move beyond these
fundamental limitations, the current proposal seeks to
establish and test a process model that relates spatial
memory and verbal performance. Such a process model can
move beyond description and representation in the abstract
and provide strong, testable predictions.
To lay the foundation of this proposed model,
consider again the results of Crawford et al. (2000). The
distinguishing result was the finding of spatial memory
biases away from the vertical axis. They interpreted this
movement away from midline to be a function of bias
towards spatial categories. This interpretation is derived
from Huttenlocher et al.’s (1991) Category Adjustment
(CA) model. According to the CA model, people encode
spatial location at two levels. The first level encodes finegrained information about target location (e.g. angular
deviation), while the second level encodes the region or
category of target location. Specifically, the CA model
proposes that people represent a central or prototypical
value within a category that is most representative of that
category. To remember a location, these two levels of detail
are then combined to produce a remembered target location.
Importantly, fine-grained and categorical information can be
weighed differently. If, for example, the fine-grained detail
is less certain, the prototype can be given more weight,
resulting in a bias away from midline. Moreover, evidence
from Huttenlocher et al. (1991) indicates that these spatial
prototypes lie along the diagonal axes. According to
Crawford et al. (2000), these spatial prototypes along the
diagonals are the source of the observed spatial memory
biases away from midline. Recall, however, that spatial
prepositions maintained their highest applicability ratings
along the vertical and horizontal axes. Thus, spatial
prepositions appear to maintain prototypes along vertical
and horizontal axes while spatial categories appear to
maintain prototypes along the diagonal axes.
But must the drift away from midline observed in
spatial memory performance result from spatial prototypes
along the diagonal? A recent model suggests no.
Specifically, the Dynamic Field Theory (DFT) (Spencer &
Schöner, 2003; Schutte, Spencer, & Schöner, 2003)
provides a formalized process account of spatial memory
bias away from reference axes without positing prototypes.
This model specifies how location-related activation is
maintained in spatial working memory (SWM) during shortterm delays and how perception and memory are integrated
within this single representational system.
The DFT can be best understood within the context of a
location memory task used to test predictions of the model.
In this task, participants are seated at a large empty table
and a spaceship-shaped object is flashed for 2 seconds on
the table. After a variable delay, participants are asked to
indicate the location of the ship using a computer mouse.
Participants in this task show the same biases away from

In addition to the excitatory and inhibitory layers of the
SWM field, there are input fields: target input, reference
input, and memory input. The upper left portion of Figure 1
shows the target input which feeds into the excitatory layer
of the SWM field. This target input turns on when the target
is visible and turns off when the target is hidden. Figure 1
also shows the reference input. This reference input captures
perception of the midline or vertical symmetry axis, the
same axis central to the linguistic and non-linguistic
representations of space discussed above. The third input is
the long-term memory field which reflects the activation
history of the SWM. This field also reciprocally feeds into
the SWM field to impact real-time spatial memory
processes.
The integration of these inputs in working memory is
governed by an interaction function that determines how
activation at one site in the SWM field influences activation
at other sites. The DFT uses a local excitation and lateral
inhibition function. Thus, activation at one site increases the
activation of its neighbors and decreases the activation of
sites further away. There are two main consequences of the
interaction function. First, strong target input can lead to a
self-sustaining peak of activation. These self-sustaining
peaks of activation maintain themselves even after the target
input is removed. In this way the field can maintain a
memory of the target location during short-term delays.
The second consequence of the interaction function is
that self-sustaining peaks can drift away from reference axes
such as midline during memory delays. The process that
gives rise to such delay-dependent spatial drift is illustrated
in Figure 2. The short activation profile in this figure was
generated by running a simulation of the model shown in
833

considering the
specific
representational
structures that
emerge in our
0
formalized
process model.
In particular, we
asked whether
the
processes
that
create Figure 2 Local excitation/ lateral inhibition
delay-dependent spatial drift in spatial working memory
might also leave some empirical signature in a spatial
language task. Toward this end, we used the ratings task
from Hayward and Tarr given its capacity to reveal
quantifiable metric effects and its centrality in the spatial
language literature (e.g., Hayward & Tarr, 1995; Crawford
et al., 2000; Logan & Sadler, 1996; Regier & Carlson,
2001).
To relate the DFT to performance in the ratings task,
we borrowed an idea from Regier and Carlson’s (2001)
Attentional Vector Sum model and scaled verbal ratings for
“above” by the angle between the representation of the
target location and the representation of the reference axis,
that is, by the spatial distance between the center of the
activation peak in SWM and the midline axis (0º). Ratings
should be highest when activation is centered at 0º and
should fall off systematically as the activation peak is
shifted to the left or right. Based on this proposal and the
dynamic properties of the DFT, we predicted that if spatial
language
and
Location Reproduction Trials
spatial
memory
10
use the same
representational
5
system—spatial
0
working
memory—then
delay (s)
-5
ratings
0
performance
10
-10
should
show
-110
-70
-50
-30
-10
10
30
50
70
110
-90
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
90
delay-dependent
target
“drift”,
giving
Variability of Location Reproductions
systematically
7
lower
“above”
6
ratings as memory
5
delays
increase
4
(i.e.
as
the
3
distance between
delay (s)
2
the activation peak
0
1
in SWM and the
10
0
midline
axis
-110
-70
-50
-30
-10
10
30
50
70
110
-90
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
90
increases).
target
Experimental
Figure 3. Spatial memory performance
Support
Subjects. 15 University of Iowa undergraduates
participated in this study in exchange for class credit or
payment.
SD of directional errors

directional error

Figure 1 with only a single input—the reference input—and
taking a time slice through the excitatory layer (top layer in
the large panel of Figure 1) of the resultant SWM field (at
time 8.00 s). Thus, this short activation profile reflects the
influence the reference input has on each neuron in SWM at
a particular moment in time (note that, because the reference
input in Figure 1 is constant throughout the memory delay,
the short activation profile actually captures the resultant
influence of the reference input throughout the trial).
As can be seen in Figure 2, the resultant reference
profile has stronger activation around midline; however,
there are also two troughs in activation to the left and right
of midline. These troughs cause systematic delay-dependent
drift away from midline when targets are positioned to the
left and right of this axis. This is captured schematically by
the tall activation profile in Figure 2. As can be seen in
Figure 2, this tall activation profile receives slightly more
reference-related input on its left side than its right side. As
a consequence, neurons on the left side of the activation
peak will tend to join into the locally-excitatory interaction,
while neurons on the right side of the peak will tend to be
laterally inhibited.
The excitatory (top) layer of the SWM field in Figure 1
shows that as this interactive process propagates through
time, activation peaks can spatially drift. In particular,
Figure 1 shows a simulation of the model during a single
trial to a -40º location. At the start of the trial, activation in
the excitatory layer of SWM is relatively uniform because
no strong inputs are present. At 2 s, the target appears at
-40º and the strong target input associated with this event
builds a peak of activation in SWM. Importantly, this
activation peak sustains itself even after the target
disappears at 4 s. And, during the ensuing memory delay,
the peak drifts systematically away from midline (i.e., away
from 0º). Note that this effect is partially counteracted by
the long-term memory input at -40º.
In summary, the DFT provides a process-based
alternative to Huttenlocher et al.’s (1991) category
adjustment model. Critically, this model links spatial
memory biases to a process that integrates remembered
information in working memory with perceived reference
frames, the same reference frames implicated in research by
Hayward and Tarr (1995). As a result, the central argument
against Hayward and Tarr’s claim of shared structure
between linguistic and non-linguistic representations of
space—that memory is biased away from a category
boundary—no longer follows obligatorily from the data.
This provides the impetus to once again consider the
potentially rich and direct connections between spatial
memory and spatial language.

Connecting the DFT with Spatial Language
Inspired by our model of spatial working memory,
we recently conducted a set of experiments designed to
investigate Hayward and Tarr’s (1995) claim that linguistic
and non-linguistic representations overlap, not by
examining representational structures in the abstract, but by
834

variability revealed
effects
of
delay
comparable to those
found on the spatial
memory trials (see
Figure
4).
Specifically, ratings
variability was higher
at the long delay and
lower for targets near
the midline axis.
In
a
final
analysis,
we
compared
spatial
memory and ratings
responses directly by
converting the ratings
“drift” apparent in
Figure 4 into a spatial
deviation
measure
(e.g., deviation at 10º
target = (change in 10
s delay rating between
10º and 20º) * 10º /
(change in 0 s delay
rating between 10º and
20º)).
This
analysis
revealed a high degree of
overlap
in
delaydependent spatial drift
across the two tasks (see
Figure 5). These results
support the prediction we
generated from the DFT
and suggest that a shared
working
memory
representation underlies
performance in both
tasks.

Verbal Trials
9
8
7

"above" rating

Method. Experimental sessions were conducted in dim
lighting in a room with black curtains covering all external
landmarks. A curved border occluded the corners of the
table (and therefore the diagonal symmetry axes).
A single referent disc appeared at midline 30cm in front
of the participant and remained visible throughout each
presentation trial. At the start of each trial the participant
moved a computer mouse to this disk. A number (100-500)
then appeared and participants begin counting backwards by
1s aloud until they made a response. This counting task
prevented the verbal encoding and maintenance of the
spaceship position or rating. A small, spaceship-shaped
target then appeared on the screen for two seconds.
Trial Types For spatial memory trials, participants were
instructed to move the mouse to the location corresponding
the ship’s location when the computer says “Ready-SetGo”. For spatial language rating trials, on the other hand,
participants are instructed to rate on a scale of 1 (“definitely
not above”) to 9 (“definitely above”) the extent to which the
word “above” describes the spaceship’s location relative to
the reference disk and say their rating when the computer
says “Please give your ‘Above’ rating.” The spoken stimuli
that indicated which response to provide were each 1500ms
in duration. In No Delay conditions, completion of the
spoken stimulus was timed to coincide with the offset of the
spaceship target. In the 10s Delay conditions, completion of
the spoken stimulus occurred exactly 10 seconds after the
disappearance of the spaceship target. Spaceship targets
appeared at a constant radius of 15cm at 19 different
locations relative to the midline axis (0º): every 10º from 70º to +70º as well as ±90º and ±110º to map onto previous
research.
Results
Participants in our modified spaceship task either gave
a spatial memory response or a verbal ratings response (1 =
“definitely not above”, 9 = “definitely above”) after a 0 s or
10 s delay. The top portion of Figure 3 shows directional
errors on the memory trials across target locations and
delays. Positive errors were clockwise, while negative errors
were counterclockwise. Consistent with previous work
(Spencer & Hund, 2002), directional error was larger in the
10 s delay condition and responses were systematically
biased away from midline (responses to negative or leftward
targets showed counterclockwise bias; responses to positive
or rightward targets showed clockwise bias). Similar effects
were found for variable error (see lower portion of Figure
3). Specifically, variability was higher in the 10s delay
condition, and responses to targets to the left and right of
midline were more variable than responses to the target
aligned with 0º.
Critically, we also found the predicted delay-dependent
drift effect in participants’ ratings performance. The top
portion of Figure 4 shows that “above” ratings in the
spaceship task followed a gradient similar to that obtained
by Hayward and Tarr (1995) and Crawford et al. (2000).
However, there was a systematic and significant decrease in
ratings in the 10 s delay condition. Examination of ratings

6
5
4

delay (s)
3
0

2

10

1
-110

-70

-90

-50
-60

-30
-40

-10
-20

10
0

30
20

50
40

70
60

110
90

target

Variability of Verbal Ratings
.9
.8

SD of "ab ove" ratin g

.7
.6
.5
.4

delay (s)
.3

0

.2
.1
-110
-90

10
-70

-50
-60

-30
-40

-10
-20

10
0

30
20

50
40

70
60

110
90

target

Figure 4 Ratings performance
10

d e l a y -d e p e n d e n t d e v i a ti o n (d e g )

8

verbal ratings
reproduction

6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8

-10
-70 -60 -50 -40 -30 -20 -10 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
target

Figure 5 Ratings and drift

Towards a Dynamic Field Model of Spatial
Language Performance
Given that we have a formal theory of SWM and
encouraging preliminary data, we are in a unique position to
develop a process model of both spatial memory and verbal
behavior in spatial tasks. The starting point of such a model
will be a modified dynamic field model that links two
dynamic fields—the SWM field discussed previously and a
new spatial prepositions field. Although this new spatial
prepositions field has yet to be formalized, the current data
suggest two important features. First, this field must be
alignable with particular locations in SWM, in particular
with perceived reference frames. We are currently
developing a process within the field theory that handles the
alignment of multiple fields, including the anchoring and
scaling necessary in such situations. Critically, these
processes must be developed in a way that allows for
835

generalizability to spatial prepositions beyond “above” such
as “left”, “right”, and “below”.
Second, consistent with the dynamic nature of the tasks
employed here, and cognition more generally, the two
fields should be dynamically coupled. This means that
activation in SWM can serve as input to the spatial
preposition field and vice versa. This dynamic coupling is
critical given the presented evidence that verbal ratings
reflect the same dynamic processes underlying spatial
working memory performance. If these layers are indeed
dynamically coupled as we suggest, then establishment of
stable activation peaks within one layer should give rise to
stable peaks in the other. Similarly, instability and drift
within one layer should give rise to a instability and drift
within the other layer. Experiments are currently underway
to test these specific predictions.
Although this provides only a limited window onto the
dynamic processes that underlie a very flexible spatial
cognitive system, we contend that this is an appropriate
starting point given the novelty of our general theoretical
approach. Indeed, the results of our current experiments will
provide the empirical foundation for a more extensive
formal model that links spatial working memory with spatial
language processes.

Richardson, D.C., Spivey, M.J., Barsalou, L.W., & McRae,
K. (in press). Spatial representations activated during realtime comprehension of verbs. Cognitive Science.
Schutte, A. R., Spencer, J. P., & Schöner, G. (2003). Testing
the dynamic field theory: Working memory for locations
becomes more spatially precise over development. Child
Development, 74, 1393-1417.
Spencer, J.P. & Hund, A.M. (2002). Prototypes and
particulars: Geometric and experience-dependent spatial
categories. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
131, 16-37.
Spencer, J.P. & Schöner, G. (2003). Bridging the
representational gap in the dynamic systems approach to
development. Developmental Science, 6, 392-412.
Stanfield, R.A., & Zwaan, R.A. (2001). The effect of
implied orientation derived from verbal context on picture
recognition. Psychological Science, 12, 153-156.
Talmy, L. (1983). How language structures space. In H.
Pick& L. Acredelo (Eds): Spatial orientation: Theory,
research, and application. Plenum. New York.
Tanenhaus, M.K., Spivey-Knowlton, M.J., Eberhard,
K.M., & Sedivy, J.C. (1995). Integration of visual and
linguistic information in spoken language comprehension.
Science, 268, 1632-1634.

References
Anderson, J.R. (2000). Cognitive psychology and it
implications. New York: Worth.
Barsalou, L.W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22,577-660.
Crawford, L.E., Regier, T., & Huttenlocher, J. (2000).
Linguistic
and
non-linguistic
spatial
categorization.Cognition, 75, 209-235.
Harnad, S. (1990). The symbol grounding problem.Physica
D, 42, 335-346.
Hayward, W.G., & Tarr, M.J. (1995). Spatial language and
spatial representation. Cognition, 55, 39-84.
Huttenlocher, J., Hedges, L. V., & Duncan, S. (1991).
Categories and particulars: Prototype effects in estimating
spatial location. Psychological Review, 98, 352-376.
Jackendoff, R. (1992). Languages of the mind. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Jackendoff, R. (1996).The architecture of the linguisticspatial interface. In P. Bloom, M.A. Peterson, L. Nadel, &
M.F. Garret (Eds) Language and Space. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Jackendoff, R. (2002). Foundations of language. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Logan, G.D.,& Sadler, D.D. (1996). The architecture of the
linguistic-spatial interface. In P. Bloom, M.A. Peterson,
L. Nadel, & M.F. Garret (Eds) Language and Space.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Regier, T., & Carlson, L.A. (2001). Grounding spatial
language in perception: An empirical and computational
investigation. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 130,2373-298

836

