UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Interpersonality: Individual differences and interpersonal priming

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5fz9q55f

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Gill, Alastair J.
Harrison, Annabel J.
Oberlander, Jon

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Interpersonality: Individual differences and interpersonal priming
Alastair J. Gill (A.Gill@ed.ac.uk)
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
2 Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh, EH8 9LW UK

Annabel J. Harrison (annabelh@cogsci.ed.ac.uk)
School of Philosophy, Psychology, and Language Sciences, University of Edinburgh
7 George Square, Edinburgh, EH8 9JZ UK

Jon Oberlander (J.Oberlander@ed.ac.uk)
School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh
2 Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh, EH8 9LW UK
Abstract
We study how Extraversion and Neuroticism influence people’s language production in interpersonal
interactive situations. A priming study used confederate priming methodology to investigate syntactic priming behaviour. We expected that Extravert sociability would be related to the strength
of priming effects, although Neurotic emotionality
might also have an effect. Results indicate that Extraversion has no effect, but Neuroticism does have
an effect. We discuss possible reasons and suggest
further experimentation to investigate this finding.
Implications and applications of this work are outlined.

Personality and interaction
Individuals differ in the way they speak and write.
Some of those differences are systematic, and can
be attributed to apparently deeper differences, such
as personality traits, like Extraversion and Neuroticism (or Emotional Stability). Level of Extraversion
is intuitively related to sociability and communication, and this is expressed through interpersonal behaviour. However, level of Neuroticism appears to
be more related to anxiety and inward focus, and
thus having greater influence on solo behavior. In
the past, it has been found that both these personality traits do significantly influence an individual’s language production behaviour in a variety of
contexts (Pennebaker and King, 1999; Dewaele and
Furnham, 1999). Recent work has investigated email text, and suggested that even in that genre,
there are characteristic sequences of words associated with each end (High or Low) of both dimensions (Extravert or Neurotic) (Gill and Oberlander,
2002, 2003b).
The majority of work on the relations between
personality and language production has studied
monologue only. Yet most everyday language occurs in the context of interpersonal interaction. So
here, we aim to investigate the role of personality
upon language use in a dialogue setting.
Studies of conversational behaviour have demonstrated that individuals align with their interlocutors on a number of levels (Pickering and Garrod, in
press). The phenomena have been examined from

464

both social and cognitive perspectives. On the social side, a key focus of interest is cooperation and
audience design. On the cognitive side, a key focus
is coordination and interpersonal priming.
For example, sociolinguistic studies have shown
that speakers adopt accent or dialectal variation or a
level of lexical density appropriate to their audience.
This variation operates at phonological, lexical, and
syntactic levels (Labov, 1972; Coupland, 1980; Bell,
1984; Bradac and Wisegarver, 1984). Audience design is regarded as a relatively conscious process over
which the speaker has a certain amount of control.
It may be a result of co-operativity, affiliation, or
willingness to take another’s perspective (Haywood,
Pickering, and Branigan, 2003).
By contrast, from a cognitive perspective, coordination is viewed as an artifact of the underlying
language production mechanisms. For example, it
has been argued that references from the comprehension system are recycled to provide output for
the production system (Pickering and Garrod, in
press). Alignment is found at the lexical level (Brennan and Clark, 1996; Branigan, Pickering, and Cleland, 2000), the conceptual level (Garrod and Doherty, 1987), and the syntactic level (Pickering and
Branigan, 1998). Unlike cooperation, such coordination is considered to be largely subconscious.
Coordination therefore provides a more direct insight into underlying processing abilities, and is less
prone to outside influence. In approaching the study
of personality in dialogue, we therefore use an interpersonal priming paradigm. At the outset, our question is very general: Can differences in interpersonal
priming be attributed to personality?
To make this question more specific—and to attempt to answer it—the rest of this paper is structured as follows. First, we introduce a little more
background on personality theory. Then, we frame
a possible explanation of recent findings on the relations between Extraversion, Neuroticism and language production; this leads to two hypotheses concerning the possible relation between personality
and interpersonal priming. We then present the
priming experiment which tested these hypotheses.
The results were somewhat unexpected, and we conclude by discussing their implications.

Overview
There are a number of approaches to personality
(Matthews and Deary, 1998). Two of the most
prominent trait theories are the five factor model
(Costa and McCrae, 1992), and Eysenck’s threefactor PEN model (Eysenck, Eysenck, and Barrett,
1985; Eysenck and Eysenck, 1991). These agree that
two main factors are Extraversion (sociability) and
Neuroticism (emotional stability). The Five Factor Model sees three further dimensions: Conscientiousness, Agreeableness and Openness; PEN arguably conflates these into one dimension, Psychoticism (tough mindedness). In what follows, we focus
on the first two dimensions, common to both models.
The traits can be summarised thus: A typical Extravert tends to be sociable, needs people to talk to,
craves excitement, takes chances, is easy-going, and
optimistic. By contrast, a typical Introvert (Low Extravert) is quiet, retiring, reserved, plans ahead, and
dislikes excitement; A typical High Neurotic tends
to be an anxious, worrying, moody individual. A
typical Low Neurotic tends be calm, even-tempered
and relaxed (Eysenck and Eysenck, 1991).

have also been shown to use more self-referent statements, and initiate more laughter (Gifford and Hine,
1994). Gifford and Hine also found that Extraverts
talk more, with other studies finding that they use
a greater total number of words (Campbell and
Rushton, 1978; Carment, Miles, and Cervin, 1965).
As would be expected, Extraverts show greater desire to initiate interactions (McCroskey and Richmond, 1990), even in computer-mediated communication (Yellen, Winniford, and Sanford, 1995). Also,
Dewaele (2002) finds that in L3 English production, Extraversion (and also Psychoticism) showed a
strong negative relationship to communicative anxiety, whilst Neuroticism showed a positive relationship.
Studies investigating hemispheric asymmetry provide a further perspective on this area, for example,
Davidson (2001) proposes the relationship between
Extraversion and positive affect with approach behaviours, and Neuroticism and negative affect and
withrawal behaviours. In the following hypotheses,
we explore the implications of personality, affect and
approach/withdrawal on priming behaviour.

Hypotheses for interpersonal priming

Personality and language
Work on personality and language behaviour has
studied a range of features. For instance, Extraverts are regarded as talking louder (Scherer,
1978), demonstrating a higher speech rate (Siegman,
1987), and they show less hesitation, but make a
higher proportion of semantic errors (Dewaele and
Furnham, 2000). At a grammatical level, Extraverts
use greater proportions of pronouns, adverbs, verbs
(Cope, 1969), which contrasts with the more explicit
language of the Introverts and their increased use
of nouns, modifiers and prepositions (Dewaele and
Furnham, 2000). Additionally, Extraverts demonstrate lower lexical richness in formal situations (Dewaele and Furnham, 2000), whilst analysis of informal e-mail communication has shown highly Neurotic language to be more repetitious (Gill, 2003;
Gill and Oberlander, 2003b). At a more contentoriented level, Pennebaker and King (1999), using
the Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count text analysis program, showed that broad psychological language categories are related to dimensions of personality variation. For example, they found that when
writing about thoughts and feelings, high Neurotics
use more negative emotion words and fewer positive
emotion words.
However, our interest here is on interaction: dialogue and conversation. Studies using speech act
coding have found that Introverts used more hedges
and problem talk, namely expressing qualification,
and dissatisfaction with one’s own activities, while
Extraverts expressed more pleasure talk, agreement,
and compliments, with content focusing more on extracurricular activities (Thorne, 1987). Extraverts

465

The likelihood of priming may be affected by the
tendency to approach or the tendency to withdraw—
or by both.
If Extraversion is associated with approach behaviours, it is natural to expect that higher Extraversion will lead to “more approach”, and that
this might mean that an individual will coordinate
more with their interlocutor. Furthermore, the Extravert’s higher drive to gain or retain the conversational floor will mean that less effort can be directed towards detailed language planning. Hence, if
their partner has made a lexical or syntactic choice,
the High Extravert is likely to re-use that choice,
rather than explicitly planning a new one (cf. Gill
and Oberlander, 2003a).
If Neuroticism is associated with withdrawal behaviours, it could well be that high levels of this
trait result in “more withdrawal” and lower engagement with the interlocutor. Furthermore, the inward
(worrying) focus of a High Neurotic might mean that
more resources are devoted to inner thought, and
fewer to interaction with the environment. Thus, we
might expect that such an individual will coordinate
less with their interlocutor.
Thus, there is a clear prediction for Extraversion,
and a slightly more complex picture for Neuroticism.
Of course, it could be that neither Extraversion nor
Neuroticism have any effect on coordination or priming.

Method
In syntactic priming, a particular syntactic structure is more likely to be produced given prior exposure to the same structure (Schenkein, 1980). This

phenomenon has been replicated under experimental conditions when speakers say, hear, or read sentences (e.g., Bock, 1986; Pickering and Branigan,
1998; Corley and Scheepers, 2002). Bock and colleagues found that people tended to repeat the active or passive form of a sentence they had just
read in describing an unrelated picture (Bock, 1986;
Bock, Loebell, and Morey, 1992). In this study we
employ the confederate priming method (Pickering
and Branigan, 1998): The subject of the experiment
takes part in a dialogue game along with a confederate of the experimenter. The game involves matching and describing pictures. Both participants apparently have the same two tasks: to describe a set
of pictures so that the other participant can match
them, and to verify whether the descriptions that
they hear match the picture that they see. However, the confederate’s descriptions are scripted.

Participants
Forty University of Edinburgh students who were
self-declared native speakers of English were paid
to participate in this study. Personality information
derived from the NEO-PI questionnaire is as follows:
Extraversion M = 51.75 (SD = 12.82), and Neuroticism M = 54.18 (SD = 12.72).

Materials and Design
We prepared two sets of pictures depicting actions.
Each set included 12 pictures depicting transitive
actions involving an agent and a patient. The entities depicted were chosen to be easily recognisable
and nameable. There were two pictures for each of
12 transitive verbs (bite, chase, dust, hit, kick, lift,
poke, pull, push, shoot, touch, weigh). These 24 pictures comprised the set of targets. The remaining
120 pictures in each set depicted intransitive actions.
There were several pictures for each of 20 intransitive verbs. These comprised the filler pictures.
The appropriate verb was printed under each action. Each set of pictures depicted the same range of
entities and actions. However, the pairing of entities
with actions was different.
We term one set the Subject’s Description Set and
the other set the Confederate’s Description Set. We
created ordered pairs of prime and target pictures by
pairing each description of a transitive action from
the Confederate’s Description Set (the prime) with
a picture depicting a transitive action from the Subject’s Description Set (the target picture).
Half of the prime sentences were assigned active
descriptions of the form ‘the X verbing the Y’, and
half were assigned passive descriptions of the form
‘the Y being verbed by the X’. An experimental item
was defined as the confederate’s scripted description
of a prime picture plus the subject’s target picture
paired with it. There were thus two versions of each
item: active confederate description and passive confederate description.

466

We constructed four lists containing 24 experimental items and 120 subject fillers. The confederate fillers were randomly distributed in the remaining gaps. The entities depicted in the target picture
were not present in the immediately preceding block
(prime plus subject fillers and confederate fillers).
The verb also differed between prime and target.
Each picture was assigned to either the match or
the mismatch condition for the matching task. For
the latter, we assigned another picture depicting a
different entity doing the same action (thus using
the same verb) was assigned. Each list contained 12
experimental items with active prime descriptions
and 12 with passive prime descriptions. Exactly one
version of each item appeared in each list. Hence,
Prime Type (active vs. passive) was manipulated
within subjects and items. The dependent measure
was the proportion of descriptions of target pictures
produced with a passive structure.

Procedure
The Subject’s Description Set was presented to the
subject via a computer program.The order of the
pictures was randomised for each subject, with between four and eight filler items intervening between
each experimental item. A divider prevented the
subject from seeing the confederate or his computer
screen. The experimenter told the subject and the
confederate that the experiment was investigating
how well people communicate when they cannot see
each other. Their tasks were alternately to describe
the pictures to the other participant, and to match
their picture to the other participant’s descriptions.
When it was the subject’s turn to match, the confederate would see a sentence appear on his screen
which he would read aloud and then press space
bar, at which point a picture would appear on the
subject’s screen. The subject was instructed to say
“yes” or “no” (or ask for repetition) and to press
the Z key for “no” and the M key for “yes” according to whether the picture matched or mismatched
the description. When it was the subject’s turn
to describe, a picture would appear on the subject’s screen and the confederate would say “yes”
or “no” (or ask for repetition) and press the Z key
or the M key according to whether the picture on
his screen matched or mismatched the description.
Throughout the session, the experimenter and confederate acted as if the confederate was a genuine
subject (e.g., the confederate asked questions about
the task). Before the experiment, there was a practice session with two filler items each, after which the
subject could ask for clarification if necessary. The
confederate also gave the first description. Hence the
confederate’s description of a prime always immediately preceded the subject’s description of a target.
Both dialogue participants wore a lapel microphone.
The experimental session was recorded on audio tape
and subsequently transcribed.

Table 1: Proportion of Passive target responses after
active and passive primes and degree of priming
Group
Nos.
PP
AP Priming
Low E
8 .1363 .0300
10.6
Mid E
27 .2015 .0270
17.5
High E
5 .1500 .0480
10.0
Low N
5 .1160 .0480
6.8
Mid N
28 .2271 .0261
20.1
High N
7 .0486 .0343
1.4
Total
40 .1820 .0302
15.2

We coded the first response that the subject produced; 3 target responses that described the agent
as the patient and the patient as the agent were
excluded. We coded the remaining target 957 responses as passive if the patient was described as
being verbed by the agent and as active if the agent
of the action was described as verbing the patient.
An analysis of variance (ANOVA) was conducted,
with prime type (active vs. passive) as a within
subjects factor and Neuroticism (Low [> −1 s.d. of
the mean], Mid [< 1 s.d. of the mean], High [> +1
s.d. of the mean]) as a between subjects factor.

Results
Proportions of passive target responses following
passive and active primes are reported in Table 1;
these are described by personality type of participant, and also for the group overall. Here we can
see that in both cases the Mid groups appear to
show greater priming. However the High and Low
Neurotic groups appear to show even lower levels of
priming than for Extraversion.
Turning now to our analysis of variance, and here
the ANOVA revealed a significant effect of prime
type (active vs. passive) on the proportion of passive
forms used (F1 (1,37) = 6.63; p < 0.05; F2 (1,23) =
97.01; p < 0.05).
A significant interaction was found between Neuroticism (Low, Mid or High) and prime type (F1
(1,37) = 3.68; p < 0.05). Post-hoc Tukey tests
revealed that both the High N and Low N groups
primed significantly less than the Mid N group (p <
0.05). No interaction was found between Extraversion and prime (F1 (1,37) = 0.60; p >0.1).

Discussion
We found a reliable effect of syntactic priming of active and passive structures in a dialogue task. This
confirms our expectations and replicates previous
syntactic priming found in dialogue (e.g., Pickering
and Branigan, 1998) and with active vs. passive
forms (e.g., Bock, 1986).
Additionally, our results demonstrate that Neuroticism is related to the degree of syntactic priming for passive constructions; Extraversion is not.

467

We now relate these results to our hypotheses. For
Extraversion, we proposed that higher levels of Extraversion would lead to an increase in priming. Here
we found that the Mid group primed more, however
this result was not significantly different to that of
the Low and High groups. In this case we therefore accept the null hypothesis that Extraversion is
not related to levels of priming. For Neuroticism,
we find that the Low and High groups primed significantly less than the Mid group. Comparing this
result directly with our Neuroticism hypothesis creates a tension: We proposed that the High group
would less likely to prime due to an inward focus
and thus withdrawal from their partner. To address
these findings, we therefore reframe our Neuroticism
hypothesis as follows: as before, we claim that the
High group are less likely to prime due to inward
focus, but that the Low group are also less likely to
prime, since they are less concerned with monitoring
themselves in relation to their interlocutor. In this
case—as in our results—the extreme High and Low
levels of the trait have an inhibitory effect on priming, and the Mid trait levels represent a facilitating
effect.
We acknowledge that such explanation is relatively speculative, and further experimentation will
be required to test this hypothesis. For example,
the NEO-PI questionnaire divides Neuroticism into
6 facets: anxiety, angry hostility, depression, selfconsciousness, impulsivity, vulnerability. It may be
that these may relate more specifically to withdrawal
or threat-monitoring, in which case these could be
related to the priming information. However, we expect that a larger experimental population would be
required for such work. For Extraversion, no significant pattern emerges, however we propose that the
extremes are similarly inhibited by over- or underother-directedness.
Turning now the significance of our findings, and
they have several important implications. At a theoretical level, they provide more data about personality behaviour in dialogue contexts, which extend previous research using monologue data. Additionally
this can better inform our understanding of personality in relation to models of language production.
Our results also contribute to the dialogue and
priming literature which, for example, acknowledge
that individuals often behave differently, but that
systematic variation has mainly been examined in
sociological terms. Here we have presented data
which shows real and important differences between
individuals in conversational behaviour, and highlights the potential role of personality in priming
experimentation, more generally.
Finally, our findings can be used to directly inform dynamic computer interface technology, which
could allow linguistic alignment in a realistic way.
For example, Nass, Moon, Fogg, and Reeves (1995)
have shown that computer users viewed their ma-

chine more favourably when it mirrored their personality. On the basis of work reported here, we are
closer to being able to represent personality at the
conversational, interactive level. We therefore anticipate that this will lead to more convincing artificial
agents and intelligent dynamic computer interfaces.
These findings also nicely complement those presented by Branigan, Pickering, Pearson, McLean,
and Nass (2003), in which computer users syntactic align with a pre-programmed computer interface,
whether they believed this to be another person or
an ‘unintelligent computer’. Therefore, if such an
‘unintelligent computer’ was to project personality,
we may expect it to vary its degree of priming—in
addition to its lexicon—depending upon the sort of
personality it may wish to project.

Conclusion
We have used experimental priming data to investigate the influence of personality on interpersonal
language behaviour. Proposing hypotheses which
suggested both Extraversion and Neuroticism influence linguistic coordination, here we found that the
less interpersonal trait—Neuroticism—surprisingly
influenced priming, whilst Extraversion did not.
Given our finding that priming is facilitated by moderate Neuroticism, but inhibited by more extreme
levels, we explain this in terms of withdrawal by
building upon a previously proposed model of personality and language production. Issues regarding
the significance and potential implications of this
study are also discussed.

Acknowledgements
The first and second authors gratefully acknowledge
support from the UK Economic and Social Research
Council and the School of Informatics. We also express our gratitude to Holly Branigan, Sarah Haywood, Alan Marshall, Janet McLean, Martin Pickering and Matt Watson for help and advice with the
study.

References
Bell, A. (1984). Language as audience design. Language in Society, 13, 145–204.
Bock, J. (1986). Syntactic persistence in language
production. Cognitive Psychology, 18, 355–387.
Bock, J. K., Loebell, H., and Morey, R. (1992). From
conceptual roles to structural relations: Bridging
the syntactic cleft. Psychological Review , 99, 150–
171.
Bradac, J. and Wisegarver, R. (1984). Ascribed status lexical diversity, and accent: Determinants of
perceived status, solidarity, and control of speech
style. Journal of Language and Social Psychology,
3, 239–255.

468

Branigan, H., Pickering, M., and Cleland, A. (2000).
Syntactic coordination in dialogue. Cognition, 75,
B13–B25.
Branigan, H., Pickering, M., Pearson, J., McLean,
J., and Nass, C. (2003). Syntactic alignment between computers and people: The role of belief
about mental states. In Proceedings of the 25th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, pages 186–191.
Brennan, S. E. and Clark, H. H. (1996). Conceptual
pacts and lexical choice in conversation. Memory
and Cognition, 22, 1482–1493.
Campbell, A. and Rushton, J. (1978). Bodily communication and personality. British Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 17, 31–36.
Carment, D. W., Miles, C. G., and Cervin, V. B.
(1965). Persuasiveness and persuasibility as related to Intelligence and Extraversion. British
Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 4, 1–7.
Cope, C. (1969). Linguistic structure and personality development. Journal of Counselling Psychology, 16, 1–19.
Corley, M. and Scheepers, C. (2002). Syntactic
priming in English sentence production: Categorical and latency evidence from an internet-based
study. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review , 9, 126–
131.
Costa, P. and McCrae, R. R. (1992). NEO PI-R
Professional Manual . Psychological Assessment
Resources, Odessa, Florida.
Coupland, N. (1980). Style-shifting in a Cardiff
work-setting. Language in Society, 9, 1–12.
Davidson, R. J. (2001). Toward a biology of personality and emotion. Annals of the NY Academy of
Sciences, 935, 191–207.
Dewaele, J.-M. (2002). Psychological and sociodemographic correlates of communication anxiety in
L2 and L3 production. International Journal of
Bilingualism, 6, 23–28.
Dewaele, J.-M. and Furnham, A. (1999). Extraversion: The unloved variable in applied linguistic
research. Language Learning, 49, 509–544.
Dewaele, J.-M. and Furnham, A. (2000). Personality and speech production: a pilot study of second
language learners. Personality and Individual Differences, 28, 355–365.
Eysenck, H. and Eysenck, S. B. G. (1991). The
Eysenck Personality Questionnaire-Revised. Hodder and Stoughton, Sevenoaks.
Eysenck, S., Eysenck, H., and Barrett, P. (1985). A
revised version of the psychoticism scale. Personality and Individual Differences, 6, 21–29.
Garrod, S. and Doherty, G. (1987). Saying what you
mean in dialogue. Cognition, 27, 181–218.
Gifford, R. and Hine, D. W. (1994). The role of
verbal behaviour in the encoding and decoding of

interpersonal dispositions. Journal of Research in
Personality, 28, 115–132.
Gill, A. (2003). Personality and Language: The projection and perception of personality in computermediated communication. Ph.D. thesis, University
of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
Gill, A. and Oberlander, J. (2002). Taking care of
the linguistic features of extraversion. In Proceedings of the 24th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, pages 363–368.
Gill, A. and Oberlander, J. (2003a). Looking forward
to more extraversion with n-grams. In L. Lagerwerf, W. Spooren, and L. Degand, editors, Determination of Information and Tenor in Texts: Multiple Approaches to Discourse 2003 , pages 125–
137. Stichting Neederlandistiek & Nodus Publikationen, Amsterdam & Münster.
Gill, A. and Oberlander, J. (2003b). Perception of email personality at zero-acquaintance: Extraversion takes care of itself; Neuroticism is a worry. In
Proceedings of the 25th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, pages 456–461.
Haywood, S., Pickering, M., and Branigan, H.
(2003). Co-operation and co-ordination in the production of noun phrases. In Proceedings of the
25th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society, pages 533–538.
Labov, W. (1972). Sociolinguistic Patterns. University of Pennysylvania Press, Philadelphia.
Matthews, G. and Deary, I. (1998). Personality
Traits. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
McCroskey, J. and Richmond, V. (1990). Wilingness
to communicate: A cognitive view. Journal of
Social Behaviour and Personality, 5, 19–37.
Nass, C., Moon, Y., Fogg, B., and Reeves, B. (1995).
Can computer personalities be human personalities? International Journal of Human-Computer
Studies, 43, 223–239.
Pennebaker, J. W. and King, L. (1999). Linguistic
styles: Language use as an individual difference.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77,
1296–1312.
Pickering, M. and Branigan, H. (1998). The representation of verbs: Evidence from syntactic priming in language production. Journal of Memory
and Language, 39, 633–651.
Pickering, M. and Garrod, S. (in press). Towards a
mechanistic psychology of dialogue. Behavioural
and Brain Sciences.
Schenkein, J. (1980). A taxonomy for repeating action sequences in natural conversation. In B. Butterworth, editor, Language production, volume 1,
pages 21–47. Academic Press, London.
Scherer, K. R. (1978). Inference rules in personality
attribution from voice quality: The loud voice of
extraversion. European Journal of Social Psychology, 8, 467–487.

469

Siegman, A. W. (1987). The tell-tale voice: Nonverbal messages of verbal communication. In
A. Siegman and S. Feldstein, editors, Nonverbal behaviour and communication, pages 642–654.
Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ.
Thorne, A. (1987). The press of personality: A
study of conversations between introverts and extraverts. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53, 718–726.
Yellen, R., Winniford, M., and Sanford, C. (1995).
Extraversion and introversion in electronicallysupported meetings. Information & Management,
28, 63–74.

