UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Key Actions in Insight Problems: Further Evidence for the Importance of Non-Dot Turns in
the Nine-Dot Problem

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2df86832

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Author
Kershaw, Trina C.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Key Actions in Insight Problems: Further Evidence for
the Importance of Non-Dot Turns in the Nine-Dot Problem
Trina C. Kershaw (tkersh1@uic.edu)
Department of Psychology
University of Illinois at Chicago
1007 W. Harrison St., Chicago, IL, 60607
difficulty preventing the discovery of the key action, such as
in the nine-dot problem (Maier, 1930).

Abstract
Key actions are single actions or behaviors that can be singled
out as leading to the solution of a problem. In the nine-dot
problem (Maier, 1930), Kershaw and Ohlsson (2004)
proposed that non-dot turns are the key action necessary for
solution. In two experiments, non-dot turns are further
analyzed as the key action necessary for solving the nine-dot
problem and its variants. Non-dot turns are found to be
predictive of solution, while the classic conception of drawing
lines outside the dots does not distinguish between solvers
and non-solvers.

Finding the Key Action in the
Nine-Dot Problem
The nine-dot problem (Maier, 1930; see Figure 1) is quite
possibly the most difficult insight problem that has been
studied, with a typical solution rate for unaided participants
of 0% (MacGregor, Ormerod, & Chronicle, 2001). Problem
solvers are required to connect all the dots in a 3 x 3 matrix
by using four straight lines, without lifting their pens from
the page or retracing any lines.

Key Actions in Problem Solving
Problem solving in everyday life, as well as the laboratory,
can be quite difficult. Often a problem or activity can seem
unduly difficult when one does not know the key action
necessary for completing the problem. A key action can be
defined as a single action or behavior that can be singled out
as the key to the solution. Examples of key actions abound
in everyday life. A proper roux cannot be made without
engaging in continual stirring. Algebra problems become
routine once one understands how to balance the equation
and isolate the variables. Finally, as I have learned one too
many times, data will invariably disappear if I have not
completed the key action of backing it up!
In laboratory problem solving, many insight problems
can be solved through the production of a key action. For
example, using the pliers as the pendulum weight is the key
action necessary for solving Maier’s (1931) two-string
problem, and moving objects in three-dimensional space is
necessary for the six matches problem (Scheerer, 1963) and
the eight-coin problem (Ormerod, MacGregor, & Chronicle,
2002). As a third example, the key action necessary for
solving the prisoner and rope problem (Metcalfe & Wiebe,
1987) is to unravel the rope into two strands, then tie the
ends of the two strands together to escape the tower.
Sometimes the key action can be realized without much
struggle, depending on an individual’s prior knowledge. A
friend (and fellow insight researcher) worked on a farm
growing up, where the splitting of rope to make it longer
was a common occurrence. He instantly knew how to solve
the prisoner and rope problem; the key action was easy to
discover. In other insight problems, however, the key action
is not easy to discover. The common use of pliers hinders
their use as a pendulum weight in Maier’s (1931) two-string
problem (cf. Birch & Rabinowitz, 1951). Additionally,
other insight problems may have multiple factors of

Figure 1: The Nine-Dot Problem and its Solution
The classic conception of the key action necessary for
solving the nine-dot problem is that participants should
draw lines that extend beyond the dots (Maier, 1930; Maier
& Casselman, 1970; Scheerer, 1963). In a related
conception, Lung and Dominowski (1985) claimed that the
key action was drawing lines that did not begin or end on
dots.
Kershaw and Ohlsson (2001) hypothesized that the key
action necessary for solving the nine-dot problem was
making non-dot turns, or turns that occur in the empty space
between dots. The conception of non-dot turns as the key
action came about through an inspection of two of
MacGregor et al.’s (2001) nine-dot problem variants. The
variant with no non-dot turn had a solution rate of 88% after
four attempts, while the variant that required one non-dot
turn only had a solution rate of 27% after four attempts.
Kershaw and Ohlsson (2004) continued in this line of
reasoning by explaining that the likelihood of producing a
key action is dependent on the cognitive factors that
underlie that action. In the nine-dot problem, multiple
factors of difficulty are operating that each lower the
probability of making a non-dot turn. Kershaw and Ohlsson
(2004) distinguished three classes of difficulty: perceptual,
knowledge, and process.
678

increase for all five problems. A third prediction was that
the first line would differentially affect the solution rates for
the problems, such that the displaced nine-dot and three-turn
problems would show the greatest increase in solution rate
due to their first lines cutting into the non-dot space.

Perceptual factors include Gestalt properties of the ninedot problem such as goodness of figure and figure-ground
relationships. Making a non-dot turn requires that one both
breaks the good figure of the square and views the white
space beyond the dots as part of the problem. Knowledge
factors refer to an individual’s prior knowledge. Making a
non-dot turn is hindered by people’s prior experience with
dot puzzles, such as connect-the-dot games played by
children (cf. Weisberg & Alba, 1981). Process factors
include the size of the search space, the specificity of the
goal state, and the amount of mental lookahead necessary to
find the solution. Making a non-dot turn is difficult because
it is not obvious where to draw the first line or what the end
state of the problem will be. In addition, people vary in the
amount of mental lookahead they possess (cf. MacGregor et
al., 2001), which affects the process of making non-dot
turns. Kershaw and Ohlsson (2004) showed that perceptual,
knowledge, and process factors interact to suppress the
probability of producing the key action of non-dot turns in
the nine-dot problem.
In the following experiments, non-dot turns are again
examined as the key action necessary to solve the nine-dot
problem. Experiment I follows up on Kershaw and Ohlsson
(2004) but adds an additional possible facilitating factor:
giving participants the first line of the solution, which
should narrow the search space. Experiment II uses a think
aloud methodology to explore what behaviors precede the
production of non-dot turns.

Method

Participants and Design One hundred fifty undergraduates
from UIC’s participant pool participated in the experiment
for course credit. No demographic data were collected
about the participants.
Participants all received the same training, and one of
five target problems.
Materials The first part of the training, the shape training,
had a perceptual component in which participants learned to
distinguish the shape of the nine-dot problem solution from
other shapes (see Kershaw & Ohlsson, 2004; Kershaw et al.,
2003). The second part of the training, the dot connecting
training, featured problems made of black, filled dots
presented on a grid of other unfilled dots as well as
problems made of black dots that were alone on the page
(see Kershaw & Ohlsson, 2001, 2004; Kershaw et al.,
2003). In addition, the training contained a dialogue
component in that participants were informed of the
purposes of each training task.
The five target problems were taken from Kershaw and
Ohlsson (2004; see Figure 2, the nine-dot problem was also
used). The problems were modified by adding a diagonal
line from the bottom right to the top left of the problem.
The placement of the first line was chosen based on an
analysis by MacGregor et al. (2001, Experiment 4).
Participants were told to treat this line as the first line of the
solution that they had to produce.

Experiment I
Prior research by Kershaw and Ohlsson (2004; Kershaw,
Ohlsson, & Coyne, 2003) has shown that increasing the
number of non-dot turns leads to greater problem difficulty,
such that the more non-dot turns a given problem requires,
the harder that problem will be to solve.
Kershaw and Ohlsson (2004; Kershaw et al., 2003)
increased solution rates through a training procedure that
targeted the multiple factors of difficulty -- perceptual,
knowledge, and process -- that hinder the production of nondot turns. This training procedure was used in Experiment
I.
A new facet of the procedure was to give participants the
first line of the solution to each target problem. Weisberg
and Alba (1981) raised the solution rate of the nine-dot
problem to 62% by giving participants the first line in
addition to instructing them to go outside of the box set up
by the dots. The placement of this first line was chosen
based on an analysis by MacGregor et al. (2001). For two
of the target problems, the first line extended into the nondot space.
The addition of the first line influenced the predictions
for this experiment. One prediction was that first line would
not affect the order nor the magnitude of the solution rates
for the five target problems that were reported by Kershaw
and Ohlsson (2004), with the 11-dot problem being the
easiest and the three-turn problem being the most difficult.
A second prediction was that the order of solution rate
would remain the same, but that the magnitude would

Figure 2: 11-Dot, 10-Dot, Displaced Nine-Dot, and
Three-Turn Problems with First Line
Procedure Participants were seen in groups. Participants
completed the shape training, and then the dot connecting
679

training. During the shape training, participants were told
that the shape they learned was the shape that would be
required to solve the target problem. During the dot
connecting training, participants were told that it was
necessary to draw lines outside the dots and turn in the
empty space between dots. Participants were also shown the
correct answer for judging a shape or connecting dots for
each judgment or problem that was completed. In addition,
they were continually reminded that what they were
learning in the training would be applicable to the target
problem.
After completing the training, participants attempted one
of five target problems (the 11-dot, 10-dot, nine-dot,
displaced nine-dot, or three-turn). Participants were given
four minutes to connect all the dots using four straight lines.
They were instructed to view the line in the problem as the
first line, and to draw the remaining lines such that all lines
could be drawn without lifting their pens from the page or
retracing the lines.

residuals were examined. The participants who solved the
11-dot problem (25/30 or 83%) caused the greatest
standardized residual, 2.2; therefore, this cell made the
greatest contribution to the chi-square. When the 11-dot
problem was removed from the analysis, the differences
between the other problems were not significant, χ2 (3,
N=120) = 4.02, p > .05, λ = .09. Therefore, once a non-dot
turn was introduced, all problems became equally difficult.
An alternative way to examine the influence of the
number of non-dot turns is to determine the probability of
making a non-dot turn (cf. Kershaw & Ohlsson, 2004). The
percentage of participants who made any non-dot turns
versus correct non-dot turns was calculated for the nine-dot
and three-turn problems, both of which require two
unassisted (not affected by the first line) non-dot turns.
Sixty-five percent (39/60) of the participants made one nondot turn. Of these participants, 100% (39/39) made two
non-dot turns. In contrast, 52% of the participants (31/60)
made one correct non-dot turn. Of these participants, 94%
(29/31) made two correct non-dot turns.

Results

Effect of drawing lines beyond the dots The nine-dot
problem forms a good Gestalt, but the dot groups that make
up the other problems do not. The tendency to draw lines
that extend beyond the boundary of the dots, the classic
explanation of difficulty for the nine-dot problem, was
measured across the problem types. The 11-dot problem
was excluded from this analysis because drawing lines
outside the dots is unnecessary for solution.
Eighty-three percent (99/120) of the participants drew
lines outside of the dots. In the 10-dot (24/30), displaced
nine-dot (28/30), and three-turn (29/30), participants were
equally likely to draw lines outside of the dots, χ2 (2, N=90)
= 5.19, p > .05, λ = .07, despite differences in solution rate.
In contrast, participants who attempted the nine-dot problem
were less likely to draw lines outside of the dots (18/30).
This effect is striking when the nine-dot problem is
compared to the three-turn problem, both of which required
two unassisted non-dot turns, χ2 (1, N=60) = 11.88, p < .05,
λ = .26. Although the solution rate for these two problems
did not differ, the three-turn problem led to a greater rate of
drawing lines outside the dots than the nine-dot problem.

Kershaw and Ohlsson (2004) found the following solution
rates for the five target problems (in the training condition):
11-dot, 97%; 10-dot, 80%; displaced nine-dot, 50%;
traditional nine-dot, 40%; three-turn, 30%. In contrast, the
respective solution rates for this experiment were 83%,
60%, 38%, 40%, and 50% (see Figure 3). However,
individual chi-square tests between each problem’s solution
rate for this experiment and Kershaw and Ohlsson’s (2004)
data were all non-significant (ps > .05).

Percent Solved

100
80

Kershaw &
Ohlsson,
2004
Current Data

60
40
20
three-turn

nine-dot

displaced nine-dot

10-dot

11-dot

0

Discussion
The results of Experiment I are comparable to Kershaw and
Ohlsson (2004) in solution magnitude, the probability of
making a non-dot turn, and the prevalence of drawing lines
outside the dots. The order of solution rates did differ in
that the three-turn problem had the third-highest solution
rate in the current data, compared to the lowest solution rate
in Kershaw and Ohlsson’s (2004) data. However, as in
Kershaw and Ohlsson’s results, the problems that required
non-dot turns did not differ significantly from each other.
In addition, individual comparisons between each problem
across the two data sets were not significant.

Problem Type

Figure 3: Comparison of Solution Order and Magnitude for
the Five Problem Types
Effect of the number of non-dot turns Despite differences
in exact solution rates, the new data are similar to those
reported by Kershaw and Ohlsson (2004). First, there are
overall differences in solution rate between the problems, χ2
(4, N=150) = 17.02, p < .05, λ = .15. The standardized
680

The current data do not support any of the predictions
fully. Providing the first line of the solution did not affect
the magnitude of solution rate, as predicted, but did affect
the order of the solution rate. The solution percentages
appear to support the third prediction, that solution
magnitude would be affected differentially, but the rate
increased for the three-turn problem yet decreased for the
displaced nine-dot problem. However, as mentioned above,
individual comparisons between the problem types across
data sets did not reveal any significant differences.
The current data give further support to the non-dot turn
as the key action necessary for solving the nine-dot problem
and its variants. As soon as a non-dot turn was introduced,
the solution rate dropped by at least 20%. In addition,
drawing lines that went outside the dots was not enough to
solve the problem. Eighty-three percent of the participants
who attempted the 10-dot, displaced nine-dot, nine-dot, or
three-turn problems drew lines outside of the dots, but only
47% of the participants correctly solved one of these four
problems.
As noted previously, giving participants the first line did
not increase the solution rate, as compared to Kershaw and
Ohlsson (2004). This finding is interesting compared to
similar manipulations used by Weisberg and Alba (1981)
and MacGregor et al. (2001). Weisberg and Alba (1981)
achieved a solution rate of 62% by giving participants the
first line and telling them to go outside the dots. MacGregor
et al. (2001, Experiment 4), in contrast, achieved a 6%
solution rate after the first 10 attempts, and 47% after 10
additional attempts by giving participants the first line of the
nine-dot problem. One explanation, in light of the current
data, is that the extensive training used in Experiment I
overshadowed any benefit of the first line for the problem
variants. Although the solution rate was raised for the
three-turn problem, its solution rate was not significantly
different than the rate found for the three-turn problem by
Kershaw and Ohlsson (2004), nor were there any
differences in solution rate across the two experiments for
any of the nine-dot problem variants.
Untrained
participants, in contrast, would most likely benefit from
being given the first line, and would thus show differences
in comparison to the control group in Kershaw and Ohlsson
(2004, Experiment 3).

Experiment I showed that making non-dot turns is
important, but did not show the process that participants go
through when making a non-dot turn. Experiment II used a
think-aloud methodology to examine the individual thoughts
and actions that lead to the making of non-dot turns. Verbal
protocols and other trace methods, such as eye movements,
have been used effectively to understand the processes
involved in achieving insight in problems such as the
mutilated checkerboard (Kaplan & Simon, 1990) and in
matchstick arithmetic (Knoblich, Ohlsson, & Raney, 2001).
Half of the participants received the training used in
Experiment I, and the other half were not trained. The
participants received either the nine-dot or 10-dot problem
as their target problem. One prediction for Experiment II is
that participants who received training will be more likely to
solve their target problems, and will show a greater
incidence of behaviors that lead to non-dot turns. Based on
solution rates found in Experiment I and Kershaw and
Ohlsson (2004), no difference in solution rate is expected
between the 10-dot and nine-dot problems.

Method
Participants and Design Twenty undergraduates from
UIC’s participant pool participated in the experiment for
course credit. No demographic data were collected about
the participants.
The design of Experiment II was a 2 x 2 factorial. The
two independent variables were type of training (control and
training) and target problem (nine-dot and 10-dot).
Materials The training materials used in Experiment II
were the same materials used in Experiment I. The control
group did not receive any training. In addition, all
participants were given a long division problem as a
practice for thinking aloud while solving the target problem.
A video camera was used to record each participant’s
verbalizations and actions.
Procedure Participants were seen individually. As in
Experiment I, the participants who received training learned
to distinguish the shape of the nine-dot problem solution
from other shapes, and learned how to connect dots. They
were shown the correct answer for each training exercise
and were reminded that the material learned in training
would be useful for solving the target problem. Participants
in the control group did not receive any training.
Before beginning the target problem, participants
practiced thinking out loud by solving a long division
problem. Participants were then given four minutes to
attempt the target problem. They were told to connect all
the dots by using four straight lines, without lifting their
pens from the page or retracing any lines. They were
instructed to talk out loud while working on the problem. If
the participant stopped verbalizing while working on the
problem, the experimenter reminded the participant to

Experiment II
Experiment I further established non-dot turns as the key
action required for solving the nine-dot problem.
Experiment I also showed that the classic conception of
difficulty for the nine-dot problem, the inability to draw
lines beyond the boundary of the dots, did not hold up as a
difficulty for the other problem types.
However,
participants were less likely to draw lines outside the dots
for the nine-dot problem, thus supporting the Gestalt factor.
The aim of Experiment II was to examine how
participants explore the search space of the nine-dot and 10dot problems. Both Kershaw and Ohlsson (2004) and
681

continue talking. Each participant’s verbalizations, as well
as his or her actions, were recorded using a video camera.

attempts of the participants. Eight participants in the
training group made at least one arrow shape, while only
three participants in the control group made an arrow shape;
this difference was significant, χ2 (1) = 5.05, p < .05, λ =
.47. Likewise, all 10 participants in the training group made
lines that extended beyond the dots, while only two
participants in the control group attempted such dots. This
difference was also significant, χ2 (1) = 13.33, p < .05, λ =
.78.
In addition, these actions were better indicators of events
that precede non-dot turns than participants’ verbalizations.
Participants who solved their target problems drew arrow
shapes and extended lines beyond the dots in the correct
places before making non-dot turns. In contrast, some
participants who did not solve their target problems also
drew arrow shapes, but drew them exclusively inside the
dots. Other non-solving participants drew arrow shapes and
extended lines, but did not make non-dot turns. As in
Experiment I, drawing lines that extended beyond the dots
was not enough to solve the target problems. Participants
needed to extend their lines in the correct places, and make
non-dot turns.

Protocol transcription Each participant’s verbalizations
and actions were transcribed into a verbal protocol by either
the author or a research assistant.
Protocols were
constructed so that the participant’s words and actions were
grouped together. Actions were described in terms of
drawing or simulating lines, and were transcribed by using a
map that numbered the dots in each problem.

Results
Effects of training and problem type Solution rates for the
problems across training types are as follows: 10-dot
training, 60% (3/5); 10-dot control, 20% (1/5); nine-dot
training, 40% (2/5); nine-dot control, 0% (0/5). A chisquare analysis was conducted to determine the effect of
problem type. There was no significant difference between
the number of solvers for the 10-dot and nine-dot problems,
χ2 (1, N=20) = .952, p > .05, λ = .13, as predicted.
A second chi-square analysis was conducted to
determine the effect of the training. Participants were more
likely to solve their target problem when they had received
training than when they had not, χ2 (1, N=20) = 3.81, p =
.05, λ = .25, as predicted.

Discussion
The results of Experiment II followed up those of
Experiment I and Kershaw and Ohlsson (2004) by showing
the importance of non-dot turns in solving the nine-dot (and
10-dot) problem(s). In addition, Experiment II showed, like
Kershaw and Ohlsson (2004), the effectiveness of training
for raising the solution rate for the nine-dot and 10-dot
problems.
Experiment II contributes to this line of research by
providing a means to analyze the process of attempting the
nine-dot problem (or one of its variants). This initial
analysis of the verbal protocols revealed that participants
who receive training are more likely to produce actions that
are necessary for solving the problem, such as drawing an
arrow shape, extending a line beyond the dots, and making a
non-dot turn. However, as shown in Experiment I and in
Kershaw and Ohlsson (2004), making non-dot turns is a
difficult key action to execute. Participants must extend
lines beyond the dots in the correct place and form the arrow
shape of the solution correctly. Merely extending any line
beyond the boundary of the dots will not lead to solution.

Analysis of behaviors that lead to non-dot turns
Participants’ verbal protocols were examined to determine
the behaviors that led to making non-dot turns, the key
action necessary for solving the 10-dot and nine-dot
problems. Based on our previous work (Kershaw &
Ohlsson, 2001, 2004; Kershaw et al., 2003), we
hypothesized that several actions would show that
participants were affected by the training and understood the
requirements of the problem: 1) making diagonal lines, 2)
making triangle shapes, 3) making the arrow-like shape of
the nine-dot problem solution, and 4) making lines that
extended beyond the boundary of the dots. For the purposes
of this paper, the two actions that will be analyzed are
making arrow shapes and making lines that extend beyond
the boundary of the dots. In addition, participants’
verbalizations may reveal attention to particular areas of the
problem, or a rehearsal of strategies.
The participants’ verbalizations were surprisingly
unhelpful in determining what thoughts preceded making
non-dot turns. The majority of participants limited their
verbalizations to keeping track of the number of lines they
had drawn so far. Only four of the 20 participants
verbalized anything about going outside of the dots.
Examples of these verbalizations include: “outside the line
here” (said while moving a pen from the bottom right dot to
the top left dot) and “let’s see, I should probably think more
about going outside,” which was not accompanied by an
action.
The use of arrow shapes and lines that extended beyond
the dots illustrated the effect of the training in the solution

General Discussion
Key actions can be identified in many different types of
problems and in everyday life, from using pliers as a
pendulum weight in Maier’s (1930) two-string problem to
learning to continually stir a roux. In the nine-dot problem,
the key action is making a non-dot turn (Kershaw &
Ohlsson, 2001, 2004; Kershaw et al., 2003). While some
key actions are easily discovered and produced, making a
non-dot turn is hindered by interacting factors of difficulty:
perceptual, knowledge, and process.
682

In Experiments I and II, making non-dot turns was
compared to the classic conception of the key action
necessary for solving the nine-dot problem, drawing lines
that extend beyond the dots (Maier, 1930; Maier &
Casselman, 1970; Scheerer, 1963). In both experiments,
drawing lines outside the dots was not sufficient to solve a
target problem. As a striking example, nearly all the
participants in Experiment II readily drew lines outside of
the dots in the 10-dot, displaced nine-dot, and three-turn
problems. However, less than half of the participants
actually solved one of these problems.
Experiments I and II provided further support for
Kershaw and Ohlsson’s (2004) analysis of the importance of
making non-dot turns. Other insight and everyday problems
are best solved through different key actions. Further study
will allow for the identification of these key actions, and the
determination of what cognitive factors underlie the
production of such actions.

movement study of insight problem solving. Memory &
Cognition, 29(7), 1000-1009.
Lung, C.T., & Dominowski, R.L. (1985). Effects of
strategy instructions and practice on nine-dot problem
solving. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 11(4), 804-811.
MacGregor, J.N., Ormerod, T.C., & Chronicle, E.P.
(2001). Information-processing and insight: A process
model of performance on the nine-dot and related
problems. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 27(1), 176-201.
Maier, N.R.F. (1930). Reasoning in humans: I. On
direction. Journal of Comparative Psychology, 10,
115-143.
Maier, N.R.F. (1931). Reasoning in humans: II. The
solution of a problem and its appearance in
consciousness. Journal of Comparative Psychology, 12,
181-194.
Maier, N.R.F., & Casselman, G.G. (1970). Locating the
difficulty in insight problems: Individual and sex
differences. Psychological Reports, 26, 103-117.
Metcalfe, J., & Wiebe, D. (1987). Intuition in insight and
non-insight problem solving. Memory & Cognition,
15(3), 238-246.
Ormerod, T.C, MacGregor, J.N., & Chronicle, E.P.
(2002). Dynamics and constraints in insight problem
solving. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 28(4), 791-799.
Scheerer, M. (1963) Problem solving. Scientific American,
208(4), 118-128.
Weisberg, R.W., & Alba, J.W. (1981). An examination of
the alleged role of “fixation” in the solution of several
“insight”
problems.
Journal
of
Experimental
Psychology: General, 110(2), 169-192.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to Stellan Ohlsson for his assistance in planning the
experiments and his ever-helpful comments. I also thank
Colleen Coyne for her help in collecting some of the data
for Experiment I and transcribing some of the protocols in
Experiment II.

References
Birch, H.G., & Rabinowitz, H.S. (1951). The negative effect
of previous experience on productive thinking. Journal
of Experimental Psychology, 41, 121-125.
Burnham, C.A., & Davis, K.G. (1969). The nine-dot
problem: Beyond perceptual organization. Psychonomic
Science, 17(6), 321-323.
Chronicle, E.P., Ormerod, T.C., & MacGregor, J.N. (2001).
When insight just won’t come: The failure of visual cues
in the nine-dot problem. Quarterly Journal of
Experimental Psychology, 54A(3), 903-919.
Kaplan, C.A., & Simon, H.A. (1990). In search of
insight. Cognitive Psychology, 22(3), 374-419.
Kershaw, T.C., & Ohlsson, S. (2001). Training for
insight: The case of the nine-dot problem. In J.D.
Moore & K. Stenning (Eds.), Proceedings of the
Twenty-third Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 489-493). Mahwah, NJ: Lance
Erlbaum Associates.
Kershaw, T.C., & Ohlsson, S. (2004). Multiple causes of
difficulty in insight: The case of the nine-dot problem.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 30(1), 3-13.
Kershaw, T.C., Ohlsson, S., & Coyne, C. (2003). The
fallacy of single-source explanations: The multiple
difficulties of the nine-dot problem. In R. Alterman & D.
Kirsh (Eds.), Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society [CD-ROM].
Cognitive Science Society.
Knoblich, G., Ohlsson, S., & Raney, G.E. (2001). An eye
683

