UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Learning Predictive Models of Memory Landmarks

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/76b317n1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Horvitz, Eric
Dumais, Susan
Koch, Paul

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Learning Predictive Models of Memory Landmarks
Eric Horvitz (horvitz@microsoft.com)
Microsoft Research, One Microsoft Way
Redmond, WA 98052 USA

Susan Dumais (sdumais@microsoft.com)
Microsoft Research, One Microsoft Way
Redmond, WA 98052 USA

Paul Koch (paulkoch@microsoft.com)
Microsoft Research, One Microsoft Way
Redmond, WA 98052 USA
how we construct models that can be used to infer the
likelihood that events will serve as memory landmarks,
reviewing the extraction of data from subjects’ online
calendars, the collection of assessments about landmarks
with tools that enable subjects to label their calendar events,
and the learning of models via Bayesian learning
procedures. After reviewing the performance of the models,
we describe, as a sample direction for the use of predictive
models of memory landmarks in computing applications, a
prototype, named MemoryLens Browser. MemoryLens
Browser employs the inferences about landmarks in
visualizations for browsing files and appointments. Finally,
we review research directions aimed at enhancing coverage
and discriminatory power of models of memory landmarks.

Abstract
We describe the construction of statistical models that provide
inferences about the probability that subjects will consider
events to be memory landmarks. We review methods and
report results of experiments probing the classification
accuracy and receiver-operator characteristics of the models.
Then, we discuss opportunities for integrating models of
memory landmarks into computing applications, and present a
prototype time-line oriented content browsing tool.

Introduction
Studies of memory support the assertion that people make
use of special landmarks or anchor events for guiding recall
(Shum, 1994; Smith, 1979; Smith, Glenberg & Bjork,
1978)) and for remembering relationships among events
(Davies & Thomson, 1988; Huttenlocher & Prohaska,
1997).
Such landmarks include both public and
autobiographical events. More generally, there has been
significant study and modeling of episodic memory, where
memories are considered to be organized by episodes of
significant events, including such information as the
location of an event, attendees, and information about
events that occurred before, during, and after each
memorable event (Tulving, 1983; Tulving & Thomson,
1980). Memory has been shown to also depend on the
reinstatement of not only item-specific contexts, but also on
more general context capturing the situation surrounding
events.
We believe that automated inferences about important
memory landmarks could provide the basis for new kinds of
personalized computer applications and services. Rather
than focusing on specific machinery proposed as models for
recall (e.g., Malmberg, Steyvers, Stephens, et al.,. 2002;.
Raaijmakers & Shiffrin, 2002; Shiffrin & Steyvers, 1997),
we set out to investigate the feasibility of directly learning
models of memory landmarks via supervised learning. We
focus here on the construction, testing, and application of
predictive models of memory landmarks, based on events
drawn from users’ online calendars.
We first review experiments with the construction of
personalized models of memory landmarks. We describe

Accessing Events and Event Properties
We will focus on the construction of models of memory
landmarks derived from users’ online calendar information.
Electronic encodings of calendars provide rich sources of
data about events in users’ lives. People who rely on
electronic calendars, often encode multiple types of events
in an online format. Such items include appointments,
holidays, and periods of time marked to indicate such
activities as travel and vacation. In large enterprises that
rely on computer-based calendaring systems, appointments
and events are typically formulated, accepted, displayed and
managed via schemas capturing multiple properties of the
events.
We developed a calendar event crawler that works with
the Microsoft Outlook messaging and appointment
management system. The crawler analyzes a user’s online
calendar to create a case library of events and properties
associated with each event. The calendar crawler extracts
approximately 30 properties for each event. Most of these
properties are obtained directly from the online data and
metadata stored for events. These properties include the time
of day and day of week of events, event duration, subject,
location, organizer, number of invitees, relationships
between the user and invitees, the role of the user (i.e., user
was the organizer, a required invitee, or an optional invitee),
response status of the user to appointment invitations (i.e.,

583

calendars and to create a case library of labeled data. The
cases typically spanned several years of presentations, trips,
meetings, tasks, and holidays, and included several thousand
items. We provided subjects with a memory-landmark
assessment tool that lists events drawn from their online
calendar within a scrollable window, ranked from most
recent to most distant events. The tool provides fields,
adjacent to each event, that subjects use to label items as
landmark or non-landmark events.
We pursued the construction of predictive models of
memory landmarks from the supervised training data. We
elected to employ Bayesian-network learning methods so as
to have the ability to visually inspect key probabilistic
dependencies among variables and, in particular, to
understand key variables and states of variables influencing
the likelihood of events being called memory landmarks.
We partitioned the data into training and testing cases,
with an 80/20 split; that is, we built the models for each
individual using 80% of their labeled data and evaluated the
learned model on the remaining 20% of the labeled data.
We employed a Bayesian structure-search procedure,
developed by Chickering, Heckerman & Meek (1997), to
build Bayesian-network models for event landmarks for
each subject The procedure employs a greedy search
through a large space of dependency structures and
computes, for each plausible dependency structure, an
approximation for the likelihood of the data given the
structure. A model score is computed as a function of this
likelihood and a model-prior parameter that penalizes for
complexity. The model with the highest score is selected.
We optimized the model-prior parameter by splitting the
training set 80/20 into subtraining and subtesting data sets,
respectively, and identifying a soft peak in the Bayesian
score. This value of the parameter at the soft peak was used
to build the model from the full training set.
We inspected the predictive models constructed for each
subject, noting dependencies among key variables, the
discriminatory power of variables, and classification
accuracy of the models at predicting the data held out from
the training procedure.
Figure 1 displays a Bayesian network built from the data
from one of the participants in the study (subject S1),
showing all of the variables and the dependencies among
them.
A sensitivity analysis demonstrated that key
influencing variables in this model for discriminating
whether an event is a memory landmark are the Subject,
Location string, Meeting sender, Meeting organizer,
Attendees, and whether the meeting is Recurrent.
We explored the strength of dependencies for variables in
the model for each subject and found similar influences of
key variables across subjects. For subjects in our study,
atypically long durations, non-recurrence of events, a user
flagging a meeting as busy or out of office, and atypical
locations or special locations had significant influence on
the inferred probability that events would be considered a
landmark event. We found that meetings marked as
recurrent meetings rarely served as memory landmarks.

user responded yes, responded tentative, no response, or no
response request made), whether the meeting is recurrent or
not recurrent, whether the time is marked as busy or free on
the user’s calendar, and the nature of the inviting email
alias—the alias used to send the meeting invitation.
In addition to properties in the database schema employed
by Outlook, a subsystem of the crawler accesses the
Microsoft Active Directory Service to identify
organizational relationships among the user, the organizer,
and the invitees, noting for example, whether the organizer
and attendees are organizational peers, direct reports,
managers, or managers of the user’s manager.
Beyond the use of data from Outlook and Active
Directory Services, we created several derived properties
representing statistics about atypical situations, based on the
intuition that rare contexts might be more memorable than
common ones. In particular, we developed procedures for
computing atypical organizers, atypical attendees, and
atypical locations. We compute a measure of the rarity for
these properties of events by considering the portion of all
meetings over all events under consideration or for a fixed
period of time (e.g., events over a year) in which the
property under consideration has the same value it has in the
event at hand. For the studies reported here, we computed
atypicality based on all events under consideration.
To compute the value of location atypia for events, we
first compute the number of times each location has
appeared in a user’s calendar over a fixed period. The
system then discretizes the location atypia variable into a
set of states, capturing a range of percentiles, and the
location atypia variable for each event acquires a particular
value based on the rarity of the location associated with that
event.
An analogous derivation is used for computing organizer
atypia and attendee atypia. For these variables, all people
attending all of the appointments for the fixed period under
consideration are analyzed, and the portion of a subject’s
appointments attended or organized respectively by each
attendee is noted. A meeting acquires the organizer atypia
or meeting atypia value associated with the least frequent
attendee or organizer of the meeting.

Building Models of Memory Landmarks
We recruited 5 participants from our organization for data
collection and tagging. We asked the subjects to review a
list of all of the appointments, holidays, and other
annotations stored in their calendars that were extracted
automatically by a calendar crawler, and to identify the
subset of events that they viewed as serving as salient,
memory landmarks. More specifically, we directed the
subjects to do the following:
Please review the events on your calendar and
identify those events that would serve as key
memory landmarks on a timeline of events for
such purposes as searching for files and
appointments.
Each subject downloaded software components and
executed the event-collection program to crawl their

584

Figure 1: Bayesian network learned from online calendar data (subject S1) showing dependencies among event properties
and likelihood that an event will be considered a memory landmark by a subject.
“memory backbones” when searching for content in a large
personal store. Models for inferring the likelihood that
events will serve as memory landmarks promise to endow
such computing applications with the ability to minimize
clutter by limiting the revelation of events to those which
are likely to be useful landmarks. Moving beyond basic
timelines for searching for desktop content, applications
include the use of the inferential models for constructing
hierarchical views of events for browsing large quantities of
time-based content, such as autobiographical corpora. We
shall now explore a sample application we have constructed
to investigate prospects for harnessing statistical models of
memory landmarks.

Table 1 shows the classification accuracies of the learned
models of landmarks. For each test case, the values of the
properties of the event are identified (or computed for
derived properties) and then input to the model which
provides a probability that the event is a memory landmark.
That is, we compute p(Event selected as a memory
landmark|E), given evidence E—the multiple properties of
associated with each event on the subject’s calendar. The
models range in classification accuracies for the five
subjects from 0.78 to 0.95.
In addition to looking at overall classification accuracies,
we swept out receiver-operator (ROC) curves to visualize
the relationship between false negatives and false positives
at different thresholds for admitting events as memory
landmarks. The false-positive rate is varied by changing the
threshold of the probability score that is required for
classifying an event as a memorable landmark, and the
corresponding false negative rate is noted. The curves for
the subjects in the study are displayed in Figure 2.
We
note that the ROC curves show a trend toward lower false
positives and false negatives with increases in the size of the
training sets.
The ROC curves are particularly important for
understanding the value of employing such predictive
models of memory landmarks in computing applications.
As we shall explore in the next section, one class of
computing applications centers on the use of a usercontrolled threshold on the probability of events used to
identify landmark events. In such uses of predictive models
of landmarks, users may be given the ability to define, e.g.,
via a slider control, the subset of all events that should be
admitted, say, for displaying within a rendering of a
timeline of events. Such timelines could provide useful

Applications of Models of Memory Landmarks
To motivate ongoing work on the use of supervised and
unsupervised machine learning to construct models of
landmark events, we developed a prototype that
demonstrates how such predictive models might be used.
We have integrated components for learning and reasoning
about memory landmarks into a prototype named
MemoryLens Browser.
The prototype is focused on
providing users with a timeline of landmark events to assist
them to find content across their computer store. We
recently distributed the prototype to a limited group of users
within our organization and are pursuing feedback about the
system.
MemoryLens comes in the spirit of recent work on
developing tools for assisting computer users to better locate
information from their personal stores (Adar, Karger &
Stein, 1999; Dumais, Cutrell, Sarin, Cadiz & Jancke, 2003).
Ringel, Cutrell, Dumais & Horvitz, (2003) recently reported
on results of a set of user studies that showed that memory

585

the timeline in accordance with the times that they were
created or last modified. An event-detail slider control
provides users with a means of changing the threshold on
the inferred likelihood of memory landmark that is required
for displaying events. The slider control allows users to
specify thresholds for admitting items for display with
successively smaller inferred likelihoods. Only calendar
items representing events that have a probability of being a
landmark that is greater than a user-set threshold are
displayed; as the slider is moved from “most memorable” to
“least memorable,” the required probability for display of
events is lowered, thus bringing in greater numbers of
events.
A screenshot of the user interface of MemoryLens
Browser is displayed in Figure 3. Thumbnails of file types
are sorted in the right-hand column of the browser, in a
traditional time-sorted view manner that computer users are
familiar with. Within the left-hand column, a list of relevant
dates associated with the files are displayed, including the
year, month, and relevant days that files were created or
modified. The middle column contains memory landmarks
that have been assigned through inference a landmark
probability exceeding a user-set threshold. The titles of
memory landmarks are displayed in the appropriate
temporal location, adjacent to the files.
Figure 3 shows three different screenshots of the
graphical interface of MemoryLens, each representating a
different setting of the probability threshold for the same
span of time. Of the three snapshots, the view at the right is
set to the highest probability threshold, thus revealing the
fewest events. In this case, only the events representing two
major conferences, for which the subject had to travel afar
to attend, are displayed. As the threshold is lowered, a
wedding, an editorial board meeting, a conference call, and
a one-on-one meeting are included in the display. Further
diminishing of the threshold for admitting events brings
larger numbers of events into view. Beyond the use of
thresholds for admitting versus excluding events from the
landmarks column, the saturation of color of the text used to
title events is faded as the probability of memory landmark
diminishes—providing an additional cue about the likely
value of using the event as a memory landmark.
We have been interested in probing the ability of models
with the discriminatory performance represented by the
family of ROC curves displayed in Figure 2, to construct
useful time-line views. Such views should contain
recognizable landmarks, while bypassing the clutter
associated with showing a great number of events, and
should allow users to work with such models in an
exploratory, interactive manner (Horvitz, 1999) with tools
embodied in MemoryLens’ controls and display.
To relay a qualitative feel for the quality of timelines
constructed with the use of the predictive models that we
have generated, consider the ROC curve for a model of
subject S1. The curve tells us that, at a probability threshold
for accepting events as landmarks where ninety percent of
the events on the timeline are correctly identified as

Table 1: Training data and classification accuracies for
predictive models tested on hold-out data for five subjects.
S1
3864
3091
773
0.87

Total events
-Train
-Test
Accuracy

S2
3740
2992
748
0.94

S3
2770
2216
554
0.95

S4
1743
1394
349
0.88

S5
1996
1596
400
0.78

landmarks can be used to help computer users find relevant
results in searches across personal corpora. Significant
decreases in the time required to identify search results was
found when memory landmarks were used in comparison
with the no-landmarks condition. That system employed
informal, heuristic rules for selecting memory landmarks.
MemoryLens Browser allows users to train models of
memory landmarks on a portion of events from their
calendar; the prototype offers menu options which provide
access to the training and modeling capabilities that we
described earlier. Users invoke a personalization component
that executes a crawl of their calendar. The prototype
provides assessment and machine-learning tools, allowing
users to identify a subset of events in their calendars as
landmark events, and to build predictive models by
invoking machine learning from the labeled data.
In use, the models constructed by users serve to infer the
likelihood that each evemt drawm from the user’s calendar
will be considered a landmark, p(Event will be viewed as a
memory landmark|E), given multiple evidential properties,
E, extracted from unlabeled calendar items.
These
likelihoods are considered in the generation of a timeline of
inferred landmarks adjacent to files gathered from across a
user’s file system. The files are positioned at places along

S3
S1

S2

S4
S5

Figure 2: Receiver-operator curves showing the
relationships of false negatives and false positives for
five subjects at a range of thresholds on probabilities for
admitting an event as a memory landmark.

586

different types and in different settings. We also seek to
better understand the value of employing accurate predictive
models of memory landmarks, based on a well-defined
probabilistic semantics, versus using simple sets of
heuristics to choose events for display.
In addition to pursuing a better understanding of the value
of memory landmarks for users performing search and
retrieval in computing applications, we are exploring several
avenues of opportunity with refining and extending models
of memory landmarks.
Generalization of Models. In one area of work, we seek an
understanding of the accuracy of inter-subject predictions.
Inter-subject classification accuracy probes the potential for
using models constructed from one subject’s training data,
or a composite model built from multiple subjects, to predict
hold-out data from other participants. Validating
generalization across users would suggest that it is possible
to field software applications that would require minimal
personalization effort, via the use of pre-trained “seed”
models. Such models would have a poor ability, without
additional training, to consider highly personalized
information such as variables containing specific text strings
representing labels on meeting locations and subjects. This
information tends to vary highly among the subjects.
Beyond Calendar Events. Events captured on users’
calendars are convenient, but only a small subset of
“events” users may wish to have captured, reasoned about,
and harnessed in computing applications appear on a
calendar. We are interested in building and refining
predictive models for other items that could serve as
additional memory landmarks or bolster event landmarks by
providing richer context. As an example, we are pursuing,
in a parallel project, the construction of predictive models
that can identify the likelihood that images drawn from a
large online personal photo library represent landmark
events. To date, image analysis tools have been used in
conjunction with several heuristics to select pictures when a
user wishes to only review a subset of photos from a large
library. Such methods include the use of a measure of the
representativeness of each image to other images in the
same session or event, based on such evidence as features
derived from an analysis of color histograms ( Platt, 2000).
In another realm, we are interested in learning from data
predictive models that can automatically select the most
important national and world developments, as captured by
news events over time.
Beyond calendar-centric events, images, and news, online
interactions, communications, and patterns of interactions
with computer-based content may serve as memory
landmarks. For example, particular email exchanges, or
documents associated with clusters of items that have been
reviewed or created in patterns of activity over time may
provide an important source of events.
Taken together, multiple models of memory landmarks
may be used in conjunction to build rich, multi-source
timelines, providing views at different scales of time and for

Figure 3: MemoryLens Browser with memory-landmark
timeline displayed at three different settings of the
threshold on the likelihood required for an event to be
considered a memory landmark.
important landmarks, fifty percent of the important
landmarks will not be displayed. Such precision and recall
may be quite tolerable for navigating to target periods of
time, given the overall density of landmarks for users; we
found that subjects in our study typically showed 2-4
landmark events per week over the span of their
assessments. A recall of half of these events would still
tend to identify landmark events for every week.
Understanding the comprehensive value of providing
users with selective views of landmark events on timelines
will require detailed user studies of the use of specific
prototypes and artifacts. We are interested in such studies
of the value of specific designs built on predictive models of
memory landmarks. Such studies would serve to enhance
our understanding of the sensitivity of particular features
and services to the performance of the predictive models.

Research Directions
We have focused in this paper on the construction and
performance of predictive models that can be used to infer
the probability that events drawn from online calendars will
be considered memory landmarks by users. We provided,
as a motivating example, a prototype application to
highlight potential applications. Although we did not
dwelled on comprehensive evaluations of the value of the
use of memory landmarks in such prototypes, we are
nonetheless interested in pursuing a deeper understanding of
the value to users of rendering memory landmarks of

587

different quantities of events, triaged by the likelihood that
events will serve as memory landmarks.
New Classes of Evocative Features. We are also exploring
the value of adding new observations features to the
modeling of memory landmarks. For example, we are
interested in the value of introducing a consideration of
observations that assist with inferences about the likelihood
that a meeting has been attended, given desktop activity
over time and the sensed location of systems. Prior work
has demonstrated the feasibility of performing relatively
accurate inferences about the likelihood that a meeting has
been or will be attended, based on an analysis of meeting
properties, including activity monitored during meetings
(Horvitz, Jacobs, & Hovel, 1999; Horvitz, Koch, Kadie &
Jacobs, 2002; Mynatt & Tullio, 2001). Information about
the likelihood of meeting attendance promises to have
influence on the probability that the meeting will be viewed
as a memory landmark. Other factors include capture and
analysis of acoustical energy during meetings, and
preparatory or follow-up activity associated with
appointments.
Learning Models of Forgetting. Finally, we believe that
there are opportunities for developing analogous statistical
models of events and tasks that will be forgotten via
supervised training. Recent longitudinal studies of office
workers have identified classes of important events that are
forgotten and have demonstrated the value of heuristics for
ways to provide reminders about such events (Czerwinski &
Horvitz, 2002). Beyond applications for people in good
health, we see the feasibility of developing models for
supporting people suffering with pathologies of memory
associated with various forms of dementia.

References
Adar, E., Karger, D. R. & Stein, L. (1999). Haystack: Peruser information environments. In Proceedings of
CIKM’99, 413-422.
Chickering, D.M., Heckerman, D. & Meek, C. (1997). A
Bayesian approach to learning Bayesian networks with
local structure. In: Proceedings of UAI ‘97, 80-89.
Czerwinski, M. & Horvitz, E. (2002). An investigation of
memory for daily computing events. Proceedings of HCI
2002, 230-245.
Davies, G. & Thomson, D., eds. (1998). Memory in
Context: Context in Memory. Wiley: Chichester, England.
Dumais, S., Cutrell, E., Sarin, R., Cadiz J., Jancke, G. Stuff
I’ve Seen: A System for personal information retrieval.
Proceedings of 26th International SIGIR 2003. 72-79.
Horvitz, E. (1999) Principles of mixed-initiative user
interfaces. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI ‘99, 159-166.
Horvitz, E., Jacobs, A., & Hovel, D. (1999). Attentionsensitive alerting. In: Proceedings of UAI ‘99, 305-313.
Horvitz, E., Koch, P, Kadie, K., Jacobs, A. (2002)
Coordinate: Probabilistic forecasting of presence and
availability. In: Proceedings of UAI ‘02, 224-233.
Huttenlocher, J., & Prohaska, V. (1997) Reconstructing the
Times of Past Events. Memory for Everyday and
Emotional Events. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, 165-179.
Malmberg, K.J., Steyvers, M., Stephens, J., & Shiffrin, R.
M. (2002). Feature frequency effects in recognition
memory. Memory & Cognition, 30, 607-613.
Mynatt, B. & Tullio, J. (2001). Inferring calendar event
attendance. In: Intelligent User Interfaces 2001,. 121-128.
Platt, J. (2000). AutoAlbum: Clustering digital photographs
using probabilistic model merging. IEEE Workshop on
Content-Based Access of Image and Video Libraries
2000, 96-100.
Raaijmakers, J. G. W., & Shiffrin, R. M. (2002). Models of
memory. In Pashler, H., & Medin, D. (eds.) Stevens
Handbook of Psychology 3rd Edition, Vol. 2: Memory
and Cognitive Processes, 43-76.
Ringel, M., Cutrell, E., Dumais, S., Horvitz, E. (2003).
Milestones in time: The value of landmarks in retrieving
information from personal stores. Interact 2003, Ninth
IFIP Interact 2003, 184-191.
Shiffrin, R.M. & Steyvers, M. (1997). A model for
recognition memory: REM retrieving effectively from
memory. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 4(2):145 166.
Shum, M. (1994). The role of temporal landmarks in
autobiographical memory processes. Psychological
Bulletin, 124, 423-442.
Smith, S. M. (1979). Remembering in and out of context.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Learning
and Memory, 5: 460-471.
Smith, S. M., Glenberg, A. & Bjork, R. A. (1978).
Environmental context and human memory. Memory &
Cognition, 6(4), 342-353.
Tulving, E. (1983). Elements of Episodic Memory. Oxford
University Press.
Tulving, E. & Thomson, D. (1980). Encoding specificity
and retrieval processes in episodic memory.
Psychological Review 80, 352-373.

Summary
We reviewed research highlighting prospects for developing
and harnessing predictive models of events that will be
viewed as landmarks. We focused in particular on the
construction and evaluation of models that infer subsets of
events drawn from subjects’ calendars. After reviewing the
classification and ROC curves associated with training sets
obtained from five subjects, we discussed the potential to
employ predictive models of memory landmarks in
computing applications. We described as an example, the
MemoryLens Browser prototype. Before concluding, we
touched on several current research directions, including
opportunities to perform additional studies to evaluate the
value of displaying memory landmarks in search tasks, on
seeking to define and understand the discriminatory power
of additional evidential distinctions in building predictive
models of landmarks, and developing models of landmark
events for online images, news stories, and other items
encountered or created by users in their daily lives that
might be encoded as important landmarks in episodic
memory.

Acknowledgments
We thank Johnson Apacible for assisting with data
collection and analysis.

588

