UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Learning Relational Categories by Comparison of Paired Examples

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3943j2wv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Kurtz, Kenneth J.
Boukrina, Olga

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Learning Relational Categories by Comparison of Paired Examples
Kenneth J. Kurtz (kkurtz@binghamton.edu)
Department of Psychology, P.O. Box 6000
Binghamton, NY 13902 USA

Olga Boukrina (oboukri1@binghamton.edu)
Department of Psychology, P.O. Box 6000
Binghamton, NY 13902 USA

Abstract

category match more frequently than by perceptual match
when the label had been applied to two examples (Gentner
& Namy, 1999). After only a single labeled example,
children did not favor the category-based extension. Gentner
and Namy conclude that a structural alignment process
(invited by the common linguistic label) yielded a deeper,
more conceptual encoding.
In light of recent findings that classification learning
influences similarity, Boroditsky (in press) collected
similarity ratings of pairs of object drawings from
participants who had first listed either similarities or
differences between the items. For both familiar and novel
stimuli, items were rated more similar by participants who
made comparisons than by those who did not. The effect
depended critically on the items being similar – suggesting
that comparison drew out a richer realization of the
commonalities between alignable objects.
How might comparison work to mediate learning and
representation? In the structural alignment framework,
comparison influence encoding by: 1) highlighting common
relations or alignable differences between examples; 2)
projecting candidate inferences from one example to
another; 3) promoting abstraction of shared structure as the
basis for a generic knowledge structure; and 4) fostering rerepresentation that alters or re-organizes representational
elements in one or both cases (Gentner & Wolff, 2000).
To illustrate, imagine a pair of cases for which a
particular relation is encoded in the learner’s mental
representation of each instance. The process of comparing
the representations would render this relation salient and
promote abstraction and transfer (e.g., Loewenstein,
Thompson & Gentner, 1999). Now, consider a common
relation that is differently encoded in each case. Rerepresentation is posited as a means of aligning nonidentical relational structures when there is semantic overlap
(Gentner & Kurtz, in preparation) or a computational
opportunity (Yan, Forbus, & Gentner, 2003). Next, consider
a relation that has only been encoded in the representation
of one of two instances. If there is sufficient surrounding
structure in common, then a candidate inference would be
projected from the more fully elaborated case to the sparser
one (Gentner, 1983; Markman, 1997).
Finally, consider a common relation that is not encoded in
the mental representations of either case. The mechanisms

Our central question is whether comparison of co-presented
instances promotes category learning. We report results of four
experiments testing acquisition of relational categories under
conditions of Comparison learning versus traditional Single
item learning. In order to control for frequency of exposure,
the Single group received twice as many learning trials.
Experiment 1 showed more accurate single-item classification
at test for both old and new items by the Comparison group
relative to the Single group. Experiment 2 used only withincategory pairs in the Comparison condition (rather than both
types of pairs), but no accuracy advantage was found.
Experiment 3 repeated this design using a reduced training set
and showed a learning effect of comparison and a marginal
advantage in transfer to new items. In Experiment 4, a novel
paradigm revealed further evidence of a facilitative effect for
within-category comparison. The power of comparison to
promote learning and transfer is discussed in terms of
mechanisms of encoding and knowledge change.

Introduction
The present research addresses the effect of comparing copresented instances during classification learning. Nearly all
theorists propose that categorizing an instance involves
some type of comparison between an instance and stored
category representations. A further role for comparison in
category learning is between presented instances and
remembered instances. Sequential effects may occur if items
presented in immediate or near succession are brought into
temporal juxtaposition (e.g., Elio & Anderson, 1981).
Learners may also experience remindings of previously
encountered instances which can guide further processing
(Spalding & Ross, 1994; Ross, Perkins & Tenpenny, 1990).
Of considerable interest to our project, Ross and Spalding
(2000) report that reminding-driven comparisons during
category learning mediate attribution of abstract features to
individual instances. We investigate the effect of
comparison of instances presented together within a
classification learning trial with the core prediction of better
learning and transfer of relational categories.
This prediction is motivated by several sources including
the rich literature supporting the structural alignment
account of analogy and similarity (Gentner & Markman,
1997). Perhaps the most directly related evidence is the
finding that 4-year-old children extend a label according to

756

listed above depend on the presence of relational
information encoded in item representations. In the current
project, we study learning in a novel domain and the
underlying relation defining each category is far from selfevident to the uninitiated. In fact, short of resorting to
exemplar memorization, the learning task is best
characterized as trying to discover each relation. We posit a
role for comparison in the discovery of relational content.
The notion of manifest versus latent representational
content is of use here (Clement, Mawby, & Giles, 1994).
While an individual may have somewhere in their idea of
‘dog’ the knowledge that dogs often feast on foodstuffs
fallen to the floor during a family meal, this relational
content is probably not routinely activated in a contextindependent manner (Barsalou, 1982). Therefore, an
analogy between a dog and vacuum cleaner might initially
fall flat for someone who does not have the ‘cleaning-up-oftable-scraps’ aspect of their ‘dog’ concept activated.
However, a thorough comparison of dog and vacuum
cleaner could well activate latent matching content. Such
resurfacing occupies a place between novel inference and
highlighting, but, like the others, it relies on available
relational content.
What is needed is a mechanism for articulating relational
content over presumably unstructured initial inputs. Such
processing is likely be of critical importance in any type of
routine formation of structured mental representations since
constraints are needed on which of the vast range of
possible relations among objects, scenes, and situations in
everyday experience should be explicitly encoded. As a
number of theorists have put forth, language may be of
particular use with regard to this problem.
We propose that comparison provides potential for a kind
of side-to-side (as contrasted with top-down or bottom-up)
interpretation process that promotes relational construal.
The best evidence we can draw upon is the phenomenon of
analogical bootstrapping in which intensive comparison of
two partially understood depictions of a simple physics
principle (heat flow) led participants to a deeper, more
relationally-rich construal (Kurtz, Miao, & Gentner, 2001).
It is not clear how such analogical insight occurs, but here
are two speculations. The first is consistent with the notion
of progressive alignment (Kotovsky & Gentner, 1996) and
states that observed commonalities at the level of lowerorder representational elements (i.e., attributes, objects,
first-order relations) may serve as entry points from which a
familiar higher-order relation can be invoked. An example
of instantiating a richer representation would be going from:
is-high(square) and is-low(circle) to: is-above (square,
circle). The second speculation is that relations do not need
to be built up so much as they need to be picked out of a
crowd. The idea here is that many relations hold for any
given case; too many to routinely articulate and encode.
When given an opportunity to compare cases, the potential
arises to find a manageable intersection of the relations.
In order to explore the power of comparison in knowledge
change, our experimental question is as follows: can

comparison promote the acquisition of novel categories
defined by non-obvious relations? Relational categories
have been treated theoretically (Gentner & Kurtz, in press;
Markman & Stilwell, 2001) and have begun to receive
empirical attention (Kurtz & Gentner, 2001; Rehder & Ross,
2001).
In a study using an early version of the present paradigm,
Kurtz & Gentner (1998) found that participants reached a
learning criteria for classification accuracy more quickly
with trials consisting of within-category pairs than with
single-instance trials. However, this can be attributed either
to comparison or to more frequent exposure to training
items, i.e., two instances per trial versus one. This creates a
difficult circumstance for the researcher since fully
convincing evidence for a comparison effect in learning
(with frequency of exposure controlled) requires obtaining
reliably higher classification accuracy on the basis of half
the number of trials. This is the challenge we pursue.
An additional purpose of this project is the advancement
of greater naturalism in the study of categorization. The
dominant paradigm is a two-way classification task with
instances that are clearly dimensionalized sets of perceptual
or verbal features. Our stimuli are line drawings depicting a
set of realistically varying “rock arrangements” having no
clear reduction into a compositional set of underlying
dimension values. Learners are asked to acquire three
different categories to avoid two limitations inherent in
binary classification: 1) a perfect success rate can be
achieved based on an ability to identify examples of only
one category and; 2) task demands encourage hypothesistesting for a boundary over positively-defined concepts.

Experiment 1
One major concern in designing the first study was
ensuring that the Comparison condition actually elicited
comparison. An act of comparison can be shallow or
intensive, and this difference can be a causal factor (Kurtz,
et al., 2001). A failure to observe a comparison effect might
be due to a failure by participants to compare. Classifying a
within-category pair can easily be done with consideration
of only one of the instances. Therefore, instead of all samecategory pairs, we designed the Comparison condition to
use an equal mix of within- and between-category pairs. In
this mixed-pairs version, the status of any given pair is not
known to the learner. Since the two instances may or may
not belong to the same category, we collect two separate
classification judgments on each learning trial. Accordingly,
the participant must give direct consideration to each
member of the pair. It is implicit in the task that the
participant must consider whether or not to guess the same
category for the two instances in each trial. However,
classifying each instance could still be done largely
independently despite taking place in a common task space.
For this reason, we used an orienting task at the beginning
of each learning trial to encourage comparison. Participants
were asked to consider the role played by one of the rocks
relative to the rest of the arrangement and then to look for a

757

corresponding rock in the other instance. The orienting task
for Single learners was to consider the role of one of the
rocks in the arrangement. In both conditions this unenforced
orienting task (no response was collected) was followed by
a question that did require a response: whether or not the
participant found the orienting task helpful. This was to
discourage participants from ignoring the orienting task.

single instance from the training set on the computer screen
along with the orienting task: “Study the example, then
focus on a single rock and consider the role it plays in the
arrangement.” Participants gave a forced-choice response
regarding the helpfulness of the orienting task and were then
asked to classify the rock arrangement into one of the three
categories. After their choice was entered, corrective
feedback was provided for a fixed interval of 3s. The
stimulus image remained on screen for the entire trial.
In the learning phase of the Comparison condition (n=50),
instances were presented two-at-a-time for 24 trials. On
each trial, the presentation of the two instances on either the
left or right side of the screen was randomized. The
orienting task instructions for each trial were: “Study the
examples, then focus on a single rock in one of the
examples and consider the role it plays in that arrangement.
Try to decide which rock plays a corresponding role in the
other example.” Participants made helpfulness judgments as
in the Single condition. Ss were then asked to classify one
of the instances followed by the other. Whether the left or
right instance was queried first was alternated by trial. After
the second response, corrective feedback for each of the
responses was presented simultaneously for a total of 6s.
The learning phase in both conditions was followed by a
common testing phase. Participants were presented with 24
old and 12 new items in random order and asked to classify
each in a single-instance trial without feedback. Additional
dependent measures were subsequently collected, but space
limitations prevent their inclusion in this report.

Method
Participants A total of 100 undergraduate students at
Binghamton University received a course credit.
Materials A set of 36 images of rock arrangements was
created on the computer. Rocks in each arrangement varied
in color, shape, and size. A subset of 24 images were
designated as the training instances and the remaining 12
images constituted the transfer set. The rock arrangements
were evenly distributed across three categories given the
names: “Tolar,” “Besod,” and “Makif.” The category Tolar
was defined by the presence of two stacked rocks similar in
color and shape. Besod was defined by the presence of one
rock supported by two others. Makif was defined by
monotonically decreasing height from left to right. Care was
taken that each instance conformed to exactly one of the
relational categories. For the Comparison condition, a fixed
set of pairings was established with an equal number of
within-category and between-category pairs.

Results and Discussion
The learning data reveal that it was not easy for most
participants to acquire the relational categories in the
allotted number of trials. We note that a set of pilot data
showed that performance did not increase notably with
twice the training. It is, however, important to remember
that chance is 33.3% percent on a three-way classification,
so the accuracy data reflects considerably more learning
than it would appear at first glance. First we describe the
learning data though we did not conduct statistical tests
since the critical comparison between conditions is
performance in the test phase when all participants respond
to the same type of trial (single instance). Early (first
quarter) classification accuracy shows that Comparison
learners (M = .44, SD = .18) got off to a slow start compared
to the Single group (M = .52, SD = .19), but they caught up
by the final quarter: Single (M = .70, SD = .22) and
Comparison (M = .69, SD = .25).
In the test phase, Comparison (M = .75, SD = .22) was
significantly better than Single (M = .65, SD = .23) on old
instances, F(1, 98)= 4.73, MSe = .234, p < .05. In addition, a
transfer effect was found with Comparison (M = .72, SD =
.22) significantly more accurate than Single (M = .59, SD =
.27) in classification of novel instances, F(1,98)= 7.29, MSe
= .444, p < .05. In sum, while Comparison learning
presented a similar level of challenge during acquisition, a

TOLAR

BESOD

MAKIF
Figure 1: Sample Rock Arrangement Stimuli used in
Experiments 1-3 Shown in Same-Category Pairs
Procedure Each participant was randomly assigned to one
of the two conditions. Before the learning phase,
participants read a set of instructions including a cover story
about different rock arrangements created by the “Ladua”
culture. Ss were instructed to try to learn to tell which rock
arrangements belonged to which of the three types.
In the Single condition (n=50) an attempt was made to
minimize the potential for temporal comparison by using a
pseudo-random order in which each trial showed an instance
from a different category than that of the previous trial. On
each of the 48 learning trials participants were shown a

758

reliable comparison advantage was found at test compared
to Single learners receiving equal exposure.

feedback as opposed to the 6s window for the dual-feedback
in the Comparison condition of Exp. 1. In the current study,
Comparison learners actually had half the overall amount of
time to study images with their correct labels then was
provided to Single learners.

Experiment 2
The goal of the second study was to determine whether a
comparison effect would be found using only withincategory pairs and a single categorization response per trial.
The structural alignment view predicts a greater likelihood
of comparison-driven effects on learning and encoding
given the opportunity to compare alignable examples.
However, as discussed, it is difficult to pin down the extent
to which participants invoke a comparison process when
making a joint classification response.

Experiment 3
Given the lack of comparison advantage in Experiment 2,
we considered the question of which is better: many
different within-category comparisons over a large training
set or repeated within-category comparisons over a small
training set? It has been shown that larger category size
promotes better transfer to novel examples when the
instances in the training set are sufficiently variable (Homa
& Vosburgh, 1976). Our hypothesis was that in the case of
relational categories, repeated comparisons of withincategory pairs in a smaller set would actually be more likely
to promote an advantage of comparison in transfer accuracy.
If Comparison learners in Exp. 2 underachieved due to a
failure to fully compare and/or insufficient feedback time,
repeated training on fewer examples might prove more
conducive to comparison-driven learning.

Method
Participants A total of 95 undergraduate students at
Binghamton University received a course credit.
Materials The materials were the same as in Experiment 1.
The assignment of pairs for the Comparison condition was
accomplished by random generation of within-category
pairings for each participant.
Procedure Each participant was randomly assigned to one
of the two conditions. The Single condition (n=46) was
conducted as in Experiment 1. The Comparison condition
(n=49) followed the procedure of Experiment 1 except that
participants were trained only on within-category pairs.
Unlike Experiment 1, participants made a joint classification
choice in response to both of the instances on each trial.
Corrective feedback for the one response was shown for 3s.

Method
Participants A total of 87 undergraduate students at
Binghamton University received a course credit.
Materials The materials were the same as in Experiment 1
except that the total number of examples in the training set
was reduced to 12. Each category was represented by four,
rather than eight, instances. All possible within-category
pairings appeared once (determining 18 of the 24 trials in
the Comparison condition). The remaining 6 trials were
randomly determined for each participant including exactly
one exposure of each training item.

Results and Discussion
A much different result was obtained relative to the findings
of Experiment 1. Comparison learners with only withincategory pairs showed good performance in the learning
phase (M = .63, SD = .16) as compared to Single learners
after an equal number of trials (M = .53, SD = .14), but not
after an equal number of exposures (M = .60, SD = .14). No
significant differences were found in test performance on
old items (Comparison: M = .66, SD = .23 and Single: M =
.67, SD = .21; p > .8) or transfer to new items (Comparison:
M = .61, SD = .23 and Single: M = .63, SD = .24; p > .6).
The evidence suggests that mixed pairs offer a more
productive learning context than exclusively withincategory pairs. This could be a benefit derived from
evaluating whether or not co-presented pairs are from the
same category. It could be due to useful contrastive
evaluation of different-category items. However, it is worth
noting on this point that no reliable difference was observed
between learning accuracy on within-category and differentcategory trials in the Comparison condition of Exp. 1 (p >
.3). Therefore, we are inclined to consider additional
explanations. One possibility is that the joint classification
task failed to fully encourage comparative evaluation of
both instances in the trials. A final and somewhat
compelling possible culprit is the 3s window for evaluating

Procedure The procedure was the same as in Experiment 2,
though the same number of learning trials with fewer items
in the training set yielded more exposures to each instance
in the Single (n=42) and Comparison (n=45) conditions.

Results and Discussion
Comparison learners (M = .79, SD = .16) showed excellent
overall accuracy on learning trials with the small category
size relative to Single learners (M = .68, SD = .16).
Although we have emphasized test performance rather than
learning accuracy, Comparison learners were reliably more
accurate across learning trials, F(1, 85)= 10.39, MSe = .25, p
< .005) with equal frequency of exposures. The Comparison
group (M = .68, SD = .16) also performed better on transfer
items, F(1, 85)= 3.91, MSe = .18, p = .051, though the
significance here was marginal. In performance on old items
at test, a trend was found (F(1, 85)= 2.54, MSe = .09, p =
.11) favoring the Comparison condition (M = .83, SD = .16)
over Single (M = .76, SD = .21). These results provide yet
another turnaround—the previous failure to find an
advantage of comparison using within-category pairs is

759

overturned in the case of repeated comparisons with a small
set of training items. The advantage is not limited to
overlearning of the items in the small set since the results at
test including transfer to new items favor Comparison. Our
interpretation is that repeated comparison opportunities
among increasingly familiar instances better allows the
fruits of comparison to be borne out.

help limit cases in which a learner embarked on a
counterproductive approach, the instruction set was given
the following addition: “Each of the three types is based on
a distinct way of arranging rocks. Please note: It is not a
small detail or a feature of one single rock. It is something
about the way in which the group of rocks are arranged.”
In the Single condition (n=20), participants completed 96
classification learning trials of single instances of the new
set of rock arrangements in pseudo-random order. Feedback
was given after each trial with study time self-paced rather
than a fixed window. In the Comparison condition (n=17),
each trial began exactly like a Single condition trial.
However, participants did not receive feedback on their
response. Instead they were shown another within-category
instance from the training set as a context item. Participants
were asked for a second time to classify the initial target
item (this was reinforced by presenting the question under
the target, not the context item). An accompanying
instruction encouraged Ss to compare the target to the
additional example from the same category. Participants
were instructed to feel free to change their initial answers or
not. Ss received feedback on their second response with
self-paced study time.
A third condition called Identical (n=13) was conducted
just as the Comparison condition except that the additional
context item was a repeat of the target item—resulting in
two identical images shown side-by-side. This task
(responding twice to the same stimulus) was justified in the
instructions as something Ss might find helpful.
In all conditions, participants went on to a test phase like
that used in Experiments 1-3.

Experiment 4
We developed an additional paradigm to evaluate
comparison of instances in category learning. The key
difference is that in all conditions the orienting task is
dropped and each learning trial begins with a single-instance
classification judgment. In the Single condition, feedback is
provided and the trial is done. In the Comparison condition,
a within-category context item appears next to the target
item, and the participant is asked for a second time to
classify the initially presented target. Once the learner has
made their second response, feedback is then provided
based on the final response. Therefore, the only difference
between conditions is that learners in the Comparison group
are asked to repeat their classification choice in light of the
availability of a context item from the same category for
their consideration. We believe this is a naturally motivating
and “unforced” version of comparison. A further advantage
of this design is that since only the single target item is
classified in each condition, we are better able to evaluate
the impact of comparison during the learning phase.

Method
Participants A total of 50 undergraduate students at
Binghamton University received a course credit.

Results and Discussion

M a t e r i a l s A full-sized stimulus set was used as in
Experiments 1-2, but some alterations were made to the set.
It was decided that the Tolar category was of a somewhat
different character than the other categories since only two
rocks in the entire arrangement participated in the relation of
“same shape and color of two stacked rocks.” In the other
categories, the relation was more globally realized in the
overall arrangement. A new relational definition and item
set for the Tolar category was developed in terms of a
symmetrical outline for each arrangement across the vertical
axis. In addition, instances of the Makif and Besod
categories were fine-tuned to ensure that the relation was
globally realized in each rock arrangement. For example,
the relation “one rock supported by two” would not be
localized in a set of small rocks off to the side. These
modifications were expected to make the learning task
somewhat easier and the results more interpretable. Pairings
for the Comparison condition were assigned such that all 28
possible same-category pairs in each category occurred once
during learning and the remaining 12 learning trials were
repetitions equated for instance exposure.

Means and standard deviations for the learning phase
accuracy are shown in Table 1. One-way ANOVA showed a
main effect of learning condition on classification accuracy
in the first quarter, (F(2, 47)= 5.22, MSe = .16, p < .05), in
the last quarter, (F(2, 47)=3.19, MSe = .12, p < .05), and in
the overall performance, (F(2, 47)= 3.77, MSe = .11, p <
.05). The first quarter difference was driven by the Identical
group and most likely reflects participants adjusting to the
somewhat odd repeated query. Planned comparisons showed
that last-quarter accuracy (the final 24 trials) was
significantly higher in Comparison versus Single, t(35)=
2.22, p < .05), as well as Comparison versus Identical,
t(28)= 2.27, p < .05.
In the test phase there was a marginal main effect of
learning condition on accuracy, F(2, 47)= 3.167, MSe =
.142, p = .051. Planned comparisons showed that
Comparison learners performed significantly better on old
items (M= .93, SD= .15) than Single learners (M = .82, SD =
.18), t(35)= 2.06, p < .05. Performance on new items was
also better for the Comparison condition (M = .87, SD = .18)
than the Single condition (M = .70, SD = .20), t(35)= 2.71, p
< .05. Trends (presumably due to small sample size) were
found in favor of Comparison over Identical for old items (p
= .08) and new items (p = .12). No difference was found in

Procedure Each participant was randomly assigned to one
of three conditions. Prior to the start of the learning phase
participants read the instruction set. However, in order to

760

Gentner, D. & Kurtz, K.J. (in press). Learning and using
relation categories. In Ahn, W.K., Goldstone, R.L., Love,
B.C., Markman, A.B., & Wolff, P.W. Categorization
inside and outside the lab. Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.
Gentner, D. & Kurtz, K.J. (in prep). Relational and object
matches in on-line evaluation of sentence analogies.
Gentner, D. & Markman, A.B. (1997). Structure mapping in
analogy and similarity. American Psychologist, 52, 45-56.
Gentner, D & Namy, L. (2000). Comparison in the
development of categories. Cognitive Development, 14,
487-513.
Gentner, D. & Wolff, P. (2000). Metaphor and knowledge
change. In E. Dietrich, & A. Markman, Cognitive
Dynamics: Conceptual Change in Humans and Machines
(pp. 295-342). NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Homa, D. &Vosburgh, R. (1976). Category breadth and the
abstraction of prototypical information. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Learning & Memory,
2(3), 322-330.
Ross, B., Perkins, S., & Tenpenny, P. (1990). Remindingbased category learning. Cognitive Psychology, 22, 460492.
Kotovsky, L., & Gentner, D. (1996). Comparison and
categorization in the development of relational similarity.
Child Development, 67, 2797-2822.
Kurtz, K.J. & Gentner, D. (1998). Category learning and
comparison in the evolution of similarity structure.
Proceedings of the Twentieth Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society, 1236.
Kurtz, K.J. & Gentner, D. (2001). Kinds of kinds: Sources
of category coherence. Proceedings of the 23rd Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, 522-527.
Kurtz, K. J., Miao, C., & Gentner, D. (2001). Learning by
analogical bootstrapping. Journal of the Learning
Sciences, 10(4), 417-446.
Loewenstein, J., Thompson, L., & Gentner, D. (1999).
Analogical encoding facilitates knowledge transfer in
negotiation. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 6, 586-597.
Markman, A.B. (1997). Constraints on analogical inference.
Cognitive Science, 21, 373-418.
Markman, A. B., & Stilwell, C. H. (2001). Role-governed
categories. Journal of Experimental & Theoretical
Intelligence, 13, 329-358.
Rehder, B. & Ross, B. (2001). Abstract coherent categories.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
& Cognition. 27(5), 1261-1275.
Spalding, T. & Ross, B. (1994). Comparison-based learning:
Effects of comparing instances during category learning.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
& Cognition, 20(6), 1251-1263.
Spalding, T. & Ross, B. (2000). Concept learning and
feature interpretation. Memory & Cognition, 28, 439-451.
Yan, J., Forbus, K., Gentner, D. (2003). A theory of
rerepresentation in analogical matching. Proceedings of
Twenty-Fifth Annual Meeting of Cognitive Science
Society.

accuracy between the Single condition and Identical
condition. We see in these results good evidence for better
learning with the opportunity to compare to a withincategory context item versus conditions with no additional
comparison or a kind of item self-comparison that serves as
a full control for exposure (equal number of classification
responses; equal number and duration of item exposures).
Table 1. Classification Accuracy in Learning.
First quarter
Single
Comparison
Identical
Last quarter
Single
Comparison
Identical
Overall
Single
Comparison
Identical

Mean

SD

.69
.71
.52

.18
.17
.16

.81
.94
.77

.18
.15
.24

.77
.84
.67

.16
.16
.18

General Discussion
We conclude that comparison of instances during category
learning is not necessarily of great impact, but when task
constraints emerge that engage the learner to apply the
machinery of comparison, superior performance in learning
relational categories is achieved. These findings are most
naturally understood in terms of learning to construct richer,
more sophisticated encodings of category instances. While
this is a difficult process, it is made easier by comparison.

Acknowledgements
We wish to thank Dedre Gentner for her important role in
the work leading up to this research. We thank the members
of the Learning and Representation in Cognition (LaRC)
Laboratory including Aliza Nelson for constructing stimuli.

References
Barsalou, L.W. (1982). Context-independent and contextdependent information in concepts. Memory & Cognition,
10(1), 82-93.
Boroditsky, L. (in press). Comparison and the development
of knowledge. Cognition.
Clement, C., Mawby, R., & Giles, D. (1994). The effects of
manifest relational similarity on analog retrieval. Journal
of Memory & Language, 33(3), 396-420.
Elio, R. & Anderson, J.R. (1981). The effects of category
generalizations and instance similarity on schema
abstraction. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Learning and Memory, 7, 397-417.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7, 155-170.

761

