UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Linguistic Untranslatability vs. Conceptual Nesting of Frames of Reference

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/20z5w8k8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Author
Bennardo, Giovanni

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Linguistic Untranslatability vs. Conceptual Nesting of Frames of Reference
Giovanni Bennardo (bennardo@niu.edu)
Department of Anthropology and Cognitive Studies Initiative, Northern Illinois University
DeKalb, IL 60115 USA
content that instantiate these ‘abstract’ relationships.1
A computational approach to cognition can be proposed
by accepting compositionality without embracing a
Fregean (logico-positivist) point of view and by turning to
the domain of mathematics (e.g., algebra and geometry).
In mathematics the primitives of a system are a set of
axioms. These axioms generate indefinitely many
theorems and each theorem can establish a foundation for
yet another theorem. Furthermore, theorems may share
parts with other theorems in a redundant manner. The set
of relational properties of any cognitive system could be,
then, nothing but a theorem derived from a set/s of other
theorems. Such a system is compositional by definition.
The linguistic analyses in Lehman & Bennardo (2003)
yielded the following set of spatial concepts. 2
State: Object; Place Or Locus; Neighborhood: Vicinity,
Contact, Interiority; Motion: Time; Direction; Path:
Beginning*, Body*, End, (Direction)*; Verticality: Angle:
Unit, Quantity (+ or -); Horizontality: Visibility, Left or
Right; Center; Part. (*conceptual content of Vector)
Some concepts are not primitives, but rely on other
concepts of the same group to function as their axioms.
This is the minimal set of axioms that is necessary to
account for the theorems (e.g. prepositions, directionals,
spatial nouns) that make up the representations of spatial
relationships in the languages analyzed.
The concept of Object is used with the meaning of any
entity existing in a possible world, either concrete or
abstract, e.g. table, idea. The place of an Object is the
actual amount of Space that it occupies. In other words, a
Place is the set of all points within the boundary of an
Object (including the boundary points). The Locus of an
Object in projective geometry is defined as the collapse of
a Place onto any of its interior points. Then, a Locus is a
neighborhood of possible projection points, the lower
limit being one point. Thus, while a Place is defined by
the size, shape, and specific geometry of the Object, a
Locus is not and can be arbitrarily reduced to a point.
The concept of Neighborhood includes the concept of
Vicinity (more than zero distance) between two Objects,
the concept of Contact (zero distance) between them and
the concept of Interiority, or, one Object in the interior of
another. The Neighborhood's border is pragmatically
determined. These concepts make up the concept of State.
The concept of Motion is an ordered sequence
(consequently, with a Direction) of Places (of an Object)

Abstract
This work focuses on the concept of frame of reference.
Levinson (2003) suggested that spatial information encoded
in one frame of reference cannot be translated into another
one. While this is partially true in language, I argue for a
nesting relationship between frames of reference at the
conceptual level. A set of spatial concepts suggested by
Lehman & Bennardo (2003) informs this investigation. In
closing a new typology of frames of reference is proposed.

Introduction
The concept of frame of reference (FOR) is widely used
in the literature about the mental and linguistic
representations of spatial relationships. After a review of
the terminologies used in different disciplines such as
philosophy, linguistics, psycholinguistics, developmental
and behavioral psychology, brain sciences, and vision
theory Levinson (2003) proposed a definition of the
concept and a typology of frames of reference.
A FOR is defined as a system of three coordinated axes
that create a 3-dimensional space within which spatial
relationships are established cognitively and expressed
linguistically. Levinson’s typology of FOR includes three
systems labeled relative, intrinsic, and absolute. When a
FOR is realized linguistically, the information coded in
one FOR (e.g., ‘the ball is behind me’) is not translatable
into another (e.g., ‘the ball is south of me’). While I agree
with most of the discussion presented by Levinson, I find
problematic the untranslatability issue. I suggest that
untranslatability only holds between linguistically
instantiated FORs, while at the conceptual level they are
nested into each other.
This investigation uses a set of spatial concepts found
in Lehman & Bennardo (2003). This conceptual apparatus
is the result of analyses conducted on English spatial
prepositions, and languages like Burmese, Thai, Italian,
and Tongan (Polynesian). After sketching the apparatus,
the three FORs are analyzed ending with a suggestion
about their conceptual contents and a new typology.

The conceptual apparatus
A computational approach to the general architecture of
cognition was adopted to arrive at the set of spatial
concepts suggested by Lehman & Bennardo (2003).
Within this approach, cognition is conceived as
computational (cf. Ballim & Wilks, 1992), thus
generatively ‘abstract’. Only the characteristics of the
computational, or, relational spaces that make up what we
call ‘cognition’ are reiterated in each cognitive module
and not the specific characteristics of the substantive

1Hirschfeld & Gelman (1994) draw a similar distinction

between ‘module’ and ‘domain.’
2 From now on a concept is indicated by initial capital letter.

102

in Time, bounded by two Places without either left or
right directionality in a disjunctive fashion and never
missing both. The concept of Path, instead, is a
geometrical (purely spatial) description of motion
‘abstracted’ from Motion. The focus is not on the moving
Object, but on the ordered sequence of Places, now
considered as Loci. The concept of Motion is inextricably
tied to Time, but the concept of Path is partially free from
it. In fact, we can indicate a Path at Time1 and then
indicate another Path at Time2 and state that they are the
same without incurring a contradiction as would happen if
the two parts of the comparison were two instances of
Motion. The instances of time used in the construction of
a Path are not unique, but they are repeatable.
Two features that Path also shares with Motion are
ordered sequence and boundedness. The interior points of
a Path are an ordered sequence of Loci with a Direction,
that is, they are Vectors with a finite magnitude. This
magnitude we call its Body and consists of a set of Loci
whose members may at a limit be one, thus, overlapping
with the first constitutive Locus. The boundary of a Path
consist of two Loci, a Vector that lacks left directionality
(Beginning), and one that lacks right directionality (End).
Object and Place (axioms of State) participate in the
construction of Motion. Locus, instead, participates only
in the construction of Path. Thus, the difference between
Place and Locus is used to separate the temporally bound
Motion from the spatially bound Path.
Verticality and Horizontality were not analyzed in as
much detail as State and Motion, and only some
conceptual components are indicated. First, Object,
Locus, and Vector (a Beginning, a Body or magnitude,
and a Direction) participate in their composition. The
concepts indicated for Verticality are Angle and Quantity
(Increasing or Decreasing). The instantiation of one or
other type of Quantity will determine the ‘up’ or ‘down’
Direction of a Vector. Angle and Quantity are also part of
the concept of Horizontality together with those of
Visibility and Left or Right. Visibility contributes to the
construction of a ‘front-back axis.’ After this, Left or
Right can be constructed. Finally, the two concepts of
Center and Part were added after the analyses of Tongan
directionals and spatial nouns (Bennardo, 2000).

distinction between viewer V and ground G can be
dispensed with and be regarded as constructed at a later
stage in the ontogenic sequence. Both the research on the
visual system (Marr, 1982) and on the developmental
sequence (Cohen, 1985; Pick, 1993; Bowerman &
Levinson, 2001) point towards the primacy of a stage in
which viewer V and ground G are conflated. It is exactly
the capacity to assign independent sets of coordinates to
objects that marks one of the milestones of cognitive
development (Piaget and Inhelder, 1956). I feel, then,
justified in suggesting this definition for the relative FOR.
A Basic relative FOR is one centered on the speaker,
viewer, cognizer (viewer). From the viewer three axes (or
six vectors) are constructed, one vertically and two on the
horizontal plane (front-back and left-right). In other
words, the viewer can be thought of as a point and as such
it implies a field (space) around it. This field will be
oriented. This orientation process takes into consideration
gravity and several bodily characteristics, both static
(orientation of face, eyes, etc.) and ambulatory (habitual
direction of movement). The viewer necessarily
(ontogenically) maps these axes onto himself/herself, that
is, considers himself/herself the origin of these axes.
Any Object in this field will be described in relation to
the viewer, thus viewer V and ground G are considered as
conflated, rather, they have not yet been cognitively
constructed as separated. If the viewer moves in any
direction, the axes will move accordingly, keeping their
origin on the viewer. These axes are an abstraction from
3-D and conic spaces that originate on the viewer and
where the angular limit is 180˚. Each axis, in fact, stands
for a collection of possible axes whose limits are provided
by the following (on three sides) relevant axes.
The appearance of a second Object in the field of the
viewer creates the double possibility of treating this latter
in direct relationship with the viewer, thus, continuing to
map the axes on the viewer, or relating the second Object
to the first one. This latter case entails the possibility of
assigning orienting axes to the first Object, thus making it
function as if it were the viewer. The orientation of the
axes mapped onto this Object are the same as that of the
axes the viewer had mapped on himself/herself. That is,
the coordinates of the viewer’s field can be kept constant.
The second Object (figure) is described as in relationship
with the first Object (ground). The front or ‘away’ Vector
of the viewer is now divided in two parts by the first
Object. Then, a new possibility is created. The ground
front-back axis may keep the same orientation of the
viewer's field, thus, we get the Translation subtype of
relative FOR (e.g., ‘the ball is in front of [beyond] the
tree’). Or the front and back mapping can be flipped so
that the front of the first Object (ground) faces the viewer,
thus, yielding the Reflection subtype of relative FOR
(e.g., ‘the ball is in front of [facing viewer] the tree’).
Both the Translation and the Reflection subtype of
relative FOR are subtypes of the Basic relative FOR. In
fact, their left and right assignments are congruent with
those of the viewer. In other words, the first Object or
ground is not yet considered as a point with an oriented
field of its own, but is still tied to the field of the viewer.

The conceptual content of the Relative FOR
Levinson (2003) defines a relative FOR in this way:
This [a relative FOR] is roughly equivalent to the various notions of
viewer-centered frame of reference mentioned above (e.g. Marr's
2.5D sketch, or the psycholinguistics' ‘deictic’ frame). But it is not
quite the same. It presupposes a ‘viewpoint’ V (given by the location
of a perceiver in any sensory modality), and a figure and ground
distinct from V. It thus offers a triangulation of three points, and
utilizes co-ordinates fixed on V to assign directions to figure and
ground. (Levinson, 2003, p. 43)

He continues by pointing out that the viewpoint V does
not necessarily coincide with the speaker even though
deictic uses can be considered ‘basic’ or ‘prototypical.’
(Levinson, 2003, p. 43)
The axiomatic distinction between the figure F (sensory
input, Object) and the viewer V (or cognizer in any
sensory channel) is conceivable as a primary one, but the
103

2

It is not possible to arrive at the construction of the
Translation and Reflection subtypes without using
(consciously or unconsciously) a Basic subtype of relative
FOR. In fact, there would be no axis to ‘translate’ or
‘reflect’ at all without having already constructed one in
advance. And this can only have happened through the
use of a Basic relative FOR.
This typology is suggested: a Basic, a Translation, and
a Reflection relative FOR.3 The label Basic highlights the
ontogenic primacy of the construction in which viewer
and ground G are conflated, that is, a set of coordinates is
mapped onto the viewer by him/herself. The other two
subtypes are derivative from the Basic and represent a
move towards recognizing that Objects have relationships
among themselves and not just with the viewer.
Let us now look into the conceptual content of the
Relative FOR. We already know from the content of the
conceptual apparatus that both vertical and horizontal
axes are only the interaction of a subset, labeled Vector,
of the concept of Path (Beginning, Body and Direction)
with the two concepts of Verticality and Horizontality.
The Beginning of these Vectors is a unique anchoring
point (the viewer) that is a Locus because its geometric
features are not relevant in the construction of the relative
FOR (also, the Beginning of a Path is by definition a
Locus). Another participating concept is Orthogonality
that is the distinguishing factor between vertical and
horizontal axes, and between front-back and left-right
axes. Orthogonality contains Angle and Unit (degree)
with a fixed Quantity attached to this last (90˚ degrees).
All the conceptual content so far listed brings with it
other more finely grained content, and, specifically,
Vector (as a subset of Path) and Locus. Moreover, this
FOR assigns front and back to the Object that becomes
the ground by mapping the viewer's coordinates onto it
(see the Translation and Reflection subtypes). This
mapping can be done by simply applying the ‘repeat
function’ (as for the Translation subtype) or by applying
the ‘repeat function’ and then letting Visibility determine
which side is front or back (as for the Reflection subtype).
The side that is not visible (beyond the Object) is the back
in the same way as it is done for one's body.
The concept of Figure (any possible Object) is also a
participant in this construction. Is this Object to be
considered a Locus or a Place? Do its geometrical
characteristics matter in constructing a FOR? Perceptually
these geometrical characteristics are available, but do they
play a role in the construction of the FOR? The answer is
‘no.’ Knowledge about the geometrical characteristics of
the Figure does not seem to play any role in the
construction of a FOR (see Talmy, 2000). What is
relevant, instead, is the fact that a point, the Object, is
being picked up in the world by means of a ‘choice
function’ (clearly not provided by perception, but by our
intentional thinking) and later put in a spatial relationship
with either oneself or another Object according to a

specific set of coordinates (in this case a relative FOR).
What does it mean to ‘pick an object’ in the world? In
order to ‘see’4 an object our line of sight has to ‘meet’ it
in the world. In order to think of this object as separated
from our self, our line of sight has to be conceived as first
leaving our eyes, then penetrating the outside world and
finally meeting the object. In other words, the actual
construction of any Object requires our use of the concept
of Path, with a Beginning (self), Body (penetration of the
world outside self), and an End (object in the world). It
follows that Path needs to be postulated as participating
in the construction of the Relative FOR.
The conceptual difference between the Basic and the
Translation and Reflection subtypes of the relative FOR is
the following. The two subtypes consider the viewer and
two Objects (instead of only one), iteratively employing
the concept of Path, a process that needs the use of the
‘repeat’ function. The coordinates of the oriented field of
the viewer are still mapped onto the viewer. In the
Translation type the front Vector is kept constant in
orientation, while in the Reflection type its orientation is
changed as a consequence of the salient use of the concept
of Path (from viewer to Object) and Visibility.
The assignment of front and back that distinguishes
between the Translation and the Reflection subtypes is
left open to cultural variations. Since all the axiomatic
conceptual material is already available (Locus, Path,
Vector, etc.), the ‘repeat’ function can be arbitrarily
applied to any of these concepts. However, minimally, the
Translation subtype is conceptually simpler. In fact, it
does not require the use of the concept of Visibility. Then,
it is the salience of Visibility in specific cultures that may
determine the preferred instantiation of one subtype over
the other. Cases in point are Dutch (and English) speakers
who habitually use the Reflection subtype (Levinson,
2003); Hausa and Tongan speakers who habitually use the
Translation subtype (Hill, 1982; Bennardo, 2000); and
Japanese speakers who use both (Levinson, 2003). This is
a summary of the conceptual content of the Relative FOR.
Object; Locus; Path; Six Vectors, each with a Beginning
(Locus of viewer, or anchor point), Body, Direction;
Verticality; Horizontality; Visibility; Orthogonality, with
an Angle, Unit (degree), Fixed Quantity (90˚ degrees).
To this we need to add the ‘choice function’ used to
construct an Object. For the Translation and Reflection
subtypes, we must add also the ‘repeat function’ yielding
two Objects and the construction of the front and back
Vectors onto one of them. Both functions are axiomatic
cognitive processes. For the Reflection subtype, repeated
use of the concept of Visibility must be added.

The Intrinsic frame of reference

3The 180˚ rotation subtype of relative FOR in Levinson (2003)

An Intrinsic FOR is one centered on an Object that is not
the viewer. From the Object, three oriented axes (or six
vectors) are constructed, one vertically and two on the
horizontal plane. Any Object in the space defined by these
coordinates is described in relation to the Object from
which the space was constructed. When the Object

is not indicated here because within this work that subtype is
considered as an instantiation of an intrinsic FOR.

4This discussion is limited to only visual input.

104

3

moves, the axes will move accordingly keeping their
origin on the Object and the assigned orientation as
well.
What differentiates the Relative and the Intrinsic FORs
is that the Beginning of the Vectors is not from the
viewer, but from an Object other than viewer. We have
already seen that this is also the case for the Translation
and Reflection subtypes of relative FOR. What is it that
distinguishes these latter two FOR from the Intrinsic one?
The difference lies in the quality of the oriented field
that is constructed for the Object or ground. This field is
completely independent in orientation from the viewer; it
is in other words a new separate field from that of the
viewer. This difference has very important consequences,
among which the most relevant is that the description of
the spatial relationship between two Objects will be freed
from references to the viewer. This, however, does not
mean that the field of the viewer has not been used to
construct the new field. Specifically, when we express
linguistically a spatial relationship by utilizing an Intrinsic
FOR, conceptually we must have used a Basic relative
one in order to arrive at the construction of the first
Object (Figure) and the second Object, making this latter
a ground by constructing from it oriented axes.
What remains to be seen is how the axes of this new
field are oriented. Typically the following three concepts
have been associated with the Object that functions as
ground in order to orient the axes mapped onto it:
Animacy, Habitual Direction of Motion, and Habitual Use
(Herskovits, 1986; Talmy, 2000). It is understood then
that these three concepts participate in the construction of
the Intrinsic FOR in a disjunctive fashion. That is, usually
only one is necessary. It is, then, a specific characteristic
of the Object picked to function as ground that determines
the orientation of the axes mapped onto it. Only one axis
need to be oriented, typically the frontal one, and the
orientation of the others will follow.
Regarding the conceptual content of the Intrinsic FOR,
all the content suggested for the Relative FOR needs to be
postulated for the Intrinsic FOR as well. We also have to
include the ‘choice function’ and the ‘repeat function.’
New concepts to be added are Animacy, Habitual
Direction of Motion, Habitual Use (disjunctively used,
even though they may overlap), and finally Part. In fact,
the Object onto which the coordinates are mapped, needs
to be assigned a ‘front.’ That is, a minimal subdivision of
the Object into parts must be done.

selected differ profoundly and may range from a
mountain to a lake, or from a river to a building.
The process of selecting fixed orienting points in the
environment requires minimally the activation of the
Relative FOR. Once these fixed points have been
conceptually established and agreed upon socially, these
same points may function as an orienting framework
between either one Object in the field of the viewer and
one of the fixed points (e.g. North) or between any two
Objects in the field of the viewer and one of the fixed
points. We have already seen in the previous discussion of
the other two types of FOR that the process of
selecting/choosing an Object to function either as figure
or ground implies the use of the concept of Path. For the
construction of the absolute FOR, then, we need
minimally either one or two Paths required for the
construction of the Object or Objects to be put into
relationship with any of the orienting fixed points. To
these we have to add two (for the Oceanic system) or four
(for the cardinal points system) Paths for the choice of the
fixed points of reference.
Table 1 summarizes the conceptual content of the
various types of FOR. A capital X indicates the presence
of a concept in the construction of a FOR. For the
concepts of Object, Path and Vector a number indicates
how many times the concept is minimally used.
Table 1: The conceptual content of FORs
Concept/Axiom

Relative

Intrinsic

Absolute

X
2+V
2
10
X
X
X

X
1/2+2/4+V
3/5 or 4/6
6
X
X
X

X
X**
X**
X**
X
X

X
X

Basic
Transl
Locus
X
X
Object
1+V 2+V
Path
1
2
Vector
6
6
Verticality
X
X
Horizontality
X
X
Orthogonality
X
X
Visibility
Part
Animacy**
Hab Dir Mot**
Habitual Use**
Choice Funct*
X
X
Repeat Funct*
X
*These two are cognitive processes.
**Only one is necessary.

Reflect
X
2+V
2
6
X
X
X
X

X
X

From Table 1 it can be seen how the conceptual
axiomatic content of the Basic relative FOR is properly
contained in its entirety in all the others, both subtypes
(Translation and Reflection) and types (Intrinsic and
Absolute). The Intrinsic and the Absolute are both derived
from the Relative, although not in an ordered sequence.
The Relative FOR, then, is suggested as an axiom for both
the Intrinsic and the Absolute ones.
The Intrinsic and Absolute FORs are made of two
different sets of concepts. The Intrinsic FOR expresses
more attention to the nature of the Object functioning as
ground (see the participation of the concepts of Part,
Animacy, Habitual Direction of Motion, Habitual Use in

The Absolute frame of reference
An Absolute FOR is neither centered on the viewer nor on
an Object. First, the two Vectors related to the vertical
axis are constructed. Second, on the horizontal plane one
or more Objects (e.g., areas, points, landmarks) in the
field of the viewer are chosen as orienting points. Third,
either the viewer or any Object in its field is put into
relationships with these Objects or fixed points.
Two examples of this system are the one that uses
cardinal points, and the one that uses landward-seaward
directions used by the speakers of many Oceanic
languages. In many other cases the environmental features
105

4

Table 1). The Absolute FOR, instead, expresses greater
attention to the nature of the field (see the participation
of a greater number of Objects and Paths in Table 1).
These findings are perfectly congruent with those of
Baayen & Danziger (1994) and Levinson (2003)
regarding a preferred use of the Intrinsic FOR by speakers
of Mayan languages, where an extremely elaborate
vocabulary also exists for describing parts of objects.
Similar congruency can be highlighted with the findings
of Levinson (2003) concerning the preferred use of the
Absolute FOR by speakers of Australian Aboriginal
languages where a very elaborate system of naming
landmarks in one's environment has also been reported.
Finally, we look closely at the issue of
‘untranslatability’ among the various FORs suggested in
Levinson (2003, p. 57-59). When we consider FORs as
instantiated into linguistic expressions, it is true that in
principle only two cases of translation are possible from
one FOR to another (i.e., from either Absolute or Relative
to Intrinsic). Do we deduce that there is ‘untranslatability’
among FORs at the conceptual level? Our discussion
points towards a negative answer. In fact, the conceptual
content of the Relative FOR has been suggested as an
axiom for the Intrinsic and the Absolute ones. Thus, if at
the linguistic level we find ‘untranslatability’ between
FOR, at the conceptual level we find ‘nesting.’ Besides,
the direction of the translatability from Relative and
Absolute to Intrinsic correlates with one independent field
in the former vs. two independent fields in the latter.

consists, in the first case, of one Object (Figure) plus two
Objects (the two ends of the axis), the viewer, three Paths
(from the viewer to the three Objects), and six Vectors
(up, down, front, back, left, and right). In the second case,
an Object for the new ground Object and a Path for its
construction are added. A new field different from the
viewer's is not constructed.
The conceptual content for a Cardinal Points subtype
consists, in the first case, of one Object (Figure) plus four
Objects (the cardinal points), the viewer, five Paths (from
the viewer to the five Objects), and six Vectors (up,
down, front, back, left, and right). An Object is added for
the new ground Object and a Path for its construction. A
new field different from the viewer's is not constructed.
Table 2: Conceptual content for types of Absolute FOR
Subtype of Absolute FOR
Radial 1
Radial 2
Single Axis 1
Single Axis 2
Cardinal Points 1
Cardinal points 2

Object
1+V
2+V
1+2+V
2+2+V
1+ 4 + V
2+4+V

Concept
Path
1
2
3
4
5
6

Vector
1
1
6
6
6
6

A Radial subtype of the absolute FOR

In Table 2, the conceptual content of the Radial subtype is
the simplest. The contents of the two Radial subtypes are
also simpler than the content of the Basic subtype of the
relative FOR in Table 1. Consequently, the axiomatic
relation between the Relative, the Intrinsic, and the
Absolute FORs needs some further attention.

Bennardo (1996) reported the results of an investigation
of the uses of FORs in Tongan language, spatial
cognition, and culture. During this investigation a Radial
subtype of absolute FOR was suggested as having a
privileged status. This FOR consists in positing a center in
one’s field out of which movement is conceived either
centripetally or centrifugally on any plane. This finding
requires a reexamination of the typology of FORs. In
particular, we need to look closer at the subtypes of the
absolute FOR: Radial, Single Axis, and Cardinal Points.
For each of the three subtypes there are two cases to be
considered. The first is when the ground is the viewer,
e.g. “X is north of me.’ The second is when the ground is
an Object different from the viewer, ‘e.g. X is north of Y.’
Each case yields different conceptual content.
In the first case we need a Center that is the viewer and
an Object (Figure). A Path from the viewer to the Object
is also required as well as (minimally) a Vector made up
of the Body of a Path and its End (centrifugal movement)
or Beginning (centripetal movement). Either the End or
the Beginning of this Path would be co-indexed with the
Center. In the second case we have to add a second
Object, which will function as Center, and a Path that is
used to determine this Center (or second Object). The
difference between the two cases is crucial. Choosing a
Center different from viewer, makes possible the
construction of a second field different from the one
constructed around the viewer.
The conceptual content for the Single Axis subtype

In discussing the relationships between the types and
subtypes of FOR three parameters are considered. The
first is the magnitude of the conceptual content, that is,
the number of concepts necessary to derive each theorem.
The second is the reference that will be made to axiomatic
relationships. When the content of a FOR is completely
contained in another, then the former will be considered
an axiom of the latter. The third is the emergent properties
that each FOR displays. Namely, it must be considered if
a FOR is based on the construction of one or two fields.
The minimal conceptual content and the construction of
only one field associated with the Radial 1 subtype of the
absolute FOR make it the choice as the most basic. This
FOR, then, is an axiom for all the other types and
subtypes. Its great simplicity makes it highly context
bound and hence very unlikely to be the only one that any
individual/culture will have. Nonetheless, it represents a
minimal stage of spatial organization assigned to the
external world. Evidence from languages around the
world suggests that this system is always used, i.e., in
demonstrative systems.
Looking for a FOR at the second stage of complexity,
or more precisely, the first theorem derived from a set of
axioms whose content is at a limit only the Radial 1
axiom, we confront two options. The first is to choose the
Radial 2 subtype of the absolute FOR, simple in
conceptual content, though it uses two fields. The second

A new typology of Frames of Reference

106

5

is the Basic relative FOR that is more complex
conceptually (it needs six Vectors instead of one), but
uses only one field. A decision is not strictly necessary at
this juncture; both options are viable. Empirically, there
are language speakers that choose to use prevalently one
option only (e.g. English speakers choose a Basic relative
FOR), and other that choose both (e.g. Tongan speakers).
We have stated that the Relative FOR functions as an
axiom for the Absolute and the Intrinsic FOR, and for two
subtypes of the Relative FOR. These latter keep the single
field feature, but increase their conceptual content
because of their complex treatment of the front-back axis.
The Single Axis and Cardinal Points subtypes of the
absolute FOR and the Intrinsic FOR are obtained in
substantially different ways. The two Absolute FORs
represent an increased conceptual content from the
Relative FOR and use a single field. This is confirmed by
the fact that they both use the vertical axis. The Radial 1
and 2 subtypes did not have it in their conceptual content.
The intrinsic FOR is obtained by an increased
conceptual complexity due to two other factors (besides
the addition of the vertical axis). The first is a closer
attention devoted to the Object that functions as figure.
The second is the construction of two fields (the viewer's
and the figure's). We have seen that the construction of
two fields is part of the conceptual content of the Radial 2
subtype of the absolute FOR. Then, we suggest that the
conceptual content of the intrinsic FOR is derived from
the Basic subtype of the relative FOR, from the Radial 2
subtype of the absolute FOR, and from conceptual
characteristics of the Object/Figure.

typology of FORs in Figure 1. It is believed that this
typology can be useful for further investigation of FORs.

Acknowledgement
My special thanks go to Kris Lehman and Janet Keller for
reading through various drafts of this work. Mistakes,
misrepresentations or fallacies are mine.

References
Baayen, H., & Danziger E. (Eds.) (1994). Max-Planck
Institute for Psycholinguistics: Annual Report 14, 1993.
Nijmegen, The Netherlands: Max-Planck Institute for
Psycholinguistics.
Ballim, A., & Wilks Y. (1992). Artificial Believers: The
Ascription of Belief. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Bennardo, G. (1996). A Computational Approach to
Spatial Cognition: Representing Spatial Relationships
in Tongan Language and Culture. Doctoral dissertation,
Department of Anthropology, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois.
Bennardo, G. (2000). Language and Space in Tonga:
‘The Front of the House is Where the Chief Sits!’
Anthropological Linguistics, 42,4, 499-544.
Bowerman, Melissa, & Levinson S. C. (2001). Language
Acquisition and Conceptual Development. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Cohen, R. (Ed.) (1985). The Development of Spatial
Cognition. London: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
Publishers.
Herskovits, A. (1986). Language and Spatial Cognition :
An Interdisciplinary Study of the Prepositions in
English . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hill, C. (1982). Up/Down, Front/Back, Left/Right. A
Contrastive Study of Hausa and English. In J.
Weissenborn & W. Klein (Eds.), Here and There:
Cross-Linguistic Studies on Deixis and Demonstration.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Hirschfeld, L. A., & Gelman S. A. (Eds.) (1994).
Mapping the Mind: Domain Specificity in Cognition
and Culture. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lehman, F. K. & Bennardo G. (2003). A Computational
approach to the cognition of space and its linguistic
expressions. Mathematical Anthropology and Cultural
Theory, 1, 2, 1-83. See: www.mathematicalanthropology.org/
Levinson, S. C. (2003). Space in language and culture:
Explorations in cognitive diversity. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Piaget, J., & Inhelder B. (1956). The Child’s Conception
of Space. New York: The Humanities Press Inc.
Pick, H. L. (1993). Organization of Spatial Knowledge in
Children. In N. Eilan, R. McCarthy, & B. Brewer
(Eds.), Spatial representation: Problems in Philosophy
and Psychology. Oxford: Basil Blackwell Ltd.
Talmy, L. (2000). Toward a Cognitive Semantics,
Volume 1: Concept Structuring Systems. Cambridge,
MA: The MIT Press.

RADIAL 1
RADIAL 2
INTRINSIC

BASIC RELATIVE

SINGLE AXIS ABSOLUTE
TRANSLATION RELATIVE
CARDINAL POINTS ABSOLUTE
REFLECTION RELATIVE

Figure 1: A typology of Frames of Reference
The arrows in Figure 1 indicates that the FOR receiving
the content of another FOR treats this latter as an axiom
of its conceptual content. Further conceptual material is
added at each stage. Thus, the necessity of a new label for
that particular type of FOR.

Conclusion
The first part of this work was devoted to the introduction
of the conceptual apparatus that is the major theoretical
tool employed in the analyses of the conceptual content of
FORs. Each member of the typology of FORs suggested
by Levinson (2003) was later analyzed. and a primary
revision was suggested. Nesting of FORs was proposed at
the conceptual level instead of untranslatability. Then, a
Radial subtype of absolute FOR was introduced. This
made clear that a further revision of the typology was
needed. Finally, the revision resulted in the proposed
107

6

