UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Mapping individuation to mass-count syntax in language acquisition

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/47x5n63h

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Barner, David
Snedeker, Jesse

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Mapping individuation to mass-count syntax in language acquisition
David Barner (barner@fas.harvard.edu)
Department of Psychology, William James Hall, 33 Kirkland Street
Cambridge, MA 02138 USA

Jesse Snedeker (snedeker@wjh.harvard.edu)
Department of Psychology, William James Hall, 33 Kirkland Street
Cambridge, MA 02138 USA
Abstract

syntax and semantics, as in (1), resulting in a categorical
effect of number specification in noun phrases:

Various theories propose that count nouns are distinguished
from mass nouns by their specification of individuation. We
present evidence that, while 3-year-old children acquiring
language extend words differentially on the basis of masscount syntax, they quantify over individuals for both novel
mass and count nouns. We suggest that children may begin
acquisition with an underspecified representation of mass
noun semantics, permitting quantification over both
individuals and continuous quantities. Also, children may rely
on ontologically based biases to guide quantification.

(1)

a. count noun ÷ individual
b. mass noun ÷ non-individual

However, such mappings may not provide the full story
of what children know about the mass-count distinction. As
noted by Barner and Snedeker (2004), mass syntax may not
have a strong interpretation like count syntax, but may be
semantically unspecified and allow reference to either
individuals or non-individuals. In their study, Barner and
Snedeker observed that 4-year-old children and adults
interpreted many mass and count nouns in the way predicted
by the mappings in (1). For example, participants judged
three tiny shoes to be more shoes than one giant shoe and
one giant portion of butter to be more butter than three tiny
portions. However, they also based judgments on number
for “object-mass” terms like furniture, jewelry, mail, and
clothing, which children begin to produce by around 4 years
of age. In each case, participants judged six tiny objects to
be more than two giant ones. Thus, count syntax led to
quantification on the basis of number, while mass syntax
quantified over both continuous quantities and certain
individual objects.1 As a result, it was concluded that objectmass terms like furniture must allow quantification over
individuals due to a lexical specification of number, which
is normally found in count syntax. Expressions that house
this feature quantify over individuals, while those that do
not assume a default interpretation of quantifying over a
continuous extent (see Borer, 2004, for a similar proposal).
This view is schematized in (2):

Introduction
In English, the specification of number sends a ripple
through the language, determining a word’s status as mass
or count, licensing the use of plural morphology, and
selecting among measure terms such as many and much.
Children begin to show signs of such knowledge early in
language acquisition, with plural production and
comprehension emerging as early as 2 years of age (Brown,
1973; Cazden, 1968; Ferenz & Prasada, 2002; Gordon,
1988), sensitivity to the mass-count distinction evidenced by
around 2;6 years (see Soja, 1992), and the use of measure
terms like more and less emerging between 2;6 and 3 years
of age (Donaldson & Balfour, 1968; Gathercole, 1985;
Palermo, 1973).
The mass-count distinction provides a particularly
interesting case of number specification, because it entrains
important consequences for both the syntax and semantics
of noun phrases. For example, count terms like cat can take
the plural morpheme (e.g., cats) follow cardinal numbers
(e.g., one cat, two cats, three cats), and be modified by
quantifiers like these, those, few and many (e.g., many cats).
Mass terms, on the other hand, can occur in none of these
environments and can be distinguished by their use with
terms like much and little (e.g., I don’t eat much porridge).
According to most accounts, this distributional difference
corresponds to a semantic distinction whereby count nouns
quantify over individuals and mass nouns quantify over
non-individuals (e.g., Bloom, 1994, 1999; Gordon, 1985;
Link, 1998; Quine, 1960; Wisniewski, Casey, & Imai,
1996). For example, Bloom proposed that children might
begin acquisition with bidirectional mappings between

(2)

a. count syntax ’ individual
b. mass syntax ÷ no number specification

If the dimension of measurement of mass terms is
specified in part by lexical semantics as these results
suggest, children may need some amount of experience with
1

But not all objects. Terms that can be used as either mass
or count (e.g., string/s, chocolate/s, paper/s, stone/s)
quantified by number as count nouns and by continuous
extent as mass nouns.

79

particular mass terms before using them to specify a
measuring dimension. This raises the question of what mass
syntax contributes to the early interpretation of noun
phrases, and whether children’s interpretation of mass nouns
differs from that of adults at any stage of development. For
example, before acquiring exceptions like mail and
furniture, do children respect mappings as in (1), or is mass
syntax semantically unspecified throughout development?
Two sources of evidence regarding this question suggest
conflicting conclusions. First, studies of word extension
indicate that children are biased to map novel count terms to
physical objects and mass terms to non-solid substances. In
a study by Soja (1992), English children aged 2;6 extended
novel words on the basis of shape for solid objects 90% of
the time when presented with count syntax, but only 76% of
the time with mass syntax. For non-solid substances,
children extended novel words on the basis of substance
91% of the time when presented with mass syntax, and 51%
of the time when given count syntax (see also Soja, Carey,
& Spelke, 1991, and Imai & Gentner, 1997). Thus, children
in her study shifted their extension of novel terms according
to their use in mass or count syntax.
However, results from Gathercole (1985) suggest that
young children may not distinguish the referential
consequences of mass and count syntax. In her study,
Gathercole found that children aged between 2;6 and 5;6
quantified mostly by number for both count nouns and mass
nouns. In fact, even children as old as 5;6 failed to reliably
quantify by continuous extent for mass nouns, unlike the 4year-olds in Barner and Snedeker (2004), who quantified by
continuous extent for both solid and non-solid stimuli
named with mass syntax (e.g., some string; some mustard).
These differences are difficult to interpret, since only
Gathercole tested both mass and count terms within
subjects, and because stimuli used in the studies were
common household objects and may have varied in
familiarity and lexico-semantic properties.
In any case, the results from Gathercole’s study are
difficult to reconcile with those from Soja’s study of word
extension, and thus it remains unclear how children
represent the semantics of the mass-count distinction early
in acquisition. Also unclear is how the different types of
knowledge used in each task are related in young children’s
linguistic representations. While for adults it seems
necessary that word extension should predict quantification
(e.g., only words that refer to discrete things quantify over
individuals) such links between content and quantification
may not yet be established in the minds of 2 or 3-year-olds.
No previous study has explicitly tested the quantification
of mass-count syntax for novel terms (i.e. where prior
lexical knowledge does not play a role). As a result,
previous studies have also not examined the relationship
between quantification judgments and word extension for
the same objects and substances. However, both of these
measures are needed in order to properly assess children’s
early interpretation of mass-count syntax, before lexical

exceptions such as object-mass terms (e.g., mail, silverware)
arise. For this reason, the present study assessed children’s
and adult’s interpretation of novel mass and count terms in
both word extension and quantity judgment paradigms.
Also, it remains an open question how object-mass terms
come to quantify over individuals, and what the precise
nature of lexical information is that distinguishes mass
nouns like mail from mass nouns like string. Various
researchers have suggested that factors such as complexity
of structure, occurrence of multiple individuals in spatiotemporal contiguity (Wisniewski, Casey, & Imai, 1997), and
shared function (Prasada, 1999) might characterize objectmass terms. The present study examined this question via
the manipulation of stimulus complexity and solidity in each
of the testing paradigms.

Experiment 1
The first experiment examined three main questions. First,
does mass syntax have a strong interpretation early in
acquisition, as measured by both word extension and
quantity judgment? To examine this question, participants
were tested with both methods for the same novel objects,
with either mass or count syntax. Second, using this method
we explored how the word extension and quantity judgment
tasks are related, and whether they make use of the same
underlying logical resources. Third and finally, we explored
whether an object’s relative complexity predicts
quantification over individuals when used in mass syntax.
What lexical properties, if any, might characterize objectmass nouns like mail and furniture? This question was
tested by varying the shapes and substances of novel
referents in the word extension and quantity judgment tasks,
to include simple and complex solid objects.

Method
Subjects
Participants were 24 Harvard undergraduates and 32
children ranging in age from 3;0 to 3;6 (mean = 3;3).
Procedures and Stimuli
Each testing session comprised four trials. In each trial the
participant was introduced to a novel object and heard the
object named with a novel term at least four times using
either unambiguous mass syntax or unambiguous count
syntax on all four trials. Half of the participants were shown
four simple objects and half were shown four complex
objects, all of which we will call “standard” objects. The
four simple standard objects were: (1) a half egg shape
made of red sculpy; (2) a kidney bean shape made from
painted-green das; (3) a cork shape made from black
Crayola-Magic; (4) an arrow shape made from terracotta.
The four complex standard objects were: (1) a gear made
from orange playdo; (2) a brass t-shaped plumbing fixture;
(3) a suede texture-painted reamer; (4) a clay milk pump
stand. The names for these objects, always presented with
either mass or count syntax (between subjects), were fem,
tannin, dak, and t u l v e r. Thus, for each trial, the

80

experimenter introduced the novel object by saying, for
example “Oh look, this is some/a fem. Have you ever seen
any fem(s) before? Do you think you have some fem(s) at
home? That is some/a nice fem isn’t it”.

Training

Instructions
Look, this is some
fem!
or,
Look, this is a fem

Word
Extension
Task

Can you point at
the fem?

Quantity
Judgment
Task

Who has more
fem?
or,
Who has more
fems?

Adults
4

Avg. number of
judgments based on
shape

Stimulus

.001. Second, adults also showed a main effect of stimulus
type, extending novel words for complex objects 2.83 times
on average (71.8%), compared to 1.75 times on average
(43.8% overall) for simple objects, F (1, 16) = 6.3, p < .05.
There were no interactions.

*

*

3

Mass
Count

2

1

0

Simple

Complex
Object type

Figure 2. Word extension by adults for novel mass and
count nouns.

Figure 1. An example of a training trial, word extension trial
and quantity judgment trial (shaded oval represents a red
sculpy half-egg, white oval represents a styrofoam shape
alternative, and shaded square represents a red sculpy
substance alternative; small ovals represent mini half-eggs).

These results indicate that adults use syntax to guide word
extension, but that extension is also influenced to a large
extent by the relative complexity of stimuli. Thus, masscount syntax does not appear to be the sole factor
determining word extension behavior for adults. More
general properties of referents appear to play a role.

Following the naming of each object, participants were
asked two questions, the order of which was varied
systematically (see Figure 1). First, in the word extension
task (see Soja, Carey, & Spelke, 1991), participants were
shown two additional objects, one which matched the
standard in shape, the other in substance, and were asked to
choose which of the two the novel word named: “Show me
some/a fem”. Second, in the quantity judgment task (see
Barner & Snedeker, 2004), participants were shown two
characters (Farmer Brown and Captain Blue), one who was
shown with the standard object and the other who was
shown with three miniature versions of the object. The
standard objects had a greater overall mass and volume than
the three miniature objects, but were otherwise identical in
shape and substance. The side on which the standard or
miniatures were shown was varied systematically.
Participants were told, “Farmer Brown has some/a fem(s)
and Captain Blue has some/a fem(s) too. Who do you think
has more fem(s)?” For both tasks, participants pointed to
indicate their response. Procedures were identical for adults
and children.

Avg. number of judgments
based on shape

3-year-olds
4

3

*

*
Mass
Count

2

1

0

Simple

Complex
Object type

Figure 3. Word extension by 3-year-old children for novel
mass and count nouns.
The children also used mass-count syntax to guide word
extension (see Figure 3). They extended novel count terms
by shape 3.56 times on average (89% overall), compared to
2 times on average (50% overall) for novel mass nouns, F
(1, 24) = 16.9, p < .001. However, children showed no main
effect of stimulus type, and no significant interactions.
Quantity judgment trials
Responses for the quantity judgment task were coded in
terms of how many times (out of four) each participant
chose the array with the greater number of objects. For
adults, two main results were obtained (see Figure 4). First,
as was the case with word extension, adults used mass-count

Results and Discussion
Word extension trials
Responses for the word extension task were coded in terms
of how many times (out of four) each participant extended a
word on the basis of shape.
For adults, two main results were obtained (see Figure 2).
First, adults used mass-count syntax to guide word
extension, extending count terms by shape 3.5 times on
average (87.5% overall), compared to only 1.08 times on
average (27% overall) for mass syntax, F (1, 16) = 31.1, p <

81

Avg. number of judgments
based on number

syntax to guide quantity judgment, using count terms to
quantify by number 3.75 times on average (93.8% overall),
compared to .67 times on average (16.8%) for mass nouns,
F (1, 16) = 85.6, p < .001. Second, adults quantified by
number 2.67 times on average (66.8% overall) for complex
items, which was significantly more than the 1.75 times on
average (43.8%) for simple items, F (1,16) = 7.6, p < .05.
This difference appeared to be due in part to adult’s
interpretation of mass syntax. While adults quantified by
number for some mass nouns that named complex objects,
they never did so for mass nouns that named simple objects.
This is interesting, since it suggests that for adults object
complexity may be sufficient to permit individuation using
mass syntax (i.e. the use of object-mass terms).

incomplete understanding of mass-count syntax, (2) a
problem interpreting the term “more”, or (3) a bias to
quantify by number for discrete physical objects. These
possibilities are examined in Experiment 2.

Experiment 2
The results of Experiment 1 are consistent with the idea that
the interpretation of mass syntax is unspecified from early in
acquisition, and allows quantification over individuals or
non-individuals. However, the results are also consistent
with several other possibilities, including a response bias to
quantify by number regardless of syntax, or an interpretation
of “more” as quantifying only by number. To rule out these
possibilities, we tested participants with non-solid
substances. If responses in Experiment 1 were due to either
a response bias or a strong interpretation of “more”, then
responding on the basis of number should persist for both
mass and count nouns. However, a change in children’s
quantification for only mass syntax would represent
evidence that children modulate judgments based on masscount information, but allow quantification over individuals
when referents are construed as such. This, in turn, would
support the claim that mass syntax, but not count syntax, has
an unspecified interpretation regarding individuation.

4

3

*

*
Mass
Count

2

1

0

Simple

Complex

Object type

Method

Figure 4. Quantity judgment by adults for novel mass and
count nouns.

Subjects
Participants were 16 Harvard undergraduates and 23
children ranging in age from 3;0 to 3;6 (mean = 3;3).
Procedures and Stimuli
Procedures for Experiment 2 were identical to those used in
Experiment 1. However, solid stimuli were replaced with
non-solid substances. The standard substances were: red
media mixer, green butter, orange paint, and brown hair gel.

Avg. number of judgments
based on number

In contrast to adults, children quantified mostly by
number for both simple and complex objects, for both mass
and count syntax (see Figure 5). As a result, children
showed no significant effect of syntax, F (1, 24) = 2.2, p >
.1, nor of stimulus type, F (1, 24) = .09, p > .8.

Results and Discussion

4

Results suggest that only the adults used mass-count
syntax to guide word extension (see Figure 6). Adults
extended count nouns by shape 2.57 times on average (64%
overall) and mass nouns 0.5 times on average (13% overall),
a difference that was marginally significant, F (1, 12) = 4.8,
p < .06. Children extended count nouns by shape 1.82 times
on average (46% overall) and mass nouns 1.42 times on
average (36% overall), which was not significant.
However, both the 3-year-olds and adults appeared to use
mass-count syntax to guide quantity judgment (see Figure
7). Adults based judgments on number 3.83 times on
average for count syntax (96% overall) and 0.5 times on
average for mass syntax (13% overall). This difference was
significant, F (1, 12) = 40, p < .001. Children based
judgments on number 1.82 times on average for count
syntax (46% overall) and 0.5 times on average for mass
syntax (13% overall), a difference that was marginally
significant, F (1, 23) = 4.1, p < .06. There was also a large
effect of task order, F (1, 23) = 11.7, p < .05, that reflected a
much greater distinction of mass-count syntax when

3

Mass
Count

2

1

0

Simple

Complex
Object type

Figure 5. Quantity judgment by 3-year-old children for
novel mass and count nouns.
The results of Experiment 1 indicate that while both
children and adults used mass-count syntax to guide word
extension, only adults appeared to use this information to
guide quantity judgment. This suggests that word extension
and quantity judgment may tap discrete logical resources.
Among the possible explanations for this are: (1) an

82

Avg. number of judgments based
on shape

quantity judgment was tested after word extension. Children
who were given the tasks in this order quantified by number
2.67 times on average for count syntax (compared to .8
times in the alternative order) and 0 times on average for
mass syntax (compared to 1 time on average in the
alternative order).

count terms as quantifying by number regardless of referent
type, suggesting a lack of strong quantificational
interpretation for mass syntax.
Results from Experiment 2 indicated that children could
use mass-count syntax to guide quantification for non-solid
substances. Across conditions, children’s interpretation of
mass syntax appeared more affected by referent type than
the interpretation of count syntax. The number bias found in
Experiment 1 disappeared mainly for mass nouns when
referents were changed from discrete physical objects to
non-solid substances.

4

* p < .06
3

Mass
Count

2

Table 1
Summary of results for Experiments 1 and 2
(4 = effect of syntax; 8= no effect of syntax)
Solids
Non-solids
W.E.1
Q.J.2
W.E.
Q.J.
4
8
8
4
3-year olds
4
4
4
4
Adults
1
Word extension
2
Quantity judgment

1

0

Children

Adults

Figure 6. Word extension by 3-year-olds and adults for mass
and count nouns that label non-solid substances.

Avg. number of judgments based
on number

A review of the word extension data revealed a similar
trend, where performance on word extension more closely
resembled adult performance when it followed quantity
judgment, suggesting an overall effect of accumulated input
on mass-count sensitivity over the course of the experiment.
Overall, results suggest that children have more than one
interpretation for the word “more”, but that its meaning is
shifted primarily by the ontological category of referents,
rather than mass-count syntax.

These results (summarized in Table 1) have three
important consequences. First, children appear to employ
distinct mechanisms for performing quantity judgments and
word extensions. The main source of this difference, and of
the difference between children and adults in this study, was
children’s treatment of simple solid objects. While both
adults and children quantified by number for mass nouns
that referred to complex objects, only children quantified by
number for mass nouns that referred to simple objects and
that were extended by substance. Interestingly, these results
appear to be consistent with observations that young
children are biased to enumerate spatio-temporally defined
individuals when counting segmented objects (e.g., counting
a fork cut in half as two forks; see Shippley & Shepperson,
1990; Wagner & Carey, 2003). In these tasks, children are
unable to use criteria of individuation for specific words,
despite being able to correctly extend them. By analogy,
when performing quantity judgments, children seem to
ignore criteria of individuation for newly learned words and
instead employ the more primitive criteria of the “object”
sortal (Xu, 1997). Children appear to base quantification on
spatio-temporal individuals whenever arrays are composed
of physical objects, and only later in acquisition use specific
sortal information to guide judgments.
It should be noted that although a spatio-temporal bias
may account for the content of individuals that children
quantified (i.e. rather than specific sortal knowledge) it
cannot explain the failure of mass syntax to determine the
dimension of measurement. Our evidence suggests that 3year-olds are only beginning to understand the effect of
mass-count syntax on quantification, and that they do not
have strong syntax-semantics mappings of the type
proposed by Bloom (1999). Thus, this study provides
further evidence children never use one-to-one mappings

4

3

* p < .06

*
Mass
Count

2

1

0

Children

Adults

Figure 7. Quantity judgment by 3-year-olds and adults for
mass and count nouns that label non-solid substances.

General Discussion
Experiment 1 revealed two main results. First, for the word
extension task, both children and adults used mass-count
syntax to guide their judgments, extending count terms on
the basis of shape and mass terms on the basis of substance.
This replicates results found for English-speaking 2.5 year
olds (see Soja, 1992). Second, for solid objects, adults used
mass-count syntax to guide quantity judgment and used
mass nouns to quantify over individuals only for complex
objects. Children, however, interpreted both novel mass and

83

between syntax and semantics of the type proposed by
Bloom (1999). Instead, it seems that only count syntax is
ever truly specified for a uniform interpretation (Barner &
Snedeker, 2004).
Given children’s difficulty using syntax to guide quantity
judgment, how do they succeed with word extension?
Minimally, the task requires an ability to distinguish mass
and count distributional frames and to determine a novel
word’s criteria of application, or content. One possibility is
that these two types of knowledge are sufficient for solving
word extension, and may operate somewhat independently
of actual mass-count semantics. For example, children may
observe that a novel term like blicket has been used in the
same syntax as a word like plastic, for which shape is an
irrelevant dimension, and therefore extend the word on the
basis of substance. Novel word extensions may be made on
the basis of correlations between mass-count syntax and
previous extensions, and may be the product of simple
mappings between content and syntax, bypassing noun
phrase quantification altogether.
Based on this, our results suggest an ability to use masscount syntax to guide word extension by 2;6 (e.g., Soja,
1992) may not reflect mature knowledge of mass-count
semantics. Even by 3;6, children are only beginning to
understand the full effect of mass-count syntax on
quantification, which arguably defines the distinction. Early
in acquisition, children may approximate adult behavior
conditions by exploiting correlations between content and
distributional frames, and by employing ontologically based
biases for interpreting quantifiers like “more”. Sometime
between 3;6 and 4, children appear to recognize that count
syntax specifies number as a dimension for comparison, and
that in this way it differs from mass syntax (Barner &
Snedeker, 2004). Mass nouns continue to be interpreted
based on lexical properties, as shown by adults in this study,
and never specify a uniform dimension for measurement.

Brown, R. (1973). A first language. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Cazden, C.B. (1968). The acquisition of noun and verb
inflections. Child Development, 39, 433-448.
Donaldson, M. & Balfour, G. (1968). Less is more: A study
of language comprehension in children. British Journal of
Psychology, 59, 461 – 471.
Ferenz, K., & Prasada, S. (2002). Singular or plural?
Children’s knowledge of the factors that determine the
appropriate form of count nouns. Journal of Child
Language, 29, pp. 49-70.
Gathercole, V. (1985). More and more and more about
more. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 40, 73104.
Geach, P. (1962). Reference and Generality. Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press.
Gordon, P. (1985). Evaluating the semantic categories
hypothesis: the case of the mass/count distinction.
Cognition, 20, 209–242.
Gordon, P. (1988). Mass/count category acquisition:
Distributional distinctions in children’s speech. Journal of
Child Language, 15, 109-128.
Gupta, A. (1980). The logic of common nouns. New Haven,
Conn.: Yale University Press.
Imai, M., & Gentner, D. (1997). A cross-linguistic study on
early word meaning. Universal ontology and linguistic
influence. Cognition, 62, 169-200.
Link, G. (1998). Algebraic semantics in language and
philosophy. Stanford, CA: Center for the Study of
Language and Information.
Macnamara, J. (1986). A border dispute: The place of logic
in psychology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Palermo, D. (1973). More about less: A study of language
comprehension. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 12, 211-221.
Prasada, S. (1999). Names for things and stuff: An
Aristotelian perspective. In R. Jackendoff, P. Bloom, &
K. Wynn (Eds.). Language, logic, and concepts: Essays
in honor of John Macnamara (pp. 119–146). Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Quine, W.V.O. (1960). Word and object. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Soja, N.N. (1992). Inferences about the meanings of nouns:
the relationship between perception and syntax. Cognitive
Development, 7, 29-45.
Soja, N.N., Carey, S., & Spelke, E. (1991). Ontological
categories guide young children’s inductions of word
meaning: object terms and substance terms. Cognition,
38, 179-211.
Wagner, L., Carey, S. (2003). Individuation of objects and
events: a developmental study. Cognition, 90, 163 – 191.
Wisniewski, E.J., Imai, M., & Casey, L. (1996). On the
equivalence of superordinate concepts. Cognition, 60,
269-298.
Xu, F., & Carey, S. (1996). Infants’ metaphysics: the case of
numerical identity. Cognitive Psychology, 30, 111 – 153.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Susan Carey and Peggy Li for their
helpful comments on previous versions of this paper. This
work was funded in part by a grant from the National
Science Foundation to the second author (IIS-0218852,
schaward 5710001440).

References
Barner, D., & Snedeker, J. (2004). Quantity judgments and
individuation: Evidence that mass nouns count. Under
review.
Bloom, P. (1999). The role of semantics in solving the
bootstrapping problem. In: Jackendoff, R., Bloom, P.,
Wynn, K. (Eds.), Language, Logic, and Concepts: Essays
in Memory of John Macnamara. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Borer, H. (2004). In Name Only. Unpublished manuscript,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles.

84

