UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
On the Representation of Physical Quantities in Natural Language Text

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4d8629j2

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Author
Kuehne, Sven E.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

On the Representation of Physical Quantities
in Natural Language Text
Sven E. Kuehne (skuehne@northwestern.edu)
Qualitative Reasoning Group, Northwestern University
1890 Maple Avenue, Ste. 300
Evanston, IL 60201, USA
theory should be reflected in the language that people use
to communicate their understanding of physical
phenomena. This paper shows that the natural language
descriptions of physical processes contain abundant
information about the constituents of physical quantities.
Moreover, the results of this study can be used in a variety
of applications, such as grammatical rules of a parser or in
the design of information extraction algorithms.2

Abstract
In this paper we investigate the forms in which quantity
information can appear in written natural language. Our
focus is on physical quantities found in descriptions of
physical processes, such as expansion, movement, or
transfer. Using Qualitative Process Theory as our
underlying formalism, we show how information extracted
from natural language text corresponds to the five
constituents of physical quantities. The results of this
analysis can be used for the creation of interpretation rules
and extraction patterns in NL systems.

Physical quantities

Introduction
Ordinary people know a lot about the physical world
around them. They know that water will eventually boil if
you heat it on a stove, that a ball placed at the top of a
steep ramp will roll down, and that a cup will overflow if
you continue to pour coffee in it. When people talk and
write about such phenomena in everyday language,
references to continuous properties are usually part of
these descriptions. From simple utterances like “The
coffee is hot” to a more complicated comparison like
“The velocity of gas molecules is higher than the velocity
of molecules in a liquid.” being able to identify and
extract the information about physical quantities is
essential to understand these sentences. Using Qualitative
Process Theory (Forbus, 1984) as the underlying
formalism, we investigate the forms in which continuous
properties can appear in written natural language. Our
focus is on physical quantities found in descriptions of
physical processes, such as expansion, movement, or
transfer.1
The way in which continuous parameters and processes
are described in natural language is not accidental. Since
Qualitative Process Theory is a formalism of how people
reason about the physical world, the basic ideas of the
1
The findings of this analysis are applicable to other types of quantities
as well. The framework of QP theory determines just determines kind of
information we are interested in, i.e. constituents of a physical quantity.
Abstract and conceptual quantities are often referred to metaphorically
by words with a physical basis and require a different semantic
interpretation. ‘The price is hot.’ is does not have anything to do with
temperature, unlike ‘The water is hot.’ However, the techniques for the
extraction of information about such quantities are essentially the same.

In Qualitative Process Theory, all physical changes in
continuous properties are caused by physical processes.
The identification of continuous parameters is therefore
an essential step in the extraction of information about
physical processes from natural language text. In an
earlier analysis (Kuehne & Forbus, 2002) we presented a
scheme for the extraction process that uses FrameNetcompatible representations (Baker, Fillmore, & Lowe,
1998; Fillmore, Wooters, & Baker, 2001) to capture
information about physical processes. The examples
presented draw from the same corpus material (Buckley,
1979; Maton et al., 1994; Moran & Morgan, 1994) used
in our previous analysis. Our goal here is to show how
information about continuous parameters can appear in
natural language, and the ways in which this information
corresponds to the following five constituents of physical
quantities:
• The Entity is a uniquely named object or an instance of
a process associated with the quantity. For example, the
word ‘brick’ in the noun phrase ‘the temperature of the
brick’ denotes an entity.3
• The Quantity Type specifies the kind of parameter. The
word ‘temperature’ in the noun phrase ‘the temperature
of the brick’ is a reference to a quantity type.
• The Value specifies the numerical or symbolic value of
the property. The number ‘3’ in ‘3 liters of water’ or

2
Although we use the results of the analysis for exactly these purposes,
the findings are presented in a general way and not limited to any
particular type of grammar or pattern language.
3
The noun ‘brick’ actually refers a particular individual, maybe
‘brick32’, not the collection of all bricks.

750

the adjective ‘hot’ in ‘the hot ground’ are values
associated with a quantity.
• The Unit specifies the physical units of the property.
Example: The word ‘kilograms’ in ‘3 kilograms of
lead.’ Units usually appear in combination with a
numerical value or with a quantifier.
• The Sign of the Derivative specifies how the parameter
is changing. In the sentence “The temperature is
increasing.” the sign of the derivative is expressed by
the word ‘increasing’, which indicates that the
parameter is changing in a positive direction.
Only the first two of these five constituents are required to
identify a physical quantity. The quantity type together
with the entity are sufficient to talk about quantities like
‘the temperature of a brick’ or the ‘the flow rate of heat’.
Values, units, and information about changes are optional
and often not explicitly stated.

Entities and quantities types
We begin with a look at the forms commonly used in
natural language descriptions to express information
about the two required constituents of physical quantities,
the entity and the associated quantity type. The remaining
three constituents, i.e. values, units, and changes, will be
discussed in the subsequent sections.

Explicitly referenced quantities
Natural language text can refer to physical quantities
either directly or indirectly, depending on whether the
type of the quantity is explicitly mentioned in the
sentence. Explicit references can be found in nouns,
verbs, and adjectives that are morphologically related to
quantity types.
Nouns
The quantity type can be explicitly mentioned as a noun,
together with one or more entities that it is associated
with.
(1) VOLUME flows from the can to the ground.
(2) The TEMPERATURE of the brick is rising.
Sentence 1 contains information about two physical
quantities, the volume of some substance in the can and
on the ground. The quantity type ‘volume’ is associated
with both locations, i.e. the ‘can’ and the ‘ground’. In (2)
the quantity type ‘temperature’ is associated with a single
entity.
The quantity type can also appear as the head of a
compound noun. The remaining constituents of the
compound noun can be treated as information about a
specialization of the quantity type. For example, in (3) the
quantity type ‘radiation heat’ is a specialization of ‘heat’;
in (4) ‘heat energy’ is a type of ‘energy’.

(3) RADIATION HEAT flows from the heater.
(4) The HEAT ENERGY of the water increases.
Verbs
Verbs can refer to physical events as well as to quantity
types associated with these events.4 The verb in sentence
5 appears as a direct reference to the quantity type
‘length’. Sentence 6 is slightly more complicated, because
it allows two different interpretations. The obvious
interpretation is to treat the verb as an explicit reference to
a quantity, as it is in (5). In this case, the quantity type
‘heat’ is tied to both entities, the stove as the source of the
heat flow and the kettle as the destination of the heat flow.
(5) The press LENGTHENS the iron beam.
(6) The stove HEATS the kettle.
Alternatively, (6) can be interpreted as an increase in
temperature of the kettle caused by the stove. Even
though the quantity type ‘temperature’ is not mentioned in
the sentence, we might infer that heating the kettle also
increases the temperature of the kettle. This is an
inference that most readers of such a descriptions will
readily draw, and it coincides with the kind of conclusions
that are supported by QP Theory.
Adjectives
Certain adjectives can refer to quantity types directly, if
the adjective is morphologically related to a quantity type.
For example, in (7) the adjective ‘denser’ refers to the
quantity type ‘density’. The quantity type in this sentence
is associated with both entities, i.e. ‘iron’ and ‘wood’.
(7) Iron is DENSER than wood.

Implicitly referenced quantities
While the quantity types in explicitly referenced
quantities are usually easy to identify and extract, implicit
references to quantities are more difficult to figure out.
Implicitly referenced quantities do not mention a quantity
type. Instead, the reader has to use the contextual
information provided by the sentence as well as available
background knowledge. The following examples show
how nouns, verbs, adjectives, and adverbs can determine
a quantity that is not explicitly mentioned in a sentence.
Verbs
A quantity type can be implicitly referenced by a verb that
describes a physical process, e.g. movement, expansion,
or transfer. The sentence in which the verb occurs usually
4
Events such as the increase or decrease of a parameter, e.g. the
temperature of a brick, can be involved in an instance of a physical
process. For one linguistic perspective on actions, processes, and events,
see (Parsons, 1990).

751

provides additional contextual information for the
interpretation of the implicitly referenced quantity.
(8) As the temperature rises, the liquid EXPANDS.
The verb 'expand' in (8) indicates that something is
changing in different physical dimensions, i.e. in length,
area, or volume. For the three-dimensional entity ‘liquid’
the appropriate quantity type is therefore ‘volume’. The
verb also includes implicit information about a positive
change in the quantity, i.e. an increase in volume of the
liquid, which we will address later.
Adjectives
The quantity type can be implicitly referenced by certain
adjectives. For example, the quantity type described by
the adjective ‘hot’ in (9) is ‘temperature’. The
comparative also encodes the ordinal relationship between
the quantities associated with the two entities, i.e. the fact
that the temperature of the stone is greater than the
temperature of the water. Similarly, the quantity type
expressed by ‘lighter’ in (10) is ‘weight’.
(9) The stone is HOTTER than the water.
(10) The upper air masses are LIGHTER than the lower
air masses.
For a correct interpretation the relationship between the
adjective and the associated quantity type has to be
known. The fact that the adjective ‘hot’ is associated with
‘temperature’ is a fact learned by a human reader and is
typically provided as background knowledge in NL
systems.
Verb/Adverb combination
Quantity types can also be determined by combining
verbs and adverbs. The quantity type referenced in (11) is
the rate of movement, or ‘velocity’. The adverb alone is
not sufficient to determine the quantity type. Although
‘faster’ is generally associated with velocity, it just
qualifies the rate of change, i.e. that something is
happening in less time. There are cases in which the
quantity type referenced by ‘faster’ is not velocity. For
example, ‘expanding faster’ in (12) refers to the rate of
expansion.
(11) The gas molecules are MOVING FASTER than
molecules in a solid.
(12) Liquid A is EXPANDING FASTER than liquid B.
All these cases have one thing in common: the referenced
quantity is a rate, most likely associated with a process
referenced by the verb (‘movement’, ‘expansion’,
‘decay’).

Noun/Verb combination
This type of implicitly referenced quantity uses a
noun/verb combination to refer to the rate of change of a
quantity.
(13) The less heat is supplied, the slower the temperature
RISES.
The quantity type in (13) is not ‘temperature’ but the rate
of change in temperature, resulting from a change in the
amount of heat. The combination of ‘rises’ and
‘temperature’ determines the quantity type, while the
combination of the verb ‘rises’ and the adverb ‘slower’
gives the direction of change.
Noun/Adjective combination
The quantity type is only implicitly referenced by a
combination of a noun and an adjective.
(14)

The BIGGER the surface [is], the more heat is
absorbed.

The quantity type in (14) is the size of the surface (not the
surface itself) associated with an unnamed participant or
the size of a participant ‘surface’. The adjective ‘bigger’
refers to the quantity type ‘size’ (or ‘area’). Since ‘big’
can also refer to the quantity type ‘volume’, the
dimensionality of the entity determines the appropriate
quantity type in this case.

Representation of values in
physical quantities
Knowing the type of a quantity and the entity it is
associated with enables us to talk and reason about it. A
simple noun phrase such as ‘the depth of the water’
contains enough information recognize it as a physical
quantity, even without having any information about a
particular value the quantity might have, the unit of that
value, or the direction in which the quantity is changing.
The following two sections examine how values and units
of quantities appear in natural language text, and how
changes in quantities can be identified.
There are three common types of references to values
and units that can be found in natural language text: in the
context of comparisons, as symbolic labels, and as
quantitative information. We will discuss values and units
together because units usually appear in combination with
values.5

5
Units can appear separately from values in definitional statements, like
“Length is measured in Meters.” or, even more explicit, “The unit of
power is the Watt.”

752

Comparison
Values in the context of a comparison appear in sentences
like “The brick is warmer than the plate.” The comparison
orders the quantities, i.e. the temperature of the brick is
greater than the temperature of the plate. However, it does
not contain exact information about the possible values of
the quantities. Even though the comparative ‘warmer’
might refer to a specific range of temperature, the exact
values cannot be known or even guessed from the
information provided by the sentence. The brick might be
red hot, while the plate is frosted with ice.
It is impossible to determine how far the values
associated with the two compared quantities are apart
from each other. The only information that can be
extracted from this sentence is the fact that the value of
one quantity is greater than the other. With several of
these comparisons along the same dimension, it is
possible to identify the potential ranges of the values for
particular quantities. For example, the temperature of a
coffee is greater than the temperature of an ice cube, and
it is lower than the temperature at the tip of a lit cigarette.

Symbolic labels
Values can also take the form of a symbolic label
associated with an entity, e.g. “The brick is hot.” Even
though the exact temperature of the brick is unknown, the
adjective ‘hot’ suggests a certain temperature range. The
range might be different depending on the context of the
sentence. In refrigeration 'hot' might be in a very different
range of temperatures than in the context of metallurgy.
Nouns that are associated with the adjective can impose
restrictions on the range of the value in certain cases. For
example, (Bierwisch, 1967) compares two simple
sentences, “The room is tall.” and “The space is tall”. In
the first sentence the noun ‘room’ might restrict the
average range of values for the height to those for a
typical room, e.g. between 8 and 10 feet. Without further
information, this kind of assumption is more difficult to
make for the second sentence. Is the space a small
compartment or a crawl space? Or is it the inside of a
cathedral? The range of typical values would be quite
different for these two cases.
Adjectives that represent a value are generally quantityspecific, i.e. they refer to a particular type of quantity as
in the sentence “The brick is hot.” Alternatively, a
quantity-neutral form could be used to express the same
fact, e.g. “The temperature of the brick is high.”6
While adjectives and adverbs such as ‘hot’ or ‘slow’
generally refer to a range of values along a dimension,
natural language also uses symbolic labels to refer to
concrete values, i.e. particular points along a dimension.
The noun phrase ‘boiling point of water’ usually refers to
The Cyc knowledge base (Lenat & Guha, 1989) handles values in a
similar way. For example, the value #$Hot is the result of
#$HighAmountFn of #$Temperature.

6

the point where liquid water turns into steam and the
value of approximately 212 degrees Fahrenheit. The noun
phrase provides a label for this particular point.7
The structure for labels that describe limit points is not
arbitrary. Usually the head of the noun phrase refers to a
point on a scale (e.g. ‘point’, ‘barrier’), while the noun
modifier is associated with a process, a dimension, or a
quantity type (i.e. ‘boiling’, ‘sound’). These two parts are
mandatory components of the label. Determining the
quantity type and the dimension is difficult in many cases,
e.g. we have to know that ‘boiling point’ is associated
with ‘temperature’ and that ‘sound barrier’ actually refers
to the speed of sound or velocity. Additionally, the label
can take an optional complement phrase that restricts the
compound noun. For example, the complement phrase ‘of
water’ restricts the interpretation of boiling point to a
particular substance. The key idea here is that the
underlying mechanisms for handling limit points are
essentially the same as those for symbolic references to
intervals on a particular dimension.

Concrete numeric values and units
The most explicit form in which values can appear is
quantitative information, i.e. by using concrete numeric
information and units. For example, in (15) the quantity
type (‘temperature’) is explicitly stated, together with
detailed information about the numeric value (‘120’) and
the unit (‘degrees Fahrenheit’).
(15) The temperature of the brick is 120 degrees
Fahrenheit.
Sentences that contain concrete numeric values and units
typically do not use quantity-specific adjectives or
adverbs instead of explicit references to the quantity type.
(16) *The water is 80 degrees Celsius hot.
(17) The water has 80 degrees Celsius.
Sentence 16 should be considered anomalous, because the
adjective ‘hot’ provides at best redundant information in
the form of a symbolic value. Units can refer indirectly to
the quantity that they are associated with, as shown in
(17). The association between units and quantity types
(degrees Celsius as a unit for temperature) is a learned
fact and has to be encoded as background knowledge.

Representations of changes in
physical quantities
The values of physical quantities cannot always be treated
as static information, because they can change while
7
Note that the compound noun ‘boiling point’ would be an
underspecified symbolic label because different substances have
different boiling points. Other labels such as ‘sound barrier’ may not
need the additional complement.

753

physical processes are active. The sign of the derivative
indicates whether a quantity is changing and in which
direction.8
The most obvious choice to express changes in the
physical world is the use of verbs. For example, if water
is flowing from one container into another, there are
several ways of expressing the change of the amount of
water in each container.
(18)

The amount of water in container A is decreasing,
while the amount of water in container B is
increasing.
(19) Water flows from container A to container B.
Although (18) and (19) might be describe the same
scenario, they are not equivalent. For example, (19) only
implies a decrease of the amount of water in location A. It
does not state this information explicitly. On the other
hand, (18) implies a flow, without actually mentioning it.
These distinctions are important for a semantic
interpretation process, because the information that is
directly available from the sentences is different.

Verbs with direct references to a quantity change
Verbs can directly refer to a change in a quantity and its
direction, i.e. whether the quantity is increasing or
decreasing, when the verb alone contains all the
information about the change and the direction and we
can therefore distinguish between verbs for positive and
negative changes in quantities. For example, gain,
increase, and add are verbs for positive changes, while
lose, decrease, and leak are associated with negative
changes.9 Some verbs belonging to this class also allow
prepositional phrase as a complement, which is restricted
to the particular direction of change indicated by the verb
itself (e.g. ‘add to’ vs. *’add from’).
(20) The brick LOSES heat to the room.
(21) The temperature of the water is INCREASING.
(22) The brick GIVES OFF heat.

(23) Heat is transferred FROM inside the house TO the
outdoors.
(24) Energy is moved TO a new location.
(25) The fan moves heat away FROM the processor.

Verbs in combination with quantity-specific
adverbs
Quantity-specific adverbs can determine the change in a
quantity in conjunction with a verb. Analogous to verbs
with direct reference to a quantity change, the
combination of verbs and quantity-specific adverbs can be
associated with a decrease in a quantity, as in (26) or with
an increase, as in (27).
Similar to the interpretation of the quantity type from
verb/adverb combinations, there are cases in which the
same adverb can refer to an increase (or a decrease) of a
particular quantity type, depending on the verb with
which it is used. For example, in the context of (27), the
adverb ‘faster’ would indicate a positive change in the
velocity of the molecules, while in (28) it will indicate an
increase in the rate at which a substance dissolves.
(26) The glass is COOLING FASTER.
(27) The molecules are MOVING FASTER.
(28) The substance DISSOLVES FASTER.

Nouns with direct references to change

Some otherwise ‘neutral’ verbs can also fall into this class
if they use specific particles to indicate a change in a
quantity, as in (22).10

Verbs with directional prepositional phrases
Verbs associated with Transfer and Motion event do not
contain a direct reference to changes in quantity. For
8

example, verbs like flow or move indicate a transfer of
something between two physical or conceptual locations,
but they do not contain information about the actual
direction of the change. Instead, this information is
provided by directional prepositional phrases attached to
the verb. The description of the transfer can be complete
when both the source and the destination are identified by
prepositional phrases, as in (23), or partial when only one
of the directional prepositional phrases is attached, as in
(24) and (25).

Information about changes in quantities can support other aspects of
QP theory, e.g. in determining relationships between continuous
parameters such as direct and indirect influences.
9
Another distinction could be made between verbs that can only used
with extensive quantities. For example, heat can be added, while
temperature cannot.
10
The particle has to agree with the complement structure of verb. For
example, the verb phrase *’gives in’ cannot take ‘heat’ as its argument.

Nouns provide another way of describing changes in
physical quantities. They can be divided into similar
classes as verbs, i.e. nouns with direct references to a
change in a quantity, and nouns that use directional
prepositional phrases.
Nouns can directly refer to a change in a quantity, and
analogous to verbs they can be divided into nouns that
refer to positive, as in (29), and negative changes, as in
(30).
(29) The INCREASE in temperature is significant.
(30) The DECREASE in pressure caused a failure.

Nouns with directional prepositional phrases
Similar to verbs of the Transfer and Motion domain, the
corresponding nouns will also need directional
prepositional phrases to describe changes in a quantity.

754

Again, the information about the transfer can be complete,
as in (31) or partial as in (32).

communicated back to human users in an intuitive
way – by using natural language.

(31) The flow of oxygen FROM the tank TO the capsule
is blocked.
(32) The transfer of heat TO the kettle has been
completed.

Acknowledgements

Discussion
Parts of our current research are concerned with the
design of a controlled language for describing physical
phenomena. One important aspect in the development of
such a language is the goal to reduce possible syntactic
and semantic ambiguity. The identification of patterns
used for references to continuous parameters in natural
language is an essential part of the semantic interpretation
process, which must include the detection of directly
referenced quantities as well as indirect references.
Research on the lexical semantics of adjectives has tried
to establish taxonomies for the different semantic
categories of adjectives (see Raskin & Nirenburg (1995)
for an overview). Several of these taxonomies focus on
the class of adjectives that we are most interested in for
extracting information about physical quantities, i.e.
qualitative (scalar, gradable) adjectives (Dixon, 1991;
Frawley, 1992). From our perspective, using the
semantics of Qualitative Process Theory, the taxonomies
suggested by Dixon and Frawley are inconsistent. The
breakup of types and subtypes appears to be arbitrary,
because several of the types of quantities can be collapsed
into a single type. In Dixon’s taxonomy the adjectives of
the ‘speed’ and ‘physical property’ types are separated
from those classified as ‘dimension’. Similarly, ‘age’ and
‘value’ are listed as separate types.
Many quantity-specific adjectives and adverbs form
opposing pairs for the same quantity type along a single
dimension. For example, ‘tall’ is the opposite of ‘short’
for the quantity type ‘height’, and ‘wide’ the opposite of
‘narrow’ for the quantity type ‘width’ (see Bierwisch
(1967, 1989) and Kennedy (2001) for a detailed analysis
of polar adjectives). For certain quantity types we can
identify not just a single opposing pair but a set of
quantity-specific adjectives. For the quantity type
‘temperature’ we can find adjectives such as ‘warm’,
‘cool’, ‘tepid’, and variations such as ‘lukewarm’ as
references besides just ‘hot’ and ‘cold’. It is an interesting
question to speculate why this variety of quantity-specific
adjectives exists for some quantity types but not for
others. Frequent use or familiarity with the concept
‘temperature’ cannot explain this fact alone.
Understanding the connections between Qualitative
Process Theory and natural language is important for
understanding the general cognitive plausibility of
qualitative models. It will also give us greater insight into
how results from qualitative reasoning can be

I would like to thank Ken Forbus and Dedre Gentner for
insightful comments on this paper, as well as Praveen
Paritosh and Chris Kennedy for interesting discussions on
the topic. This research was supported by the Artificial
Intelligence program of the Office of Naval Research.

References
Baker, C. F., Fillmore, C. J., & Lowe, J. B. (1998). The Berkeley
FrameNet Project. In: Proceedings of the 17th International
Conference on Computational Linguistics and 36th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(COLING-ACL 98), Montreal, Canada.
Bierwisch, M. (1967). Some semantic universals of German
adjectivals. Foundations of Language, 3, 1-36.
Bierwisch, M. (1989). The Semantics of Gradation. In M.
Bierwisch & E. Lang (Eds.), Dimensional Adjectives (pp. 71261). Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag.
Buckley, S. (1979). From Sun Up to Sun Down. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Dixon, R. M. W. (1991). A New Approach to English Grammar,
on Semantic Principles. Oxford, England: Clarendon Press.
Fillmore, C. J., Wooters, C., & Baker, C. F. (2001). Building a
Large Lexical Databank Which Provides Deep Semantics. In:
Proceedings of the Pacific Asian Conference on Language,
Information, and Computation, Hong Kong, China.
Forbus, K. D. (1984). Qualitative Process Theory. Artificial
Intelligence, 24, 85-168.
Frawley, W. (1992). Linguistic Semantics. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Kennedy, C. (2001). Polar Opposition and the Ontology of
'Degrees'. Linguistics and Philosophy, 24(1), 33-70.
Kuehne, S. E., & Forbus, K. D. (2002). Qualitative Physics as a
component in natural language semantics: A progress report.
In: Proceedings of the Twenty-fourth Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society, George Mason University,
Fairfax, VA.
Lenat, D. B., & Guha, R. V. (1989). Building large knowledgebased systems : representation and inference in the Cyc
project. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Maton, A., Hopkins, J., Johnson, S., LaHart, D., McLaughlin, C.
W., Warner, M. Q., & Wright, J. D. (1994). Heat Energy
(annotated teacher's ed.). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Moran, J. M., & Morgan, M. D. (1994). Meteorology - The
Atmosphere and the Science of Weather (4th ed.). New York,
NY: Macmillan College Publishing.
Parsons, T. (1990). Events in the Semantics of English.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Raskin, V., & Nirenburg, S. (1995). Lexical Semantics of
Adjectives: A Microtheory of Adjectival Meaning (Technical
Report MCCS-95-288). Las Cruces, NM: New Mexico State
University.

755

