UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Paying Attention to Attention: Perceptual Priming Effects on Word Order

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5c15w2g8

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Nappa, Rebecca
January, David
Gleitman, Lila
et al.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Paying Attention to Attention: Perceptual Priming Effects on Word Order
Rebecca Nappa (nappa@sas.upenn.edu)
Department of Psychology, 3401 Walnut St.
Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA

David January (djanuary@sas.upenn.edu)
Department of Psychology, 3401 Walnut St.
Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA

Lila Gleitman (gleitman@sas.upenn.edu)
Department of Psychology, 3401 Walnut St.
Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA

John Trueswell (trueswel@sas.upenn.edu)
Department of Psychology, 3401 Walnut St.
Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA
decide where the upcoming utterance is to start, and much
of how it is to proceed. A number of factors seem to
contribute to this process.
First, studies have found a crucial role for preferred (i.e.
primed or otherwise accessible) syntactic structures in the
form a message ultimately takes (e.g. Bock & Loebell,
1990).
Additionally, lexical/conceptual factors (e.g.
accessibility, animacy) have been shown to affect word
order materially, even at the expense of a preferred syntactic
structure (Tversky, 1977; Bock, 1986; MacDonald, Bock &
Kelly, 1993).
The role perceptual prominence plays in word and/or
constituent order, however, seems a bit more nebulous.
Within the literature on visual attention, it is quite clear that
perceptual cues are involved in the interpretation of visual
stimuli; research on perception of ambiguous figures (e.g.
duck/rabbit, wife/mother-in-law) has shown that the
perception of such stimuli can be driven by localizing eye
gaze on critical features of a given interpretation
(Georgiades & Harris, 1997). And perceptual factors (e.g.
size, color) are clearly involved in ordering within simple
conjoined noun phrases (e.g. A bear and a dog) (Osgood &
Bock, 1977; Gleitman, Gleitman, Miller & Ostrin, 1996),
but the role of perceptual prominence in constituent order
remains unclear. Some find no relationship between
initially fixated stimuli and subject role assignment (Griffin
& Bock, 2000), while others find evidence supporting a role
for attention (perceptual prominence) in constituent order
(Tomlin, 1997; Forrest, 1996).
Some have interpreted these latter results as evidence for
an incremental account of language production, in which a
speaker builds an utterance as it is produced, and is apt to
begin with whichever sentential elements are most salient at
the time of speech onset. This account contrasts with more
structuralist version of sentence planning, in which the
underlying message of an utterance must be wholly planned
prior to the onset of speech, and which accounts for the
robust and reliable effects of syntactic priming (see Bock, in
press, for discussion).

Abstract
Two experiments are reported which examine how
manipulations of visual attention affect adult speakers’
linguistic choices regarding word order and verb use when
describing simple visual scenes. Participants in Experiment 1
were presented with scenes designed to elicit the use of one of
two perspective verbs (e.g., “A dog is chasing a man”/“A man
is running from a dog”). Speakers’ visual attention was
manipulated by preceding the display with a crosshair
positioned on one or the other character. Cross-hair position
affected word order and verb choice in the expected direction.
Experiment 2 replicated this effect with a subliminal
attention-capture cue, and results were further extended to the
order within conjoined noun phrases in sentential subjects (“A
cat and dog are growling…”). The findings have important
implications for incremental theories of sentence planning and
suggest some specifics for how joint-attention might serve as
a useful cue to children learning verbs.

Introduction
What makes people say what they say? This is a complex
question, which has been the source of much investigation
and dispute over the past several decades. Early on in the
generative linguistic tradition, the emphasis on the
productive and creative power of structural expression led
many researchers to assume that properties of a visual
stimulus can be related to a speaker’s linguistic choices in
only vague and theoretically uninteresting ways (e.g.,
Chomsky, 1957). Currently, though not disputing that one
can say – or not say – many different things under the same
environmental conditions, investigators doing experimental
research on word order and structural choices in sentence
production have concluded that some combination of
perceptual, conceptual and linguistic accessibility contribute
in a dynamic way to utterance planning. In particular,
questions of word order have received much attention, and
prompted much debate, as this issue must be richly
intertwined with the planning of both an utterance’s
overarching message and the syntactic structure carrying
that message. In advance of speaking, one must somehow
999

A troubling issue with all prior investigations into
perceptual prominence and word ordering arises, however,
if one examines the methodology. Manipulations have all
been overt attention-getting devices (raising demand
characteristic concerns), and have often had rigid task
demands allowing for minimal generalization.
The current research investigates the question of
perceptual contributions to word and constituent order,
drawing on the attention and perception literature for more
suitable methods. In two experiments, subjects’ attention
was directed subtly (Experiment 1) and then subliminally
(Experiment 2) to scene participants, to determine whether
perceptual cues under these covert conditions have any
effect on the linguistic choices speakers must make. If such
perceptual factors lead subjects to differing descriptions of
identical scenes, a clear role can be established for
attentional factors in sentence planning and constituent
order. Such results may also provide evidence for an
incremental approach to production, or perhaps, rather, to
message planning. Finally, as we describe later, these
effects may rebound on aspects of word learning.

69% of the time, dipsreferred subjects and verbs were used
27% of the time.

Figure 1: Sample Perspective Verb item from Experiment 1.
Table 1: Norming study baseline rates of verb usage in PV
stimuli in Experiment 1. Percentage of total usage across all
utterances in parentheses.
Item

Preferred
Verb

Dispreferred
Verb

Buy/sell

Sell (62)

Buy (38)

Chase/flee
(dog/man)
Chase/flee
(rabbit/elephant)
Eat/feed
(puppies/dog)
Eat/feed
(child/mother)
Give/receive

Flee (57)

Chase (43)

Chase (71)

Flee (29)

Feed (76)

Eat (24)

Feed (95)

Eat (5)

Give (71)

Receive (29)

Listen/talk (office)

Talk (76)

Listen (24)

Listen/talk
(phone)
Perform/watch
(singer)
Perform/watch
(speaker)
Win/lose (boxing
match)
Win/lose (race)

Talk (19)

Listen (29)

Perform (67)

Watch (33)

Perform (86)

Watch (14)

Win (95)

Lose (5)

Win (48)

Lose (24)

Experiment 1
In the spirit of the afore-mentioned perceptual attention
research on ambiguous figure resolution, our first
investigation of attentional effects on event interpretation
used a simple crosshair fixation point – prior to stimulus
presentation – to direct a subject’s eye gaze to a scene
participant (analogous to directing gaze to a set of critical
features in the ambiguous figure literature). Stimuli were
designed to elicit one of two word order and verb choices on
the part of the speaker, thereby making one or the other
character in a scene the subject of the sentence. If initial
visual attention subtly alters a speaker’s perspective on the
scene, we should expect that the speaker’s choice of
sentential subject and verb would be influenced by our
attentional manipulation.

Methods
Norming and Stimuli Prior to initiating data collection on
an attention-manipulating task, the specific stimuli to be
used were normed, to identify baseline rates of verb
selection for these particular items.
Twenty-one
monolingual English-speaking University of Pennsylvania
Intro Psychology students participated for course credit.
Subjects were presented with the 52 pictures to be used in
experiment one, and asked to describe the event that was
taking place in the scene using a simple sentence. No other
manipulations or cues were introduced. Of these 52
pictures, twelve depicted pairs of so-called Perspective
Verbs (e.g. chase/flee, see Figure 1), and these were the
critical items (PVs).
Rates of verb use for these twelve items varied (see Table
1), but for each verb pair, subjects showed some degree of
bias towards one interpretation and/or verb choice; there
was a preferred verb and a dispreferred verb, and hence a
corresponding preferred subject and dispreferred subject
(passives were rare, occurring only 6 times across all 252
items). Overall, preferred subjects and verbs were used

Participants and Design Eighteen monolingual Englishspeaking Introductory Psychology students at the University
of Pennsylvania participated in this study for course credit.
There were three conditions, defined by the location of the
crosshair fixation point prior to scene presentation:
Dispreferred (where the dispreferred subject would appear),
Preferred (where the preferred subject would appear), and
Middle (a neutral middle region, as a control).
Manipulations were within-subjects, with each subject’s
gaze directed to the dispreferred subject on four of the
twelve critical items, to the preferred subject on four of the

1000

twelve critical items, and to a neutral middle region on the
remaining four items.
Procedure Subjects in this experiment were presented with
52 scenes depicting participants engaged in a given activity
(e.g. a picture of a boy swimming), including the twelve
critical items, depicting perspective verb pairs. Subjects
were instructed to describe each picture using one simple
sentence, and subjects’ utterances throughout the task were
recorded.
A crosshair fixation point preceded presentation of each
of the 52 scenes. This fixation point was presented onscreen for approximately 500 msec, then immediately
followed by presentation of the scene (either filler or trial).
(Earlier pilot work with an eyetracker confirmed that
subjects followed directions and routinely fixated the cross
prior to stimulus presentation.) Subjects in the current study
were misled to believe that position of the crosshair was
random and irrelevant to their task, so as to prevent their
eyes from inspecting scenes in the same fashion on each
trial. Position of the crosshair in fact corresponded directly
to position of an upcoming scene participant. Although
some subjects noted that the fixation marker frequently had
been where an object appeared, no subject reported noticing
the correlation between the location of scene participants
and the crosshair. And in post-experimental interviews,
most subjects who bothered to posit a guess as to the
experiment’s purpose speculated that it pertained to color
brightness and/or interpersonal relationships of scene
elements.

Results and Discussion

Proportion of Utterances With Preferred Subject

Rate of preferred verb usage was highly influenced by cue
location in the expected direction (see Figure 2). In
particular, when the preferred subject (e.g., the dog) was
visually cued, speakers uttered on 77% of the trials
sentences like “A dog is chasing a man.” When the
0.9
0.8
0.7

dispreferred subject was cued, however, speakers produced
such utterances only 61% of the time (and showed a
corresponding increase in utterances like “The man is
running from the dog”). Analyses of Variance (ANOVAs)
on participant and item means revealed that the effect of cue
location was significant (both p’s<.05).

Experiment 2
Following the results of Experiment 1, a couple of questions
arose. First were concerns regarding demand characteristics
of the crosshair fixation point manipulation. Although
subjects did not seem to sense the specific purpose of the
experiment (namely, subject and verb selection), many
noticed that the crosshair’s position frequently corresponded
to an object in the upcoming scene. We worried that this
knowledge alone might have subtly influenced their
linguistic choices. To this end, we developed an attentioncapture cue (see Jonides & Yantis, 1988), as discussed
below, which successfully directed subjects’ attention to a
particular region of the scenes, without being consciously
perceptible.
Secondly, as discussed previously, much prior research on
sentence production and linguistic choice has compared the
role of many different factors, from animacy to size of
entities, on differing constructions. Specifically, different
variables seem to contribute differently to linguistic choice
in simple conjoined noun phrases (e.g. the dog and the man
vs. the man and the dog) than to linguistic choices involving
thematic role assignment (e.g. the dog chased the man vs.
the man fled the dog). In Experiment 2, we wanted not just
to replicate our prior result, but also to compare the
influence of our covert attention-capture manipulation on
these sorts of different constructions. To this end, twelve
additional items were added in Experiment 2, depicting
events in which two scene participants were engaging in an
activity together (see Figure 3, designed to elicit “The
cat/dog and the dog/cat are growling at each other”). These
Conjoined Noun Phrase (CNP) items were aimed at eliciting
descriptions containing a conjoined noun phrase in the
sentential subject position (e.g. A dog and a cat are
growling), so as to investigate the effect of our covert
manipulation on word order in a simple conjoined noun
phrase.

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

Dispreferred
Subject

Middle

Preferred
Subject

Figure 3: Sample Conjoined Noun Phrase item from
Experiment 2.

Crosshair Location

Figure 2: Proportion of utterances beginning with the
preferred subject and verb, by condition, in Experiment 1.
1001

Methods
Norming and Stimuli CNP pictures were first normed for
baseline preferences. Twenty-one monolingual Englishspeaking University of Pennsylvania Intro Psychology
students described 64 scenes (52 fillers, and the 12 CNP
items), absent any manipulations or cues. In an effort to
avoid utterances beginning with uninformative sentential
subjects (e.g. “Two people are…”), CNP stimuli consisted
of scenes with animal, rather than human, participants (e.g.
a dog and a cat growling, see Figure 3).
Baseline rates of first-mentioned scene participants varied
less than with the PV stimuli in Experiment 1 (See Table 2).
Most items were relatively unbiased, but scene participants
with even a slight advantage were dubbed Preferred FirstMentioned, and referred to as such from this point onward,
for the sake of simplification. Overall, preferred firstmentioned participants were mentioned first 56% of the
time, dispreferred first-mentioned only 44%.
Table 2: Norming study baseline rates of first-mentioned
participants in CNP stimuli in Experiment 2. Percentage of
total usage across all utterances in parentheses.
Item
Biking

Preferred Firstmentioned
Turtle (61.9)

Dispreferred
First-mentioned
Dog (38.1)

Dancing

Fish (57.1)

Bear (42.9)

Eating

Koala (52.4)

Panda (47.6)

Growling

Cat (52.4)

Dog (47.6)

Juggling

Elephant (52.4)

Seal (47.6)

Jumping

Frog (57.1)

Cat (42.9)

Playing
cards
Playing
horns
Rowing

Pig (57.1)

Dog (42.9)

Rhino (52.4)

Snail (47.6)

Bear (52.4)

Snowman (47.6)

Skating

Monkey (57.1)

Rabbit (42.9)

Swinging

Elephant (61.9)

Monkey (38.1)

Waiting

Penguin (52.4)

Deer (47.6)

Both the location of the attention-capture cue and the left-toright orientation of the scene were systematically varied,
creating a 2 X 2 design (cued participant X leftmost
participant) and four stimulus lists. Manipulations were
within-subjects, with each subject assigned randomly to one
of these four lists.
Procedure Subjects in this experiment were presented with
64 scenes: the same 40 fillers and 12 PV scenes used in
Experiment 1 and the 12 normed CNP scenes. Subjects
were instructed to describe each picture using one simple
sentence, and subjects’ utterances and eye movements were
recorded throughout the task.
Prior to stimulus presentation, subjects fixated a crosshair
fixation point (equidistant from the two scene participants)
for 500 msec. Subjects were misled to believe that position
of the crosshair was randomized, to assist the experimenters
in maintaining eyetracker calibration accuracy (no subject
reported suspecting anything otherwise). The fixation point
was then followed by a brief, covert attention-capture
manipulation. This manipulation consisted of a small black
target area (subtending an area of approximately 0.5X0.5
degrees of visual angle) against a white background, with a
duration of 60-80 msec, followed immediately by the
stimulus. Although no subject reported noticing the
subliminal cue, it was highly effective in capturing
attention. Subjects looked first to the cued location a
median of 76% of the time.

Results
Table 3 shows rates of mentioning the Preferred FirstMentioned participant first for the CNP stimuli, and Table 4
shows rates of using the Preferred Subject for the PV stimuli
for all four conditions in the 2X2 design. Collapsing across
sentence types, significant effects of Left-Right Position and
Attention-Capture were observed; leftmost and cued entities
were more likely to be first-mentioned (p’s<0.01). Further
analyses showed that Left-Right orientation was significant
only for word order in CNP stimuli (p<0.01), not for subject
selection in PV items. Both sentence types, however,
showed significant, stable effects of Priming, with primed
characters more likely to appear first in CNPs (p<0.05) and
to be the subject of a perspective verb (p<0.01).

An additional consideration that arises when adding the
CNP stimuli is orientation. As previously mentioned, one
factor driving word order in conjoined noun phrases is the
left-to-right bias, with leftmost participants more likely to be
first mentioned. This prediction bore out in the current
norming study as well, with leftmost participants mentioned
first 78.2% of the time for CNP items (as compared to only
52.8% of the time for PV items in prior norming study).
Participants and Design Forty monolingual Englishspeaking Introductory Psychology students at the University
of Pennsylvania participated in this study for course credit.
1002

Table 3: For all four conditions of Conjoined Noun Phrase stimuli, proportion of utterances in which subjects mentioned
Preferred First-Mentioned participant first

Preferred First-Mentioned
on Left
Dispreferred FirstMentioned on Left
Average

Preferred First-Mentioned
Primed
79.3%

Dispreferred FirstMentioned Primed
63.8%

Average

58.1%

41.4%

49.7%

68.7%

52.6%

71.6%

Table 4: For all four conditions of Perspective Verb stimuli, proportion of utterances in which subjects mentioned used
Preferred Subject

Preferred Subject on
Left
Dispreferred Subject on
Left
Average

Preferred Subject
Primed
87.4%

Dispreferred Subject
Primed
66.4%

Average

77.3%

60.1%

68.7%

82.3%

63.2%

General Discussion
Language Production Overall, our results show a role for
perceptual prominence in constituent ordering, and may be
taken as support for a more incremental approach to
sentence production.
It is important, however, to keep these results in the
context of the current literature on the subject of speech
production. Although Griffin and Bock (2000) found no
correlation between first-fixated scene participants and firstmentioned participants, in an extensive investigation into
the time course of message extraction from a visual scene,
they did show tightly linked eye movement and speech
patterns once an utterance was to begin; subjects looked
reliably to an object less than a second before producing the
corresponding word. This, and other research in this vein
(Bock, Irwin, Davidson & Levelt, 2003), implies a system
that begins with an initial, message-planning stage, followed
by a more incremental process of retrieving the necessary
lexical elements to construct an utterance (see Bock, in
press, for discussion).
Our result is in no way inconsistent with this model of
speech production. It is quite possible that subjects in our
studies, rather than beginning to incrementally code their
final utterance at the onset of the stimulus, begin with an
information-extracting, message-planning stage, and that the
perceptual priming effects we see take effect in this early
stage. In the analogous ambiguous-figure literature, such
attentional manipulations seem to affect the way subjects
perceive, or interpret a stimulus. This may well be what’s
resulting from our similar attention-driving tools: a different
perception, or interpretation of the stimulus. Ongoing
research will investigate the effects of the same perceptual
prime on both transitive verbs – where subjects must shift to

76.9%

an infrequent, passive structure to alter subject role
assignment – and symmetrical predicates – where prominent
information tends to appear in the object role/position (e.g.
“I met Meryl Streep” vs. “Meryl Streep met me”) (Gleitman
et al., 1996). These explorations into the underlying nature
of the perceptual prime should begin to determine where
and how it is having its effect.
Language Acquisition These results have interesting
implications for word learning studies as well. It has been
noted that perspective verb pairs should be specifically very
difficult for children acquiring a language to learn, as in
many cases both members of these pairs necessarily cooccur under the same situational circumstances (Gleitman,
1990; Fisher, Hall, Rakowitz & Gleitman, 1994); for
instance, a child is not apt to be presented with a situation
that involves chasing but, at the same time, does not involve
fleeing, and vice versa. How can the young learner figure
out, then, whether the mother was saying “chase” or “run
away?” These studies showed that syntactic information
can inform the listener/learner as to the speaker’s intended
meaning. By varying the syntactic frame in which a novel
verb appeared while referring to a perspective verb stimulus
(e.g. “The man is glorping the dog” vs. “The dog is glorping
the man,” with regard to Figure 1) Fisher et al. showed that
young listeners are quite adept at using this syntactic input,
or “zoom lens,” to arrive at the same interpretation intended
by the speaker.
Another “zoom lens” that is more closely related to the
present studies, is joint visual attention of speaker and
listener. Infants as young as 2-months-old engage in such
gaze-following activities (Bruner, 1998), looking where an
adult is looking, during conversation. Moreover, by 12 to
18 months of age, the infant can successfully use this gaze-

1003

direction information as a cues for how to label new objects
(Baldwin, 1993). Contributions of attentional cues to word
learning have not been as broadly or rigorously investigated
for the case of verb learning. Given our current result on the
relationship between attention-direction and variation
between subject and verb choice, we suggest that similar
attentional cues are available to the young language learner
in successfully parsing and interpreting speech as well, even
in the especially difficult case of perspective verbs.
Conclusion
Taken together, the results of these two experiments as they
interface with relevant prior investigations clearly
demonstrate a relationship between attention and language
production. Further investigation will be necessary to delve
into the detailed nature of this relationship, and explore the
way it fits into a model of language production. These
results, though, and the implications they have for
attentionally-aware young language learners trying to
interpret the speech stream, open exciting new investigative
doors in both language production and acquisition.

speaking. Psychological Science, 11, 274-279.
Jonides, J. & Yantis, S. (1988). Uniqueness of abrupt visual
onset in capturing attention. Perception & Psychophysics,
43, Apr 1988, pp. 346-354
MacDonald, J.L., Bock, J.K. & Kelly, M.H. (1993). Word
and world order: Semantic, phonological, and metrical
determinants of serial position. Cognitive Psychology, 25,
188-230.
Osgood, C.E. & Bock, J.K. (1977). Salience and
Sentencing: Some Production Principles. In Sheldon
Rosenberg (Ed). Sentence Production: Developments in
Research and Theory. Hillsdale, N.J.: Erlbaum.
Tomlin, R.S. (1997). Mapping conceptual representations
into linguistic representations: The role of attention in
grammar. In Nuyts, Jan & Pederson, Eric (Eds).
Language and conceptualization. Language, culture and
cognition. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Tversky, A. (1977). Features of similarity. Psychological
Review, 84, 327-352

References
Baldwin, D. (1993). Infants’ ability to consult the speaker
for clues to word reference. Journal of Child Language,
20, 395-418.
Bock, J.K. (1986). Meaning, sound, and syntax: Lexical
priming in sentence production. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 12, 575586.
Bock, J.K., Irwin, D., Davidson, D. & Levelt, W.J.M
(2003). Minding the clock. Journal of Memory and
Language, 48, 653-685.
Bock, J.K., Irwin, D.E. & Davidson, D.J. (in press)
Putting First Things First. In J. M. Henderson & F.
Ferreira (Eds.), The integration of language, vision, and
action: Eye movements and the visual world. New York:
Psychology Press.
Bruner, Jerome S. (1998). Routes to reference. Pragmatics
& Cognition, 6, 209-227.
Chomsky, N. (1957). Syntactic Structures. Oxford, England:
Mouton.
Fisher, C., Hall, D.G., Rakowitz, S. & Gleitman, L. (1994).
When It Is Better to Receive Than to Give: Syntactic and
Conceptual Constraints on Vocabulary Growth. Lingua,
92, 333-375.
Forrest, L. B. (1996). Discourse goals and attentional
processes in sentence production: The dynamic construal
of events. In A. E. Goldberg (Ed.), Conceptual structure,
discourse and language. Stanford, CA: CSLI
Publications.
Georgiades, M. & Harris, J.P. (1997). Biasing effects in
ambiguous figures: Removal or fixation of critical
features can affect perception. Visual Cognition, 4, 383408
Gleitman, L. (1990). The structural sources of verb
meanings. Language Acquisition, 1, 3-55.
Gleitman, L., Gleitman, H., Miller, C. & Ostrin, R. (1996).
Similar and similar concepts. Cognition, 58, 321-376.
Griffin, Z.M. & Bock, J.K. (2000). What the eyes say about
1004

