UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Perception as Prediction

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8vp7c0tt

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Author
Hockema, Stephen A.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Perception as Prediction
Stephen A. Hockema (shockema@indiana.edu)
Psychology and Cognitive Science, Indiana University
1101 E. Tenth St., Bloomington, IN 47405 USA

Abstract

There is evidence for the predictive capabilities of the system in many everyday activities, like tracking moving objects
behind occluders, navigation through crowds, simple eyehand coordination, and in several related experimental phenomena where the system exhibits momentum when tracking predictable changes. For example, in the phenomenon
known as representational momentum , subjects learn to anticipate the continuation of a transformation, for example an
object moving across a computer screen. When the object
suddenly disappears and subjects are probed about its nal
position, there is evidence that the remembered position is
shifted forward along the path of the trajectory (Freyd, 1992).
This has been taken by some (e.g. Freyd, 1992; Hubbard,
1999) as evidence of a dynamic representation that continues to move forward after the real object has disappeared.
However, the evidence is also consistent with the possibility that the trajectory of the object is being perceptually predicted and thus the perceived position of the object at any
given instant in time is actually ahead of its actual position.1
Such a view would be consistent with an explanation for several other perceptual illusions given recently by Changizi and
Widders (2002) and Changizi, Nijhawan, Kanai, and Shimojo
(2003).
This paper will present further empirical evidence of a perceptual adaptation that is triggered by predictable variation.
A simulation of the experiments using a simple model of a
predictive mechanism will then be presented as additional
support for these ideas.

Learning is often about prediction. This paper asks whether
perception is also. The main idea is that perception is a stream
and that perceivers learn the trajectory through which one moment in that stream turns into the next. A behavioral experiment with children is described that tests two hypotheses developed from this idea.. In the experiment, children briefly
watch a transformation (e.g., a triangle increasing in size
and/or saturation). If children learn the trajectory of change
and if prediction is at the core of perception, then a subsequent
statically presented object should trigger the perceptual system
to anticipate the “next state”. To test this, children were asked
to make same/different judgments that should, by hypothesis,
be interfered with by the learned trajectory. Children became
less able to detect pairs that were the “same” when asked to
make judgments about the dimension that they had seen varied.
Furthermore, there was evidence that two dimensions could be
made more integral by covarying them simultaneously. Both
of these results were simulated with a simple connectionist
model constructed to embody a predictive mechanism. Taken
together, these results lend support to the idea that the perceptual system is designed to make predictions in time and that
this architecture gives a “dynamic” aspect to perception.

Introduction

Perception is an interaction in time between a dynamic mind
and a dynamic world. It is crucial to the understanding of
this process that both sides of the relation are changing in
time. This paper examines two key implications of this fact:
1) an element of prediction must be inherent in the perceptual
process, and 2) the system should be adaptable to a changing
environment.
There is ample evidence for the adaptability of the perceptual system in the short and long term. In the short term,
the evidence shows up in the form of aftereffects and priming. For example, motion aftereffects (MAEs), illusions of
motion (without displacement) that occur after viewing real
motion in a certain direction for a short time, are considered
to be perceptual adaptations that serve to keep the system in
balance (Anstis, Verstraten, & Mather, 1998). In the long
term, adaptation shows up as the perceptual learning of new
psychological dimensions and features and the readjustment
of the relative attention paid to existing dimensions (Goldstone, 1998). In brief, our perceptual systems constantly tune
themselves to the environment.
Furthermore, our perceptual systems must also be tuned to
anticipate the future. In the short term, the system must be
able to predict, at a very low level, how our environment and
the things in it change and appreciate which changes are normal and which are unexpected. Normal changes include regular transformations along dimensions, for example changes
in position, size, orientation, luminance, pitch, and so on.

Experiment
If an adaptable, predictive mechanism is built into our lowlevel perceptual systems then it should be possible to prime
the system to anticipate and perceive change as in the momentum effects, even when tested with static objects. If the
primed change is along a dimension, this might disrupt the
perception of the value for this dimension in a subsequently
presented static object. If caused by an adaptable, predictive
mechanism, this disruption would have two characteristics:
1. a perceptual shift in the direction of the primed change;
and
2. less certainty about the precise value of the dimension.2
1

Of course it is possible that both of these theories are operating.
This is analogous to uncertainty principles in physics, although
it also stems from the imperfection that will be inherent in any physical predictive mechanism, especially in circumstances where it has
only had a brief exposure to the trajectory that it is trying to learn to
predict.
2

571

the child, pointing out what they should have done, and then
continue the sequence. If, after 32 trials, the child had not yet
grasped the task, the training phase was repeated. If they still
had not grasped the task after three passes, the subject’s data
was replaced.
In the second phase, the priming phase, all children
were shown a simple video animation that lasted 80 seconds
and consisted of 20 repetitions of a transformation of two
shapes. The transformation that children saw depended on
their condition assignment and will be described in the next
section, however the instructions were identical for all four
conditions. Children were told that they were playing a game
in which they were supposed to press the space bar whenever the shapes stop changing and begin to change back .
The game was simply a ruse to help keep the children paying
attention to the crucial animations.
The nal phase of the experiment, the test phase, was
similar to the training phase. Here subjects were again told to
press the space bar as quickly as possible whenever they saw
a pair of shapes that were the same size. In the test phase,
the shapes being compared were either a pair of circles or a
pair of squares. Half of the comparisons were the same size
and half were different. The shapes were either both blue or
both red, with their saturations varying as described in the
next section. As in the warm-up phase, the computer emitted
a beep whenever a new pair was displayed and a different
pitched beep whenever the space bar was pressed. No feedback was provided during the test phase.
During the test phase, each pair was displayed for exactly
1.25 seconds. After being given the instructions, and prior to
starting, subjects were warned that the speed would be fast
and that they should get ready. There were 32 test stimuli in
this phase, broken down into four sets of eight. After each
set of eight, the computer would pause and the subject would
be reminded of the instructions, and told to get ready again.
Test trials were presented to subjects in one of four random
orders. To ensure that children were still on task, any child
that pressed the space bar on at least 20% or more than 80%
of the test trials was replaced.

This experiment deals with the second characteristic. It
was designed to test the hypothesis that priming the perceptual system with bidirectional change along a dimension
could lead to perceptual spreading along it. Such an effect
should make it more dif cult for perceivers to make accurate
comparisons along this dimension subsequent to experiencing this priming. In particular, the spreading should increase
the likelihood that perceivers will see two things that are actually the same as being different on the dimension.
In this experiment, this hypothesis was evaluated using a
task where the dimensional change was expansion and contraction in size . Thus, it was expected that subjects would
have more dif culty judging two shapes as being the same
size after exposure to change along the size dimension than
after being exposed to no change, or to change along an irrelevant dimension. In this experiment, color saturation was used
as the control dimension. The participants were preschoolaged children under the assumption that the developing perceptual system is more sensitive to these priming effects.
The use of preschool children was also motivated by the
desire to investigate the usefulness of a predictive mechanism
to a developing perceptual system. Based on the simple idea
that things that change together go together , the hypothesis
was formulated that if the perceptual system adapts to a coherent transformation along more than one dimension, these
dimensions might become perceptually fused , or more integral in the sense formalized by Garner and Felfoldy (1970).

Method
The experiment was a between-subjects design. Subjects
were randomly assigned to one of four conditions. There
were also four possible orderings of the test trials (see below).
Subjects were randomly assigned to one of these four orders,
which were counter-balanced across the four conditions.
Participants Thirty-two children from the Bloomington,
IN area have participated. Children were all between 4 years
and 4 years, 8 months of age. (Mean age was 4.3 years.)
Procedure The experiment was divided into three phases,
all of which used a computer to present the stimuli.
In the rst, warm-up phase, subjects were familiarized
with the computer and trained to press the space bar whenever they were presented with a pair of shapes on the screen
that were the same size. This phase was the same for all subjects, regardless of what condition they were in. The items
presented included pictures of various common and colorful
objects (e.g. balls, ags, hearts, etc). Across trials matching and mismatching objects and matching and mismatching
sizes varied orthogonally so as to instruct the child as to the
importance of attention to size only.
Subjects were presented with 32 warm-up comparisons,
starting at a slow presentation rate and gradually increasing
to 1.25 seconds per pair. Whenever a new pair appeared, the
computer would emit a short beep. A different pitched beep
would sound whenever the space bar was pressed. If an error
was made (either the pair were the same size and the child
failed to press the space bar, or the pair were different sizes
and the child incorrectly pressed the space bar), the computer
would emit a lower beep and the warm-up sequence would
stop. The experimenter would then explain the mistake to

Materials The priming phase was designed to teach the
perceptual system a predictable trajectory of change. There
were four possible animations used corresponding with the
four conditions. All animations showed the gradual transformation of a pair of side-by-side triangles. The left and right
triangle always transformed identically and in synch with one
another. The left triangle was always red and the right triangle
was always blue. The four conditions were as follows:
1. Control: increasing and decreasing saturation;
2. Size-Only: increasing and decreasing size;
3. Correlated: both size and saturation increasing and decreasing: the bigger the triangles got, the more saturated, and
the smaller they got, the less saturated;
4. Anti-correlated: both size and saturation increasing and
decreasing: the bigger the triangles got, the less saturated,
and the smaller they got, the more saturated.
Since size is at least one of the transformed dimensions in
Conditions 2-4, the three conditions will collectively be referred to as the Size-change conditions. Conversely, since
saturation is at least one of the transformed dimensions in
Conditions 1, 3 and 4, these three conditions will be referred

572

to together as the Saturation-change conditions.
The minimum size (area) of the triangles in the three
Size-change animations, as displayed on the monitor, was
1.83cm2 (base 1.63cm, height 2.25cm); the maximum size
was 29.25cm2 (base 6.5cm, height 9.0cm). The minimum
saturation in the Saturation-change animations was 0.1 on a
scale of 0 to 1; the maximum was 1.0. For Condition 1, the
size of the triangles remained constant at 29.25cm2. For Condition 2, the saturation of both triangles remained constant
at 0.8. For the Size-change animations, the triangles always
started and ended at their smallest point.
In the Testing phase, there were four different types of
comparison possible. These were among shapes that were
either big, medium or small in size (see Table 1) and high,
medium or low in saturation (1.00, 0.45 and 0.20 respectively
in the range of 0 1).

Identical

Avg. Num. of Misses

4.0

2.0

0.0

Control

Size-Only

Anti-correlated

Correlated

Animation Condition

Figure 1: Average Misses for Same-Size trials
1.75
1.50

Circles
9.33
5.25
2.33

1.25
1.00

d'

Squares
27.56
12.25
4.86

3.0

1.0

Table 1: Actual On-Screen Areas (in cm2 )
Term
Big
Medium
Small

Sat. Diff.

0.75

The four types of comparison were as follows:
1. Identical: Pair being compared were identical in both
size and saturation. There were four variations of this:
big/high, big/low, small/high, small/low.
2. Saturation Different: Pair being compared were the
same size, but differed in saturation. There were two variations of this: big/high compared to big/low and small/high
compared to small/low.
3. Size Different: Pair being compared were the same saturation, but differed in size. There were four variations of
this. In the rst two, the pair were both high saturation. In
the second two, the pair were both low saturation. One of
the shapes was always medium size and the other was always
either small or big.
4. Both Different: Pair being compared were different both
in size and saturation. In these pairs, the bigger shape always
had the higher saturation. (This was done for reasons related
to other experiments not reported here.) As in the Size Different comparisons, one of the shapes was always medium size
and the other was always either small or big.

0.50
0.25
0.00

Control

Size-Only

Anti-correlated

Correlated

Animation Condition

Figure 2: Average disciminibility

An analysis from the perspective of Signal Detection Theory (SDT) was also performed. Figure 2 shows the average
d 0 (discriminability or sensitivity) for each of the four conditions.3 As can be seen, the three Size-change conditions
had a signi cantly lower average d 0 value (p < .03) than the
Control Condition. (In this context, lower d 0 values mean
that it is harder to distinguish Same Size shapes from Different Size shapes.) The three Size-change conditions also
had a marginally signi cant (p < .06) higher average β value
(criterion for pressing the space bar): they were less likely to
respond Same Size in general. Also, the Correlated condition by itself also had a signi cantly lower d 0 (p < .01) and
higher β (p < .03) than the Control condition.
Figure 3 shows the False Alarms, again broken down by the
four conditions and two types of relevant test trial (Size Different trials on the left and Both Different trials on the right).
Considering Figure 3, notice that the gap between the number
of False Alarms in the Different Size, Same Saturation trials
and the number of False Alarms in the Different Size, Different Saturation trials increased in the conditions where size
and saturation were covaried (Correlated and Anti-correlated)
over what it was in the conditions where they were varied in-

Results
Children’s errors were classi ed by the type of comparison
trial in which they occurred and the condition to which the
subjects were assigned. There were two broad classes of errors: Misses, where the shapes were the same size yet the
subject failed to press the space bar, and False Alarms where
the shapes were different size and yet the subject incorrectly
pressed the space bar.
Figure 1 shows the average number of Misses broken down
by the four priming conditions and two types of relevant test
trial (Identical trials on the left and Saturation Different trials on the right in each group). As can be seen, there were
signi cantly more Misses in the Size-Change conditions as
compared to the Control Condition (p < .02 for the Identical
trials, p < .002 for the Saturation Different trials).

3
For one subject in Condition 2, d 0 was infinite because the subject had a Hit Rate of 1.0. For this subject, d 0 was estimated using
an adjusted Hit Rate of 15.5/16 = .9688, yielding a d 0 of 3.01.

573

Sat. Same

The speeded comparison task focusing on just size was
chosen speci cally to induce errors
it is known that children have dif culty ignoring variation on an irrelevant dimension to focus on just one dimension (Smith & Evans, 1989).
The point of interest here was how the type of errors would
be affected by the prior experience with a systematic trajectory of change. It is noteworthy that in the Control and Sizeonly conditions, performance was not signi cantly different
for test comparisons where the saturation was different than
it was for comparisons where the saturation was the same.
Thus, size and saturation were fairly separable in these two
conditions. The fact that the gap in the number of False
Alarms widened in the two covaried conditions over the
two independent conditions is taken as support for the second hypothesis: It appears that coherent, predictable change
along both the size and saturation dimensions caused them
to become more integral, such that saturation differences had
signi cantly more of an effect on size comparisons. This nding has developmental implications, providing a possible account for how low-level features and properties that start out
as perceptually distinct can congeal into perceptual dimensions when they are experienced as covarying in a predictable
and coherent way. One thing that is very interesting about the
present results is that it took only a relatively short exposure
(80 seconds) to such regularity to produce this effect! Further,
the effect appeared to decay slowly (not measurably) over the
course of the experiment. Taken together, the quick adaptation and slow decay of the effect suggest that an interesting
avenue of future research will be to explore the relationship
between the amount of experience with certain types of transformation and the duration of the adaptation. This type of
predictive learning of correlations may well be a potent part
of the developmental process.

Both Diff.

5.0

Avg. Num. of False Alarms

4.0

3.0

.

2.0

1.0

0.0

Control

Size-Only

Anti-correlated

Correlated

Animation Condition

Figure 3: Average False Alarms for Different-Size trials

dependently. The graph shows the group averages and the
error bars are the standard error of these means. For each
subject, the difference between their number of False Alarms
on the Different Size, Same Saturation trials and the Different Size, Different Saturation trials was computed. This difference was found to be signi cantly above zero in both the
Correlated (p < .006) and Anti-correlated (p < .028) conditions. Comparing to the Control and Size-only Conditions, it
can be seen that no such difference existed where the dimensions were varied independently during the priming event.
When the within-subject difference scores of the two covaried conditions are compared to the difference scores of the
two independent conditions, the covaried differences are
signi cantly bigger (p < .04). Thus, differences in the irrelevant dimension of saturation had a larger effect on subjects’
comparisons of size during test when size and saturation were
covaried together during the priming event.
To see if the effect of the priming event looses its potency
over time, the probability of error on any given test trial was
correlated with how long after the priming phase it occurred.
Table 2 shows the correlation coef cients between error frequency and trial. In no case was the correlation signi cant.
Thus, performance did not change throughout the test phase.

Signal Detection Theory: An Alternative Explanation
Signal Detection Theory (SDT) is a type of analysis that assumes that the system responsible for making decisions is inherently noisy, such that, for example in the case of this experiment, even when the shapes are obviously very different in
size there is still a chance that the subject will respond Same
Size . What makes SDT really useful here is that it provides
a way of separating subjects’ propensity to respond Same
Size (their bias or criterion) from their ability to tell the difference between the Same Size test trials and the Different
Size trials. The predicted perceptual spreading effect should
result in a decrease in this second ability, not merely a change
in bias. And, importantly, there was a signi cant difference
in discriminability (d 0 ) triggered by experience with the Sizechange transformations. Subjects had a harder time distinguishing between Same Size and Different Size test trials in
these conditions, as the spreading hypothesis would predict.
The assumption of inherent noise that underlies SDT also
provides another way to explain the data. It is possible that
priming the system with changing size ( dynamic priming ),
increased the internal noise in the perceptual system related
to size judgements. (In SDT terms, this amounts to increasing
the variance of both the signal absent and signal present
distributions.) This would show up in the analysis as a decrease in d 0 , as seen. This provides a potentially useful description at a different level of abstraction. Indeed, the uncertainty stemming from the proposed predictive mechanism

Table 2: Correlation between trial number and error prob.
Condition
Control
Size-only
Correlated
Anti-correlated

r
−.12
.12
−.17
−.29

Discussion
The results appear to support the rst hypothesis of perceptual spreading. Priming with size transformations in the three
Size-change conditions led to a decrease in the ability to detect shapes that were the same size in the Test phase. This is
consistent with spreading (bidirectional propagation) along
the size dimension due to the anticipation of change by the
perceptual system. Such spreading apparently leads to dif culties in comparison.

574

gradual, continuous variation (for which it cannot already account), it might actively train itself to predict this variation.
The model was constructed such that its predictions could be
fed back into its input units, enabling extrapolation in time
and giving perception temporal extent .
There is not room in this paper to go into the details of
the input representation and training procedure. Basically, a
shape was represented by its values on the size and saturation saturation dimensions. There were three different training sequences corresponding to the four animation conditions
in the experiment. (The Correlated and Anti-correlated conditions were equivalent in the model representations, so they
were combined into a single simulation condition called Covaried .) For each pattern in a sequence, the network was
trained to predict the next pattern. A small amount of noise
was injected into this process.
Sixteen networks were trained and tested in each condition
on the same sequences of test pairs that the children saw in the
experiment. The model made comparisons as follows: Given
two patterns to compare, one was chosen to go rst, passed
through the network and the outputs were buffered. Then the
other pattern was passed through the network and its outputs
on the nine size units were compared to the buffered outputs
of the rst pattern using a cosine distance metric. If they fell
within 30 degrees of one another, the process was stopped.
If not, the buffered outputs from the two patterns were then
fed back in as inputs (keeping the same context layer activations).5 This process repeated until either the output vectors
eventually came within λ = 30 degrees of one another or 10
iterations had gone by. Whenever this process terminated, the
following value was calculated:

might provide a mechanistic explanation (at a lower level) for
the increased noisiness.
Yet another possibility, and perhaps a simpler account of
the present data than the adaptive prediction hypothesis, is
that the dynamic priming of size increased the children’s
sensitivity to size differences, enabling them to make nergrained distinctions of size. In this case, the inherent noisiness of the system would have more of an effect. Subjects
would be more sensitive to very slight discrepancies in size
caused by noise and would be less likely to respond Same
Size in general (i.e., they would both Miss more and False
Alarm less). This would show up in the analysis as a difference in their response bias, β.
The fact that there was a marginally signi cant increase
in β in the three Size-change conditions means that this hypothesis cannot be ruled out here as a possibility.4 It should
be noted that this alternative only offers an explanation for
the overall decrease in performance in the three Size-change
conditions relative to the Control condition, but it does not
address the effects related to increased Integrality. Nor does
this bias-shift account explain the (more signi cant) shift in
d 0 , which indicates that subjects in the size-change conditions
really did have more dif culty distinguishing the Same Size
test trials from the Different Size trials. For this, an adaptive,
prediction mechanism still seems to be reasonable.
A motion aftereffect? The analysis of the probability of
error as a function of trial is interesting because it shows that
the induced effect does not decay rapidly. If it were a typical
motion aftereffect, 80 seconds of exposure to the animation
motion might be expected to trigger on the order of 10 seconds of aftereffect, as motion aftereffects typically decay with
the square root of the time exposed to the inducing motion
(Anstis et al., 1998). Yet the error rate showed only a very
slow decay, lasting over a minute.
Furthermore, the present effects are also set apart from typical motion aftereffects in that they occur after seeing bidirectional motion. Motion aftereffects typically occur in the opposite direction from the direction of inducing motion (Anstis
et al., 1998). The theory behind this is that the visual system
adapts to correct what it (mistakenly) takes to be drift in the
neurons detecting motion in the inducing direction and lowers their weight relative to neurons sensitive to motion in the
opposite direction. If this accurately re ects what really happens (in a MAE), then bidirectional motion should not produce the aftereffect because there will be no incentive for the
visual system to suspect drift in the rst place, the opposing
motions will cancel each other out.
Thus, it would appear that the effect observed in this experiment is a new and different type of perceptual adaptation that
is related to traditional motion aftereffects, but underwritten
by a potentially different mechanism.

How Different = Iterations Required +

1 − cos(θ)
.
1 − cos(λ)

(1)

This equation gives an estimate on how different the two (dynamic) representations were from one another. The more iterations that were required, the more different the patterns
were. θ is the nal angle between the two output vectors.
Finally, the model decided whether or not to say Same
Size for the patterns based upon how different they were
from one another. The likelihood of saying same was inversely proportional to the score computed by Equation 1.
This was operationalized with:
Say Same = (rand < exp(

−How Different
))
β

(2)

where rand was a random number uniformly distributed
between 0 and 1, and β was a bias parameter that was set to
2 for this simulation.
Results and Discussion Figures 4 and 5 show the average
Misses and False Alarms (respectively) over the simulation
runs. These are comparable to Figures 1 and 3.
As can be seen, the basic trends that were present in the
child data were also present in the model simulations. In
particular, there were signi cantly more misses in the Sizechange conditions as compared to the Control condition. Furthemore, the degree of integrality signi cantly increased in

Model Simulation
The basic principle of perceptual prediction was embodied in
a connectionist model consisting of a simple recurrent network (Elman, 1990). Its task was to actively sample its sensory input and try to predict how it changes in time. By its
nature, such a network allows for supervised learning in the
sense that it can validate its predictions by what eventually
happens. Thus, whenever the model encounters consistent,

4
5

575

This has been taken up in other experiments not reported here.
The prediction of dynamic spreading stems from this.

Identical

tation caused two dimensions that were initially fairly separable to become more integral. The model simulation then tried
to esh out one way a simple predictive mechanism could
simultaneously explain both of these effects.
Taken together, these data support the idea that perceptual
adaptations go beyond being temporary adjustments to unusual environments and can have important developmental
consequences. Indeed, this is the real stuff of development.
Long term effects are achieved as the accumulated result of
many small tweaks to the system occurring on a situationby-situation basis. Thus, understanding how the perceptual
system can and does adjust in short time windows to speci c situations should be useful towards increasing our understanding of the type of lasting changes that the architecture
can achieve. These results are admittedly only a rst step in
that understanding, but they do indicate several directions for
future work in this regard.

Sat. Diff.

5.0

Avg. Num. of Misses

4.0

3.0

2.0

1.0

0.0

Control

Size-Only

Covaried

Animation Condition

Figure 4: Misses from model simulation
Size Diff.

Both Diff.

Acknowledgements

6.0

Thank you to Linda Smith, Michael Gasser, Robert Goldstone
and Robert Port for their feedback on this research.

Avg. Num. of False Alarms

5.0

References

4.0

Anstis, S., Verstraten, F. A. J., & Mather, G. (1998). The motion
aftereffect. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 2(3), 111–117.
Changizi, M. A., Nijhawan, R., Kanai, R., & Shimojo, S. (2003).
Perceiving-the-present and a general theory of illusions of
projected size, projected speed, luminance contrast and distance.
(Under Review. Found online on 12/1/2003 at URL
http://www.geocities.com/changizi/pp3.pdf.)
Changizi, M. A., & Widders, D. (2002). Latency correction explains
the classical geometrical illusions. Perception, 31, 1241–1262.
Elman, J. (1990). Finding structure in time. Cognitive Science, 14,
179–211.
Freyd, J. J. (1992). Dynamic representation guiding adaptive behavior. In Time, action, and cognition: Toward bridging the gap.
Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Press.
Garner, W. R., & Felfoldy, G. L. (1970). Integrality of stimulus dimensions in various types of information processing. Cognitive
Psychology, 1, 225–241.
Gibson, J. J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual perception.
Hillsdale, NJ, USA: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Goldstone, R. L. (1998). Perceptual learning. Annual Review of
Psychology, 49, 585–612.
Helmholtz, H. L. F. von. (1866). Concerning the perceptions in
general. In Treatise on physiological optics (Vol. III, pp. 1–37).
(Translated by J. P. C. Southall, 1925, Optical Society of America. Reprinted in 1962, New York: Dover Publications, Inc.)
Hubbard, T. L. (1999). How consequences of physical principles
influence mental representation: The environmental invariants
hypothesis. In Fechner Day ’99: The end of 20th century psychophysics — Proceedings of the 15th annual meeting of the International Society for Psychophysics. Tempe, AZ, USA: International Society for Psychophysics.
James, W. (1890). The Perception of Time. In The Principles of Psychology (Vol. 1, pp. 605–642). Cambridge, MA, USA: Harvard
University Press.
Smith, L. B., & Evans, P. (1989). Similarity, identity, and dimensions: Perceptual classification in children and adults. In
Object perception: Structure and process. Hillsdale, NJ, USA:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.

.

3.0

2.0

1.0

0.0

Control

Size-Only

Covaried

Animation Condition

Figure 5: False Alarms from model simulation

the Covaried condition as seen in the increased False Alarm
gap of Figure 5. This was due to the fact both the size and
saturation dimensions shared the hidden layer and the network learned that each of these dimensions was a good cue to
predict the next state of the other.

General Discussion
At the core of this paper is the idea that our perceptual systems are oriented around transformations. Transformations
contain rich information about the structure of the world. Indeed, it is through this temporal structure that we perceive
atemporal structure. (For example, movement is necessary
for the detection of occluding edges.) Furthermore, perception itself is a process: it has temporal extent. There is never
a single instant when we achieve a percept.6 Moreover,
given that the objects of our perception can be changing at
the same time we are perceiving them, it behooves us to learn
to anticipate their transformations.
The experiment presented herein was designed with this
in mind. It provided evidence for a perceptual adaptation in
response to brief experience with a predictable trajectory. It
showed that there is a dynamic component involved in perception, even with static shapes that are perceptually present.
It also showed that experience with coherent transformations
might have developmental consequences, given that the adap-

6
These ideas have a long history in psychology, going back
through Gibson (1979) at least as far as James (1890) and Helmholtz
(1866).

576

