UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Promoting Flexible Problem Solving: The Effects of Direct Instruction and Self-Explaining

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0kk9v6s6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Author
Rittle-Johnson, Bethany

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Promoting Flexible Problem Solving:
The Effects of Direct Instruction and Self-Explaining
Bethany Rittle-Johnson (bethany.rittle-johnson@vanderbilt.edu)
Department of Psychology and Human Development, Vanderbilt University
230 Appleton Place, Peabody #512, Nashville, TN 37203
Abstract

Invention vs. Instruction

How do people learn flexible problem-solving knowledge,
rather than inert knowledge that is not applied to novel
problems? Both the source of the knowledge – instructed or
invented – and a central learning process – engaging in selfexplanation – may influence the development of problemsolving flexibility. Seventy-seven third- through fifth-grade
students learned about mathematical equivalence under one of
four conditions that varied on two dimensions: 1) prompts to
self-explain and 2) invention vs. instruction on a procedure.
Both self-explaining and direct instruction helped students to
learn a correct problem solving procedure. Self-explanation
promoted transfer, whereas direct instruction had both
positive and negative effects on transfer. Overall, selfexplanation is an important learning mechanism underling the
acquisition of flexible problem solving with or without direct
instruction.

Introduction
Everyday, we are faced with new problems to solve. How
do we complete our income tax return, write a new resume,
or find a new route home given recent road construction?
When faced with a problem repeatedly, we often develop
procedures for solving the problem, i.e. step-by-step
methods for solving the problem. Ideally, we learn flexible,
relatively abstract procedures that we can appropriately
apply to a variety of tasks so that we do not need to invent
new procedures when task conditions shift. Flexible,
abstract, knowledge is also a key characteristic of expertise
(Chi, Feltovich, & Glaser, 1981). Thus, understanding how
people develop flexible, abstract knowledge is crucial for
understanding learning and development and for designing
learning environments to support flexibility.
Unfortunately, people of all ages and across a large range
of domains often gain inert knowledge instead – knowledge
that is not applied to new situations (see Bransford, Brown,
& Cocking, 2001 for a review). For example, physics
students typically fail to use knowledge of physics
principles, such as Newton’s Laws, to solve everyday
problems (Halloun & Hestenes, 1985). Indeed, even
scientists sometimes fail to use their scientific knowledge to
solve mundane tasks (Lewis & Linn, 1994).
How do people learn flexible knowledge, rather than
simply gaining inert knowledge, and how can we support
this learning? In the current study, two processes were
evaluated: 1) The source of new knowledge – invention or
direct instruction and 2) A potential mechanism underlying
flexible learning - generating self-explanations for why and
how things work.

Where do new procedures come from? Typically, we
invent a procedure through problem exploration or we learn
a procedure from others (e.g. via imitation or direct
instruction). Major theories of learning and philosophies of
education differ in their emphasis on the sources of new
procedures. The current paper focuses on one source of
knowledge from other people – direct instruction – and
compares it to inventing procedures on ones own.
Invention and learning from direct instruction can both
lead to learning of the target behavior or knowledge (e.g.
Judd, 1908). However, a major concern with discovery
learning is that a substantial proportion of learners never
invent a correct procedure or engage in correct ways of
thinking (Mayer, 2004).
Another critical issue is the relative effectiveness of each
source of knowledge for supporting flexible, generalizable
knowledge. Direct instruction on a procedure can lead
people to learn the procedure by rote, to make nonsensical
errors and to be unable to transfer the procedure to solve
novel problems (e.g. Brown & Burton, 1978; Hiebert &
Wearne, 1986), whereas when people invent procedures,
they often use the procedures flexibly in new situations
(Hiebert & Wearne, 1996). Thus, there appears to be a
trade-off between instruction improving problem solving on
a restricted range of problems but potentially harming
flexible problem solving on a broader range of problems.
The current study evaluates the pros and cons of direct
instruction versus encouragement to invent a procedure on a
single task and evaluates the role of self-explaining as a
learning mechanism under both conditions.

Self-Explaining
A potential mechanism underlying the impact of instruction
and invention on procedural flexibility (and learning more
generally) is learners’ attempts to generate explanations for
why and how things work. Successful learners typically
generated explanations while studying worked-examples to
problems. These explanations included identification of gaps
in understanding and linkages to previous examples or
sections in the text (Chi, Bassok, Lewis, Reimann, & Glaser,
1989). Subsequent research indicates that learners ranging
from 5-years-old to adulthood in domains ranging from
number conservation to computer programming can learn
more if they are prompted to generate self-explanations
(Aleven & Koedinger, 2002; Bielaczyc, Pirolli, & Brown,
1995; Chi, de Leeuw, Chiu, & LaVancher, 1994). These
findings are cooborated by findings from classroom-based
research on individual differences and on cross-cultural

1161

differences in teaching practices (Stigler & Hiebert, 1997;
Webb, 1991). In all cases, generating explanations is
associated with greater learning.
Thus, generating
explanations to explain how or why things work is a critical
learning process across the lifespan and across domains.
However, the informal theories or working hypotheses
that learners develop are not always correct. Rather, learners
often develop incorrect theories, and engaging these incorrect
theories is critical to supporting learning (Bransford et al.,
2001). Evidence from a variety of domains indicates that
learners’ incorrect informal theories are resistant to change
and often persist after formal instruction that contradicts their
theories (e.g. Halloun & Hestenes, 1985).
Prompting students to generate explanations for incorrect,
as well as correct, solutions, beliefs, etc, may be one method
for helping learners overcome incorrect prior knowledge.
For example, Siegler (2002) found that prompting students to
explain both correct and incorrect solutions led to greater
procedural flexibility than only explaining correct solutions.
In the current study, learners in the self-explanation condition
were prompted to explain both correct and incorrect solutions
to maximize the effectiveness of the explanation condition.
Prompting students to self-explain has been used in
conjunction with a variety of sources of new information
(reading a text, studying worked example, problem-solving
with feedback), but has not been used in combination with
direct instruction on a correct procedure nor has prior
research directly compared the role of self-explaining under
different sources of new knowledge. Prompting students to
engage in an effective learning process after direct
instruction may help students to understand and generalize
the procedure. Similarly, prompts to self-explain may help
students to invent and generalize correct procedures when
they do not receive direct instruction (Siegler, 2002).

The current study
These issues were evaluated in the context of children
learning to solve problems that tap the idea of mathematical
equivalence. Mathematical equivalence is a fundamental
concept in both arithmetic and algebra. Unfortunately, most
children in elementary and middle school do not seem to
understand equivalence, and this poses a major stumbling
block for students’ success in algebra (Kieran, 1981). Novel
problems such as 3+4+5=3+__ challenge students’ naïve
understanding of equivalence in a familiar arithmetic
context, and approximately 70% of fourth- and fifth-graders
do not solve these problems correctly (Alibali, 1999; RittleJohnson & Alibali, 1999). In the current study, third
through fifth graders learned to solve these mathematical
equivalence problems under one of four conditions based on
two factors: 1) direct instruction on a correct procedure vs.
prompts to invent a new way to solve the problems and 2)
prompts for self-explanations vs. no prompts.

Method
Participants. Initial participants were 121 third- through
fifth- grade students from an urban, parochial school serving
a working- to middle-class population. In line with previous
studies using mathematical equivalence problems, 34
students (29%) solved at least half of the mathematical
equivalence problems correctly at pretest and thus were
excluded from the study. One student was excluded because
he did not take the pretest, and 9 students were excluded
because they were absent on the day of the delayed posttest,
so they could not be included in the repeated-measure
analyses. The final sample consisted of 37 third-graders,
22 fourth-graders, and 18 fifth-graders.
Design. Students were randomly assigned to one of four
conditions based on crossing two factors: 1) instruction on a
correct procedure or prompts to invent a procedure and 2)
prompts to self-explain correct and incorrect solutions or no
prompts. There were 20 participants in the instruction +
explain condition, 21 students each in the invent + explain
and instruction-only conditions, and 15 students in the
invent-only condition (unequal group sizes due to random
differences in absenteeism at the delayed posttest).
P r o c e d u r e. Students completed the pretest in their
classrooms. Students who solved at least half of the
mathematical equivalence problems incorrectly participated
in a one-on-one intervention session.
During the
intervention session, there were 3 phases: warm-up,
intervention (instruction problems and practice problems, all
with accuracy feedback), and follow-up. At the end of this
session, students completed the immediate paper-and-pencil
posttest. Approximately 2 weeks later, students completed
the delayed paper-and-pencil posttest in their classrooms.
Intervention session. All problems presented during this
session were in standard format (see Table 1). At the
beginning of the session, students solved two warm-up
problems, explained how they had solved each problem, and
were told whether they had solved the second problem
correctly to motivate students to try to figure out correct
ways to solve the problems. During the intervention phase,
all students solved 8 problems. On all problems, students
explained how they solved the problem and then were told if
they had solved it correctly. The first two problems were the
instructional problems and were both in the format
A+B+C=A+_ (A+ problems).
For students in the
instruction conditions, the experimenter explained a correct,
add-subtract, procedure for solving the problem. For the
problem 4+9+6 = 4+__, the experimenter said: “You can
add the 4 and the 9 and the 6 together before the equal sign
(gesture a “circle” around the 3 numbers), and then subtract
the 4 that’s over here, and that amount goes in the blank.
So, try to solve the problem using this strategy.” Students in
the invention conditions were asked to try to figure out a
new way to solve the problems.

1162

Table 1: Procedural Knowledge Problem Types.
Problem Type
Problem Format
Standard

A+B+C=A+__ (A+)
A+B+C=__+C (+C)

No repeated addend

A+B+C=D+__
A+B+C=__+D

Subtraction too

A+B-C=A+__
A+B-C=__ - C

Swap sides

A+__=A+B+C
__+C=A+B+C

Table 3: Procedures for Solving Equivalence Problems
Procedures

Sample student explanation

Correct Procedures

Next, students solved 6 practice problems that alternated
between the two standard problem formats (see Table 1).
After solving each of these problems, students were also
told the correct answer to the problem. Students in the
explain conditions were then prompted to try to explain a
correct and an incorrect solution. They were shown the
solution that two students at another school had gotten – one
correct and one incorrect – and were asked to explain both
how each student had gotten the answer and why each
answer was correct or incorrect. The intervention trials were
presented on a laptop computer that recorded accuracy and
solution times. At the end of the intervention, students
solved two follow-up problems without feedback and
explained their solutions.
Assessments. The pretest, immediate posttest and delayed
posttest were identical except that only a subset of the
procedural knowledge problems were presented at pretest.
The procedural knowledge assessments contained 4 types of
problems, as shown in Table 1. Letters stand for numbers
and indicate when a number was repeated within a problem.
The standard problem formats were used during the
intervention. One instance of each of the standard and no
repeated addend problems was presented on the pretest.
One instance of each of the problems in Table 1 were
presented on the posttests. Students were encouraged to
show their work when solving the problems. The 5 items on
the conceptual knowledge assessment are shown in Table 2.
Table 2: Conceptual Knowledge Assessment Items
Item

Coding (2 pts)

Define equal sign

Mention “the same” or
“equal” (2pts)

Rate definitions of equal sign: Rate 4
definitions as “always, sometimes or
never true”

Rate “two amounts are
the same” as “always
true” (2 pts) or
“sometimes true” (1 pt)

Group Symbols: Place symbols such as
=, +, <, & 5 into three groups

Group =, >, and <
together (2 pts)

Recognize use of equal sign in multiple
contexts: Indicate whether 8 problems
such as 8=2+6 and 3+2=6-1 make sense

7 or 8 correct (2 pts); 6
correct (1 pt)

Correct Encoding: Reproduce 4
equivalence problems from memory

Correctly reproduce
problem (.5 point each)

Equalize

“I added 8 plus 7 plus 3 and I
got 18 and 8 plus 10 is 18.”

Add-subtract

“I did 8 plus 7 equals 15 plus
3 equals 18 and then 18 minus
8 equals 10”

Grouping

“I took out the 8’s and I added
7+3.”

Incorrect Procedures
Add all

“I added 8+7+3+8, which is
26”

Add to equal sign

“8 plus 7equals15, plus 3
is18.”

Incorrect
Grouping

“I added 8 plus 7.”

Coding. On the procedural knowledge assessments,
students’ percent correct was used (arithmetic slips were
ignored). Students’ verbal explanations during the
intervention were used to code students’ procedure use on
those problems (see Table 3). On the conceptual knowledge
assessment, each item was scored from 0-2 points for a
possible total of 10 points (see Table 2).

Results
The effects of condition were assessed on three outcomes:
procedural learning, procedural transfer, and conceptual
knowledge. Procedural learning was assessed 3 times:
verbally at the end of the intervention and on the immediate
and delayed posttests. Procedural transfer and conceptual
knowledge were assessed twice – on the immediate and
delayed posttest. Results were evaluated for each outcome
using repeated-measures ANOVAs with time of assessment
as a within-subject factor and instruction vs. invention and
prompts to explain (yes/no) as between subject factors.
Pretest conceptual and procedural knowledge were included
in all analyses as covariates.

Procedural Learning
First, consider procedural learning, which was assessed
using problems identical in form to those presented during
the intervention (see Table 1). As shown in Figure 1,
generating explanations and, to some extent, receiving
instruction led to greater accuracy on the learning problems.
There was a main effect for explaining, F (1, 71) = 6.11, p =
.02, ηp2 = .08, and a marginal effect for instruction, F (1,71)
= 2.84, p = .10, η p2 = .04, and no interaction between the
two conditions and no effects of time of assessment.

1163

No Explain

Invent Only
Invent+Explain

100

Explain

90

Instruct Only

0.7

80

Instruct+Explain

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

60
50
40

0

Invent

70

of

Children

0.8

Percent

Avg. Proportion Correct (Learning)

1
0.9

30
20

Instructed

10

Figure 1: Effect of condition on learning problems

Instruct Only
Instruct+Explain

80

Follow-up2

Follow-up1

Practice +C

Practice A+

Practice +C

Practice A+

Practice +C

Practice A+

90

Instruct A+

Instruct A+

Invent Only
Invent+Explain

100

Figure 3: Use of Add-Subtract procedure trial-by-trial
during the intervention and follow-up, by condition.

70
60
50
40

50

30

45

20

40
Percent of Children

10

Follow-up2

Figure 2: Incorrect procedures: Trial-by-trial use during the
intervention and follow-up, by condition.

35
30
25
20
15
10
5
Follow-up2

Follow-up1

Practice +C

Practice A+

Practice +C

Practice A+

Practice +C

0
Instruct A+

Inspection of students’ procedure use during the
intervention provided insights into learning pathways (see
Table 3 for a description of each procedure). First, consider
students’ use of incorrect procedures. As shown in Figure 2,
during the instruction phase (first two problems), students in
the instruction condition quickly abandoned their incorrect
procedures whereas most students in the invention
conditions persisted in using incorrect procedures. During
the practice phase, when students first encountered a
problem in a different format (+C problem), there was a
sharp return to using incorrect procedures. Students in the
instruction condition continued to struggle with the +C
problems, especially if not prompted to self-explain.
Students in the invent-only condition struggled across
problems – at least 50% continued to use incorrect
procedures, whereas students who were prompted to selfexplain steadily decreased in use of incorrect procedures.
Next, consider students’ use of the correct instructed
procedure – add-subtract (see Figure 3). Students in the
instruction conditions quickly learned the add-subtract
procedure and many students persisted in using this
procedure across a majority of problems. However, a third
of the students did not apply the procedure when the surface
structure of the problem changed (+C problems), even
though the procedure required only a very minor adaptation.
Of students in the invent conditions, about 15-20% invented
and used this procedure. Next, consider the other
commonly used correct procedure – grouping (see Figure 4).
Students in the invent conditions gradually increased their
use of this procedure. Prompts to explain also helped

Practice A+

Follow-up1

Practice +C

Practice A+

Practice +C

Practice A+

Practice +C

Practice A+

Instruct A+

Instruct A+

0

Invent Only
Invent+Explain
Instruct Only
Instruct+Explain

Instruct A+

Perc ent of Children

0

Figure 4: Use of Grouping procedure trial-by-trial during
the intervention and follow-up, by condition.
students to invent and maintain use of the procedure on the
follow-up problems. Finally, students in the invent
conditions also used the equalizer procedure on 12% of
intervention trials, whereas students in the instruct+explain
condition used it on 6% of trials and students in the instructonly condition used it on less than 1% of trials.
Overall, over half of students in the invent-only group did
not learn a correct procedure through feedback alone. Less
than a quarter of students in the other conditions had similar
difficulty. Rather, direct instruction quickly led children to
adopt a correct procedure, and prompts to explain helped
students to invent new procedures.

Procedural Transfer
Next consider students’ ability to transfer their procedures
to novel problems (see Figure 5). Overall, there was a main
effect of explaining F(1, 71) = 3.93, p = .05, ηp2 = .05 and
no overall effect of instruction, interaction between the two,
or effect of test time. Prompts to explain supported transfer
of procedures to novel problems, but instruction vs.
invention did not have a general effect on transfer (although
see below for an important caveat). Inspection of success
on individual problems suggested that the impact of

1164

Avg. Proportion Correct (Transfer)

Discussion

No Explain

0.6

Explain

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Invent

Instructed

Figure 5: Effect of condition on transfer performance
condition varied by problem type. To evaluate this, a
second repeated-measures ANOVA was conducted with
transfer problem type (no repeated addend, including
subtraction, swapping sides; see Table 1) as an additional
within-subject factor. Indeed, there was an interaction
between problem type and instruction, F (2, 142) = 9.37, p <
.001, η p2 = .12, but no interaction of explaining with
problem type. Follow-up analyses indicated that instruction
improved performance on problems without a repeated
addend, F (1, 71) = 7.89, p = .006, ηp2 = .10. The instructed
procedure did not need to be modified to solve problems
without a repeated addend. Instruction had no reliable
effect on the other problem types. However, focusing on
the most difficult individual problem (A+B-C=_-C),
receiving instruction actually harmed performance,
regardless of explaining, F (1,71) = 13.12, p = .001, ηp2 =
.16. For example, on the delayed posttest, very few of the
students who received instruction solved the problem
correctly, whereas at least a third of students in the invent
conditions solved the problem correctly (see Figure 6). This
may be because the invented grouping procedure is easier to
apply to this problem than add-subtract.
Conceptual Improvement
Finally, there was no effect of condition on gains in
conceptual knowledge. Although students as a whole made
small gains in conceptual knowledge from pretest to
immediate posttest (m = 2.9 vs. 3.1 out of 10), t(76) = 2.0, p
=.05, and made even great gains after a delay (m = 3.8),
t(76) = 5.7, p < .001, the amount of gain did not vary by
condition.
No Explain

Proportion of Children Solving
Correctly

0.5

Explain
0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0
Invent

Instructed

Figure 6: Effect of condition on hardest transfer problem,
A+B-C=_-C, at delayed posttest

Self-explanation is a critical learning mechanism that
leads to greater procedural flexibility. The current findings
converge with past findings that better learners
spontaneously produce self-explanations and that prompting
learners to generate explanations leads to greater learning
(Aleven & Koedinger, 2002; Bielaczyc et al., 1995; Chi et
al., 1989; Chi et al., 1994). The current findings expand
past research by demonstrating that self-explanation is an
important learning mechanism regardless of instruction. For
students who received direct instruction on a correct
procedure, prompts to self-explain had little influence on the
use of the instructed procedure. Rather, the prompts
promoted generation of additional correct procedures.
Indeed, 57% of students in this condition used at least two
correct procedures during the intervention, compared to
only 24% of students who received instruction but were not
prompted to explain. Using multiple procedures is a
common feature of development and is beneficial to
performance (Siegler, 2002). Prompts to explain under
invention conditions also promoted invention of a correct
procedure (Siegler, 2002).
Overall, students in the explain conditions were better
able to solve transfer problems, regardless of instruction.
Analysis of students’ explanations revealed that students
rarely explained the rationale for why a solution was
correct. Approximately 8% of explanations included
mention of equal sides or the importance of the equal sign.
Rather, most why explanations where ambiguous or
described the procedure for solving the problem. Combined
with the finding that explanations did not influence
conceptual learning, this suggests that prompts to selfexplain on a problem-solving task promote exploration of
alternative procedures but not reflection on conceptualunderpinnings of the procedure. Self-explanations are one
promising mechanism for explaining why some learners
make improvements in conceptual understanding after
learning a new procedure while others do not (RittleJohnson & Alibali, 1999), but the current study does not
support this hypothesis.
The current findings have important implications for the
debate between use of direct instruction vs. encouragement
to invent procedures. There are serious limitations to
relying on people inventing correct procedures without
guidance on effect learning processes. Half of the students
in the current study never invented a correct procedure when
receiving feedback on the correct answers alone. Some
prior research has suggested that feedback is critical to
supporting invention during exploration, but even this level
of support was insufficient for many learners (e.g Lacher,
1983). In comparison, as in previous studies, direct
instruction supported rapid adoption of a narrowly used
procedure (e.g. Alibali, 1999). A third of the students in the
instruction groups failed to generalize the add-subtract
procedure even when receiving feedback during the
intervention, and instruction only supported transfer to a
very similar problem that required no adaptation to the

1165

procedure. On the hardest problem, having received
instruction interfered with problem solving. Overall, direct
instruction by itself appears to be a quick route to inert
knowledge. However, promoting engagement in effective
learning processes, such as self-explaining, helped students
to avoid many of the downsides of both invention and direct
instruction.
Overall, it is not the source of procedure, but rather
engagement in a fundamental learning process, selfexplanation, that is important for promoting flexible
problem-solving.

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by a small research grant from
Peabody College, Vanderbilt University. A special thanks
to Jennifer Behnke and Gayathri Narasimham for collecting
the data and to Kathryn Swygart, Betsy Thomas and
Stephanie Crisafulli for help coding and entering the data.

References
Aleven, V. A. W. M. M., & Koedinger, K. R. (2002). An
effective metacognitive strategy: Learning by doing and
explaining with a computer-based Cognitive Tutor.
Cognitive Science, 26(2), 147-179.
Alibali, M. W. (1999). How children change their minds:
Strategy change can be gradual or abrupt. Developmental
Psychology, 35(1), 127-145.
Bielaczyc, K., Pirolli, P. L., & Brown, A. L. (1995).
Training in self-explanation and self-regulation strategies:
Investigating the effects of knowledge acquisition
activities on problem solving. Cognition and Instruction,
13(2), 221-252.
Bransford, J. D., Brown, A. L., & Cocking, R. R. (2001).
How People Learn: Brain, Mind, Experience, and School
(Expanded Edition ed.). Washington, D.C.: National
Academy Press.
Brown, J. S., & Burton, R. R. (1978). Diagnostic models for
procedural bugs in basic mathematical skills. Cognitive
Science, 2(2), 155-192.
Chi, M. T. H., Bassok, M., Lewis, M. W., Reimann, P., &
Glaser, R. (1989). Self-explanations: How students study
and use examples in learning to solve problems. Cognitive
Science, 13(2), 145-182.
Chi, M. T. H., de Leeuw, N., Chiu, M. H., & LaVancher, C.
(1994). Eliciting self-explanations improves
understanding. Cognitive Science, 18(3), 439-477.
Chi, M. T. H., Feltovich, P. J., & Glaser, R. (1981).
Categorization and representation of physics problems by
experts and novices. Cognitive Science, 5, 121-152.
Halloun, I. A., & Hestenes, D. (1985). The initial
knowledge state of college physics students. American
Journal of Physics, 53, 1045-1055.
Hiebert, J., & Wearne, D. (1986). Procedures over concepts:
The acquisition of decimal number knowledge. In J.
Hiebert (Ed.), Conceptual and procedural knowledge:

The case of mathematics (pp. 199-223). Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Hiebert, J., & Wearne, D. (1996). Instruction,
Understanding, and Skill in Multidigit Addition and
Subtraction. Cognition and Instruction, 14(3), 251-283.
Judd, C. H. (1908). The relation of special training to
general intelligence. Educational Review, 36, 28-42.
Kieran, C. (1981). Concepts associated with the equality
symbol. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 12(3), 317326.
Lacher, M. B. (1983). Effects of feedback, instruction, and
initial performance level upon training and persistence of
verbal rehearsal. Journal of General Psychology, 108(1),
43-54.
Lewis, E. L., & Linn, M. C. (1994). Heat energy and
temperature concepts of adolescents, adults, and experts:
Implications for curricular improvements. Journal of
Research in Science Teaching, 31(6), 657-677.
Mayer, R. E. (2004). Should there be a thre-strikes rule
against pure discovery learning? The case for guided
methods of instruction. American Psychologist, 59(1), 1419.
Rittle-Johnson, B., & Alibali, M. W. (1999). Conceptual
and procedural knowledge of mathematics: Does one lead
to the other? Journal of Educational Psychology, 91(1),
175-189.
Siegler, R. S. (2002). Microgenetic studies of selfexplanation. In N. Garnott & J. Parziale (Eds.),
Microdevelopment: A process-oriented perspective for
studying development and learning (pp. 31-58).
Cambrdige: Cambridge University Press.
Stigler, J. W., & Hiebert, J. (1997). Understanding and
Improving Classroom Mathematics Instruction. Phi Delta
Kappan, 79(1), 14-21.
Webb, N. M. (1991). Task-related verbal interaction and
mathematics learning in small groups. Journal for
Research in Mathematics Education, 22(5), 366-389.

1166

