UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Qualitative and Quantitative Effects of Surprise: (Mis)estimates, Rationales, and FeedbackInduced Preference Changes While Considering Abortion

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9678x64x

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
de Osuna, Jennifer Garcia
Ranney, Michael
Nelson, Janek

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Qualitative and Quantitative Effects of Surprise: (Mis)estimates, Rationales,
and Feedback-Induced Preference Changes While Considering Abortion
Jennifer Garcia de Osuna (jmgdo@berkeley.edu)1
Michael Ranney (ranney@cogsci.berkeley.edu)
Janek Nelson (jamin@socrates.berkeley.edu)

University of California, *Graduate School of Education, 4533 Tolman Hall, Berkeley, CA 94720
this general hypothesis about (especially surprising)
minimalist interventions––for instance, that a single,
germane, critical number may foster conceptual change.
Some studies have noted that learning related base rate
values (seeds) affects one’s estimates (e.g., about spatial
judgments or populations; Brown & Siegler, 1996; Brown,
2002, etc.). While intuitions about real world quantities are
often incorrect (Brown, 2002), exposure to base rates
increases the accuracy of one’s estimates on closely related
topics, and the benefits of such exposure can have lasting
effects even months later (Brown & Siegler, 1996). Little is
known, though, about the effects of base rate queries and
feedback on preference/policy formation and change, so we
suggest three “ifs.” 1) If intuitions about real world numbers
are often flawed, then they are likely being used to create
anomalous or skewed personal policies among people. 2) If
feedback can correct these intuitions, such feedback might
affect individuals’ policies. 3) If people are generally biased
toward evidence (and they are; e.g., Schank & Ranney,
1991), then giving them factual, numeric feedback––say, the
U.S. abortion rate, our main example––should affect
conceptions and interpretations about the abortion rate, and
thus affect both personal policies on abortion and the
explanations supplied when justifying their policies. Among
other questions, we seek to answer the following: Can
supplying factual, numeric information about abortion
markedly change one’s abortion policy? Does receiving the
actual rate as feedback affect the Points of View (POVs) by
which people reason about abortion? Most such POVs (see
below), involve moral or ideological reasoning aspects;
religion plays a role, as well. (Space constraints prohibit
reviewing the vast abortion literature here, e.g., Bernas &
Stein, 2001, and we seek to focus on more paradigmrelevant aspects, in any case.)
We explore and measure phenomena of these sorts using
a novel paradigm, Numerically Driven Inferencing (NDI;
Ranney et al, 2001), and one of NDI’s central empirical
methods: EPIC (Estimate, Preference, Incorporate, and
Change; cf. Lurie & Ranney, 2003, who introduced PEIC
and IC as complementary methods). Such analytic frames
allow us to study both estimates of, and dynamically
changing preferences about, base rates (e.g., Munnich,
Ranney, Nelson, Garcia de Osuna & Brazil, 2003). NDI also
represents an emerging coherentist framework in which
numbers are the “tips of the iceberg” of a person’s thinking
about a network of (magnitude-relevant) evidential and
hypothetical propositions. A prime aspect of NDI’s
paradigmatic novelty is in its elicitation of what people
prefer a quantity to be; it is further unique in its analysis of

Abstract
The Numerically Driven Inferencing (NDI) paradigm, and
one of its methods, EPIC (Estimate, Prefer, Incorporate, and
Change), are used to study both one’s estimates and the
effects of numeric feedback on one’s personal policies
(herein, about abortion). Both quantitatively and qualitatively,
92 undergraduates offered estimates and preferences for the
legal U.S. abortion rate, explaining and justifying them. After
receiving the (usually, quite surprising) true rate as feedback,
they provided another (typically changed) preference-andrationale. Results show that people vastly underestimated the
abortion rate, and largely advocated decreases in it––both preand post-feedback. Feedback caused most of those who
initially wanted no change in the abortion rate both to
abandon the status quo and change preference-justifications;
after feedback, two thirds of these students preferred a rate
decrease, while the rest preferred an increase. Although many
researchers hold that belief revision and conceptual change
are quite difficult to elicit, these and other results show
dramatic effects of simple base rate feedback on policy
evaluation. Our findings highlight the importance of having
and using data when reasoning about society-engaging topics
such as abortion rates. This experiment represents a new way
to study numerically-based reasoning that includes the
subjective natures of our personal beliefs and social lives.

Please answer this question: “As a percentage of the current
U.S. population, what is its legal immigration rate?” Does a
typical response of 10% (Ranney, Cheng, Garcia de Osuna
& Nelson, 2001) sound right? The true value is about thirtyfold less––only 0.3%. Does (or ought) this datum alter your
immigration preference––your personal policy––some?
Common sense may suggest that beliefs, decisions, and
rationales will (or should) change with new information, but
literatures from science learning to attitude change (e.g.,
from evolution or inertia to executions or diversity; Ranney
et al., 2001), suggest that people are often unmoved by new
data. Classical economics even suggests that preferences are
exogenous (e.g., from estimates; Lurie & Ranney, 2003).
The Theory of Explanatory Coherence and its models
(e.g., ECHO) describe a set of principles that guide belief
evaluation and revision. Two such principles are that we (a)
weigh evidence more strongly than conjecture, and (b)
accept propositions explained more parsimoniously (Ranney
& Thagard, 1988; Read & Marcus-Newhall, 1993; Schank
& Ranney, 1991; Thagard, 1989). True base rates, then,
would seem to represent parsimonious evidence (relative to
a host of instances or anecdotes) and thus be (1) weighted
heavily in one’s reasoning about an issue and (2) evaluated
as quite acceptable. The present paper explores aspects of
1

The order of the first two authors is alphabetical. *For J. Nelson’s address, substitute in “Department of Psychology, 3510 Tolman Hall.”

422

(Our lab has since replicated this abortion item’s results, and
has noted the effects both of varying how the rate is framed–
–e.g., with respect to a million fertile women, Munnich et
al., 2003––and of omitting a numeric referent.)

how such individuals’ policies (as base-rate relative
preferences) evolve in the face of numeric information.
Using EPIC to study abortion numeracy, we asked each
individual to Estimate the current legal abortion rate––per
one million live births––and then offer a Preference (and
thus a policy, relative to one’s estimate) for what each
would want the current rate to be (had one the power to
change the rate), and give reasons for both numbers. They
then received feedback (the actual abortion rate), which they
Incorporated into their knowledge of the abortion issue.
Students then provided a second preference and explanation;
by contrasting their former and new preferences, estimates,
and reasons, we can note Changes in preferences and
policies that resulted from the feedback. Essentially, then,
EPIC has four queries, about a rate X that has a value Y: (1)
What is X’s value? (2) What should X’s value be? (3) X’s
value is actually Y, so (4) Now, what should X’s value be?

Coding Scheme for Written Justifications
As part of NDI’s methodology, the written justifications for
abortion preferences (before and after feedback) were coded
qualitatively using verbal analysis methods. We developed a
14-category coding scheme by extracting major patterns
from elicited explanations, and then coded all justifications
with the scheme. A student’s explanation could fit up to
three of the 14 coding categories, with many requiring more
than one code. Inter-rater reliability for coding the reasons
was 90% among three coders. For ease of discussion, the 14
categories were grouped into six broader categories called
Points of View (POVs) by which people justified their
personal abortion rate preferences. These POVs are: (1)
preferring a utopian world in which abortions are essentially
unnecessary or moot; (2) that the abortion rate should reflect
the greater good for society; (3) that abortions should
always be allowed/legal, regardless of circumstance; (4) that
abortions should only be allowed in some circumstances; (5)
that abortions should never be allowed (e.g., illegal) under
any circumstances; and (6) other/no explanation.2

Method
Participants, Design, Materials, and Procedure
Psychology pool undergraduates (N = 92) participated, as
part of their course requirement. (The “N” will often be
somewhat fewer in our Results, due to occasional missing
data points.) The experiment used a pre- and post-feedback
repeated measure, within a 2X2 factorial between-group
design, although the two independent variables (Ranney et
al., 2001) are tangential to the present issues and so omitted
here, due to space constraints. Responses included numeric
(continuous) estimates and preferences, written explanations
of the estimates and preferences, and Likert ratings about:
(a) general preference about a rate change, (b) familiarity
with the topic, and (c) how much one cared about the topic.
This paper examines only one topic from a set of 16
(usually less emotion-laden) randomized topics: the U.S.
legal abortion rate (which we defined for students––and
represents the vast majority of abortions). Each person was
first asked to estimate the current rate––per one million live
births––and to explain the bases of that estimate. Next, each
was asked how low and high the true abortion rate would
have to be to be surprising, and to rate the confidence that
the rate would fall in one’s “non-surprise interval.” Students
were then each asked to give a numeric preference for the
abortion rate, had one the power to change it, and to explain
the preference. Then, they rated, on a 5-point Likert scale,
how familiar they were with the topic of abortion rates, and
how much they cared about the topic (with both ratings in
contrast to the average American). As another measure of
rate preference, on a 1-5 scale, students were also asked
whether they generally preferred (1) a big decrease, (2) a
decrease, (3) neither an increase nor a decrease, (4) an
increase, or (5) a big increase. After this, feedback was
provided––the then-current abortion rate––an oftenshocking 335,000 per million live births (gleaned from
independent federal agencies, e.g., the CDC & NIH; nb. the
rate has since dropped some). Each was then asked to
consider the feedback and again give a numeric preference,
and to explain that final preference. Finally, the students
were again asked both to rate how much they cared about
the topic and to offer a 5-point general preference rating.

Results
Findings are reported following the EPIC procedure:
Estimates and Preference (EP), then Incorporation
(feedback) and Change (IC). We also focus analysis on (a)
written, post-preference, justifications, (b) correlations
between preferences and some Likert ratings, and (c), two
especially interesting subsets of participants: those who
wanted a rate of zero abortions, and those who notably
changed the direction of their preferences after feedback.
(Space limits do not permit us to report all, or even all
statistically significant, findings; cf. Ranney et al., 2001.)
2

POVs (1-6) map onto the original 14 (a-n) code categories as
follows. POV-1: (a) “perfect world” in which all pregnancies are
desired or yield loving adoptions, (b) “birth control,” with perfect
contraception preventing all unwanted pregnancies, and (c)
“responsibility” by full abstinence or pregnancy-completion. (I.e.,
a-c respondents wish abortions need never be considered.) POV-2:
(d) abortions needed to optimize social benefit (e.g., economics,
improved life-quality for all, and crime reduction). (POVs 3-5
concern availability or legality.) POV-3: (e) “better for mother or
unborn child,” as some wish to reserve abortion as perhaps better
for the mother (e.g., her health) and/or fetus’s predicted life, (f)
“basic ‘pro-choice’ position,” as some didn’t expand on being prochoice, (g) “women’s right,” with which they may choose abortion,
and (h) “status quo,” such that the abortion rate ought not change.
(In categories e-h above, rationales include notions that abortions
ought always be available.) POV-4: (i) “not for contraception,” by
which some decried abortions-as-birth-control, and (j) “emergency
only,” with abortions only allowed in extreme cases (e.g., after
rape or to save a mother’s life). POV-5: (k) “murder/loss of life,”
in which the fetus’s loss of life is deplored, and/or abortion is seen
as murder, and (l) the “basic con position,” as some didn’t expand
on being anti-abortion. (Codes k-l reflect being fully anti-abortion.)
POV-6: (m) a comment/rationale that was not captured by prior
codes (e.g., “Why are you asking me this?”) or (n) no explanation.

423

Estimates and Initial Preference/Policy
Participants greatly underestimated the abortion rate. The
median estimate was 5,000 abortions per million live births
(M=50,479; S.D. = 148,469), much less than the true––and
often evocative––rate of 335,000. (Due to high variance, we
focus more on median estimates, as they usually inform
more than do means.) In general, students’ initial numeric
preferences differed from what they thought the true rate to
be (i.e., there was, overall, a significant difference between
one’s estimate and initial preference; t(88)=-2.62, p=.01).
The median initial preference was only 100 abortions per
million live births (M = 19,381; S.D. = 110,372), or 4,900
less than the median estimate––that is, a policy advocating a
98% (or fifty-fold) decrease. Thus, most people (62.2%)
preferred rate decreases, relative to their estimates. Counterintuitively, ratings of familiarity and caring about the topic
did not significantly correlate with estimate accuracies,
indicative of rather modest metacognition.
Recall that we also elicited initial general preference
ratings (from 1-5) for the abortion rate. These ratings tended
to favor decreasing the abortion rate (M= 2.07), and were
negatively correlated with initial caring ratings (r(90)=-.32,
p=.002). The initial numeric preferences of those who
wanted a general decrease (a “1” or a “2” rating) differed
significantly (F(1,86) = 4.33; p = .04) from preferences of
those who did not. The median initial preference was zero
for those initially wanting a (Likert scale) decrease in
abortions (n=56, M= 1,337.32; S.D.= 3,577). The median
initial preference was 2,000 abortions per million live births
for those who initially preferred either (a) an increase, or (b)
neither an increase or a decrease on the Likert scale (n=34,
M= 50,001; S.D.=178,723). Before feedback, the majority
(62%) chose either “prefer big decrease” or “prefer
decrease” for the abortion rate, prior to feedback, mirroring
the numeric preferences. Only two participants wanted an
“increase,” and none preferred a “big increase.” The rest
(35.6%) preferred “neither an increase nor a decrease.” As
expected, given the great tendency to underestimate, initial
preferences were negatively correlated with later being
surprised by the feedback (r(89)= -.25, p=.02).
Of the 67 explanations by those who initially preferred a
decrease in abortion (relative to their estimate), the bulk of
them fell into three POVs: 26 explanations held that
abortions should never be allowed, 24 referred to a utopian
world in which abortions are unnecessary or moot, and 10
asserted that abortions should only be allowed in some
circumstances. For example, one decrease-preferring
participant (with Estimate: 100,000; Initial Preference: 0)
wrote, “It would be great if every baby was cherished
enough to be allowed to live.” Another person preferring a
decrease (Est: 1,000; Init. Pref: 10) stated, “Because I don’t
believe women should end a child’s life unless it affected
their own physical health.” People preferring a rate equal to
their estimates most often indicated that abortions should
always be allowed (17 of 29 explanations); the remaining
justifications were from all other POVs except that for the
"Other/no explanation" (see Table 1). For example, one of
these status-quo students (Est: 800; Init. Pref: 800) stated,
“[I prefer] as many as necessary to not have unwanted
children. I believe people have the right to have an abortion

Figure 1: Distributions of general preference ratings
(Likert; 1-4 out of 1-5), before and after feedback.
if they cannot have the child for personal reasons.” All three
people whose preferences exceeded their estimates indicated
that abortions ought always be allowed. For example, one
(Est: 20,000; Init. Pref: 1,000,000) stated, "People should
choose whether or not they can bring a kid to the world."

Incorporation (of Feedback) & Preference Change
After feedback, the median numeric preference increased to
1,000 abortions per one million live births (M = 108,178;
S.D.= 174,688). However, that median is a larger 99.7%
decrease-policy from the true abortion rate of 335,000.
(Recall that the median initial preference called for a 98%
decrease-policy in the rate, relative to their estimates.) Final
numeric preferences still significantly differed from the
feedback value (t(88)=-12.25, p<.001), and represented a
non-proportionate shift in policy (p < .001 via a Wilcoxon
Signed Rank test). Mirroring this policy shift toward a
greater decrease (percentage-wise) in abortions, the mean
Likert rating for general preference dropped from 2.1 (out of
5) to 1.8 after feedback (t(89)=3.39, p=.001). After
feedback, 51.1% preferred a “big decrease,” dramatically up
from 32.6% (and 25.0% preferred a “decrease,” down
slightly from 28.3%). This movement is evident in Figure 1,
which contrasts the distribution of initial Likert ratings for
general preferences before and after feedback. Those who
initially chose “neither an increase nor a decrease” most
notably changed Likert ratings for general preferences; after
feedback, 66% of them (21 of 32) “moved off the status-quo
fence,” with five coming to prefer a “big decrease,” nine a
“decrease,” and the other seven dramatically diverging to
prefer an “increase.” In Figure 1, this scattering is seen in
the shrinking of the “Neither” bar and the growth of both the
“Big Decrease” bar and––more surprisingly––the “Increase”
bar. (Note that no one in this study ever preferred a “Big
Increase.”) This striking bifurcation of most of the (initially)
status-quo group is qualitatively analyzed below.
Mean care ratings (from 1 to 5: “not at all” to “much
more than average”), increased significantly after feedback,
from 3.29 to 3.51 (t(90)=-2.89, p=.005). Numeric and
(Likert) general preference measures concurred, because
after feedback, numeric preferences continued to differ
between those wanting either a “decrease” or “big decrease”
and those who did not (M= 1,337 and 50,001, respectively
F(1,87) = 445.8; p<.001). Interestingly, both before and
after feedback, “care” ratings were negatively correlated
with general-preference Likert ratings (respectively, r(90)= .32, p=.002; r(90)= -.21, p=.047). That is, those “caring”
more about abortion preferred more of a decrease in its rate.
Table 1 shows the effect of feedback (i.e., pre- vs. post-)
on the percentage of each POV mentioned, within the four
424

Table 1: Percent usage of POVs, from pre-feedback to post-feedback, by general/Likert preference rating.
Point of View (POV) Justification
Abortions should never be allowed
Utopian world: abortion as non- issue
Allow abortions only in some circumstances
(Other / No Explanation)
Abortion rate ought depend on the greater good
Abortions should always be allowed
Totals (i.e., each column sums to 100%)

Big Decrease (1)
PrePost48.6
40.4
40
31.6
2.9
24.6*
0
1.8
2.9
0
5.7
1.8
100
100

Decrease (2)
PrePost28.1
21.4
31.3
50*
28.1
25
0
3.6
3.1
0
9.4
0
100
100

Neither (3)
PrePost3.5
0
6.9
0
3.5
0
17.2
18.2
10.3
0
58.6
81.8*
100
100

Increase (4)
PrePost0
0
0
0
0
0
0
12.5
0
37.5*
100
50*
100
100

“semi-flippers,” 14 shifted to preferring a “decrease” (11 of
whom were “technically surprised” by the feedback, in that
335,000 fell outside of their non-surprise intervals).
Remarkably, given that almost everyone underestimated the
rate (mostly by vast amounts), the other seven changed to
wanting an increase in the abortion rate (e.g., by concluding
that numerically unwarranted taboos due to media-skewed
rate perceptions may be inhibiting abortions); indeed, six of
the seven were technically surprised by the high feedback.
For all semi-flippers, as per above, the initial (Likert)
general preference was “3” (i.e., “neither an increase nor a
decrease”). The post-feedback mean general preference for
the semi-flippers dropped to 2.43, but this aggregates a drop
to 1.64 for “decreasers-come-lately” (DCLs) and a rise to
4.00 for “increasers-come-lately” (ICLs).
Table 2 shows the POV distributions for the 21 semiflippers, pre- and post-feedback, which significantly
differed (χ2(5,N=105)=11.88, p=.036). Pre-feedback, most
of their rationales indicated that abortions should always be
allowed (12 out of the 21 people, with the other nine being
grounded in all other POVs). Post-feedback, the POVs these
students used depended entirely on whether one had semiflipped to prefer an abortion-rate increase or a decrease.
(Note: there were 22 instances, post-feedback, as one person
used two POVs.) This feedback-driven bifurcation was
total, as shown in Table 2’s last two columns; note the
complete lack of overlap, post-feedback, between the first
two POVs (rows) and the next three (i.e., excluding
“other/no explanation”). After feedback, four of the seven
ICLs justified their preferences with “abortions should
always be allowed,” while the other three justified with
“abortions should reflect the greater societal good.” (One
used both.) However, DCLs didn’t use either of these two
POVs to justify preferences: Instead, the greatest number of

levels of general preference Likert ratings that people used.
Five notable distributional changes are marked by asterisks
(*s). One such change (from 2.9% to 24.6*%) represents the
finding that, before feedback, only one of 35 “big decrease”
justifications was coded as “Abortions should be allowed
only in some circumstances,” but 14 of 57 “big decrease”
justifications were so coded after feedback.
As a rather orthogonal analysis from those above, the
following set of subsections examine three sets of
participants and how they were differentially affected by
feedback: those preferring zero abortions (both before and
after feedback), those changing their basic position on the
abortion rate, and the remaining participants.
Zero Preference Participants Of all students, 34.8%
initially wanted zero abortions. After feedback, 84.2% of the
34.8% still preferred zero abortions. Initially, such people
typically used a utopian world POV (50%), or a POV that
abortions should never be allowed (41%). Feedback spurred
only a non-significant drop in the use of a utopian world
POV (42%), concomitant with a non-significant rise in the
view that abortions should never be allowed (44%).
Preferring zero abortions before feedback was correlated
with initial caring ratings (r(88)=.24, p=.025); there was no
correlation, though, between preferring zero abortions after
feedback and final caring ratings (r(88)=.06; p=.60).
Participants Who Changed Away from "Status Quo" Of
89 respondents, 24% changed their policy direction––and
all of these 21 were those who initially preferred neither an
increase nor a decrease in abortions on the Likert scale, yet
preferred either an increase or a decrease after feedback. We
refer to these as “semi-flips,” as no one fully flipped sides
(e.g., from “increase” to “decrease” or vice versa). Of the

Table 2: POV changes for semi-flip participants/POV-instances (pre- vs. post-feedback; 21 people vs. 22 POV instances),
by general preference/Likert ratings (ICL = “increaser-come-lately;” DCL = “decreaser-come-lately”).
Pre-Feedback (out of 21 semi-flippers)
Point of View (POV) Justification
(Note: the order has changed from Table 1)
Abortions should always be allowed
Abortion rate ought depend on the greater good
Utopian world where aborting a non-issue
Abortions should never be allowed
Allow abortions only in some circumstances
(Other / No Explanation)

Neither an Increase nor Decrease
12
2
2
1
1
3

(8 became DCLs; 4 became ICLs)
(both became ICLs)
(both became DCLs)
(who became a DCL)
(who became a DCL)
(2 became DCLs; 1 became ICL)
425

Post-Feedback (of 22 POVs)
Decrease or
Increase
Big Decrease
5
0
3
0
0
8
0
3
0
3
0
0

their non-surprise intervals––even though their mean
confidence of doing so, just after offering their intervals,
was 74%. Thus, participants were roughly 3.5 times less
likely to capture the true rate than they anticipated.
The effect of the feedback on one’s preference was likely
due, in part, to its shocking magnitude. Results show that
learning the true abortion rate clearly changed reasoning
about abortions––with regard both to peoples’ preferences
and the points of view (POVs) by which they justified their
policies. While the median person went from preferring 100
abortions per million live births to preferring 1,000, since
the median estimate was 5,000 and the feedback was
335,000, students’ new preferences represented a much
more stringent relative abortion policy (from -98% to
-99.7%). Indeed, the failure to capture the feedback value in
one’s non-surprise interval was significantly correlated with
exhibiting a dramatic (i.e., non-proportionate) change in
abortion policy (r(54)=.4; p<.01).
Overall relative policy preferences also became more
fervently abortion-reducing (constrictive) on other metrics
post-feedback. There was a significant overall drop in
general Likert preference ratings for the abortion rate, after
feedback. Indeed, almost 20% more of the students
preferred a “big decrease” after learning the true rate (see
Figure 1). The justifications also changed: Before feedback,
25.2% of the full set of explanations provided that abortions
should always be allowed, while only 11.1% stated that
abortions should be allowed in only some circumstances.
After feedback, these frequencies were essentially reversed
(13.5% vs. 20.2%). The only people who showed little shift
in either their numeric preference or written justifications
were those who preferred zero abortions––before and/or
after feedback. Considering that these zero-preferring
people (a strange-bedfellows group seeming to include
utopian liberals and abolitionist conservatives; see Results)
essentially held absolutist policies (for zero abortions), it is
not surprising that the true rate did little to change that wish.
In both more quantum and qualitative senses, one of the
most dramatic of the above results is that those who initially
adopted a “status quo” policy usually changed their
positions after seeing the generally surprising base rate
feedback. Of the 32 respondents who first preferred neither
an increase nor a decrease in the abortion rate, feedback
caused 21 of them (66%) to take a directional position, thus
becoming “semi-flip” participants. Base rate feedback also
changed the POVs by which semi-flip people justified their
preferences. While before feedback, most such students
claimed that abortions should always be allowed, regardless
of circumstances, these justifications shifted dramatically
after feedback. The participants who changed to preferring
decreasing the abortion rate no longer claimed that abortions
should always be allowed, and instead largely justified their
new preferences by preferring a utopian world in which
abortions need never be considered, because either (a) all
pregnancies would be wanted (or all unwanted pregnancies
prevented), or (b) all unwanted babies would be readily
adopted by loving homes. (This is consistent with “Wow!
That’s too many!” reactions.) Conversely, those semiflippers who changed to prefer an increase after feedback
used none of the justifications eventually used by those who

their post-feedback instances involved the utopian POV
(eight of 14 instances); the remainder of these participants’
explanations included the POVs that either abortions should
never be allowed (three of 12 instances) or should be
allowed only in some circumstances (three of 12 instances).
Thus, most semi-flippers initially wrote that abortions
ought always be allowed, yet not one DCL wrote that belief
after feedback. Further, semi-flippers were so polarized after
feedback that there was no overlap at all between the POVs
of the ICLS and the DCLs. For example, one initiallystatus-quo participant who first both estimated and preferred
a rate of 20,000 (per million live births) wrote, “I think it is
a good number.” After feedback, the same person changed
views, preferring an increase in the abortion rate to 500,000,
stating: “I think there are too many kids being [born] into
this country, especially since a lot...are being raised by
teen/bad/druggie parents.” In contrast, a semi-flipper who
changed to prefer a decrease in the abortion rate postfeedback, at first both estimated and preferred a rate of 800,
stating, “[I prefer] as many as necessary to not have
unwanted children. I believe people have the right to have
an abortion if they cannot have the child for personal
reasons.” Post-datum, this person wanted a rate of 200,000
(again, a decrease from the feedback’s 335,000), stating, “A
lot of these probably happen because women/men aren’t
taking the right precautions and with education or birth
control. I think this number could start to decrease. But I do
believe women have the right to abortions, but not the right
to use abortions as a birth control method.”
Remaining (“Non-Zero, Non-Semi-Flip”) Participants
The distributional shift in POVs was also significant for the
rest of the people (χ2 (5, N=80)=139.24, p<.001)––those
who preferred abortion rates above zero, but did not change
the direction of their general preference (Likert) rating after
feedback. Such people were neither semi-flippers nor those
wanting zero abortions, and so represent a less extreme
subgroup than those discussed above. It is instructive to note
how the relative POV use changed for these intermediate
“non-semi-flip/non-zero-preference” participants: Before
feedback, the top three abortion POVs for these non-zero,
non-semi-flip students were equally split (with 23.5% of
instances apiece) among “allowed in some circumstances,”
“never allowed,” and “always allowed.” After feedback,
though, the POV that abortions should be allowed in some
circumstances represented 33.9% and the two absolute
POVs that abortions should either always or never be
allowed––made up 16.9% and 18.6% of the responses,
respectively. The other POVs’ percentages changed rather
less (utopian world: 13.8Æ18.6; other/no explanation:
9.8Æ10.3; should depend on greater good: 5.9Æ1.7).

Discussion
Respondents largely estimated the legal U.S. abortion rate to
be far lower than the true rate––seven times lower in mean,
and 67 times lower in median. In fact, 79% of students were
“technically surprised” by the feedback, such that the true
abortion rate was not contained in their elicited non-surprise
intervals. Thus, only 21% of our students captured the true
value (335,000 legal abortions per million live births) in
426

reasoning that lies beneath the iceberg-tips of estimation and
quantitative preference. NDI’s methods (e.g., EPIC)
represent new tools with which science may better probe the
submerged prominences and embedded fissures of thought.

changed to prefer a decrease, and vice versa. Instead, these
increasers-come-lately largely continued to claim that
abortions should always be allowed, regardless of
circumstances, or that the abortion rate should reflect the
greater good for society. So, while semi-flip participants
seemed rather homogenously like-minded before feedback,
when it caused them to bifurcate into divergent positions (to
prefer an increase or a decrease) there was no overlap in the
types of justifications used. This is a dramatic effect,
considering that the intervention is a single, albeit highly
reliable, piece of information (i.e., 335,000:1,000,000).

Acknowledgments
We thank Laura Germine, Geoff Saxe, Franz Cheng, Ed
Munnich, Nick Lurie, Patti Schank, Christine Diehl, Steve
Adams, Michelle Million, Dan Appel, Luke Rinne, Sujata
Ganpule, David Levine, Barbara Ditman, Tracy Craig, Tae
Kim, Danny Kahneman, and our UC-Berkeley Reasoning
Group, among others, for comments.

Some Implications and Extensions

References

Our results show some of the effects of numerical
feedback on personal preferences and policies regarding
topics such as abortion––that is, topics for which the
feedback is often surprising and quite far from individuals'
estimates. More recent work from our laboratory observes
this phenomenon in many realms, involving dozens of items
and their rates––about incomes, inflation, executions, home
ownership, etc.––and even SAT percentile use in college
admissions. Lurie and Ranney (2003) are extending this
work even further, into the arena of health-care research
funding, and have proposed a general model that relates
numeric estimates, preferences, feedback, and seeds.
One implication of this work is the need to improve
citizens’ thinking about critical base rates. For many of the
topics our Reasoning With Numbers group employs, many
people are clearly quite unaware of crucial numbers related
to an issue (Ranney, et al., 2001), and they even have low
metacognitive knowledge-awareness (e.g., no significant
correlation, for abortion, between familiarity and accuracy).
Therefore, our lab has carried out a variety of promising
classroom-based experiments, from grades 5-12, to foster
such metacognition (e.g., Munnich, Ranney, & Appel,
2004). Among other goals, our curricula are meant to
improve students’ abilities to (a) estimate (e.g., by
disconfirming sub-par, early, estimate-hypotheses and
bringing more knowledge and accountability to bear), (b)
prefer (or justify what they prefer, e.g., by reflecting on
more dimensions influencing one’s wishes), (c) utilize
feedback (e.g., by “letting go” of one’s estimate), and (d)
triangulate or “N-angulate” (e.g., by seeking relevant
external information sources). Curricular assessments show
broad numerical reasoning gains over control students (e.g.,
in estimation; Munnich, Ranney, & Appel, 2004).
Most people use information other than statistics (e.g.,
ethics, pragmatics, and conventions) to form their positions,
and even use misconceptions of true statistics, at times. Still,
the actual numbers, especially when surprising, can
significantly affect how they think about the issue. Thus,
NDI results contrast with views of scholars in diverse fields
who suggest that learning, transfer, belief revision, and
attitudinal (or conceptual) change are quite difficult to foster
(Munnich, Ranney, & Appel, 2004; Munnich et al, 2003;
Ranney et al., 2001). Incorporating numeric feedback––even
just a single, critical, number––can often dramatically
change how one views an issue and reasons about one’s
positions. Further, such changes clearly transcend the
domain of numbers, in that there is much non-numeric

Bernas, R., & Stein, N. (2001). Changing stances on abortion during case-based reasoning tasks: Who changes and
under what conditions. Discourse Processes, 32, 177-190.
Brown, N.R. (2002). Real-world estimation: Estimation
modes and seeding effects. In B.H. Ross (Ed.) Psychology
of Learning and Motivation, 41, New York: Academic.
Brown, N.R. & Siegler, R.S. (1996). Long-term benefits of
seeding the knowledge-base. Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review, 3, 385-388.
Lurie, N., & Ranney, M. (2003, November). Estimates,
Preferences, and Preference Change: Biasing, Debiasing,
and Seeding Effects in Thinking About Base Rates. Paper
presented at the annual meeting of the Society for
Judgment and Decision Making, Vancouver, Canada.
Munnich, E.L., Ranney, M.A., Appel, D.M. (2004).
Numerically-Driven Inferencing in instruction: The
relatively broad transfer of estimation skills. To appear in
Proceedings of the Twenty-sixth Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Munnich, E.L., Ranney, M.A., Nelson, J.M., Garcia de
Osuna, J.M., & Brazil, N.B. (2003). Policy shift through
Numerically-Driven Inferencing: An EPIC experiment
about when base rates matter. Proceedings of the Twentyfifth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 834-839). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Ranney, M., Cheng, F., Garcia de Osuna, J., & Nelson, J.
(2001, November). Numerically Driven Inferencing: A
new paradigm for examining judgments, decisions, and
policies involving base rates. Paper presented at the
annual meeting of the Society for Judgment and Decision
Making, Orlando, FL.
Ranney, M., & Thagard, P. (1988). Explanatory coherence
and belief revision in naive physics. Proceedings of the
Tenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society
(pp. 426-432). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Read, S.J., & Marcus-Newhall, A. (1993). Explanatory
coherence in social explanations: A parallel distributed
processing account. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 65, 429-447.
Schank, P. & Ranney, M. (1991). The psychological fidelity
of ECHO: Modeling an experimental study of explanatory
coherence. Proceedings of the Thirteenth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.892897). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Thagard, P.(1989). Explanatory coherence. Behavioral &
Brain Sciences, 12(3), 435-502.
427

