UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Reinforcement Learning of Dimensional Attention for Categorization

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/04q789kv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Philips, Joshua L.
Noelle, David C.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Reinforcement Learning of Dimensional Attention for Categorization
Joshua L. Phillips & David C. Noelle
(

JOSHUA . L . PHILLIPS , DAVID . NOELLE

@ VANDERBILT. EDU)
Vanderbilt University
Nashville, TN 37235 USA

Abstract
The ability to selectively focus attention on stimulus dimensions appears to play an important role in human category learning. This insight is embodied by learned dimensional attention weights in the ALCOVE model (Kruschke, 1992). The success of this psychological model
suggests its use as a foundation for efforts to understand the neural basis of category learning. One obstacle to such an effort is ALCOVE’s use of the biologically implausible backpropagation of error algorithm to
adapt dimensional attention weights. This obstacle may
be overcome by replacing this attention mechanism with
one grounded in the reinforcement learning processes
of the brain’s dopamine system. In this paper, such a
biologically-based mechanism for dimensional attention
is proposed, and the fit of this mechanism to human performance is shown to be comparable to that of ALCOVE.

Introduction
Human category learning performance cannot be easily
explained without recourse to a mechanism for selective dimensional attention (Shepard et al., 1961). Dimensional attention is the cognitive process which emphasizes task relevant stimulus dimensions while deemphasizing others. Thus, contemporary formal models of
categorization, such as the Generalized Context Model
(GCM) (Nosofsky, 1984), have incorporated adaptable
dimensional attention parameters. By adjusting these parameters in a category-specific fashion, the GCM has repeatedly provided excellent fits to human data reflecting
the frequency (or probability) with which each stimulus
is recognized as an instance of a target category. When
the GCM is applied to experimental results, dimensional
attention parameters are freely varied to optimize the
model fit. This means that, while the GCM provides a
powerful account of learned categorization performance,
it offers no explanation for how dimensional attention is
adjusted over the course of learning.
This shortcoming of the GCM has been addressed by a
connectionist model called ALCOVE (Kruschke, 1992).
ALCOVE incorporates the GCM’s formalization of category knowledge, but it also provides a precise algorithm for modifying the attentional “weight” assigned to
each stimulus dimension, based on feedback provided
to learners on their categorization judgments. In a typical category learning experiment, learners are presented
with stimulus objects, one at a time, and are asked to



make classification judgments for each. Immediately following each judgment, feedback is provided, typically
informing the learner of the correct category label for the
preceding stimulus. Once learning is complete, categorization judgments on transfer stimuli, for which no feedback is provided, can provide a window into the structure
of the learned category knowledge. The ALCOVE model
uses the feedback provided during training to calculate
an “error signal”, which is simply the difference between
the category assignment made by the model and the specified “true” category. A variant of the backpropagation
of error learning algorithm (Rumelhart et al., 1986) is
used to communicate this error signal to an early stage
of stimulus encoding, and this backpropagated error signal is used to adjust ALCOVE’s dimensional attention
weights. Like the GCM, ALCOVE provides good fits to
human performance data on learned categories. Unlike
the GCM, ALCOVE provides a detailed account of how
dimensional attention is shaped by experience.
ALCOVE has been proposed as a model of psychological processes, with virtually no aspiration to explain
the neural basis of human category learning. Despite this
fact, the empirical successes of ALCOVE and its connectionist formalization make the model a tempting candidate for a coarse characterization of associated brain
mechanisms. Perhaps ALCOVE can be refined, with
each of its proposed psychological mechanisms mapped
onto a corresponding detailed account of the underlying
neural machinery. One feature of ALCOVE that stands
in the way of such a theoretical reduction is its use of
the backpropagation of error algorithm in order to learn
dimensional attention weights. This powerful learning
algorithm has long been criticized for its lack of biological plausibility (Crick, 1989), suggesting that the brain
cannot be adapting dimensional attention based on such
a gradient-based technique (c.f., O’Reilly (1996)).
As a first step toward a biological model of category
learning, we replaced the backpropagation-based dimensional attention mechanism used by ALCOVE with a reinforcement learning mechanism intended to reflect the
role of the brain’s dopamine (DA) system in learning.
This role for dopamine has been formalized by other researchers in terms of an algorithm called temporal difference (TD) learning (Sutton, 1988; Montague et al.,
1996). Versions of ALCOVE which adapt dimensional
attention weights using the biologically supported TD

1101

learning method, instead of the more computationally
powerful but biologically implausible backpropagation
method, were found to fit human performance data about
as well as the original ALCOVE. Thus, this work offers
a more biologically realistic model of the adaptation of
dimensional attention without sacrificing accuracy in accounting for human categorization behavior. Also, the
ability to capture human performance with the highly
stochastic TD learning method suggests that cognitive
mechanisms for adapting dimensional attention may not
need to be particularly precise.

Background
ALCOVE Architecture
The ALCOVE (Kruschke, 1992) model of category
learning is a feedforward connectionist model that involves three layers of processing units (see Figure 1(a)).
The input layer consists of a set of units that each correspond to a single dimension in the stimulus psychological space. Explaining the structure of this perceptual
representation is outside of ALCOVE’s scope. When fitting ALCOVE to human data, multidimensional scaling
(MDS) techniques are typically applied to collected stimulus similarity ratings in order to discern the psychological space used by human learners (Shepard, 1962a; Shepard, 1962b). Each input unit has its own dimensional attention weight, αi . These weights are non-negative scalar
values that modulate the amount of attention paid to
the corresponding stimulus dimension. Higher αi values
magnify the differences between stimuli along the given
dimension, making them easier to discriminate based on
that dimension. As learning progresses, these weights
are adjusted via the backpropagation of error algorithm.
The hidden layer in ALCOVE contains a set of units
that are arranged in psychological space, one for each
training exemplar. The activation level of each hidden
unit is determined by the following equation:


ahid
j

exp



c

∑ αi  h ji
i

r

ain
i 

r q



where ahid
is the activation of hidden unit j, c is the
j
specificity of the hidden units, αi is the attention weight
for input unit i, h ji is the preferred stimulus input for hidden unit j along stimulus dimension i, ain
i is the activation value of input unit i, r is the psychological distance
metric, and q is the similarity gradient. Hidden unit activity is at a maximum when the inputs match the preferred
stimulus of the unit (i.e., ain
i matches h ji ). This activation
fades exponentially as the stimulus becomes more distant
from the preferred exemplar in psychological space, with
the c, r, and q parameters controlling exactly how activation decreases with psychological distance.
Finally the output layer contains a set of units receiving activation from the hidden layer via association
weights. Each output unit corresponds to a category label that might be assigned to a stimulus. These units

are standard linear units, with their activation levels, aout
k ,
computed as the sum of exemplar unit activation levels,
ahid
j , weighted by the corresponding association weights,
wk j . Output unit activations are mapped onto response
probabilities using an exponential Luce choice rule:
exp φaout
K 

PK

∑ exp
k

φaout
k 

where P K is the probability of selecting category K for
the current stimulus, and φ is a gain term. These response
probabilities may be used to compare network responses
with human performance data.
After the presentation of each stimulus and the consequent outputs are produced, the output unit corresponding to the
 correct response is presented with a target activation level of  1, and other units are presented with targets of 1. An error signal consisting of the difference
between aout
k and these targets is used to adjust weight
values (though output units that “overshoot” their target
values are assigned zero error). The association weights
are then adjusted using this error signal directly (i.e., using the delta rule), but the selective attention weights are
adjusted based on a backpropagated error signal. The resulting weight update equations are:
∆wout
kj
∆αi

λα ∑

λ w tk


∑

j  k

tk

hid
aout
k  aj



akout  wk j  ahid
j c  h ji


ain
i 


∆wout
kj

is the adjustment value for the association
where
weight from hidden unit j to output unit k, ∆αi is the adjustment value for the attention weight for input unit i,
λw and λα are the learning rate parameters for the association weights and attention weights, respectively, and tk
is the target value for output unit k.

Temporal Difference Learning
Electrophysiological studies of the dopamine neurons
of the basal ganglia have suggested that the firing rates
of these cells code for changes in expected future reward (Shultz et al., 1997). This is particularly interesting
because a measure of change in expected reward is the
key variable of a reinforcement learning method called
temporal difference (TD) learning (Sutton, 1988). This
has led a number of researchers to develop TD learning
models of the role played by the midbrain dopamine system in learning (Barto, 1994; Montague et al., 1996).
In the TD framework, a continuous reward value (r) is
delivered on each time step (t), with positive reward being desirable. A neural system called the adaptive critic
learns to predict expected future reward (V ), given features of the current situation. When future rewards are
exponentially discounted by a factor, γ (between 0 and 1),
with immediate rewards being valued more than temporally distant ones, the change in expected future reward
 is given

between two consecutive time steps
by:

1102

δt

r t  γV t

V t

1

This δ value is called the temporal difference (TD) error.
The global TD error value can be used to drive learning in the adaptive critic, improving predictions of future reward, and it can also be used to adapt connection
weights in neural networks which select actions, pushing those choices toward actions that regularly lead to
reward. Models of this kind have been used to explain
motor sequence learning in the striatum (Barto, 1994) as
well as other forms of learning. We propose that this
form of reinforcement learning may also be used to learn
dimensional attention weights that lead to correct categorization responses and, thus, reward.

Modeling Approach
Applications of TD learning typically focus on choosing
an action from a discrete set. There is currently no clear
understanding of how to apply these methods to domains
in which a continuous output is needed. Dimensional attention weights are continuous parameters, however, so
some modification to standard TD learning is needed to
apply this technique to the adaptation of dimensional attention. We have devised two novel connectionist architectures to accomplish this. Our strategy encodes attentional weight vectors (with one αi weight per dimension)
across a single layer of standard connectionist processing units, called the attention map layer. Each unit in
this layer possesses a fixed preferred attentional weight
vector, and activation of a unit encourages the use of that
unit’s preferred dimensional attention weights. The activation level of each unit is largely determined by its individual bias weight, and the TD learning method is used
to adapt these bias weights so as to optimize reward.
At the start of each trial, each of these attention map
units is activated, to some degree, by its bias weight.
The units then compete to determine the set of dimensional attention parameters to be used by ALCOVE, and
the result of this competition is a set of such attention
weights. ALCOVE then processes the current stimulus
in its usual fashion, producing a categorization judgment.
ALCOVE’s association weights are then modified in the
usual way, using the delta rule, but the dimensional attention weights are handled differently. If ALCOVE confidently chooses the correct category, it is rewarded. Otherwise, it is not. The TD error, δ, is calculated based on
this reward signal, and this error is used to modify the
bias weights of all active attention map units.
Two different architectures for the attention map layer
were investigated. The first of these used conjunctive
coding, resulting in a localist representation of dimensional attention. Under this scheme, the preferred attentional weight vectors of processing units were distributed
evenly throughout the weight vector space. Thus, each
unit corresponded to a position in attention weight vector space, and the positions of all of the units in the attention map layer formed a uniform grid in this space.
On each trial, a simple winner-take-all competition determined the one unit whose preferred weight vector would
specify the distribution of attention for that trial. Learning occurred only for the winning unit, using the follow-

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: (a) ALCOVE Network Architecture. (b) Tile
Coding Of The Attention Map Layer — A single unit is
centered in each tile.
ing weight update equation for
 its single bias weight:
∆wi

λr r

ai f neti

where λr is the attention map learning rate, r is the reward for the current trial, ai is the activation value of the
winning attention map unit, and f neti is the derivative
of the unit’s activation function (which was the standard
logistic sigmoid). Note that this is the standard method
for updating weights based on TD error, under the condition of absorbing
reward (i.e., we don’t predict reward

past the end of the trial). In this
 case, ai acts as our reward
prediction (V t 1 ), and we do not predict beyond this
trial, so V t
0 and δ r ai . A reward value (r) of
 1 was delivered to the network on trials in which ALCOVE selected the correct category label and produced
a confident response (i.e., all output units within 0 5 of
their targets). A reward of 0 was delivered, otherwise.1
Our second attention map architecture used tile coding, resulting in a distributed representation of dimensional attention. In this case, the attention map layer
was partitioned into disjoint tilings, where each tiling
contained a set of units with preferred dimensional attention weight vectors that uniformly spanned the full
weight space. The preferred weight vectors of the units
in the various tilings were not identical, however, because each tiling was “offset” from the others, as shown
in Figure 1(b). To precisely represent a position in the
attention weight space, one unit in each tiling is activated, with the overlap in the tiles surrounding the positions of these units determining the dimensional attention weights to be used. This kind of distributed representation was originally used in the Cerebellar Model
Articulation Controller (CMAC) (Albus, 1975), and improved generalization in TD learning systems has been


1 An obvious alternative reward schedule involves stochastically making category judgments based on P K and rewarding any correct judgment. While we are currently investigating this approach, it is likely that it will produce behavior that
deviates substantially from that of standard ALCOVE. Dimensional attention weights do not change much in ALCOVE until
the network starts to make strong responses. This is part of
the “three-stage learning” profile that ALCOVE exhibits. Our
reward schedule encourages this pattern of learning.

1103





found to result from their use (Sutton, 1996). Previous
models have used such representational schemes to encode network inputs, but here they have been used in a
novel way to select dimensional attention weights. As in
the conjunctive coding architecture, each attention map
unit is activated by a bias weight, and a competition ensues between units. In the tile coding scheme, the most
active unit across all tilings restricts activity in the other
tilings to those that are close to the winning unit (i.e.,
units whose tiles overlap with that of the winning unit).
This competitive process is recursively applied to tilings
that do not contain the winning unit until one unit is active in each tiling, and the tiles corresponding to these
units all overlap. The attention weight vector at the center of this overlapping region is then used by ALCOVE
to process the current stimulus. Once feedback is provided, reward is calculated as in the conjunctive coding
case, and TD learning is used to adjust the bias weights
of all of the winning units in the attention map layer.
In standard ALCOVE, the initial attention weights are
often set to be all equal and to sum to one. This effectively emphasizes all dimensions equally at the start of
training. We selected initial bias weights in the attention
map layer so as to form a similar initial bias in our models. The unit in the attention map whose preferred attention weight vector matched ALCOVE’s standard initial attention weights was given a maximum bias weight
(0 05), and the bias weights assigned to other units fell
off
in a Gaussian fashion as the distance from this peak

increased (in attention weight space), bottoming out at
0 05. A small  amount of uniformly sampled noise was
then injected into each bias weight, and the result was
clipped to the 0 05 0 05 range. The variance of the
Gaussian and the range of the injected noise were free
parameters of the model.












Results
In order to assess the ability of our reinforcement-based
dimensional attention mechanism to account for human
performance, we applied our models to several previously reported category learning studies. The performance of our modified version of ALCOVE was compared to that of the standard version of ALCOVE and to
the performance of the GCM. In all cases, the values of
dimensional attention weights were bound between zero
and one. (This was only a new upper bound for ALCOVE, which standardly forces these weights to be nonnegative.) In all of the learning models, weights were
updated after every simulated trial.

Dimensional Attention & Learning Difficulty
Shepard et al. (1961) examined the effect of category
structure on the relative speed with which a category
is learned. Stimuli were composed of three easily separable binary dimensions, for a total of eight possible
stimuli. Six category structures were examined, ordered
approximately by increasing number of relevant dimensions. Thus, the Type 1 category structure requires attention to only one binary dimension to solve the task,

the Type 2 structure requires that only two of the dimensions be attended, while Types 3, 4, 5, and 6 all
require attention to all three, in order of increasing dimensional significance. The speed with which humans
learn these categories matches this ordering of tasks, but
models that lack a dimensional attention mechanism fail
to learn Type 2 categories faster than some of the more
difficult categories. Kruschke (1992) showed that ALCOVE, with its adaptive dimensional attention mechanism, learned Type 2 tasks at a relative rate comparable
to human learners. We have replicated these simulations
(using bounded attention weights and learning after every trial), and the results are shown in Figure 2.
We applied our reinforcement learning version of ALCOVE to these six categorization tasks. Since stimuli
had three dimensions, the attention weight space was
three-dimensional. The conjunctive coding model used
a 15 15 15 unit topology in its attention map layer
(3375 units total), while the tile coding model used five
tilings of 9 9 9 units each (3645 units total). The results of these simulations are shown in Figure 2. Note
that our models learn Type 2 categories faster than the
higher numbered types, just as ALCOVE does. Model
parameter values were manually selected to produce performance that matched the category learning times exhibited by ALCOVE. These results demonstrate that TD
learning can adapt dimensional attention weights so as to
speed category learning.








Categorization of Continuous Separable Stimuli
In order to demonstrate the ability of our models to quantitatively fit human performance on categorization tasks
involving stimuli with continuous and separable dimensions, we applied these models to an experiment conducted by Nosofsky (1986) . The stimuli in this experiment consisted of semicircles that varied in size and contained a radial line oriented at different angles. These
stimuli were to be categorized as members of one of two
categories, and four different category structures were
explored (see Figure 3). The frequency with which each
of the sixteen possible stimuli were placed in a target category was measured after training, and the GCM was fit
to these response probabilities.
We fit both standard ALCOVE and our reinforcement
learning models to this data, as well. Since the stimulus space was two-dimensional, our models used a twodimensional attention map layer. In the conjunctive coding case, a 15 15 unit topology was used (225 units
total), and the tile coding model used 9 tilings of 5 5
units each (225 units total). While both schemes used
the same number of units, the tile coding model discretized the space with a much greater resolution. Stimuli were presented to the models using the MDS code
found by Nosofsky. Free parameters of the models were
fit to Nosofsky’s Subject 1 data for each category structure separately. A simple hill-climbing optimization algorithm on sum-squared error was used.
The quality of the resulting fits are summarized in Table 1. While the original ALCOVE model provided the

1104





ALCOVE

P(correct)

1.0

Conjunctive Code

1.0

0.6

0

10

20

30

40

0

50

Type 1
Type 2
Type 3
Type 4
Type 5
Type 6

Type 1 0.8
Type 2
Type 3
Type 4
Type 5 0.6
Type 6

Type 1 0.8
Type 2
Type 3
Type 4
Type 5 0.6
Type 6

0.8

Tile Code

1.0

10

20

30

epoch

epoch

40

50

0

10

20

30

40

50

epoch

Figure 2: Model Learning Curves For Shepard’s 6 Tasks — One epoch involves one trial with each distinct stimulus.

Model
GCM
ALCOVE
Conj. Code
Tile Code

1
99.93%
99.65%
99.51%
99.54%

Category Structure
2
3
94.73% 84.52%
96.45% 86.62%
95.84% 86.01%
95.62% 83.55%

4
98.31%
98.61%
97.72%
97.72%

Table 1: Model Fits To Nosofsky (1986) – Percent Variance Accounted For
Model
GCM
ALCOVE
Conj. Code
Tile Code

1
99.10%
98.56%
98.44%
98.25%

2
98.30%
99.29%
98.16%
97.27%

Category Structure
3
4
97.20% 99.80%
93.53% 99.79%
92.51% 99.57%
91.15% 99.15%

5
98.20%
98.34%
97.94%
97.80%

6
99.20%
98.71%
98.53%
97.30%

Table 2: Model Fits To Nosofsky (1987) – Percent Variance Accounted For
best overall fits, our models matched the data almost as
well, and all general trends in the ALCOVE and GCM
fits are present in our models. This suggests that our
mechanisms for learning dimensional attention can quantitatively capture human performance on learning tasks
that require selective attention to separable dimensions.

Categorization of Continuous Integral Stimuli
Integral stimulus dimensions often entail a difficulty in
focusing attention on individual dimensions. Despite
this fact, Nosofsky (1987) showed that models equipped
with a dimensional attention mechanism fit human categorization performance on such stimuli slightly better
than models that lacked such a mechanism. This study
involved 12 different color chips which varied in saturation and brightness. Six different category structures
were used, and these are shown in Figure 3. The frequency with which each of the 12 stimuli were placed in
a target category was measured after training, and, once
again, the GCM was fit to these response probabilities.
We applied both the original ALCOVE and our reinforcement learning versions to this human data. The
same attention map layer sizes as used in the previous
simulations were used here, and, as before, MDS representations of the stimuli were presented to the models. A
summary of the model fits is shown in Table 2.

The GCM provides the best fits to the data in this
study. It seems that the ALCOVE model and our models
had trouble learning Category Structure 3. This is a difficult category structure which benefits little from selective attention to specific dimensions. Note, however, that
the fits of our reinforcement learning models are close to
the standard ALCOVE fits, and our models continue to
exhibit the same trends in learning as ALCOVE.

Discussion
Our results show that established computational models
of the brain’s dopamine system can provide an adequate
replacement for the biologically implausible backpropagation of error method for adapting dimensional attention during category learning. The new models were able
to learn useful dimensional attention weights from their
less-informative global reinforcement signal. This suggests that cognitive mechanisms for allocating dimensional attention may not be as precise as those posited
by the original ALCOVE model.
One noteworthy feature of our reinforcement learning
models was their tendency to exhibit fluctuations in performance over training, rather than smooth and monotonic learning as displayed by the original ALCOVE
model. If each network model is to mirror the performance of an individual learner, these performance fluctuations may reflect stochasticity commonly observed in
individual behavior. Also, if performance is averaged
across multiple “simulated individuals”, smooth learning
curves, like those generated by ALCOVE, are produced.
Our models encoded dimensional attention weights in
a fairly conjunctive fashion, with individual units in the
attention map layer specifying levels of attention for all
of the dimensions. This is needed because the appropriateness of attention to one dimension depends on how
attention is allocated to the other dimensions. Such a
conjunctive encoding requires very large attention map
layers, however, and this may limit the scalability of this
approach. In order to address this issue, we are currently
exploring more compact distributed representations for
dimensional attention weight vectors.
Eventually we hope to modify ALCOVE to make use
of additional biologically plausible mechanisms of neural computation. This work represents the first step in
this process, identifying a biologically realistic method
for governing dimensional attention.

1105

Figure 3: Category Structures Used In Nosofsky (1986) and Nosofsky (1987)

Acknowledgments
The authors extend their thanks for helpful comments on
this work to Tom Palmeri, the members of the Vanderbilt
University Computational Cognitive Neuroscience Laboratory, and three anonymous reviewers.

References
Albus, J. S. (1975). A new approach to manipulator control: The cerebellar model articulation controller
CMAC. Journal of Dynamic Systems, Meaasurement, and Control, 97(3):220–227.

Nosofsky, R. M. (1987). Attention and learning processes in the identification and categorization of integral stimuli. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 13(1):87–108.
O’Reilly, R. C. (1996). Biologically plausible errordriven learning using local activation differences:
The generalized recirculation algorithm. Neural
Computation, 8(5):895–938.
Rumelhart, D. E., Hinton, G. E., and Williams,
R. J. (1986). Learning representations by backpropagating errors. Nature, 323:533–536.

Barto, A. G. (1994). Adaptive critics and the basal ganglia. In Houk, J. C., Davis, J. L., and Beiser, D. G.,
editors, Models of Information Processing in the
Basal Ganglia, pages 215–232. MIT Press.

Shepard, R. N. (1962a). The analysis of proximities:
Multidimensional scaling with an unknown distance function. I. Psychometrika, 27:125–140.

Crick, F. M. C. (1989). The recent excitement about neural networks. Nature, 337:129–132.

Shepard, R. N. (1962b). The analysis of proximities:
Multidimensional scaling with an unknown distance function. II. Psychometrika, 27:219–246.

Kruschke, J. K. (1992). ALCOVE: An exemplar-based
connectionist model of category learning. Psychological Review, 99:22–44.
Montague, P. R., Dayan, P., and Sejnowski, T. J. (1996).
A framework for mesencephalic dopamine systems
based on predictive hebbian learning. Journal of
Neuroscience, 16:1936–1947.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1984). Choice, similarity, and the context theory of classification. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
10(1):104–114.
Nosofsky, R. M. (1986). Attention, similarity, and
the identification-categorization relationship. JEP:
General, 115(1):39–57.

Shepard, R. N., Howland, C. L., and Jenkins, H. M.
(1961). Learning and memorization of classifications. Psychological Monographs, 75(13 Whole
No. 517).
Shultz, W., Dayan, P., and Montague, P. R. (1997). A
neural substrate of prediction and reward. Science,
275:1593–1599.
Sutton, R. S. (1988). Learning to predict by the methods
of temporal differences. Machine Learning, 3:9–44.
Sutton, R. S. (1996). Generalization in reinforcement
learning: Successful examples using sparse coarse
coding. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 8:1038–1044.

1106

