UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Self-Explanation Reading Training: Effects for Low-Knowledge Readers

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0j08z749

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
O'Reilly, Tenaha
Best, Rachel
McNamara, Danielle S.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Self-Explanation Reading Training: Effects for Low-Knowledge Readers
Tenaha O’Reilly (t.oreilly@mail.psyc.memphis.edu)
Rachel Best (r.best@mail.psyc.memphis.edu)
Danielle S. McNamara (d.mcnamara@ mail.psyc.memphis.edu)
Psychology Department, University of Memphis
Memphis, TN 38152 USA

Abstract
This study examined the effects of self-explanation
reading strategy training (SERT) and Preview training on
high-school students’ comprehension of a science text.
The students (n=136) were from a middle to lower SES,
inner-city Virginia high school. They were assessed in
terms of their science knowledge and reading skill. Nine
biology classes were then randomly assigned to SERT,
Preview, or Control conditions. Science comprehension
was assessed both immediately after training and after a
one-week interval. The results indicated that after the
one-week retention interval, SERT participants
outperformed both Preview and Control participants on
passage comprehension. This comprehension advantage
was particularly enhanced for low-knowledge readers.
This result replicates with high-school student findings
reported by McNamara (in press) with college students.

Introduction
Many high-school students encounter difficulties
comprehending their textbooks, particularly those
covering scientific material (Bowen, 1999; Snow,
2002). Problems with comprehension can occur for a
variety of reasons. One source of difficulty occurs from
text specific factors, such as text cohesion (Beck,
McKeown & Gromoll, 1989; McNamara, Kintsch,
Songer, & Kintsch, 1996). Another source of problems
stems from the reader’s aptitudes. Of course, efficient
decoding abilities are necessary for the reader to
understand the words in the sentences (e.g., Perfetti,
1985). However, comprehension difficulties also occur
even for readers who understand the words. These
comprehension problems can emerge from the inability
to draw inferences (e.g., Long, Oppy, & Seely, 1994)
and the failure to apply other higher-level reading
skills, such as meta-cognitive reading strategies
(Cornoldi & Oakhill, 1996).
The recent RAND report on Reading for
Understanding (Snow, 2002) documents the pressing
need to improve reading comprehension. The RAND
report also provides a useful heuristic for
conceptualizing reading comprehension, which includes
four interactive components: Characteristics of the text,

the reader, the comprehension activities, and the sociocultural context. Accordingly, these factors rarely
operate in isolation, and as such, potential interactions
between attributes associated with these factors need to
be considered in order to develop a more complete
understanding of reading comprehension processes.
In terms of text characteristics, research has shown
that the structure of the text plays a major role in
comprehension. For example, in an analysis of the
cohesion of social studies texts, Beck et al. (1989)
found that many texts have structures that are far from
optimal in terms of promoting deep comprehension.
Texts often present too much information with too little
detail, contain loose unconnected statements, and have
poor integration with previous sections. Overall, the
manner in which many informational texts are written
present challenges for comprehension.
The knowledge and skills readers bring into the
reading situation play an important role in the
comprehension of informational texts (McNamara &
Kintsch, 1996; Voss & Silfies, 1996). For example,
Voss and Silfies found that prior knowledge helps the
reader spell out causal links between concepts, whereas
reading skill contributes to a better textbase
understanding. Indeed, other research has shown that
conceptual gaps in text are most easily repaired with
domain knowledge (McNamara et al, 1996; cf.
McNamara, in press).
Comprehension activities, or the use of higher level
reading strategies, also have a major impact on learning
(Pressley, Wood, Woloshyn, Martin, King, & Menke,
1992). For example, Chi, De Leeuw, Chiu, and
LaVancher (1994) have found positive learning gains
for a technique called self-explanation. Students who
were asked to explain what they learned from a biology
text made more inferences, integrated more information
across topics, and developed a deeper understanding of
the text than did Control students.
Similarly, McNamara (in press; McNamara & Scott,
1999) developed a comprehensive reading strategy
intervention called self-explanation reading strategy
training (SERT). SERT helps improve comprehension
by encouraging students to make use of various reading

1053

strategies to build connections between the reader’s
knowledge and the text. It teaches students to use active
reading
techniques
including
comprehension
monitoring, logic and common sense, elaboration,
paraphrasing, bridging inferences, and prediction to
improve their ability to explain a text and understand it
at a deeper level. McNamara (in press) found that
college students who were trained to use SERT
outperformed controls on measures of text
comprehension. This improvement was especially
enhanced for low-knowledge readers on text-based
questions (assessing knowledge of information
explicitly stated in the text).
While the effects of SERT have been beneficial in
improving comprehension with college students, the
effects of SERT training on high-school students has
not been tested. Examining the influence of learning
strategies is especially important in high-school
populations because there is a dearth of strategic
reading interventions being taught and used in
classrooms (Cox, 1997, Garner, 1990). Moreover, in
comparison to other countries, students in the United
States are falling behind students in other countries on
measures of reading comprehension (Snow, 2002).
The purpose of this study was to examine the effect
of SERT training on high-school students’ ability to
comprehend science texts. We compared students’
comprehension of science texts after they had received
either SERT training, Preview training, or a reading
Control condition. Previewing is a reading strategy
designed to help students better comprehend texts by
encouraging them to preview various subsections of the
text before they read. This strategy training is based on,
and includes the K-W-L instructional technique
developed by Ogle (1986). The use of preview
techniques is relatively common and has been
associated with comprehension gains (Johnston &
Allington, 1991).
Our goal was to examine whether SERT or Preview
training helped students to better understand the science
passages in comparison to the Control condition. First,
we predicted that students trained with SERT and
Previewing would outperform students in the reading
Control group who did not receive reading strategy
training. We expected both types of interventions to
facilitate students’ science text comprehension.
However, we expected the benefits of SERT and
Previewing to depend on the students’ level of prior
knowledge. This prediction arises from the way in
which each technique encourages the use of prior
knowledge. Previewing focuses on the activation of
relevant prior knowledge before reading the text to
provide a mental schema of the contents. While prior
research has clearly shown the benefits of schemas to
improve comprehension, we doubt that they will be
particularly useful if the student has little prior

knowledge about the topic. As such, we expect the
benefits of previewing to depend largely on the amount
of prior knowledge the student has about the text topic,
primarily benefiting relatively high-knowledge
students. In contrast, SERT encourages students to
actively process texts (e.g., elaborate and link
information contained in the text). The student learns to
use whatever knowledge available, including logic and
general knowledge, to make sense of the text. Our
previous research demonstrated that SERT was
primarily beneficial to low-knowledge students
(McNamara, in press). We expect similar results here.

Method
Nine biology classrooms within an inner-city school
were randomly assigned to one of three conditions:
SERT, Preview, or Control. Students in the three SERT
classrooms were provided training on how to selfexplain text using five reading sub-strategies. Preview
participants were taught how to preview the text before
they read it. Control classrooms were simply asked to
read the text. After reading, they were asked to focus on
any strategies they used to help them better remember
the text. Comprehension was assessed using two
science passages taken from school science texts. The
passages differed in topic and length, which allowed us
to examine whether the strategies were used across
different science texts. We used both text-based and
bridging-inference questions to assess students’
comprehension of the science passages.
Participants
The sample consisted of 136 ninth and tenth-grade
biology classes. Students were of mixed gender and
ethnicity. The high school was located in an inner city
region of Norfolk, Virginia.
Materials
Student aptitudes were measured with two tests; a
modified version of the Gates-MacGinitie Reading Skill
Test and a Prior Knowledge Test. The GatesMacGinitie test is a standardized reading
comprehension test, designed for grades 10-12. The test
consisted of 40 multiple-choice questions designed to
assess student comprehension on several short text
passages (Cronbach’s Alpha α=.91). Due to time
constraints, the vocabulary section of the test was not
administered, and the time limit for the comprehension
question section was reduced to 15 minutes. The prior
knowledge test consisted of 35 multiple-choice items
which tap knowledge of different science domains
including biology, scientific methods, mathematics,
earth science, physics, mathematics, and chemistry
(Cronbach’s Alpha α=.74).

1054

To examine immediate and long-term retention, there
were two comprehension testing sessions; one
immediately following training, and again one week
after training. A text on viruses, describing the
structure, and reproduction of viruses as well as some
examples of viruses and how they relate to disease, was
used during the immediate test. The passage was 1216
words in length with a Flesch Reading Ease of 45.1 and
Flesch-Kincaid Grade level of 10.6. One week later, we
administered a text about earthquakes, which described
the causes of earthquakes and the conditions under
which they occur. The earthquake text was 749 words
in length with a Flesch Reading Ease of 65.1 and
Flesch-Kincaid Grade level of 7.5. In an ideal
laboratory setting, the order of the texts would be
counterbalanced between testing sessions. However,
this was not possible due to logistical constraints (e.g.,
high rates of absenteeism and movement of students
between classes).
Reading comprehension was assessed with a set of 8
open-ended and 8 multiple-choice questions; half were
text-based and half were bridging-inference questions.
For each comprehension assessment, students were
asked to indicate whether they had finished reading
and, if not, how far they had read.
Self-Explanation Reading Training (SERT) was
delivered in three main phases; introduction,
demonstration, and practice (see McNamara, in press).
During the introduction phase, participants were
provided with a description and examples of selfexplanation. The instructor defined and provided
examples for five reading strategies: comprehension
monitoring, paraphrasing, elaboration/logic and
common sense, prediction, and bridging.
During the demonstration phase, participants watched
a video depicting a student reading and self-explaining
a text about forest fires. Participants could refer to the
accompanying video transcript during viewing. The
video was paused at various points, and participants
identified and discussed the strategies being used by the
student in the video. In the practice phase, the
participants worked in pairs to practice self-explanation
while reading a chapter from their science textbook.
The participants took turns self-explaining, alternating
after each paragraph. At the end of each paragraph, the
partner who was listening (and not self-explaining)
summarized the paragraph.
Preview training was also delivered in the form of
three phases. During the introduction, participants were
given a description of the basic Preview strategy; a
review of subsections in a text that can be previewed
(Title,
introduction,
objectives
bold
italics,
pictures/figures, conclusion and chapter review
questions) and strategies for note-taking during reading
(questions such as, What I know, What I need to know.
What I found out). During demonstration, the instructor

demonstrated the Preview strategies to the class with a
text on forest fires. Finally, during practice, the students
practiced using the preview techniques on a chapter
taken from their textbook.
In the Control condition, participants read the science
texts to which trained groups were exposed during
training. Participants wrote down strategies they used
while reading, but did not discuss the strategies.
Design and Procedure
Each class was randomly assigned to one of the three
conditions; SERT, Preview, or Control (three classes
were assigned to each condition). Experimental
sessions were conducted during students’ regular
classroom time by two experimenters. Prior to training,
students completed the prior knowledge and GatesMcGinitie Reading test. A 15-minute time limit was
given for each test. The prior knowledge test was
administered first.
SERT and Preview training were conducted during
two class periods conducted on consecutive days.
Participants were told that the purpose of the study was
to learn strategies that would help them to better
understand and remember what they read. The total
amount of time spent learning the experimental
interventions during the two days was approximately
the same. The Control condition required one class
period. Students in the Control condition were told that
the purpose of the training was to find out about the
strategies they use when reading their textbooks.
Immediately after training and after a one-week
interval, participants were given 30 minutes to read the
science passage and answer comprehension questions.
In the experimental conditions, the experimenter briefly
reviewed the strategies for either SERT or Preview
before beginning the comprehension test. For both the
virus and earthquakes texts, the students did not have
the text available when they answered the questions.

Results
Pre-test Scores
Scores on the pretest measures of prior knowledge
and reading skill were examined as a function of
condition to ensure that the groups were comparable on
these measures. To do this, we conducted two
univariate ANOVAs, with condition as the betweensubjects factor (SERT, Preview, and Control) and
student aptitude scores (either prior knowledge or
reading Gates-MacGinitie). There were no reliable
differences in prior knowledge scores (F(2,135)=0.74,
MSE=0.017, p>0.05) or Gates-MacGinitie scores
(F(2,134)=0.77, MSE=41.192, p>0.05) as a function of
condition.

1055

To examine the effects of individual differences, we
used a median split to divide students into high and
low-knowledge groups, or high and low reading
comprehension skill groups.
Effects of Training Condition

(F(1,124)=6.63, MSE=0.286 p<0.05), indicating that
students answered more questions based on the text
correctly (M=0.46, SD=0.18) than questions requiring
bridging-inferences (M=0.31, SD=0.17). No other
effects were significant.
Control

To assess the effectiveness of SERT training on
students’ comprehension of the virus and earthquake
texts, we conducted two sets of mixed model ANOVAs.
The within-subjects factors were question type (textbased or bridging-inference), question format (multiplechoice or open-ended) and the between-subjects factors
condition (SERT, Preview, or Control) and either
reading skill (high or low) or prior knowledge (high or
low). A combined analysis of reading skill and prior
knowledge could not be performed because there were
too few participants. To avoid conflating effects of
reading skill with prior knowledge, the participants’
scores on the prior knowledge measure were entered as
covariates in the reading skill analysis, and vice versa,
the participants’ scores on the reading skill measure
were entered as covariates in the prior knowledge
analysis.
There were no reliable main or interaction effects of
condition on the immediate comprehension test (virus
text). In contrast, the earthquake text administered one
week later revealed reliable effects of training
condition. Therefore, the present analysis focuses on
the latter results.

SERT

0.5

Proportion correct

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0

Figure 1. Proportion correct on Earthquakes
comprehension test as a function of condition
Control

Preview

SERT

Proportion correct

0 .6

Reading Skill Analysis
In the first analysis, reading skill was treated as a
between-subjects variable, while prior knowledge was
included as a covariate. There was a main effect of
condition (F(2,124)=3.72, MSE=0.268, p<0.05),
indicating that SERT participants (M=0.43, SD=0.15)
outperformed Control (M=0.36, SD=0.16) and Preview
(M=0.36, SD=0.12) participants (see Figure 1). A posthoc analysis using Least Significant Difference
confirmed this trend showing that SERT participants
performed better than Preview (p<0.05) and Control
participants (p<0.05); however, Control and Preview
did not differ (p<0.05). There was also a main effect of
reading skill (F(1,124)=11.08, MSE=0.798, p<0.05),
indicating that high reading skill students (M=0.43,
SD=0.15) better understood the earthquake passage
than did low reading skill students (M=0.34, SD=0.13).
Our analysis also showed effects for question format
and question type, which were independent of training
condition. There was a significant effect for question
format
(F(1,124)=16.86,
MSE=0.664,
p<0.05)
indicating that more multiple-choice questions
(M=0.48, SD=0.19) were answered correctly than openended questions (M=0.29, SD=0.15). There was also a
significant
main
effect
for
question
type

Preview

0 .5
0 .4
0 .3
0 .2
0 .1
0 .0

Low

Knowledge

High

Figure 2. Proportion correct on Earthquakes
comprehension test as a function of condition and
prior knowledge
Prior Knowledge Analysis
This section examines how the effects of condition
depended on students’ prior knowledge by including
prior knowledge as a between-subjects variable, and
reading skill as a covariate. As reported above, the main
effects of condition, question format, and question type
were reliable There was also a main effect of prior
knowledge (F(1,124)=11.10, MSE=0.783, p<0.05),
indicating that high-knowledge (M=0.43, SD=0.14)
students better understood the passage than did lowknowledge students (M=0.34, SD=0.13). This main
effect was qualified by a significant interaction between
knowledge and condition (F(2,124)=3.84, MSE=0.271,
p<0.05). A Post hoc Least Significant Difference

1056

analysis indicated for low-knowledge students, SERT
participants (M=0.43, SD=0.15) outperformed Control
(p<0.05) (M=0.30, SD=0.16) and Preview (p<0.05)
participants (M=0.30, SD=0.12) (see Figure 2). There
was no difference between Control and Preview
participants (p<0.05). In contrast, the effect of
condition was not evident for high-knowledge
participants (F(2,67)=0.41, MSE=0.036, p>0.05).

Discussion
Our findings indicate that SERT training helps
students comprehend science texts. Specifically, SERT
students performed better on the earthquake
comprehension assessment than did Preview or Control
students. Moreover, our findings also suggest that
SERT training is particularly beneficial to facilitating
comprehension among low-knowledge students, as
evidenced by the finding that low-knowledge students
trained with SERT performed better on the earthquake
comprehension test than did low-knowledge students in
the Preview and Control conditions.
The finding that the effect of SERT training emerged
one week after training is encouraging because it
suggests that students remember and use the strategies
beyond the time of training. We expect that the lack of
training effects on the immediate comprehension test is
likely due to a fatigue effect following training.
Overall, our findings replicate those of McNamara
(in press), which showed that SERT training facilitated
readers’ comprehension of scientific texts. Most
importantly, both McNamara’s study and the present
results show that low-knowledge students tend to
benefit most from SERT training in terms of
comprehension gains. This is a very important finding
because it suggests that the SERT method may be an
effective technique for supporting comprehension
among low-knowledge students most at risk from
comprehension problems while reading difficult
textbooks.
We predicted that SERT and Previewing would have
differential effects on comprehension. We predicted
that Preview technique would be less effective for lowknowledge students because using the Preview
technique requires students to activate their prior
knowledge before reading (i.e., when previewing the
titles and subtitles). Thus, we expected Previewing to
help high-knowledge students and SERT to benefit low
knowledge students. Although we confirmed the latter
prediction, we did not find benefits for previewing. This
result may be because the students were relatively low
knowledge overall. Perhaps the benefits of Previewing
depend on a greater availability of prior knowledge than
possessed by these inner-city high-school students.
Indeed, a majority of students may not have sufficient
knowledge to make use of previewing (Snow, 2002).

We expected the use of the SERT method to facilitate
comprehension because of the manner in which the
student engages with the material during the application
of the SERT techniques. Specifically, the reader
engages in on-line comprehension monitoring, while at
the same time applying techniques known to aid
comprehension, such as elaboration and bridging (Chi
et al, 1994). This on-line method allows the student to
process information effectively, which, in turn, supports
comprehension. SERT strategies may provide a
scaffold by which the student can integrate new
information into their existing knowledge schemas,
even in the absence of domain knowledge. Conversely,
when using the Previewing method, students do not
necessarily engage in on-line comprehension
monitoring and reading strategy techniques. Rather, the
Preview method encourages readers’ to use
comprehension monitoring prior to reading. A potential
problem with this method is that it does not engage the
reader as effectively with the text and the information
they are reading.
In terms of understanding the reading process, our
study supports the view that the comprehension
activities used by the reader play a critical role in
reading comprehension (e.g., Pressley et al, 1992). That
is, students who have better comprehension skills, as
reflected in their use of comprehension monitoring
practices and utilization of active reading strategies, are
likely to make comprehension gains (Chi et al, 1994).
Of course, to understand the links between reading
strategy
use
(e.g.,
self-explanations)
and
comprehension, it is necessary to investigate the
associations between strategy use and comprehension.
For example, McNamara (in press) investigated the
links between styles of self-explanation and
performance on a science comprehension test. She
found a reliable positive correlation between college
students’ comprehension scores and their use of logic
and common sense self-explanations. In a similar vein,
O’Reilly, Sinclair, and McNamara (in press) also found
correlations between self reported use of individual
SERT strategies and comprehension. However, more
research is needed in this area to understand more fully
the ways in which students use strategies to facilitate
comprehension actually support learning gains.
In conclusion, our findings suggest that SERT
training is a useful method of reading strategy training,
which can be used to enhance comprehension at the
high-school level. Indeed, McNamara and colleagues
are currently working on integrating the SERT method
of teaching into the high-school classroom. McNamara,
Levinstein, and Boonthum (in press) have developed an
interactive, automated version of SERT training,
designed to be integrated into classrooms. The longterm aim is to develop a SERT intervention which is
tailored to the needs and level of the student. In its

1057

current form, the automated trainer, iSTART
(Interactive Strategy Trainer for Active Reading and
Thinking) teaches students the SERT strategies. The
program comprises the three basic components used in
the
tutor
delivered
training:
introduction,
demonstration, and practice. During the practice
section, in which students practice using the strategies,
the iSTART system assesses the quality of the selfexplanations and provides feedback to the student to
encourage deep processing of the text (McNamara et
al., in press).
Several preliminary examinations of the iSTART
system have indicated that the computerized version of
SERT training is as effective as live SERT training
(O’Reilly, Sinclair, & McNamara, in press). Overall,
the present findings and those collected from the
iSTART studies indicate that SERT is an effective
reading strategy intervention, which can be used in the
classroom to help students comprehend difficult
textbooks.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the members of the ODU
Strategy Lab who helped to conduct this study,
including Kim Cottrell, Karen Fuller, Erin McSherry,
Grant Sinclair, Danny Simmons, and Karen Stockstill.
This project was supported by NSF (IERI Award
number 0241144). Any opinions, findings and
conclusions or recommendations expressed in this
material are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the NSF.

References
Beck, I., McKeown, M., & Gromoll, E. (1989).
Learning from social studies texts. Cognition and
Instruction, 6, 99-158.
Bowen, B. A. (1999). Four puzzles in adult literacy:
Reflections on the national adult literacy survey.
Journal of Adolescent and Adult Literacy, 42, 314323.
Chi, M. T. H., de Leeuw, N., Chiu, M., & LaVancher,
C. (1994). Eliciting self-explanations improves
understanding. Cognitive Science, 18, 439-477.
Cornaldi, C. & Oakhill, J. (Eds.), Reading
comprehension
difficulties:
Processes
and
Intervention. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Cox, B. (1997). The rediscovery of the active learner in
adaptive contexts: A developmental-historical
analysis of transfer of training. Educational
Psychologist, 32, 41-55.
Johnston, P., & Allington, R. (1991). Remediation. In
P. D. Pearson, R. Barr, M. L. Kamil, P. Mosenthal

(Eds.), Handbook of reading research (pp. 9841012). White Plains, NY: Longman Inc.
Garner, R. (1990). When children and adults do not use
learning strategies: Toward a theory of settings.
Review of Educational Psychology, 60, 517-529.
Long, D., Oppy, B., & Seely, M. (1994). Individual
differences in the time course of inferential
processing. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 20, 1456-1470.
McNamara, D. S. (in press). SERT: Self-Explanation
Reading Training. Discourse Processes.
McNamara, D. S., & Kintsch, W. (1996). Learning
from texts: Effects of prior knowledge and text
coherence. Discourse Processes, 22, 247-288.
McNamara, D. S., Levinstein, I. B. & Boonthum, C. (in
press). iSTART: Interactive Strategy Trainer for
Active Reading and Thinking. Behavioral
Research Methods, Instruments, and Computers.
McNamara, D., Kintsch, E., Songer, N., & Kintsch, W.
(1996). Are good texts always better? Interactions
of text coherence, background knowledge, and
levels of understanding in learning from text.
Cognition and Instruction, 14, 1-43.
McNamara, D. S., & Scott, J. L. (1999). Training
reading strategies. Proceedings of the Twenty-first
Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Ogle, D. S. (1986). K-W-L group instructional strategy.
In A. S. Palincsar, D. S. Ogle, B. F. Jones, & E. G.
Carr (Eds.), Teaching reading as thinking
(Teleconference Resource Guide, pp. 11-17).
Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and
Curriculum Development.
O’Reilly, T., McNamara, D. S., & Sinclair, G. P. (in
press). Reading Strategy Training: Automated
versus Live. Proceedings of the 26th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Chicago,Il: Cognitive Science Society.
Perfetti, C. (1985). Reading ability. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Pressley, M., Wood, E., Woloshyn, V. E., Martin, V.,
King, A., & Menke, D. (1992). Encouraging
mindful use of prior knowledge: Attempting to
construct explanatory answers facilitates learning.
Educational Psychologist, 27, 91-109.
Snow, C. (2002). Reading for understanding: Toward
an R&D program in reading comprehension. Santa
Monica, CA: RAND.
Voss, J. F., & Silfies, L. N. (1996). Learning From
History Text: The Interaction of Knowledge and
Comprehension Skill With Text Structure.
Cognition and Instruction, 14, 45-68.

1058

