UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Semantic Inhibition due to Short-Term Retention of Prime Words: The Prime-Retention Effect
and a Controlled Center-Surround Hypothesis

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/07g063r6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Author
Davelaar, Eddy J.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Semantic Inhibition due to Short-Term Retention of Prime Words:
The Prime-Retention Effect and a Controlled Center-Surround Hypothesis
Eddy J. Davelaar (e.davelaar@bbk.ac.uk)
School of Psychology, Birkbeck, University of London
Malet Street, WC1E 7HX, London, UK
http://www.geocities.com/ejdavelaar

has led to the view that the semantic priming effect is due to
a fast-acting automatic process and a slow-acting controlled
process (Neely, 1976, 1977, 1991). By varying the stimulusonset-asynchrony (SOA) between the prime and the target,
the relative contributions of these processes can be
modulated. It is therefore assumed that with short SOAs the
priming effect is predominantly due to automatic processes.
However, this assumption has been challenged by
behavioural and neuroimaging studies that show context
effects at short SOAs (e.g., Mummery, Shallice & Price,
1999; Smith, Besner & Miyoshi, 1994).
One theory that specifically addresses the possibility of
controlling the spread of activation is the Center-Surround
hypothesis by Dagenbach and Carr (1994). In a nutshell, the
hypothesis states that there exists a mechanism that
facilitates “the semantic code on which it is focused or
centered while inhibiting surrounding codes, codes that are
similar to but different from the desired code and are
competing with it for retrieval” (p.328, italicised words
were between quotes in original). Dagenbach and Carr’s
work was mainly focused on priming effects found at the
threshold of subjective and objective awareness and was
applied quite successfully in a model of negative priming
(Houghton & Tipper, 1994). However, in the standard
supra-threshold priming paradigm, the data does not seem to
demand such on-center-off-surround mechanism. This may
be because the prime word does not have to be actively
maintained. An on-center-off-surround mechanism would
be necessary under conditions of prime-retention. For
example, when a task requires focusing on a particular
word, the increased activation to that word would lead to
more spread of activation, which would in turn compromise
the attentional focus on the word, due to the now-activated
distractors. Intuitively, we are able to focus on the word
‘doctor’ for several seconds without strongly activating
related concepts like ‘nurse’, ‘patient’, ‘hospital’,
‘medicine’ and so on. Besides preventing a situation where
the whole lexicon becomes activated, inhibitory
mechanisms seem particularly relevant in situations of
short-term retention where a robust focus is necessary (e.g.,
Grossberg, 1978).
The view that will be pursued here is that there exists a
trade-off between prime-activation and activation-spread, of
which the balance depends on the task requirements. This
hypothesis will be referred to as the Controlled CenterSurround hypothesis, implying that a controlled effort (i.e.,
deliberate active maintenance) needs to be made in order to
observe the on-center-off-surround mechanism at supra-

Abstract
The semantic priming effect is shown to be modulated by the
instruction to maintain the prime word while conducting a
lexical decision to the target. Specifically, the priming effect
is absent in situations of prime-retention. An extended version
of Dagenbach and Carr’s (1994) Center-Surround hypothesis
is proposed, in which the prime-retention effect, the absence
of priming under prime-retention, can be accommodated. This
extended hypothesis suggests that under prime-retention,
activation remains centered on the prime, preventing
unwanted spread of activation. This impact of the on-centeroff-surround mechanism increases over time, making it
sensitive to manipulations of stimulus duration.

Introduction
In the field of memory, semantic priming is a basic
paradigm used to investigate the processes that inter-relate
conceptual representations in long-term memory. The basic
result is reduced lexical decision times or naming latencies
and improved accuracy to words (i.e., targets), when they
are preceded by a related word (i.e., the prime) relative to
control. The semantic priming effect is such a robust
phenomenon that even the absence of priming is
theoretically relevant, as can be seen by the large literature
on the prime-task effect (the absence of priming when
attention is allocated away from the semantic level, but is
still within the verbal domain) (see for a review, Maxfield,
1997). The implied assumption in the priming literature
seems to be that the more attention the prime word receives,
the more priming is expected. This paper focuses on the
counterintuitive observation that the semantic priming effect
is absent when in a standard priming paradigm the prime
has to be reported after making a lexical decision to a target.
This observation will be referred to as the prime-retention
effect, as it is the active retention of the prime in short-term
memory that modulates the priming effect.

Controlled Center-Surround Hypothesis
There are a number of theories and models of priming, but
for the present purposes the spreading-activation view of
semantic priming will be addressed to highlight the need for
auxiliary mechanisms to accommodate the to-be-presented
data. In the standard spreading-activation theory, concepts
in semantic memory are linked together to form a semantic
network, with the strength of the connection between two
concepts representing the strength of association. Extensive
investigations into the nature of the semantic priming effect

268

for discussion, Holender, 1986). In addition, the results
obtained by Henik, et. al. (1994) were not replicated without
participants completing several other experimental
conditions, which could have led to carry-over effects.

threshold SOAs. In the prime-retention paradigm used here,
the participant is presented with the prime and has to
maintain it while making a lexical decision to a target. The
Controlled Center-Surround hypothesis would predict that
normal priming effects are found when the prime need not
be retained (as the on-center-off-surround mechanism is not
fully operational), while in the retention condition the offsurround component nullifies (or even reverses) the priming
effect.
Before presenting the experiments that were designed
to address the Controlled Center-Surround hypothesis, the
next section will highlight two earlier reports that presented
hints of a prime-retention effect.

Experiments
Here, three experiments are reported that were specifically
designed to address the prime-retention effect. The
experiments involved two blocks of prime-target pairs in a
standard lexical decision paradigm. The first block was
always the control condition, in which participants did not
need to maintain the prime word. In the second block,
participants were required to maintain the prime and give a
verbal report (in Experiment 1) or recognise it from four
alternatives (in Experiment 2 and 3) after the lexical
decision. In order to assess whether the prime has been
processed on the semantic level, the association strength
between prime and target was taken into account in the
analyses. Any modulation with associative strength would
counter an explanation based purely on shallow nonsemantic processing.
According to the Controlled Center-Surround
hypothesis, in the control condition, normal priming effects
are expected for strongly and weakly related targets at both
short and long SOAs, as the activation of the prime is
allowed to decay after presentation. However, in the
retention condition, it is expected that only strongly related
targets show priming effects at both SOAs (controlled oncenter), but that weakly related targets show less or even no
priming effect (controlled off-surround).

Earlier reports
A prime-retention effect, the absence of a priming effect
when the prime is actively maintained during lexical
decision, can be observed in reports from at least two
research groups (Fischler & Goodman, 1978; Henik,
Friedrich, Tzelgov & Tramer, 1994). In a study by Fischler
and Goodman (1978), participants were tested on a masked
priming paradigm in which the prime was presented very
briefly (50 ms) with a visual mask preceding and succeeding
it. They asked participants to report the prime word after
making a lexical decision to the target string. Participants
were able to report the prime in about 50 % of the trials.
Semantic priming was only found when the prime could not
be reported; the priming effect was absent when participants
could correctly report the prime word. A second example of
the prime-retention effect can be found in one of the
conditions in a study by Henik, Friedrich, Tzelgov and
Tramer (1994). These authors were interested in the timecourse of the prime-task effect (the finding that the priming
effect is eliminated when the prime word is processed on a
non-semantic level). Participants had to read the prime out
loud and make a lexical decision to a target word. In one
particular condition (in their experiment 3), the SOA was
relatively short (240 ms) and therefore participants had to
report the prime word after the lexical decision was made,
thus actively maintaining it during the lexical decision. No
priming effect was found in this condition. Henik et. al.
(1994) explained the lack of priming in terms of the prime
being processed at a shallow (e.g., phonological) level and
thereby preventing resources to be allocated to the semantic
level. However, this idea was not elaborated further.
The results by Fischler and Goodman (1978) and
Henik, et. al. (1994) suggest at the very least that
maintaining the prime modulates the priming effect and that
the underlying mechanism may be inhibitory in nature.
However, the results indicating this were tangential to the
main focus of their investigations and did not receive
enough attention. Therefore it is possible that their results,
indicating a prime-retention effect, may have been a chancefinding. For example, in Fischler and Goodman’s (1978)
study, the results strongly depended on the erroneous recall
performance of the participants (50 % error rate), making
the data sensitive to participants’ idiosyncratic biases (see

Experiment 1
Participants. Twenty volunteers from the University of
London participated in the experiment in exchange for £5.
All participants had English as their first language, were
right-handed and had normal or corrected-to-normal vision.
Design. The experiment conformed to a 3 x 2 within-subject
design, with Relatedness (unrelated, low-related, highrelated) and Retention as independent variables. Lexical
decision times and accuracy were measured.
Materials. Eighty-four word pairs were selected from the
MRC Psycholinguistic Database (Coltheart, 1981). The
word pairs had a word frequency ranging from 10 to 660 per
million (Kucera & Francis, 1967). The association strengths
between the prime and target word ranged from 12.5 to 73.8
(M=34.5; Moss & Older, 1996). A median split divided the
targets in the high and low association trials. All words and
pseudohomophones were one syllable long. Unrelated trials
were formed by rearranging the related pairs. Each
participant saw each word only once, but target words
rotated across participants in all conditions.
Apparatus. The experiment was run on an IBM-compatible
PC using Micro Experimental Laboratory (MEL)
Professional software (Schneider, 1995). Letter size was
approximately 0.5 cm and average viewing distance was
about 50 cm.

269

Procedure. Participants were given the instructions on the
screen as well as verbally by the experimenter. The
experiment had a total of 168 trials grouped into two blocks;
the ‘no retention’ block was always followed by the
retention block. After the instructions for each block,
subjects practised 8 trials. On each trial, a fixation stimulus
was presented for one second in the center of a computer
screen, followed by a word in lowercase white letters that
remained for one second. After a 250 ms interval (blank
screen) a target was presented (in uppercase yellow letters)
that remained on the screen until a lexical decision was
made. In the control condition, the next trial started after a
500 ms delay, whereas in the retention condition a question
mark prompted the participant to recall the prime word. The
experimenter recorded the recall. Participants got feedback
whenever an error was made.

Experiment 2
Participants. Twenty-four volunteers from the University of
London participated in the experiment. All participants had
English as their first language, were right-handed and had
normal or corrected-to-normal vision.
Design. The experiment conformed to a 3 x 2 within-subject
design, with Relatedness (unrelated, low-related, highrelated) and Retention as independent variables. Lexical
decision times and accuracy were measured.
Materials. 112 word pairs were selected from the MRC
Psycholinguistic Database (Coltheart, 1981). The word pairs
had a word frequency ranging from 10 to 660 per million
(Kucera & Francis, 1967). The association strengths
between the prime and target word ranged from 5.4 to 66.7
(M=34.5; Moss & Older, 1996). A median split divided the
words in high and low association-trials. All words and
pseudohomophones were one syllable long. Unrelated trials
were formed by rearranging the related pairs. Each
participant saw each word only once, but target words
rotated across participants in all conditions.
Apparatus. The apparatus as in Experiment 1 was used.
Procedure. Participants were given the instructions on the
screen as well as verbally by the experimenter. The
experiment had a total of 224 trials grouped into two blocks;
the ‘no retention’ block was always followed by the
retention block. After the instructions for each block,
subjects practised 8 trials. On each trial, a fixation stimulus
was presented for one second in the centre of a computer
screen, followed by a word in lowercase white letters that
remained for one second. After a 250 ms interval (blank
screen) a target was presented (in uppercase yellow letters)
that remained on the screen until a lexical decision was
made. In the control condition, the next trial started after a
500 ms delay, whereas in the retention condition a list of
four words appeared (the prime and three distractors) and
the participant had to indicate by pressing one of four keys
which one was the prime word. Participants got feedback
whenever an error was made.

Results and discussion
The mean median reaction times and error rates for all
conditions are presented in Table 1. Performance on naming
the prime was at ceiling (100% correct), discounting an
explanation based on some form of speed-accuracy tradeoff. Because of the large differences in standard deviations
between the control and the retention condition, logtransformed RTs were used in the analyses with the
Retention-variable, while untransformed RTs were used in
the pairwise within-block comparisons.
An overall ANOVA on the lexical decision times
revealed a main effect of Retention [F(1,19)=40.35,
MSe=0.04, p<.001] and a marginal effect of Relatedness
[F(2,38)=2.55, MSe=0.02, p=.091]. The interaction did not
reach significance. A similar ANOVA on the response
accuracy only revealed a marginal effect of Relatedness
[F(2,38)=2.64, MSe=0.001, p=.084].
Pairwise comparisons were conducted to specifically
address the predictions made by the Controlled CenterSurround hypothesis. This analysis revealed that priming
effects were only obtained for the strongly related primetarget pairs in the no-retention control condition both for
RTs [t(19)=2.48, p<.05] and error rates [t(19)=2.42, p<.05].
Experiment 1 replicates the failure to obtain a priming
effect when the prime word needs to be retained. Although
several methodology-related explanations could be given for
the absence of priming, the mere observation of a lack of
priming due to an experimental manipulation begs further
inquiry. One possibility for the lack of priming in the
retention condition could be that participants were preparing
the articulatory response while making the lexical decision.
This could lead to a form of response interference, where
both verbal and manual responses are prepared and
executed. Therefore, Experiments 2 and 3 employed a
recognition task on the prime word instead of a verbal
response. It was hoped that this would ‘clean up’ the
processes during the lexical decision.

Results and discussion
The mean median reaction times and error rates for all
conditions are presented in Table 1. Performance on
recognising the prime was at ceiling (99% correct) and did
not show an effect of Relatedness.
An overall ANOVA on the (log-transformed) lexical
decision times revealed a main effect of Retention
[F(1,23)=43.34, MSe=0.0056, p<.001] and a main effect of
Relatedness [F(2,46)=11.61, MSe=0.004, p<.001]. The
interaction did not reach significance. A similar ANOVA on
the response accuracy only revealed a main effect of
Relatedness [F(2,46)=3.97, MSe=0.001, p<.05] and a
marginal Retention x Relatedness interaction [F(2,46)=2.59,
MSe=0.001, p=.086].
Pairwise comparisons revealed that priming effects
were only obtained for the strongly related prime-target
pairs in the no-retention control condition for RTs
[t(23)=3.90, p=.001]. Priming effects in the error rates were

270

Experiments 1 and 2 develops over time. Interestingly, in
contrast to the findings with long SOA, with short SOA, the
numerical values of the RT-priming effect are larger in the
retention than in the control condition.

found for strongly related prime-target pairs in both
Retention conditions [control: t(23)=2.10, p<.05; retention:
t(23)=2.40, p<.05] and for weakly related prime-target pairs
in the retention condition [t(23)=2.81, p=.01].
Experiment 2 replicates the findings of Experiment 1 in
showing priming effects only in the control condition and
only for the strongly related prime-target pairs. A betweenexperiment analysis further revealed that the reaction times
between the two groups did not differ (all ps>.15),
suggesting that the type of memory task did not have a
noticeable impact on performance.
Given the possibility that the amount of priming is
affected by the increased attentional focus, a Controlled
Center-Surround hypothesis would have to predict that the
off-surround component exerts more influence the more
attention is paid to the prime word. It is therefore expected
that at shorter SOAs, priming will be observed in the
retention condition, even when the prime can be reported
after the lexical decision. Experiment 3 tests this
assumption.

Table 1: Results of Experiments 1, 2 and 3. RTs in ms and
proportion correct within brackets.
Unrelated
WeakStrongrelated
related
Experiment 1 (N=20): recall + long SOA
Control
606 (.95)
587 (.98)
Retention
759 (.96)
769 (.98)

576 (.98)
736 (.96)

Experiment 2 (N=24): recognition + long SOA
Control
633 (.96)
631 (.99)
597 (1.0)
Retention
816 (.98)
828 (1.0)
788 (1.0)
Experiment 3 (N=31): recognition + short SOA
Control
755 (.97)
741 (.96)
722 (.99)
Retention
1070 (.98)
1015 (.98)
1012 (.99)

Experiment 3
Thirty-two volunteers from the University of London
participated in the experiment. All participants had English
as their first language, were right-handed and had normal or
corrected-to-normal vision. The design, materials and
procedure were the same as in experiment 2, with the
difference that the prime was presented for 250 ms and was
immediately followed by the target.

General Discussion
The three experiments provided further insight into the
observation that priming effects are absent when the prime
word is actively maintained during lexical decision to the
target. In all three experiments, reaction times in the
retention condition were slower than in the standard control
condition, which merely reflects the increase in cognitive
demand in this dual-task situation. The effect of relatedness
was only significant in Experiments 2 and 3, which
employed a recognition task on the prime word. Although
the interaction between Retention and Relatedness was not
significant in any of the experiments, based on previous
reports, pilot studies and the predictions from the Controlled
Center-Surround hypothesis, pairwise comparisons revealed
an interesting picture. With long SOA (1250ms), priming
was only found for strongly related targets and only in the
control condition, the prime-retention effect. With short
SOA (250 ms), priming was found for weakly and strongly
related targets in the retention condition and for strongly
related targets in the control condition.
Although further studies are required to investigate this
pattern in more depth, the present set of experiments already
rules out two alternative explanations for the absence of a
priming effect in the retention condition. First, in Fischler
and Goodman (1978), Henik et. al. (1994) and Experiment
1, a verbal report had to be given after the lexical decision
task. It is possible that the absence of semantic priming does
not originate at a memory level, but instead may be due to
some form of interference between executing the lexical
decision and preparing the articulatory response for
reporting the prime. However, the fact that the main results
did not change when a recognition task was used instead of

Results and discussion
The mean median reaction times and error rates for both
conditions are presented in Table 1. Performance on
recognising the prime was at ceiling (98% correct) and did
not show an effect of Relatedness. The data from one
participant were excluded from the analysis due to extreme
long RTs.
An overall ANOVA on the (log-transformed) lexical
decision times revealed a main effect of Retention
[F(1,30)=75.14, MSe=0.06, p<.001] and a main effect of
Relatedness [F(2,60)=8.15, MSe=0.005, p=.001]. The
interaction did not reach significance. A similar ANOVA on
the response accuracy also revealed a marginal effect of
Retention [F(1,30)=3.51, MSe=0.002, p=.071] and a
marginal effect of Relatedness [F(2,60)=2.62, MSe=0.001,
p=.081].
Pairwise comparisons revealed that, for RTs, priming
effects were obtained for the strongly related prime-target
pairs in both the control [t(30)=3.46, p<.005] and the
retention [t(30)=2.20, p<.05] condition. Weakly related
prime-target pairs showed a priming effect only in the
retention condition [t(30)=2.15, p<.05]. Priming effects in
the error rates were found only for strongly related primetarget pairs in the no-retention control condition
[t(30)=2.43, p<.05].
Experiment 3 confirms the assumption that the
mechanism responsible for the absence of priming in

271

The figure for the short SOA is more complex (see
Figure 2). The same prediction for identity priming is made,
with larger ‘priming’ in the retention condition compared to
control. However, the priming effect at short SOA seems
larger in the retention condition than in the control
condition. This pattern was replicated in a follow-up study
(not reported here) and if this holds true in future studies, it
would mirror the two-stage activation process proposed in
the literature using homographs (words that have multiple
meanings). In this two-stage process, an initial (automatic)
activation of all meanings of a word is followed by a stage
in which non-dominant or incongruent meanings are
suppressed (Simpson & Burgess, 1985; Simpson & Kang,
1994). According to the hypothesis proposed here, the
suppression in the second stage is a result of biased
competition, where a deliberate directed attention to
relevant word meanings makes them win this competition.

a recall task, suggest that the retention of the prime and not
the articulatory preparation of the prime was crucial.
Second, Henik, et. al. (1994) suggested that the absence of
priming in their experiment was due to the prime word
being held at a shallow level of processing (e.g.,
phonological code) preventing “the needed attentional
resources from being allocated at the semantic level” (p.
165). However, in the experiments reported here, the
strength of the prime-target association modulated the
effect. This also indicates that the prime-retention effect and
the prime-task effect are different phenomena. The former
requires full processing and active maintenance of the prime
word, whereas the latter requires allocating attention away
from the semantic level (but remaining within the same
processing domain; Chiappe, Smith & Besner, 1996).
In awaiting more conclusive evidence, the current
results support the proposal that the center-surround
mechanism, which is assumed to be a structural component
of the semantic memory system, dominates when more
attention is directed to the prime word. In such situations
prime-activation and activation-spread may trade off. To
illustrate the Controlled Center-Surround hypothesis,
consider Figure 1. In this figure, the strength of association
between prime and target are set on the abscissa with the
weakest strength to the right. On the ordinate the priming
effect (RTunrelated – RTrelated) is set out for the long SOA
(averaged over Experiments 1 and 2) and for the control and
retention condition. The ‘priming effect’ for the ‘prime’ is a
linear extrapolation of the values for the strong and weak
associates. This figure makes two points. First, it makes the
intuitive prediction that when the prime is in short-term
memory, a decision on the prime itself is speeded up.
Second, the overall pattern resembles the textbook example
of an attentional on-center-off-surround ‘Mexican hat’
receptive field in the visual domain.

Short SOA
control

Priming effect (ms)

control

strong

weak

unrelated

Priming effect (ms)

Although not predicted initially, the numerically larger
priming effect with short SOA is not inconsistent with the
Controlled Center-Surround hypothesis. The initial
activation of the prime facilitates strong and weak related
targets, but the inhibitory influence is only felt after the
prime has received a large amount of activation (as is the
case with long SOA). When the prime needs to be retained,
the prime is activated very strongly, leading to larger
priming effects for both weak- and strong-related targets at
short SOA, but at long SOAs the off-surround component
depresses both targets below the point where priming effects
are obtained (or even a trend for a negative priming is
observed). This attentional tuning on semantic concepts is
only suggested by the presented dataset. A series of
experiments are being prepared to address other
methodological and theoretical issues. Nevertheless, the
mere observation that the priming effect is modulated by
short-term retention of the prime word poses interesting

retention

0
weak

0

Figure 2: Priming effect as function of the strength of the
prime-target association for short SOA. The values for the
‘prime’ are linear extrapolations from the values at strong
and weak strength.

20

strong

20

-20

40

'prime'

40

'prime'

Long SOA

60

retention

60

unrelated

-20

Figure 1: Priming effect as function of the strength of the
prime-target association for long SOA. The values for the
‘prime’ are linear extrapolations from the values at strong
and weak strength.

272

maps, and plans. In R. Rosen & F. Snell (Eds.), Progress
in Theoretical Biology, Vol. 5. New York: Academic
Press.
Henik, A., Friedrich, F. J., Tzelgov, J., & Tramer, S. (1994).
Capacity demands of automatic processing in semantic
priming. Memory and Cognition, 22, 157-168.
Holender, D. (1986). Semantic activation without conscious
identification in dichotic listening, parafoveal vision and
visual masking: a survey and appraisal. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 9, 1-66.
Houghton, G., & Tipper, S. P. (1994). A model of inhibitory
mechanisms in selective attention. In D. Dagenbach & T.
H. Carr (Eds.), Inhibitory Processes in Attention,
Memory, and Language. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Kucera, H., & Francis, W. N. (1967). Computational
analysis of present-day American English. Providence,
RI: Brown University Press.
Maxfield, L. (1997). Attention and semantic priming: a
review of prime task effects. Consciousness and
Cognition, 6, 204-218.
McDermott, K. B., & Watson, J. M. (2001). The rise and
fall of false recall: the impact of presentation duration.
Journal of Memory and Language, 45, 160-176.
Moss, H., & Older, L. (1996). Birkbeck word association
norms. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates: Hove, UK.
Mummery, C. J., Shallice, T., & Price, C. J. (1999). Dualprocess model in semantic priming: a functional imaging
perspective. NeuroImage, 9, 516-525.
Neely, J. H. (1976). Semantic priming and retrieval from
lexical memory: evidence for facilitatory and inhibitory
processes. Memory and Cognition, 4, 648-654.
Neely, J. H. (1977). Semantic priming and retrieval from
lexical memory: roles of inhibitionless spreading
activation and limited-capacity attention. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 106, 226-254.
Neely, J. H. (1991). Semantic priming effects in visual word
recognition: a selective review of current findings and
theories. In D. Besner & G. W. Humphreys (Eds.), Basic
processes in reading: visual word recognition. Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Schneider, W. (1995). MEL Professional version 2.0.
Psychology Software Tools, Inc: Pittsburgh.
Simpson, G. B., & Burgess, C. (1985). Activation and
selection processes in the recognition of ambiguous
words. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 11, 28-39.
Simpson, G. B., & Kang, H. (1994). Inhibitory processes in
the recognition of homograph meanings. In D. Dagenbach
& T. H. Carr (Eds.), Inhibitory Processes in Attention,
Memory, and Language. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Smith, M. C., Besner, D., & Miyoshi, H. (1994). New limits
to automaticity: context modulates semantic priming.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory
and Cognition, 20, 104-115.
Spitzer, M., Braun, U., Hermle, L., & Maier, S. (1993).
Associative semantic network dysfunction in thoughtdisordered schizophrenic patients: direct evidence form
indirect semantic priming. Biological Psychiatry, 34, 864877.

constraints on existing and future computational models of
priming.
The finding of a prime-retention effect motivates taking
a closer look at the structure of semantic memory and the
influence of controlled attention on its internal dynamics.
Understanding these characteristics may provide valuable
contributions to debates on the automaticity assumption of
the spread of activation and resource limitations in
language/cognitive processing. For example, an initial step
in modelling the prime-retention effect (Davelaar, 2004),
suggests ways to account for a variety of empirical findings
on the interaction between attention and memory, such as
hyperpriming in thought-disordered schizophrenic patients
(e.g., Spitzer, et. al., 1993), individual differences in
negative priming and presentation rate effects in false
memory (McDermott & Watson, 2001).
Dagenbach and Carr (1994) proposed the CenterSurround hypothesis to account for the strategic carry-over
effects in masked priming experiments. Here, the primeretention effect suggests that (1) the center-surround
mechanism can be observed in the behavioural data when
attention is allocated to parts of the semantic system and (2)
has a specific time-course. Future research, using the primeretention paradigm, could provide detailed information on
the structure of semantic memory and the temporal
dynamics of the processes that control the spread of
activation.

Acknowledgments
During the writing process of this paper, the author was
supported by a fellowship (T026271312) and subsequently
by a research grant (RES-000-22-0655) both from the
Economic and Social Research Council. The author would
like to thank Jennifer Aydelott and Marius Usher for
comments on a previous version.

References
Chiappe, P. R., Smith, M. C., & Besner, D. (1996).
Semantic priming in visual word recognition: activation
blocking and domains of processing. Psychonomic
Bulletin and Review, 3, 249-253.
Coltheart, M. (1981). The MRC Psycholinguistic Database.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 33, 497505.
Dagenbach, D., & Carr, T. H. (1994). Inhibitory processes
in perceptual recognition: Evidence for a center-surround
attentional mechanism. In D. Dagenbach & T. H. Carr
(Eds.), Inhibitory Processes in Attention, Memory, and
Language. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Davelaar, E. J. (2004). Towards a model of the primeretention effect. Proceedings of the 26th Annual Meeting
of the Cognitive Science Society.
Fischler, I., & Goodman, G. O. (1978). Latency of
associative activation in memory. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 4(3), 455-470.
Grossberg, S. (1978). A theory of human memory: selforganization and performance of sensory-motor codes,

273

