UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Semantic Effects in Speech Production

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1720t0cx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Nestor, Adrian
Andonova, Elena

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Semantic Effects in Speech Production
Adrian Nestor (adriannestor@students.nbu.bg)
Elena Andonova (eandonova@cogs.nbu.bg)
Department of Cognitive Science
New Bulgarian University, 21, Montevideo Street
Sofia 1618, Bulgaria

Abstract
The paper reports empirical and computational research on
semantic facilitation and inhibition in the picture-word
interference paradigm for different values of stimulus onset
asynchrony (SOA). The main claim it makes is that purely
semantic facilitation effects are conditioned by the degree of
picture-word semantic similarity in contrast to inhibition
effects for which categorical relatedness is typically
sufficient. The experimental results support this claim and a
simulation with an attractor neural network attempts to
provide a unified account of semantic facilitation and
inhibition in this paradigm as a function of SOA.

Introduction
Semantic facilitation from context words in a picture
naming task, just like semantic priming in visual word
recognition, has been a somewhat controversial issue.
However, in picture naming, unlike word recognition, the
issue does not seem to have been settled in favor of
facilitation. It is naturally to ask then why purely semantic
facilitation should show up when making a lexical decision
or reading words but not when naming pictures. Both
methodological and theoretical grounds are examined as
potentially responsible for the failure to establish such a
result with a picture naming task. The claim we attempt to
support is that the categorical view on semantic similarity,
as opposed to a graded featural one, is mainly responsible
here. However, if facilitation is shown to be possible, one
has to face the challenge of accommodating it with other
experimental results, notably picture-word interference, in
the framework of a general theory of speech production.
Originating with the study of Rosinski, Golinkoff &
Kukish (1975), the picture-word interference paradigm
established a classical result in the psycholinguistic
literature. To put it succinctly, it takes more time to name
the picture of an object in the presence of a semantically
related word than in the presence of an unrelated one. For
instance, naming the picture of a DOG in the presence of the
word ‘cat’ takes longer than in the presence of ‘tree’.
The classical study of Glaser and Düngelhoff (1984)
opened the way to time-course analyses of the interference
effect in the picture-word paradigm by systematic
manipulation of the stimulus onset asynchrony (SOA)
values, i.e. the temporal difference between the onsets of the
two stimuli on a trial, the target picture and the context
word. Examining different SOA values ranging from –400
to 400 ms, where negative SOA values correspond to word

onset preceding picture onset, the two researchers found
semantic inhibition in a small time window around
synchrony (SOA=0) with a maximum inhibitory effect at
100 SOA. A facilitation effect at – 400 ms SOA, on the
other hand, was not found to be significant.
Semantic interference around synchrony has been
replicated many times and extended to cover various
modifications of stimulus properties such as modality of the
prime, category of named objects, stimulus duration, SOA
etc. (Alario, Segui & Ferrand, 2000; Damian & Martin,
1999; La Heij, 1988; Roelofs, 1992; Schriefers, Meyer &
Levelt, 1990; Starreveld & La Heij, 1996).
Facilitation at early SOAs, on the other hand, was more of
a debated possibility. While the early studies of Sperber,
McCauley, Ragain and Weil (1979) and Carr, McCauley,
Sperber and Parmelee (1982) reported facilitation, later
research failed to obtain it (Alario, Segui & Ferrand, 2000;
Glaser & Glaser, 1989; La Heij, Dirx & Kramer, 1990). The
reason invoked for this difference was twofold. First, early
studies used long or very long SOAs – Sperber et al. (1979),
for instance, reported facilitation for an interstimulus
interval of as much as one second – which opened the gate
to strategies on the part of subjects. Second, they failed to
separate semantic from associative relatedness. ‘Dog’ and
‘cat’, for example, are good candidates not only for
cohyponims, i.e. members of the same semantic category,
but also for close associates as recorded by free association
norms. The nature of the facilitation could have been then
associative rather than semantic as suggested by robust
purely associative facilitation results at negative SOA
values (Alario, Segui & Ferrand, 2000; La Heij, Dirx &
Kramer, 1990; Lupker, 1988). As a result, currently the
issue seems to be settled pretty much against the possibility
of purely semantic facilitation at negative SOAs.
The debate on facilitation in the picture-word paradigm
can be paralleled quite interestingly with the debate on
automatic semantic priming in lexical decision and word
reading. Does a word prime speed up, for instance, the
lexical decision for a semantically related word compared to
a semantically unrelated one? The examination of many
studies investigating this issue cannot give us a straight
answer (see Neely, 1991 for a review). Similarly to the line
taken in the picture-word paradigm, it was suggested that
automatic priming in such a task reflects only an associative
relationship (Shelton & Martin, 1992).
McRae and Boisvert (1998) suggested that the divergence
of results and the failure to elicit purely semantic priming in

1011

a number of studies could be due to an inadequate
conception of semantic relatedness. In many of the previous
studies two concepts have been taken as semantically
related if they belonged to the same intuitive semantic
category as judged by the researcher. However, if
categorical relationships do not reflect accurately the
organization of our semantic memory and only approximate
quite roughly the graded nature of semantic similarity, e.g.
featural similarity (McRae, de Sa & Seidenberg, 1997), then
our choice of semantically related prime-target pairs in the
experiment should be performed accordingly. McRae and
Boisvert tested their hypothesis in a series of experiments
with a lexical decision task controlling the semantic
similarity of stimuli. The results supported their hypothesis.
Highly similar pairs, e.g. turkey – goose, did elicit semantic
priming at –250 ms while less similar pairs, e.g. turkey –
robin, did not. Purely semantic priming was also obtained
with synonyms and near-synonyms by Perea and Gotor
(1996) both in lexical decision and word reading tasks, a
result which adds further support to the hypothesis
mentioned above.
In picture-word experiments researchers also tend to
adhere to a categorical understanding of semantic
relationship. Two concepts are judged as semantically
related if they relate as cohyponyms or as category –
exemplar pairs. This is enough to guarantee a reliable
interference effect, so facilitation is searched for by the
same standards. What if facilitation is a smaller effect
sensitive to the degree of similarity between picture target
and context word? An average or even low degree of
similarity might be enough for a large and robust
interference effect around synchrony but facilitation at
earlier SOAs might remain undetected.
If one could show, as we attempt below, that there is
semantic facilitation and, additionally, that it is conditioned
by the degree of semantic similarity, that would be a
successful extension of the results from one experimental
paradigm to another and additional support for a graded
view of semantic relatedness. However, it would amount to
more than simply importing an experimental result from one
paradigm to another. In picture-word experiments, in
contrast to primed lexical decision or word reading,
semantic interference is the rule. Putting together semantic
facilitation and inhibition as a function of SOA is the
challenge one would have to face next. A simulation with an
attractor neural network is our candidate for accommodating
these opposite effects.
The proper way of understanding and deploying semantic
relatedness, on the other hand, might not be the only
problem in detecting a small facilitation effect in pictureword experiments. One particular aspect of the procedure
made use of in such experiments can also be a source of
worry. In most of the studies in the paradigm, subjects are
allowed to familiarize themselves with the target pictures
and their proposed names in a pre-experimental session.
Presenting the pictures and their desired names in advance
certainly offers a number of benefits like keeping low the

rate of misnaming errors. Familiarization with the target
pictures is also supposed, as argued by Glaser and
Düngelhoff (1984), to homogenize subjects with respect to
visual processing of the pictorial stimuli. All of this,
however, comes at a price. Subjects are primed before the
experiment with the visual stimuli. Asking them to name the
pictures in a pre-experimental session extends the scope of
priming to all levels of processing in speech production.
Moreover, having subjects learn the names of the pictures in
advance could be a way of turning a lexical task into more
of a memory task. Instead of accessing semantic memory
for the concept corresponding to the picture, subjects may
try to recall the name used for it before the experiment. The
impact of these factors on the detection of a semantic effect,
especially a small one, is hard to predict. The alternative we
offer is a careful control of the pictorial stimuli, in particular
their name and image agreement. Optimizing the stimulus
material rather than preparing subjects for the test could be a
reasonable alternative.

Experiment
The experiment addresses mainly the possibility of a
semantic facilitation effect at an early SOA in the pictureword interference paradigm. The hypotheses we explore
ascribe the failure to find such an effect in previous studies
to an inadequate view on semantic similarity and to
procedural specificity.
First, the experiment aims at exploring the role of
semantic similarity in this paradigm. The question we ask is
whether a high degree of semantic similarity, as opposed to
simple categorical relatedness, could induce such an effect
at an early SOA.
Second, we attempt to improve on the experimental
procedure by eliminating subjects’ familiarization with the
stimulus material before the experiment and replace it with
careful control of the stimuli. If this familiarization is the
main culprit for hiding facilitation, we would expect to
detect such an effect independent of the degree of picturecontext word semantic similarity as long as they qualify for
categorical relatedness.
Finally, as we deploy a somewhat nonstandard procedure
and as it is the first time an experiment in this paradigm is
run with Bulgarian stimuli, it is desirable to seek the
replication of the classical result in the paradigm, i.e.
semantic inhibitory effects around synchrony.

Participants
We tested 45 undergraduate students at the New Bulgarian
University in Sofia, Bulgaria. All were native Bulgarian
speakers and reported normal or corrected-to-normal vision.
None of them participated in the norming studies performed
in advance on the stimulus material used in the experiment.

Materials and Design
Thirty-six black-and-white drawings of common objects
were selected from the pool of items for which norms are
available in Bulgarian as part of the crosslinguistic study of

1012

Bates et al. (2003). The choice of items was guided mainly
by the attempt to maximize their nameability or consensus,
i.e. percent of subjects naming the picture with the same
name (dominant name), and image agreement as rated by
subjects on a 1-to-7 scale. The main properties of the
materials are summarized in Table 1.
Table 1: Properties of the target picture stimuli.
Consensus (%)
Image agreement
(1-7)
Subjective
frequency (1-7)
Concreteness (1-7)

Mean
92
5.7

Range
78-100
4.6-6.6

4.7

3.5-6.2

5.9

4.5-6.7

Next, 36 picture-word pairs were constructed such that
each picture and its corresponding word denote concepts
from the same intuitive semantic category, e.g. spider and
ant as insects. Care was taken that the pairs would not be
close semantic associates by the examination of free
association norms for Bulgarian (Gerganov, Ivancheva,
Kurlova, Nikolov & Nikolova, 1984).
The total set of pairs was split in two halves as they
scored higher (M=5.03, SE=0.15) or lower (M=3.33,
SE=0.1) on a semantic similarity test in which 20 subjects
were asked to rate the degree of similarity of the objects
denoted by the pair items on a 1-to-7 scale (1 – very
dissimilar, 7 – very similar).
Each picture was additionally assigned a nonword and an
unrelated word by random choice of a word from a different
semantic category. Thus, our first factor was type of
context: semantically related, unrelated and nonword.
Context type was crossed with the SOA. Three values were
chosen to cover the time-course of semantic effects in
picture naming: -350, 0 and 100 ms. Negative SOA values
indicate that the context item was presented before the target
picture. Both factors were within-subject.
Nine different lists were constructed containing all
picture-word pairs, an equal number of pairs per condition.
Half of the semantically related pairs in each list fell in the
higher semantic similarity group while the other half in the
lower semantic similarity one.

Procedure
Subjects were randomly assigned to lists and tested
individually using the PsyScope Experimental Control Shell
on a Macintosh computer with a 14-in. monitor.
The pictures were scaled and centered in an imaginary
square with dimensions 4.5° X 4.5° visual angle. The
(non)words, displayed below the pictures, were selected for
each target so as to maximize the length match with their
corresponding pictures. Both stimuli on a trial, the picture
and the distractor, were thus displayed within an imaginary
rectangle with dimensions 4.5° X 6° centered in the middle
of the screen.
The subjects were instructed to name the pictures that
would appear on the screen as quickly and accurately as

possible with the best name they could think of and to avoid
false starts, hesitations or extraneous material.
Each experimental trial had the following structure. A
fixation crosshatch appeared in the center of the imaginary
rectangle containing the picture and the (non)word for 200
ms followed by a 50 ms blank interval. Depending on the
SOA, next appeared the picture, the (non)word or both. The
(non)word stimulus duration was set to 200 ms. The target
picture remained on the screen for a maximum of 2 seconds.
The picture disappeared from the screen as soon as a vocal
response was registered by a voice key.
The experimental session was preceded by a 6 trial warmup set to let subjects familiarize with the task. There was no
previous presentation of the stimulus material in the
experiment and once presented stimuli were not repeated
later with the same subject.

Results
Responses such as productions of names different from the
dominant name, verbal disfluencies or no responses were
scored as errors and excluded from the analysis. Three
subjects and two items were excluded from the analysis
because of the large percentage of errors they produced
(more than 25 %). The error percentage for the remaining
trials reached a level of 6.4%. Latencies greater than 3 SDs
above the mean per condition were also removed. The
resulting mean naming latencies per condition averaged by
subjects are presented in Table 2. Positive values for
semantic effects indicate facilitation while negative values
indicate inhibition.
Table 2: Mean naming latency and semantic effect per
condition1.
Context type
Semantically related
Semantically unrelated
Nonword
Semantic effect

- 350
892
911
898
19

SOA
0
973
941
910
-32*

100
958
934
910
-24*

An overall analysis of variance (ANOVA) was conducted
on the RT data, with context type and SOA as withinsubject factors. Both analyses, by subjects and by items,
revealed significant main effects for distractor type2
(F1(2,82)=12.99; F2(2,66)=8.51), for SOA (F1(2,82)=23.96;
F2(2,66)=13.48) and for their interaction (F1(4,164)=6.52;
F2(4,132)=2.97). The lexical effect between the unrelated
word condition and the nonword one was also found
significant in a separate analysis (F1(1,41)=9.11;
F2(1,33)=66). Naming latencies were significantly smaller
at the negative SOA compared to either of the other two
conditions. More importantly, we obtained semantic
facilitation at –350 ms SOA and inhibition at 0 and 100 ms.
Planned comparisons run for each of the SOA values
established significant inhibitory effects both at synchrony
1
2

1013

Effects significant at p<.05 are marked with an asterisk *.
In all analyses reported, p<.05 unless otherwise stated.

(F1(1,41)=6; F2(1,33)=11.27) and at 100 ms (F1(1,41)=4.8;
F2(1,33)=4.3). However, at the negative SOA there was
only a trend to semantic facilitation both by subjects and by
items (F1(1,41)=3.48, p<.07; F2(1,33)=3.42, p<.08).
Next, planned comparisons by items between the related
and unrelated conditions were run at each SOA separately
for the high and low similarity sets. They both replicated the
inhibition pattern found at 0 and 100 ms with all items. The
only difference showed up for the negative SOA where
semantic facilitation reached significance for the high
similarity set (F(1,16)=4.57) but not for the low similarity
set (F(1,16)=0.5, p<.56). An additional power analysis
showed the power to detect with all items an effect of the
same size as the one obtained with the high similarity set
was as high as 0.84.
The error analysis did not lead to any significant results.

Discussion
The experiment tested the possibility of detecting semantic
facilitation at a negative SOA along with inhibition around
synchrony in the picture-word interference paradigm.
One hypothesis ascribing the failure to detect facilitation
in previous experiments to potential procedural drawbacks,
namely pre-experimental familiarization of subjects with the
stimulus material, was not supported by the results. Without
familiarization we only noticed a trend to facilitation at –
350 ms SOA (Glaser & Düngelhoff, 1984). However, we
were able to replicate the inhibition results they and many
others reported for small positive SOAs.
A second hypothesis linked this failure to too rough a
conception of semantic similarity, namely categorical
relationship. A move from a categorical view to a featural
similarity view on semantic similarity proved successful in
obtaining semantic facilitation in the word recognition
paradigm (McRae & Boisvert, 1998). Making the same
move in the picture-word interference paradigm proved to
be a successful strategy, too. Categorical relatedness alone
was not enough to deliver a significant facilitation effect.
But high semantic similarity did provide us with such an
effect. Additionally, the power analysis indicated that
categorical relatedness, that is, the analysis including all
semantically related pairs, was very likely to detect a
significant effect of the size of the one we observed with the
high semantic similarity set, if such an effect existed. The
absence of a graded inhibitory effect at positive SOAs, on
the other hand, was not a surprising result. As categorical
relatedness is able to ensure large inhibitory results, a
ceiling effect seems a likely explanation for this absence.
However, one worry we still need to address is the
possibility of strategy use. Facilitation alone is not at stake.
One has to ensure it is automatic. We could argue against
expectancy effects at least on two grounds. First, 350 ms is
still a small interval. It does not depart so much from the
250 ms limit proposed by Neely and Keefe (1989) for
ensuring automaticity of effects and is still far from the
large SOA values used in the early studies. Second, a lower
relatedness proportion is believed to diminish or eliminate

expectancy effects for long SOAs, e.g. de Groot (1984).
Related pairs made up only a third of the stimuli subjects
were presented and they could have deployed expectancy
strategies meaningfully only at –350 ms SOA, that is, on
one ninth of the total number of trials. Taken together, the
size of the interval and the proportion of the occasions for
potential strategy use could offer reasonable support for the
claim that the semantic effect we observed was automatic.
Finally, our results and interpretation need to be qualified
by the remark that they were obtained in Bulgarian, a Slavic
language. To what degree effects like the one we investigate
are sensitive to language characteristics is an experimental
question. The study of Bates et al. (2003) raised such an
issue with respect to timed picture naming. One peculiarity
noticed about Bulgarian in this study was that naming
latencies were longer than in other languages. In our
experiment we also obtained naming latencies a little longer
than the ones reported in similar experiments carried out in
other languages. However, we were successful in replicating
semantic interference effects for this language as they have
been observed in many others. That only gives further
ground for the expectation that semantic effects are robust
enough across language dissimilarities.

Simulation
Once experimental evidence is available, the next step
would be to offer an explanation for the effect in the general
framework of a speech production theory. A unified account
of semantic inhibition and facilitation in a picture naming
task as a function of SOA would be the main challenge here.
If we conceive of the speech production system as a series
of layers (stages) one on top of the other, we might get a
very general idea of the way most theories in the field go.
The sequence semantic representations (semantic
processing) – lemmas (syntactic processing) – lexemes
(morpho-phonological processing) – phonetics is a good
candidate here (Dell, 1986; Levelt, Roelofs & Meyer, 1999).
The interference effect is typically explained in this
framework by competition / inhibition of the lexical items at
the level built on top of semantics, e.g. lemmas (Roelofs,
1992) or lexemes (Starreveld & La Heij, 1996). A
semantically related word compared to an unrelated one
activates more its corresponding lexical unit at the next level
as it receives additional support from the semantic
representation of the target to be named. Thus it makes a
more powerful competitor than the lexical representation of
an unrelated word and interference shows up as a result.
In order to explain the pair of facilitation - inhibition
effects in single word production we set up a small 3 layer
neural network simulating lexical item activation based on
semantic input. The input layer hosts semantic
representations distributed over a set of feature units. The
output layer stands for localist representations of lexical
items at some level in the speech production system,
possibly lexemes. The hidden layer thus compresses the
intermediate levels of processing, notably lemma (syntactic)
processing. Therefore, we may view the network as a

1014

Semantic effect

simplified model of speech processing in three stages:
concept activation, lemma retrieval and lexeme selection.
A 20 X 30 X 20 feedforward architecture was enriched
with a full set of interconnections at the hidden layer
(without self-connections). Continuous spread of activation
and a continuous version of backpropagation through time
(Pearlmutter, 1989) as a training algorithm were made use
of in order to be able to simulate temporal properties and
relations of the stimuli like SOA and stimulus duration as
well as naming latencies (see Plaut, 1995).
The network was trained for a fixed amount of time on 20
input-output pairs. The inputs were random distributed
patterns on the semantic layer while the outputs were
localist lexeme representations. That is, each input pattern
was supposed to activate only its corresponding lexeme
node on the output layer. Semantic relatedness was
simulated by featural overlap. We had 15 related input pairs
sharing on average around 5 features and 3 for a minimum.
Another 15 unrelated pairs had at most 2 features in
common. The first item in each pair stands for the concept
denoted by the context word while the second stands for the
meaning evoked by the picture.
In the simulation context meanings were presented to the
network by clamping the state of the semantic layer to their
assigned representations for a limited amount of time.
Target meanings, in contrast, were presented to the network
until the network settled, that is, until no lexeme unit
changed its state by more than an output tolerance value.
The time needed for the network to settle provided us with
an estimation of naming latencies.
The three SOAs in the experiments were simulated by
presenting the context meaning before the meaning of the
target, at the same time or after it. Figure 1 presents the
results. Both the mean latency differences and the size of the
three SOAs are given in network time units. (The absolute
time scale of the network is arbitrary.)

less time for a negative SOA to change the overall hidden
layer configuration moving from a related context to the
target than from an unrelated one. Therefore, the locus of
the facilitation effect seems to be the hidden layer, that is, in
our interpretation, the lemma level. Next, inhibition shows
up at synchrony and at a short positive SOA as the lexeme
node for a related context tends to be more active than the
lexeme of an unrelated context making it a stronger
competitor for the target node. On the other hand,
processing of related and unrelated contexts did not seem to
make much difference at the hidden layer. So, we could
conclude that the locus of the inhibition effect is the lexeme
level rather than the lemma level (see also Starreveld & La
Heij, 1996). To conclude, the simulation offers a tentative
explanation of both effects suggesting, however, that they
reside at different levels and stages of processing.
The theoretical relevance of the simulation and the
architecture we proposed intends to reach, however, farther
than the simulation of the two opposite semantic effects we
discussed. The key feature, we could say, is a distributed
conception of lemma representation and the view that
lemma retrieval corresponds to slipping into an attractor
rather than activating above threshold a distinct lemma
node. While the theoretical advantages of such a proposal
are certainly in need of evaluation, we believe it could
answer a major challenge put forward by Caramazza (1997):
why should the speech production system be in need of
lemma entities? The answer we propose is that lemmas play
the role of a hidden layer in a connectionist network, namely
they re-represent the semantic input (see also Dell,
Schwartz, Martin, Saffran & Gagnon, 1997 for a similar
suggestion). However, if lemmas continue to be conceived
of as separate individual nodes as current models describe
them (Dell, 1986; Levelt, Roelofs & Meyer, 1999), it is hard
to see how such a re-representation could take place.
Distributing lemmas across a set of features, on the other
hand, can make them serve that purpose.

1

Conclusions

0.5
0
-0.5
-1
-1.5
-7

0

2

SOA

Figure 1: Mean latency differences between the related and
unrelated conditions for three SOA values
The simulation replicated the experimental pattern of
results: facilitation at an early SOA and inhibition for
positive SOA values. Tracing the patterns of activation at
both the hidden and the output layer suggested to us the
following explanation of the effects. Related input patterns
tend to have similar hidden layer representations or, at least,
more similar than unrelated input patterns. Thus, it takes

A graded featural view of semantic relatedness, as opposed
to simple categorical relatedness, proves to be essential for
ensuring purely semantic facilitation effects not only in
word recognition but also in picture naming. Besides giving
support to a featural account of semantic similarity and
semantic memory organization, this also serves as a warning
that categorical relations might be too rough a conception of
semantic relatedness for the detection of potential semantic
effects in various tasks.
Different loci for semantic facilitation and inhibition in
picture-word experiments as a function of SOA are
identified based on a simulation with an attractor neural
network – the lemma level and the lexeme level in our
interpretation. A hypothesis concerning the distributed
nature of lemma representation is advanced with the more
general goal of motivating the presence of lemmas in the
speech production system.

1015

Acknowledgments
The paper summarizes the main results reported in the
master thesis of the first author under the supervision of the
second. We thank Maurice Grinberg for his help in
designing the simulation. We also thank Armina Janyan and
Velina Balkanska for their help in designing and running the
experiment. Finally, we are much indebted to Keith
Stenning for his helpful comments and his review of the
original material this paper is based on.

References
Alario, F.-X., Segui, J., Ferrand, L. (2000). Semantic and
associative priming in picture naming. The Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 53A, 741-764.
Bates, E., D’Amico, S., Jacobsen, T., Szekely, A.,
Andonova, E., Devescovi, A., Herron, D., Lu, C.,
Pechmann, T., Pleh, C., Wicha, N., Federmeier, K.,
Gerdjikova, I., Gutierrez, G., Hung, D., Hsu, J., Iyer, G.,
Kohnert, K., Mehotcheva, T., Orozco-Figueroa, A.,
Tzeng, A., Tzeng, O. (2003). Timed picture naming in
seven languages. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 10
(2), 344-380.
Caramazza, A. (1997). How many levels of processing are
there in lexical access? Cognitive Neuropsychology, 14,
177–208.
Carr, T.H., McCauley, C., Sperber, R.D. & Parmelee, C.M.
(1982). Words, pictures and priming: On semantic
activation, conscious identification, and the automaticity
of information processing. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: HPP, 8, 757-777.
Damian, M.F. & Martin, R.C. (1999). Semantic and
phonological codes interact in single word production.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Language, Memory
and Cognition, 25, 345-361.
de Groot, A.M.B. (1984). Primed lexical decision:
Combined effects of the proportion of similar primetarget pairs and the stimulus asynchrony of prime and
target. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Experimental Psychology, 36(A), 253-280.
Dell, G.S. (1986). A spreading-activation theory of retrieval
in sentence production. Psychological Review, 93, 283321.
Dell, G.S., Schwartz, M.F., Martin, N., Saffran, E.M. &
Gagnon, D.A. (1997) Lexical access in normal and
aphasic speech. Psychological Review, 104, 801-838.
Gerganov, E., Ivancheva, L., Kurlova, R., Nikolov, V.,
Nikolova, T. (1984). Bulgarski normi na slovesni
asotsiatsii. Sofia: Izdatelstvo Nauka i Izkustvo.
Glaser, W.R. & Düngelhoff, F.-J. (1984). The time course
of picture-word interference. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: HPP, 10, 640-654.
Glaser, W.R. & Glaser, M.O. (1989). Context effects in
Stroop-like word and picture processing. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 118, 13-42.
La Heij, W. (1988). Components of Stroop-like interference
in picture naming. Memory and Cognition, 16, 400-410.

La Heij, W., Dirkx, J. & Kramer, P. (1990). Categorical
interference and associative priming in picture naming.
British Journal of Psychology, 81, 511-525.
Levelt, W.J.M., Roelofs, A., & Meyer, A.S. (1999). A
Theory of Lexical Access in Speech Production.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 1-75.
Lupker, S.J. (1988). Picture naming: An investigation of the
nature of categorical priming. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 14, 444455.
McRae, K. & Boisvert, S. (1998). Automatic semantic
similarity priming. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Language, Memory and Cognition, 24, 558-572.
McRae, K., de Sa, V., Seidenberg, M. (1997). On the nature
and scope of featural representation of word meaning.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 126, 99130.
Neely, J.H. (1991). Semantic priming effects in visual word
recognition: A selective review of current findings and
theories. In Besner, D. & Humphreys, G.W. (eds.) Basic
processes in reading: Visual word recognition. Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Neely, J.H., & Keefe, D.E. (1989). Semantic context effects
on visual word processing: A hybrid prospective /
retrospective processing theory. In G.H. Bower (Ed.), The
psychology of learning and motivation: Advances in
research and theory, vol. 24. New York: Academic Press.
Pearlmutter, B. A. (1989). Learning state space trajectories
in recurrent neural networks. Neural Computation, 1,
263–269.
Perea, M. & Gotor, A. (1997). Associative and semantic
priming effects occur at very short stimulus-onset
asynchronies in lexical decision and naming. Cognition,
62, 223-240.
Plaut, D.C. (1995). Semantic and associative priming in a
distributed attractor network. Proceedings of the 17th
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp
37-42). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Roelofs, A. (1992). A spreading-activation theory of lemma
retrieval in speaking. Cognition, 42, 107-142.
Rosinski, R.R., Golinkoff, R.M. & Kukish, K.S. (1975).
Automatic semantic processing in a picture-word
interference task. Child Development, 46, 247-253.
Schriefers, H., Meyer, A.S. & Levelt, W.J.M. (1990).
Exploring the time course of lexical access in speech
production: Picture-word interference studies. Journal of
Memory and Language, 29, 86-102.
Shelton, J.R. & Martin, R.C. (1992). How semantic is
automatic semantic priming? Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Language, Memory and Cognition, 18, 1191
– 1210.
Sperber, R.D.,McCauley, C., Ragain,R.D., &Weil, C.M.
(1979). Semantic priming effects on picture and word
processing. Memory & Cognition, 7, 339-345.
Starreveld, P.A. & La Heij, W. (1996). Time-course
analysis of semantic and orthographic context effects in
picture naming. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Language, Memory and Cognition, 22, 252-255.

1016

