UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Sensorimotor Contingencies, Event Codes, and Perceptual Symbols

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3qc09243

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Author
Jameson, Jason

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Sensorimotor Contingencies, Event Codes, and Perceptual Symbols
Jason Jameson (j-jameson@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University, 2029 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-2710 USA

1995; Lave & Wenger, 1991; Rumelhart & McClelland,
1986; Searle, 1980; Smith & Thelen, 2003; Suchman, 1987;
Thelen, 1994; Thelen, Schoner, Scheier, & Smith, 2001;
Thomas, 1999; Van Gelder, 1998; Varela, Thompson, &
Rosch, 1992). In particular, one approach questions the
requirement that the symbols used in cognitive processing
should be amodal. Instead, in a Perceptual Symbol System
(PSS), the symbols are modality-specific representations
that do bear a principled resemblance to the things
represented (Barsalou, 1999; Barsalou, et al., 2003).
Specifically, these symbols are perceptual in the sense that
they re-enact selective aspects of experience. But this view,
though promising, remains underspecified in important
ways. This paper is an attempt to clarify a fundamental
construct of the PSS approach, the perceptual symbol.
The specific goals of this paper are: (1) to present an
account of conceptual representation that is at odds with the
traditional view in one important respect—that the symbols
used in thought are amodal; (2) to review theoretical
arguments and empirical evidence that suggest that PSS
should be taken seriously as a plausible alternative to
Cognitivism; (3) to show that there are certain respects,
however, in which the PSS framework is underspecified,
specifically with respect to the foundational concept of a
perceptual symbol; (4) based on the assumption that to
clarify the concept of perceptual symbol requires some
understanding of what perceptual experience is, to present
one type of skill theory of perception that provides a
comprehensive account of how perception and action
interact to support perceptual experience; (5) to connect this
account to perceptual symbols by adopting representational
structures called event codes that possess key properties
required by a PSS; (6) to review consistent empirical
evidence that the properties of event codes that hold at the
fine level of basic sensorimotor interaction might also hold
during higher level cognitive processing; and (7) to suggest
limitations and remaining questions for future study.

Abstract
Cognitivism, the traditional approach to understanding
cognition, has argued for the essential role of symbolic
computations over internal mental representations. But this
view has been criticized on a number of grounds, one in
particular being the assumption of amodality: that the symbols
involved in processing are arbitrarily related to their referents.
An opposing view—the framework of Perceptual Symbol
Systems—holds that the elements of thought should be treated
not as amodal symbols, but rather as modality specific, analog
representations that simulate particular aspects of perceptual
experience. Though this approach has been gaining in
popularity from intuitively appealing theoretical accounts, and
suggestive empirical support, it has suffered from a lack of
specificity for key constructs. To address this problem, this
paper presents a more detailed study of the foundational
concept of perceptual symbol. The proposal builds from
recent work on the skill-based nature of visual perception (the
Sensorimotor Contingency Theory), and research that
provides tools for representing the inseparable link between
perception and action (the Theory of Event Coding). From
these two sources, the characterization of a perceptual symbol
as a selective re-enactment of perceptual experience, treated
as a unit, will be elaborated and defended.

Introduction
Cognitive science, for much of its short history, has been
dominated by a view of cognition that emphasizes the
necessary role of computation, and which holds that
cognitive processing is rule-governed manipulation of
internal mental representations (Fodor, 1975, 1983; Fodor &
Pylyshyn, 1988; Johnson-Laird, 1989; Minsky, 1975;
Newell & Simon, 1972; Pinker, 1998; Pylyshyn, 1984). The
symbols that comprise these representations are what codify
knowledge, and indeed are knowledge. Under this
interpretation, symbols possess several key properties, the
most important of which, for the purposes of this paper, is
amodality: that a symbol is arbitrarily related to the thing it
represents (Barsalou, 1999; Markman & Dietrich, 2000). In
addition, specific psychological theories that adopt this
framework “generally assume that knowledge resides in a
modular semantic system separate from episodic memory
and modality-specific systems for perception, action, and
emotion” (Barsalou, et al., 2003). This view of cognition
has undoubtedly met with much success (for accessible
overviews, see Johnson-Laird (1989) and Pinker (1998)).
There are critics, however, who have challenged this
framework (Barsalou, 1999; Carlson, 1997; Clancey, 1997;
Clark, 1997; Damasio, 1994; Dourish, 2001; Dreyfus, 1972;
Gibson, 1979; Glenberg, 1997; Harnad, 1990; Hutchins,

Why a Perceptual Symbol System?
The framework of Perceptual Symbol Systems (PSS) is a
perceptually-based approach to conceptual representation
that has gained in popularity for many theoretical and
empirical reasons. On the theoretical side, the view is more
sophisticated than its empiricist predecessors. First,
it
appears that the rejection of perceptually oriented
approaches was too hasty (Barsalou, 1999). For example,
the criticism that perceptual symbols are just holistic records
of perceptual experience (like internal pictures that lack any
interpretation) is based on the assumption that perceptual
624

this comprehension process are fundamentally experiential,
and not surprisingly, derive much motivation from the PSS
framework. In research motivated by these ideas, people
have been found to recognize a picture of an object (for
example, a nail) more quickly if the object is in the same
orientation, vertical or horizontal, implied by a text passage
read earlier (“The nail was hammered into the
floor/wall”)(Stanfield & Zwaan, 2001). In related work,
sentences such as “Open the drawer” are judged as sensible
more quickly if at the same time people move in a manner
consist with the implied motion (in this case, pulling rather
than pushing)(Glenberg & Robertson, 2000). People also
appear to re-enact the eye movements that accompanied
earlier perceptual processing (Laeng & Teodorescu, 2002;
Mast & Kosslyn, 2002; Richardson & Spivey, 2000). These
results are just a few of the many that have provided support
for the PSS framework (for a more detailed review, see
Barsalou, et al., 2003)

symbols could not also be treated as discrete, componential
units; and in this regard, be used productively in forming
multimodal symbolic structures. But under this new
construal, perceptually-based conceptual systems can
acquire the power to represent a variety of concepts ranging
in abstractness, and thereby possessing the desired
flexibility shown by humans (Barsalou, et al., 2003).
Second, because of the analog relationship with their
referents, perceptual symbols provide a great deal of
implicit information about the things they represent (Zwaan,
1999). This information can then be made explicit through
perceptual processes like scanning and selective attention
(Goldstone & Barsalou, 1998). An amodal system requires
that knowledge be expressed in terms of syntactically wellformed sentences, usually expressed in a first-order
predicate calculus, or LISP-type language. This requirement
places a heavy burden on a system if it must represent all
knowledge explicitly (even the most mundane kind—for
example, that cars have four wheels).
Third, the foundations of amodal symbol systems are not
without problems, specifically in terms of how the symbols
are acquired—the transduction problem (Barsalou, 1999)—
and how the symbols relate back to the world—the symbol
grounding problem (Harnad, 1990). If perception and
cognition are realized by fundamentally different cognitive
processes, then how does one representational language get
transduced—that is, translated—into the other? Conversely,
how does the output of cognitive processing connect with
the world to enable purposeful interaction? In other words,
how do the symbols become grounded?
Fourth, though presumed to be flexible by virtue of the
(amodal) form of the symbols (such as using the symbol
CAT to stand for all cats), amodal symbol systems lack the
flexibility of human cognition. To get around this problem,
amodal representations have been supplemented with
specific episode information (Markman & Dietrich, 2000).
Fifth, amodal conceptual systems are well known to be
able to account for numerous findings after the fact
(Anderson, 1978; Solomon, 2001), but of far greater
importance is the power of a theory to make a priori
predictions. The amodal view cannot easily predict
perceptually-motivated effects, whereas a perceptuallybased view can do so with ease (Barsalou, et al., 2003).
In addition to the theoretical support, a growing body of
empirical research suggests a strong influence of
perceptually-based knowledge on conceptual processing.
For example, in a property-listing task, people will generate
response that depend on the nature of the perceptual
variables involved in the simulation (e.g., listing “roots” for
“rolled-up lawn”, rather than for “lawn”, because roots are
less occluded in a rolled-up lawn)(Barsalou, Solomon, &
Wu, 1999). From studies in text comprehension, in an effort
to comprehend a text passage, people appear to construct
online simulations of the situations described in the text. In
other words, comprehension of language becomes
“preparation for situated action” (Richardson & Spivey,
2000). The situation models (Zwaan, 1999) that underlie

The Structure of a Perceptual Symbol System
A PSS is a conceptual system composed of an integrated
set of simulators (which in practice can be interpreted as the
concepts). The simulators are composed of frames, which
integrate perceptual symbols, and provide structure for
event sequencing. Moreover, each simulator implies a
simulation competence—the potential for producing an
indefinite number, and limitless variety of perceptual
simulations. Finally, processes of selective attention and
memory integration provide the requisite representational
power for the system to act as a fully functional conceptual
system in the classical sense (Barsalou, et al., 2003; Fodor
& Pylyshyn, 1988).
For a PSS to function as a conceptual system, it should
possess certain properties. (1) The conceptual system should
be able to interpret novel experience. This is what
fundamentally distinguishes a conceptual system from a
simple recording system (Barsalou, 1999). A conceptual
system is selective and is able to bind tokens (perceived
individuals) to knowledge of types stored in long-term
memory. A record (e.g. a picture), on the other hand, is an
undifferentiated—uninterpreted—mass. (2) A conceptual
system should allow the thinker to go beyond the
information given, to use stored knowledge to make
inferences. (3) Conceptual systems should have the potential
for generating an indefinite number of thoughts; that is, they
should be productive.
For a conceptual system to do this, it must be composed
of things that have special properties. What exactly these
properties are is contested, but Markman and Dietrich
(2000) have provided an illuminating analysis of the issue,
and their general approach will be adopted here.
Specifically, they have argued that internal mediating states
can possess certain characteristics: (1) they may be
enduring; (2) discrete; (3) abstract (amodal); (4) rulegoverned; or (5) they may possess a compositional structure
(for more detail on these properties, see Markman &
Dietrich, 2000). Internal mediating states in the cognitivist
625

tradition hold all five. Those in the dynamical systems
approach hold fewer. Relaxing one or more of these
constraints can affect the representational capacity of a
conceptual system.
There are two important ingredients that support the
interpretive capabilities of a simulator, and as a result, the
representational power of a PSS: the frames, which integrate
and organize perceptual symbols; and the “potentially
infinite set of simulations that can be constructed from the
frame” (Barsalou, 1999). Thus, to understand what CAR
means is to know, not only the perceptual symbols that
comprise the representation for cars, but it is to know also
how to interact with cars—to be able to organize the
complex action sequences involved in effective interaction
with cars. This means that the frames would be composed of
perceptual symbols from several different modalities, and
that a simulation could thus be considered a multimodal,
selective re-enactment of perceptual experience
The importance of simulators and simulations for
supporting the conceptual functions of the PSS cannot be
overstated. However, given the role of perceptual symbols
in supporting simulations, much work remains to be done in
specifying their properties (such as how the symbols are
encoded, stored, and used). There are difficulties, however,
in getting a clear sense of what a perceptual symbol is, and
how it fits in with the functional architecture of a PSS.
Most definitions of a perceptual symbol tend to
emphasize the neural substrate, and specifically, that
perceptual symbols are “records of the neural states that
underlie perception” (Barsalou, 1999). But a limitation of
this approach is that it captures just one aspect of the
information contained within perceptual symbols. Though
much current research tries to incorporate properties of
classical cognitive architectures into neural networks, what
is needed is a more explicit account of the functional
structure to complement the neural description. What is
needed, then, is a better sense of what information goes into
a perceptual symbol and how that information is stored so
that it can support the conceptual functions of a Perceptual
Symbol System. In other words, we need a theory of
perception, and a theory of how the products of perception
are represented.

The SCT
The main goal of the Sensorimotor Contingency Theory
(SCT) is to provide an answer to the so-called “hard
problem” of visual consciousness: to explain how physical
or informational processes could give rise to the qualitative
character of experience (Chalmers, 1996). The solution to
the problem is framed in terms of an interpretation of visual
perception as a “mode of exploratory activity that is
mediated by knowledge of sensorimotor contingencies”
(O'Regan & Noë, 2001). This idea is in opposition to views,
such as Muller’s Doctrine of Specific Nerve Energies, in
which what makes one sensory modality different from
another is due to the nerve pathways that gather
information. Rather, what makes modalities differ is that
each is supported by different sets of sensorimotor laws: the
dependencies between motor outputs, and the sensory
consequences of those actions. In other words, the laws are
the implicit, procedural knowledge of the expectancies
derived from an agent’s interaction with an environment.
For more details, and supporting evidence, see O’Regan &
Noë (2001),
According to this view, sensorimotor contingencies are a
key ingredient in most, if not all aspects of cognition. As the
authors describe it, “To see is to explore one’s environment
in a way that is mediated by one’s mastery of sensorimotor
contingencies and to be making use of this mastery in one’s
planning, reasoning, and speech behavior” (O’Regan &
Noë, 2001). How to scale up to these behaviors remains to
be seen, however. It is this role that the PSS should fill—to
account for the emergence of abstract thought from this
fundamental perception-action interface.
But there are a number of problems to be overcome in
attempting to extend these principles to the PSS framework.
The main limitation is that no indication is given for how
sensorimotor contingencies should be represented, or even
whether they should be represented at all. For reasons given
in Markman and Dietrich (2000), it is too early to abandon
representation as an explanatory construct in theories of
cognition. So, to be able to characterize a perceptual symbol
as a selective reenactment of perceptual experience, to be
treated as a unit, not only must there be some sense of what
perception consists in, there must also be a way to represent
the information that supports both perception and cognition.
In addition, the representation should possess the right
properties to support the functional requirements of a
conceptual system. The Theory of Event Coding (TEC), and
specifically, the event code, is proposed to fill this role.

Perception as a skill
The perspective in this paper holds that perception is a skill:
that it is the ability to engage in purposeful and effective
interaction with the world (Ballard, 1983; Clark, 2002). The
approach outlined is just one of many types of “skill”
theories of perception, but it is one of the most elegant and
best developed. Specifically, this Sensorimotor Contingency
Theory holds that to perceive is to engage in skilled
exploration of an environment, with the exploration
mediated by the implicit knowledge of the lawful
dependencies that hold between actions and sensory
consequences (O’Regan & Noë, 2001). Thus, these lawful
dependencies are assumed to play an essential role in
providing content for perceptual symbols.

The TEC
The Theory of Event Coding (TEC) addresses the
relationship between perception and action planning. In
opposition to traditional approaches, the TEC does not
assume independence between the two processes, but
instead emphasizes that both functions are supported by a
common representational medium. At the heart of the TEC
is the notion of an event code, which “consists of the codes
that represent the distal features of an event” (Hommel, et
626

committed in a “joining” task (e.g., where a lid would be put
either on or in a container) that required attention be
devoted to the endpoint, than in a “separation” task, in
which a lid would be taken either off or out of a container,
and attention would be required at the starting point. These
results are consistent with the potentially important role of
goals, and the principle of effect cause of actions, in
encoding event sequences at a more general level.

al., 2001). These codes, then, are what underlie perceptionaction dependencies, but also, more generally, cognitive
processes. In their words, “The theory holds that cognitive
representations of events (i.e., of any to-be-perceived or tobe-generated incident in the distal environment) subserve
not only representational functions (e.g., for perception,
imagery, memory, reasoning) but action related functions as
well (e.g., for action planning and initiation)” (Hommel, et
al., 2001). The principle of common coding is a core
assumption of the theory. The other—the principle of effect
cause of actions—places special emphasis on the roles of
specific types of feature codes within the event code; that is,
the feature codes for actions are initiated by the resultant
changes in sensory input caused by the actions.
As representational constructs, the event codes are
discrete, compositional, and the individual elements retain
an identity, even when they participate in more complex
structures (Hommel, personal communication, Feb. 2004).
In all, these considerations implicate an important functional
role that event codes may play as representational constructs
within the PSS.

Discussion
Much talk is made in this paper about perceptual symbols
being “selective”, suggesting that not all information from
perception is used during cognitive processing. But what
exactly does this mean? That the components of cognitive
processing are less vivid, in the sense that all information
carried over is less definite, less certain? Or does it mean
that only specific kinds of information are carried over, such
as spatial information, but that the information is no less
definite, no less certain than when it was originally
processed?
What are the laws of sensorimotor contingency that
describe particular core aspects of experience, such as our
experience of space, or time? Already much fascinating
work has addressed the problem of doing this for space
(Philipona, O'Regan, & Nadal, 2003), but then how might
that knowledge map onto cognitive psychological research
on space? And perhaps of even greater interest, how does
our more abstract notion of time map onto that (Boroditsky
& Ramscar, 2002; Gentner, Imai, & Boroditsky, 2002)?
What implications does this view have for the problem of
reference—determining how cognitive structures connect
with the external world (Evans, 1982)? On the one hand, it
seems that there might be no such problem, since in both
cases, the thing representing, and the thing represented are
one and the same. Truly, the “external world” is itself an
assortment of mental entities. In other words:

Scaling up
Because the TEC has focused on fine sensorimotor
interactions, such as “arrows or circles that come and go on
a screen, or hand and fingers that go up and down on a key
pad” (Hommel, et al., 2001), how are these event codes
integrated to produce more complex event structures? Why
start with the TEC rather than, say, with CHREST (Lane,
Cheng, & Gobet, 2000) or PLAN (Chown, Kaplan, &
Kortenkamp, 1995)? There are several reasons. First, the
TEC is compatible with CHREST (as a model of active
perception) and PLAN (a model of navigation that uses
cognitive maps), and indeed they may all share a common
logic (Hommel, et al., 2001). Second, the TEC was adopted
primarily for practical reasons: It seemed to bear most
closely on the issues addressed in the SCT, and would prove
the shortest leap to make from non-representational to a
representational description of sensorimotor dependencies.
Third, it appeared that the best bet was to start small, at the
principled “bottom”, and then to work up. But associated
with this is a riskier bet: that because of the recursive nature
of the event codes, the integrative mechanisms operating at
the lower-levels worked also at the higher levels. Fourth, the
connection from the TEC to PSS had already been
suggested by other researchers, specifically Richardson and
Spivey (2001). Finally, some recent evidence in word
learning suggests that the principles operating in the TEC
might also hold at higher levels. Specifically, Terry Regier
and his colleagues have suggested that more attention is
paid to the endpoint than to the beginning of a spatial event
(Regier & Zheng, 2003). Furthermore, as evidence of this,
Regier and Zheng found that finer semantic distinctions are
present in spatial terms at the endpoints of spatial events
than at their beginnings. Specifically, in a task that required
participants to judge whether two events, presented very
briefly, were the same or different, fewer errors were

Despite the importance of realism in many philosophical
theories of concepts and meaning, this assumption
seems
superfluous and unempirical, and it introduces a number of
additional problems to be dealt with that could be avoided
without it. Rather than making a realist assumption, it would be
easier to adopt a coherence-based framework. That is, the only
information that any person has about the outside world comes
from perceptual representations, which are themselves mental
entities. Thus, rather than being concerned with whether a
particular concept correctly refers to all and only proper
extramental entities, it would be better to generate a theory in
which the use of the concept attempts to remain consistent with
other representations in the system. (Markman & Stillwell, in
press)

But to someone still wary of the potential problems this
(apparently) neo-idealistic position might suggest, the claim
isn’t so risky: we need not take on the assorted difficulties a
Berkelyian idealism might, since we wouldn’t be making
claims about ontological status of the world (and whether it
still would exist even if one were not immediately
627

O’Regan for the time they devoted to answering my
questions.

perceiving it), but only claims about what is psychologically
efficacious—that is, about the cognitive structures that
matter to the thinker. But is this true? If it is the case that
only a subset of information is carried over from perceptual
processing to cognitive processing, though derived from the
same source, might there still be a problem of reference?
Also related: what information is carried over from
perceptual to conceptual processing? Isn’t this
“selection/extraction” problem eerily similar to the
transduction problem faced by amodal theories of
cognition? What are the principles that determine which sets
of sensorimotor contingencies will be exercised during, say,
activation of the perceptual symbol for DOG, and deducing
from a perceptual simulation that a dog, if it wags its tail, is
happy?
What implications does this view have for understanding
“meaning”? Might it be the case that “meaning” is a quale,
much like the “redness” of red, or the “hotness” of hot? That
is, could the meaning of, say, “apple” be the qualitative
feeling of what-it-is-like to interact effectively with apples,
based on the implicit, procedural knowledge of the
sensorimotor contingencies that define the actual and
allowable interactions with apples? Given that O’Regan and
Noë (2001) claim that the knowledge of sensorimotor laws,
and the current exercise of that knowledge, determine the
qualia of experience, is it too much of a leap to claim that
the meaning of objects arises from the whole stretch of
competent engagement with them? Admittedly, the problem
of meaning and reference is a difficult one—beyond the
scope of this paper—but the hope is that this discussion will
serve as an “intuition pump” for more detailed analyses.

References
Anderson, J. R. (1978). Arguments concerning
representations for mental imagery. Psychological
Review, 85, 249-277.
Barsalou, L. W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22, 577-660.
Barsalou, L. W., Solomon, K. O., & Wu, L. L. (1999).
Perceptual simulation in conceptual tasks. Paper
presented at the Cultural, typological, and psychological
perspectives in cognitive linguistics: The proceedings of
the 4th conference of the International Cognitive
Linguistics Association, Vol. 3, Amsterdam.
Barsalou, L.W., Simmons, W.K., Barbey, A., & Wilson,
C.D. (2003). Grounding conceptual knowledge in
modality-specific systems. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
7, 84-91.
Chalmers, D. (1996). The Conscious Mind: In Search of a
Fundamental Theory. Oxford University Press.
Chown, E., Kaplan, S., & Kortenkamp, D. (1995).
Prototypes, locations, and associative networks (PLAN):
Towards a unified theory of cognitive mapping. Cognitive
Science, 19, 1-51.
Clancey, W. J. (1997). Situated Cognition. Cambridge:
Cambridge University.
Clark, A. (1997). Being There: Putting Brain, Body, and
World Together Again. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Clark, A. (2002). Is seeing all it seems? Action, reason and
the Grand Illusion. Journal of Consciousness Studies, 9.
Damasio, A. (1994). Descartes' Error. New York, NY: The
Grosset Putnam.
Dourish, P. (2001). Where the action is: The foundations of
embodied interaction. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dreyfus, H. (1972). What computers can't do: The limits of
artificial intelligence. New York: Harper and Row.
Evans, G. (1982). The varieties of reference. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Fodor, J. A. (1975). The language of thought. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Fodor, J. A. (1983). The modularity of mind: An essay on
faculty psychology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Fodor, J. A., & Pylyshyn, Z. W. (1988). Connectionism and
Cognitive Architecture - a Critical Analysis. Cognition,
28, 3-71.
Gentner, D., Imai, M., & Boroditsky, L. (2002). As time
goes by: Evidence for two systems in processing space >
time metaphors. Language and Cognitive Processes, 17,
537-565.
Gibson, J. J. (1979). The Ecological Approach to Visual
Perception. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Glenberg, A. M. (1997). What memory is for. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 20, 1-19.
Glenberg, A. M., Robertson, D. A., (2000). Symbol
Grounding and Meaning: A Comparison of HighDimensional and Embodied Theories of Meaning.
Journal of Memory and Language, 43, 379-401.

Conclusion
The main goal of this paper has been to elaborate a link
between three deeply related, and mutually enriching areas
of study. However, much of the difficulty still remains in
determining how exactly the (putative) underlying processes
(such as how event features are integrated into event codes)
give rise to the functional properties of a PSS. But clearly,
the possibility that sensorimotor contingencies, event codes,
and perceptual symbols comprise the fundamental
components of thought further suggests a deeper result: that
now we might be more assured that suggestive correlations
between perception and cognition (Goldstone & Barsalou,
1998) could now be given a principled causal basis for their
interaction. We might now be in a better position to
understand just in what respects perceptual processes might
hold at the conceptual level; and accordingly, how we as
researchers, and possessors of minds, might broaden and
enrich our investigations.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NSF-ROLE award
21002/REC-0087516. I thank Dedre Gentner and Sam Day
for valuable discussions. Also, I would like to thank Larry
Barsalou, Bernhard Hommel, Alva Noe, and Kevin
628

Solomon, K. O., & Barsalou, L. W. (2001). Representing
properties locally. Cognitive Psychology, 43, 129-169.
Suchman, L. (1987). Plans and Situated Actions.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Thelen, E. (1994). A dynamic systems approach to the
development of cognition and action. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Thelen, E., Schoner, G., Scheier, C., & Smith, L. B. (2001).
The dynamics of embodiment: A field theory of infant
perseverative reaching. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
24.
Thomas, N. J. T. (1999). Are Theories of Imagery Theories
of Imagination? An Active Perception Approach to
Conscious Mental Content. Cognitive Science, 23, 207245.
Van Gelder, T. (1998). The Dynamical Hypothesis in
Cognitive Science. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 21.
Varela, F., Thompson, E., & Rosch, E. (1992). The
Embodied Mind: Cognitive science and human
experience. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Zwaan, R. A. (1999). Situation models: The mental leap
into imagined worlds. Current Directions in
Psychological Science, 8.

Goldstone, R. L., & Barsalou, L. W. (1998). Reuniting
perception and conception. Cognition, 65, 231-262.
Harnad, S. (1990). The Symbol Grounding Problem.
Physica D, 42, 335-346.
Hommel, B., Musseler, J., Aschersleben, G., Prinz, W.
(2001). The theory of event coding: A framework for
perception and action planning. Behavioral and Brain
Sciences, 24.
Hutchins, E. (1995). Cognition in the wild. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1989). The computer and the mind :
An introduction to cognitive science. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Laeng, B., & Teodorescu, D.-S. (2002). Eye scanpaths
during visual imagery reenact those of perception of the
same visual scene. Cognitive Science, 26.
Lane, P. C. R., Cheng, P. C. H., & Gobet, F. (2000).
CHREST+: Investigating how humans learn to solve
problems using diagrams. Artificial Intelligence and the
Simulation of Behavior (AISB) Quarterly, 103, 24-30.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning:
Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Markman, A. B., & Dietrich, E. (2000). Extending the
classical view of representation. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences. 4, 70-75.
Mast, F. W., & Kosslyn, S. M. (2002). Eye movements
during visual mental imagery. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 6, 271-272.
Newell, A., & Simon, H. A. (1972). Human problem
solving. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
O’Regan, J. K., & Noe, A. (2001). A sensorimotor account
of vision and visual consciousness. Behavioral & Brain
Sciences, 24.
Philipona, D., O'Regan, K., & Nadal, J. P. (2003). Is there
something out there? Inferring space from sensorimotor
dependencies. Neural Computation, 15.
Pinker, S. (1998). How the mind works. London: The
Penguin Press.
Pylyshyn, Z. W. (1984). Computation and Cognition:
Towards a Foundation for Cognitive Science. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Regier, T., & Zheng, M. (2003). An attentional constraint
on spatial meaning. In Proceedings of the 25th Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society.
Richardson, D. C., & Spivey, M. J. (2000). Representation,
space and Hollywood Squares: looking at things that
aren't there anymore. Cognition, 76, 269-295.
Rumelhart, D. E., & McClelland, J. L. (1986). Parallel
Distributed Processing. Explorations in the
Microstructure of Cognition, Vol. 1: Foundations.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Searle, J. R. (1980). Minds, brains, and programs.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 3, 417-457.
Smith, L. B., & Thelen, E. (2003). Development as a
dynamic system. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7, 343348.
Smith, L. B., Thelen, E. (Ed.). (1993). A Dynamic Systems
Approach to Development. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
629

