UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Sensitivity to Confounding in Causal Inference: From Childhood to Adulthood

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/02m1235x

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Schofield, E. Christina
Cheng, Patricia W.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Sensitivity to Confounding in Causal Inference: From Childhood to Adulthood
E. Christina Schofield (christis@ucla.edu)
Department of Psychology, Box 951563
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1563 USA

Patricia W. Cheng (cheng@psych.ucla.edu)
Department of Psychology, Box 951563
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1563 USA

Abstract

confounding when there are two candidate causes for a
novel outcome.

A necessary condition for correctly assessing causality is the
absence of confounding causes. This set of experiments
assesses whether people are sensitive to confounding when
they infer causation. Two stories were constructed, one in
which two candidate causes and an outcome perfectly
covaried (confounded), and one in which one candidate cause
occurred independently of a second candidate cause that
perfectly covaried with an outcome (unconfounded). If people
reason by forming contrast groups that hold alternative causes
constant, then in the confounded case, subjects should say that
it is impossible to determine causality when two candidate
causes are confounded. In the unconfounded case, subjects
should be able to say that the candidate is causal. If people
are not sensitive to confounding, then they should attribute
causality to both candidates in the confounded case, and the
results for the target candidate should be the same as those in
the unconfounded case. This experiment was conducted with
children and adults. Children saw one of the two conditions,
while adults saw both conditions. Both children and adults
make a distinction between confounded and unconfounded
causes when making attributions of causality. Our results

As well as being a potential means of improving science
instruction and for examining whether children assess
causality in the same manner as adults, assessing children’s
sensitivity to confounded causes is also important for
differentiating between two models of causal attribution: the
unconditional ∆P model (Jenkins & Ward, 1965), and the
focal sets approach (Cheng and Novick, 1992).
Under the unconditional ∆P model, people compare the
frequency of e, an effect of interest, when c, a potential
cause, is present, with the frequency of e when the potential
cause is not present:
∆P = P(e|c) – P(e|~c)

show that children are able to state the indeterminacy of
confounded causes at an age much earlier than
previously documented.

Introduction
One view of how children learn is that they approach
the world as scientists and form theories about the world
(e.g. Gelman, 1996) using information about variation and
covariation to establish causal connections (Gopnik, Sobel
& Schulz, 2001). Further, they intervene upon the world in
order to discover these relationships (Schulz, 2003).
Although children may have misconceptions in their
explanations, as when a child states that he thinks God made
the sun out of gold and lit it with fire (Siegler, 1998), the
presence of such misconceptions does not mean that
children are unable to use the data present in the
environment to form correct causal attributions. Given that
adults have had many more experiences than children, we
should not expect children’s theories to be the same as
adult’s theories, especially for complex phenomena. What
is important is whether the same process is utilized when
determining causality. In particular, this paper seeks to
examine whether both children and adults are sensitive to

If ∆P = 0, then the candidate is considered noncausal; if ∆P
is noticeably greater than 0, then the candidate is thought to
cause the outcome, and if ∆P is noticeably less than 0, the
candidate is thought to prevent the outcome. In the
unconditional version of this model, people ignore
confounding and pool over all the information known about
the candidate cause. Using this formulation, if both
candidate causes perfectly covary with each other and the
outcome, then both will be judged as causal. Under the focal
sets approach, the same formula can be used, but is
evaluated only when comparing across groups where
alternative causes are held constant. If people utilize the
focal sets approach, they could make a determination when
no confounding was present, but would be indeterminate in
the case of perfect covariation because no focal set could be
formed.
One study looking at third, sixth and ninth graders, as well
as non college young adults and undergraduate college
students found that before the ninth grade, students were
unlikely to state that there was insufficient evidence to
determine causality when there is confounding (Kuhn,
Amsel, O’Loughlin, 1988). But, these experiments involved
causes for which the students were likely to have prior
theories, and people interpret ambiguous data in ways that
are consistent with their prior beliefs (Darley & Gross,
1983). Kuhn et. al. do not indicate whether students who did
not notice the indeterminacy were answering in a manner
consistent with their prior theory. Also, this set of studies

1215

focuses on the coordination of theory and evidence, and one
of criteria used for assessing student’s answers was their
ability to justify their responses. If this is an unconscious
process, students might be sensitive to the differences
between conditions, yet unable to justify their responses. In
the present study, the task is made much simpler, by
presenting the students with a novel effect and asking for
their causal attribution without asking for a justification.
Data from two experiments are presented. Both
experiments assess whether people differentiate between
confounded and unconfounded causes. In one experiment,
the subjects are undergraduates, while in the other
experiment the subjects are pre-school age children. In
both experiments, participants were presented with two
possible causes for a novel event, and were asked to
determine the cause of the novel event. In one condition
the two possible causes were independently occurring,
while in the other conditions, the two candidate causes
always occur together. If people are sensitive to
confounding they should be able to make a causal
attribution in the first condition but not the second.

Methods
These experiments were designed to assess the extent to
which people are sensitive to the independent occurrence of
potential causes of an effect when making judgments of
causality. The first experiment was conducted on adults.
Even if adults are able to succeed in this task, it could easily
be due to prior training. The second experiment was
conducted on children. The similar materials were used for
both experiments. Below we describe the methods for both
experiments before reporting the results.

In both stories, the parties occur at the same time and on
the same day. The day of the party, half of the bunnies ate
candy. At one of the parties the bunnies ate cake, while at
the other party they did not. In the confounded condition all
the bunnies who ate candy also ate cake, in the nonconfounded condition half of the bunnies who ate candy
also ate cake, and vice versa. All the bunnies at the cake
party grew new pink wings; none of the bunnies at the “no
cake” party did. Two avoid confusion between the two
stories, in one story, the bunnies ate green grass candy and
yellow cheesecake; in the other story the bunnies ate blue
berry candy and orangey orange cake.
At the end of the story, participants were asked about the
causality of each of the causal candidates in the story.
1) Does Yellow Cheese Cake/ Blue Berry Cake all by
itself make bunnies grow new pink wings? Yes,
No, Impossible to tell.
2) Does Green Grass Candy/ Orangey Orange Candy
all by itself make bunnies grow new pink wings?
Yes, No, Impossible to tell.
The text of the story was accompanied by illustrations,
with an appropriately colored wedge in the bunnies’
stomachs representing the cake, and a candy shaped object
in the bunnies’ stomach representing green grass candy.
Because we were attempting to revise the stimuli in order
to make the directions clearer for the children, the stimuli
underwent slight modification across the 10 subjects. The
conditions remained the same, but there were slight changes
in wording and pictorial presentation across groups.
The stories were shown as a power point presentation on a
15” computer screen.

Procedure Participants were randomly assigned to

Experiment 1
Participants 10 undergraduates at the University of
California, Los Angles enrolled in the Introduction to
Psychology Course participated in the study. Students
receive class credit for participating in the study and were
recruited using an on-line bulletin board for this course.

Design This experiment had two conditions and utilized a
within subjects design. In one condition, the two possible
causes of an unusual event were perfectly correlated
(confounded). In the other condition, the same two possible
causes occurred independently of one another. Subjects
were asked about the causality of the candidate causes in
turn. The ordering of the stories, as well as the order in
which the subject was asked about each candidate cause,
was counterbalanced across subjects.

Materials Two passages of approximately the same length
were constructed, (one story was 668 words and the other
was 681 words). Both passages tell the story of bunny
rabbits that went to two different parties.

conditions that differed based on the ordering of the stories
and assessment questions. Participants were then told that
they were going to hear a story about bunny rabbits in two
little bunny towns; that something interesting was going to
happen to these bunny rabbits, and that they were going to
try to figure out what happened.
Participants looked at the illustrations on the screen as the
experimenter read the story aloud. At the end of the story,
participants were asked about the causality of each of the
causal candidates in the story.
The experimenter wrote down their answers on an answer
sheet as they progressed through the story.

Experiment 2
Participants 16 pre-school children from the Bellagio day
care center at the University of California, Los Angeles
participated in the study. Nine male and seven female
children between the ages of 4;5 and 5;7, with a mean age of
4;11 participated in the study. One student was excluded
from the analysis for answering incorrectly on questions
about the facts of the stories presented. The rest of the
students answered all of the questions correctly (as
explained later).

1216

Design This experiment had two conditions and utilized a
between subjects design. In one condition, the two possible
causes of an unusual event were perfectly correlated
(confounded). In the other condition, the two possible
causes of an unusual event occurred independently of one
another. The order in which children were asked about each
candidate cause was counterbalanced across conditions.

Materials The stories presented to the children had the
same content as the stories presented to the adults, with two
differences. In both conditions, children saw green grass
candy and yellow cheesecake. (This was possible because
subjects only saw one story, which ruled out the possibility
of carryover between stories.) The children’s assessment
procedure also differed from that of the adults.
Children were first asked for their spontaneous attribution.
“Do you think that it is possible to figure out why the
bunnies grew new pink wings?”. If the child answered yes
then the following questions were asked.
1) Why do you think these bunnies [pointing to those
who went to the cake party] grew new pink wings?
2) Why do you think these bunnies [pointing to those
who went to the no cake party] did not grow new
pink wings? The ordering of these two questions
was counterbalanced across conditions.
Because children sometimes do not answer in the free
response, do not address both of the causal candidates, or do
not address the causal candidates in their responses (i.e.
“Bunnies grew wings because they wanted to”), additional
probes were added, asking about each of the candidate
causes separately. Children were told about statements that
other children had made while reading this story. Children
were asked to say whether they thought these statements
were “definitely right, definitely wrong, or impossible to
tell.” The statements they were asked to judge were
1) GREEN GRASS candy all by itself makes bunnies
grow pink wings.
2) YELLOW CHEESE CAKE all by itself makes
bunnies grow pink wings.
3) YELLOW CHEESE CAKE and GREEN GRASS
candy together make bunnies grow pink wings.
If the child had previously indicated that the yellow
cheesecake was causal, they were not asked about the
yellow cheesecake again, (and the same for the other
candidates).

Procedure Children were randomly assigned to conditions.
Children were video taped during the session. In order to
accustom children to the camera, they were first introduced
to the camera and allowed to see themselves on the LCD
screen. Children were then told that they were going to hear
a story about bunny rabbits in two little bunny towns; that
something interesting was going to happen to these bunny
rabbits, and that they were going to try to figure out what
happened.
Participants looked at the illustrations on the screen as the
experimenter read the story aloud. At the end of the story,

children were asked 4 questions to assess whether they
understood and remembered the content of the story. The
experimenter pointed to a picture of the bunnies with the
candy in their tummies and asked “What did these bunnies
eat?”, the correct answer being candy (or cake and candy in
the confounded case). The experimenter then pointed to the
bunnies without candy in their tummies and asked “Did
these bunnies eat candy?”, the correct answer being no. The
experimenter then pointed to a picture of the bunnies at the
cake party and asked “What did these bunnies eat at the
party?” (this question was omitted in the confounded
condition if children answered cake and candy to the first
question above), the correct answer being cake. The
experimenter then pointed to a picture of the bunnies at the
no-cake party and asked “Did these bunnies eat cake?”, the
correct answer being no. Children who did not correctly
answer all questions were excluded from the study.

Results
Experiment 1
Adults subjects were sensitive to confounding when they
make causal judgments. In the confounded condition, when
asked whether cake caused new pink wings, all 10 subjects
said it was impossible to tell. When asked whether candy
caused new pink wings, all 10 subjects said it was
impossible to tell. In the unconfounded condition, when
asked whether cake caused new pink wings, 8 subjects said
cake did cause pink wings (the correct answer); 1 subject
said it was impossible to tell; and 1 subject said cake did not
cause pink wings. When asked whether candy caused pink
wings, 6 subjects said candy did not cause pink wings (the
correct answer); 4 subjects said it was impossible to tell.
Using McNemar’s test for 2-related samples of categorical
data, we see that the pattern of responses differed across
conditions for both of the causal candidates. Subjects were
more likely to say the cake was causal in the unconfounded
condition than in the confounded condition, and more likely
to say it was impossible to assess causality in the
confounded condition than in the confounded condition (p <
0.05, exact statistic, binomial distribution used). Subjects
were more likely to say that the candy was not causal in the
unconfounded condition than in the confounded condition,
and were more likely to say it was impossible to tell in the
confounded condition than in the unconfounded condition
(p < 0.05, exact statistic, binomial distribution used).
Using a C2 for each set of data, we see that subjects are
picking the response that corresponds with the focal set
theory reliably better than chance in most cases. Each of
following C2 analyses uses three cells, corresponding to the
three possible responses for the task (yes, no , impossible to
time). In the confounded condition, subjects all said that it
was impossible to tell if the cake was causal (C2 = 20,df=2,
p<0.05) and it was impossible to tell if the candy was causal
(C2 = 20,df=2, p<0.05). In the unconfounded condition,
subjects were more likely to say that the cake was causal

1217

than any other answer choice (C2 = 9.8,df=2, p<0.05). None
of the subjects said the candy was causal (X2 = 10, df=1,
p<0.05) and were evenly split between saying the candy was
not causal or that there was not enough information to
assess the relationship.

Experiment 2
Children were also sensitive to confounding when they
make causal judgments, but this data has more variability
associated with it than the adult version of the experiment.
Children were categorized into one of five causal
attribution categories: the cake is causal, the candy is causal,
both causal (jointly or independently), it is impossible to
tell, and other causal attribution. If children made a
spontaneous causal attribution, this was taken as the value
for the measure. Otherwise, the value for this measure was
taken from the child answers to questions about each
individual candidate.
Using a C2 analysis for this data, we see that the pattern of
responses differed across conditions, (C 2 = 10.18,df=4,
p<0.05). In the confounded condition, 3 children said both
were causal and 4 children said it was impossible to tell. No
other responses were given by children in the confounded
condition. In the unconfounded condition, 4 children said
cake was causal, 1 child said candy was causal, 2 children
said they both were causal, and one child gave an alternate
attribution. No children said that it was impossible to
establish causality.

Conclusions
Both children and adults make a distinction between
confounded and unconfounded candidate causes when
making attributions of causality. All adults said that it was
impossible to tell whether the cake or the candy alone
caused the wings in the confounded conditions. Because the
conditions used in this experiment are consistent with
examples used in scientific methodology classes, it is
possible that the adults have had prior experience in science
classes that train them to be able to do this. The same is
not true of the children, however.
The child data suggests that children are able to state that
is impossible to attribute causality when two candidate
causes perfectly covary at a much earlier age than
documented by previous studies. Children as young as 4
years old, less than a third as old as previously believed,
made such attributions. They were also able to use
frequency data to make a causal attribution.
The difficulty in using data to prove that a theory is correct
or incorrect may not be due to student’s inattention to
confounded causes. Instead, it may be that that having to
justify their responses, or an interaction with prior
knowledge is the problem. When introducing children to
the abstract idea of confounding, it may be useful to build of
their intuitions of causal attribution by first having them
make judgments of potential causes of novel effects. Their

answers to these problems could then be used as a basis for
discussion about the abstract concept of confounding.

Acknowledgments
The preparation of this paper was supported by an NSF
fellowship to the first author and an NIH Grant MH64810 to
the second author.

References
Carpenter, T.P., Fennema, E., Penelope, P. L, Chiang, C., &
Loef, M. (1989) Using knowledge of children’s
mathematics thinking in classroom teaching: An
experimental study. American Educational Research
Journal, 26, 499-531.
Cheng, P. W., & Novick, L. R. (1992). Covariation in
natural causal induction. Psychological Review, 99, 365382.
Darley, J.M. & P,H.Gross (1983). A hypothesis-confirming
bias in labeling effects. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 44, 20-33.
Gelman, S. A. (1996) Concepts and Theories. In T.K.F Au
and R. Gelman (Eds.) Perceptual Development (pp117150). Academic Press., San Diego, CA.
Gopnik, A., Sobel, D.M., Schulz, L.E. (2001) Causal
learning mechanisms in very young children: Two-,
three-, and four-year-olds infer causal relations from
patterns of variation and covariation. Developmental
Psychology, 37 (5), 620-629.
Hunting, R.P., Davis, G. & Pearn, C.A. (1996) Engaging
whole-number knowledge for rational-number learning
using a computer-based tool. Jounal for Research in
Mathematics Education, 27 (3), 354-379.
Jenkins, H. M, & Ward, W. C. (1965). Judgment of
contingency between responses and outcomes.
Psychological Monographs: General and Applied, 79 (1,
Whole No. 594): 17.
Kuhn, D., Amsel, E, & M. O’Loughlin (1988) T h e
development of scientific thinking skills. Academic Press,
Inc: New York, NY.
Schulz, L.E. (2003, April) The play’s the thing: Intervention
and Causal inference. In L.E. Schulz (Chair)
Understanding children’s causal knowledge: Exploring
the origins of causal inference. Symposium conducted at
the meeting of the Society for Research in Cognitive
Development, Tampa, FL.
Siegler, R.S. (1998) Children’s Thinking (3rd ed.). Prentice
Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ.

1218

