UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Simple and Complex Extralinguistic Communicative Acts

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3bw071nk

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Bosco, Francesca M.
Sacco, Katiuscia
Colle, Livia
et al.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Simple and Complex Extralinguistic Communicative Acts
Francesca M. Bosco (bosco@psych.unito.it)
Katiuscia Sacco (sacco@psych.unito.it)
Livia Colle (colle@psych.unito.it)
Romina Angeleri (angeleri@psych.unito.it)
Ivan Enrici (enrici@psych.unito.it)
Gianluca Bo (gianluca.bo@metis-ricerche.it)
Bruno G. Bara (bara@psych.unito.it)

Centro di Scienza Cognitiva e Dipartimento di Psicologia, Università di Torino
via Po 14 - 10123 Torino, Italia
Abstract
The present research aims to investigate the distinction
between simple and complex communicative acts in the
context of extralinguistic communication. We propose that,
within the same pragmatic phenomena studied - which are
standard communicative acts, deceit and irony - a simple
communicative act is easier to comprehend than a complex
one. Our proposal is based on the different complexity of
inferential
processes
involved
in
comprehending
communicative acts. We provide empirical evidence in
support to our hypothesis with an experiment on children
aged 5;5 to 8;6 years. We consider our results as favoring a
unitary model of communication, where ‘linguistic’ and
‘extralinguistic’ are similar expressive channels underlying
the same cognitive faculty.

Introduction
Philosopher John Searle (1975) introduced the classical
distinction between direct and indirect speech acts. A direct
speech act consists of a sentence where a speaker means
exactly and literally what she is saying, for instance [1]
'Please pass me the salt', proffered by the speaker to obtain
the salt, located on the table, from her table-companion. On
the contrary, an indirect speech act consists of a sentence by
which the speaker communicates to the hearer more than
what she is actually saying. For instance [2] ‘Do you mind
passing me the salt?’ or [3] ‘My soup is lacking in salt’,
proffered by a speaker in order to obtain the same goal as in
the previous example.
Searle claims that the primary illocutionary force of an
indirect speech act is derived from the literal meaning via a
series of inferential steps. The hearer's inferential process is
triggered by the assumption that the speaker is following the
Principle of Cooperation (Grice, 1975), together with the
evidence of an inconsistency between the utterance and the
context of enunciation. According to Searle, the hearer tries
first to interpret the utterance literally, and only after the
failure of this attempt, due to the irrelevance of the literal
meaning, does he look for a different one, which conveys
the primary illocutionary force. In this view, an indirect
speech act is intrinsically harder to comprehend than a

144

direct one. Indeed, understanding a direct speech act such as
[1] is straightforward, that is, it does not require inferences,
while understanding indirect speech acts, such as [2] and [3]
relies on some kind of common knowledge. However, the
length of the inferential path is not the same for each
indirect speech act. For instance [3], an example of non
conventional indirect speech act, requires a greater number
of inferences than [2], an example of conventional direct
speech act.
Some authors have criticized this position for different
reasons (Clark, 1979; Sperber & Wilson, 1986; Recanati,
1995). In particular, Gibbs (1986; 1994) shows that a
speaker can use an indirect act when she thinks that there
might be obstacles against the request she intends to
formulate: for example, when the speaker does not know
whether the hearer owns the object she desires, he can use a
conventional indirect request. The context specifies the
necessity of using a conventional indirect and thus helps the
hearer to understand the intended meaning more quickly.
Gibbs suggests that, in such a circumstance, the partner
infers the meaning of a conventional indirect speech act via
an habitual shortcut that facilitates its comprehension.
In addition, Bara and Bucciarelli (1998) point out that for
2;6-3 year old children conventional indirects, such as
‘Would you like to sit down?’, compared to direct speech
acts, such as ‘What is your name?’, are equally easy to
comprehend. On the contrary, the same children have
difficulties with non-conventional indirects: for instance
they find it hard to understand that the answer ‘It's raining’
to the proposal ‘Let's go out and play’ corresponds to a
refusal.
On the basis of the Cognitive Pragmatics theory, by
Airenti, Bara and Colombetti (1993a), Bara, Bosco and
Bucciarelli (1999) advanced an alternative explanation that
constitutes the theoretical basis for the present research. The
authors propose to abandon the distinction between direct
and indirect speech acts and to adopt a new one between
simple and complex speech acts, based on the increasing
complexity of the inferential processes underlying their
comprehension. This distinction has the distinct advantage
of applying not only to standard speech acts, but also to non
standard ones, like irony and deceit.

The aim of the present research is to extend the
distinction between simple and complex speech acts to
extralinguistic communication, and to provide empirical
evidence in support of our hypothesis.

Cognitive Pragmatics theory
Airenti et al. (1993a) have presented the bases for a theory
of
the
cognitive
processes
underlying
human
communication that holds for both linguistic and extralinguistic communication. A major assumption of Cognitive
Pragmatics is that intentional communication requires
behavioral cooperation between two agents; this means that
when two agents communicate they are acting on the basis
of a plan that is at least partially shared. The authors call
this plan a behavior game. The behavior game is a social
structure mutually shared by the participants of the
dialogue. Each communicative action performed by the
agents realizes the moves of the behavior game they are
playing. The meaning of a communicative act (either
linguistic or extralinguistic or a mix of the two) is fully
understood only when it is clear what move of what
behavior game it realizes. Consider for example the
following communicative exchange:
[4]
Susan: “Do you have 10 dollars?”
Mark: “Oh, I forgot my wallet”
Mark understands that Susan is asking him to lend her
some money on the basis of the behavior game they are
mutually sharing:
[5]
[LEND-MONEY]:
• A gives money to B;
• B returns money to A.
A game provides a context for the assignment of meaning
to a communicative action (Bosco, Bucciarelli & Bara,
2004). It is the sharedness of these knowledge structures
that allows them to maintain conversational cooperation in
spite of Mark's refusal to cooperate on the behavior level.

Simple and complex standard speech acts
The comprehension of any kind of speech act depends on
the comprehension of the behavioral game bid by the actor1.
Unless a communicative failure occurs, each participant in a
dialogue interprets the utterances of the interlocutor on the
ground she gives as shared between them. According to
such a perspective, the difficulty in comprehension of
different types of speech acts depends on the chain of
inferences required to pass from the utterance to the game it
refers to. Direct and conventional indirect speech acts do
immediately make reference to the game, and thus they are
defined as simple speech acts. On the contrary, non
conventional indirect speech acts can be referred to as
complex speech acts in that they require a chain of
inferential steps, since the specific behavior game of which
they are a move is not immediately identifiable (Bara &
1

Since the theory holds both for linguistic and extralinguistic
communication, we prefer to use the terms actor and partner
instead the classical speaker and hearer.

145

Bucciarelli, 1998). For example, to understand [1] and [2] it
is sufficient for the partner to refer to the game [ASK-FOROBJECT]. In order to understand [3], a more complex
inferential process is necessary: the partner needs to share
with the speaker the belief that if the soup is lacking salt it is
not good to eat and that if there is some salt on the table and
somebody proffers [3] she probably wants it. Only then, can
the partner attribute to the utterance the value of a move of
the game [ASK-FOR-OBJECT].
In other words, if the problem is how to access the game,
the distinction between direct and indirect speech acts is
irrelevant. The comprehension of a speech act requires the
comprehension of the game of which it is part: in order to
understand the actor's communicative intentions, the partner
has to find a meaningful connection between the actor's
utterance and the behavioral game they are playing. In the
case of simple speech acts there is an immediate
correspondence between the utterance and the game, that is
the utterance straightforwardly refers to the game. On the
contrary, in the case of complex speech acts the
comprehension of the link between the speech act and the
game requires the partner to make longer inferential
processes. The bigger the distance between the utterance
and the communicative context shared by actor and partner,
the more difficult the comprehension of the utterance itself.
In sum, the difference in the difficulty of comprehension
between simple and complex acts depends on the steps
needed to refer the utterance to the game bid by the actor or
already shared by the participants.
We find the notion of simple and complex speech act
more useful rather than the one of direct and indirect speech
act because, as Bara et al. (1999) propose, it can be
extended to other non standard pragmatic phenomena, in
particular irony and deceit.

Simple and complex deceits and ironies
A deceit occurs when the mental states that the actor
entertains are covertly different from those she
communicates. Bara et al. (1999) propose that the difficulty
in its comprehension can vary depending on the complexity
of the inferential chain necessary to refer the utterance to the
behavioral game. Consider the following example:
[6] Andrew is eating some biscuits from a plate in front of
him. He hears Julia arriving, and then he pushes away the
empty plate in front of him. Julia sees the empty plate and
asks: “Who has finished my biscuits?”. Andrew answers…
(a) Simple: “I don’t have the slightest idea”
(b) Complex: “I’m on a diet”
In our example, the deceitful speech act [6a] is simple
because it consists in an utterance which denies the actor's
private (and true) belief (not-p), that would allow the partner
to immediately refer to the game [BISCUIT-STEALING]
that the actor wishes to conceal from the partner. Instead, a
complex deceitful speech act, such as [6b], consists in an
utterance which leads to the inference: if he is on a diet, he
cannot eat biscuits, that is inconsistent with the game
[BISCUIT-STEALING] that the actor wishes to deny. Thus,

to comprehend a complex deceit, an agent needs a longer
inferential chain.
Cognitive Pragmatics theory claims that irony can be
understood when compared with the belief provided by the
behavior game shared between actor and partner (Airenti,
Bara & Colombetti, 1993b; Bara, in press). According to
Bara et al. (1999), bearing in mind the complexity of the
inferential chain necessary to refer the utterance to the game
bid by the interlocutors, it is possible to distinguish two
kinds of irony, simple and complex. Consider the following
example:
[7] Alex takes out from a toaster two completely burned
pieces of toast. Mary arrives and Alex asks with a puzzled
expression: “Am I a good cook?” Mary answers…
(a) Simple : “The best cook in the world!”
(b) Complex: “I’ll hire you in my restaurant”
A simple ironic speech act, such as [7a], corresponds to the
antiphrastic theory of irony (Grice, 1989): an actor
expresses p to mean not-p. Thus, a simple irony
immediately contrasts with a belief shared between the
agents, in our example that Alex is not a good cook. On the
contrary, a complex ironic speech act requires a series of
inferences in order to detect its contrast with the belief
shared by the agents. Consider our example, by producing
the complex irony [7b], an actor proffers an utterance which
implies the belief p (to employ someone in a restaurant, s/he
has to be a good cook), contrasting with the belief not-p (the
guy is not a good cook), shared between the two agents.
Thus, a person needs a longer inferential chain to
comprehend a complex deceit rather than a simple one.
Bosco and Bucciarelli (submitted) empirically supported
the distinction between simple and complex speech acts:
children aged from 6;7 to 10 years, find it easier to
comprehend simple speech acts, rather than complex ones,
within the same pragmatic phenomena investigated, i.e.
standard speech acts, deceits and ironies.
The present research focuses on the difference of the
inferential processes between communicative acts
pertaining to the same pragmatic category and it did not
analyze the difference among inferential processes existent
among various kind of pragmatic phenomena. Details about
how different types of mental representations underlie the
comprehension of standard communicative acts, deceits and
ironies can be found elsewhere, e.g. Bucciarelli, Colle and
Bara (2003): such a work focuses on the type of inference
underlying specific kinds of pragmatic phenomena; for
instance, understanding an ironic act requires the detection
of a contrast between the speech act and the background
knowledge shared by the interlocutors. The present research
deals instead with the length of the inferential processes
underlying the comprehension of communicative acts within
the same pragmatic phenomenon, i.e. simple vs. complex
standard acts, simple vs. complex deceits, simple vs.
complex ironies.

146

Experiment: simple vs. complex extralinguistic
communication
As we have shown in the previous paragraphs, the
difference between simple and complex acts has been
demonstrated in the context of linguistic communication.
Let us now focus on extralinguistic communication. By
extralinguistic communication we refer to actions such as
facial expressions, hand gestures and body movements
when they are intentionally performed to share a
communicative meaning. These means of expression are of
special importance in that communication, in the first
phases of life, heavily relies on such kinds of actions. Also,
persons who have lost the ability to communicate through
language, e.g. patients with aphasia, have to resort to
extralinguistic means. Not to mention the various kinds of
situations in which normal adults need to communicate but
are forced not to use speech. For all these sort of reasons,
we conducted a study in the context of extralinguistic
communication. In particular, our aim is to analyze whether
the distinction between simple and complex acts holds also
in such a context: if language and gestures are comparable
ways of communication, we should expect that the
distinctions made in linguistic contexts holds also for
extralinguistic communication.
According
to
Cognitive
Pragmatics
theory,
communication is indeed a unitary cognitive faculty aimed
at modifying and sharing mental states, while ‘linguistic’
and ‘extralinguistic’ are means of expression that an agent
may use indifferently in order manifest to and share her
communicative intentions. For instance, waving a hand or
saying ‘Hello’ are two ways of greeting that are only
superficially different; at a deeper level, they can be seen as
two different realizations of a greeting act. Thus, as Bara
and Tirassa (1999; 2000) propose, the difference between
‘linguistic’ and ‘extralinguistic’ communicative acts turns
out to be a matter of cognitive processing rather than of
intrinsic nature. Within such a perspective Bucciarelli et al.
(2003) assume that the construction of the meaning of a
communicative act is independent of the input modalities2.
Empirically, they tested the prediction that a communicative
act has in principle the same difficulty of comprehension,
whether performed through speech or gestures. Their results
show that children of different age groups comprehend each
pragmatic phenomenon (simple and complex standard
communicative acts, simple deceits and simple ironies)
equally well in the two modalities.
The present experiment investigates the comprehension of
different extralinguistic communicative acts. It consists of
two experimental conditions: simple and complex. In both
conditions, participants have to attribute communicative
2

Note that on the bases of other theoretical approaches (Burling,
1993; Chomsky, 1987), nonverbal and verbal communication do
have separate roots in phylogenies; on such basis, the prediction
that what holds for linguistic communication holds also for
extralinguistic communication would be false.

intentions to actors in videotaped stories. Our analysis
focuses on a perspective of a third person who observes an
actor and a partner in a communicative interaction. We now
report one example for each of the investigated pragmatic
phenomena. They are all extracted from our experimental
protocol.
Standard extralinguistic communication
[8] Ann has just finished preparing dinner and walks out of
the kitchen holding a dish of pasta. In order to call Bob,
who is listening to loud music, Ann moves her head as if to
say ‘Come on! Dinner’s ready’.
In the simple version of the task, Bob [8a] nods to show that
he is coming. In the complex version of the task, Bob [8b]
places his hand on his stomach as if to say ‘I’m hungry’.
The request of coming for dinner is part of the behavior
game [FAMILY-DINNER], in which Ann prepares dinner,
calls Bob when dinner is ready, and B answers. Bob's [8a]
nodding is a simple standard communicative act because it
is a straightforward answer to Ann’s question and, thus,
immediately relies on the game shared between the two
agents. On the contrary, to understand that the complex
standard gesture [8b] for ‘I’m hungry’ implies an
acceptance, a person has to assume that if one is hungry
then he wants to eat and that if one wants to eat then he has
the intention of coming to dinner.
Extralinguistic deceit
[9] Bill and his brother are playing with cushions in their
room, when a lamp falls down and breaks into pieces. Mum
comes into the room and, standing with her hands on her
hips, she assumes a severe and questioning look as if to ask
‘Who broke the lamp?’.
In the simple version of the task, Bill [9a] opens his arms in
order to state his innocence. In the complex version of the
task, Bill [9b] takes a book and shows it to Mum in order to
convince her he was reading. Bill's [9a] gesture is a simple
deceit because it immediately denies the actor's private
belief, allowing the partner to refer to the game
[DOMESTIC-MISDEED]. On the contrary, [9b] is a
complex deceit because it implies a belief (if one is reading
a book he is not moving, then he cannot cause any damage)
that is inconsistent with the game [DOMESTICMISDEED]. Thus, in order to understand this sort of deceit
one needs to make a more complex inferential chain.
Extralinguistic irony
[10] Alice pours some soup into her and Ben’s plates and
both assume a disgusted look. Alice looks at Ben as if she is
waiting for a comment.
In the simple version of the task, Ben, with an ironic
expression [10a] licks his lips as if to say ‘It’s delicious!’. In
the complex version of the task, Ben with an ironic
expression, [10b] gives his plate to Alice as to ask to have
some more soup. Ben's [10a] gesture is a simple irony
because it immediately contrasts with the belief (the soup is
not good) which is part of the game [HOME-COOKING]
shared between Alice and Ben. On the contrary, the

complex irony [10b] implies a belief (if one asks for more
food, it is because the food is good) that contrasts with the
belief ‘the soup is not good’ shared between the two agents.
In conclusion, within the same pragmatic category,
comprehending a simple communicative act requires an
easier inferential chain than that required for a complex act.
Indeed, simple acts immediately refer to the behavior game
shared by actor and partner, while complex acts do not.
Thus, for each of the investigated pragmatic phenomena, we
predict that simple communicative acts are easier to
comprehend than complex communicative acts.
Our study was conducted on children of different age
groups. Indeed, adult subjects possess a fully developed
cognitive system and communicative competence, and thus
should not show any interesting errors in comprehending the
different kinds of pragmatic tasks. On the contrary, within a
developmental perspective, we expect that the ability to
comprehend each kind of communicative act improves with
children's age.

Material and Procedures
The experimental material comprised 12 videotaped scenes,
each lasting 20-25 seconds and showing two characters
engaged in a communicative interaction. All communicative
acts were completely extralinguistic, performed only
through gestures. Of these 12 scenes, 4 represented standard
communicative acts, 4 deceiving acts and 4 ironic acts. Each
scene has been recorded in two versions, one simple and
one complex (see the examples described in the previous
paragraph). Thus we devised two experimental protocols, A
and B. Each protocol contains only one version for each
scene. In each protocol the scenes are represented in a
different random order. Half of the participants dealt with
protocol A, while the other half dealt with protocol B. Each
child was randomly assigned to protocol A or B. Every
child saw 4 scenes representing a standard communicative
act (2 simple + 2 complex), 4 scenes representing a
deceiving communicative act (2 simple + 2 complex) and 4
scenes representing an ironic act (2 simple + 2 complex).
At the end of each scene, children had to show that they
had understood the communicative interaction by explaining
to the examiner what had happened and what the actor’s
communicative intention was. Participants’ responses were
rated by 2 independent judges. For each item, judges
assigned a score of Ø (completely wrong answer), 1 (only
partially correct answer) or 2 (correct answer).

Participants
The protocol was administered individually to 300 children,
divided into three age groups: 100 children ranging from 5
to 5;6 (mean age = 5;3 years), 100 children ranging from 6;6
to 7 (mean age = 6;9 years), and 100 children ranging from
8 to 8;6 (mean age = 8;2). Within each age group, there
were 50 males and 50 females. Children came from nursery
and primary schools of Turin.

147

4

Results
Our hypotheses were globally confirmed. Figure 1 shows
the mean percentages of the correct responses over all
children to the simple and complex items: in every type of
investigated phenomena (standards, deceits and ironies),
subjects understand the simple communicative acts better
than the complex ones. More in detail, overall children
understand simple standard communicative acts more easily
than the complex ones (T Test: t = 5.55; p < .0001).
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

simple
complex

standard

deceit

irony

Figure 1: Histogram of the mean percentages of correct
responses over all children.
As shown in Table 1, the same result holds for 5-yearolds (T Test: t = 3.20; p < .002), for 6-year-olds (T Test: t =
2.67; p < .009) and for 8-year-olds (T Test: t = 3.76; p <
.0001). The same pattern of results holds also for simple and
complex deceits. Simple deceits are easier, both overall
subjects (T Test: t = 10.19; p < .0001), and within the
various groups: for 5-year-olds (T Test: t = 5.63; p < .0001),
for 6-year-olds (T Test: t = 5.98; p < .0001) and for 8-yearolds (T Test: t = 6.15; p < .0001). Finally, for ironic acts,
simple ones are easier than complex ones over all subjects
(T Test: t = 3.26; p < .001), for 6-year-olds (T Test: t = 2.24;
p < .03) and for 8-year-olds (T Test: t = 3.11; p < .003),
whereas there is no significant difference for 5-year-olds (T
Test: t = 0.65; p < .52).
Table 1: Mean percentages of correct responses over all
children and for single age groups.
Age
groups

Standard

Deceit

Irony

Simple Complex Simple Complex Simple Complex

5-5;6

67

50

70

42

37

34

6;6-7

79

65

83

53

56

39

8-8;6

86

68

83

56

64

46

Global

78

61

79

50

51

39

We also found significant data concerning children’s
performance improvement, in understanding every kind of
task, in accordance with the increase of their age.
Differences in performance among the three groups have
resulted in both simple and complex standard speech acts

148

(Anova: F ranging from 6.53 to 10.36; p ranging from .002
to .0001). Also the performances in comprehension of deceit
improve as the age of the subjects increase, both for simple
and complex deceits (Anova: F ranging from 3.32 to 6.44; p
ranging from .002 to .03). The same result holds for simple
ironies (Anova: F = 13.23; p < .0001) and for complex
ironies (Anova: F = 3.1; p < 0.05).

Conclusions
In the present study we aimed to extend the analysis on
simple vs. complex communicative acts to the domain of
extralinguistic communication. The results globally confirm
our predictions. Simple communicative acts are easier to
comprehend than complex ones in all pragmatic phenomena
investigated. This is true of all subjects, even within age
groups. We explain such data considering the cognitive
processes underlying the comprehension of the investigated
tasks: in order to be understood complex communicative
acts involve a higher inferential load than simple ones.
Furthermore, as predicted, children’s improve their
performance in all investigated tasks, in accordance with the
increase of their age.
Only in one case our data are not in line with our
expectations: we did not detect significant differences in the
comprehension of simple vs. complex ironies in the
youngest group of 5-year-olds. A possible explanation is
that irony is a too difficult pragmatic phenomenon to be
fully understood by children of that age. For this reason
irony comprehension results difficult in both cases (simple
and complex): children gave such a few correct answers,
that no significant difference emerged. This interpretation is
consistent with results in literature which showed that only
6 year-old-children seem to fully grasp the intentions of
ironic exchanges (Lucariello & Mindolovich, 1995). In line
with such data Bucciarelli et al. (2003) found that irony –
expressed both by linguistic speech acts and by gestures – is
the most difficult pragmatic phenomena to comprehend, in
comparison to standard communicative acts and deceits, for
children aged 2;6 to 7 years. In addition, though still in line
with our results, the authors found that only a small
percentage (38%) of the 4;6-5;6 children in their study
understood ironic gestures in an experimental setting.
Our results on children’s ability to interpret
extralinguistic gesture with a deceitful intent are in line with
other experimental studies. For example Shulz and
Cloghesy (1981) showed that only from 5 years of age
children start to interpret pointing gestures with a deceitful
intent, and that such an ability improves with the age. A
related task has been studied by Call and Tomasello (1999).
The authors investigated children’s ability to deal with
deceits - with the classic false belief task - in an
extralinguistic form. The results are consistent with the
verbal version of the task: only a few 4 year olds are able to
complete the task, whereas most 5 year olds succeed.
Let us now consider our results in a wider perspective.
Our main prediction was to detect an increasing difficulty in
comprehension between simple and complex extra-

linguistic communicative acts in different pragmatic tasks.
Such a prediction was grounded on the assumption that
comprehension of simple and complex communicative acts
can be explained by the complexity of the inferential chain
involved in each of them, despite the communicative
channel used to express them, i.e. linguistic or
extralinguistic. Our results confirm such a perspective: we
find the same trend of difficulty between simple and
complex communicative acts that other studies underlined
in linguistic comprehension (see Bucciarelli et al., 2003;
Bosco & Bucciarelli, submitted). These similarities between
linguistic and extralinguistic comprehension, which we
found in each of the investigated pragmatic phenomenon,
confirm that speech acts and extralinguistic communicative
acts share the most relevant mental processes. Opposing
viewpoints (e.g. Chomsky, 1987; Burling, 1993) consider
linguistic and extralinguistic communication as two distinct
phenomena, different in their intrinsic nature, and having
separate roots in phylogenies. According to such a view,
language is a complex module, independently evolved due
to a non-finalized, genetic mutation. Our data seem to
falsify the hypothesis of a separated line of development of
language and communication, in favor of a unified
theoretical framework in which linguistic and extralinguistic
communication develop in parallel as different aspects of a
unique communicative competence (Bara, in press).

Acknowledgments
This research was supported by the Ministero Italiano
dell'Università e della Ricerca Scientifica (MIUR), FIRB
Project, research code RBAU01JEYW.

References
Airenti, G., Bara, B. G., & Colombetti, M. (1993a).
Conversation and behavior games in the pragmatics of
dialogue. Cognitive Science, 17, 197-256.
Airenti, G., Bara, B. G., & Colombetti, M. (1993b).
Failures, exploitations and deceits in communication.
Journal of Pragmatics, 20, 303-326.
Bara, B. G. (in press). Cognitive Pragmatics. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Bara, B. G., & Bucciarelli, M. (1998). Language in context:
The emergence of pragmatic competence. In A. C.
Quelhas & F. Pereira (Eds.), Cognition in context. Lisbon:
Istituto Superior de Psicologia Aplicada.
Bara, B. G., & Tirassa, M. (1999). A mentalist framework
for linguistic and extralinguistic communication. In S.
Bagnara (Eds.), Proceedings of the 3rd European
Conference on Cognitive Science (pp. 285-290). Roma:
Istituto di Psicologia del Consiglio Nazionale delle
Ricerche.
Bara, B. G., & Tirassa, M. (2000). Neuropragmatics: Brain
and communication. Brain and Language, 71, 10-14.
Bara, B. G., Bosco, F. M., & Bucciarelli, M. (1999). Simple
and complex speech acts: What makes the difference
within a developmental perspective. In M. Hahn & S.

149

Stones (Eds.), Proceedings of the XXI Annual Conference
of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 55-60). Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Bosco, F. M., & Bucciarelli, M. (submitted). Simple and
complex deceits and ironies.
Bosco, F. M., Bucciarelli, M., & Bara, B. G. (2003). Literal
meaning and context categories in the attribution of
communicative intentions. In R. Alterman & D. Kirsh
(Eds.), Proceedings of the XXV Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society (pp. 162-167). Boston,
Massachusetts: Cognitive Science Society.
Bosco, F. M., Bucciarelli, M., & Bara, B. G. (2004).
Context categories in understanding communicative
intentions. Journal of Pragmatics. 36, 436-488.
Bucciarelli, M., Colle, L., & Bara, B. G. (2003). How
children comprehend speech acts and communicative
gestures. Journal of Pragmatics, 35, 207-241.
Burling, R. (1993). Primate calls, human language, and non
verbal communication. Current Anthropology, 34, 25-53.
Call, J., & Tomasello, M. (1999). A nonverbal false belief
task: the performance of children and great apes. Child
Development, 70, 381-395.
Chomsky, N. (1987). Language and problems of
knowledge: The Managua Lectures. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Clark, H. H. (1979). Responding to indirect speech acts.
Cognitive Psychology, 11, 430-477.
Gibbs, R. W. (1986). What makes some indirect speech acts
conventional? Journal of Memory and Language, 25,
181-196.
Gibbs, R. W. (1994). The poetics of mind. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole & J.
L. Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and semantics 3: Speech acts.
New York: Academic Press.
Grice, H. P. (1989). Studies in the way of words.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Lucariello, J., & Mindolovich, C. (1995). The development
of complex metarepresentational reasoning: the case of
situational irony. Cognitive Development, 10, 551-576.
Recanati, F. (1995). The alleged priority of literal interpretation. Cognitive Science, 19, 207-232.
Searle, J. R. (1975). Indirect speech acts. In P. Cole & J. L.
Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and semantics 3: Speech acts. New
York: Academic Press.
Shultz, T. R., & Cloghsey, K. (1981). Development of
recursive awarness of intention. Developmental
Psychology, 17, 465-471.
Sperber, D. & Wilson, D. (1986). Relevance. Oxford, UK:
Blackwell.

