UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Simulating the temporal reference of Dutch and English Root Infinitives

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/43z6327d

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Freudenthal, Daniel
Pine, Julian
Gobet, Fernard

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Simulating the temporal reference of Dutch and English Root Infinitives
Daniel Freudenthal (DF@Psychology.Nottingham.Ac.Uk)
School of Psychology, University Park
Nottingham, NG7 2RD UK

Julian Pine (JP@Psychology.Nottingham.Ac.Uk)
School of Psychology, University Park
Nottingham, NG7 2RD UK

Fernand Gobet (Fernand.Gobet@Brunel.Ac.UK)
Department of Human Sciences, Brunel University
Uxbridge, Middlesex, UB8 3PH UK

Abstract

(1994). According to Wexler’s Optional Infinitive (OI)
Hypothesis, by the time children begin to produce multiword speech, they have already correctly set all the basic
inflectional and clause structure parameters of their
language. They thus have adult-like knowledge of the word
order and inflectional properties of the language they are
learning. However, there is a stage of development (the
Optional Infinitive stage), during which the abstract features
of Tense (TNS) and Agreement (AGR) can be absent from
the underlying representation of the sentence. This results in
children initially using both finite and non-finite verb forms
in contexts in which a finite form would be obligatory in the
adult language. The great strength of the Optional Infinitive
Hypothesis is that it explains the data from a wide variety of
languages, as well as the relative sparseness of other errors.
However, the theory also has some important weaknesses.
Firstly, the theory assumes a large amount of innate
knowledge and ignores the possibility that the Optional
Infinitive phenomenon may be understood as the result of an
input-driven learning process without the need to assume
large amounts of innate knowledge. Simulations with the
MOSAIC model have already shown that a simple learning
mechanism which is sensitive to the distributional
characteristics of the input can give a close quantitative fit
to the prevalence of the Root Infinitives in English and
Dutch over a range of MLUs (Freudenthal, Pine & Gobet
(2002a, 2003, in preparation).
Secondly, while the Optional Infinitive phenomenon
occurs in several languages, cross-linguistic differences
exist in the finer detail of the phenomenon that are
problematic for Wexler’s theory. One obvious way of
explaining these differences is in terms of differences in the
distributional characteristics of the language being learned.
In this paper we assess the viability of such an explanation
by simulating cross-linguistic differences in the fine detail
of the OI-phenomenon in Dutch and English using
MOSAIC. The central aim of this paper is therefore to
investigate whether the same mechanism that captures one
of the key similarities in the speech of children learning
different languages can also capture differences in the way

Hoekstra & Hyams (1998) claim that the overwhelming
majority of Dutch children’s Root Infinitives (RIs) are used to
refer to modal (not realised) events, whereas in English
speaking children, the temporal reference of RIs is free.
Hoekstra & Hyams attribute this difference to qualitative
differences in how temporal reference is carried by the Dutch
infinitive and the English bare form. Ingram & Thompson
(1996) advocate an input-driven account of this difference and
suggest that the modal reading of German (and Dutch) RIs is
caused by the fact that infinitive forms are predominantly
used in modal contexts. This paper investigates whether an
input-driven account can explain the differential reading of
RIs in Dutch and English. To this end, corpora of English and
Dutch Child Directed Speech were fed through MOSAIC, a
computational model that has already been used to simulate
the basic Optional Infinitive phenomenon. Infinitive forms in
the input were tagged for modal or non-modal reference based
on the sentential context in which they appeared. The output
of the model was compared to the results of corpus studies
and recent experimental data which call into question the
strict distinction between Dutch and English advocated by
Hoekstra & Hyams.

Root Infinitives in Child Language
A striking feature of the speech of children who are
acquiring their native language, is that, in many languages,
children go through a stage where they produce R o o t
Infinitives (non-finite verb forms in contexts that require a
finite verb form). Thus, English-speaking children may
produce utterances such as (1), and Dutch children may
produce utterances such as (2).
(1) Daddy drink coffee
(2) Papa koffie drinken (Daddy coffee drink-inf)
This phenomenon has been subject to considerable linguistic
theorizing, as the fact that it occurs in several languages
(including English, Dutch, Swedish, German and French)
suggests the operation of invariant principles. A particularly
influential Nativist theory has been provided by Wexler

410

Infinitives are not exclusively modal, they can occur with
stative as well as eventive verbs.

that this phenomenon patterns as a function of differences in
the languages being learned, and hence can provide a
unified account of patterns of cross-linguistic similarity and
difference in children’s early multi-word speech.

Problems with Hoekstra & Hyams’ Account
While the Hoekstra & Hyams’ account explains the
differential reading of Dutch and English Root Infinitives, it
predicts that the proportion of modal readings of RIs in
Dutch and English is radically different. Theoretically, all
RIs in languages with an infinitival morpheme should be
modal, while the reference of English RIs is free. The
proportion of modal RIs in Dutch and German appears to be
considerably lower than 1.00 however. Wijnen (1996)
reports a proportion of .85 averaged over 4 children, and
Ingram & Thompson (1996) report a proportion of .55 using
a strict criterion and .79 using a lenient criterion.
Ingram & Thompson also suggest that the modal reading
of RIs in German (and Dutch), is caused by the fact that
infinitive forms in adult German and Dutch are typically
used in conjunction with a modal, as in (7) and (8). Since
Dutch-speaking children predominantly hear infinitive
forms in modal contexts in the input, they come to associate
these forms with the modal reading and use them
predominantly to express desires.

The Modal Reference of Root Infinitives
The majority of Root Infinitives that Dutch children produce
carry a modal meaning: they tend to express desires and
wishes, or relate to unrealized events. Hoekstra & Hyams
(1998) have dubbed this the Modal Reference Effect. The
type of verbs that occur as Root Infinitives also differs from
inflected verbs. Dutch speaking children appear to use Root
Infinitives when referring to actions rather than static
situations. This has been called the Eventivity Constraint.
Wijnen (1996), analysed the speech of four Dutch children,
and found that 95% of the children’s Root Infinitives
contained eventive verbs, and 85% of the Root Infinitives
had a modal reference, thus confirming the Modal
Reference Effect and Eventivity Constraint. According to
Hoekstra & Hyams, the Modal Reference Effect and
Eventivity Constraint do not hold for English. They present
data based on an (unpublished) paper by Ud Deen (1997),
who found that only 13% of English Root Infinitives carry a
modal meaning. Ud Deen also found that, while the majority
of English Root Infinitives are eventive in nature, this effect
is less pronounced than it is in Dutch, with 75% of English
RIs containing eventive verbs. Hoekstra & Hyams explain
this cross-linguistic difference by referring to differences
between the English and Dutch infinitive form. The English
infinitive, they claim, is not a true infinitive, but a ‘bare
form’. Dutch has a true infinitive as it has an infinitival
morpheme. This infinitival morpheme is thought to carry an
irrealis feature which is responsible for the modal reference.
This, they argue, is evident from the analysis of the
following utterances:

7. Ik ga morgen werken (I go-FIN Tomorrow work-INF)
8. Wil je spelen? (Want-FIN you play-INF)
The proportion of modal Root Infinitives in English may
also be considerably higher than the .13 that was found in a
corpus study by Ud Deen. An inherent weakness of corpus
studies is that the modal/nonmodal reading of an utterance is
assigned on the basis of the context in which it is produced.
However, since the corpora are transcripts of spontaneous
speech, the information required to discriminate between
modal and non-modal readings is often lacking. For this
reason, Blom, Krikhaar & Wijnen (2001) conducted an
experiment in which children produced descriptions of
modal and non-modal events. In the experiment, the
majority of Dutch children’s Root Infinitives (68%) were
used to describe modal events. For the English children this
was 44%. While this difference was significant and in the
expected direction, this finding is problematic for Hoekstra
& Hyams, as it suggests that the difference between Dutch
and English is not a qualitative difference, but a graded,
quantitative one which may well be related to the
distributional characteristics of the language rather than
differences in infinitival morphology.
In this paper, MOSAIC will be used to investigate the
source of the differential reading of Dutch and English Root
Infinitives. MOSAIC has a number of characteristics that
make it a suitable candidate for such an investigation.
Firstly, the model has already been shown to successfully
simulate the developmental change in the prevalence of
Root Infinitives in Dutch and English (Freudenthal, Pine &
Gobet 2002a, 2003, in preparation), as well as phenomena
related to Subject Omission in English (Freudenthal, Pine &
Gobet 2002b). The model’s success in simulating the finer
detail of the OI phenomenon therefore provides a strong test

3. I see John cross the street*
4. I saw John cross the street
5. I see John crossing the street
Utterance (3) is ungrammatical in English, because the
English bare form denotes ‘not only the processual part of
the event, but includes the completion of that event’
(Hoekstra & Hyams 1998, p. 105). A correct description of
an ongoing event in English would therefore require the use
of the past tense as in (4), or the progressive as in (5).
Sentence 6 makes it clear that this constraint does not
operate in Dutch: an ongoing event may be described using
a present tense construction. Apparently, the Dutch
infinitive does not signal completion of the event.
6. Ik zie/zag Jan de straat oversteken
I see/saw John the street cross-INF
I see/saw John cross the street.
This difference between the English and Dutch infinitival
form also explains the difference with respect to the
eventivity of Root Infinitives, as, according to Hoekstra &
Hyams it is the modal reading of Dutch Root Infinitives that
forces the selection of an eventive verb. Since English Root

411

later in development (Wijnen et al, 2001). Early in training,
the model encodes many utterance final phrases. Since the
infinitive takes sentence-final position (as can be seen in
examples 7 and 8), the model produces many utterances
with only non-finite verb forms. As the model encodes
longer and longer phrases, these Root Infinitives are slowly
replaced by auxiliary/modal plus infinitive constructions.

of an input-driven account of the OI phenomenon.
Secondly, the model learns off Child Directed Speech. The
use of Child Directed Speech ensures a realistic frequency
distribution, so that differences in the surface characteristics
of a language are reflected in the input in a quantitatively
realistic way. This is of particular importance as the practice
of using artificially created input sets (which is common in
simulations of phenomena in child speech) may lead the
researcher to misrepresent the distributional characteristics
responsible for the phenomenon under investigation.
Thirdly, MOSAIC uses no built-in linguistic knowledge.
Whatever representations it builds up during learning are a
result of the interaction between its learning mechanism and
the distribution of the input it sees. This last characteristic is
important because Hoekstra & Hyams’ explanation of the
differential reading of RIs is dependent on the assumption
that the child knows that the infinitival morpheme implies a
modal interpretation (rather than learning the association
through exposure to the input). MOSAIC will be described
below, followed by the details of the simulation.

Simulating Language Acquisition in MOSAIC
Whilst the version used for the simulations discussed here
has changed from the earlier simulations, the main
theoretical underpinning of the model remains the same.
The basic tenet of the model is that the learning of language
is a performance-limited process which is heavily weighted
towards the most recent elements in the speech stream (i.e.,
which has an utterance final bias). Several authors have
argued that children are better at learning material that
occurs towards the end of the utterance (Naigles & HoffGinsberg, 1998; Shady & Gerken, 1999; Wijnen et al.
2001).
MOSAIC learns from orthographically coded input, with
whole words being the unit of analysis. The model is a
simple discrimination net (an n-ary tree) which is headed by
a root node. At the start of learning the discrimination net
consists of just the root node. More nodes (encoding words
or phrases) are added as the model is shown more
utterances. An important requirement for nodes to be added
is that whatever follows the word to be encoded in the input,
must already have been encoded in the model. That is, the
model will only learn a new word, when it has already
encoded the rest of the utterance. This results in the model
building up its representation of the utterances it is shown
by starting at the end of the utterance, and slowly working
its way to the beginning.
If the model were to see the utterance I go home three
times, it would on its first pass encode the fact it has seen
the word home at the end of an utterance. On the second
pass, it would encode the sequence go home. After a third
pass, it would have encoded the whole utterance. Figure one
gives a graphical representation of the model at this stage.
The fact that MOSAIC builds its representation of an
utterance by starting at the end of the utterance is the major
mechanism responsible for its simulation of the
development of Root Infinitives in Dutch. Early in Dutch
children’s development, 80-90% percent of their utterances
containing verbs are Root Infinitives. This drops to 10-20%

Figure 1: MOSAIC after it has seen the utterance
I go home three times.
In the example illustrated in Figure 1, a (sentence final)
word is encoded after one exposure. In fact, MOSAIC
actually learns much more slowly than this, and the input
corpus is fed through the model several times, so output of
increasing average length can be generated after consecutive
exposures to the input corpus. The probability of creating a
node in MOSAIC is given by the following formula:



1
NCP = 

1+ e m−u / c 

d

where: NCP = Node Creation Probability

€

m = a constant, set to 20 for these simulations.
c = corpus size.
u = total number of utterances seen.
d = distance to the end of the utterance.

The formula results in a basic sigmoid curve. The formula
contains the size of the corpus and total number of
utterances seen. The size of the corpus is included because
the size of the available input corpora differs considerably
(13,000 to 30,000 utterances for the corpora used in these
simulations). The use of the term (m – u/c) ensures that after
n presentations of the complete input corpus the Node
Creation Probability is identical for corpora of different
sizes. The ‘distance to the end of the utterance’ in the
exponent causes material that occurs near the beginning of
the utterance to have a lower likelihood of being encoded
than material that occurs near the end. This effect decreases
as the model sees more input.

412

Production of Novel Utterances

simulations the proportion of modal infinitives is larger than
it is for English. For all four possible comparisons of Dutch
against English simulations, the difference was statistically
significant (χ2(1) > 12.00 p < .001).

Utterance production in MOSAIC involves outputting all
the utterances the model has encoded. However, the output
that MOSAIC produces consists of more than the input it
has seen. MOSAIC has a mechanism for linking words or
phrases that have occurred in similar contexts. When the
overlap between two words is sufficiently high (more than
10% of both the words that preceded and followed the target
words are the same), the two words get linked. Two words
that are linked can be substituted for each other when the
model produces output. This mechanism allows MOSAIC to
produce utterances that were not present in the input.
Redington, Chater & Finch (1998), and Mintz (2003), have
shown that similar mechanisms based on co-occurrence
statistics can be quite effective in grouping words that are of
the same syntactic category.
The model also includes a chunking mechanism, which
results in frequent multi-word phrases being treated as one
unit. Since the chunking mechanism does not play an
important role in these simulations, it is not discussed any
further in this paper.

Table 1: Proportion of modal infinitives and total number of
infinitives for Dutch and English simulations.
Simulation1
Simulation2

Dutch
.70 (1447)
.54 (1474)

English
.47 (1577)
.48 (2581)

While these values are very close to those reported by
Blom et al., this analysis ignores the complication that
(especially in English) it is difficult to unambiguously
identify the infinitive. In the English present tense, only the
third singular differs from the infinitive. A true Root
Infinitive can therefore only be identified in a third singular
context (since many of the forms resembling the infinitive
may actually be correctly inflected finites).
A second analysis was therefore performed on the subset
of utterances that had a third singular subject (e.g. He go/Hij
gaan). While the Dutch data could be restricted to all
singulars rather than just third singular, it was considered
preferable to use the same restriction for both languages.
The results of these analyses are shown in Table 2.

The Simulations
In order to distinguish modal from non-modal Root
Infinitives in the output of the model, infinitive verb forms
in the input were tagged to reflect the context in which they
occurred. In order to do this, all utterances in the input were
(automatically) searched for words denoting a modal or notrealised context. These words constituted the standard
modals, as well as some other words denoting a not-realised
context, including want and go. The utterances containing a
word denoting a modal context were then searched for
words that matched an infinitive form. If such a word was
found, it was tagged for having occurred in a modal context
(by adding –MOD to the verb).
For both languages, two input corpora (available through
the CHILDES data base (MacWhinney 2000)) were
selected. For Dutch, these were the corpora of Matthijs
(Simulation1) and Peter (Simulation2). For English the
corpora of Anne (Simulation1) and Becky (Simulation2)
were selected. The size of the corpora was approximately
13,000 utterances for Dutch, and 30,000 utterances for the
English input. Since the input corpora consist of Child
Directed Speech, the distributional characteristics are
representative of the language that children hear. Each input
corpus was fed through the model iteratively until the output
reached a Mean Length of Utterance (MLU) of
approximately 2.5. At this stage, all the utterances the model
could produce were generated. The full output consisted of
approximately 7,500 utterances for the Dutch corpora, and
15,000 for the English corpora. Next, all utterances in which
all verbs matched the infinitive form were selected. The
proportion of these utterances that had the infinitive form
tagged for a modal context (i.e. had been learnt off a modal
context) was then calculated. Table 1 gives the results for
the English and Dutch simulations. For both Dutch

Table 2: Proportion of modal infinitives and total number of
infinitives for Dutch and English simulations,
third singular context only.
Simulation1
Simulation2

Dutch
.66 (104)
.58 (102)

English
.43 (89)
.42 (118)

Again, the proportion of modal RIs is larger in the Dutch
simulations than it is in the English simulations (For all four
possible comparisons, χ2(1) > 4.30, p < .05). Thus,
MOSAIC clearly captures the difference between the two
languages, suggesting that the differential reading of Root
Infinitives in English and Dutch is related to the surface
characteristics of the languages.
Having established that MOSAIC simulates the
differential reading of RIs, we can now assess whether
MOSAIC simulates the difference in verb types that occur
in Root Infinitives. Hoekstra & Hyams cite a paper by
Wijnen (1996) who found that 95% of Dutch Root
Infinitives contained eventive verbs. In English, Ud Deen
(1997), found that only 75% of Root Infinitives contained
eventive verbs. While a direct comparison between these
numbers is difficult as Wijnen and Ud Deen used a different
set of verbs, stative verbs do appear to be used more often in
English than in Dutch Root Infinitives. In order to perform a
more controlled analysis, all Root Infinitives in Table 2
were coded for whether the main verb denoted an event or
not. As can be seen in Table 3, MOSAIC does simulate the
effect, though only three out of four differences are

413

statistically significant (χ2(1) > 6.20, p < .02). The value of
.92 for Dutch (simulation2) was not significantly different
from .87 (English, simulation2). Inspection of the noneventive verbs in simulation2 for Dutch revealed that 5 out
of the 8 instances consisted of the verb zien (see), which
was linked to the verb kijken (look), and was thus
substituted in production. It thus appears that the
generativity mechanism may have inflated the proportion of
non-eventive Root Infinitives for this simulation.

Table 4: Proportion of modal contexts for third singulars
followed by infinitive in English and Dutch input corpora.
Input1
Input2

Dutch
.98
.92

English
.37 (212)
.41 (153)

Also of interest now is the question of what the nonmodal contexts are in which these constructions occur. In
English a large majority (90%) of these non-modal contexts
do turn out to be ‘do-questions’. Thus, while third-singular
plus infinitive constructions can occur in modal as well as
non-modal contexts, the dummy modal do alone makes up
close to 40% of these contexts. In the Dutch input, nonmodal contexts are limited in number, and largely confined
to Root Infinitives (though a few double verb constructions
do occur). The majority of non-modal Root Infinitives
therefore appear to be learned off double-verb constructions
in English and off Root Infinitives in Dutch.
Turning to the eventive-stative distinction it now also
becomes apparent why Root Infinitives are more likely to
contain statives in English. In English, stative verbs such as
want or need frequently occur in utterances like Does he
want it. In Dutch such an utterance does not carry the
inflection on the dummy modal, but on the inverted main
verb (Wil hij dat; Wants he that). As a result, statives in
Dutch only occur as infinitives in very infrequent double
verb constructions such as Dat zou hij willen (That would he
want) The higher proportion of statives in English Root
Infinitives can therefore also be explained in terms of the
use of the dummy modal do in the input.

Table 3: Proportion of Root Infinitives (third singular
context only) that have an eventive main verb.
Simulation1
Simulation2

Dutch
.77 (113)
.56 (140)

English
.80
.87

What causes the Modal Reference Effect?
The fact that MOSAIC simulates the difference between
Dutch and English for both the modal reading of Root
Infinitives and the eventivity of the main verb, suggests that
these effects are related to differences in the surface
characteristics of the two languages. In order to understand
what these relevant surface characteristics might be, it is
useful to examine more closely in what contexts third
singular subjects are followed by a form resembling the
infinitive. In both Dutch and English, the majority of the
contexts are likely to be questions. English and Dutch differ
however, in the way questions are formed. Whereas Dutch
uses inversion to transform a declarative into a question, in
English, the auxiliary do is inserted, resulting in phrases
such as Does he go. While the auxiliary do patterns like a
modal, it does not carry a modal or not-realised meaning. In
English, a third singular subject followed by an infinitive
form can therefore occur in both a non-modal (Does he go),
and a modal context (Can he go). In Dutch, a third singular
followed by an infinitive form can occur in double verb
constructions such as Kan hij fietsen (Can he cycle-inf), or
Ik zie Jan lopen (I see John walk-inf). The first of these is
modal, but the second is not. Root Infinitives in the input
are a further source of third singular plus infinitive contexts.
In some situations (for example elliptical answers to
questions) Root Infinitives are allowed in Dutch. In the two
languages, the third singular is thus followed by the
infinitive in different contexts. If a child learns Root
Infinitives off the input, it is likely to produce them in the
context in which they are most frequently encountered. One
way of directly testing such an input-driven account of Root
Infinitives is to search the input for occasions where a third
singular is followed by an infinitive form, and noting
whether the context is modal or not. Table 4 presents the
results of such an analysis (using the most frequent third
singular subjects that were present in the Root Infinitives of
the model’s output). Table 4 shows that in Dutch third
singular plus infinitive constructions occur in a modal
context more often than they do in English (again all four
differences are statistically significant χ2(1) > 6.2, p < .02).

Conclusions
While Wexler’s Optional Infinitive Hypothesis can explain
the cross-linguistic occurrence of Root Infinitives,
additional assumptions are required the explain the crosslinguistic differences in the fine detail of the phenomenon.
Hoekstra & Hyams (1998), explain some of this fine detail
(the differential temporal reference of Dutch and English
children’s Root Infinitives) by referring to qualitative
differences between the languages. Specifically, they argue
that the English infinitive is a bare form rather than a true
infinitive. They argue that the English bare form does not
carry the irrealis feature, which signals the modal reading of
the infinitive. They therefore postulate qualitative
differences in the fine detail of infinitival morphology
between the two languages. Since children are thought to
know the full grammar, English-speaking children will use
Root Infinitives both in modal and non-modal contexts, and
Dutch children should use Root Infinitives overwhelmingly
in modal contexts. Experimental work by Blom et al. has
shown however, that the difference is not as large as
predicted by Hoekstra & Hyams, suggesting that it is a
graded quantitative, rather than a qualitative difference.
In this paper MOSAIC was used to investigate whether
the difference between Dutch and English could be related

414

Blom, E., Krikhaar, E. & Wijnen, F. (2001). Nonfinite
clauses in Dutch and English child language: An
experimental approach. In: A. H-J. Do, L. Domínquez &
A. Johansen (Eds.): Proceedings of the 25th annual Boston
University Conference on Language Development. pp.
133-144. Cascadilla Press.
Freudenthal, D., Pine, J. & Gobet, F. (2002a). Modelling the
development of Dutch Optional Infinitives in MOSAIC.
In: W. Gray & C. Schunn (Eds.), Proceedings of the 24th
Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society pp. 322327 Mahwah, NJ: LEA.
Freudenthal, D., Pine, J. & Gobet, F. (2002b). Subject
omission in children’s language; The case for
performance limitations in learning. In: W. Gray & C.
Schunn (Eds.), Proceedings of the 24 th Annual Meeting of
the Cognitive Science Society, pp. 328-333. Mahwah, NJ:
LEA.
Freudenthal, D., Pine, J. & Gobet, F. (2003). The role of
input size and generativity in simulating language
acquisition. In: F. Schmalhofer, R. Young, & G. Katz
(Eds.): Proceedings of EuroCogSci 03. The European
Cognitive Science Conference 2003. Mahwah NJ: LEA.
Freudenthal, D., Pine, J. & Gobet, F. (in preparation).
Modelling the development of children’s use of optional
infinitives in English and Dutch using MOSAIC.
Ingram, D & Thompson, W. (1996). Early syntactic
acquisition in German: evidence for the modal hypothesis.
Language, 72, 97-120.
Hoekstra, T. & Hyams, N. (1998). Aspects of root
infinitives. Lingua, 106, 81-112.
MacWhinney, B. (2000). The CHILDES project: Tools for
analyzing talk. Third Edition. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Mintz, T.H. (2003). Frequent frames as a cue for
grammatical categories in child directed speech.
Cognition, 90, 91-117.
Naigles, L. & Hoff-Ginsberg, E. (1998). Why are some
verbs learned before other verbs. Effects of input
frequency and structure on children’s early verb use.
Journal of Child Language, 25, 95-120.
Redington, M., Chater, N. & Finch, S. (1998). Distributional
information: A powerful cue for acquiring syntactic
categories. Cognitive Science 22, 425-469.
Shady, M. & Gerken, L. (1999). Grammatical and caregiver
cues in early sentence comprehension. Journal of Child
Language, 26, 163-176.
Ud Deen, K. (1997). The interpretation of root infinitives in
English: Is eventivity a factor? Term paper, UCLA.
Wexler, K. (1994). Optional infinitives, head movement and
the economy of derivation in child grammar. In N.
Hornstein & D. Lightfoot (Eds.), Verb Movement.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wijnen, F. (1996). Temporal reference and eventivity in
root infinitives. MIT occasional Papers in Linguistics, 12,
1-25.
Wijnen, F., Kempen, M. & Gillis, S. (2001). Root infinitives
in Dutch early child language. Journal of Child
Language, 28, 629-660.

to the surface characteristics of the two languages. The fact
that MOSAIC has already been used to simulate the
developmental patterning in the prevalence of Root
Infinitives (relative to simple and compound finites) in
English and Dutch lends credence to the basic mechanism
for producing Root Infinitives that MOSAIC employs.
While MOSAIC is clearly insufficient as a full model of the
language acquisition process, it is a valuable tool for
exploring how an utterance final learning bias can interact
with the distributional properties of the input to produce the
phenomena apparent in children.
MOSAIC clearly simulates the difference between
English and Dutch in terms of the modal reading as well as
the eventive/stative nature of the verbs in Root Infinitives.
The fact that both phenomena can be explained by the use of
the dummy modal ‘do’ (which patterns like a modal without
ascribing modal meaning) shows that subtle differences in
the distributional characteristics of languages can have quite
profound effects on the patterning of child data. As these
effects can be quite difficult to predict a priori,
computational modelling can be an invaluable tool for
investigating the complex relations between input
characteristics and child speech.
The analyses reported here also underscore the
importance of using realistic input when simulating child
speech, as some effects are only likely to be simulated when
realistic input is used. While dummy do is only one of many
modals in English, it accounts for 40% of the third singular
+ infinitive contexts. However, do is also responsible for the
occurrence of eventive RIs. Since these occur at a maximum
rate of 20% in these simulations, an underestimation of the
incidence of do in artificial input would likely result in
failure of the model to simulate the effect. This is even more
apparent when one realises that third singular plus infinitive
contexts are largely restricted to questions; it seems unlikely
that without prior knowledge of the importance of questions
a researcher constructing artificial input would include ‘doquestions’ at a sufficient rate to simulate these effects.
The fact that the interaction between the learning
mechanism and the distributional characteristics of the input
can produce the different levels of modal Root Infinitives in
the two languages strongly suggests that the observed
phenomenon is related to surface characteristics (the
contexts in which infinitives occur), rather than to
differences in the infinitival morphology between the
languages. Since MOSAIC does not have any knowledge of
infinitival morphology (in fact does not employ any built in
linguistic knowledge), these results clearly show that the
Modal Reference Effect can be explained without assuming
that children know the full grammar of their language, or the
fine detail of infinitival morphology.

Acknowledgements
This research was funded by the ESRC under grant number
RES000230211

References
415

