UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Smarter and Richer?: Executive Processing and the Monty Hall Dilemma

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/17n092w0

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Author
Neys, Wim De

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Smarter and Richer?: Executive Processing and the Monty Hall Dilemma
Wim De Neys (Wim.Deneys@psy.kuleuven.ac.be)
Department of Psychology, K.U.Leuven, Tiensestraat 102
B-3000 Leuven, Belgium
concealing the prize, and obviously, he will not
open the guest’s door either. Taking into account
that two thirds of the times the prize will be in
one of the non-chosen doors, the non-chosen
door that is still closed will hide the prize in two
thirds of the trials (Tubau & Alonso, 2003).
Empirical studies of the Monty Hall Dilemma
consistently showed that the vast majority of
college students fails to give the correct response
(switching rates ranging from 9% to 21%, e.g.,
Burns & Wieth, 2000, 2003; Friedman, 1998;
Granberg & Brown, 1995; Krauss & Wang,
2003; Tubau & Alonso, 2003). Likewise, vos
Savant (1997) reports that after she discussed the
problem in a weekly magazine column she
received up to 10,000 letters in response. Ninetytwo percent of the writers from the general
public disagreed with the switching answer. To
paraphrase Friedman (1998), it seems that
because of peoples poor MHD reasoning
“millions of dollars were left on Monty’s table”.
Research indicates that the typical MHD
response can be attributed to the operation of
erroneous but very powerful intuitions or
heuristics. For example, Shimojo and Ichikawa
(1989) found that most people base their answer
on the so called number-of-cases heuristic (“if
the number of alternatives is N, then the
probability of each one is 1/N”). Thus, since
only two doors remain people will automatically
assign a 50% chance to each door and fail to take
the “knowledgeable host” information into
account. Similar claims can be found in Falk
(1992) and Johnson-Laird, Legrenzi, Girotto,
Legrenzi, and Caverni (1999).
It has been argued that human thinking in
general typically relies on the operation of
intuitive, prepotent heuristics instead of a
deliberate, controlled reasoning process. The
primacy of these heuristics has been called the
fundamental computational bias in human
cognition (Stanovich, 1999). Whereas the fast
and undemanding heuristics provide us with
useful responses in many situations they can bias
reasoning in tasks that require more elaborate,
analytic processing (e.g., Evans & Over, 1996;
Kahneman, Slovic, & Tversky, 1982;. Sloman,
1996; Stanovich, 1999; Stanovich & West, 2000;
Tversky & Kahneman, 1983).
Stanovich and West (e.g., 2000) stressed that
although the modal response is often erroneous
in many reasoning tasks, a small proportion of

Abstract
The Monty Hall Dilemma (MHD) is a striking
example of the human tendency to base probability
judgment on intuitive, erroneous heuristics instead
of an analytic, normative reasoning process. Two
experiments tested the claim (e.g., Stanovich &
West, 2000) that correct, normative reasoning draws
on executive, working memory resources (WM)
whereas heuristic reasoning would be purely
automatic. Experiment 1A examined the link
between MHD-reasoning and WM-capacity.
Participants that solved the MHD correctly had a
significantly higher WM-capacity. Experiment 1B
presents a new approach to test the role of the WMresources experimentally. Participants solved the
MHD while WM-resources were burdened by a
secondary task. Correct responses decreased under
load. The results provide new evidence for the
differential role of executive resources in heuristic
and analytic reasoning.

Introduction
A main theme of cognitive reasoning research over
the last decades is that human judgment frequently
violates traditional normative standards. In a wide
range of reasoning tasks most people do not give
the answer that is correct according to logic or
probability theory. The discrepancy between
normative models and peoples actual performance
has been labeled the “normative/descriptive gap”
(Stanovich, 1999). The present study focuses on
one of the most striking examples of this
discrepancy: The Monty Hall Dilemma.
The notorious, counterintuitive Monty Hall
Dilemma was adapted from a popular TV game
show (Friedman, 1998). Host Monty Hall asks his
final guest to choose one of three doors. One of the
doors conceals a valuable prize and the other two
contain worthless prizes such as goats or a bunch of
toilet paper. After the guest makes a selection, the
host, who knows where the prize is, opens one of
the non-chosen doors to show that it contains a dud.
The guests are then asked if they want to stay with
their first choice or switch to the other unopened
door.
Most people have the strong intuition that
whether they switch or not the probability of
winning remains 50% either way. However, from a
normative point of view, the best strategy is to
switch to the other door. Indeed, switching yields a
2/3 chance of winning. The solution hinges on the
crucial fact that the host will never open the door
285

the participants does give responses that are in line
with the normative standards. Their research on
individual differences showed that participants that
gave the normative response on classic reasoning
tasks such as the conjunction fallacy (Tversky &
Kahneman, 1983) and the Wason (1966) selection
task were disproportionally those highest in
cognitive (working memory) capacity. According to
Stanovich and West’s dual process framework (see
also Evans & Over, 1996; Sloman, 1996) correct
normative responding requires that an analytic,
controlled reasoning process overrides the prepotent
heuristics. The inhibition of the heuristic system
and the computations of the analytic system would
draw on limited, executive working memory
resources. The more resources that are available,
the more likely that the analytic system will be
successfully engaged and the correct response
calculated.
The Stanovich and West (2000) findings suggest
that a possible antidote to erroneous MHD
reasoning might be a high working memory span. If
correct normative reasoning requires executive
working memory (WM) resources, then participants
with a higher WM-span should be more likely to
select the switching response. Bluntly put, the
guests that win the prize in the game show will not
only be richer but also “smarter”1. The link between
MHD-reasoning and WM-capacity was examined
in Experiment 1A.
The Stanovich and West framework and related
dual process theories have been severely criticized
(e.g., Stanovich & West, 2000). One important
issue concerns the central assumption about the role
of controlled, executive resources. Both the claim
that correct, normative reasoning depends on the
executive system and the characterization of the
heuristic system as automatic and independent from
executive control have been questioned (e.g.,
Handley, Feeney, Harper, 2002; Klaczynski, 2000,
2001; Osman, 2002)
Experiment 1B presents a new approach in the
dual process field. The experiment adopted
secondary task methodology to burden the
executive WM-resources while participants were
solving the MHD. If correct responding in the
MHD draws on WM-resources, performance should
decrease under load since less resources will be
available for inhibition of the prepotent “50%heuristic” and subsequent analytic computations.
On the other hand, if the heuristic processing would
not be automatic and would draw on WM, it will
also become harder for people to come up with the
“equal probability” answer. The procedure thereby

allows a direct, experimental test of the basic
executive processing assumptions.

Experiment 1A
Method
Participants
A total of 236 first-year psychology students
from the Unversity of Leuven, Belgium,
participated in return for psychology course
credit.
Material
Working memory measure. Participants’ working
memory capacity was measured using a version
of the Operation Span task (Ospan, La Pointe &
Engle, 1990) adapted for group testing (Gospan,
for details see De Neys, d’Ydewalle, Schaeken,
& Vos, 2002). In the Ospan-task participants
solve series of simple mathematical operations
while attempting to remember a list of unrelated
words The main adaptation in the Gospan is that
the operation from an operation-word pair is first
presented separately on screen (e.g., ‘IS (4/2) – 1
= 5 ?’). Participants read the operation silently
and press a key to indicate whether the answer is
correct or not. Responses and response latencies
are recorded. After the participant has typed
down the response, the corresponding word (e.g.,
‘BALL’) from the operation-word string is
presented for 800 ms. As in the standard Ospan
three sets of each length (from two to six
operation-word pairs) are tested and set size
varies in the same randomly chosen order for
each participant. The Gospan-score is the sum of
the recalled words for all sets recalled
completely and in correct order.
Participants who made more than 15% math
errors or whose mean operation response
latencies deviated by more than 2.5 standard
deviations of the sample mean were discarded
(participants already in the bottom quartile of the
Gospan-score distribution were not discarded
based on the latency criterion). De Neys et al.
(2002) reported an internal reliability coefficient
alpha of .74 for the Gospan. The corrected
correlation between standard Ospan and Gospanscore reached .70.
Monty Hall Dilemma. Participants were
presented a standard version of the MHD taken
from Krauss and Wang (2003). The formulation
tried to avoid possible ambiguities (e.g., the
random placement of the prize and duds behind
the doors and the knowledge of the host were
explicitly mentioned). The text stated (translated
from Dutch):

1

The term « smarter » refers of course to the tight
connection between executive WM-capacity and general
cognitive ability (e.g., Engle, Tuholski, Laughlin, &
Conway, 1999).

Suppose you’re on a game show and you’re
given the choice of three doors. Behind one door

286

is the main prize (a car) and behind the other two
doors there are dud prizes (a bunch of toilet paper).
The car and the dud prizes are placed randomly
behind the doors before the show. The rules of the
game are as follows: After you have chosen a door,
the door remains closed for the time being. The
game show host, Monty Hall, who knows what is
behind the doors, then opens one of the two
remaining doors which always reveals a dud. After
he has opened one of the doors with a dud, Monty
Hall asks the participant whether he/she wants to
stay with his/her first choice or to switch to the last
remaining door. Suppose that you chose door 1 and
the host opens door 3, which has a dud.

of executive capacity on the reasoning tasks in
their studies.
The present association between MHDperformance and WM-capacity supports
Stanovich and West’s basic claim concerning the
involvement of executive resources in normative
reasoning. However, the evidence remains
purely correlational. More direct evidence for the
mediating role of the executive resources is
needed (Klaczynski, 2000). Experiment 1B
introduces secondary task methodology to test
the basic processing claims experimentally.

Experiment 1B

The host now asks you whether you want to switch
to door 2. What should you do to have most chance
of winning the main prize?

A major problem for Stanovich and West (2000)
and related dual processing frameworks is that
the basic processing assumption, the different
involvement of controlled, executive resources
in heuristic and analytic reasoning, is disputed.
On one hand, available (correlational) evidence
for the role of executive resources in analytic,
normative reasoning has been questioned (e.g.,
Klaczynski, 2000). On the other hand, the
proposed characterization of the heuristic system
as automatic and independent from executive
control has been challenged (e.g., Handley,
Feeney, Harper, 2002; Klaczynski, 2001;
Osman, 2002). Experiment 1B presents a new
approach to test the basic processing claims.
Participants solved the MHD while they
performed a secondary task that burdened the
executive WM-resources. If correct responding
in the MHD draws on WM-resources,
performance should decrease under load since
less resources will be available for inhibition of
the dominant “50%-heuristic” and subsequent
analytic computations. On the other hand, if
heuristic processing would not be automatic and
would draw on WM, it will also become harder
for people to come up with the “equal
probability” answer and we would expect a
decrease in “50%” responses. In case both the
heuristic and normative response would draw on
executive resources the computation of any
single response should be hindered and we might
expect a random guessing pattern under
secondary task load.
The secondary task was adopted from Kane
and Engle (2000). Participants were requested to
continuously tap a novel, complex finger pattern
(e.g., index finger/ring finger/ middle finger/
pinkie) with their non-dominant hand while
reasoning. The task was selected because
previous studies (e.g., Kane & Engle, 2000;
Moscovitch, 1994) consistently showed that it
put a premium on efficient executive WMfunctioning.

a. Stick with your first choice, door 1.
b. Switch to door 2.
c. It does not matter. Chances are even.

The MHD was presented on computer. Participants
were instructed to carefully read the basic problem
information (text in italics), first. When they were
finished reading they pressed the ENTER-key and
then the question and answer-alternatives
(underlined text) appeared on the screen (text in
italics remained on the screen). Participants typed
their response (a, b, or c) on the keyboard.
Instructions stated there were no time limits.
Procedure
The experiment was run on computer. Participants
were tested in groups of 21 to 48. Participants
completed the Gospan and MHD in a one-hour
session, in which they also completed some other
tasks not part of the present investigation. The
MHD was presented after the Gospan task.

Results and discussion
Six participants were discarded because they did
not meet the operation correctness or latency
requirements of the WM-measure. Mean Gospanscore of the remaining 230 participants was 32.26
(SD = 10.45).
Consistent with previous MHD-studies only a
small minority of the participants (5.2%) gave the
correct switching answer. The vast majority
(85.7%) believed that switching and sticking were
equally good strategies. However, the crucial
finding is that the participants that did give the
correct response had a significantly larger WMcapacity. Mean Gospan-score of the participants
that gave the correct response was 38.08 vs. only
31.94 for the incorrect responders, t(228) = 2, n1 =
12, n2 = 218, p < .05. In terms of effect sizes,
Cohen’s d reached .59. Such an effect is classified
as “moderate” (Rosenthal & Rosnow, 1991) and
corresponds to the effect sizes reported by
Stanovich and West (1998a, 1998b) for the impact

Method
287

Burdening the executive resources with the
tapping task affected participants’ performance.
As Table 1 shows the response pattern was
clearly not random. The switching rate under the
secondary task load decreased to 0%. This
decrease in the proportion of correct responses
reached marginal significance, p1 = 5.22%, p2 =
0%, n1 = 230, n2 = 41, t(269) = 1.50, p < .07,
one-tailed. The finding supports the claim that
correct normative reasoning in the MHD draws
on executive WM-resources. Burdening the
executive resources did not decrease the rate of
“equal probability” answers. Indeed, there was a
slight tendency in the opposite direction. This
suggests that the central MHD intuition to assign
a 50% chance to the two remaining doors is an
automatic, heuristic response that does not

Participants
Forty-one first-year psychology students from the
Unversity of Leuven, Belgium, participated in
return for psychology course credit. None of the
participants had participated in Experiment 1A. All
participants had taken the Gospan-test prior to
Experiment 1B. Between 13 to 46 days intervened
between participation in the Gospan-test and
Experiment 1B.
Materials
Monty Hall Dilemma. Participants were presented
the same version of the MHD as in Experiment 1A.
WM-load task. A program executed by a second
computer collected the finger-tapping data. All
participants tapped on the “V”, “B”, “N”, and “M”
keys on the QUERTY-keyboard of the second
computer.

Table 1: Percentage of Different Responses in
Experiment 1A and 1B
Experiment
Answer
1A: No load
1B: Load
Stick
9.1 (21)
7.3 (3)
Switch
5.2 (12)
0.0 (0)
Equal
85.7 (197)
92.7 (38)

Procedure
All participants were tested individually.
Participants were instructed to tap the index-ringmiddle-pinkie pattern with their non-dominant
hand. The experiment started with five 30s practice
tapping trials. Participants always received on-line
accuracy feedback: Whenever a wrong finger (key)
was tapped the computer emitted a 300 ms, low
pitch tone. During the first three practice trials the
program also calculated the mean tapping speed for
each participant. If any one intertap interval in the
subsequent trials was more than 150 ms slower than
the established mean, the computer emitted a 600
ms, high pitch tone. The online monitoring served
to assure that the tapping task was properly
performed.
After the tapping practice, the experimenter
explained that the practice tapping speed had to be
maintained in the upcoming reasoning task.
Participants then read the basic MHD problem
information (underlined text) on the screen. When
they were finished reading they pressed the
ENTER-key and started tapping. Then the question
and answer-alternatives (text in bold) were
presented and participants continuously tapped the
finger pattern (with online response time and
accuracy feedback) until they gave their response.
Participants said out loud the letter (a, b, or c)
corresponding to their answer. Instructions stated
there were no time limits.

Note. Raw frequencies in parentheses.

involve executive processing.

General Discussion
The present study focused on the Monty Hall
Dilemma because it is one of the most striking
examples of the “normative/descriptive” gap in
the literature (Friedman, 1998). As in previous
MHD studies only a small proportion of
participants gave the correct, normative
switching response. However, Experiment 1A
established that the participants that did give the
correct response had a significantly larger
working memory capacity. This finding
complements the work of Stanovich and West
(2000) on individual differences in executive
resources with related reasoning tasks.
According to the Stanovich and West (2000)
framework and associated dual process theories
(e.g., Evans & Over, 1996; Sloman, 1996)
correct normative responding requires that an
analytic, controlled reasoning process overrides
prepotent heuristics. The inhibition of the
heuristic system and the computations of the
analytic system would draw on limited
executive, working memory resources. The more
resources that are available, the more likely that
the analytic system will be successfully engaged
and the correct response calculated. Experiment
1B provided experimental evidence for this
view. Burdening the executive resources with a
secondary task while participants were solving
the MHD tended to decrease the rate of correct,

Results and discussion
Performance of the participants in Experiment 1A
was used as a baseline to evaluate the impact of the
WM-load. A control analysis established that the
WM-capacity of the participants in Experiment 1A
(Mean Gospan-score = 32.26, SD = 10.45) and 1B
(Mean Gospan-score = 33.1, SD = 10.88) did not
differ, F(1, 269) < 1.
288

switching responses: Although the participants in
Experiment 1A and 1B had comparable span sizes,
non of the participants in Experiment 1B managed
to solve the MHD correctly under WM-load.
Indeed, more people tended to commit the intuitive
tendency to assign a 50% chance to the two
remaining doors. These findings support the basic
claim of dual process theories concerning the
differential involvement of executive resources in
analytic and heuristic reasoning.
As in most MHD-studies, the proportion of
correct responses under “standard” conditions in the
present study was very low. A consequence of this
low figure is that the study inevitably suffers from a
floor-effect. The decrease in correct performance
under executive load in Experiment 1B still reached
marginal significance but the decrease could never
be large. One possible solution for the floor-effect
is adopting some of the manipulations known to
increase MHD performance. Previous studies
indicated that practice with the task, training
procedures and simple clarifications of the causal
structure of the task (e.g., Burns & Wieth, 2000,
2003; Krauss & Wang, 2003; Tubau & Alonso,
2003) increase performance. Thus, testing the
impact of the WM-load with such modified MHD
versions might suffer less from a floor-effect. In
addition, it might be especially enlightening to
examine how different span groups benefit from the
increased performance manipulations.
The present findings indicate that executive
resources are necessary for correct, normative
reasoning. However, by no means this implies that
a large resource pool is also sufficient for correct
reasoning. The relation between WM-capacity and
reasoning performance is not absolute. Although
participants that solved the MHD correctly in
Experiment 1A had a larger WM-span, numerous
“high spans” nevertheless answered erroneously.
To illustrate this point MHD-performance of
participants in the top and bottom quartile of the
WM-capacity distribution in Experiment 1A was
compared. Consistent with the previous findings
high spans gave significantly more switching
responses2. But even among the 25% most
cognitively gifted college students only 10% gave
the correct response. Clearly, factors outside the
cognitive WM-ability spectrum will also affect
performance
(e.g.,
“epistemic
thinking
dispositions”, see Stanovich, 1999). Thus, in
pointing out the necessary role of executive, WMresources for correct reasoning the present study
does not minimize the role of other mediating
factors.
The present study demonstrated the potential of a
dual task approach to test the central processing
claims of dual process theories. In principle, future

studies could adopt this procedure with all the
classic tasks studied in the field (e.g.,
conjunction fallacy, base-rate neglect, selection
task). Of course, the final empirical evaluation of
the executive processing claims of dual process
theories will depend on the generalization of the
present findings.

Acknowledgements
Preparation of this manuscript was supported by
a grant from the Fund for Scientific ResearchFlanders (FWO).

References
Burns, B. D., & Wieth, M. (2000). The Monty
Hall dilemma: A causal explanation of a
cognitive illusion. Paper presented at the FortyFirst Annual Meeting of the Psychonomic
Society, New Orleans, LA.
Burns, B. D., & Wieth, M. (2003). Causality and
Reasoning: The Monty Hall dilemma. Paper
presented at the Twenty-Fifth Annual Meeting
of the Cognitive Science Society, Boston, MA.
De Neys, W., d’Ydewalle, G., Schaeken, W., &
Vos, G. (2002). A Dutch, computerized, and
group administrable adaptation of the operation
span test. Psychologica Belgica, 42, 177-190.
Engle, R. W., Tuholski, S. W., Laughlin, J. E., &
Conway, A. R. A. (1999). Working memory,
short-term memory, and general fluid
intelligence: A latent-variable approach.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
128, 309-331.
Evans, J. St. B. T., & Over, D. E. (1996).
Rationality and reasoning. Hove, UK:
Psychology Press.
Falk, R. (1992). A closer look at the probabilities
of the notorious three prisoners. Cognition, 77,
197-213.
Friedman, D. (1998). Monty Hall’s three doors:
Construction and deconstruction of a choice
anomaly. American Economic Review, 88, 933946.
Granberg, D., & Brown, T. A. (1995). The
Monty Hall dilemma. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 21, 182-190.
Handley, S. J., Feeney, A., & Harper, C. (2002).
Alternative antecedents, probabilities, and the
suppression of fallacies in Wason’s selection
task. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 55A, 799-818.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., Legrenzi, P., Girotto, P.,
Legrenzi, M. S., & Caverni, J-P. (1999). Naïve
probability: A mental model theory of
extensional reasoning. Psychological Review,
106, 62-88.
Kahneman, D., Slovic, P., & Tversky, A. (1982).
Judgement under uncertainty: Heuristics and

2

p1 = 10%, p2 = 1%, n1 =70, n2= 70, t(138) = 2.21, p <
.03.

289

Shimojo, S., & Ichikawa, S. (1989). Intuitive
reasoning about probability: Theoretical and
experimental analysis of the “problem of three
prisoners”. Cognition, 32, 1-24.
Sloman, S. A. (1996). The empirical case for two
systems of reasoning. Psychological Bulletin,
119, 3-22.
Stanovich, K. E. (1999). Who is rational?
Studies of individual differences in reasoning.
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Stanovich, K. E., & West, R. F. (1998a).
Individual differences in framing and
conjunction effects. Thinking and Reasoning,
4, 289-317.
Stanovich, K. E., & West, R. F. (1998b).
Cognitive ability and variation in selection task
performance. Thinking and Reasoning, 4, 193230.
Stanovich, K. E., & West, R. F. (2000).
Individual
differences
in
reasoning:
Implications for the rationality debate.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 23, 645-726.
Tubau, E., & Alonso, D. (2003). Overcoming
illusory inferences in a probabilistic
counterintuitive problem : The role of explicit
representations. Memory & Cognition, 31, 596607.
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1983).
Extensional versus intuitive reasoning: The
conjunction fallacy in probability judgment.
Psychological Review, 90, 293-315.
vos Savant, M. (1997). The power of logical
thinking. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Wason, P. C. (1966). Reasoning. In B. M. Foss
(Ed.), New Horizons in Psychology: I (pp. 106137). Harmandsworth, England: Penguin.

biases. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University
Press.
Kane, M. J., & Engle, R. W. (2000). Workingmemory capacity, proactive interference, and
divided attention: Limits on long-term memory
retrieval. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 26, 336-358.
Klaczynski, P. A. (2000). Is rationality really
“bounded” by information processing constraints?
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 23, 683-684.
Klaczynski, P. A. (2001). Framing effects on
adolescent task representation, analytic and
heuristic processing, and decision making:
Implications for the normative/descriptive gap.
Applied Developmental Psychology, 22, 289-309.
Krauss, S., & Wang, X. T. (2003). The psychology
of the Monty Hall Problem: Discovering
psychological mechanisms for solving a tenacious
brain teaser. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 132, 3-22.
La Pointe, L. B., & Engle, R. W. (1990). Simple
and complex word spans as measures of working
memory capacity. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition,
16, 1118-1133.
Moscovitch, M. (1994). Cognitive resources and
dual-task interference effects at retrieval in
normal people: The role of the frontal lobes and
medial temporal cortex. Neuropsychology, 8, 524534.
Osman, M. (2002). Is there evidence for
unconscious reasoning processes?. Paper
presented at the Twenty-fourth Annual Meeting
of the Cognitive Science Society, Fairfax, VA.
Rosenthal, R., & Rosnow, R. L. (1991). Essentials
of behavioral research: Methods and data
analysis (2nd Edition). New York: McGraw-Hill.

290

