UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Social and cultural influences on causal models of illness

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2mg377wr

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Author
Lynch, Elizabeth B.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Social and cultural influences on causal models of illness
Elizabeth B. Lynch (bethlynch@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, 2029 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208 USA
different cognitive processes in order to effectively predict
the behavior of ontologically distinct objects. This view
predicts and explains cross-cultural universals in human
thinking. Sperber and Hirschfeld (2004) argue that stability
of cultural knowledge results from the universal structure of
the human mind, in particular the fact that all minds process
information in similar, highly constrained ways. For
example, there is striking cross-cultural uniformity in
folkbiological knowledge. Medin and Atran (in press) argue
that cross-cultural uniformity in thinking and behavior with
regard to plants and animals is due to the existence of a
universal cognitive module, the folkbiology module, that
evolved specifically to process information about plants and
animals. Despite differences in experience or environmental
input, minds are universally constrained to construct a
particular kind of representation of plants and animals –
hence, cultural uniformity and stability.

Abstract
Causal models of illness vary extensively across socio-cultural
groups. The current paper describes two studies that were designed
to explore the role of universal domain-specific causal knowledge
in causal models of illness. The first study compares illness causal
models in three American groups: registered nurses, energy
healers, and college undergraduates. The second study examines
illness causal models in a group of Maya in Guatemala. In all
groups illness models are composed of systematic combinations of
domain-specific causes. It is argued that analysis of causal models
in terms of domain-specific causal types reveals similarities in
illness models that would be obscured by comparison of specific,
detailed causes. The analysis of illness models as patterns of
domain-specific causes suggests that American energy healers
have models of illness that are more similar to those of the Maya
than to illness models of American undergraduates and RNs.

Introduction

The current paper presents two descriptive studies that
demonstrate how universal domain-specific knowledge is
expressed in causal models of illness, which are
characterized by cross-cultural diversity rather than
uniformity. Domain-specificity theory implies that, just as
there are different ontological kinds of objects in the world
(e.g. mental and physical objects), there are also different
kinds of causal mechanisms. For example, there are
psychological causal mechanisms, like intentionality, which
explain behavior of animate objects, and there are physical
causal mechanisms which explain the behavior of inanimate
objects. One role of cognitive modules is to constrain the
search for causal explanations by delimiting the range of
possible causes for a particular phenomenon. Thus, causes
can be divided into types based on the module with which
they are associated. For example, blocked arteries and
chemical imbalance are physical causes of illness. Low selfesteem and problems in love relationships are psychological
causes. These causes differ in specific detail but are of the
same type. Causal models of illness can be analyzed in
terms of the kinds of causes of which they are composed.

An issue of interest to both anthropologists and
psychologists is the extent to which conceptual
representations are affected by socio-cultural factors and the
mechanisms by which this influence occurs. The extent to
which thinking varies across cultures depends in large part
on the content of the domain. For example, the domain of
folkbiology is characterized by striking similarities across
cultures, while less consistency has been observed in social
attribution (Choi, Nisbett & Norenzayan, 1999) moral
reasoning (Miller, Bersoff, & Harwood, 1990, Haidt, Koller,
& Dias, 1993), and reasoning about illness (Murdock, 1980;
Kleinman, 1978). In general, theories of cultural knowledge
transmission that explain diversity of knowledge are distinct
from ones that explain uniformity.
Explanations for cultural diversity often assume that the
mind is a “blank slate,” open to any form of knowledge
(Atran, 2001; Pinker, 2000; Sperber & Hirschfeld, 2004). In
contrast, explanations of uniformity in knowledge across
cultures appeal to a view of the mind as a highly structured,
modular information-processing device. As Pinker (2000),
Atran (2001), and Sperber & Hirschfeld (2004) argue, the
view of the mind as a blank slate is almost certainly wrong.
There is plenty of evidence that the mind is not a blank
slate, but is structured in a modular way such that
qualitatively distinct reasoning processes are utilized for
different kinds of phenomena (Carey & Gelman, 1991;
Hirschfeld & Gelman, 1994, Pinker, 2004).

One important dimension of variation among cultural
belief systems about illness is whether illness is attributed to
psychological causes – human or spiritual agents – or to
natural causes (Murdock, 1980, Foster, 1976). In a world
survey of illness theories, Murdock (1980) found that every
cultural group in his sample (which did not include
industrialized societies) explained (at least some) illness in
terms of spirit aggression.
Spirit aggression is a
psychological cause. In contrast, biomedical theories of
illness (used by medical doctors) explain illness using
physical causes. One explanation for this difference is that

The mind, like other parts of the natural world, evolved in
an environment with a particular structure. The modular
nature of the mind is the result of evolutionary adaptations
to the objective structure of the world. The mind evolved
867

consist of psychological causes while the causal chains
of RNs will consist of physical causes.

different cultural groups use different cognitive modules to
process information about illness. That is, some cultural
groups think about illness as a psychological phenomenon,
and generate psycho-social attributions, while others
construe illness as a physical phenomenon, and generate
physical explanations. On this account, cultural environment
influences the domain in which individuals search for
causes of illness. Perhaps, some cultural groups use the
domain of folk psychology to explain illness where other
groups use the domain of folk physics (or folk biology). An
alternative possibility is that multiple domains are used to
process information about illness. Sperber & Hirschfeld
(2004) suggest that some belief systems, like religion,
maintain stability by being “anchored” in several cognitive
domains at once. Thus, different cultural groups may
combine different kinds of causes in different ways in their
causal models of illness (Ahn, 1998).

2. Illness models are anchored in several domains.
Causal models of illness are composed of both
psychological and physical causes which are patterned
systematically within groups.
3. A third possibility is that there is no systematicity in
use of domain knowledge in illness models. That is,
mental and physical causes may be distributed in
different ways across different individuals and/or across
different illnesses.
It is expected that energy healers will cite psycho-social
causes of both illnesses more often than RNs. The question
that will distinguish between the first and second
alternatives above is whether illness models consist of a
single kind of cause or multiple kinds of cause. The
question that will distinguish between the second and third
alternatives is whether different kinds of causes pattern
systematically within groups.
In addition to the two practitioner groups, a group of
undergraduates was also interviewed. Because the nurses
may have had more experience with illness than the energy
healers, undergraduates were included as an independent
measure of the effect of experience on concepts of illness.

The current paper will look at use of psycho-social causes
and physical causes in the causal models of illness of three
groups of participants. The groups were chosen precisely
because they have different beliefs systems of illness. The
first group consisted of registered nurses (RNs) who work
as medical practitioners in professional medical settings and
practice standard scientific biomedicine. The second group
of participants consisted of energy healers. These
individuals believe that illness is caused by a disruption or
imbalance of “energy” in the body and that illness can be
treated by balancing that energy. Energy healers often
explain illness as the result of psychological problems
(Eden, 1999). RNs and energy healers were chosen because
they practice healing within belief systems that vary in the
kinds of causes to which illness is attributed. Variation
along the dimension of psychological versus physical
attribution is cross-culturally salient, as mentioned above.
While findings from these groups cannot be automatically
generalized to other cultural groups, current findings can
generate hypotheses about the causal models of other
cultural groups which can then be tested. Study Two in the
current paper demonstrates that this framework can be
usefully extended to very different cultural settings.

Method
Participants This study included three groups of
participants. The first group consisted of 13 registered
nurses (RNs) with an average age of 41 and an average of
13 years of nursing experience. The second group consisted
of 14 energy healers with an average age of 48 and an
average of 8 years of energy healing experience.
Practitioners had an average of four years of college
education and there was no difference in level of education
across groups. The final group consisted of 23
undergraduates (UGs) with an average age of 18 and no
energy or medical experience. Some undergraduates did
only a single illness and others did both (5 did both
illnesses, 10 only heart attack, 8 only depression). No
differences were observed among those who did one versus
both illnesses.

Experiment One
The question of interest is how domain-specific causes are
invoked in illness causal models of different groups. To
measure causal models, causal chains leading to depression
and heart attack were elicited from each participant in an
open-ended format. The key feature of this study is the
elicitation of causal chains rather than lists of causes.
Elicitation of causal chains will provide evidence for
distinguishing between three possible patterns of use of
domain-specific causal information. The three possible
patterns are:

Procedure All participants were asked about heart attack, a
physiological illness, and clinical depression, a
psychological illness. The order of the illnesses was
counterbalanced across participants. For each illness,
participants were first asked to list all the causes of the
illness and then, for each cause, were asked for causal
chains linking each elicited cause to the target illness. To
elicit the causal chain linking cause X to the illness, the
experimenter asked, for example, “How does X cause
illness A” (e.g. How does high blood pressure cause a heart
attack?). The participant responded with an intermediary
cause, Y. The experimenter then repeated the probe with

1. Different groups use different domains of knowledge
to construct causal models of illness. This hypothesis
predicts that the causal chains of energy healers will
868

These measures are not independent so with a Bonferroni
adjustment the p-value for significance was adjusted to
0.013. There were no differences between groups in the
proportion of causal interactions among physical causes
[F(2,40)=1.4, p=.257], nor in the proportion of physicalmental causal interactions [F(2,40)=2.1, p=.13], which were
quite low across groups. The key difference between groups
was that energy participants were more likely than other
groups to cite mental-physical interactions [F(2,40)=5.26,
p=.01]. Tukey post hoc tests showed that Energy healers
cited more mental-physical interactions than RNs and UGs,
who did not differ from one another. Undergraduates were
more likely than RNs and Energy healers to cite interactions
among mental causes [F(2,40)=5.28, p=.01]. Interactions
among mental causes made up the bulk of undergraduate
depression concepts.
The most important finding in depression models is that
all groups included equal proportions of mental and physical
causes in their conceptual models of depression but showed
systematic differences in the patterns of causal interaction
among them. Specifically, the RNs and UGs placed mental
and physical causes on separate causal chains but Energy
healers included both types of causes on a single causal
chain.

cause Y: “How does Y cause a heart attack?” This process
was continued until the participant said the causal chain was
complete. All interviews were recorded and transcribed.

Results
Across illnesses causes were collapsed into four types:
physiological, psycho-social (henceforth called mental),
behavioral, and energy. Depression models included an
additional cause type, external environmental.
Depression Table 1 lists the average proportion of each
type of cause in the models of participants from each group.
Anovas were used to compare the proportion of each type of
cause across groups. Because these measures are not
independent a Bonferroni adjustment set the p-value for
significance to 0.01. With this adjustment, only the
difference in proportion of energy causes was reliably
different across groups [F(2,40)=17.77, p<.001]. Proportion
of physical causes [F(2,40)=.925, p=.41], mental causes
[[F(2,40)=4.12, p=.024], and environmental causes
[F(2,40)=2.15, p<.13] did not differ across groups.
Proportion of behavioral causes [F(2,40)=5.24, p=.01] was
marginally different across groups. Tukey post hoc tests
showed that the Energy group cited slightly more behavioral
causes than the UG group.

Heart attack Table 3 shows proportions of causes in heart
attack models across groups. Energy participants cited
proportionately fewer physical causes of heart attack than
RNs or Undergraduates [F(2, 42 = 14.9, p<.0001]. Post hoc
tests indicated that the RNs and UGs cited equal proportions
of physiological causes and EN participants cited fewer than
both groups. Energy participants cited a greater number of
psychological causes of heart attack than did either of the
other groups, who were equivalent [F(2, 42 = 34.9,
p<.0001]. These differences were reliable with a Bonferroni
adjustment. Not surprisingly Energy participants cited a
greater proportion of energy causes.

Table 1. Proportion of depression cause types by group.
CAUSE
Physical
Mental
Behavioral
Environmental
Energy

UG

RN
0.33
0.66
0.00
0.01
0.00

EN
0.43
0.53
0.02
0.02
0.00

0.32
0.43
0.11
0.10
0.19

The next set of analyses measured the types of causal
relations in the conceptual models of each group. Systematic
differences in the types of causal relations across groups
indicates the extent to which groups represent different
patterns of causal types within their models of illness. The
majority of causal relations within the depression models of
all groups consist of physical and mental factors (UG=99%,
RN=96%, EN=75%) so analysis of causal relations focused
on physical and mental causes only. Table 2 shows the
proportion of each type of causal interaction among physical
and mental causes across groups.

Table 3. Proportion of causes in heart attack models.
Relation
PHYSICAL
PSYCHOLOGICAL
BEHAVIORAL
ENERGY

UG
0.10
0.80
0.03
0.07

RN
0.28
0.47
0.12
0.14

RN
0.77
0.08
0.15
0.00

EN
0.45
0.27
0.17
0.10

The next set of analyses explores patterns of causal
relations in models of each group. A majority of the causes
in heart attack models of all groups were ones with physical
effects (RN=0.98, UG=0.99, DUAL=0.88, ENERGY=0.77),
so the following set of analyses compares the proportion of
physical effects that have either physical, mental,
behavioral, or energy causes. Table 4 shows the distribution
of these types of relations in individual models of
participants in each group.

Table 2. Proportion of relations in depression models.
Causal Relation
Physical-Physical
Mental-Mental
Physical-Mental
Mental-Physical

UG
0.70
0.08
0.16
0.00

EN
0.16
0.43
0.02
0.40

869

patterns in their conceptual models of illness, and if so,
whether their concepts correspond to either of the American
groups.

Table 4. Proportion of causal relations across groups.
Causal Interaction
Physical-Physical
Physical-Mental
Behavioral-Physical
Energy-Physical

UG
0.54
0.11
0.35
0.00

RN
0.61
0.11
0.27
0.00

EN
0.21
0.42
0.27
0.09

Method
Participants Participants were 13 illiterate Itza’ Maya
adults living in Peten, Guatemala. All participants spoke
Spanish as their primary language. Peten is a very different
cultural environment from Chicago, IL where participants
from Experiment 1 reside. None of the Itza’ participants was
trained in medicine.

These measures are not independent but all effects are
reliable with a Bonferroni adjustment. An ANOVA showed
that Energy participants cited proportionately fewer physical
– physical causal interactions (PP relations) than RNs and
UGs [F(2,42)=20.31, p<.0001]. ENERGY participants
mentioned the greatest number of mental-physical causal
interactions in their heart attack models [F(2,42)=23.73,
p<.0001]. There were no differences across groups in the
frequency of behavioral-physical relations [F(2,42)=.68,
p=.51]. Finally, Energy participants mentioned a greater
number of energy-physical relations [F(2,42)=9.79,
p<.0001]. In all causal relation analyses, Tukey post hoc
tests showed that RNs and UGs were equivalent and both
were different from Energy participants.
As in models of depression, energy healers and RNs and
UGs showed different patterns of causal relations among the
causes in their conceptual models of heart attack. Like in
depression models, Energy healers cite causal interactions
among mental and physical causes whereas RNs and UGs
do not.
Summary Experiment 1 provides compelling evidence for
Alternative two cited above – that illness models are
anchored in several domains. Alternative One predicted that
illness models would consist of a single kind of cause. This
was not supported by current findings. All groups used both
psycho-social and physical causes in illness models.
Alternative Three was also ruled out, because mental and
physical causes patterned systematically, rather than
randomly, across participants within a group. Causes also
patterned similarly across illnesses for each group. Across
both illnesses energy healers frequently cited causal
relations in which mental (psycho-social) causes led to
physical effects. RNs and UGs rarely mentioned causal
interactions between mental and physical features. For
depression, mental and physical causes were conceived as
distinct causal chains. For heart attack, these participants
rarely mentioned mental causes at all. While energy healers
combined mental and physical causes within a single causal
chain, RNs and UGs kept mental and physical causes on
separate causal chains. Further, they did not conceive of
heart attack as psychologically caused.

Procedure Causal models were elicited in Spanish for the
Itza’ illnesses which most closely resemble depression and
heart attack. The illnesses were tukul (meaning “thought”
and glossed “pensiveness” in Itza', a wasting illness) and
derrame (glossed as the verb “to spill” in Spanish; derrame
cerebral is the Spanish gloss for “stroke”).

Results
Itza' explain tukul as the result of separation from a family
member which leads to dilution of the blood and rashes on
the skin. 100% of Itza' participants attributed tukul to social
causes (85% to separation from a family member), and 77%
stated that social causes led to a change in the state of the
blood (62% said the blood thinned, or was diluted, by too
much thinking). 85% specified physical effects that result
from the thinning of the blood, usually skin rashes (69%).
Every Itza’ participant explained tukul as the result of
psycho-social factors leading to physical changes in the
body.
Derrame is also seen as the result of an interaction of
mental and physical causes. Itza' explain derrame as
resulting from anger, which slows the blood, causing it to
“spill” into the brain or nerves. 100% of Itza’ participants
attributed derrame to strong emotions (85% to anger), and
70% claimed that strong emotions cause the blood to change
state in some way (e.g. blood stops circulating or gets cold),
which causes it to mix inappropriately with some other
substance of the body (85%), usually the brain or nerves
(70%). Every Itza’ participant explained derrame as the
result of the deleterious effect of strong emotions on the
state of the blood in the body.
Summary Itza concepts of tukul and derrame were
structurally similar to energy healer concepts of depression
and heart attack. Specifically, their conceptual
representations of both illnesses included causal interactions
in which psycho-social factors led to physical ones.

General Discussion
The current experiments show that, rather than being
processed from within a single domain, illness knowledge is
anchored in multiple domains. Illness models can be
explained as specific combinations of domain knowledge. In
Experiment 1 illness concepts of energy healers, RNs and
Undergraduates showed systematically different causal
patterns among mental and physical features. Specifically,

Experiment Two
Whereas Experiment One included groups from a single
cultural environment, the current experiment uses the same
method to measure concepts of illness in individuals from a
very different cultural environment, Peten, Guatemala. The
question of interest is whether Maya have systematic
870

mechanical factors were the proximate cause. Analysis at
the level of causal types reveals more agreement across
individuals and illnesses than analysis at the level of
specific, detailed causes.
Similarity in the causal models of energy healers and
Maya is also revealed by analysis of patterns of causal types
rather than analysis of overlap in specific causes. There was
virtually no overlap in the specific causes cited by energy
healers and Maya. In fact, it is not even clear that the
illnesses being explained were conceptualized as precisely
the same (biomedically defined) conditions across groups.
But when analyzed as patterns of domain-specific causal
types, it is clear that Maya and energy healers have similar
causal models of illness. For both groups illnesses are
caused by psycho-social factors which lead to proximate
causes which are physical in nature. It would be
unreasonable to expect that Maya, who have little or no
formal education, would independently derive the same
specific causes of illness as energy healers or
undergraduates who live in a completely different cultural
context. Analysis of illness models as patterns of domainspecific causal types reveals uniformities in thinking across
cultures that are obscured by exclusive focus on specific,
detailed causes.
In sum, cultural knowledge about illness may take the
form of learning the culturally appropriate heuristics for
combining domain specific knowledge to construct causal
models of illness. Diversity among illness models reflects
differences in the ways that different cultural groups
combine information from different domains. For RNs and
undergraduates, illness explanations are constructed from
single causal types and culture specifies which type of cause
is relevant to which illness. For energy healers and Maya,
all illnesses are presumed to be caused by psycho-social
factors which lead to physical changes. Thus, diversity in
models of illness across cultures may be analogous to
diversity in language across cultures where an overlapping
set of categories, for example nouns and verbs, are
combined in different ways.

RNs and undergraduates rarely mentioned causal interaction
between mental and physical causes. Energy healers, on the
other hand, saw both illnesses as resulting from psychosocial causes which result in physical changes. Experiment
2 showed that the Itza’ also view these illnesses as resulting
from the physical effects of psycho-social factors.
Results from both studies clearly distinguish between the
three alternatives presented above. Alternative Three, which
was that mental and physical causes would be distributed in
unsystematic ways in illness models, was ruled out.
Evidence from RNs and undergraduates was also
inconsistent with the first alternative, which proposed that
illness models would be composed of causes from a single
domain. RNs and undergraduates used psycho-social causes
in explanations of depression, and physical causes in
explanations of heart attack and depression. Thus, these
participants utilized causes from distinct domains. However,
for these participants a single causal chain consisted of only
one type of cause. Data suggest that depression is construed
both psychologically and physically for RNs and
undergraduates, and heart attack is construed physically.
Stress was the only psychological cause utilized in heart
attack models of RNs and undergraduates. Stress may be a
cause that is flexible, and can function as either
psychological or physical. When RNs and undergraduates
mentioned stress in the context of heart attack, they usually
discussed physiological aspects of stress, such as increased
adrenalin. However, because the nature of stress was
ambiguous in the current study, it was coded as a
psychological cause. For RNs and undergraduates, some
illness models are constructed from within the cognitive
domain of folk psychology, and others are constructed from
within the domain of folk physics. For these participants,
cultural factors influence whether an illness should be
construed in psychological or physical terms. In this sense,
Alternative Two is correct. Knowledge about illness is
anchored in both domains.
Energy healer models are also consistent with Alternative
Two. But in the case of energy healer models, single causal
chains were composed of knowledge from different
domains. For these participants causal chains are composed
of psycho-social and physical causes. Further, when causal
chains contain both kinds of causes, psycho-social causes
are the distal causes and physical causes are proximate. The
fact that domain boundaries are not preserved in causal
chains of energy healers might be taken to suggest that
domain knowledge does not constrain models of illness for
energy healers. However, the systematicity in the models of
energy healers is reflected in the uniformity with which
individual participants combined psycho-social and physical
causes. That is, the coherence of illness models across
participants and across illnesses is precisely in their
systematic use of causes from different domains.
Participants cited different specific causal factors for heart
attack and depression, but all participants were committed
to the belief that some kind of psycho-social factor was the
initial, distal cause of both illnesses and that physical,

Acknowledgments
The work in this paper would not have been possible
without the generosity of the research participants, all of
whom volunteered their time and wisdom. Thanks also to
Douglas Medin, Lance Rips, Scott Atran, Michael Bailey,
the Medin lab, and three anonymous reviewers for
comments on earlier drafts. Work in this grant was
supported by a National Science Foundation grant to
Douglas Medin..

References
Ahn, W. (1998). Why are different features central for
natural kinds and artifacts? The role of causal status in
determining feature centrality. Cognition. 69(2), 135-178
871

Atran, S. (2001). The trouble with memes: Inference versus
imitation in cultural creation. Human Nature, 12(4), 351381.
Atran, S., Medin, D, & Ross, N. (in press). The Cultural
Mind: Environmental decision-making and cultural
modeling within and across populations. Psychological
Review.
Carey, S. & Gelman, R. (Eds.). (1991). The epigenesis of
mind: Essays on Biology and Cognition. Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum
Choi, I, Nisbett, R, Norenzayan, A. (1999). Causal
attribution across cultures: Variation and universality.
Psychological Bulletin. 125(1), 47-63.
Foster, G. M. (1976). Disease etiologies in non-Western
medical systems. American Anthropologist, 78, 773-782.
Haidt, J., Koller, S., & Dias, M. (1993). Affect, culture,
and morality, or is it wrong to eat your dog? Journal of
Personality & Social Psychology, 65(4,) 613-628.
Hirschfeld, L. A. & Gelman, S. A. (1994). Mapping the
Mind: Domain specificity in cognition and culture.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kleinman, A. (1978). Concepts and a model for the
comparison of medical systems as cultural systems. Social
Science & Medicine, 12, 85-93.
Medin, D. & Atran, S. (in press). The Native Mind:
Biological categorization, reasoning, and decision-making
in development and across cultures. Psychological
Review.
Miller, J., Bersoff, D., & Harwood, R. (1990). Perceptions
of social responsibilities in India and in the United States:
Moral imperatives or personal decisions? Journal of
Personality & Social Psychology, 58(1), 33-47.
Murdock, G. P. (1980). Theories of illness: A world survey.
Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Pinker, S. (2002). The Blank Slate: The modern denial of
Human Nature. New York: Viking Press.
Sperber, D. & Hirschfeld, L. (2004). The cognitive
foundations of cultural diversity and stability. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 8(1), 40-46.

872

