UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Spatial Language and Reference Frame Assignment; The Role of the Located Object

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8p25n560

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Burigo, Michele
Coventry, Kenny

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Spatial Language and Reference Frame Assignment;
The Role of the Located Object

Michele Burigo (mburigo@plymouth.ac.uk)

School of Psychology, Faculty of Science, Drake Circus,
University of Plymouth, PL4 8AA, UK

Kenny Coventry (kcoventry@plymouth.ac.uk)

School of Psychology, Faculty of Science, Drake Circus,
University of Plymouth, PL4 8AA, UK
(1) identify the reference object (e.g., the house), (2)
superimpose multiple reference frames (relative and
intrinsic), (3) construct spatial templates and align them to
the relevant reference frames, (4) select a reference frame,
(5) combine templates into a composite template, (6) search
the composite template that fits best with the located object
for each position within the template, (7) calculate whether
the goodness of fit measure for the located object is high
(good or acceptable region) or low (bad region). In this
paper we focus on the process underlying the orientation of
space and the consequent reference frames selection.
Experimental evidence has demonstrated that by rotating
the reference object by 90º (noncanonical orientation),
acceptability ratings for above mirror the new spatial
template that is the sum of all the reference frames active in
that moment (Carlson-Radvansky & Irwin, 1994). The
acceptability for the given spatial preposition varies as a
function of the reference frame activated. Consider the
scenes in Figure 1. In the canonical orientation the absolute,
relative and intrinsic reference frames overlap. In the
noncanonical orientation the absolute reference frame is
dissociated from the intrinsic. This produces a lower
acceptability for the given spatial preposition because a
conflict emerges between all the reference frames activated
in that moment (Carlson-Radvansky & Irwin, 1994;
Carlson, 1999).

Abstract
Spatial prepositions work as pointers to localize objects in
space. For instance “The book is over the table” indicates that
the located object (LO) is somewhere “over” the reference
object (RO). To understand where the LO is people need to
assign direction to space (selecting a reference frame). Three
experiments are reported which investigated the reference
frame conflict between LO and RO. We found that when the
LO was not vertically aligned, the appropriateness for a given
spatial preposition (above, below, over and under) changes. In
general scenes with the LO pointing at the RO were judged
less acceptable than scenes with the LO vertically oriented.
These results suggest that reference frames for both LO and
RO are accessed before direction can be assigned for spatial
prepositions. Modifications to Multiple Frame Activation
theory (Carlson-Radvansky & Irwin, 1994) are discussed.

Introduction
Spatial language forms an essential part of the lexicon for a
competent speaker of a language. In English, spatial
prepositions work as pointers to localize objects in space.
For instance “The book is over the table” indicates that the
located object (“the book”) is somewhere “over” the
reference object (“the table”). Prepositions like “over” and
“behind” (the so-called projective prepositions) are
particularly interesting as they require the selection of a
reference frame before the assignment of a direction to
space specified by the preposition can be established.
Levinson (1996) distinguishes between the intrinsic (objectcentred), relative (or viewer-centred/deictic), or absolute
(environment-centred/extrinsic) reference frames. For
example, “the car is behind the house” used intrinsically
locates the car in relation to the opposite wall from where
the salient front of the house is (which is where the back
door is). The relative use of the same expression locates the
car directly behind the opposite wall to where the speaker
and hearer are standing. The absolute frame locates an
object with respect to a salient feature of the environment,
such as the gravitational plane or cardinal directions (e.g.,
North, South, etc.).
Carlson-Radvansky and Logan (1997) have argued that
spatial apprehension occurs in a series of stages as follows;

Figure 1: Canonical absolute/intrinsic “above” (left picture),
noncanonical absolute “above” (middle picture) and
noncanonical intrinsic “above” (right picture).
Although there is evidence that reference frame activation is
important, to date studies have only focused on the
reference frame generated from the reference object
(Carlson & Logan, 2001; Carlson, 1999; CarlsonRadvansky & Logan, 1997). Furthermore, theories of spatial

168

predicted that rotating the LO in this way would influence
the appropriateness of over, under, above and below

language largely assume that the assignment of direction is
generated from the reference object to the located object.
For example, in the Attentional Vector-Sum model (Regier
& Carlson, 2001) the direction indicated by a spatial relation
is defined as a sum over a population of vectors that are
weighted by attention. An attentional beam is focused on the
reference object (at the point that is vertically aligned with
the closest part of the located object) and separated in a
population of vectors pointing toward the located object.
But other experiments suggest that both objects (even
distractors or those not relevant for the task) require
allocation of attention to be processed (Lavie, 1995; Lavie
& Cox, 1997). This suggests that both objects could play a
role in the spatial apprehension process.
There is much evidence indicating that the LO is
important in establishing the acceptability of a range of
spatial prepositions (see Coventry & Garrod, 2004 for a
review). For example, Coventry, Prat-Sala and Richards
(2001) found that the appropriateness of a spatial
preposition is correlated with the functional relation
between located and reference object. For example, an
umbrella is regarded as being more over a person if it is
shown to protect that person from rain than when the rain is
shown to hit the person. Furthermore, Coventry et al. found
that the acceptability ratings for over and under were more
influenced by the function of the object than by the relative
positions of LO and RO, while conversely above and below
were more influenced by geometry than function.
Additionally, in a study which manipulated reference frame
conflicts with function present (e.g., the man holding the
umbrella in the gravitational plane was either upright, lying
down, or upside down), Coventry et al. found that reference
frame conflicts influenced the acceptability of above and
below more than over and under.

(1)

a
b

(2)

Experiment 1
In this experiment we tested the hypothesis that the
reference frame(s) associated with the located object would
affect acceptability of over, under, above and below to
describe the position of the LO in relation to a RO.

Method
Participants & Procedure
Twenty-three undergraduate students from the University of
Plymouth participated in this investigation for course credit.
All the participants were English native speakers.
Participants had to judge the appropriateness of a spatial
preposition (above, below, over or under) to describe
pictures using a scale from 1 to 9 (where 1 = not at all
acceptable and 9 = perfectly acceptable). All trials showed
the located object in a “good” or “acceptable” location,
never in a “bad” location (following Carlson-Radvansky
and Logan’s definitions, 1997).
1

2

3

4

5

9

10

+
6

7

8

Figure 3: Location for the located object with respect to
the reference object (indicated here with a “plus”).
The located object could appear in 10 different locations
around the reference object (see Figure 3). The sentences
were shown before the scene and in this form; <The
“located object” is PREPOSITION the “reference object”>.
The prepositions tested were above, below, under or over.
Two orientations for the located object were used: “vertical”
and “pointing at”. In the “pointing at” condition the axis of
the located object was pointing exactly towards the centerof-mass of the reference object.

a
b

Materials
The materials consisted of three stimuli; a circle, an
hourglass and a stickman. These objects were selected as the
circle does not have an oriented axis, while the hourglass
has a salient axis but not an intrinsic top and bottom, and the
stickman has a salient axis and an intrinsic top and bottom.
We will use the following labels to classify the objects; “no
axis” (circle), “ambiguous axis” (hourglass) and “intrinsic
axis” (stickman). All the objects employed were presented
at the same size and distance from the reference object
regardless of the orientation. This is because it has been
found that proximity, center-of-mass orientation and
distance affect the appropriateness of spatial preposition
(Regier & Carlson, 2001).The objects could appear as
reference objects or as located objects, but the same object
was never shown as LO and RO at the same time.

Figure 2: Reference frame conflicts between LO and RO.
However, although there is much evidence that the located
object does influence the acceptability of a range of
prepositions, no studies to date have examined whether the
located object contributes to reference frame assignment,
and hence the assignment of direction to space. This paper
reports three experiments employing an acceptability rating
task where possible reference frame conflicts for both the
located object and reference object are manipulated. For
example, consider the scene in Figure 2, and the
acceptability of man [a] is above man [b]. In (1), the
reference frame of man in location [a] is aligned with the
reference frame of man [b] (the reference object), but not in
(2) where their intrinsic reference frames are in conflict. We

169

trials generate a reference frame conflict in the pointing
condition but the hourglass did not. This could be explained
by a preferential assignation of a top/bottom orientation
based on the vertical plane. In other words an hourglass
could not be seen as upside down but always as pointing
away from the reference object.
Acceptability rating showed that for inferior spatial
prepositions (below-under) the pointing condition was more
acceptable than the vertical one. All these results can be
explained by the activation of an intrinsic reference frame
on the located object that in the case of under-below
produces facilitation and with above-below produces
conflict. Therefore the results seem to suggest that the
orientation of the located object is important in establishing
the appropriateness of projective prepositions. However,
this experiment only used two located objects (an hourglass
and a stickman), so there is an issue regarding the extent to
which the results can be generalized. For this reason the aim
of the next experiment is to try to replicate the effect of the
orientation of the LO using a wider range of LOs and
orientations of LO.

Design
The experiment consisted of 480 trials constructed from the
following variables: 4 spatial prepositions X 10 locations X
3 objects X 2 orientations (“vertical” and “pointing at”). The
locations were collapsed in two factors; high vs. low
location (2 levels) and proximity (3 levels) as follows; far
misaligned (locations 1, 6 and 5, 10) versus near misaligned
(locations 2 and 4) versus aligned (central location). All the
trials were presented in a randomized order.
Results
A 4-way within subjects ANOVA was performed on the
rating data. The variables included in the analysis were; 2
located objects (hourglass versus stickman) x 2 preposition
set (above-below vs. over-under) x 2 superior versus inferior
prepositions (above-over vs. below- under) x 2 orientations
of LO (vertical and pointing at). The division between
spatial prepositions has been employed following the
Coventry et al. findings summarized above (Coventry, PratSala and Richards, 2001).
6.0

Hourglass
Stickman

5.9
5.8

Experiment 2
The second experiment utilized the same design and
procedure as the first experiment, except that more materials
and orientations of LO were included.

5.7
5.6
5.5
5.4

Method

5.3
5.2

vertical

pointing

Above-Over

vertical

Participants & Procedure
Twenty-nine undergraduate students from the University of
Plymouth participated in this investigation for course credit.
All the participants were English native speakers and none
of them took part in the previous experiment. The procedure
was the same procedure used for the previous experiment
based on the acceptability rating task of the given spatial
prepositions; above, below, over and under.

pointing

Below-Under

Figure 4: 3-way interaction between superior versus inferior
prepositions (above/below vs. over/under), located object
and orientation of LO (collapsed over locations).
Trials with the circle as the located object were excluded
from the analysis since this kind of object does not have an
axis. Furthermore we analyzed only the trials with a circle
as the reference object because it has no axis. A main effect
of preposition set (above-below vs. over-under) was found,
[F(1, 22) = 7.21, p < .05]. Higher ratings were given for
Above-Below (M = 6.526) than for Over-Under (M =
5.192). This is unsurprising as it known that these spatial
prepositions have larger areas of acceptability. No other
significant main effects were found. There was a significant
3-way interaction between superior versus inferior spatial
prepositions, located object and orientation of LO [F(1, 22) =
6.694, p < .05 ], displayed in Figure 4. It is interesting to
note that objects with a top/bottom orientation such as a
stickman are rated less acceptable when pointing (M = 5.42)
than when vertical (M = 5.65) for trials with above-over,
although this was not the case for below-under (Mvertical =
5.58; Mpointing = 5.72). None of the other interactions were
significant.

Materials
This experiment involved a wider number of located objects
and two more orientations; “pointing away” from the
reference object and “upside down”. The reference object in
this experiment was always a picture of a football. The
located objects were picked from two sets; the first
consisted of objects with a distinctive top-bottom (8 new
objects “with an intrinsic axis”) and the second one of
objects with “an ambiguous axis” (7 new objects plus the
hourglass). All the stimuli were hand-drawn and
transformed to electronic format by a computer scanner.
Design
There were 384 trials constructed from the following
variables: 8 located objects X 3 locations (collapsed over
side) X 4 spatial preposition X 4 orientations (“vertical”,
“upside down”, “pointing at” and “pointing away”). All the
trials were presented in a randomized order. We added 192
distractors where the LOs were objects without salient axes,
meaning that a total of 576 trials were presented.

Discussion
An interesting difference was found between trials with the
stickman and trials with the hourglass as LOs. The stickman

170

Experiment 3
Results
A full factorial ANOVA was chosen to analyze the data. In
this analysis we focus on trials where the LO had an
intrinsic axis (following the results of Experiment 1). A
significant main effect was found for preposition type
(above-below vs. over-under), [F(1,28) = 15.44, p < .001], for
superior versus inferior prepositions, [F(1,28) = 10.72, p <
.005], for location [F(1,28) = 80.17 p <.0001] and for
direction [F(1,84) = 3.35, p < .05]. Objects vertically oriented
(M = 5.75) were judged more acceptable than the other
levels of orientation. In particular the “upside down” (M =
5.6) and “pointing at” (M = 5.55) orientations produced the
lowest ratings (and indeed generated the highest reference
frame conflict). The analysis also revealed significant 2way interactions between preposition set and location [F(1,28)
= 10.96, p < .005], between preposition set and direction
[F(1,84) = 3.23. p < .05] and between superior versus inferior
prepositions and direction [F(1,84) = 2.82, p < .05].

This experiment used the same basic methodology as
before, but this time with a range of reference objects
including ROs without a salient axis, with an ambiguous
axis, and with an intrinsic axis.

Method
Participants& procedure
Twenty-three undergraduate students from the University of
Plymouth participated in this investigation for course credit.
All the participants were English native speakers and they
did not take part in any of the previous experiments. The
procedure was the same as that used in Experiments 1 and 2.
Materials
For this experiment we used a set of 24 objects (8 “without
a salient axis”, 8 “with an ambiguous axis” and 8 “with an
intrinsic axis”). The objects “with an ambiguous axis” and
“with an intrinsic axis” were the same as those used in
Experiment 2. We drew 8 new objects “without a salient
axis”. Thus we were able to study the effect of the reference
frame activation on the located object in scenes with
different kinds of reference object.

6.6

Superior
Inferior

6.4
6.2
6.0
5.8
5.6

Design
The experiment was composed of 576 trials with the
following factors: 8 located objects with an intrinsic axis
(treated as random factor), X 3 reference objects (picked up
from a set of 24 objects, 8 with no axis, 8 with an
ambiguous axis, and 8 with an intrinsic axis; within subjects
factor), X 2 prepositions set (between subjects factor), X 2
superior-inferior preposition (within subjects), X 3 locations
for the probe (within subjects) and 4 directions for the
located object (within subjects). This time preposition set
was between subjects; half the participants received above
and below and the other half received over and under.

5.4
5.2
5.0
4.8
vertical

upside
pointing AWAY
upside
pointing AWAY
pointing AT
vertical
pointing AT

Above-Below

Over-Under

Figure 5. 3-way interaction between orientation of LO,
superior-inferior prepositions and preposition set.
Finally, there was also a significant 3-way interaction
between superior-inferior prepositions, preposition set and
location, [F(1,28) = 5.45, p < .05], and between preposition
set, superior-inferior preposition and direction [F(1,84) = 3.99,
p < .01]. This interaction is displayed in Figure 5. As can be
seen in Figure 5, the results of the orientation of LO are
clearest for above, which exhibited a reliable difference
between the vertical orientation of LO and all the other
levels of LO. For over, pointing away from the RO is also
associated with higher acceptability ratings. The results are
less clear for inferior prepositions.

Results
We performed two analyses; one by subjects (F1) and one
by materials (F2). The results were similar for both analyses,
so here we report the F1 analyses alone. The means for all
the conditions can be found in Table 1. Significant main
effects were found for superior-inferior prepositions [F(1,22)
= 18.74, p < .001], for location [F(1,22) = 69.14, p < .0001]
and for orientation of LO [F(1,44) = 5.25, p < .005].
Furthermore we found several significant 2-way
interactions; between preposition set and RO [F(1,44) = 3.61,
p < .05], between location and RO [F(1,44) = 4.45, p < .05],
between superior-inferior prepositions and orientation of LO
[F(1,66) = 4.93, p < .005] and between location and
orientation of LO [F(1,66) = 3.12, p < .05].

Discussion
The pattern of results in this second experiment confirms
the hypothesis that the orientation of the located object
influences acceptability ratings, although there are clear
differences between prepositions. However, in the first two
experiments the reference objects were objects without a
salient axis. It is therefore possible that the activation of the
located object reference frame could depend on the features
of the reference object. The next experiment tested whether
the effects of the orientation of LO were present across a
wider range of ROs.

171

Located Object
(intrinsic)

additional reference frame is generated from the located
object as well as from the reference object and the final
template generated is influenced by its orientation.
In addition to the reliable effects of the orientation of LO
for intrinsic objects, the results of Experiment 1 showed
some interesting differences between intrinsic objects and
objects such as an hourglass with a salient axis, but without
an intrinsic axis. For the objects like an hourglass, the
“pointing at” condition was considered more acceptable
than the vertical condition. A possible explanation is that
people assign a subjective top/bottom orientation to
“ambiguous” objects. Thus the hourglass in trials with
above-over should be seen as pointing away from the
reference object instead of pointing at the RO.
The last experiment provided evidence that the conflict
among reference frames emerges across a range of reference
objects, including those that are more “real” with a
top/bottom orientation. So the effect of the located object is
not exclusive for circle-like reference objects but it is part of
a more general process.
But why should we activate the located object reference
frame when the reference frame of the RO should be
sufficient to localize the objects in the scene? An
explanation is that objects not vertically oriented suggest
that there is something implausible in the scene. A cat
upside down is not a “plausible” stereotypical mental
representation. Thus the knowledge revision function
(Holland, Holyoak, Nisbett & Thagard, 1986, Wason, 1960)
should look for an explanation; this activates the located
object reference frame to process every possible orientation
that fits with the whole scene. Another possible explanation
is based on the concept of direction of potential motion
(Regier, 1996). People perceive objects rotated away from
the gravitational plane as falling. So a located object
oriented at 90º may be perceived as moving downwards on
a path to the left of/right of and away from the reference
object.

Reference Object
No axis

Ambig.

Intrin.

Above

vertical
inverted
point at
point away

6.281
5.560
5.524
6.047

6.307
5.542
5.670
6.026

6.375
5.490
5.644
5.974

Below

vertical
inverted
point at
point away

5.797
5.411
5.786
5.387

6.036
5.604
5.823
5.536

6.167
5.453
5.754
5.578

Over

vertical
inverted
point at
point away

5.419
5.047
5.182
5.785

5.084
4.823
5.115
5.366

5.479
5.220
5.188
5.335

Under

vertical
inverted
point at
point away

5.131
4.691
5.335
4.698

5.058
4.901
5.073
4.693

5.162
4.889
5.156
4.901

Table 1. Means for conditions across the four spatial
prepositions (above, below, over and under).
A 3-way interaction was also significant between superiorinferior prepositions, location and orientation of LO [F(1,66)
= 3.93, p < .05] and a 4-way interaction between superiorinferior prepositions, location, RO and orientation of LO
[F(1,132) = 2.74, p < .05]. Follow-up analysis revealed
significant differences in orientation between prepositions
and locations, but the effects of orientation were present at
all levels of RO.

Discussion
The outcome from this experiment supports the idea that the
orientation of the located object affects acceptability ratings
even when the reference object has an intrinsic orientation.
The results for this experiment mirror the results of the
previous experiment, but extend the results to show that the
activation of reference frame for the LO is not restricted to
cases where the RO does not provide sufficient information
to cue a reference frame.

Implication for existing models
The results found suggest a review of the key characteristics
of the spatial apprehension process Carlson-Radvansky &
Irwin, 1994; Carlson & Logan, 2001; Hayward & Tarr,
1995; Logan & Sadler, 1996). We found evidence of an
involvement of the located object reference frame in the
process of assigning direction to space. Therefore evaluating
the process of goodness of fit of the spatial preposition
involves the located object as well and future studies should
take this into account. The finding that the located object
interacts with the spatial apprehension process has some
repercussions for models of spatial language as well.
Models such as the Attentional-Vector-Sum model (Regier
& Carlson, 2001) simulate attentional processes, but thus far
does not deal with attentional processing of the LO (but see
Regier, Carlson & Corrigan, 2004, for a modification of
AVS to deal with processing of function). It may be
possible to develop the AVS model to deal with the
projection of vectors from the LO to the RO as well as the

General Discussion
The series of experiments explored the hypothesis that the
spatial apprehension process computes a composite template
for a given spatial preposition making use of the located
object reference frame as well as the reference object
reference frame. The results of the experiments confirmed
this hypothesis showing that the orientation of the located
object affects acceptability ratings for projective
prepositions.
The results suggest necessary extensions to the idea of
Multiple Frame Activation (Carlson-Radvansky & Irwin,
1994) where it is suggested that in comprehending a scene
multiple frames are available. However, we found that an

172

Levinson, S. C. (1996). Frames of reference and
Molyneux’s question. In P. Bloom, M. A. Peterson, L.
Nadel, & M. F. Garrett (Eds.), Language and space (pp.
109-169). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Logan, G. D. & Sadler, D. D. (1996). A computational
analysis of the apprehension of spatial relations. In P.
Bloom, M. A. Peterson, L. Nadel, & M. F. Garrett (Eds.),
Language and space (pp. 493-529). Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Regier, T (1996). The Human Semantic Potential. Spatial
language and constrained connectionism. Cambridge,
The MIT Press.
Regier, T. & Carlson, L. A. (2001). Grounding spatial
language in perception: An empirical and computational
investigation. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 130 (2), 273 – 298.
Regier, T., Carlson, L. A., & Corrigan, B. (2004). Attention
in spatial language: Bridging geometry and function. In
L. Carlson & E. van der Zee (Eds.). Functional features in
language and space: Insights from perception,
categorization and development. Oxford University Press.
Wason, P. C. (1960). On the failure to eliminate hypothesis
in conceptual task. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 12, 129 – 140.

other way round (see Coventry and Garrod, 2004, for a
discussion).
Limitations and future developments
This investigation brings experimental evidence in support
of the hypothesis that the located object, in a scene with two
objects, takes part in the spatial apprehension process.
Future investigations should attempt to ascertain the degree
to which features of the LO influence the spatial
apprehension process further. For example, in some
contexts the LO may be more important than the RO, and
vice versa for other contexts. In addition, the present
experiments do not tell us anything about the time course of
processing of LO reference frames. Studies underway are
testing the conflict among reference frames using a reaction
time paradigm. Finally, we should consider how these
findings can be implemented within frameworks such as the
AVS model.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Lau Thiam Kok for his drawing
skills.

References
Carlson-Radvansky, L. A. & Irwin, D. E. (1994). Reference
frame activation during spatial term assignment. Journal
of Memory and Language, 33, 646 – 671.
Carlson-Radvansky, L. A. & Logan, G. D. (1997). The
influence of reference frame selection on spatial template
construction. Journal of Memory and Language, 37, 411
– 437.
Carlson, L. A. (1999). Selecting a reference frame. Spatial
Cognition and Computation, 1, 365 – 379.
Carlson, L. A. & Logan, G. D. (2001). Using spatial terms
to select an object. Memory and Cognition, 29 (6), 883 –
892.
Coventry, K. R., Prat-Sala, M. and Richards, L. (2001). The
interplay between geometry and function in the
comprehension of Over, Under, Above and Below.
Journal of Memory and Language. 44(3), 376 – 398.
Coventry, K. R., & Garrod, S. C. (2004). Saying, seeing and
acting. The psychological semantics of spatial
prepositions. Psychology Press; Hove and New York.
Hayward, W. G. & Tarr, M. J. (1995). Spatial language and
spatial representation. Cognition, 55, 39 – 84.
Holland, J. H. , Holyoak, K. J., Nisbett, R. E. & Thagard, P.
R. (1986). Induction: Processes of inference, learning,
and discovery. Cambridge, MA: MIT press.
Lavie, N. (1995). Perceptual load as necessary condition for
selective attention. Journal of Epxerimental Psychology:
Human, Perception and Performance. 21(3), 451 – 468.
Lavie, N. & Cox, S. (1997). On the efficiency of visual
attention: efficient visual search leads to inefficient
distractor rejection. Psychological Science. 8(5), 395 398

173

