UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Structural Differences in Abstract and Concrete Item Categories

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6mk03050

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Wiemer-Hastings, Katja
Barnard, Kimberly K.
Faelnar, Jon

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Structural Differences in Abstract and Concrete Item Categories
Katja Wiemer-Hastings (Katja@niu.edu)
Kimberly K. Barnard (Barnardkk@earthlink.net)
Jon Faelnar (JDF1078@aol.com)
Department of Psychology, Northern Illinois University
DeKalb, IL 60115 USA

Abstract
We explored reasons why categories of abstract items, such as
cognitive processes or communication, are weak determinants
of abstract item similarity.
Three experiments, using
exemplar listing tasks and similarity ratings on the exemplars,
compared the structure of taxonomic categories of abstract
versus concrete entities. In comparison to concrete item
categories, we found that there were consistently fewer
typical items for abstract item categories, but that nonetheless
item pairs within abstract item categories were rated about as
similar to each other as items matched in typicality in
concrete categories. Abstract item pairs from different
categories were more similar than concrete item pairs from
different categories, indicating lower semantic distance of the
categories. Taken together, these data suggest that taxonomic
categories are less informative for abstract than concrete
items. We discuss alternative factors in abstract concept
organization.

Taxonomies for Abstract Items
When asked to sort the items apple, cabbage, squirrel and
duck into stacks, most people will presumably sort them into
types of produce and animals. Concrete item categories
have a strong, graded structure organized around
prototypical items, and are relatively distinct from other
categories. As a consequence, concrete item categories
offer salient dimensions that are readily used in reasoning
involving their members.
Because of their family
resemblance structure, in which items share groups of
features with other category members, two typical items
from the same category, such as squirrel and duck, are likely
rated as similar. Categories are important organizational
structures that enable us to use our knowledge in reasoning
processes such as classification, similarity judgments, and to
effectively acquire new knowledge through analogies and
inferences. As such, categories touch upon and inform
many areas of research that are central to cognitive science.
Categories for concrete things are only a subset of our
knowledge. We also have representations of abstract and
complex entities, such as processes, events, mental
experiences, stories, and relations. Abstract concepts
constitute a large and important part of our daily
experiences and actions. Even so, very little is known about
categories of abstract concepts. A complete understanding
of the organization of our knowledge cannot be achieved
unless we understand how other kinds of things are
organized.

There are several reasons to expect that taxonomic
categories for abstract items are not as distinct and salient as
those for concrete items. First, some research has shown
that abstract items (in this case, verbs) are not organized
into distinct clusters, but that classes of such items overlap
with others on many dimensions (Huttenlocher & Lui, 1979;
Miller & Johnson-Laird, 1976). The features of concrete
items are highly correlated; that is, given that two items
share a feature, they typically share some other features as
well, making them more similar to each other than to items
in different categories. As a consequence, categories are
more distinct from one another. In contrast, a verb may
share features with verbs from many different categories to
a similar extent. Hampton (1981) has made a similar
proposal for abstract concepts in general. Thus, categories
of relational concepts may overlap more and offer less
constraint on their processing.
Second, taxonomic similarities appear to have little
impact on similarity judgments of abstract concept pairs.
When people rate the similarity of item pairs that are
taxonomically similar and that also share a thematic
relation, people tend to focus on the thematic relation for
abstract items, but on the taxonomic relation for concrete
items. For example, participants often rate jealousy and
anger as similar because jealousy may lead to anger. Much
less frequently, participants refer to the information that
both are emotional states (Wiemer-Hastings & Xu, 2003).
In contrast, given an item pair like cat and mouse,
participants will more frequently refer to both being animals
than to one chasing the other (Wiemer-Hastings & Xu,
2003; Wisniewski & Bassok, 1999). Participants use
thematic relations as explanations for concrete item
similarity judgments mostly when no taxonomic similarity
is present; for abstract item pairs, thematic relations are used
frequently also when items are taxonomically related.
One possible explanation for this striking effect is that
taxonomic similarity of abstract items, e.g., the similarity of
two emotions, or two cognitive processes, is not salient
information. This raises the question how useful taxonomic
abstract item categories are. Abstract categories may be
useful for talking about groups of abstract items, such as
events, but they may not reflect actual knowledge
organization in memory. For example, the concepts joy,
sadness, wedding and farewell could be organized into
emotion terms and events, or into concepts of positive
versus negative connotation, respectively. There is no
salient dimension here along which to unambiguously split

1452

the four words into two groups, and the relations between
joy and wedding, or sadness and farewell, are quite salient.
If taxonomic classes of abstract items turn out to be of little
functional use, the next question would be whether abstract
items are organized around some alternative information.
The results discussed above suggest thematic relations as
one possible source for abstract category organization.
Recently, it has been found that when given a choice,
individuals routinely sort even concrete items around
thematic relations (Murphy, 2001; Lin & Murphy, 2001).
For example, when presented with the four items squirrel,
mouse, nut, and cheese, people may sort them into pairs of
animal and type of food (squirrel – nut; mouse – cheese)
instead of animals and foods. Since such thematic relations
have already been shown to play a very prominent role in
similarity judgments of abstract item pairs, chances are
good that they will provide dominant information to their
categorization as well.
The main concern of this paper is the question why
people do not effectively use taxonomic abstract item
categories, such as emotions, cognitive processes, actions,
attitudes, attributes, and so on in category-related tasks such
as similarity ratings. The main hypothesis was that abstract
and concrete item categories differ in the amount of
constraint that they place on membership. This was
examined in two separate hypotheses. First, it was
hypothesized that participants would generate fewer typical
examples for abstract than for concrete item categories.
That is, we expected that fewer abstract items would be
listed by a large number of participants. Related to this
issue, we also hypothesized that abstract item categories
would be less distinct than concrete item categories. That
is, we predicted that members of two abstract item
categories would be almost as similar to each other as
members of the same abstract item category. Abstract items
from the same category may share comparatively fewer
category-specific features, and may share relatively more
features with members of other categories.
Three
experiments tested these hypotheses.

Experiment 1
Experiment 1 compared the numbers of types and tokens
generated for abstract versus concrete item categories. In
accordance with the first hypothesis, it was predicted that
significantly more participants would list the same items for
concrete categories than for abstract ones.

Method
Twenty participants generated exemplars for 24 commonly
used categories, 12 for concrete, and 12 for abstract items.
Example categories are tools, pets, object attributes, and
positive emotions. Category lists were constructed from
taxonomic trees and extended to include a variety of
categories. Since there is no well-established taxonomic
model for abstract items, abstract item categories were taken
from ontologies and social categories. Each participant
listed exemplars for all categories, to control for individual
differences. Categories were listed in random order. There

was no time limit. Participants were instructed to list as
many exemplars for each category as they could think of.

Results & Discussion
For each category, types and tokens were calculated. Type
scores count different exemplars, whereas tokens also count
repeated mentions of exemplars. The ratio of both indicates
the agreement among participants or the mean production
frequency for each exemplar. A highly available exemplar
should be mentioned by many participants, resulting in a
higher production frequency or token / type ratio.
Categories that place strong constraints on cognitive
processing would be characterized by higher token / type
ratios.
Abstract and concrete categories did not differ in the
number of types that were generated. However, more
idiosyncratic responses were generated for abstract item
categories. Consistent with the prediction, more participants
listed the same exemplars for concrete item categories (see
Table 1), t (10)=7.93, p<0.001. For the vast majority of
abstract item categories, individual exemplars were listed by
fewer than 2 participants, whereas on average, at least 3
participants listed exemplars for concrete item categories.
Table 1: Types and Token / Type Ratios from Experiment 1

Concrete
Abstract

Types
37.75
35.42

Tokens / Type
3.41
1.57

Token / type ratios for concrete item categories varied
from 2.25 (foods) to 4.78 (pets), SD=0.79. In contrast, very
few participants listed the same exemplars for abstract item
categories. The token / type ratio varied only very little
across the different abstract item categories (SD=0.43), with
the token /type ratios ranging from 1.06 (prosocial actions)
to 1.82 (social offenses). The only exception to this
dichotomy was one abstract item category, object attributes,
which is actually relatively concrete, and which had a ratio
of 2.71. Without this category, the standard deviation of
ratios for abstract categories was reduced to SD=0.26.
Overall, it seems that low agreement is a general
characteristic of abstract item categories, which could
indicate that these categories do not reflect actual
organization in memory. Instead, participants may retrieve
exemplars out of a different organization, leading to high
response variation. A possible confound that may account
for the observed differences was that abstract item
categories tend to be broader categories than concrete item
categories. Experiment 2 varied the broadness of the
categories systematically to test this.

Experiment 2
Experiment 2 replicated the procedure used in Experiment 1
with categories of different specificity levels. One set of
categories was at a broad, abstract level, another set was
more specific. Generally, specific categories contain fewer
members and should thus place stronger constraints on
exemplar production. The expectation was, accordingly,

1453

that agreement would be higher for specific categories. The
categories used in this Experiment are shown in Table 2.
Table 2: Categories Used in Experiment 2

Abstract

Concrete

Broad
Actions
Mental Processes
Communication
Events
Attitudes
Animals
Plants
Foods
Liquids
Natural Substances

Specific
Reasoning
Mental Disorders
Object attributes
Character Traits
Offensive Actions
Wild animals
Pets
Tools
Office Supplies
Beverages

We also selected abstract and concrete item categories
that were based on situations. Three such categories were
based on scenes or settings, and three were based on events
or scripts. Both have been shown to be efficient schemata
for organizing knowledge in a systematic way (Shank &
Abelson, 1977; Tversky & Hemenway, 1983). It has been
argued that abstract items are characterized by situational
contexts, rather than by internal features (Barsalou &
Wiemer-Hastings, in press; Wiemer-Hastings & Graesser,
2000). Abstract concepts typically involve agents, goals,
relations, actions and events, and emotional or cognitive
experiences. As such, they are akin to abstract situation
schemata, and may be organized around situations. Thus,
we predicted that abstract, but not concrete, items generated
for a given situation, are perceived as similar to each other.

Method
Sixty undergraduate students at Northern Illinois University
participated in this experiment. Twenty participants each
generated exemplars for broad categories, more specific
categories and for situation categories that were either a
setting (e.g., workplace) or an event (e.g., wedding). For the
situation-based categories, abstract item instructions asked
for “actions, events, or mental processes that could occur in
the situation”; concrete item instructions asked for ”objects
occurring in the situation”. The settings and events were
identical for both groups to allow for direct comparison.
Altogether, there were ten broad and ten specific categories
(five abstract, five concrete), and six situation-based
categories.

Results & Discussion
As in the first experiment, we evaluated the results through
token /type ratios. The data replicated the findings from
Experiment 1. Table 3 shows the results. Interestingly, the
use of more specific categories (e.g., offensive action instead
of the broad action) did not improve agreement scores, even
though it had an effect on the number of types listed.
The token / type ratio for broad category exemplars did
not statistically differ between concrete and abstract items,
suggesting that broad superordinate categories of concrete

items structurally resemble abstract item categories. A
significant difference was found for specific categories,
where the token / type ratios were significantly higher for
concrete than for abstract items (t(8)=3.76, p<0.01) and also
higher than for concrete items listed for broad categories
(t(8)=3.10, p<0.05). That is, switching to a more specific
category level increased category constraint for concrete,
but not for abstract items.
The data suggest that the abstractness level does not have
much of an impact on how many typical exemplars are
produced for abstract categories. It seems, then, that the
differences observed for concrete versus abstract items
reflect a more general difference: Abstract item categories
do not have many typical exemplars, and the few typical
exemplars have relatively low typicality scores, as measured
by the number of participants naming each. These first
results suggest that categories may not provide the strong
basis for inferences and similarity judgments for abstract
items that is usually seen for concrete items.
Table 3: Types and Token / Type Ratios from Experiment 2

Broad
Specific
Situation

Abstract
Concrete
Abstract
Concrete
Abstract
Concrete

Types
42.2
34.8
30.6
28.6
36.3
57.7

Token / Type
1.63
1.78
1.49
3.25
1.60
2.07

Surprisingly, the pattern did not change much for
situation categories. Participants generated substantially
more items for concrete situation categories than for other
categories, suggesting that this category type places low
constraint on concrete items. This is not the case for
abstract items. Still, the token / type ratio was significantly
higher for concrete than for abstract items, t(10)=2.72,
p<0.05. That is, there seems to be more consensus on what
concrete items occur in situations than what abstract
processes, events or states may.

Experiment 3
Previous experiments suggested that taxonomic category
membership plays a minor role in similarity judgments for
abstract items (Wiemer-Hastings & Xu, 2003). We suspect
that this is due to overlapping categories, such that members
of the same category may be only slightly more similar than
members of different categories. Accordingly we predicted
that, overall, item pairs should be more similar for items
from the same category, but that this effect should be more
pronounced for concrete item pairs than for abstract ones.
That is, we expected that the difference in similarity for
same- vs. different-category abstract item pairs would be
significantly smaller than for concrete item pairs.
Alternatively, item pairs used in previous experiments
were very untypical exemplars of their respective
categories, which could have lowered the salience of their
category membership. In the present experiment, we

1454

control for this by collecting similarity ratings only for the
most typical items for abstract item categories.
If
membership in the same taxonomic category does not
substantially increase similarity ratings, compared to ratings
of members of different categories, then typicality is
unlikely the reason for people’s neglect of taxonomic
similarity in similarity judgments.
With respect to the situation-based categories, we had no
strong predictions. However, we suspected that concrete
items may be less constrained by such categories than by
taxonomic categories, thus that situation-based abstract item
categories may actually be more distinct.

membership (same vs. different), and between-subjects
variable category level (broad vs. specific) on similarity
ratings. The mean similarity scores for these variables are
shown in Tables 4 for broad and specific categories.

Method

Category Distinctness of Abstract Items Similarity was
rated significantly higher for items of the same categories
than those of different categories across all item groups,
F(1, 25)=154.88, MSE=0.21, p<0.001. This was a large
effect, ε2=0.86. Further, consistent with our prediction, an
interaction of category membership with concreteness was
revealed, F(1, 25)=46.68, MSE=.21, p<0.01. This effect
was moderately high, ε2=0.65. As can be gathered from the
difference scores in Table 4, concrete item categories had a
larger semantic distance overall (difference M=2.14) than
abstract item categories (M=0.92). Similarity ratings among
abstract items were significantly higher for same-category
pairs than between-category pairs, but, consistent with our
predictions, this difference was significantly smaller than
for concrete item categories.

We used high-frequent exemplars collected in Experiment 2
for different category types to make sure they would be
typical items for the categories. There were two constraints:
first, we omitted some items that had been generated for
multiple categories (with the exception of happiness and
happy for one set for lack of alternative choices). Second,
the exemplars selected from concrete versus abstract item
categories were matched in typicality, for fair comparison.
This means that the concrete item pairs used in Experiment
3 were not the most typical of their categories, but instead
were matched in typicality (as measured by generation
frequency in Exp. 2) to the abstract item pairs. Accordingly,
the actual differences between these categories are likely
strongly underestimated in this Experiment.
Fifty-seven undergraduates from Northern Illinois
University participated in this experiment for course credit.
Four participant groups were formed at random to judge the
similarity of items generated for broad, specific, abstract
situational, or concrete situational categories, respectively.
For the broad and specific categories, participants were
presented with three items from each of five categories,
resulting in 15 items presented in random order. Abstract
and concrete items were rated by the same participants, but
were blocked to avoid contrast effects on the ratings. For
the situation-based categories, there were six categories for
abstract and concrete items each. Since 18 items had to be
rated in pair-wise combinations, concrete and abstract items
were presented between-subjects to avoid fatigue effects.
Each item was rated against each other item in the context
of the entire list, to allow for category information to affect
the ratings. Thus, if category information was accessible
from the items, we expected that items associated with the
same categories would be rated as more similar to each
other than to items not belonging to the category. The order
of ratings was varied so that item pairs were presented in
ascending vs. descending order, and so that each item was
presented equally often in first vs. second position of the
item pairs. Ratings were made on a 6-point scale.

Results & Discussion
We predicted that the difference in similarity for abstract
item pairs within and between categories would be
significantly smaller than for concrete item pairs. A mixed
ANOVA tested the effects of within-subject variables
abstractness (concrete vs. abstract) and category

Table 4: Ratings from Experiment 3

Category
Same
Different
Difference

Broad
Abstract Concrete
3.63
3.88
2.74
1.98
0.89*
1.90*

Specific
Abstract Concrete
2.94
3.84
2.00
1.45
0.94*
2.39*

Category Type There was a small significant effect of
category level, F(1, 25)=4.77, MSE=1.35, p<0.05; ε2=0.16.
Overall, as we expected, specific categories produced
greater differences in same-versus different category pair
similarity. Table 4 shows that this effect is almost absent
for abstract item categories (the interaction of category
membership and concreteness approached significance,
p=0.09). So, specific categories of abstract items are not
more distinct than broad categories – their members are
quite similar to members of other specific categories. This
suggests that low category distinctness is a general problem
for abstract items categories that spans different category
levels. This finding is consistent with the results from
Experiment 2, which showed that category specificity had
no impact on the production frequency of the exemplars.
Situations and Abstract Items Table 5 shows the mean
similarity scores obtained for situation-based categories.
The pattern of similarities is almost reverse from the one
obtained for taxonomic categories: Abstract item pairs are
more similar for same-category pairs than concrete ones,
and abstract item categories are more distinct.
In comparison to taxonomic categories, the most striking
difference is the low similarity of concrete items of the same
situation-based category. Abstract items that are typical for
a given situation seem to be as highly similar to each other
as members of the same taxonomic abstract item category.
This is an important finding because it suggests that
situations put semantic constraints on abstract, but not on
concrete items. Accordingly, situation knowledge may

1455

affect abstract item processing (such as similarity ratings)
relatively more than concrete items.
Table 5: Ratings for Situation–Based Categories
Category
Same
Different
Difference

Abstract
3.44
2.50
0.94*

Concrete
2.28
1.78
0.50

In an ANOVA, the interaction of concreteness and
category membership approached significance, p=0.07.
Specifically, only similarity ratings of abstract items
differed significantly for pairs of the same versus pairs of
different categories. The semantic distance was the same
for taxonomic and situation categories for abstract items. In
contrast, there was a drop in distinctness for concrete
situation-centered categories (M=0.50) as opposed to the
taxonomic categories.

Conclusions
We have shown that abstract and concrete item categories
differ systematically. The observed differences may explain
some of the processing differences for abstract and concrete
items. In particular, abstract item categories were found to
have exemplars with low production frequencies, i.e. very
few exemplars are named by two or more individuals.
Experiment 2 showed that the token / type ratio for abstract
item categories is at the same level as that for general
concrete item categories. Thus, asking for exemplars of
mental processes may be somewhat akin to asking for
exemplars of objects. However, they differ from broad
concrete item categories in at least two important respects:
First, more specific subcategories of abstract items do not
evoke exemplars with higher production frequencies, as
they do for concrete items. Experiment 2 showed that in
fact, the token / type ratio dropped slightly from broad
(1.63) to specific (1.49) abstract item categories. At the
same time, the number of different exemplars mentioned
was lowered, suggesting that the more specific categories
were indeed smaller categories.
Second, Experiment 3 shows that broad concrete item
categories are more distinct than either broad or specific
abstract item categories. Thus, we do not think that the
difference between abstract and concrete item categories can
be reduced to a difference in the abstraction level with
abstract item categories being “super-superordinate”
categories. An alternative explanation may be that abstract
item categories are not organized around typical exemplars
which, having most resemblance to the other exemplars, are
recollected most often. Instead, it may be that participants
have to actively construct the category as an ad hoc
category. Memory for abstract concepts does not seem to be
organized around taxonomic categories that can be recalled
easily using a category label.
Further, the data suggest that abstract categories,
regardless of category level, are less distinct from each other
than concrete categories. Rated similarity is significantly
higher for members of the same category versus members of

different categories. However, the difference is much
smaller than for concrete item categories (with the notable
exception of situation-based categories). At this point, it is
important to remember that the concrete exemplars used in
the third Experiment were actually not the most typical
exemplars of their categories by far, that is, the differences
we observed in category distinctness probably substantially
underestimate actual differences.
Considering these differences, it does not come as a
surprise that taxonomic categories are used less as a basis
for similarity judgments of abstract than of concrete item
pairs. We also predict based on these data that there would
be little agreement in sorting tasks using abstract items since
there does not seem to be a strongly organized categorical
structure for abstract items.
The data raise the question how meaningful abstract item
categories are. Are they merely nominal in function, to
enable us to talk about them at an abstract level? Or do they
have any impact on the representation and processing of
abstract concepts? Our data do not give conclusive answers
to these questions but suggest that categorization of abstract
items follows different principles and perhaps
functionalities from that of concrete items. Referring to
related studies, in what follows we will outline a few
hypotheses. First, it is informative to link the present
findings to studies that explore the content of abstract
concepts in comparison to concrete concepts. Second,
research on similarity processes, which are presumably
involved in categorization, suggests that thematic relations
may be an important source for structuring abstract
concepts. It is possible that this is linked to the first issue –
that the content of abstract concepts is more compatible with
thematic than with taxonomic processing.

Conceptual Content
Hampton (1981) found that not all abstract concepts fit a
prototypical structure and suggested that this may be due to
lower feature correlations. Most likely, this is related to the
content of abstract concepts. Hampton suggested on the
basis of feature lists that their content consists of social
components of situations, e.g., agents, behaviors, and goals.
More recent findings are consistent this view. Analyses of
conceptual content through property generation tasks
suggest that abstract concepts have few “properties” in the
classical sense (i.e., perceptual or functional features, parts)
but instead have a high percentage of features that are
related to situations and to subjective experiences in a
situation (Barsalou & Wiemer-Hastings, in press; WiemerHastings, Krug & Xu, 2001; Wiemer-Hastings & Xu, under
review). Knowledge of situations is also linked to concrete
concepts (e.g., part of our knowledge of chairs is that a
person can sit on them to eat or to write), but concrete
concepts are further distinguished through a high proportion
of entity properties (i.e, external and internal parts, surface
features, etc.), of which abstract concepts have very few or
none.
Abstract concepts have two specific characteristics that
are likely related to the observed lack of distinctive
categories for abstract items. One is the smaller set of

1456

features that are used to describe them, which may reflect
that the concepts themselves have a lot more overlap than
concrete concepts do. This could be directly linked to the
high similarity scores of exemplars listed for different
categories (Experiment 3). This may be accentuated even
more by the other characteristic, namely that features of
abstract concepts are significantly less specific than those of
concrete concepts (Wiemer-Hastings & Xu). For example,
a concrete item may be linked to a specific action (e.g.,
eating) while an abstract item may simply be linked to some
action. The differentiation of categories requires a relative
large feature basis to arrive at categories that are
characterized by somewhat distinct clusters of features.
General features are not likely to offer such differentiation.
Hierarchical category structures have been linked to
correlated features. Concrete item properties such as parts
and functions may be systematically correlated, e.g. because
of causal links between their features (e.g., a bee can fly and
has wings – it can fly because it has wings). In contrast,
situation properties can be more flexibly linked to form a
seemingly unlimited variety of abstract concepts. An agent
can be found in a large variety of situations and there are
few constraints on their specific set-up. Thus, categories
governed largely by situational features may all overlap
since they would all involve the same kinds of features, to
different extents. For example, emotions and cognitive
processes would both involve a person, a situation that the
emotion / cognition is related to, and an element of
introspective experience.
As a result, abstract item
categories may have more overlap with less distinction.

Taxonomic versus Thematic Relations
One central purpose of categories is to allow for
inferences about novel objects, based on their similarity to
known objects. Likewise, categories in memory enable us
to generate instances that could serve a particular function.
Categories can be structured around taxonomic information,
where several items are a kind of X (e.g., gadgets, emotions)
or thematic information, where items fill complementary
roles in a proposition. For example, they may be related via
an instrument function (knife, meat), a causal relation
(cause, effect) a temporal sequence (question, answer) or
through a variety of other relations. Both taxonomic and
thematic relations are part of our knowledge of abstract and
concrete concepts, but there may be a functional advantage
in the majority of situations to using one over the other
when dealing with concrete or abstract concepts. In
particular, as suggested by the findings discussed initially in
this paper, taxonomic inferences may be more critical for
novel concrete objects or reasoning involving objects, while
thematic inferences may be more functional when
processing abstract concepts. For example, to specific
actions require objects with specific functional or perceptual
features; identifying one is facilitated by categories
organized around functional and perceptual features. In
contrast, abstract item categories may have less practical
relevance. For example, to understand an emotion, it may
be more important to process events and traits leading up to
it than to have quick access to other emotions.

Our data suggest that taxonomic relations of abstract
items are comparatively weak. We suggest that abstract
items may be organized quite differently from concrete
items. For example, Experiments 2 and 3 show that
situations provide as much structure for abstract items as
taxonomic categories. While concrete items are used across
different situations, abstract items that occur in a similar
context are perceivably interrelated. We suspect that in the
future, cognitive scientists may discover quite different
structural principles for abstract item categories, and that
they will centrally involve thematic relations.

References
Barsalou, L.W., & Wiemer-Hastings, K. (in press). Situating
abstract concepts. In D. Pecher & R. Zwaan (Eds.),
Grounding cognition: The role of perception and action
in memory, language, and thought. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Gentner, D. (1981). Some interesting differences between
nouns and verbs. Cognition and Brain Theory, 4, 161178.
Hampton, J.A. (1981). An investigation of the nature of
abstract concepts. Memory & Cognition, 9, 149-156.
Huttenlocher, J., & Lui, F. (1979). The semantic
organization of some simple nouns and verbs. Journal of
Verbal Learning & Verbal Behavior, 18, 141-162.
Lin, E.L., & Murphy, G.L. (2001). Thematic relations in
adults' concepts. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 130, 3-28.
Miller, G.A., & Johnson-Laird, P.N. (1976). Language and
perception. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.
Murphy, G.L. (2001). Causes of taxonomic sorting by
adults: A test of the thematic-to-taxonomic shift.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 8, 834-839.
Shank, R., & Abelson, R. (1977). Scripts, plans, goals, and
understanding. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Tversky, B., & Hemenway, K. (1983). Categories of
environmental scenes. Cognitive Psychology, 15, 121149.
Wiemer-Hastings, K., & Graesser, A.C. (2000).
Contextually representing abstract concepts with abstract
structures. Proceedings of the 22nd Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 983-988), Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Wiemer-Hastings, K., Krug, J. K. D., & Xu, X. (2001).
Imagery, context availability, contextual constraint and
abstractness. In Proceedings of the 23rd Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp.11061111).
Wiemer-Hastings, K., & Xu, X. (under review). Content
differences for abstract and concrete concepts.
Wisniewski, E. J., & Bassok, M. (1999). What makes a man
similar to a tie? Stimulus compatibility with comparison
and integration. Cognitive Psychology, 39, 208-238.

1457

