UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Task Complexity and Difficulty in Two Computer-Simulated Problems: Cross-cultural
Similarities and Differences

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4bm7r3d6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Guss, C. Dominik
Glencross, Emma
Tauson, Teresa
et al.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Task Complexity and Difficulty in Two Computer-Simulated Problems:
Cross-cultural Similarities and Differences
C. Dominik Güss (dguess@unf.edu)
Emma Glencross (eglencross@juno.com)
Ma. Teresa Tuason (ttuason@unf.edu)
Lauren Summerlin (lauren233axo@aol.com)
F. Dan Richard (drichard@unf.edu)
Department of Psychology, 4567 St. Johns Bluff Road, South
Jacksonville, FL 32224 USA

problem objectively is, the more difficult it is. However, the
described problem characteristics are not objective
descriptions of complex problems, but are dependent on the
knowledge and experience of the problem solver.
Individuals differ in experiences regarding problem-related
knowledge and strategic knowledge. The complexity,
transparency, and dynamics of a situation interpreted
subjectively might be completely different. Therefore, both
the problem’s specific characteristics and the experience of
the problem solver will influence the subjective
interpretation of the problem. This interpretation is a crucial
aspect of the problem solving process and thus, one might
expect individual differences.
Knowledge and experience of the problem solver is
strongly influenced by one’s cultural environment and
several studies have shown how problem solving differs
between cultures (Cole, Gay, Glick, & Sharp, 1971; Güss,
2002; Strohschneider & Güss, 1999). Culture is a broad
term that can be defined in many ways (Kroeber &
Kluckhon, 1963). Under a psychological perspective it can
refer to implicit and explicit shared knowledge that is
transmitted from generation to generation (Smith & Bond,
1998). This knowledge is helpful for a specific group to
adapt to specific conditions of the environment. Cross
cultural differences in problem solving strategies validate
that the people’s knowledge base is strongly influenced and
shaped by their cultural environment. In essence, the more
interesting questions is why and how problem solving
strategies are influenced by culture.
One aspect of this implicit knowledge are values that
direct behavior, one such value is called uncertainty
avoidance. A problem is by definition an uncertain situation
as the problem solver does not know how to reach a goal
state. Uncertainty avoidance refers to “the extent to which
the members of a culture feel threatened by uncertain or
unknown situations” (Hofstede, 2001, p. 161). Our
expectation is that values of uncertainty avoidance influence
the initial perception of a problem. For example Hofstede
(2001) studied uncertainty avoidance in 53 countries. In his
study, India and the United States showed weak uncertainty
avoidance, whereas Brazil showed high uncertainty
avoidance.

Abstract
Complex problems have often been described along certain
dimensions, e.g. complexity, transparency, and dynamics.
However, problem descriptions of the researcher and
problem-characteristics perceived by the participant might
differ. This study investigates subjective task complexity and
its relationship to complex problem solving performance.
Research questions are: Do problem perceptions differ a)
between different complex problems? b) between cultures?
and c) between participants’ performance? Two hundred
eighty three students from the US, Brazil, and India
participated in this study. Participants played the two
computer simulations, Fire and Coldstore, and filled out a
problem-characteristics questionnaire after each simulation.
Factor analysis revealed two factors; one labeled “Task
Complexity”, the other “Task Difficulty”. Results indicate a)
that Fire was perceived as more complex and more difficult
than Coldstore in the Brazilian and US sample. The Indian
sample perceived both problems as equally complex and
difficult; b) a significant main effect of culture was found in
Fire and Coldstore regarding Complexity; c) a significant
main effect of performance was found for Task Difficulty in
Fire and Coldstore, but not for Task Complexity. Cultural
variables that could explain the results, such as uncertainty
avoidance and differences in computer experience, are
presented. Results are further discussed under a theoretical
and applied perspective.

Complex Problem Solving and Culture
The study of complex problem solving has increased in the
last decades especially in Europe (Frensch & Funke, 1995).
Computer simulations of complex problems have been
widely used to study human problem solving behavior
(Brehmer & Dörner, 1993). The researchers were motivated
to incorporate into their simulations characteristics common
to real life situations, e.g. complexity, transparency, and
dynamics (Dörner, 1996). A problems’ complexity is
derived from the inclusion of many interdependent
variables. Complex problems are nontransparent in that the
problem solver initially does not know or understand the
nature of the hidden variables in the problem situation. The
situations change dynamically with and without the actions
of the problem solver. One might derive that the more
complex, the more non-transparent, and the more dynamic a
511

complex” and “There are many variables in this simulation”.
Examples of questions related to transparency are “Not
everything is visible that you would like to see” and “The
game developments were quite surprising”. Examples of
questions related to dynamics are “The simulation is
dynamic with many changes”, “Changes occur often
without my intervention”.
In the Fire simulation, the participant assumes the role of
a fire fighting commander and has to try to protect three
towns and the forest from approaching fires. In Coldstore,
the participant takes the role of a supervisor in a grocery
store with a coldstorage unit. The automatic temperature
device has broken down and the participant has to manually
control the temperature until the cooling trucks arrive. The
goal is to keep the temperature stable at an optimal
temperature in order to keep products from freezing or
spoiling. Each simulation lasts about 12 minutes.
A comparison of the simulation characteristics of Fire and
Coldstore shows that Fire is more complex and more
dynamic, yet both are similarly non-transparent. On the
screen of the Fire simulation, the participant sees the forest,
three cities, fire fighting trucks, helicopters, water dikes, and
stone area. In Coldstore, the participant sees the control
wheel, the actual temperature, and the target temperature on
the screen. Fire is not just more complex regarding stimuli
on the screen, but also regarding possible actions. Fire offers
4 main (and a few other) command options for 3 helicopters
and 9 fire fighting trucks at any time. These commands can
be given to individual units or several units at the same
time. At any given time, a person has the choice of a
minimum of 4 x (12!) = 312 alternatives. (In fact, the
participant has still some additional options). On the other
hand, the participant can also just wait and watch what
happens. Coldstore offers the participant only one option, a
control wheel which the participant clicks with the cursor to
regulate the temperature.
Although both simulations can be described as highly
dynamic and changing in a non-linear way, Fire is
significantly more dynamic than Coldstore. Fires break out
at certain times in the simulation, in different locations.
Wind strength, wind direction, and interventions of the
participant all influence how the fire spreads. Subjectively,
participants experience time pressure. In Coldstore, the
development of the temperature changes but with delayed
effects.
Both simulations can be described as moderately nontransparent. In Fire, participants see the fire, and see wind
direction and strength. However, many participants have
problems operating the commands. Even if participants have
played a test game and have read the instructions, many
don’t understand the impact of the consequences and longterm effects of some of the commands. In Coldstore,
transparency is related to delayed feedback. Participants
have the impression, and are often surprised, that the
temperature does not immediately react to changes on the
control wheel. For many participants, the reasons behind the
temperature fluctuations are hard to understand. Analysis of
participants’ questionnaire responses will show if Fire is
indeed described as more complex, more dynamic, and
similarly non-transparent as Coldstore. Data analysis will

This study investigates the following questions: Do
participants perceive different problems in different ways,
i.e. is one problem regarded as more complex than another
problem? Do perceived problem-characteristics differ
between cultural groups? If so, can differences in
uncertainty avoidance explain differences in problem
perception? Might it be that those problems are created and
described with a bias from a western point of view?

Method
Participants
Participants in this study were 283 students from three
countries. In India (n=96), participants came from the
University of Kerala in Thiruvananthapuram, and from
Loyola College, Kerala. In Brazil (n=86), participants were
from the universities of Gama Filho, Rio de Janeiro and
Faculdade Roy Barbosa, Salvador da Bahia. In the United
States (n=101), students were from Northern Illinois
University and University of North Florida. Participants
received either course credit or were paid for their
participation. Students were from the schools of arts and
sciences, social sciences, and business. None of the
participants had taken part in other complex problem
experiments prior to this study. Seventy percent of the
participants were majors in psychology. One hundred
seventy-six participants were female, and 107 participants
were male. Their ages ranged between 18 and 38 years. The
average age in the US sample was 22.6 years, in the Indian
sample 23.8 years, and in the Brazilian sample 22.0. The
mean ages in the three cultural samples were not
significantly different. Samples were comparable according
to course or major and gender. Data were collected in group
sessions (2 hours) and individual sessions where Fire and
Coldstore simulations were administered (2 hours).

Materials: Fire, Coldstore, and Problemcharacteristics-questionnaire
Participants played two computer simulations, called “Fire”
(Gerdes, Dörner, & Pfeiffer, 1993) and “Coldstore”
(Reichert & Dörner, 1988). Instructions to each simulation
were provided and test games were played before the actual
simulation started. After each simulation, a questionnaire
regarding simulation characteristics was completed.
Instructions and questionnaires were translated from English
in translation-backtranslation procedures into Brazilian
Portuguese with the help of bilingual Brazilians. The
material was presented in Brazilian Portuguese in Brazil and
in English in the US and in India. Indian participants, as
bilinguals, had no difficulties in answering the Likert-scale
questions. The questionnaires consist of identical items and
are labeled Fire-characteristics-questionnaire (FCQ) and
Coldstore-characteristics-questionnaire
(CCQ).
This
questionnaire is a modification of the one originally
developed by Schaub (2001). It consists of 24 items which
participants rate on a 7-point Likert scale regarding
complexity, transparency, and dynamics. Examples of
questions related to complexity are “I find the game
512

Task Complexity and Task Difficulty in the US,
Brazilian, and Indian Samples

reveal a universal or a culture-relative perception of
problem characteristics.
Initially, the reliability of the two game characteristicsquestionnaires (FCQ, CCQ) was studied. Exploratory factor
analysis was conducted to investigate the underlying
theoretical structure of the instruments, and measurement
equivalence was studied with item analysis. Data regarding
participants’ subjective evaluation of simulation characteristics was then compared between the three cultural groups
and related to performance in the two simulations.

In a next step, Fire and Coldstore were compared regarding
Complexity and Difficulty. Results showed that Fire was
perceived as more complex and more difficult than
Coldstore (see Figure 1). Lower mean scores indicate high
complexity and high difficulty. Dividing the overall score of
18 by 7 (7 items), gives an average of 2.6 on a scale from 1
to 7. This means that overall, the Fire simulation was
considered quite complex and quite difficult [Complexity:
MF = 17.59, SDF = 6.43; MC = 22.97, SDC = 8.80; F(1, 551) =
-67.36, p < .001, η2 = .11] and [Difficulty: MF = 18.57, SDF =
5.98; MC = 21.74, SDC = 6.96; F(1, 557) = 33.25, p < .001,
η2 = .056].

Results
In cross-cultural comparisons, data must be analyzed for
equivalence before any meaningful cross-cultural
comparisons can be made. Cronbach’s alpha was used to
assess the instrument’s reliability. The Cronbach’s alpha
coefficients of 13 complexity items were .632, .552, and
.802 for the Indian, Brazilian, and US samples respectively.
The internal consistency for complexity items is adequate
for the US sample, but not for the Indian and Brazilian
samples. The Cronbach’s alpha coefficients of the 7
transparency items and 4 dynamics items in all three cultural
samples were relatively low, i.e. between .242 and .551.
This was the case for the Fire- and the Coldstorecharacteristics-questionnaire (FCQ and CCQ). The
Cronbach’s alpha coefficients for all 24 items in Fire were
.762, .691, and .827, for India, Brazil, and the US, and
indicate a one-dimensional construct. Further investigation
of the measurement’s structure using exploratory factor
analysis was conducted for the overall sample and for each
cultural group. Results indicated two main factors (overall
and in each cultural sample). The first factor “Task
Complexity” refers to items indicating complexity,
transparency, and dynamics. The second factor “Task
Difficulty” refers to the subjective impression of the
participant on the situation. To compare the factor structure
and loadings between the different cultural groups, the
coefficient of congruence (MacCallum, Widaman, Zhang, &
Hong, 1999) was calculated. Results indicate a similar
factor structure in all the cultural samples in both
simulations. In a next step, item analysis was conducted
following van de Vijver and Leung (1997) approach. Items
showing cultural bias were excluded from further analysis.
Items of Factor 1 and Factor 2 are significantly correlated
in both simulations (Fire-complexity and Fire-difficulty, r =
.189**; Coldstore-complexity and Coldstore-difficulty, r =
.178**. Moreover, items of Factor 1 in both simulations are
significantly correlated (Fire-complexity and Coldstorecomplexity, r = .361**) and items of Factor 2 in both
simulations are significantly correlated (Fire-difficulty and
Coldstore-difficulty, r = .130*). Factor 1 in one simulation
and Factor 2 in the other simulation are not significantly
correlated. Cronbach’s alpha coefficients for the new scales
“Task Complexity” and “Task Difficulty” were calculated
for the cultural subgroups and for the overall sample. The
Cronbach’s alpha coefficients ranged between .606 and .833
in the two Fire item subscales and between .648 and .795 in
the two Coldstore item subscales. These reliability measures
can be considered satisfactory considering the small number
of items in each scale.

24

USA
Brasil
India
18

12

Fire: Complexity

Fire: Difficulty

Coldstore: Complexity Coldstore: Difficulty

Figure 1: Mean values of US, Brazilian, and Indian
participants in Complexity and Difficulty in Fire and
Coldstore (Complexity and Difficulty scores are inverted).
In a next step, Complexity and Difficulty in Fire and
Coldstore were compared among the three cultural groups
using ANOVAs. Scheffe post-hoc tests were calculated to
compare differences in the mean values between the three
cultures. Comparisons of mean values between cultures in
Fire showed that the US and Indian samples had
significantly higher average scores regarding Complexity
and Difficulty than the Brazilian sample. Brazilian
participants perceived the Fire simulation as more complex
and difficult (low scores indicate higher complexity). US
participants perceived Coldstore as significantly less
complex and less difficult. Interestingly, Indian participants’
ratings in Coldstore did not differ significantly from their
ratings in Fire. These findings show how participants from
different cultures view problems quite differently. In the
following parts, we will analyze Complexity and Difficulty
in relation to task performance.

Fire: Task Complexity and Difficulty in Relation to
Actual Task Performance
The performance variable in Fire was the percentage of
protected forest at the end of the simulation. Among all the
participants, the percentage of protected forest ranged from
41.97% to 97.45% (M = 63.91%, SD = 19.36). The overall
scores were distributed in percentile ranks: 25th percentile at
46.61%, 50th percentile at 52.92%, and 75th percentile at
513

83.01%. Every participant was assigned a score from 1 to 4
according to his or her performance, with higher scores
indicating higher performance. Separate two-way ANOVAs
were calculated with the two independent variables culture
(3 levels) and performance score (4 levels). Dependent
variables were Complexity and Difficulty.

complexity. Regarding complexity, interaction effects
between performance and culture were not significant.

Coldstore: Task Complexity and Difficulty in
Relation to Actual Task Performance
In Coldstore, the sum of the absolute deviations (SAD) from
the target temperature was the performance criterion. The
minimum of SAD was 134.82, the maximum 1360.85 (M =
632.99, SD = 263.71, N = 288). The overall SAD scores
were distributed in percentile ranks: 25th percentile at
434.80, 50th percentile at 667.41, and 75th percentile at
826.29. The SAD was recoded into values of 1 to 4
according to performance, with higher scores indicating the
least deviations, and thereby better performance.

28

26

Fire: Complexity

24

22

USA
20

Brasil
India

18
28

16
26

14
24

Low performance

Medium low
performance

Medium high
performance

Coldstore: Complexity

12

High performance

Figure 2: Mean Complexity values of US, Brazilian, and
Indian participants according to performance in Fire
(Complexity scores are inverted).

22

USA
Brasil
India

20

18

16

14

28

12

Low performance
26

Fire: Difficulty

24

Medium high
performance

High performance

Figure 4: Mean Complexity values of US, Brazilian, and
Indian participants according to performance in Coldstore
(Complexity scores are inverted).

22

USA
20

Medium low
performance

Brasil

Separate ANOVAs were calculated with the independent
variables, culture (3 levels) and performance score (4
levels). Dependent variables were Complexity and
Difficulty. Again, a high score stands for low complexity
and low difficulty (inverted, e.g. “I find the game complex”
1-Yes, 7 -No).
In the Coldstore simulation, a significant main effect of
culture was found for Complexity, F(2, 258) = 6.64, p =
.002, η2 = .051, but not for Difficulty (see Figures 4 and 5).
US participants found the Coldstore simulation less
complex compared to Brazilian and Indian participants. A
significant main effect of performance was only found for
Difficulty, F(3, 257) = 3.391, p = .019, η2 = .039 but not for
Complexity. As post hoc Scheffe tests reveal, the American
participants rated the simulation’s complexity as well as the
simulation’s difficulty significantly lower than the Brazilian
and Indian participants. No significant differences between
the Brazilian and Indian samples were found.
As evident in Figure 5, the Difficulty scores in Coldstore
are relatively similar among the low, medium low, and
medium high performance groups with an unusual pattern in
the American sample. Only high performing participants
viewed the simulation as less difficult. This means that
participants who performed well in Coldstore (group 4),
rated the simulation as less difficult than those who did not

India
18

16

14

12

Low performance

Medium low
performance

Medium high
performance

High performance

Figure 3: Mean Difficulty values of US, Brazilian, and
Indian participants according to performance in Fire
(Difficulty scores are inverted).
Regarding the Fire simulation, a significant main effect of
culture was found in both Complexity, F(2, 260) = 8.66, p <
.001, η2 = .065, and Difficulty, F(2, 260) = 14.11, p < .001,
η2 = .10 (see Figures 2 and 3). Post-hoc Scheffe tests
showed, that Brazilian participants rated the Fire simulation
as significantly more complex and more difficult than US
and Indian participants. A significant main effect of
performance was found for Difficulty, F(3, 259) = 17.69, p
< .001, η2 = .175, but not Complexity. Those who performed
better tended to rate the Fire simulation as less difficult.
However, regardless of their actual performance on the Fire
task, the Fire simulation was viewed with similar

514

participants found Fire and Coldstore equally complex and
difficult.
There are several possible explanations for these crosscultural differences. One most plausible reason for the
differences among the three cultures is uncertainty
avoidance. We expect that low scores in uncertainty
avoidance will result in low ratings of complexity and
difficulty. In our study, we assessed uncertainty avoidance
with the same three questions Hofstede used, but applied
them to the school context instead of the work context. In
Hofstede’s study (2001), India and the United States
showed weak uncertainty avoidance scores, whereas Brazil
showed high uncertainty avoidance. Surprisingly in our
samples, India showed the strongest uncertainty avoidance,
Brazil the least uncertainty avoidance, and the US scores
were between the Indian and Brazilian ones. The differences
between the countries were statistically significant. The
different results of our study and Hofstede’s study might be
related to the samples. Whereas Hofstede’s samples
consisted of IBM managers, our samples consisted of
students. Our participants were also significantly younger
and Hofstede has shown significant correlations between
age and uncertainty avoidance. A final reason for the
different results might be related to changes in cultures.
Most of Hofstede’s data were collected between 1967 and
1972, i.e. more than 30 years ago and having undergone
significant political, economic, and societal development.
India, for example, underwent many economic and political
changes, especially since the opening of its borders in the
1990s to the world market.
Data analysis revealed that differences in uncertainty
avoidance cannot explain cultural differences in problem
perception. Brazilian participants, for example, had the
lowest uncertainty avoidance scores but the highest
Complexity and Difficulty scores in Fire.
A seemingly obvious influence on Complexity and
Difficulty scores may be attributed to differences in
computer experiences, familiarity with such computer
simulations, and motivation to play and succeed in the
simulations. However, current results show that although
these variables were assessed, none of them can explain the
cross-cultural differences in Complexity and Difficulty. The
correlations between these variables and task Complexity
and Difficulty were not statistically significant.
Why do Brazilian participants compared to US and Indian
participants find Fire more complex and difficult? Brazilians
perception of Fire as more complex and difficult might be
related to the Brazilian time-orientation (Milosevic, 2002).
Cross-cultural studies show lower punctuality in Brazil
compared to the US (Levine, West, & Reis, 1980) and a
more
impulsive
present-orientation
in
Brazil
(Strohschneider & Güss, 1998). Dealing with a highly
dynamic situation like Fire puts the participant under time
pressure. Thus, Brazilians with a culture of less strict time
orientation may regard the situation as complex and
difficult, since their focus is mostly on the immediate,
current situation and not on actions in a course of time.
Another question related to the results is why Indian
participants view Complexity and Difficulty of Fire and
Coldstore similar and Brazilian and US participants view

perform as well. We found this trend in the American and
Brazilian samples, but not in the Indian sample. The
interaction effect between performance and culture was
significant for Difficulty, F(6, 254) = 2.585, p = .019, η2 =
.059.
28

26

Coldstore: Difficulty

24

22

USA
20

Brasil
India

18

16

14

12

Low performance

Medium low
performance

Medium high
performance

High performance

Figure 5: Mean Difficulty values of US, Brazilian, and
Indian participants according to performance in Coldstore
(Difficulty scores are inverted).

Discussion
In this study, we asked whether problem-characteristicsperceptions differ between complex problems, between
cultures, and between performance levels. These questions
were studied by administering the simulations Fire and
Coldstore and the problem-characteristics-questionnaires to
US, Brazilian, and Indian participants. The questionnaires
assessed Task Complexity and Task Difficulty. Overall and
as expected, Fire was perceived as more complex and more
difficult than Coldstore.
In both simulations, no differences were found regarding
participants’ perception of Task Complexity in relation to
performance. Regardless of whether a participant performed
in the low, medium or high level, the perception of the
simulations’ complexity was relatively similar. However,
Task Difficulty in both simulations was dependent on
performance levels. Participants who performed better
regarded the simulations as less difficult compared to those
who performed less well. The participant’s perception of the
task, whether difficult or easy, is related to their actual
performance.
This study showed that task complexity and difficulty
assessment is an essential step if one wants to compare
performance in specific problems. If these simulations are
administered in an applied setting or in training programs, it
is important to know how the characteristics of these
simulations are perceived.
Data analysis also revealed interesting cross-cultural
differences. Brazilian participants, compared to Indian and
US participants, found the Fire simulation more complex.
US Americans, compared to Brazilian and Indian
participants, found Coldstore less complex and less difficult.
Brazilian and US participants found Fire more complex and
difficult compared to Coldstore. However, Indian
515

Frensch, P., & Funke, J. (Eds.) (1995). Complex problem
solving: The European perspective. Hillsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Gerdes, J., Dörner, D. & Pfeiffer E. (1993). Interaktive
Computersimulation “Winfire” [The interactive computer
simulation
“Winfire”].
Otto-Friedrich-Universität
Bamberg: Lehrstuhl Psychologie II.
Glencross, E., & Güss, D. (2004). Values, problem solving,
and planning strategies in India and the United States.
Manuscript under preparation.
Güss, D. (2000). Planen und Kultur? [Planning and
culture?] Lengerich, Germany: Pabst.
Güss, D. (2002). Decision making in individualistic and
collectivist cultures. In W. J. Lonner, D. L. Dinnel, S. A.
Hayes, & D. N. Sattler (Eds.), OnLine Readings in
Psychology and Culture, Western Washington University,
Department of Psychology, Center for Cross-Cultural
Research. Web site: http://www.wwu.edu/~culture
Hofstede, G. (2001). Culture’s consequences (2nd ed.).
Thousand Oaks: Sage.
Kroeber, A. A. & Kluckhohn, C. (1963): Culture. A critical
review of concepts and definitions. New York: Vintage
Books.
Levine, R. V., West, L. J., & Reis, H. T. (1980). Perceptions
of time and punctuality in the United States and Brazil.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 38(4), 541550.
MacCallum, R. C., Widaman, K. F., Zhang, S., & Hong, S.
(1999). Sample size in factor analysis. Psychological
Methods, 49, 615-618.
Milosevic, D. Z. (2002). Selecting a culturally responsive
project management strategy. Technovation 22(8), 493508.
Nisbett, R. E., Peng, K., Choi, I, & Norenzayan, A. (2001).
Culture and systems of thought: Holistic versus analytic
cognition. Psychological Review, 108(2), 291-310.
Reichert, U., & Dörner, D. (1988). Heurismen beim
Umgang mit einem „einfachen“ dynamischen System
[Heurisms in handling a „simple“ dynamic system].
Sprache & Kognition, 7(1), 12-24
Schaub, H. (2001). Persönlichkeit und Problemlösen
[Personality and problem solving]. Hernsbach. Beltz.
Smith, P. B., & Bond, M. H. (1998). Social Psychology
across cultures (2nd ed.). London: Prentice Hall..
Strohschneider, S., & Güss, D. (1998). Planning and
problem solving: Differences between Brazilian and
German students. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology,
29(6), 695-716.
Strohschneider, S. & Güss, D. (1999). The fate of the
Moros: A cross-cultural exploration of strategies in
complex and dynamic decision making. International
Journal of Psychology, 34(4), 235-252.
van de Vijver, F., & Leung, K. (1997). Methods and data
analysis of comparative research. In J. W. Berry, Y. H.
Poortinga, & J. Pandey (Eds.), Handbook of crosscultural psychology. Volume 1: Theory and method (pp.
257-300). Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon.

Fire more complex and difficult than Coldstore. Some
studies describe on a general level Western thought as
analytic and Eastern thought as holistic (Nisbett, Peng,
Choi, & Norenzayan, 2001). A more detailed look at this
dichotomy in empirical studies about thinking patterns
might reveal more detailed intra- and cross-cultural
variations on this general theme. It might be that Brazilian
and US participants pay more attention to the details and
characteristics of the problems. In a current study
(Glencross & Güss, 2004) we find that Indian participants
inquire less about problem situations and show more
optimism regarding successful planning than US
participants. Indians seem to accept the situations as they
are, without asking many questions. We find this acceptance
of the problem also in other cross-cultural studies between
India and Germany (Güss, 2000; Strohschneider & Güss,
1999). These findings could explain why Fire and Coldstore
are perceived similarly by the Indian participants.
To summarize, this study stresses the importance of crosscultural research in the field of cognition. This study
showed how perception of task complexity and difficulty
can differ between participants of different cultures. For
further research, these problem-characteristics-perceptions
could be related to strategies that participants use to deal
with the complexity and difficulty of the task. It is likely
that individuals use different strategies to deal with different
perceptions of task complexity and difficulty. The
perception of problem characteristics is often the start of the
problem solving process, and one can expect and be amazed
by the interesting and relevant cross-cultural differences
during the next problem solving stages.

Acknowledgements
This research would not have been possible without the
support of friends and colleagues in Germany, the US,
Brazil, and India. We would like to thank especially Prof.
Dietrich Dörner in Germany for providing the two
simulations; Prof. Charles Miller in Illinois; Prof. Cristina
Ferreira, Prof. Cilio Ziviani, Prof. Nadia, and Dr. Miguel
Cal in Brazil; Prof. Krishna Prasaad Sreedhar, Dr. S. Raju,
Dr. Ajay Kesavan, and Mr. Ibrahim Syed in India, and the
many students who participated.
This research would also not be possible without funding.
This study is based on work supported by the National
Science Foundation under Grant 0218203 from 2002 to
2005 with the title “Cultural influences on dynamic decision
making”.

References
Brehmer, B., & Dörner, D. (1993). Experiments with
computer-simulated microworlds: Escaping both the
narrow straits of the laboratory and the deep blue sea of
the field study. Computers in Human Behavior, 9, 171184.
Cole, M., Gay, J., Glick, J., & Sharp, D.W. (1971). The
cultural context of learning and thinking. New York:
Basic Books.
Dörner, D. (1996): The logic of failure. New York: Holt.

516

