UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Adaptability of Language Specific Verb Lexicalization Biases

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/26s7q5gx

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Havasi, Catherine
Snedeker, Jesse

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Adaptability of Language Specific Verb Lexicalization Biases
Catherine Havasi (havasi@mit.edu)
Department of Computer Science, 77 Massachusetts Ave
Cambridge MA 02139 USA

Jesse Snedeker (snedeker@wjh.harvard.edu)
Department of Psychology, 33 Kirkland St.
Cambridge, MA 02138 USA

differences in the meanings of verbs than in the meanings of
nouns. To learn verbs, they argue, children must first
discover how their language chooses to package events. To
the extent that lexicalization patterns are systematic within a
language, children should be able to draw generalizations
from known instances, developing lexicalization biases
which allow the pace of verb learning to accelerate.
The parade case for systematic cross-linguistic variation
in lexicalization is the conflation patterns that occur in verbs
of motion (Talmy, 1975). A motion event consists of a thing
that is moving (the figure), the location it is moving relative
to (the ground), the manner in which it is moving and the
path along which it moves. All languages have ways of
expressing these elements, but how they do so varies.
‘Manner’ languages, such as English and Mandarin,
typically pack manner of motion into the verb, leaving path
for an optional prepositional phrase (“He ran into the
store”). In contrast, ‘path’ languages, such as Spanish and
Greek and typically encode path in the verb and fob off
manner on an optional gerund (“Él entró en la tienda
corriendo”). In English, path verbs are relatively scarce
(Gutiérrez, 2001; Talmy 1975). This cross-linguistic
difference in verb use shows up in distributional analyses
and production studies with both children and adults (Aske,
1989; Jackendoff, 1990; Berman & Slobin, 1994).
This systematic difference in lexicalization patterns also
results in differences in how the speakers of manner and
path languages learn new motion verbs, consistent with the
predictions of Gentner’s relational relativity hypothesis
(1982). When confronted with a novel verb used to describe
a single motion event, English speaking adults and seven
year olds will extend the word to other events with the same
manner of motion but not to events that have the same path
(Naigles & Terrazas, 1998; Hohenstein & Naigles, 2000). In
contrast Spanish speaking adults and seven-year olds extend
the verb to events that have the same path but not the same
manner. Thus each group has developed a lexicalization
bias that is consistent with the primary verb lexicalization
pattern in their language.
While verb lexicalization biases clearly exist, we know
little about how they might develop or how they are
mentally represented. One intriguing hypothesis comes
from the literature on the development of the shape bias in
noun learning. Smith and colleagues have argued that the
shape bias is a generalization based on the words that the
child has previously acquired (Smith, Jones, Landau,
Gershkoff-Stowe & Samuelson, 2002). Children, they

Abstract
Languages vary in how they encode motion events. For
example, English motion verbs often encode the manner of
the motion while Spanish motion verbs encode the path.
Efficient verb learning has been argued to involve the
acquisition of language specific lexicalization biases. When
given a novel verb paired with a single motion event, English
speakers interpret it as a manner verb, Spanish speakers as a
path verb. The present study examines the nature and
plasticity of this lexicalization bias. Do lexicalization biases
result in a permanent alteration of the semantic interface? Or
are these biases continually shaped through our experiences
with word learning? English-speaking adults were taught 12
motion verbs. The composition of the set of verbs was varied
from 100% manner to 100% path with 3 levels in between.
Lexicalization biases were monitored by testing verb
extension after the first ambiguous exemplar of each verb.
We replicate the finding that English speakers have an initial
manner bias. However, we find that this bias changes over
time in response to the input: Participants who learned path
verbs developed a path lexicalization bias. Experiment 2
replicates this result with a different syntactic frame.

Introduction
Children’s early lexicons are curiously lopsided. Across a
variety of linguistic environments, nouns dominate early
vocabularies, while verbs are initially scarce (for a review
see Gentner & Boroditsky, 2001). There are a number of
explanations for initial noun dominance, which are by no
means mutually exclusive. Verbs differ from nouns in the
frequency with which they occur in isolation or in salient
positions within the utterance and they also differ in the
types of concepts that they encode and the types of entities
that they pick out in the world. All of these factors have
been argued to play a role in early noun dominance
(Gleitman, 1990; Tardif, Shatz & Naigles, 1997; Caselli,
Casadio & Bates, 1999; Snedeker & Gleitman, 2004).
Gentner and her colleagues have argued that nouns are
prominent in the early lexicon because they typically denote
physical objects which can be individuated (and presumably
conceptualized) on the basis of the child’s perceptual
experience of the world (1982; Gentner & Boroditsky,
2001). Verbs, they argue are more difficult for novice
language learners because perception does not package
events into stable individuals. Instead languages decide
how to conflate the conceptual components of events into
lexical items. This results in greater cross-linguistic
553

claim, are initially unbiased learners who acquire their first
nouns by patiently waiting for the situational concomitants
of word use to tease apart the many alternate hypotheses
about how a word might be extended. In this way, they
manage to acquire a sizeable number of nouns, many of
which are well-organized by shape. They argue that the
shape bias is simply a second-order generalization of these
known words. This account is supported by two lines of
evidence. First, in the studies of Smith and her colleagues
children fail to show a systematic shape bias until they have
acquired a substantial number of nouns (but see Waxman,
1999). Second, toddlers who are trained on shape-based
categories develop a shape bias and show accelerated
acquisition of nouns, while those who are trained on
substance-based categories or given an unsystematic
training set do not.
While Gentner makes no specific proposal for how verb
lexicalization biases could be acquired, the mechanism laid
out by Smith seems consistent with the relational relativity
hypothesis. Children learn a number of verbs that follow a
language specific lexicalization pattern and then form the
expectation that verbs in the same semantic field will be
extended in a parallel fashion. But what does this
expectation consist of? There are at least three possible
explanations for how cross-linguistic differences in word
learning biases could be instantiated.
First, children’s word learning experiences could
permanently alter their conceptual systems resulting in a
change in the repertoire of possible concepts or in their
relative salience or stability. This is an unlikely explanation
for the manner-path lexicalization bias. Speakers of the two
languages show similar behavior on nonlinguistic memory
and categorization tasks, suggesting that verb conflation
patterns do not affect the accessibility of manner or path
concepts (Papafragou, Massey & Gleitman, 2002).
Furthermore, since both languages have ways of expressing
both manner and path, the linguistic evidence itself radically
limits the degree to which conceptual alteration can be
invoked. Thus we have to look to changes in the semantic
interface which maps between linguistic forms and
concepts.1
Second, lexicalization biases could be permanent
alterations in the semantic interface. The mappings between
linguistic forms and concepts could be altered so that certain
conceptual dimensions are unavailable as candidates for
verb meanings, although they might be used in nonlinguistic
tasks or even as meanings for other terms. This mechanism
would be the semantic parallel of Werker’s functional
reorganization hypothesis for phonological development
(1995). Finally, lexicalization biases may be more plastic
mappings between linguistic forms and concepts which can
modified as the child gains access to new information
sources. Critically, if lexicalization biases are
generalizations on the basis of known words, then they may

be dynamically updated as children learn a larger and more
varied set of verbs. To date there has been little work on the
plasticity of the semantic interface between words and
concepts. While several studies have examined the effects of
age of acquisition on semantic processing of a second
language, the results vary with the measures and contrasts
that are studied (compare e.g., Weber-Fox and Neville, 1996
with Munnich, 2002). To the best of our knowledge no one
has looked at the plasticity of lexicalization biases.
Experiment 1 explores the possibility that manner
lexicalization bias for motion verbs continues to be
malleable into adulthood and is shaped by the set of verbs
that a person learns. Experiment 2 replicates this finding
when the verb is presented in a different syntactic context.

Experiment 1
Each participant learned twelve new motion verbs. For each
novel verb, participants (1) saw a single ambiguous scene
with a salient path and manner of motion, (2) were tested to
determine their initial interpretation of the verb, (3) saw five
additional instances of the new verb which disambiguated
its meaning (e.g. five scenes with same manner but a novel
path), and finally, (4) were tested again to ensure that they
had learned the novel verb.
Critically, the proportion of path and manner verbs was
varied across participants. Some participants learned only
manner verbs, some learned only path verbs, and others
received different proportions of both types. We predicted
that our adult participants would have little difficulty
learning either the manner or the path verbs. The critical
measure was the participants' responses to the initial test
trials, which followed the first ambiguous scene. Because a
single verb-scene pair is consistent with either a manner or
path interpretation, responses to this test sequence reveal the
participants' verb lexicalization bias. Since our participants
are English speakers, we expect that they will begin with an
initial bias to interpret the novel verbs as encoding manner
of motion. However, if these estimates of prior probability
are updated in response to the verbs that the participant has
learned, then responses on the initial test trials should
change in response to novel verbs. Thus we predict that
over the course of the experiment participants who learn
path verbs will develop a path bias, while those who learn
manner verbs will retain the manner bias. 2

Methods
Participants 56 adult native English speakers participated
in this study. Since our goal was to determine how
previously learned verbs influence the interpretation of
future verbs, we eliminated all participants who failed to
2

Similar issues have been explored in artificial category learning
studies. Critically, Kersten, Goldstone & Schaffert (1998) found
that adults who learned manner event categories were more likely
to focus on the manner feature of an ambiguous category. They
used simple animated events with bug-like agents and no sentential
context. These stimuli did not appear to engage participants’ prior
lexicalization biases: English speakers showed a strong initial path
bias. Unlike the present work, the study did not examine
generalization after a single ambiguous exemplar.

1

We follow Jackendoff’s (2002) suggestion that language specific
semantics are most parsimoniously described as an interface
between linguistic forms and conceptual representations, rather
than as a separate level of representation, but nothing in our
argument rests upon this distinction.

554

sequentially. The participant is asked if clip is an instance
of the new verb (“Is this torging?”). One test clip matches
the manner of the ambiguous event but not the path; the
other matches the path but not the manner. During the
training phase, participants are presented with 5 video clips
which disambiguate the meaning of the word. If the verb is
being taught as a path verb, then all 5 clips will show the
same path as the ambiguous training clip but vary in their
manner. If the word is being taught as a manner verb, the
reverse will be true. The final test parallels the initial test;
one video matches the path of the ambiguous clip, the other
matches it in manner. This test allows us to determine if the
participant has succeeded in learning the verb.
Each manner verb was arbitrarily paired with a path verb.
The paired verbs shared the same initial scene and the same
test scenes (see Tables 1 & 2). Pairing the items in this way
allowed us to examine how participants with different verb
learning experiences responded to identical stimuli. The
disambiguating videos were different for each member of a
pair. Subjects were assigned to one of five conditions which
differed in the proportion of the novel verbs that encoded
path (0, .25, .50, .75 or 1). The 12 verb pairs were randomly
ordered and half of the participants in each condition were
tested with the blocks in reverse order.
Procedure Stimuli were presented on a computer which
using custom software. The participants were told that they
would be watching videos that would teach them new words
and answering the questions about these words.

learn 5 or more of the verbs after viewing the
disambiguating scenes. Sixteen participants were excluded
for this reason.
Stimuli Participants saw short video clips of motion events.
Each event depicted an actor moving in a salient manner
and in a salient path with respect to some reference object
(e.g., a woman walking tip-toe behind a large sign). Twelve
manner and twelve path concepts were selected as target
verb meanings. Some concepts corresponded to English
verbs, some to English prepositions, and some had no
monomorphemic English equivalent. The path verb
meanings were: around, between, down, up, in front of,
along, in, diagonal to, over, across, and behind. The
manner verb meanings were: crab-walk, crawl, twirl, flapwalk, hop on 1 foot, hop on 2 feet, march, run, skip, stoopwalk, tiptoe, and walk.
Participants were presented with a block of questions and
videos for each of 12 novel nonce verbs. Each block was
identical in layout and was made up of 4 phases: an initial
ambiguous scene, an initial bias test, training and a final test
phase. An example test block for a manner verb is shown in
Table 1 and an example for a path verb is shown in Table 2.
Table 1: Sample block for a novel manner verb.
Manner

Path

Crab-walk
Crab-walk
Skip
Crab-walk
Crab-walk
Crab-walk
Crab-walk
Crab-walk
March
Crab-Walk

Out
Behind
Out
Front
In
Between
Across
Diagonal to
Out
Between

1
0.8

Table 2: Sample block for novel path verb.
Target Concept:
Out
Ambiguous Scene
Initial Test: Manner
Initial Test: Path
Training One
Training Two
Training Three
Training Four
Training Five
Final Test: Path
Final Test: Manner

Manner

Path

Crab-walk
Crab-walk
Skip
Hop 2 Feet
Walk
Run
Stoop-walk
Dance
March
Crab-Walk

Out
Behind
Out
Out
Out
Out
Out
Out
Out
Between

Prep Frame (Exp. 1)
Direct Obj Frame (Exp. 2)

0.6
Path Bias in Final 4 Blocks

Target Concept:
Crab-Walk
Ambiguous Scene
Initial Test: Manner
Initial Test: Path
Training One
Training Two
Training Three
Training Four
Training Five
Final Test: Path
Final Test: Manner

0.4
0.2
0
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6
-0.8
-1
0%

25%

50%

75%

100%

Percentage of Path Verbs in Training Set

Figure 1: Path Bias on Final Blocks

Results
Responses to the final test questions were used to exclude
participants who failed to learn the verbs. Our analyses
focused entirely on participants responses in the initial test.
To explore how bias changed over time we examined
responses to the first four verb blocks and the last four verb
blocks. The participants’ responses were converted to path
bias scores by taking the proportion of blocks where the
subject extended the word to the path match and subtracting
the proportion of blocks where they extended the word to

In the ambiguous scene, the participant saw a written
sentence containing a new nonce verb (e.g. “She is going to
torg out the door.”) and a video which illustrates the
sentence (e.g., a woman crab walking out of the door). The
initial test consists of two clips which are presented
555

the manner match. This number would equal -1 for a
perfect manner bias and 1 for a perfect path bias.
The ANOVA of the first four blocks revealed that these
English speaking subjects entered the study with a strong
manner bias (M = -.58, F (1,40) = 145.69, p < .001). 76% of
the participants responded yes to a manner video while only
5% responded yes to a path video. However, there were also
differences between the training condition demonstrating
that the verbs in the training set were already beginning to
shape participants interpretations of the initial ambiguous
scenes (F(4,40) = 12.97, p < .001). This effect was driven by
participants in the 100% Path Verbs Condition who had no
systematic bias in these early blocks (M = .08).
In the final four blocks of the experiment, the initial bias
trials are clearly shaped by the set of verbs that the
participant has learned (see Figure 1, F(4,40) = 45.14, p <
.001). Participants in the 100% Path Condition have
developed a strong, consistent path bias in their
interpretation of new verbs (M = .85). Those in the 0% and
25% Path Conditions show an equally clear manner bias (M
= .98, M = .88). In the 50% and 75% Path Conditions
participants flout the input, continuing to show a mild
preference to interpret the new word as a manner verb.

frame is used more frequently with manner verbs, although
it can be used colloquially with path verbs as well (e.g. “She
ran around the tree.” or “She circled around the tree.”). In
English path verbs are often used in simple transitive frames
(“She circled the tree.”) and this usage is typically
considered more proper. Naigles and Terrazas (1998) found
that both English and Spanish speakers were more likely to
interpret novel verbs as encoding manner when syntactic
frames with semantically rich prepositions were used. If the
participants assume that each component of the motion
event is encoded in only one word of the sentence, they may
be reluctant to conflate path in the verb when it is already
marked in the preposition. In Experiment 2 we used simple
transitive sentences to explore whether the syntactic context
influenced participants’ initial lexicalization biases or the
changes in these biases in response to newly learned words.

Methods
Participants 52 English-speaking adults participated in this
study. Responses from 2 participants were excluded because
they failed to learn 5 or more target verbs.
Stimuli, Procedure and Coding Participants were tested on
the same verbs sets as before (100%, 75%, 50%, 25% or 0%
Path Verbs). The procedure was identical to Experiment 1
except that verbs were introduced with simple transitive
frames. Thus “He torged down the stairs” became “He
torged the stairs.”

1
0.8

Prep Frame (Exp. 1)
Direct Obj Frame (Exp. 2)

Change in Path Bias

0.6

Results

0.4

When the novel words were presented in transitive frames,
subjects showed only a weak bias in the first four verb
blocks (M = -.14, F(4,40) = 3.56, p = .067) which may
reflect the early effect of Training Condition on path bias
(F(4,40) = 6.56, p < .001). Participants in the 0% Path
Condition show a manner bias (M = -.60) while those in the
100% Condition have a path bias (M = .28). By the final
four verb blocks, participants’ initial interpretations of the
new nonce verbs are essentially categorical and closely
match the set of words that they have learned (F(4,40) =
60.17, p < .001). There is a reliable shift in bias between
the first and final blocks, which interacts with Training
Condition (F(4,40) = 21.56, p < .000). Participants who
learned all path verbs showed an increase in path bias (M =
.60) while participants who learned all manner verbs
showed an increase in manner bias (M = -.33). A direct
comparison of Experiments 1 and 2 demonstrates that
syntactic frame influenced participants’ performance on
both the final and first 4 blocks. These differences are
limited to the 50% and 75% Path conditions, conditions
where subjects are given weak evidence for a lexicalization
pattern which differs from the dominant pattern in English.

0.2
0
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6
0%

25%

50%

75%

100%

Percentage of Path Verbs in Training Set

Figure 2: Change in Path Bias between the First 4 and
Last 4 blocks.
To further explore how lexicalization biases changed over
the course of the experiment, we directly compared the
results of the first and final blocks. In Figure 2 this is
graphed as the change in path bias. There was a substantial
increase in path bias in the final trials (F(1,40) = 7.45, p <
.009) and a reliable interaction between the time in the
experiment and the Training Condition (F(4,40) = 4.75, p <
.003). Participants in the 100%, 75% and 50% Conditions
showed an increase in path bias, while participants in the
25% and 0% retained or strengthened their manner bias.

General Discussion
These experiments 1) replicate Naigles & Terrazas’
findings that adult speakers of English have a bias to assume
that novel verbs encode the manner of motion rather than
the path; 2) demonstrate that this lexicalization bias remains

Experiment 2
In Experiment 1, the nonce verbs appeared with
prepositional phrase arguments. In English, this syntactic
556

plastic into adulthood; and 3) demonstrate that this
lexicalization bias can be influenced by the words that a
person learns. English speaking adults who were taught new
motion verbs developed lexicalization biases that matched
the verbs in their training set. This pattern was observed
regardless of whether the ground nominal was presented as
the object of a preposition (consistent with a manner verb)
or as the direct object of the verb (consistent with a path
verb). In the remainder of the discussion we re-examine
Gentner’s relational relativity hypothesis in the light of
these findings and discuss the development of verb
lexicalization biases.

taking on the scene. In light of such variability, rigid
lexicalization biases are likely to be counterproductive.
Within language variation in lexicalization also seriously
limits the role that these biases can play in constraining
word learning, and thus limits the explanatory potential of
the relational relativity hypothesis.
If language-specific semantic mappings cannot eliminate
the ambiguity inherent in events, then how do children ever
become rapid and efficient verb learners? We believe that
two factors are at play. First, children may improve in their
ability to make use of cross-situational observation. Much
of the work in early word learning has focused on what
children are able to learn from a single word-scene pair. In
the case of nouns it may be possible to make a meaningful
conjecture about the meaning of a word on the basis of a
single referent. Many of children’s early nouns label
artifacts and natural kinds. Concepts of these kinds are
organized in taxonomic hierarchies, which have multiple
levels (animal, mammal, dog, poodle) and categories which
are mutually exclusive at a given level (Markman, 1989).
This conceptual structure helps bridge the gap between
reference and meaning. Once the observer has correctly
picked out the referent of an artifact or natural-kind term,
then its meaning can be limited to concepts on the path from
the individual exemplar up to the top of the hierarchical
tree. If there is a conceptually or perceptually privileged
basic level, then a single referent might provide enough
information to map the word to the correct node of that tree
(Rosch et al., 1976; Markman, 1989).
But in the case of verbs, cross-situational observation may
be essential. There is little evidence that the concepts
encoded in verbs form complex taxonomic hierarchies.
Instead most observers have argued that states and events
are grouped into semantic fields which are organized as a
cross-cutting lattice of concepts rather than as mutually
exclusive categories (Talmy, 1985; Behrend, 1995).
Identifying a single referent event merely identifies a point
in this multi-dimensional conceptual space but it does not
tell the observer which dimension(s) of the event are
encoded in the verb. Multiple exemplars, however, can be
used to rule out the relevance of some dimensions and
provide convergent evidence for the importance of others.
Second, children’s verb learning also benefits from their
increasingly sophisticated representations of the utterances
in which new verbs appear. Initially children must learn the
meanings of new words by observing the nonlinguistic
contexts in which those words are used. This initial
information source provides ample support for noun
learning but provides inadequate information about
meanings of many verbs (see e.g., Snedeker & Gleitman,
2004). More sophisticated learners can use the known words
which co-occur with novel verbs to focus their attention on
the relevant events. As the child gains knowledge about the
syntax of her language, the structural environments in which
the verb occurs can also provide increasingly fine-grained
information about its meaning

Reexamining Relational Relativity
Gentner’s relational relativity hypothesis proposes that the
acquisition of verbs is delayed because children must
discover how their language packages and categorizes
events (1982). Naigles and colleagues have extended this
argument by suggesting that efficient verb learning requires
the acquisition of language-specific semantic patterns,
which we have called lexicalization biases (Naigles &
Terrazas, 1998). The current study demonstrates that
learners retain a remarkable degree of plasticity in
lexicalization biases. They can not only learn verbs which
violate the lexicalization pattern of their language; they can
actually change their lexicalization biases to reflect the
patterns in newly acquired words. These results suggest that
verb lexicalization biases are not the result of permanent
alterations in conceptual structure or unalterable changes in
the semantic interface. Instead these biases appear to be
plastic generalizations based on the words the learner has
acquired. In essence a lexicalization bias results from a
change in the prior probability of a class of hypotheses
based on the prior success of hypotheses from that class.
The flexibility of these biases raises questions about the
role that they play in potentiating early verb learning. If
stable lexicalization patterns are required to repackage
relational components into the individuated events, then
why do adults have little difficulty in rapidly and
spontaneously recombining these components? 3 We would
argue that this ability is essential for learning the range of
verbs that exist within any one language. While the
variability of cross-linguistic encoding of events has
received much attention, there is considerable variation in
verbs that can be used to describe a single event within a
language (Gleitman, 1990). For example, we can refer to an
event in which a girl kicks a ball to her mother as giving,
passing, kicking, rolling, receiving, moving, crossing or
contacting depending on the components of meaning that
we wish to include in the verb or the perspective that we are
3

Perhaps that the manner-path distinction is the wrong place to
search for stable lexicalization biases, since both manner and path
languages have verbs of each type (Ashe, 1989). We challenge the
reader to come up with a better example of a systematic
lexicalization pattern which applies to a large number of verbs.
The explanatory potential of the relational relativity hypothesis
depends on the prevalence of this predictable variation.

557

children's acquisition of verbs. (pp. 251-273). Hillsdale,
NJ, US: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc
Berman, R. & Slobin, D., eds. (1994). Relating events in
narrative: A cross-linguistic developmental study.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gentner, D. (1982). Why nouns are learned before verbs:
Linguistic relativity versus natural partitioning. In S.A.
Kuczaj, II (Ed.), Language development: Vol 2. language,
thought, and culture. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gentner, D. & Boroditsky, L. (2001). Individuation,
relativity and early word learning. In M. Bowerman and
Levinson (Eds.), Language acquisition and conceptual
development. England: Cambridge University Press.
Gleitman, L. (1990). The structural sources of verb
meanings. Language Acquisition, 1, 3-55.
Hohenstein, J., & Naigles, L. (2000). Preferential looking
reveals language specific event similarity by Spanish- and
English-speaking children. Paper presented at the BU
Conf. on Lang. Development, Nov 2000, Boston, MA.
Jackendoff, R. S. (1990). Semantic Structures. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Jackendoff, R. (2002) Foundations of Language: Brain,
Meaning, Grammar, Evolution. Oxford Univ. Press, NY.
Kersten, A.W., Goldstone, R.L., & Schaffert, A. (1998).
Two competing attentional mechanisms in category
learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 24, 1437-1458.
Levin, B. (1993). English Verb Classes and Alternation.
Chicago, IL: U of Chicago Press.
Markman, E. (1989). Categorization and naming in
children: Problems of induction. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, Bradford Books.
Naigles, L. & Terrazas, P. (1998). Motion-verb generalizations in English and Spanish: Influences of language and
syntax. Psychological Science, 9, 363-369.
Papafragou, A., Massey, C., Gleitman, L. (2002). Shake,
rattle, 'n' roll: The representation of motion in language
and cognition. Cognition. Vol 84(2): 189-219.
Rosch, E., Mervis, C.B., Gray, W.D., Johnson, D.M., &
Boyes-Braem, P. (1976) Basic objects in natural
categories. Cognitive Psychology, 8, 382-439.
Schwartz, R.G., & Leonard, L.B. (1980). Words, objects,
and actions in early lexical acquisition. Papers and
Reports in Child Language Development, 19, 29-36.
Smith, L.B., Jones S.S., Landau B., Gershkoff-Stowe L., &
Samuelson L. (2002). Object name learning provides onthe-job training for attention. Psych. Science, 13, 13-19.
Snedeker, J. & Gleitman, L. (2004). Why it is hard to label
our concepts. In Hall & Waxman (eds.), Weaving a
Lexicon. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Tardif, T., Shatz, M. & Naigles, L. (1997). Caregiver speech
and children’s use of nouns versus verbs : A comparison
of English, Italian, and Mandarin. JCL, 24, 535-565.
Talmy, L. (1975). Semantics and syntax of motion. In J.
Kimball (Ed.), Syntax and semantics (Vol 4., pp 181238). New York: Academic Press.
Talmy, L. (1985). Lexicalization patterns: Semantic
structure in lexical forms. In T. Shopen (Ed.), Language
typology and syntactic description, Vol. 3, pp. 57–149.
New York: Cambridge University Press.

Examining the Early Development of Verb
Lexicalization Biases
Clearly the present experiments cannot rule out the
possibility that young language learners have relatively
inflexible language-specific lexicalization biases which
serve as sharp constraints on children’s hypotheses about
verb meaning. Furthermore, even plastic and probabilistic
biases could provide useful guidance for verb learning.
Understanding the role of lexicalization biases in early verb
learning clearly requires studying how these biases develop
in young children. The limited information that we have
about the development of the manner-path bias suggests that
this bias may emerge quite late: Hohenstein and Naigles
(2000) have found the 3 year old English speakers and
Spanish speakers show no differences in their extension of
novel motion verbs (both populations prefer to extend the
words to events with the same manner of motion). The
obvious explanation is that children this age simply lack the
ability to derive lexicalization biases from the words they
learn. But this seems unlikely in light of Smith and
colleagues’ finding (2002) that children under two can
develop a shape-bias after learning just a handful of
exemplars. The alternative explanation is that the verbs that
3-year-olds know simply don’t support this generalization.
In elicited production tasks English speaking adults show a
clear preference for manner, however, speakers of path
languages like Greek and Spanish often produce equal
numbers of manner and path verbs when describing motion
events (Papafragou et al., 2002; Naigles et al., 1998),
suggesting that young Spanish speakers may have little
evidence for a path lexicalization bias. To determine
whether young children can form verb lexicalization biases
in response to clear category structure, we are currently
testing three- and five-year old children in a modified
version of Experiment 1. Our preliminary findings (N = 9)
suggest that five-year-olds will rapidly form a bias for the
dimension which has been relevant on previous trials.
Children who are given six path verbs select path as the
relevant dimension on 67% of all trials, while those who are
given manner verbs do so only 25% of the time (p < .05).

Acknowledgments
This work grew out of conversations with Sourabh Niyogi
and Bob Berwick and we are grateful for their ideas,
inspiration and assistance. We also thank Melanie Goetz,
Liz Sepulveda, Natan Cliffer, Rob Speer, Mahvash Malik
and Sylvia Yuan, for their assistance with filming and
testing. This project was funded by a grant from the NSF
(IIS-0218852) to the second author and Bob Berwick.

References
Aske, J. (1989). Path predicates in English and Spanish: A
closer look. Proceedings of the 15th Annual Meeting of the
Berkeley Linguistics Society, 1-14. Berkeley, CA: BLS.
Behrend, D. A. (1995). Processes involved in the initial
mapping of verb meanings. In M. Tomasello & W.E.
Merriman (Eds.), Beyond names for things: Young

558

