UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Importance of Temporal Information for Inflection-type Effects in Linguistic and Nonlinguistic Domains

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/6dm9q7p9

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Hupp, Julie M.
Sloutsky, Vladimir
Culicover, Peter

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Importance of Temporal Information for Inflection-type Effects in Linguistic
and Non-linguistic Domains
Julie M. Hupp (hupp.34@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science
1961 Tuttle Park Place
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Vladimir Sloutsky (sloutsky.1@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science
1961 Tuttle Park Place
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43210, USA

Peter Culicover (culicover.1@osu.edu)
Department of Linguistics and Center for Cognitive Science
1712 Neil Avenue
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43210, USA
stem), and nonconcatenative devices (e.g., interleaving a
string of vowels with a string of consonants).
Two types of inflections are frequently present in many
European languages, prefixes and suffixes, and it has been
established that suffixes are easier to acquire (e.g., interpret
suffixation as an inflectional derivation) than prefixes. This
finding is not specific to the English language. Crosslinguistically, the suffixing preference results in stems
generally being ordered before the added morpheme
because language users prefer to process stems before the
added morpheme (Hawkins & Cutler, 1988). Overall,
suffixing is more frequent than prefixing (Hawkins &
Gilligan, 1988). A number of explanations have been
proposed, although any single explanation alone may not
fully account for this phenomenon.
First of all, there are positional differences with the
addition of a morpheme at the beginning and the end of the
word, which is important because words take place in time
(Gasser, 1994). For example, words are often recognized
before they are completed (Tyler, Marslen-Wilson, Rentoul,
& Hanney, 1992). The information that reaches the ear first
may be the key to the identification of that piece of
information. If this is the case, then the temporal aspect of
language may be the underlying reason for suffixation
preferences in language.
Similarly, the psychologically most salient part of any
word is its beginning portion (Clark 1991; Hawkins &
Cutler, 1988). This is to say that the effect of distorting a
word is more severe if the distortion is at the beginning of
the word (e.g., prefix) rather than the end (e.g., suffix). This
is true in both comprehension and production. In
comprehension, adding a morpheme to the end of a word
does not affect the recognition of the word, and in
production, it is easier to produce a familiar sequence

Abstract
One of the important tasks of language acquisition is the
ability to distinguish between an inflectional derivation from a
target word, which is a variant of this word (e.g., tool Æ
tools), and a completely new word (e.g., tool Æ stool). In an
attempt to explain the ability to solve this problem, it has been
proposed that the beginning of the word is its most
psychologically salient portion. However, it is not clear
whether this phenomenon is specific to language or whether it
stems from a more general cognitive mechanism, with
beginnings of sequences being more salient than endings.
The three reported experiments were designed to answer this
question. In these experiments, participants judged the
similarity of test sequences to target sequences across three
domains: linguistic, musical and visual. The test items were
judged as more similar to an original target item if
information was added to the end of that item rather than to
the beginning of the item across all three domains. This
suggests that there may be a more general cognitive
mechanism underlying the well-documented suffixation
preference, according to which changes in the end of the word
are more readily interpreted as inflectional derivations from
the target word.

Introduction
One of the important tasks of language acquisition is the
ability to distinguish between an inflectional derivation
from a target word, which is a variant of this word (e.g.,
toolÆ tools), and a completely new word (e.g., tool Æ
stool).
There are multiple types of inflections that exist across
languages, including prefixation (e.g., adding a morpheme
before the stem), suffixation (e.g., adding a morpheme after
the stem), infixation (e.g., adding a morpheme inside the

1
613

followed by a modification in the form of a suffix than the
reverse, a modification first and then the familiar word
(Clark, 1991).
These contentions seem to be supported by the literature
on language acquisition. In particular, Slobin (1985)
claimed that children use procedures or strategies called
Operating Principles (OP) in their linguistic development.
He proposed many different principles that children use, but
the one of importance for this area is OP (ATTENTION):
BEGINNING OF UNIT. This principle states that children
pay attention to the first syllable of an extracted speech unit.
They store it separately and in relation to the unit with
which it occurs. If a child were specifically attending to the
beginning of a word, then adding a morpheme to the end of
the word would be less detrimental to the recognition of that
word than adding the morpheme to the beginning of the
word.
Clark has done much research on the area of children and
inflections that add support to suffixation preference from a
developmental perspective. She has found that children
acquire inflections from their earliest word use and continue
to comprehend and produce them throughout their linguistic
development (1995). In general, children begin to add noun
and verb inflections between 18 and 24 months; however,
they consistently learn suffixes before prefixes, even when
these inflectional forms express equivalent information
(1995; 1998). In addition, children aged 5 to 7 find
nonsense suffixes are easier to imitate than nonsense
prefixes (1998).
Overall, children seem to find it easier to process
information added to the ends of words than to the
beginnings, and it has been argued that the beginning of the
word is its most psychologically salient portion. This would
explain why children are better at learning suffixes rather
than prefixes. These findings map quite well onto the adult
research on inflectional morphology.
However, it is not clear whether this phenomenon is
specific to language or whether it stems from a more general
cognitive mechanism.
We suggest that this ability may reflect a more general
property of processing of temporally organized information:
changes in the beginning of a sequence are easier to detect
than at the end of the sequence. If this is the case, then nonlinguistic information that has temporal structure may also
give rise to inflection-type effects, such that changes at the
end of the sequence would more likely be considered
variants of the original string than changes at the beginning
of the sequence.
To test this hypothesis, we conducted three experiments,
using language (Experiment 1), music (Experiment 2), and
visual sequences (Experiment 3).

Experiment 1: Inflections in the Linguistic
Domain
Method
Participants There were 17 participants in this experiment.
The participants were undergraduate students from The
Ohio State University who participated to fulfill a
psychology course requirement. Five participants failed to
correctly respond to at least 70 % of the catch items and
were excluded from this experiment.
Design and Materials The stimuli consisted of 42 sets, with
each set consisting of a 2-syllable artificial Target word
followed by two Test words. One of the Test words was the
Target with a morpheme added to the beginning (Test-Pre).
The other Test word was the Target with a morpheme added
to the end (Test-Post).
The Target words were constructed by randomly
connecting discrete syllables (e.g., Ta-Te) with .06 sec
between syllables (see Johnson & Jusczyk, 2001; Saffran,
Aslin, & Newport, 1996, for details of stimuli creation).
The Test words were created by either adding a syllable to
the beginning of the Target word (Test-Pre: BE-Ta-Te), to
the end of the Target word (Test-Post; Ta-Te-BE), adding
nothing to the Target word (Test-Identical: Ta-Te), or
changing the Target word completely (Test-Different: PuLa-Fi).
On each trial, participants received a Target word,
followed by two Test words (the order of each of the Test
words was counterbalanced), and their task was to
determine which of the Test words was more similar to the
Target.
There were six types of sets determined by pairing of the
types of Test words: Pre-Post, Pre-Identical, Post-Identical,
Pre-Different, Post-Different, and Identical-Different. The
first type was the focal interest (e.g., 25 Pre-Post sets),
whereas the remaining 5 conditions were catch trials (3 sets
for each condition, and 2 additional Identical-Different sets
for the practice trials). The set types varied within
participants.
Procedure Each participant received 2 randomly presented
practice trials with a break to ask the experimenter any
questions, and then the remaining 40 trials were presented
randomly. Presentation software was used to deliver the
instructions, present the stimuli and record the responses.
The participants were instructed that they would hear a 2syllable Target word followed by two Test words, and they
were to decide which of the Test words was more similar to
the initial Target word. If the first Test word was most
similar, they were to press “F” on the keyboard, and if the
last Test word was most similar, they were to press “L”. To
start each new trial, they were instructed to press the space
bar.
There was 1 sec in between each word, and the order of
the Test words was counterbalanced across sets.
The
Target word was heard from both of the computer speakers
2
614

while the first Test word was heard only from the left
speaker and the second Test word was heard only from the
right speaker.

Experiment 3a: Inflection-type Effects in the
Visual Domain
Method

Results and Discussion

Participants There were 17 participants in the visual
domain. The participants were undergraduate students from
The Ohio State University who participated to fulfill a
psychology course requirement. Using the same exclusion
criterion as in Experiment 1, 2 participants were eliminated
from this experiment.

Overall, participants were accurate on catch trials,
exhibiting over 90% accuracy (M = 94.90%), above chance,
one-sample t (16) = 25.43, p < .001.
However, the analysis of participants’ responses to PrePost items was of considerable interest. Data analyses
focused on the percent of participants’ responses in which
the Test-Post item was considered more similar to the
Target than the Test-Pre item. Overall, in more than 85% of
responses (M = 88.00%) participants deemed the Test-Post
item to be more similar to the Target than the Test-Pre item,
above chance, one-sample t (16) = 9.64, p < .001. Thus, as
expected there was a clear tendency to choose the Test-Post
items as more similar to the original Target word than the
Test-Pre words.
Having established that the procedure captures the effect
in the domain of language, we conducted Experiments 2 and
3, using the same procedure with music tones and visual
patterns.

Design and Materials The design was the same as in
Experiments 1 and 2. The stimuli in this experiment
consisted of object sequences. There were a total of 25
objects that were randomly connected to form the Target
sequences. The Target sequences were composed of either
all red, blue, green or orange shapes. Each set consisted of a
Target sequence made of two simple objects that flashed for
1 sec each while centered at the top of the computer screen
(e.g., Cross, Heart).
Then, 1 sec later, the first of two Test sequences appeared
at the bottom of the screen. There was 1 sec in between
each Test sequence, and the order of the Test sequences was
counterbalanced across sets. The first Test sequence
appeared on the bottom left of the computer screen, and the
second Test sequence appeared on the bottom right of the
screen. The Test items were created by adding an object
(e.g., Diamond) for 1 sec either at the beginning of the
Target sequence (Test-Pre; Diamond, Cross, Heart), at the
end of the Target sequence (Test-Post: Cross, Heart,
Diamond), no change at all to the Target sequence
(Identical: Cross, Heart) or changed the sequence
completely (Different: Star, Light Bulb, Lock). The object
that was added was of a different color than the Target
sequence: a red Target sequence would have a blue object
added (and vice-versa), and green and orange were similarly
paired.

Experiment 2: Inflection-type Effects in the
Domain of Music
Method
Participants There were 18 participants in this experiment.
The participants were undergraduate students from The
Ohio State University who participated to fulfill a
psychology course requirement.
Design and Materials The design was the same as in
Experiment 1, except the sets were made up of a 2-note
Target melody and two Test melodies. The Test items were
created by adding notes to either the beginning (Pre) or the
end (Post) of the Target melodies.

Procedure The overall set up of the experiment was similar
to Experiments 1 and 2. In this experiment, the participants
were instructed that they would see a Target sequence of
objects on the top of the screen followed by two Test
sequences on the bottom of the screen. They were to decide
which Test sequence was more similar to the initial Target
sequence.

Procedure The overall procedure was identical to
Experiment 1. The main exception was that instead of
hearing words, the participants were instructed that they
would hear a small Target musical melody followed by two
Test melodies. From this, they were to decide which Test
melody was the most similar to the original Target melody.

Results and Discussion

Results and Discussion

Overall, participants were accurate on catch trials for this
experiment as well, exhibiting over 90% accuracy (M =
91.85%), above chance, one-sample t (17) = 20.35, p < .001.
Similar to Experiment 1, data analyses of central interest
focused on the percent of participants’ responses in which
the Test-Post item was considered more similar to the
Target than the Test-Pre item. Once again, the participants
were more likely to choose the Test-Post items as more
similar to the Target than the Test-Pre items (M = 71.56%),
above chance, one-sample t (17) = 4.03, p = .001.

Participants were accurate on catch trials with an overall
accuracy over 95% (M = 98.04%), above chance, onesample t (16) = 63.23, p < .001.
Similar to Experiments 1 and 2, participants were more
likely to choose the Test-Post items as more similar to the
Target than the Test-Pre items (M = 91.53%), above chance,
one-sample t (16) = 13.72, p < .001.
Having established that this effect is present in the visual
domain, it was important to investigate the effect of
temporal information in this domain.
Therefore,
3
615

Experiment 3b was conducted as a control experiment for
the visual domain without the addition of temporal
information.

General Discussion
The results of the three reported experiments clearly
indicate that across the three domains, the beginning of the
sequence was more salient than the end of the sequence, and
as a result, the addition of a single element to the beginning
of the sequence was perceived as a greater change than the
addition of a single element to the end of the sequence.
Presence of this tendency across the three domains indicates
that this tendency is not limited to language. More
specifically, the “suffixation preference” found in the
linguistic domain appears to be analogues for sequences of
musical tones and visual patterns, all having a temporal
component.
Results of Experiment 3b indicate that the temporal
component is fundamental: once the temporal component is
removed and stimuli are presented simultaneously, the
effect is diminished.
Therefore, the suffixation preference, which is often
considered a useful linguistic bias for solving the
inflectional problem, does not appear to be specific to
language, but rather it stems from processing of temporally
organized information.
To better understand this phenomenon, it is important to
investigate this bias in native speakers of languages that do
not have the same dominant suffixing preference (e.g.,
Thai). This may further reveal the direction and strength of
this tendency.
In addition, there are several important questions that are
to be answered in future research. First, it is unclear
whether this tendency to consider the beginning of a
sequence as more salient than the end of a sequence appears
as a domain-general attentional bias or whether it first
manifests itself in the domain of language, and then gets
extended to other temporally organized domains. Although
the former possibility seems more likely, a developmental
study using the same set of stimuli is necessary to answer
this question.
Given the fact that the effect exists in the visual domain
even without temporal information, it is important to
investigate possible explanations. Since the visual images
without temporal information were presented in a manner
that resembles the structure of written material, it is possible
that this structure brought about the positional biases similar
to those in the linguistic domain. For example, while
reading English, one visually scans from left to right;
therefore, this same mechanism could account for the effect
in Experiment 3b even without temporal information. To
better understand the phenomenon, it is necessary to
structure the visual information so that a left to right
scanning pattern does not temporally constrain the
information (e.g., vertical presentation of the stimuli). In
addition, this explanation may be further expanded if the
effects would vary not only according to the presentation of
the stimuli, but also developmentally. This explanation
could be ruled out if children who do not yet read readily
show this effect in the visual domain without temporal
information.
Another important question is how flexible is this
tendency in non-linguistic domains. The suffixation
preference is very flexible in the domain of language

Experiment 3b: The Visual Domain without
Temporal Information
Method
Participants There were 18 participants in the visual
control condition. The participants were undergraduate
students from The Ohio State University who participated to
fulfill a psychology course requirement.
Design and Materials The design was the same as in the
previous experiments. The stimuli in this experiment
consisted of the same object sequences that were used in
Experiment 2 without the addition of temporal information.
That is to say that the participants viewed a row of
stationary shapes instead of a dynamic sequence of shapes.
The Target appeared at the top of the screen while the
Test items simultaneously appeared at the bottom of the
screen. Once again, the positioning of the Test sequences
was counterbalanced across sets. One Test sequence
appeared on the bottom left of the computer screen, and one
Test sequence appeared on the bottom right of the screen.
Similar to Experiment 3a, the Test items were created by
adding an object (e.g., Diamond) either to the left of the
Target sequence (Test-Pre; Diamond, Cross, Heart,), to the
right of the Target sequence (Test-Post: Cross, Heart,
Diamond), no change at all to the Target sequence Identical:
Cross, Heart) or changed the sequence completely
(Different: Star, Light Bulb, Lock).
Procedure The overall set up of the experiment was similar
to the previous experiments. In this experiment, the
participants were instructed that they would see a Target
sequence of objects on the top of the screen and two Test
sequences on the bottom of the screen. They were to decide
which Test sequence was more similar to the initial Target
sequence.

Results and Discussion
Participants were accurate on catch trials with an overall
accuracy over 95% (M = 95.55%), above chance, onesample t (17) = 42.26, p < .001.
Similar to Experiments 1, 2 and 3a, participants were
more likely to choose the Test-Post items as more similar to
the Target than the Test-Pre items (M = 80.89%), above
chance, one-sample t (17) = 7.52, p < .001.
However, when this control condition is compared to the
original visual domain experiment, it appears that the
absence of temporal information attenuates this effect.
There is a higher propensity to choose the Test-Post items as
more similar to the Target than the Test-Pre items when
there is the addition of temporal information, independentsamples t (33) = 2.07, p < .05.

4
616

spoken word recognition. Journal of Memory and
Language, 27, 368-381.

(otherwise people would not be able to acquire various
kinds of inflectional morphology), and if it stems from a
general mechanism, this tendency has to exhibit flexibility
in other domains as well. These issues are currently under
investigation.
In sum, the results suggest that when information is added
to the end of a Target sequence, it is perceived as more
similar to the original Target than if the same information
was added to the beginning of this Target. This was true
across all three domains investigated, suggesting that there
might be a general cognitive mechanism of processing of
temporal information that may underlie the suffixation
preference, which is prominently present in the linguistic
domain.

Acknowledgments
We would like to thank Zach Schendel for the creation of
the musical stimuli. This research is supported by grants
from the National Science Foundation (REC #0 208103 and
BCS # 0078945) to Vladimir M. Sloutsky.

References
Clark, E. V. (1991). Acquisitional principles in lexical
development. In S. A. Gelman & J. P. Byrnes (Eds.),
Perspectives on language and thought: Interrelations in
development. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University
Press.
Clark, E. V. (1995). Language acquisition: The lexicon and
syntax. In J. L. Miller & P. D. Eimas (Eds.), Handbook of
perception and cognition, 2nd ed.: Speech, language, and
communication. New York, NY: Academic Press.
Clark, E. V. (1998). Morphology in language acquisition.
In A. Spencer & A. M. Zwicky (Eds.), The handbook of
morphology. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Gasser, M. (1994). Acquiring receptive morphology: A
connectionist model. Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics, 32, 279-286.
Hawkins, J. A., & Cutler, A. (1988). Psycholinguistic
factors in morphologicalasymmetry. In J. A. Hawkins
(Ed.), Explaining language universals. New York, NY:
Basil Blackwell.
Hawkins, J. A., & Gilligan, G. (1988). Prefixing and
suffixing universals in relation to basic word order.
Lingua, 74, 219-259.
Johnson, E. K., & Jusczyk, P. W. (2001). Word
segmentation by 8-month-olds: When speech cues count
more than statistics. Journal of Memory & Language, 44,
548-567.
Slobin, D. I. (1985). Crosslinguistic evidence for the
language-making capacity. In D. I. Slobin (Ed.), The
Crosslinguistic study of language acquisition, Vol. 1: The
data; Vol. 2: Theoretical issues. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Saffran, J. R., Aslin, R. N., & Newport, E. L. (1996).
Statistical learning by 8-month-old infants. Science, 274,
1926-1928.
Tyler, L. K., Marslen-Wilson, W. D., Rentoul, J., &
Hanney, P. (1992). Continuous access processes in
5
617

