UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Role of Explanation Coherence of Two Premises on Property Induction

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3kp841g7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Do, Kyung Soo
Park, Ju Hwa

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Role of Explanation Coherence of Two Premises on Property Induction
Kyung Soo Do (ksdo@skku.edu)
Ju Hwa Park (jhpark@skku.edu)

Department of Psychology, Sungkyunkwan University
Seoul 110-745, KOREA

Abstract
Three experiments on property induction were conducted to
explore whether an incoherent premise discounted the
believability of the conclusion when there were two premises.
In all three experiments, a single premise increased or
decreased the likelihood of the conclusion depending on the
nature of explanatory coherence of a premise and a
conclusion. However, when there were two premises, one that
shared the reason with the conclusion (coherent premise), and
one that does not (incoherent premise), the believability of the
conclusion was affected differently in three experiments.
When two premises and the conclusion were presented
simultaneously in Experiment 1, the believability of the
conclusion was increased. That is, an incoherent premise did
not seem to affect the believability of the conclusion as much
as the coherent premise. The incoherent premise seemed to
decrease the believability of the conclusion a little bit when
the two premises and the conclusion were presented
sequentially so that each premise was not ignored in
Experiment 2. The incoherent premise decreased the
believability of the conclusion below the baseline condition in
Experiment 3, where participants were asked to write down
reasons for each premise being true. Results of three
experiments suggested that only the confirming evidences
were processed under natural conditions. A few possible
theoretical implications were considered.

Introduction
When someone asks a question whether a target object has a
certain property (target property), such as “Does an ostrich
lay eggs?”, and you do not know the answer, you might
induce the answer by checking whether some object (source
object), usually objects that are similar to the target object,
has the target property. In the ostrich example, you would
answer “yes” if you think ostriches are similar to geese and
know that geese lay eggs. As this example shows, what
conclusion you make depends on what objects are used as
source objects.
What object is an effective source object in property
induction depends on a number of factors: The nature of the
target property, the level of knowledge of the person, and
the cultural background of the person, to name a few.
People used different source objects depending on their
knowledge and occupation (Proffitt, Coley, & Medin, 2000).
Also there seems to be a culture difference in property
induction (Choi, Nisbett, & Smith, 1997). Even though the
level of knowledge and the cultural background of the
person affect the property induction, the effect of the nature
of the target property on property induction has been the

321

focus of most research. More specifically, what objects are
effective as source objects in inducing two types of
properties, and how the information of the source objects
are used for property induction have been more widely
investigated.
There are two types of target properties, blank properties
and nonblank properties, and the effectiveness of source
objects seems to differ between the two types. The
effectiveness of a source object seems to depend on the
similarity between the target object and the source object for
blank properties for which we do not have any other
information to rely on (e.g., 'have BCC in blood') (Osherson,
Smith, Wilkie, Lopez, & Shafir, 1990; Rips, 1975; Sloman,
1993). However, the similarity between the target object and
the source object does not seem to work for nonblank
properties for which we have other information to infer
about the target object having the target property (e.g., 'can
cut the wire') (Smith, Shafir, & Osherson, 1993). As the
relationship between objects and the target property are
diverse (Murphy & Medin, 1985), there are many ways of
inducing nonblank properties: People seem to use other
relevant information, such as body size or strength, in
inducing nonblank properties (Smith et al., 1993). People
rated the believability of the conclusion differently when the
target property is about shape from when the target property
is about behavior (Heit & Rubinstein, 1994).
One way of inducing nonblank properties is comparing
the reason for the target object having the target property
with the reason for the source object having the target
property.
Sloman (1994, 1997) proposed that the
explanation coherence between the premise and the
conclusion affect the plausibility of the conclusion. If the
target object and the source object share the same
explanation, informing the participants that the source
object has the target property increases the believability of
the conclusion that the target object has the target property.
For instance, computer programmers and secretaries have
bad backs because they sit all day long. Therefore,
informing the participants that “Computer programmers
have bad backs” would make the conclusion “Secretaries
have bad backs” more plausible than when the participants
are not informed about the computer programmers having
bad backs. However, if the target object and the source
object do not share the same reason, informing the
participants that the source object has the target property
decreases the believability of the conclusion that the target
object has the target property. In the bad back example, for
instance, furniture movers had bad backs because they lift
heavy things. Therefore, informing that “Furniture movers
had bad backs” would make the conclusion “Secretaries

reason why the object has the target property for each
premise.

have bad backs” less plausible. That is, premises that have
different explanations seem to discount the plausibility of
the conclusion. Sloman called this the explanation
discounting principle.
As has been described, the explanation discounting
principle explains empirical results quite well when there is
just one piece of relevant information. However, it is not
specific about how it works when there are multiple pieces
of relevant information, especially when there is conflicting
information. There can be a few modified versions of the
explanation discounting principle. The most extreme form
of the explanation discounting principle would assume that
the participants use all the information in inducing
properties in equal degree (equivalence hypothesis, but
hereafter I use equivalence hypothesis and the explanation
discounting principle interchangeably). However, the
equivalence hypothesis needs to be tested, because when
there is more than one piece of relevant information, people
do not use all the information they have. People are known
to be cognitive misers (Nisbett & Ross, 1980). They seem to
use information that confirms their predictions or
hypotheses, but ignore information that disconfirms. They
produced cases that confirmed their hypotheses (Wason,
1960) or they were more willing to search information that
confirms than information that is likely to disconfirm
(Shaklee & Fischhoff, 1982). Therefore if the confirmation
strategy is the default way of using information, then it is
quite likely that the explanation discounting principle may
not apply when there is more than one piece of relevant
information.
In this paper, we intend to explore whether the
explanation discounting principle works when there are two
premises in property induction tasks. There are two kinds of
premises: “Same” premises, in which the source object has
the target property for the same reason as the target object,
and “Different” premises, in which the source object has the
target property for reasons different from that of the target.
In three experiments, we are mainly interested in the
believability of the conclusion of the mixed conditions
where one Same premise and one Different premise are
presented. If the implicit equivalence hypothesis of the
explanation discounting principle was correct, the
conclusion in the mixed conditions should be rated not
higher than that of the baseline condition, where the
conclusion is presented without any premises. On the other
hand, if the confirmation strategy is the default mode of
using multiple pieces of information in property induction,
the conclusion in the mixed conditions should be rated not
lower than that of the baseline condition.
The premises and the conclusion were presented
simultaneously in Experiment 1 to explore whether the
explanation discounting principle applies when there are
two premises. Experiment 1 is regarded as a natural
condition because we did not try any manipulation to make
the premises being processed. Experiments 2 and 3 were
intended to find the boundary condition where the
explanation discounting principle applies. Each premise and
the conclusion were presented successively in Experiment 2
to make each premise salient and not be ignored. In
Experiment 3, participants were asked to write down the

Experiment 1
There were two goals for Experiment 1. First, we wanted to
replicate Sloman’s (1994, 1997) finding that one Same
premise increased the plausibility of the conclusion, and one
Different premise decreased the plausibility of the
conclusion. Second, we wanted to compare the explanation
discounting principle against the confirmation strategy by
presenting two premises, one Same premise and one
Different premise.

Method
Design There were five experimental conditions in
Experiment 1. In two single-premise conditions, one
premise was presented on top of the conclusion. There was a
horizontal line between premises and the conclusion. In the
Same condition, one Same premise was presented, and in
the Different condition, one Different premise was
presented. Two premises were presented with the
conclusion in the remaining three two-premises conditions:
In the S+S condition, two Same premises were presented on
top of the conclusion. In the S+D condition, the Same
premise was presented on the top line and the Different
premise was presented on the next line. In the D+S
condition, the Different premise was presented on the top
line and the Same premise was presented on the next line.
Each participant was randomly assigned to one of the five
experimental conditions. Therefore, the premise condition
was a between subjects variable.
Participants Ninety-five Sungkyunkwan University
students who attended an "Introduction to Psychology"
course participated as a requirement for the course. Nineteen
participants were randomly assigned to each experimental
condition. None of them had participated in property
induction experiments prior to the current experiment.
Material Twelve properties were used in the experiment as
the target property. The target properties and the
corresponding occupations were selected based on the
results of an item selection experiment. In the item selection
experiment, two hundred Sungkyunkwan University
students were asked to write down at least two occupations
that have the target property and the reasons they have the
target properties over 24 properties. The 24 properties were
selected from 32 items used in Sloman (1994, 1997) and
judged appropriate in Korea. Of the 24, 12 properties were
selected as experimental material. All premises and
conclusions took the form of an occupation or class of
people having the target property, such as "Veterans have
problems getting jobs."
Procedure There were three stages in the experiment. At
Stage 1, participants were presented only the conclusion of

322

However, the explanation discounting principle did not
seem to apply in the two-premises conditions. Presenting
two premises increased the rating of the conclusion in the
S+S condition, F(1, 18) = 21.92, p < .001, MSE = 13.25,
and in the S+D condition, F(1, 18) = 11.09, p < .001, MSE =
17.54, and did not affect the rating of the conclusion in the
D+S condition, F(1, 18) = 2.14, ns. According to the
explanation discounting principle, the conclusion in the S+D
and D+S conditions, in which there was a premise that has
the target property for reasons different from that of the
target object, was expected to yield ratings at least not
higher than that of the baseline phase. However, even in the
D+S condition, where the difference from the baseline is
smaller than the S+D condition, the average rating for the
experiment phase was a little larger than that of the baseline,
though not statistically significant. Thus, the results in S+S,
S+D, D+S conditions seemed to fair better with the
confirmation strategy. That is, participants might have
processed only the information that can confirm or
strengthen the plausibility of the conclusion when there are
two pieces of conflicting information. The possibility of
adopting the confirmation strategy got further support from
participants' subjective reasons for their responses.

twelve induction problems, and were asked to rate the
probability of each conclusion. Each conclusion was
presented on a computer monitor screen one at a time. The
presentation order of the twelve conclusions was
randomized within a subject. The rating at Stage 1 was used
as a baseline rating of the participant. After they finished
baseline estimation, they did an intervening task for more
than five minutes (Stage 2). The intervening task was not
related with property induction, or any of the properties or
the occupations used in the experiment. After the
participants completed the intervening task, they were
presented twelve experimental property induction problems
and asked to rate the probability of each conclusion
considering the premises. After they finished rating twelve
induction problems, they were given the induction problems
and their ratings for each problem and were asked to type in
the reason for their response. The presentation order of the
twelve induction problems was randomized within a subject.
Presentation of the items and recording of responses in
Stages 1 and 3 were manipulated by a program written in
Visual Basic 6.0. Pentium-class PCs and computer monitors
were used in Stages 1 and 3.

Results and discussion

Subjective report The reasons participants wrote down for
their conclusions in the experiment were classified into 11
possible categories in the single-premise condition and 20
possible categories in the two-premises conditions.
In the single-premise conditions, participants seemed to
use the information in the premise. More specifically, in the
Same condition, about 65% of the reasons matched that of
the experimenter. In the Different condition, about 35%
reported that the reasons for the premise and the conclusion
did not agree. In general, results in the single-premise
conditions suggested the explanation discounting principle
seemed to apply when there is just one piece of relevant
information.
However, participants seemed to mainly use confirming
information and ignore disconfirming information when
there were two premises. More specifically, in the S+S
condition, 58% of the responses mentioned the premises and
the conclusion had the same reason. In the S+D and D+S
conditions, 29% of the responses mentioned only the Same
premise, and 21% mentioned reasons they spontaneously
made to make both the premise and the conclusion shared
the same reason. In other words, in about half of the
responses, participants searched for reasons that are the
same as the conclusion. Of the remaining 50%, 22% of the
response mentioned only the conclusion. As a whole,
participants' subjective reports in two-premises conditions
strongly suggested that they adopted the confirmation
strategy.

Rating Average ratings of the baseline (Stage 1) and the
experiment phase (Stage 3) for each premise condition are
presented in Fig. 1. As the difference between the rating in
the baseline phase and that of the experiment phase was the
main interest, ratings in the baseline phase and that of the
experiment phase were regarded as a within-subjects
variable, and one factor within-subjects ANOVA was
conducted for each premise condition.
In single-premise conditions, presenting a Same premise
increased the rating in the Same condition, F(1, 18) = 4.87,
p < .05, MSE = 92.96, and presenting a Different premise
decreased the rating in the Different condition, F(1, 18) =
51.93, p < .001, MSE = 21.92. Results in the single-premise
conditions replicated Sloman's (1994) results and
corroborated the explanation discounting principle.

p r o b ab i l i ty

80
70
60
50
40
S

D
ba s e line

S +S

S +D

D +S

w i t h p r e mi s e

Experiment 2
Figure 1. Average ratings of the conclusion: Experiment 1.
(S: Same; D: Different)

323

The results of Experiment 1 strongly suggested that
participants processed only a part of the information given
to them. That is, they seemed to use information that gave

p < .001, MSE = 21.92, and presenting a Different premise
decreased the rating in the Different condition, F(1, 18) =
16.29, p < .001, MSE = 133.96.
Presenting two premises increased the rating of the
conclusion in the S+S condition F(1, 18) = 14.15, p < .001,
MSE = 29.26, but did not affect the rating of the conclusion
in the S+D condition, F(1, 18) = 1.50, ns, and in the D+S
condition, F(1, 18) = .79, ns. Different from Experiment 1,
the ratings of the two mixed conditions, the S+D and the
D+S conditions, were not different from that of a baseline,
which suggested that making premises not ignored by
presenting one after the other makes all the information
attended and as a consequence can exert both facilitating
and discounting effect on property induction, even though
the discounting effect seems not as strong as the facilitating
effect.

support for the conclusion, and ignore information that was
incoherent with the conclusion. Experiments 2 and 3 were
intended to test this possibility of non-use of disconfirming
information by making premises salient so that
disconfirming information was not to be ignored. In
Experiment 2, premises were made salient by presenting the
premise(s) and the conclusion one after the other.

Method
Participants Ninety-five Sungkyunkwan University
students participated in Experiment 2. They were recruited
in the same way as that of Experiment 1. Nineteen
participants were randomly assigned to one of the five
premise conditions.
Material The materials of Experiment 2 were identical to
that of Experiment 1.

Subjective report As in Experiment 1, participants seemed
to use the information in the premise in the single-premise
conditions. More specifically, in the Same condition, about
73% of the reasons matched that of the experimenter. In the
Different condition, about 44% reported that the reasons for
the premise and the conclusion did not agree.
The pattern of responses in the two-premises conditions
of Experiment 2 was similar to that of Experiment 1. 52% of
the responses mentioned that the premises and the
conclusion had the same reason in the S+S condition. In the
S+D and D+S conditions, 28% of the responses mentioned
only the Same premise, and 22% mentioned reasons they
spontaneously made to make both the premise and the
conclusion share the same reason. Furthermore, 26% of the
responses mentioned only the conclusion.
In general, results of Experiment 2 were quite similar to
that of Experiment 1, but sequentially presenting premises
did at least partially succeed to make information that
disconfirms the conclusion affect the believability of the
conclusion.

Procedures The procedures of Experiment 2 were identical
to that of Experiment 1, except for the following changes in
the temporal order of presenting premises and conclusion at
Stage 3. At Stage 3 of Experiment 2, the premise on the top
line of the screen appeared and remained visible until
participants made responses indicating their rating of the
conclusion. The second premise, if there was one, appeared
on the screen 3 seconds after the start of the first premise
and remained visible until participants made responses.
Finally, the conclusion appeared on the screen 3 seconds
after the onset of the last premise, and remained visible until
the response. The sequential presentation of the premises
and the conclusion was intended to make sure that the
premises not be ignored.

Results and Discussion
Rating Average ratings of the baseline and the experiment
phase for each premise condition are presented in Fig. 2. In
single-premise conditions, presenting a Same premise
increased the rating in the Same condition, F(1, 18) = 6.00,

Experiment 3
Presenting the premises and the conclusion successively
changed the pattern of results a little in Experiment 2. In
Experiment 3, the disconfirming premise was forced to be
processed by asking participants to write down reasons why
each premise could be true.

probability

80
70

Method

60

Participants Ninety-five Sungkyunkwan University
students participated in Experiment 3. They were recruited
in the same way as that of Experiment 1. Nineteen
participants were randomly assigned to one of the five
premise conditions.

50
40
S

D
baseline

S+S

S+D

D+S

with premise

Figure 2. Average ratings of the conclusion: Experiment 2.
(S: Same; D: Different)

324

Material The materials of Experiment 3 were identical to
that of Experiment 1.

much larger degree, and succeeded to give very strong
support for the explanation discounting principle when there
were two conflicting premises.
As a whole, the results of the three experiments seemed to
suggest that the explanation discounting principle seemed to
work only when the disconfirming information became
salient by either being presented one by one or by forcing
respondents to think about the reasons.

Procedures The procedures of Experiment 3 were identical
to that of Experiment 1, except for the following three
changes. First, in Experiment 3, participants were tested in
groups. Nineteen participants in each premise condition
were seated in a large class room. They were seated in a
way such that there was at least one seat unoccupied in all
directions. Second, participants were given a small booklet.
Third, participants were asked to write down the reasons for
the premises being true and the believability rating of the
conclusion. Separate booklets were given at each stage, so
that participants could not look at their baseline ratings
when they did induction problems. In the booklet for Stage
3, the conclusion was printed in a page following the page
where premises and their responses for the premises were
written, so that participants could not read their reasons for
the premises.

General Discussion

Results and Discussion
Rating Average ratings of the baseline and the experiment
phase for each premise condition are presented in Fig. 3. In
single-premise conditions, presenting a Same premise
increased the rating in the Same condition, F(1, 18) = 8.03,
p < .05, MSE = 61.53, and presenting a Different premise
decreased the rating in the Different condition, F(1, 18) =
38.02, p < .001, MSE = 78.76.
Presenting two premises increased the rating of the
conclusion in the S+S condition F(1, 18) = 9.55, p < .01,
MSE = 74.76, but decreased the rating of the conclusion in
the S+D condition, F(1, 18) = 8.70, p < .01, MSE = 38.00,
and D+S condition, F(1, 18) = 9.71, p < .01, MSE = 65.67.
In general, making premises salient by writing down
reasons why they can be true did not affect the effects of
confirming information, probably because the confirming
information had already exerted its influence due to the
confirmation strategy people spontaneously use in most
situations. However, presenting a disconfirming premise
decreased the rating of the conclusion in Experiment 3 in a

proba bilit y

80
70
60
50
40
S

D
ba s el ine

S +S

S +D

D+S

w ith pre m is e

Figure 3. Average ratings of the conclusion: Experiment 3.
(S: Same; D: Different)

325

Three experiments were conducted to explore whether the
explanation discounting principle works when there are two
conflicting premises. The results of the three experiments
can be summarized as follows: (1) Both the confirmation
strategy and the explanation discounting principle seemed to
work when there was just one premise. In three experiments,
it has been consistently observed that the Same premise
increased the rating of the conclusion, supporting the
confirmation strategy, and that the Different premise
decreased the rating of the conclusion, supporting the
explanation discounting principle. Results of the singlepremise conditions suggested that people seemed to search
for relevant information and use it when they had just one
piece of relevant information. (2) However, only the Same
premise(s) seemed to affect the plausibility of the
conclusion when there were two premises under natural
conditions. Ratings in the two mixed conditions were higher
than or equal to the baseline in Experiment 1, but got equal
or lower than the baseline when the premises were forced to
be processed in Experiments 2 & 3. Our interpretation that
only the confirming information seemed to influence the
judgments and decisions is in good agreement with the
information processing strategies generally accepted in
cognitive psychology, such as Johnson-Laird & Byrne
(1991) and Nisbett & Ross (1980).
However, the explanation discounting principle can
explain the results of the three experiments if the implicit
assumption that all information is processed in the same
degree was modified. First, as I mentioned in the
Introduction, the explanation discounting principle did not
make any explicit assumption concerning the fate of
conflicting information. Therefore, our interpretation of the
discounting principle might be an unfair test of the
discounting principle. Second, the relevance of the
confirming premise and the disconfirming premise might be
different. For instance, if we adopt the coherence of
Thagard (1992), confirming premises share more attributes
with the conclusion than the disconfirming premises. More
specifically, the confirming premise shares the reason and
the consequences of the reason with the conclusion (e.g., in
the bad back example, both programmers and secretaries
share two attributes, sit all day long and have bad backs),
whereas the disconfirming premise shares only the
consequences (e.g., furniture movers and secretaries have
one attributes in common, they have bad backs). Therefore,
the explanation discounting principle can explain the results
of current experiments if their relevance were used as

Sloman, S. A. (1997). Explanatory coherence and the
induction of property. Thinking and Reasoning, 3, 81-110.
Smith, E.E., Shafir, E., & Osherson, D.N. (1993). Similarity,
plausibility, and judgments of probability. Cognition, 49,
67-96.
Thagard, P. (1992). Conceptual revolution. Princeton;
Princeton University Press.
Wason, P. C. (1960). On the failure to eliminate hypotheses
in a conceptual task. Quarterly Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 12, 129-140.

relative weights of each premise. However, the explanation
discounting principle still has problems explaining why
making premises salient decreased the believability of the
conclusion below the baseline in Experiment 3.
One aspect that has to be solved in the preceding
argument is who, what, or when determines the processing
order of the information. That is, deciding whether certain
information is confirming or disconfirming to the
conclusion can be solved only after we figure out the
conclusion in the property induction tasks. Therefore the
order of processing information might be different from the
order the information is given. If this is the case, then there
have to be multiple stages of processing. For instance, a
primitive assessment of the relevance/confirmation of
premises to the conclusion precedes the detailed processing
of the relevant or confirming information.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Korea Research Foundation
Grant (KRF-2002-074-HS1002).

References
Choi, I., Nisbett, R. E., & Smith, E. E. (1997). Culture,
categorization, and inductive reasoning. Cognition, 65,
15-32.
Heit, E., & Rubinstein, J. (1994). Similarity and property
effects in inductive reasoning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 20, 411422.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. & Byrne, R. M. J. (1991). Deduction.
Hove, UK: Erlbaum.
Murphy, L., M., & Medin, D. M. (1985). The role of
theories in conceptual coherence. Psychological Review,
92, 289-316.
Nisbett, R. E., & Ross, L. (1980). Human inference:
strategies and shortcomings of social judgments.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Osherson, D. N., Smith, E. E., Wilkie, O., Lopez, A., &
Shafir, E. (1990). Category based induction.
Psychological Review, 97, 185-200.
Proffitt, J. B., Coley, D., & Medin, D. L. (2000). Expertise
and category-based induction. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 26, 811828.
Rips, L. J. (1975). Inductive judgments about natural
categories Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal
Behavior, 14, 665-681.
Shaklee, H., & Fischhoff, B. (1982). Strategies of
information search in causal analysis. Memory &
Cognition, 10, 520-530.
Sloman, S. A. (1993). Feature-based induction. Cognitive
Psychology, 25, 231-280.
Sloman, S. A. (1994). When explanations compete: The role
of explanatory coherence on judgements of likelihood.
Cognition, 52, 1-21.

326

