UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Role of Prior Learning in Biasing Generalization in Artificial Language Learning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0n0606k4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Lany, Jill
Gomez, Rebecca

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Role of Prior Learning in Biasing Generalization in Artificial
Language Learning
Jill Lany (lany@u.arizona.edu)
Department of Psychology, The University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721-0068

Rebecca Gómez (gomez@u.arizona.edu)
Department of Psychology, The University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721-0068
that learners’ sensitivity to patterns and
relationships varies as a function of modality.
Recent work by Gómez (2002; Gómez,
Welch, & Lany, 2003) speaks to another way
learning may be guided. Gómez’ studies suggest
that learners selectively tune in to regularities by
seeking out the most reliable structure in their
input. While learners are highly sensitive to
conditional probabilities of adjacent elements
(e.g., Saffran, Aslin, & Newport, 1996), Gómez
demonstrated that when conditional probabilities
between adjacent elements are low or unreliable,
learners attend to relationships between nonadjacent elements. These findings indicate that
learners are biased to take the statistical
reliability of a structure into account.
Importantly, languages make use of various cues
highlighting relevant structure, not just statistical
ones1.
Saffran’s (2002) work suggests that learners
are biased before they even begin to learn
language. Gómez’s work (2002; Gómez et al.,
2003) suggests that statistical characteristics of
the input itself can bias learning. Research also
suggests learners can be biased by prior
experience.
Saffran and Thiessen (2003) provided
evidence that once infants form phonological
generalizations based on regularities in their
input, those generalizations influence how they
parse new speech materials. Lany, Gómez, and
Gerken (2004) demonstrated that generalization
occurs at the abstract level of syntax-like
structure. In these experiments, adults were
exposed to a language consisting of categories of
words, with restrictions on how categories could
combine (see Braine, 1987; Frigo & MacDonald,
1998; Gerken, Wilson, & Lewis, in press;
Gómez & Lakusta, in press). The language is
composed of words belonging to the categories
a, b, X, and Y. As in natural languages, the rules

Abstract
Because unbiased learners are unlikely to arrive at the
appropriate generalizations of their language (Gold,
1967), accounts of acquisition must examine the
nature of learning biases. One form of bias is
learners’ prior learning experience. Adult participants
familiarized with a category-induction language
learned a language with the same underlying structure
but novel vocabulary much more rapidly than naïve
learners (Lany, Gómez, & Gerken, 2004). In the
present experiments, we extend our investigations of
prior learning experience by manipulating whether
learners were initially exposed to fully- or partiallycued structure. Generalization is hindered by prior
exposure to fully-cued structure, but enhanced by prior
exposure to structure that is partially-cued. The
results are important for understanding of the role of
prior experience in constraining language acquisition.

Introduction
The syntax of natural languages is highly
complex. Without corrective feedback,
unconstrained learners are unlikely to converge
on the grammar of their linguistic community
(Gold, 1967). However, language learners
regularly manage to discover the underlying
patterns of their language while ignoring
irrelevant structure, suggesting that they are
constrained. Recent work in artificial language
learning has begun to investigate forms of
learning constraints, or ways in which learning
processes might be guided.
Saffran (2002) demonstrated modality
constraints on learning an artificial language by
exposing adult learners to a phrase-structure
language in which the presence of one item in a
phrase predicted the presence of another item
(Language P), or to a phrase-structure language
in which predictive relationships were absent
(Language N). Participants were presented with
either an auditory or visual version of Language
P or N. Learning of Language P was better when
presentation was auditory. Visual language
learners acquired the predictive and nonpredictive languages equally well, suggesting

1

For example, languages are rich with prosodic cues
to syntactic structure, and learners are sensitive to
such cues beginning in early infancy (see Jusczyk,
1997 for an overview).

785

see also Gerken et al., in press). However, cues
in natural language are variable, differing with
strength according to category. For example, a
corpus analysis (Lany et al., 2004) showed that
in infant-directed speech, a greater proportion of
nouns are marked with morpho-syntactic cues
than verbs – e.g. nouns were fully cued by a
determiner and a plural or diminutive ending
20% of the time and partially cued by either a
determiner or an ending 60% of the time. Verbs
were fully cued both by an auxiliary and
inflectional ending 1% of the time and by one or
the other 20% of the time. Thus languages
contain different degrees of fully- and partiallycued structure.
In this study, we asked whether learners
with prior exposure to a well-cued pattern have
an advantage over naïve learners in acquiring a
version of that pattern in which the cues
highlighting relevant structure are diminished.
In Experiment 1, we exposed a control group to
18 minutes of a partially-cued aX bY language,
in which only 60% of the X and Y words had
cues to category membership. We exposed an
experimental group to 18 minutes of a fully-cued
aX bY language, in which 100% of the X and Y
words had cues to category membership, and
then transferred them to 18 minutes of the
partially-cued aX bY language. Interestingly,
learners with prior exposure to a fully-cued
language did not subsequently learn a partially
cued language better than the control group.
However, in Experiment 2, learners with prior
exposure to a partially-cued language learned a
second partially-cued language better than naïve
learners. Why might this be the case? Learners
initially exposed to the fully-cued language may
have learned the perfectly predictive surface
regularities resulting from the underlying
structure, as opposed to the category
relationships. These surface regularities were
probabilistic in the partially-cued language, and
thus a focus on this aspect of structure would not
result in successful learning at transfer. In other
words, perhaps learners of the fully-cued
language were hindered by their focus on the
surface regularities of the strings. Learners of
the partially-cued language were not led to rely
exclusively on a cue that would later be less
reliable. We speculate on factors facilitating this
group’s transfer in the discussion.

involve relationships between word categories.
Specifically, the language has restrictions on
how categories of different types can be
combined within a string, such that a elements
are paired with X elements and b elements with
Ys, but not vice versa. (See Figure 1.)
a1

X1
a1X1

X2
a1X2

X3
a1X3

X4
a1X4

X5
a1X5

a2

a2X1

a2X2

a2X3

??

a2X5

b1

Y1
b1Y1

Y2
b1Y2

Y3
b1Y3

Y4
b1Y4

Y5
b1Y5

b2

b2Y1

b2Y2

b2Y3

??

b2Y5

Figure 1. A typical aX bY paradigm. Learners are
exposed to a subset of the grammatical pairings of
markers and content-words then are tested for
generalization to the withheld (??) pairings.

Learners exposed to 18 or 6 minutes of the
aX bY language successfully acquired the
language in the former but not the latter
condition. However, learners exposed to 18
minutes of one language, and then transferred to
a second language with the same underlying
pattern, but none of the same words, learned the
pattern with just 6 minutes of exposure.
The findings of Lany et al. (2004)
demonstrate that learners do not remain the same
over the course of acquisition. Rather, the
learning process changes them, constraining the
ways they perceive and learn about subsequent
input. Thus, prior experience represents an
additional constraint enabling learners to
successfully acquire language.
Using this procedure, we can begin to
investigate other ways learning might be
facilitated by prior experience. In doing so, it is
important to explore the extent to which this
process might be useful in natural language
acquisition.
In English, consistency in head direction
results in a co-occurrence relationship between
determiners and nouns, and also between
auxiliaries and verbs. These relationships both
involve a functional element preceding a lexical
one, and restrictions on co-occurrences of
categories of functional and lexical elements
(similar to the aX bY structure used by Lany et
al., 2004). Importantly, learners only truly
acquire categories, and their co-occurrence
restrictions, when there are cues indicating
category membership (Frigo & McDonald, 1998;

786

distinct ending (i.e. an ending that was not
present on any of the other words, cued or
uncued). Examples are jeeloff, skyjer, bowda,
and pefto. These uncued words replaced four of
the cued words from the fully-cued version of
the language. The partially-cued versions of the
language consisted of 24 possible strings (12 aX
strings and 12 bY strings), however, 8 strings (4
aX and 4 bY strings) were withheld from
familiarization to be presented at test, so the
familiarization set consisted of 16 strings.
The test materials for the partially-cued
languages consisted of 32 strings, half
grammatical and half ungrammatical. Eight
grammatical strings had been withheld from
familiarization (four were cued and four were
uncued). Eight strings had been presented
during familiarization (four were cued, four were
uncued). There were also 16 strings from the
grammar of the unheard language.
The process underlying successful learning
of this language is twofold (Braine, 1987; Frigo
& MacDonald, 1998). Learners must first
discover that there are different categories of
words, which requires that words from different
categories be differentiable based on their
semantic or phonological characteristics. Once
learners are sensitive to the categories, they can
then learn that there are restrictions on how
categories co-occur. Learners with knowledge of
co-occurrence restrictions can generalize to
novel combinations that respect these
restrictions. When cues to category membership
are present, generalizations can be accomplished
through attention to the pairing of as and bs with
the endings of the X and Y words. Additionally,
learners exposed to the partially cued language,
can generalize to novel combinations involving
uncued words by noting that if an X-word is
paired with a particular a word, it can co-occur
with other a words, but not with b words.
Procedure There were eight conditions in this
experiment, resulting from the between-subjects
manipulations of familiarization type (Transfer
vs. Control), version (Version A vs. Version B),
grammar (Grammar 1 vs. Grammar 2),
Aside from instructions at the start of the
familiarization phase, which were delivered by
the experimenter, the entire experiment was
conducted on a Hewlett Packard Brio PC
running SuperLab 2.01 software.
In the Transfer condition, participants
listened over headphones to 18 blocks
(approximately 18 minutes) of randomly ordered
strings from their fully-cued training language,
and then answered two iterations of 16 test

Experiment 1
Method
Participants Ninety-five University of Arizona
undergraduate students participated for course
credit, forty-eight in the experimental condition.
Materials Learners in these experiments were
exposed to category-induction languages of the
form aX bY. We constructed both a fully-cued
and a partially-cued aX bY language. The fullycued language had two versions which shared the
same underlying structure, but had none of the
same words (two versions were necessary to test
transfer). The vocabulary of each version of the
language consisted of two a elements (ong and
rud in Version A, and ush and dak in Version B)
and two b elements (alt and pel in Version A,
and erd and vot in Version B). The vocabulary
of each version also consisted of six bisyllabic X
words and six bisyllabic Y words. The X words
all ended with the same syllable (“-ul” in
Version A and “-it” in Version B). Similarly, all
Y words shared the same final syllable (“-ee” in
Version A and “-oo” in Version B.
Additionally, each version had two variants, or
grammars. The two grammars of a version were
composed of the same set of words, but differed
in how they were combined – strings from
Grammar 1 (G1) took the form aX bY and strings
from Grammar 2 (G2) took the form aY bX. For
example, strings from Version A, G1were ong
bivul and erd suffee, and strings from G2 were
ong suffee and erd bivul. In Version B, G1
strings were ush zamit and alt wifoo, and G2
strings were ush wifoo and alt zamit. The fullycued versions of the language consisted of 24
possible strings (12 aX strings and 12 bY
strings), however, 4 strings (2 aX and 2 bY
strings) were withheld from familiarization to be
presented at test, so the familiarization set
consisted of 20 strings.
The test materials for the fully-cued
languages consisted of 16 strings, half
grammatical and half ungrammatical. Four
grammatical strings had been withheld during
familiarization, four strings had been presented
during training, and eight strings were
ungrammatical strings (these were from the
unheard language). Strings that were
grammatical for one group of participants were
ungrammatical for the other.
The materials for the partially-cued
languages were the same as those of the fullycued languages, with the exception that only
60% (four of six) of the X and Y words had
endings cueing their category membership.
Uncued words were bisyllabic, and each had a

787

Control participants endorsed heard grammatical
test strings more often than unheard grammatical
strings, but the Transfer group did not perform
better than the control group. Neither group
showed differences in endorsement rates to
unheard grammatical and ungrammatical strings,
ts ≤ 1.82, ps ≥ .076. Thus there was no
generalization to unheard items.
These findings suggest that Transfer learners
did not benefit from their prior exposure to a
fully-cued aX bY language. One explanation is
that learners cannot acquire an aX bY pattern
with only partial cues, regardless of their prior
experience. However, given that other studies
provide evidence of learning partially cued aX
bY structure (e.g. Frigo & McDonald, 1998), this
explanation seems unlikely. An alternative
explanation is that learners exposed to a fullycued language focused only on the surface
relationship between the a and b elements and
endings on the X and Y words, essentially
learning a co-occurrence relationship between
the first word in the string and the ending on the
second. If this were the case, they would learn
only the surface regularities resulting from the
underlying structure as opposed to the category
relationships. Experiencing a perfectly
predictive relationship between the first word
and the ending of the second may have led
Transfer learners to tune-in to this aspect of the
partially-cued language as opposed to the
abstract structure.
We next tested whether learners would
transfer from a partially-cued aX bY language, by
exposing them to a partially-cued aX bY
language before transferring them to another
version of this partially-cued language. Because
the initial language does not have a perfect
correspondence between the initial word and
ending of the final word of a string, learners
would not likely focus solely on it, and thus
might perform differently than the Experiment 1
learners at transfer.

questions, each in a different random order and
separated from each other by a brief pause.
Using the “Y” and “N” keys on their keyboard,
participants made yes/no judgments on the
grammaticality of each string. They then
repeated this familiarization and test procedure
for a partially-cued version of the language with
novel vocabulary. In the Control condition,
participants were familiarized with 18 blocks of
the partially-cued language before test.
For the fully-cued language, participants
sensitive to the aX bY structure should endorse
grammatical test strings, including those
withheld during training, more often than they
endorse ungrammatical ones. Similarly, for
participants familiarized with a partially-cued
language, sensitivity to the aX bY structure
would be indicated by higher endorsement rates
to withheld grammatical strings (both cued and
uncued) than to ungrammatical ones.
Results and discussion Preliminary analyses
indicated that there were no differences in
learning as a function of language version or
grammar, so we collapsed across these variables.
Mean endorsement rates to test strings are found
in Table 1.
We tested whether participants in the
Transfer group learned the partially-cued
language better than Control participants. We
did a three-way mixed ANOVA, with a betweenparticipant factor of familiarization type
(Transfer vs. Control), and the within-participant
factors of test string familiarity (heard vs.
unheard), and test string cues (cued vs. uncued).
The dependant measure was the difference in
endorsement rates to grammatical test strings and
their ungrammatical counterparts.
There was a main effect of test string
familiarity, F (1, 92) = 88.89, p < .001, with the
difference in endorsement rates to heard
grammatical strings and ungrammatical ones (M
= .27, SE = .026) more than to unheard ones (M
= .05, SE = .022). There were no other main
effects or interactions. Thus, both Transfer and

Table 1: Endorsement Rates to Test Items with Standard Errors in Parentheses

Expt 1
Transfer
Control
Expt 2
Transfer-2

Grammatical
Heard
Cued
Uncued
.76 (.028) .77 (.031)
.80 (.020) .75 (.026)

Grammatical
Unheard
Cued
Uncued
.54 (.029) .60 (.028)
.62 (.025) .56 (.031)

Ungrammatical
Cued
Uncued
.50 (.031) .55 (.032)
.56 (.029) .59 (.026)

.83 (.028)

.59 (.036)

.48 (.033)

.80 (.026)

788

.54 (.031)

.48 (.032)

suggesting that learning in the Transfer-2 group
was generally better than the Control group.
Paired-sample t tests comparing
endorsement rates for each of the four types of
grammatical strings and ungrammatical ones
indicate that the Transfer-2 group learned the
underlying structure of the language (see Table 1
for means and standard errors). Endorsement
rates to grammatical heard test strings, cued and
uncued, were higher than those to ungrammatical
ones, ts (47) ≥ 6.36, ps ≤ .001. Critically,
endorsement rates to unheard grammatical
strings with cues were higher than those to
ungrammatical strings, t (47) = 2.10, p = .04.
(Recall that control subjects in Experiment 1 did
not show such learning). Endorsement rates to
grammatical unheard strings without cues did not
differ from those to ungrammatical ones, t (47) =
1.68, p = .1.
In sum, learners with prior exposure to a
partially-cued language subsequently learn a new
version of such a language better than naïve
learners. Thus, these findings shed light on how
learners might acquire patterns in the absence of
robust cues typically necessary for successful
learning.

Experiment 2
Method
Participants Forty-eight University of Arizona
undergraduates participated for course credit.
Materials The language materials were the two
partially-cued versions of the language used in
Experiment 1.
Procedure The procedure for Experiment 2
participants was the same as for the Transfer
group in Experiment 1, such that participants
were familiarized and tested on one version of
the language in Phase 1, and then transferred to
the other version in Phase 2. Half of the
participants were exposed to Version A of the
partially-cued language and then Version B, and
half to Version B and then A. This group is
referred to as the Transfer-2 group.
Results and discussion We wanted to
determine whether participants in the Transfer-2
group learned the partially-cued language they
heard in Phase 2 better than the control
participants from Experiment 1. Thus, we did a
three-way mixed ANOVA, with the betweenparticipant factor of familiarization type
(Transfer-2 vs. Control), and the withinparticipant factors of test string familiarity (heard
vs. unheard), and test string cues (cued vs.
uncued). The dependant measure was the
difference in endorsement rates to grammatical
and ungrammatical test strings. Mean
endorsement rates to test items can be found in
Table 1.
We found that the difference in the Transfer2 learners’ endorsement rates to grammatical vs.
ungrammatical test items (M = .21, SE = .030)
was higher than that of the control group from
Experiment 1(M = .11, SE = .031), F (1, 93) =
5.69, p = .019. There was an effect of test string
familiarity, with the difference in endorsement
rates to heard grammatical test strings and
ungrammatical ones (M = .27, SE = .026) greater
than the difference between unheard grammatical
test items and ungrammatical ones (M = .05, SE
= .022), F (1, 93) = 102.45, p < .001. There was
also an effect of test string cues. The difference
in endorsement rates to grammatical test strings
with cues and ungrammatical strings (M = .20,
SE = .026) was significantly greater than the
difference to grammatical test strings without
cues and ungrammatical strings (M = .13, SE =
.023), F (1, 93) = 6.50, p = .012. There were no
interactions between any of the three variables,

General discussion
In this set of experiments, we demonstrated that
what learners can acquire from their input
changes as they gain experience with a particular
type of structure. Our results suggest that
learners exposed to a fully-cued categoryinduction language become sensitive to a
phonological pattern in the form of a perfect
correspondence between a and b words and the
endings on the X and Y words. Because they
have not become sensitive to the underlying
category relationships, only to the surface
correlates of this pattern, their learning of a
partially-cued language in which this relationship
is probabilistic is not enhanced relative to
controls. However, exposure to a partially-cued
language facilitates subsequent acquisition of
another partially-cued language. What is the
basis for generalization in these learners? Recall
from Experiment 1 that control participants
exposed to a partially-cued language do not
generalize to new strings. Tranfer-2 learners,
whose initial learning phase was identical to
controls’, are also unlikely to have learned the
aX bY structure. While neither the Transfer nor
the Transfer-2 group appeared to successfully

789

Understanding the scope of these biases will
contribute importantly to our theories of
language acquisition.

acquire the structure of their initial training
language, unlike learners transferred from a
fully-cued language, Transfer-2 learners were
not led to rely on a cue that would later be
disrupted. While we cannot precisely determine
what aspect of their exposure to the partiallycued language facilitated generalization, it is
clear that strong sensitivity to the underlying
category relationships does not drive the effect.
Generalization may be driven by sensitivity to
the underlying pattern learners acquire in their
initial exposure. Generalization may also be
influenced by other similarities between
languages. In these experiments, strings from
both versions of the language were composed of
two words, the first monosyllabic and the second
bisyllabic, and most Xs and Ys in both versions
of the language had distinctive features in the
form of endings on the words. If some or all of
these similarities were absent, transfer of
structure might be less likely to occur, thus
raising important questions about constraints on
transfer. We might test this by transferring
learners to languages in which some of these
similarities are removed.
These results add to our previous work
(Lany et al., 2004) by providing information
about how prior learning experience can interfere
with generalization (Exp. 1) or enhance it (Exp.
2). We plan to extend this work by asking
whether prior exposure to one of the partialstructure languages facilitates acquisition of a
language in which the cues are even further
diminished. This would be analogous to asking
whether the higher incidence of partially cued
noun phrases found in English child-directed
speech could help learners acquire verb phrases
(in which category structure is less reliably
marked). This manipulation should also provide
information about how prior learning affects the
flexibility of later learning.
In conclusion, learners’ prior experience can
be instrumental in shaping what they acquire
from their input. Learning biases of other sorts
have also been proposed, such as constraints on
the kinds of computations likely to be performed
based on the modality of the input (Saffran,
2002), and the tendency to acquire the most
reliable or statistically predominant structure
from indeterminate input (Gómez, 2002; Gómez
et al., 2003). Prior experience is yet another
source of bias constraining language learners.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by NIH R01
HD42170-01 to RLG.

References
Braine, M.D.S. (1987). What is learned in
acquiring word classes – A step toward an
acquisition theory. In B. McWhinney (ed.),
Mechanisms of Language Acquisition. Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Frigo L., & MacDonald, J. (1998).
Properties of phonologicasl markers that affect
the acquisition of gender-like subclasses.
Journal of Memory and Language, 39, 448-457.
Gerken, L., Wilson, R., & Lewis, W. (in
press). Seventeen-month-olds can use
distributional cues to form syntactic categories.
Journal of Child Language.
Gold, E.M. (1967). Language identification
in the limit. Information and Control, 10, 447474.
Gómez, R.L. (2002). Variability and
detection of invariant structure. Psychological
Science, 13, 431-436.
Gómez, R.L., & Lakusta, L. (in press). A
first step in form-based category abstraction in
12-month-old infants. Developmental Science.
Gómez, R.L., Welch, K., & Lany, J. (2003).
Statistical determinants of learning. Paper
presented at BUCLD, Boston, MA.
Jusczyk, P.W. (1997). The Discovery of
Spoken Language. Cambridge, MA: The MIT
Press.
Lany, J., Gómez, R.L, & Gerken, L. (2004).
Generalization to parallel structure in language
acquisition. Manuscript submitted for
publication.
Saffran, J.R. (2002). Constraints on
statistical learning. Journal of Memory and
Language, 47, 172-196.
Saffran, J.R., Aslin, R.N., & Newport, E.L.
(1996). Statistical learning by 8-month-old
infants. Science, 274, 1926-1928.
Saffran, J., & Thiessen, E. (2003). Pattern
induction by infant language learners.
Developmental Psychology, 39, 484-494.

790

