UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Social Circle Heuristic: Fast and Frugal Decisions Based on Small Samples

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1hg79025

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Pachur, Thorsten
Rieskamp, Jorg
Hertwig, Ralph

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Social Circle Heuristic: Fast and Frugal Decisions Based on Small Samples
Thorsten Pachur (pachur@mpib-berlin.mpg.de)
Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Center for Adaptive Behavior and Cognition, Lentzeallee 94
14195 Berlin, Germany

Jörg Rieskamp (rieskamp@mpib-berlin.mpg.de)
Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Center for Adaptive Behavior and Cognition, Lentzeallee 94
14195 Berlin, Germany

Ralph Hertwig (ralph.hertwig@unibas.ch)
University of Basel, Department of Psychology, Missionsstrasse 60/62
4055 Basel, Switzerland

Abstract
Whereas reliance on information from one’s proximal
social environment for generalizing about the population
has often been associated with erroneous judgments, this
information is often valuable and can be exploited for
making accurate inferences. The social circle heuristic is a
judgment mechanism in which the content and structure
of people’s social networks are used for making inferences
about frequencies in the population in a paired
comparison task. Because the heuristic has a stopping
rule, judgments generated by it will often be based on
small samples sizes. In this paper we present experimental
evidence that shows both that the social circle heuristic
can compete with a more thorough strategy, and that
people actually apply it.

Samples as Reflections of the Environment
Scarcity of information is one of the central properties of
everyday decision making. For many judgment problems in
the real world, neither direct knowledge of the to-be-judged
values nor complete knowledge of all relevant facts that
might help predict the correct value are available. Instead,
inferences have to be made under uncertainty, based on
information that is more or less predictive of the criterion.
What processes underlie people’s inferences in such
situations? Recent approaches to judgment under
uncertainty that acknowledge the bounded rationality of
humans have advanced the notion of fast and frugal
decision making (Gigerenzer, Todd, & The ABC Research
Group, 1999). The heuristics proposed by this program are
based on Brunswik’s (1955) idea that judgments are made
on the basis of cues that are probabilistically related to the
target criterion. As Gigerenzer et al. (1999) have shown,
such mechanisms can be astonishingly accurate despite
using only a limited amount of information.
Typically, fast and frugal heuristics rely on cues that are
qualitatively different from the criterion (e.g., considering
whether or not there is rent control in a city to predict which
of two cities has a higher homeless rate). In the case of
frequency judgments, however, the target criterion can be
inferred by sampling instances of it from a population. For
example, which first name occurs more often in the

population: Martin or Simon? Or, does bladder cancer or
renal cancer have a higher annual incidence rate? For these
inference problems concerned with environmental
frequencies, it is possible that—rather than accessing
proximal cues—samples consisting of instances of the
criterial event are drawn from the proximal environment. As
such, samples can also serve as “keys to assessing the distal
environment” (Fiedler, 2000, p. 661), and in the absence of
direct knowledge about the environment, these “reflections”
of the environment are used to infer its latent properties.
That humans use proximal samples when making
inferences about the entire population has been argued in
various forms. For instance, in one interpretation of the
availability heuristic (Tversky & Kahneman, 1973; see also
Sedlmeier, Hertwig, & Gigerenzer, 1998), frequencies in the
environment are judged by accumulating easily accessible
instances of the target event (e.g., Lichtenstein, Slovic,
Fischhoff, Layman, & Combs, 1978). Judgment phenomena
such as the false consensus effect (Ross, Green, & House,
1977) or the optimistic bias (Weinstein, 1980), have been
attributed to the employment of the availability heuristic,
and the use of such a small-sample-based heuristic has
therefore been associated with the fallibility and irrationality
of human decision making.
In contrast, we ask how humans can achieve fairly
accurate judgments in spite of the scarcity and cognitive
boundedness they have to face in the real world, and
examine what processes contribute to this achievement (cf.
Krueger & Funder, in press). Elaborating on the idea of
sample-based judgments, we propose and test a simple
heuristic for paired comparisons that exploits frequency
information in one of people’s most proximal environment:
their social network.

The Social Environment as Sample Space
People’s inferences have been shown to be strongly
sensitive to information in their social environment.
Prominent examples are attitude formation (e.g., Fishbein &
Ajzen, 1975), conformity behavior (Hirshleifer, 1995;
Latané, 1981) or risk frequency judgments (Benjamin,
Dougan, & Buschena, 2001; Hertwig, Pachur, &

1077

Kurzenhäuser, 2003). Furthermore, there is evidence that
information obtained from individuals is accessed and used
more readily than is the same information obtained in an
abstract, statistical format when making judgments (Borgida
& Nisbett, 1977)—even when it is pointed out that the
concrete individual represents a highly unrepresentative
instance (Hamill, Wilson, & Nisbett, 1980).
Apart from the well-known vividness argument,
information obtained about concrete individuals could
receive special prominence for several reasons: First, as no
mediating factor can distort it, information directly obtained
or observed about the members of one’s own social network
is highly reliable. Second, the observations of instances of
the target criterion are per se a valid indicator of the
criterion. Further, the information is easily accessible, as
information about social network members represents a
constantly recurring and thus well-rehearsed event. Finally,
observations of criterial events in one’s social environment
are naturally sampled, that is, encountered sequentially and
represented as natural frequencies. This format has been
shown to foster probabilistic reasoning (Hoffrage, Lindsey,
Hertwig, & Gigerenzer, 2000).
Based on these reasons, we propose that people use their
social network as a sample space to search for information
they use to draw numerous inferences. Specifically, we
propose one heuristic, the social circle heuristic, which
makes inferences about which of two events occurs more
frequently in the entire population: With the heuristic,
instances of the events in question are sampled from a
person’s social network.

circles. For instance, one’s family might fall in the circle
second closest to the middle, friends in the third circle, and
one’s acquaintances in the outer circle. As described in the
next section, the social circle heuristic works by
sequentially sampling instances of the events in question
from the different circles, starting with the focal circle. As
soon as the search of a complete circle favors one of the two
alternatives, the sampling process is terminated and no
further circles are looked up. Note that moving outwards,
the number of the circles’ members increases
monotonically, and, as a consequence, so too does the
sample size on which an inference can be based.

The Social Circle Heuristic
After defining the sample space and its structure, we are
now in the position to describe the social circle heuristic in
more detail. Consider the following inference problem:
Which disease occurs more often in the population, hepatitis
or tuberculosis? The social circle heuristic is a heuristic for
such pair comparisons in which events (or characteristics)
are judged according to their population frequency.
The heuristic consists of four building blocks and starts
with the recognition heuristic (Goldstein & Gigerenzer,
2002).1 The social circle heuristic has a search rule, which
specifies where to search, a stopping rule, which specifies
when to stop sampling, and a decision rule, which specifies
how to make an inference based on the information gathered
through sampling (for different building blocks of heuristics
see Gigerenzer et al., 1999).
Which event is more frequent in population: A or B ?

How Social Circles Guide Search and Stop Search

--

In light of the computational limitations of human cognition
and the fact that inferences often have to be made without
an exhaustive search of available information (Simon,
1956), the question of when to stop information search
arises. In other words, when does one stop sampling from
one’s social network?
An individual’s social network is no homogenous entity
of identical types of relationships. Rather, one can argue
that social networks have a hierarchical structure, with the
relationships that a person has to the members of his or her
social network differing in genetic relatedness, frequency of
contact, emotional closeness, content of contact, and
function (e.g., Milardo, 1992). Collapsing across these
dimensions, we will differentiate among the following
social circles: family, friends, and acquaintances.
A central idea of the social circle heuristic is that the
structure of the social network is used during the sampling
process, that is, the heuristic exploits the hierarchical
structure of the social environment to guide and stop the
sampling process. A popular notion in social network
research has been to represent the hierarchical structure of a
social network as concentric circles (Moreno, 1936; Kahn &
Antonucci, 1980), with the person whose network is
described in the focal circle, and persons of increasing
“distance” to the person occupying increasingly peripheral

Recognition

++
Oneself

--

Guess

++

Family

--

++

Friends

---

Choose the alternative to
which the cue/heuristic points

+++-

++

Acquaintances

- -/++

+-

+-

++

Other cues

+-

Figure 1: Flow chart of the social circle heuristic and the
relationship of the sampling process to the recognition
principle and inferences based on other cues (such as Take
the Best; Gigerenzer & Goldstein, 1996).
It operates as follows:
Step 0 – Use the recognition heuristic. If the name of only
one of the two events is recognized, then predict that
the recognized one is more prevalent than the
1

This latter point also illustrates how fast-and-frugal heuristics can
be combined by nesting.

1078

unrecognized one. If the names of both events are
recognized, recruit the social circle heuristic.
Step 1 – Search rule: Search the social circle for instances
of the events, running sequentially through the circles,
starting with the focal circle.
Step 2 – Stopping rule: If search within a circle favors one
event, stop search. If; within a circle; the same number
of instances is found for both events, continue the
search in the next circle.
Step 3 – Decision rule: Predict that the event for which a
higher number of instances is found is the more
prevalent in the population. If the sampled information
does not discriminate between the alternatives (and no
other information is known), then guess after the last
circle is searched.
Due to the stopping rule, the search process will often be
terminated early, and an inference based on information
gathered with the social circle heuristic will be derived from
samples of small sizes. Note that this also implies that as
soon as search is stopped at a particular circle, information
in more peripheral circles that might overturn the decision,
is not considered. In this sense, the heuristic is noncompensatory. To rely on small samples has often been seen
as unreasonable (“belief in the law of small numbers”;
Tversky & Kahneman, 1971), and only recently a few
authors have highlighted the possible value of such a
strategy (e.g., Dawes, 1989; Fiedler & Kareev, 2004;
Kareev, 2000).

How Accurate Is the Social Circle Heuristic?
In order to test the accuracy of the social circle heuristic, we
conducted a computer simulation where the task of the
heuristic was to judge which of two events, A or B, occurs
more frequently in the entire population. For this task, the
heuristic could search for instances of the events in its
spatial vicinity. The population consisted of 2,500 agents,
represented in a 50×50 matrix in which each cell
represented one agent (see Figure 2, which shows the
environment simplified to a population with 100 agents in a
10×10 matrix). We used the city block metric to define the
distance between the agents. For instance, in Figure 2—
which shows the social network of agent #45 in a population
of 100—agent #44 is at a distance of 1 from agent #45,
agent #34 is at a distance of 2 from agent #45, agent #33 is
at a distance of 3 from agent #45 etc. It is assumed that each
agent’s social network consists of 40 other agents that differ
with regard to their distances to the agent. Thus, an agent
could maximally sample information about 41 agents
(including himself). This social network is divided into
different social circles: Circle 1, that only includes the agent
itself, Circle 2, including all neighboring agents with a
distance of 1 (4 agents), Circle 3, including all neighboring
agents with a distance of 2 (8 agents), and Circle 4,

including all neighboring agents with a distance of 3 or 4
(28 agents).2

Distance = 0
Circle 1
Distance = 1
Circle 2
Distance = 2
Circle 3
Distance = 3 or 4
Circle 4

Figure 2: Environment in the computer simulation (here
simplified as a 10×10 population).
Two environments were used to test the performance of
the social circle heuristic. In the first environment, instances
of 10 event categories were distributed randomly across the
2,500 agents (see Figure 3). The 10 events mimicked the
frequency distribution of a real world environment used in
the experiment (discussed further below): occurrences of
infections in Germany. As can be seen from Figure 3, the
distribution of the proportions of the infections is very
skewed and falls into a J-shaped distribution, a pattern
found in many real-world domains (Hertwig, Hoffrage,
Martignon, 1999). The proportions of the 10 most frequent
infections (from a set of 24) were chosen because their
proportional distribution could be represented in a
population of 2,500 agents. The most frequent event was set
at a frequency of 2,000; the 9 other events were distributed
according to this anchor and the proportions reported by the
Robert Koch Institute (for details see Pachur, 2002).
Secondly, we constructed an environment in which the
same overall number of instances in the population was
distributed across the 10 event categories such that the
frequency across the 10 events was linearly increasing. As a
result, this linear environment and the skewed environment
differed substantially with regard to the dispersion of the
frequency distribution. We were interested in the effect of
the frequency distribution of the events as this property can
have an effect on the success of a strategy (Hertwig,
Hoffrage, Martignon, 1999).
To make an inference, the social circle heuristic starts
with Circle 1 and looks whether event A or B is present. If
one is and the other not, no further circles will be looked up,
irrespective of what information is present in the other
circles, and it will be inferred that the sampled event is more
frequent in the population. If neither of the events is present
in Circle 1, the agents in Circle 2 will be looked up. If one
2

The matrix was a wrapped environment, that is, the agents at the
borders had neighbors at the opposite side. For instance, in Figure
2, the left-hand neighbor of agent #41 is agent #50.

1079

event occurs more frequently in Circle 2, search is stopped
and an inference is made after looking up only four agents.
The same rule applies to Circle 3. Only if the number of
instances in the first three circles does not discriminate, then
Circle 4, and thus the maximum number of 41 agents will be
looked up. If even circle 4 does not discriminate, one of the
events is picked randomly.
2000

Frequency in population

1800
1600

Linear distribution

1400

Skewed distribution

1200
1000
800
600

heuristic a median of 75.6% correct choices (mean 75.2, SD
=8.9), the exhaustive strategy 84.4% (mean 83.1, SD=6.3).
Table 1 shows the performance of the social circle
heuristic in more detail. Because of the stopping rule, the
social circle heuristic terminated for some inferences the
search at Circle 1, for some at Circle 2, for some at Circle 3,
for some at Circle 4, and for some a guess had to be made.
The second column of Table 1 reports for each circle the
percentage of choices for which search was stopped at the
circle. The social circle heuristic had to guess in 31.6% of
the cases (whereas the exhaustive sampling strategy had to
guess in 33.6% of all choices). The rightmost columns
shows the percentage of correct inferences for these choices.
Note that in the skewed environment, contrary to normative
expectations, the accuracy decreases from Circle 1 to Circle
3. In the linear environment, in contrast, the accuracy
increased.

400

Table 1: Proportion and accuracy of choices after search
was terminated for the SCH in the two environments. The
ns in the first column refer to the number of agents looked
up.
Circles
% of choices
% of correct
stopped at each
choices
circle
Skewed Linear
Skewed Linear
Circle 1 (n=1)
19.2
18.8
95.7
69.7
Circle 2 (n=5)
13.2
38.4
88.2
74.0
Circle 3 (n=13)
13.8
26.2
84.2
78.1
Circle 4 (n=41)
22.3
13.7
85.5
85.8
Guessing
31.6
3.0
50.0
50.0

200
0
A

B

C

D

E
F
G
Event categories

H

I

J

Figure 3: Distribution of the 10 events in the two
environments used in the computer simulation.
As a benchmark for the social circle heuristic, its
performance was compared with the performance of an
exhaustive sampling strategy. For an inference of whether
event A or event B occurs more often in the entire
population, this strategy, normatively more appropriately,
always looks up all 41 agents in the social network (that is,
this strategy aggregates information across all circles). The
event for which more instances can be sampled is inferred to
be more frequent in the entire population. If an equal
number of instances is sampled for both events, or if no
instances can be sampled at all, one of the events is picked
randomly.
For each of the two environments, the random distribution
of the 10 events (totalling around 2,400 instances) was
repeated 100 times, and each time 100 agents were picked
randomly as starting points for the two strategies. At each
run, the 10 events were combined in a pair comparison
(yielding 45 pairs) and the task was to infer which event is
more frequent in the entire population.
How well does the simple social circle heuristic perform
compared to the exhaustive sampling strategy? In the
skewed environment, derived from a real-world distribution,
surprisingly, both strategies showed an identical proportion
of correct inferences with a median of 77.8% (arithmetic
means: social circle heuristic 76.3%, exhaustive sampling
strategy 77.5%). Showing a similar level of performance,
the social circle heuristic looked up, on average, only 24.7
agents, which is approximately 55% of the amount of
information that the exhaustive sampling strategy used
(which always looks up all 41 agents).
In the linear environment, the picture was different: here
the exhaustive strategy clearly achieved a higher accuracy
than the social circle heuristic. Whereas the social circle

Thus, we have accumulated a number of arguments for
the usefulness of the social circle heuristic. First, it is a
simple strategy that can be assumed to be easily performed
by a boundedly rational agent. By restricting the search
process and the amount of information on which an
inference is based to a minimum, the social circle heuristic
allows for very quick judgments. Second, as we have seen,
it performs equally well as a more thorough strategy that
takes much more information into account, and this
performance seems to hinge on the statistical structure of
the environment. Overall, the social circle heuristic achieves
an astonishingly high proportion of correct inferences. But
can we find evidence for people’s use of such a simple and
efficient strategy for making inferences about event
frequencies?

Do People Use the Social Circle Heuristic?
The 24 infectious diseases (the proportions of 10 of these
were also used in the computer simulation) for which
official records are kept by the Robert Koch Institute were
combined in a complete paired comparison (yielding 276
pairs), and 40 participants were asked to choose the
infectious disease that has a higher annual incidence rate in
Germany. After this test, participants indicated for each
infection and each of their circles (self, family, friends, and

1080

acquaintances) how many, if any, people in their circles had
been affected by the infection. They also indicated whether
they recognized the name of the infection. From this
information, we calculated how often participants had an
opportunity to choose in accordance with the social circle
heuristic and determined which prediction the social circle
heuristic made in each of these cases (only pairs where both
infections were recognized and the reported number of
instances in the social network discriminated between the
two infections were included). Overall, only relatively little
occurrences of the infections were reported by the
participants, which is not surprising given the rarity of
infections. The social circle heuristic made predictions for
33 participants, and was applicable (i.e., discriminated
between the infections), on average, with 11.1% of all
choices. Figure 4 shows how often these 33 participants
made a choice in accordance with the prediction of the
social circle heuristic.
For each participant, the bar indicates the percentage of
choices that were in line with the prediction of the social
circle heuristic. Overall, the median proportion of inferences
in accordance with the social circle heuristic was 79.5%
(mean 77%, SD=15.9). It seems fair to conclude that the
social circle heuristic did quite a good job in describing
participants’ judgments (focusing on those in which it was
applicable).

Correct predictions (%)

100

50

actual incidence rates (averaged values from a 5-year period
were used to eliminate year-to-year fluctuations).
An index for the ecological validity was defined as the
number of correct inferences made by the social circle
heuristic divided by the number of pairs where it was
applicable. This index was calculated separately for each
participant. The median ecological validity was .83 (mean
.78), indicating that, overall, strictly following the social
circle heuristic when it was applicable would have led to an
accuracy of over 80% correct choices.
In contrast, how did the non-adherence to the social circle
heuristic affect participants’ performance? As indicated by
the ecological validity index, strictly following the social
circle heuristic would have yielded over 80% correct
choices (which is far above the performance the participants
achieved overall). Analyzing the choices that were in line
with the predictions of the social circle heuristic and those
that were not in line with it, it turned out that when the
participants could apply the heuristic and did, they achieved
on average 83.4% (SD=18.5) correct choices, whereas when
they could but did not apply the heuristic, they achieved on
average only 45% (SD=25.5) correct choices.
To be able to evaluate the accuracy of the social circle
heuristic for the domain of infections, we also tested the
strategy that always takes all instances that our participants
reported into account. The exhaustive strategy showed a
very similar fit with our participants’ choices (median
81.8% mean 77.6% of choices in line with the predictions of
this strategy), but was applicable in slightly fewer cases. In
terms of ecological validity, the predictions of this strategy
achieved no higher accuracy than the social circle heuristic
(median ecological validity of .83, mean .79), which is in
line with the results of the computer simulation.

Discussion

0
33 individual participants

Figure 4: How often the 33 participants who reported
instances of the infections in their social network made
choices in accordance with the social circle heuristic.

How Ecologically Rational Is the Social Circle
Heuristic?
The social circle heuristic is a psychologically plausible
strategy: people appear to use it when trying to infer with of
two risk events is more frequent. But how accurate a
strategy is the heuristic when applied to the infections and
based on the occurrences of the infections recalled by our
participants? In other words, how ecologically rational are
the inferences of the social circle heuristic in the task that
our participants solved? In a second analysis, the predictions
of the social circle heuristic for each individual were
compared with the correct choices, that is, according to the

In the real world, inferences from small samples need must
not be less accurate than inferences from larger samples. In
this paper we investigated, both in a computer simulation
and in an empirical study, a simple decision mechanism that
exploits a person’s social network as an easily accessible
sample space for judging event frequencies in paired
comparisons. The results show that the social circle
heuristic allows one to judge accurately, with simple search,
stopping, and decision rules, the environmental frequencies
of randomly distributed events in a paired comparison task.
At the same time, this mechanism describes people’s
choices rather well. Thus, the performance of the social
circle heuristic provides another instance for the argument
that small samples can be an efficient basis for judgments in
the real world (cf. Fiedler & Kareev, 2004; Kareev, 2000).
This paper was intended to explore the appropriateness of
this heuristic in an environment that has a naturally
occurring statistical structure, and it was shown that the
heuristic works particularly well in such an environment. A
question for future research is why the heuristic works so
well under these conditions and how it performs in
environments in which events occur in clusters.

1081

By virtue of its reliance on the structure of social
networks, the social circle heuristic represents another
example of a judgment policy in which the mind is a mirror
image of the environment. The social circle heuristic thus
follows in the footsteps of the pioneering work by Egon
Brunswik (1955), John Anderson (e.g., Anderson &
Schooler, 1991), and Roger Shepard (e.g., 1994).

Acknowledgments
The authors wish to thank the Max Planck Institute for
Human Development for financial support.

References
Anderson, J. R., & Schooler, L. (1991). Reflections of the
environment in memory. Psychological Science, 2(6),
396-408.
Benjamin, D. K., Dougan, W. R., & Buschena, D. (2001).
Individuals’ estimates of the risks of death: Part II—New
evidence. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 22(1), 35-57.
Borgida, E., & Nisbett, R. E. (1977). The differential impact
of abstract vs concrete information on decisions. Journal
of Applied Social Psychology, 7(3), 258-271.
Brunswik, E. (1955). Representative design and
probabilistic
theory
in
functional
psychology.
Psychological Review, 62, 193-217.
Dawes, R. M. (1989). Statistical criteria for a truly false
consensus effect. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 25, 1-17.
Fiedler, K. (2000). Beware of samples! A cognitiveecological sampling approach to judgment biases.
Psychological Review, 107, 659-676.
Fishbein, M., & Ajzen, I. (1975). Belief, attitude, intention,
and behavior: An introduction to theory and research.
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Gigerenzer, G., & Goldstein, D. G. (1996). Reasoning the
fast and frugal way: Models of bounded rationality.
Psychological Review, 103, 650-669.
Gigerenzer, G. & Todd, P. M., & the ABC Research Group
(1999). Simple heuristics that make us smart. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Goldstein, D. G., & Gigerenzer, G. (2002) Models of
Ecological Rationality: The Recognition Heuristic.
Psychological Review, 109(1), 75-90.
Hamill, R., Wilson, T. D., & Nisbett, R. E. (1980).
Insensitivity to sample bias: Generalizing from atypical
cases. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 39,
578-589.
Hertwig, R., Hoffrage, U., & Martignon, L. (1999). Quick
Estimation: letting the environment do the work. In: G.
Gigerenzer, P. M. Todd, & the ABC Research Group,
Simple heuristics that make us smart (p. 209-234). New
York: Oxford University Press.
Hertwig, R., Pachur, T., & Kurzenhäuser, S. (2003). The
accuracy and processes of judgments of risk frequencies.
Manuscript submitted for publication.
Hirshleifer, D. (1995). The blind leading the blind. In M.
Tommasi & K. Ierulli (Eds.), The New Economics of
Human Behavior. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

Hoffrage, U., Lindsey, S., Hertwig, R. & Gigerenzer, G.
(2000). Communicating Statistical Information. Science,
290, 2261-2262.
Kahn, R. L., & Antonucci, T. C. (1980). Convoys over the
life course: Attachment, roles, and social support. Life
Span Development and Behavior, 3, 253-286.
Kareev, Y. (2000). Seven (indeed, plus or minus two) and
the detection of correlations. Psychological Review,
107(2), 397-402.
Fiedler, K., & Kareev, Y. (2004) Does decision quality
(always) increase with the size of information samples?
Some vicissitudes in applying the law of large numbers.
Manuscript submitted for publication.
Krueger, J. I., & Clement, R. W. (1994). The truly false
consensus effect: An ineradicable and egocentric bias in
social perception. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 67: 596-610.
Krueger, J. I., & Funder, D. C. (in press). Towards a
balanced social psychology: Causes, consequences and
cures for the problem-seeking approach to social behavior
and cognition. Behavioral and Brain Sciences.
Latané, B. (1981). The psychology of social impact.
American Psychologist, 36, 343-356.
Lichtenstein, S., Slovic, P., Fischhoff, B., Layman, M., &
Combs, B. (1978). Judged frequency of lethal events.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human learning
and memory, 4(6), 551-578.
Milardo, R. M. (1992). Comparative methods for
delineating social networks. Journal of Social and
Personal Relationships, 9, 447-461.
Moreno, J. L.(1936). Organization of the social atom.
Sociometric Review, 1, 11-16.
Pachur, T. (2002). Judgements of health risk frequencies:
On people’s sensitivity to information validities, the effect
of personal experience, and the plausibility of ecological
judgement models. Unpublished Diploma Thesis. Berlin:
Freie Universität.
Ross, L., Green, D., & House, P. (1977). The “false
consensus effect”: An egocentric bias in social perception
and attribution processes. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 13, 279-301.
Sedlmeier, P., Hertwig, R. & Gigerenzer, G. (1998). Are
judgments of the positional frequencies of letters
systematically biased due to availability? Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 24, 754-770.
Shepard, R. N. (1994). Perceptual-cognitive universals as
reflections of the world. Psychonomic Bulletin and
Review, 1, 2-28.
Simon, H. (1956). Rational choice and the structure of the
environment. Psychological Review, 63, 129-138.
Tversky, A. & Kahneman, D. (1971). Belief in the law of
small numbers. Psychological Bulletin, 6, 105-110.
Tversky, A. & Kahneman, D. (1973). Availability: A
heuristic for judging frequency and probability. Cognitive
Psychology, 5, 207-232.
Weinstein, N. D. (1980). Unrealistic optimism about future
life events. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
39, 806-820.

1082

