UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Time Course of Verb Processing in Dutch Sentences

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5b23r2f6

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Goede, Dieuwke de
Wester, Femke
Ouden, Dirk-Bart den
et al.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Time Course of Verb Processing in Dutch Sentences
Dieuwke de Goede (d.de.goede@let.rug.nl)
Femke Wester (f.wester@let.rug.nl)
Dirk-Bart den Ouden(d.b.den.ouden@let.rug.nl)
Roelien Bastiaanse (y.r.m.bastiaanse@let.rug.nl)

University of Groningen
Graduate School of Behavioral and Cognitive Neurosciences
Department of Linguistics, PO Box 716
9700 AS Groningen, The Netherlands

Lewis P. Shapiro (shapiro@mail.sdsu.edu)

San Diego State University
Department of Communicative Disorders, 5500 Campanile Drive
San Diego, CA 92182-1518

David A. Swinney (dswinney@psy.ucsd.edu)
University of California, San Diego
Department of Psychology, 9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0109

a trace (or gap) is postulated after accused. Using the CMP
task3 priming effects were found for probes related to the
antecedent boy when presented at the gap position (directly
after the verb). Importantly, no priming was found at a
control position before the verb. In other words, it appears
that listeners reactivate the meaning of the moved
constituent when they encounter the gap. This finding has
been replicated many times (for an overview see
Featherston, 2001; Love & Swinney, 1996).
Several explanations have been given for this
phenomenon. Swinney and colleagues (1988) provide a
structural account: the meaning of the moved object is
recovered in its base position to regain the canonical
sentence structure. This would suggest a close
correspondence between linguistic theory (or at least the
generative approach) and psychological reality (the
functioning of the human parser). Others (e.g. Pickering &
Barry, 1991) came up with a verb-centered, semantic,
account: the meaning of the moved object is reactivated
because after processing the verb a dependency relation is
established between the verb and its dependents, that is, its
arguments (see also Nicol, 1993).
The current paper is an attempt to broaden this research
area by extending the topic of research to the activation

Abstract
In Dutch matrix clauses the verb is not in its base position, but
has been moved from the end of the clause to second position.
Three Cross-Modal Priming experiments showed that the online activation pattern for moved verbs in Dutch differs
significantly from the pattern for moved nouns in English.
Whereas in wh-movement reactivation of moved nouns is
found at their base position, the current results suggest that
moved verbs are maintained active during the entire clause.
The results are discussed in light of a gap-filling account, and
three proposals are given to explain the long-lasting activation
of the verb.

Introduction
Cross-Modal Priming (CMP) studies (e.g. Love &
Swinney, 1996; Swinney, Ford, Bresnan, & Frauenfelder,
1988) have shown that in complex sentences where the
object is not in its base position the meaning of this moved
constituent is reactivated at its original position, directly
after the verb. Swinney et al. (1988) tested reactivation of
moved wh-phrases in sentences such as:
(1) The cop saw the boyi whoi the crowd at the party
accused ti of the crime.1
Since boy is the direct object of accused in base structure2,
and English is an SVO language, the base position of boy is
to the right of the verb accused. Therefore, it is assumed that

3

The CMP task is a dual task in which participants listen to
sentences and make a lexical decision to a visual probe presented
at a particular point during each sentence. Faster reaction times to a
probe that is associatively related to a particular word in the
sentence as compared to reaction times to a probe that is unrelated
(but otherwise comparable to the related probe) is attributed to
priming effects. If priming is found at a certain point during the
sentence, this is taken as evidence that the meaning of the relevant
word in the sentence is activated.

1

Following the traditions in processing research, the t refers to the
gap position (trace) and co-indexation indicates the relationship
between filler and gap.
2
Strictly speaking, ‘who’ is the direct object of ‘accused’ and not
‘boy’, but it is assumed that ‘who’, because of its coreference with
‘boy’, has inherited the semantic characteristics of ‘boy’.

279

pattern of verbs. It is unknown whether verbs that are not in
their base position are reactivated at this position. If moved
verbs show reactivation at their base position, then a strong
case can be made for the possibility that listeners attempt to
recover base word order whenever they encounter a
structure that is non-canonical. However, some
characteristics of verbs suggest that moved verbs might
behave differently from moved noun constituents.

because no pre-gap control probe-point was included in the
design.

Experiment 1 & 2
In two consecutive CMP experiments, the question was
addressed whether or not verb movement has processing
consequences similar to wh-movement. The experimental
sentences in these experiments are Dutch matrix clauses in
which the verb has been moved from its base clause-final
position to V2 position, leaving behind a gap. If verb
movement and wh-movement are processed similarly, we
expect to find activation of the verb directly after the verb
(direct priming), deactivation of the verb in between the
overt verb position and the gap, and finally reactivation at
the gap (gap-filling).

Linguistic Background
Whereas in wh- and NP-movement whole sentence
constituents (XPs) are moved, in verb movement it is only
the verb itself (the head, X0) that moves. Linguists (e.g.
Chomsky, 1995) stress that movement of syntactic heads is
radically different from movement of syntactic phrases,
having for example no effect on interpretation.
In English, the language in which most studies on gapfilling have been performed, verb movement only occurs in
negative inversion structures and in questions, where the
auxiliary moves. In Dutch, however, verb movement is an
omnipresent phenomenon. Dutch is generally agreed to be
an SOV language (Koster, 1975, but see Zwart, 1997), but
in a matrix clause the finite verb moves from its basic,
clause-final, position to the second position in the clause
(Verb Second or V2).

Method
Participants 44 Participants were tested in experiment 1
and 60 in experiment 2.
Materials Sentences consisting of a matrix clause (SVO)
followed by an embedded clause were auditorily presented.
In both experiments the matrix clause ended after the direct
object. In experiment 1 the direct object occurred directly
after the verb (see example sentence 2), in experiment 2 an
adjunct preceded the direct object (see example sentence 3).

Psycholinguistic Background

(2) De kleine jongens imitereni [1] hun fanatieke [2] roodaangelopen voetbaltrainer ti, omdat [3] ze later
allemaal profvoetballer willen worden.
The little boys imitatei [1] their fanatical [2] red-faced
soccer coach ti, because [3] they all want to be
professional soccer players when they grow up

Verbs play a central and binding role in the sentence: they
not only determine the event of the sentence, but they are
also linked to all other main constituents of the sentence (the
arguments) and assign thematic roles to these constituents.
Psycholinguistic studies suggest that these differences
between nouns and verbs may matter in sentence
processing: influences of argument structure have been
found at different levels of sentence processing (for
interference effects see Shapiro, Zurif, & Grimshaw, 1987;
for syntactic priming effects, see Trueswell & Kim, 1998).
It is unknown what role the characteristics of verbs play
in on-line processing of moved verbs, although two
unpublished studies suggest that the patterns for verb
movement might differ from those found in wh-movement.
Muckel, Urban and Heartl (p.c.) examined split particle
verbs in German SVO sentences in which the matrix verb
had been moved to V2 and the particle remained in the base
position of the verb (German is an SOV language).
Responses to identical probes were faster than responses to
control probes at the control probe point (which was placed
in front of the word preceding the particle, so two words
before the gap) as well as at the experimental probe point.
No interaction between probe point and probe type was
found, so no evidence was found for reactivation.
Basilico, Piñar and Antón-Méndez (1995) ran a CMPstudy that focused on moved verbs in Spanish. They used
declarative sentences with two different word orders (VSO
and VOS) and concluded that in the sentences where the
verb was moved (VSO) the verb was activated at the gap.
Conclusions about reactivation cannot be drawn, however,

(3) De trouwe volgelingen wijzigeni [1] eens in de zoveel
tijd hun altijd [2] controversiële mening ti [3], want [4]
hun leider is een wispelturig man.
The faithful followers changei [1] once in a while their
always [2] controversial opinion ti [3], because [4]
their leader is a rather fickle man.
The probes that were presented during the experimental
sentences were verbs that were either associatively related
to the finite verb or unrelated but matched to the related
probe for baseline lexical decision time, frequency, length
and argument structure. Both probe types were pre-tested
off-line for any possible inadvertent source of priming. The
same prime - unrelated probe - related probe triads were
used in both experiments.4
Probes were presented at four different positions (see
example sentences 2 and 3):
1.

4

verb probe point: indicated as [1], placed directly
after the verb

Two triads were excluded in experiment 2 for counterbalancing
reasons (we used 4 probe points instead of 3, so the number of
experimental sentences had to be dividable by 4).

280

2.
3.
4.

control probe point: indicated as [2], presented at
700 ms after [1] in experiment 1 and at 1500 ms
after [1] in experiment 2
end-of-clause probe point: measured in experiment
2 only and indicated as [3], presented at the end of
the clause (offset object head noun)
conjunction probe point: indicated as [3] in
experiment 1 and as [4] in experiment 2, presented
at the offset of the conjunction.

across probe points. The exclusion of errors and outliers (all
values deviating from the participants and item mean for the
particular data point with more than 2.5 SD were excluded)
resulted in 2.7 and 3.1 percent data loss, respectively.
The mean RTs for all probe points and probe types are
presented in Table 1 (the values that are presented here and
in the following tables are derived from the subjectanalyses; the item-analysis revealed very similar data).
The subject-based ANOVAs revealed a significant main
effect of probe type in both experiments; overall, the related
probes generated shorter RTs than the control probes (exp 1:
F1 (1,40) = 7.91, p = .008; exp 2: F1 (1,56) = 4.61, p =
.036). The item-based ANOVA was marginally significant
in experiment 1 (F2 (1,41) = 3.43, p = .07), but did not reach
significance in experiment 2 (F2 (1,39) = .98, p > .3).
Paired t-tests showed significant5 faster responses to
related than to control probes (priming) at the verb probe
point in experiment 1 (t1 (40) = 2.53, p = .008; t2 (41) =
1.75, p = .044), but not in experiment 2 (t1(56) = .15, p >
.4; t2 (39) = .29, p > .3). At the control probe point priming
was found in both experiments (this effect was significant in
the subject analysis (exp 1: t1 (40) = 2.64, p = .006; exp 2:
t1 (56) = 2.49, p = .008), but in the item-analysis only a
trend was found (exp 1: t2 (41) = 1.40, p = .085; exp 2: t2
(39) = 1.37, p = .09). Furthermore, priming was found at the
end-of-clause probe point in experiment 2 (t1 (56) = 2.08, p
= .021; t2 (39) = 1.76, p = .043). Neither of the experiments,
however, showed a priming effect at the conjunction probe
point (exp 1: t1 (40) = .81 p > .2; t2 (41) = .82, p > .2; exp 2:
t1 (56) = -.98, p > .15; t2 (39) = -.95, p > .15).

In experiment 1 42 experimental sentences were used, in
experiment 2 there were 40 experimental sentences. In each
experiment, an equal number of pseudo-experimental
sentences (sentences with the same structure as the
experimental sentences) were added and combined with
non-words, to prevent any correlation between sentence
type and response type. In addition, 20 filler sentences of
different structures (10 words, 10 non-words) and 15 yes/no
comprehension questions were added (to encourage
participants to pay attention to the spoken sentences).
Probe point and probe type were both within-participants
factors. All sentences were ordered pseudo-randomly. A
completely counterbalanced design was created to assure
that all participants saw both related and control probes, and
saw probes at all three probe points. Each participant was
tested twice, on the same list, but with related and control
probes shifted.
Procedures The participants were tested individually in a
sound-proof room with no visual distractors. The sentences
were presented over headphones with an interval of 1500
ms. The probes were presented on a standard computer
screen. The experimental software Tempo (designed at the
University of California, San Diego, for running CMPstudies), combined with a response box with two buttons,
was used to present the items and register the accuracy and
RTs of the responses. Each probe was presented for 300 ms
and a response could be given within a 2000 ms interval
from stimulus onset. Importantly, the sentences continued
without interruption during visual presentation of the probe.
Participants were instructed to listen carefully to the
sentences and to expect comprehension questions about
some sentences, but only about the sentence immediately
prior to the question. Questions were answered and lexical
decisions were made by pressing the left button on the
button box for no and non-word and the right button for yes
and word. Participants were instructed to answer as quickly
and accurately as possible.

Table 1: Mean RTs (and SDs) to probe type
as a function of probe position in experiment 1 and 2.
probe type

verb

control

end-of- conjunction
clause

Experiment 1
control
633 (68)
related
617 (65)
difference
16 (41)

635 (61)
621 (66)
14 (33)

-

626 (72)
620 (73)
6 (47)

Experiment 2
control
663 (94)
related
662 (91)
difference
1 (49)

671 (99) 668 (95)
657 (84) 654 (101)
15 (45) 14 (51)

666 (88)
672 (103)
-6 (42)

Conclusion and Discussion
These experiments did not provide evidence for reactivation
of the verb at its base position. Both experiments converge
on a pattern of activation of the verb at the control probe
points (700 and 1500 ms after the actual occurrence of the
verb in the sentence) and deactivation of the verb
immediately following the conjunction linking the matrix to
the second clause. The second experiment further shows that
the verb is active at the end of the clause. The results for the

Results
Participants were excluded from further analysis 1) if their
error score on the lexical decision task was greater than
10%, 2) if their mean or SD RT deviated from the overall
mean or SD by more than 2.5 SD, or 3) if less than 67% of
the comprehension questions were answered correctly. Data
from three participants were excluded in both experiments.
Error rates were low (1.4% and 1.8%, respectively) and
equally distributed across related and control probes and

5

281

As no inhibition effects were expected all t-tests are 1-tailed.

verb probe point, where priming of the verb was expected
directly after its occurrence, are less clear. Although
significant facilitation of the related probe compared to the
control probe was found in experiment 1, experiment 2
surprisingly showed a null-effect at this probe position. 6
An important question that remains to be answered after
these experiments is: Why do verbs remain active for such
an extended period of time? One possible reason is that
verbs stay active to 'find' their arguments in order to thetamark them (Argument Structure Hypothesis).7 According to
this hypothesis continued activation is predicted up to the
final argument. As all verbs that were used in the current
experiments were two-place verbs, the final argument was
always the direct object, which occurred at the end of the
matrix clause in both experiments.

Participants and Procedures 48 Participants were tested
following the same procedure as in experiment 1 and 2.

Results
The data were handled in the same way as in experiment 1
and 2. Three participants were excluded from further
analysis and exclusion of errors and outliers resulted in 3.0
percent data loss.
The RTs for this experiment are presented in table 2 and
show faster responses to related probes than control probes
at all probe points (F1 (1,44) = 24.35, p < .001; F2 (1,41) =
6.38, p = .016). So, first of all, directly after the verb, a
significant priming effect is obtained again, which indicates
that a small adaptation in probe placement (consistently at
the onset of the first word following the verb or slightly
later) resulted in stable priming effects at this probe point
(t1 (44) = 3.08, p = .002; t2 (41) = 1.75, p = .044). But more
interestingly, activation of the verb was still evident after all
arguments were processed, 700 ms into the adjunct (t1 (44)
= 2.35, p = .012; t2 (41) = 2.39, p = .011), as well as at the
end of the clause (t1 (44) = 2.59, p = .007; t2 (41) = 1.77, p
= .042).

Experiment 3
To test the Argument Structure Hypothesis, an experiment
was run that employed an adjunct immediately after the
second argument. This allowed investigation of whether
saturation of the argument structure of the verb is the basis
for discontinued activation of the verb, or whether the verb
always remains active up till the end of the clause.

Table 2: Mean RTs (and SDs) to probe type
as a function of probe position in experiment 3.

Method
Materials The same primes, related probe and control
probes were used in experiment 3, but the sentences were
slightly altered. The experimental sentences still consisted
of a matrix clause followed by an embedded clause, but
after the Object Noun Phrase an adjunct was inserted (4).
The adjuncts that were used were Adverbial Phrases of
Time.

probe type

verb

control

end-of- conjunction
clause

control
related
difference

721 (86)
697 (89)
24 (53)

723 (95)
706 (96)
17 (48)

(4) De domme gedetineerden beroven [1] vijftien rijke
bejaarden tijdens hun [2] eerste proefverlof [3], dus
vrijlating zit er voorlopig niet in.
The stupid detainees rob [1] fifteen rich seniors during
their [2] first parole [3], so release seems to be out of
the question for now.

The current experiment shows that verbs in Dutch
declarative matrix clauses are maintained active throughout
their entire clause, even after all arguments have been
encountered.

712 (89)
693 (88)
19 (48)

-

Conclusion

General Discussion
The aim of the first two experiments was to evaluate
whether moved verbs (in Dutch) behave similarly to moved
nouns, which show reactivation of the moved constituent at
the location of the gap. The results show that, at least in
Dutch, processing of moved verbs is different from that of
moved noun constituents in English. No evidence was
provided for reactivation of the verb at its base (clausefinal) position. Instead, the experiments demonstrated that
the verb remains active from the point where it is first
encountered up to the offset of the object head noun, clausefinally. So even though activation of the verb at the site of
the gap was found in the second experiment, the verb was
also active at the control probe points, unlike in the gapfilling studies in English (Love & Swinney, 1996).
The question whether verb movement is reflected in
psychological reality cannot be answered on the basis of
these data. Although we did not find evidence for
reactivation, a syntactically based Gap-Filling Account can

The verb probe point (see [1]) was presented slightly later
than in experiment 1 and 2: at the onset of the first word
following the verb, and if this point could not be measured
adequately, at the onset of the first vowel of this word. The
control probe point [2] was now at 700 ms after the onset of
the adjunct. The final probe point was at the end of the
clause, directly at the offset of the final word of the adjunct
[3].
6

Phonological assimilation made it impossible to place all probe
points exactly at the onset of the next word. Post hoc analyses
showed that probes that were placed too early had a low
probability to show faster RTs to related probes than to control
probes, whereas the majority of probes that were presented exactly
at the onset of the word following the verb showed facilitation for
the related probe (χ2 (1) = 17.4, p < .001). Part of the third
experiment focuses on this observation.
7
More accounts will be discussed in the General Discussion.

282

still hold for the data; the verb was indeed active at the gap.
It is possible that, instead of being reactivated, verbs are
maintained active until the gap (and because of the gap).
The studies by Basilico et al. (1995) and Muckel et al.
(p.c.) show that the present results do not stand alone. The
results from both studies can be interpreted in different
ways, but their findings might well be in line with ours.
Muckel et al. found activation of a split particle verb at a
control probe point and at the particle. Since they did not
test for priming directly after the verb and do not present
baseline reaction times for the two probe types the results
are suggestive of either continued activation of the verb or
no activation at all8. Basilico et al. found activation of the
verb at the site of the assumed gap (VS*O) in Spanish
sentences with non-basic word order. However, they did not
test directly after the verb, neither did they use a control
probe point to check whether the activation of the verb had
faded in between. It is possible, therefore, that a moved verb
in Spanish also remains active.
As far as the third experiment is concerned, current
linguistics theories disagree about the position of adjuncts
and therefore it remains unclear whether the base position of
the verb should be postulated at the end of the clause (after
the adjunct) or after the direct object (in front of the
adjunct). If the verb gap is posited in front of the adjunct in
sentences like the ones used in experiment 3, the results of
this particular experiment show activation of the verb even
after the gap and thus provide evidence against the GapFilling Account as an explanation for our data.
It is not inconceivable that movement of verbs is not
reflected in psychological reality. In wh-extraction, all
linguistic theories accept some kind of relation between the
wh-constituent and the verb later in the sentence. In
movement of noun constituents, gap-filling is necessary to
assign thematic roles to constituents that are detached from
their subcategorizer. In contrast, the assumption of verb
movement is very theory-internal to generative linguistics
(Chomsky, 1995). Also, where verb movement is
concerned, gap-filling is not necessary for sentence
interpretation but only for structural, syntactic reasons: to
fulfill requirements formulated by formal syntactic theory.
The Gap-Filling Account can definitely be rejected if nonmoved verbs are also found to remain active in English. A
study in English will be performed by Lewis Shapiro and
David Swinney. In this study sentences similar to the ones
used in the present experiments will be used. In English, the
finite verb is in base position, and there is no gap at the end
of the clause. If the verb does not remain active in English,
the present results are most likely to be due to restoration of
the base word order (gap-filling). If, however, the results for
the study on English are similar to the results of the
experiments discussed in this paper, other accounts will gain
in credibility.

Three possible alternative accounts will be discussed in
the final section of this paper.9 The first account is the
Argument Structure Account which was tested in experiment
3. According to this explanation, verbs remain active to be
able to assign theta roles to their arguments. This hypothesis
was falsified in experiment 3 where activation of the verb
was found during an adjunct phrase placed after the final
argument.
An alternative syntactic explanation for the present data is
the VP-shell Theory (Larson, 1988). According to the
variant of Van Zonneveld & Bastiaanse (2000), both
arguments and adjuncts are in SpecVP positions. This is
only possible when the VP is recursive: it takes a VP as a
complement. The VP-shell theory thus predicts a sentence
structure with as many VPs as there are specifiers
(arguments and adjuncts). The VP-shell in itself is a
complement of IP. An example of sentences as used in
experiment 2 can illustrate this (figure 1).

/
the girls

IP

\

I'
/ \
kissi VP
/ \
every day V'
/ \
ti VP
/ \
the boys V'
/ \
ti

Figure 1: Syntactic representation for Dutch, according to
VP-shell theory (simplified version of an experimental
sentence from experiment 2).
As this figure shows, there is an empty V0 position in the
first and second VP. According to Van Zonneveld &
Bastiaanse (2000) the verb is not ‘moved’ to the head of I',
but it is ‘lexicalized’ or ‘activated’ again in each head
position of V'. This means that the verb is active during the
entire clause and, unlike nouns, does not need to be
reactivated at the gap position.
9

These accounts are all based on the assumption that only verbs
show long-lasting activation. Although no continued activation for
wh-constituents was found in CMP experiments within the
standard wh-movement paradigms, Nicol (1993) could not exclude
a pattern of maintained activation of PPs in sentences with
ditransitive verbs, where the PP was fronted, and of subjects in S relative clause - V - O sentences, where priming of the subject was
found after the verb. Nevertheless, other explanations could apply
to these data as well (or even better), suggesting that detailed
studies on the activation pattern of nouns need to be done as well.
We are currently preparing a study on the activation pattern of
nouns.

8

In this case, the priming effects can be explained by the
materials: identical probes are generally more 'sensitive to priming'
than associatively related primes.

283

in Spanish. Poster presented at the Eighth Annual CUNY
Conference on Human Sentence Processing, Tucson, AZ.
Chomsky, N. (1995). The minimalist program. Cambrigde,
MA: MIT Press.
Featherston, S. (2001). Empty categories in sentence
processing. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins
Publishing Company.
Fellbaum, C. (1993). English verbs as a semantic net.
Obtained from: www.cogsci.princeton.edu/~wn, Five
papers on Wordnet (pp. 40-61).
Frisson, S. & Pickering, M. J. (1999). The Processing of
Metonymy: Evidence From Eye Movements. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 25, 1366-1383.
Gentner, D. & France, I. M. (1988). The verb mutability
effect: Studies of the combinatorial semantics of nouns
and verbs. In S. L. Small, G. W. Cottrell, & M. K.
Tanenhaus (Eds.). Lexical ambiguity resolution:
Perspectives from psycholinguistics, neuropsychology,
and artificial intelligence (pp. 343-382). San Mateo, CA:
Kaufmann.
Koster, J. (1975). Dutch as an SOV Language. Linguistic
Analysis, 1, 111-136.
Larson, R. K. (1988). On the double object construction.
Linguistic Inquiry, 19, 335-391.
Love, T. & Swinney, D. (1996). Coreference processing and
levels of analysis in object-relative constructions;
demonstration of antecedent reactivation with the crossmodal priming paradigm. Journal of Psycholinguistic
Research, 25, 5-24.
Pickering, M. J. & Frisson, S. (2001). Processing ambiguous
verbs: evidence from eye movements. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 27, 556-573.
Pickering, M. & Barry, G. (1991). Sentence processing
without empty categories. Language and Cognitive
Processes, 6, 229-259.
Shapiro, L. P., Zurif, E., & Grimshaw, J. (1987). Sentence
processing and the mental representation of verbs.
Cognition: International Journal of Cognitive Science,
27, 219-246.
Swinney, D. A., Ford, M., Bresnan, J., & Frauenfelder, U.
L. (1988). On the temporal course of gap-filling and
antecedent assignment during sentence processing. In B.
Grosz, R. Kaplan, M. Macken, & I. Sag (Eds.), Language
Structure and Processing ( Stanford, CA: CSLI.
Trueswell, J. C. & Kim, A. E. (1998). How to prune a
Garden Path by nipping it in the bud: fast priming of verb
argument structure. Journal of Memory and Language,
39, 102-123.
Zonneveld, R.van & Bastiaanse, R. (2000). Frasale recursie:
De syntaxis van de gelaagde VP. TABU, 30, 143-173.
Zwart, J. W. (1997). Morphosyntax of Verb Movement: a
minimalist approach to the syntax of Dutch. Dordrecht:
Kluwer Academic Publishers.

The verb thus remains active within its own clause
boundary. Only when a new CP or IP is encountered, with a
new VP-shell structure as its complement, the activation of
the verb is no longer necessary and will therefore disappear.
This is exactly what was found in the present experiments.
Interestingly, unlike the Gap-filling Account, VP-shell
theory predicts similar verb-activation patterns for both
English and Dutch matrix clauses, because in both cases the
verb c-commands the entire VP-shell.
A third theory (Semantic Account) is deduced from
studies that show that verbs are more polysemous than
nouns (Fellbaum, 1993; Gentner & France, 1988) and are
more adjustable and mutable. In a paper-and-pencil task,
Gentner & France (1988) found that if the meaning of a verb
does not fit with the noun that it co-occurs with, participants
are more eager to change the meaning of the verb than the
meaning of the noun. Interestingly, these mutability effects
are seen in on-line processing as well: an eye-tracking study
by Pickering and Frisson (Pickering & Frisson, 2001)
showed that lexical ambiguity resolution for verbs is
delayed compared to nouns. The suggestion of these authors
is that the interpretation of a verb is highly dependent on the
arguments with which it combines in a particular sentence.
Interestingly, this is also the case for non-ambiguous verbs
that have multiple senses. To understand the full meaning
of, for example, the verb open, one needs to know whether
it concerns opening a door, or a file. According to the
“underspecification model” (Frisson & Pickering, 1999)
“the processor activates a single underspecified meaning for
a verb with multiple senses and uses evidence from context
to home in on the appropriate sense” (Pickering & Frisson,
2001, p. 564). Therefore, also in the case of unambiguous
verbs, delaying the interpretation process until the
arguments are processed seems to make sense.
Although Pickering and Frisson focus on the role of
arguments, it is possible that adjuncts play a role in the
interpretation of the verb, too. Actually, one should notice
that verb-interpretation and sentence-interpretation are
intermingled and can be seen as ongoing processes, which
possibly only stop at clause boundaries. This also suggests
that the VP-shell Account and the Semantic Account might
be difficult to tease apart and should perhaps be interpreted
as accounts that explain the same phenomena, but do so at a
different linguistic level.

Acknowledgments
The first author is funded by the Dutch Organization for
Scientific Research (NWO) under grant #360-70-091.
Edwin Maas has been of invaluable help in setting up the
first experiment. We are grateful to John Hoeks, Roel
Jonkers and three anonymous reviewers for their helpful
comments on earlier versions of this paper.

References
Basilico, D., Pinar, P., & Anton-Mendez, I. (1995).
Canonical word order and the processing of verbal traces

284

