UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Time-Course and Cost of Telicity Inferences

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5tv336z1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Proctor, Andrea S.
Dickey, Michael Walsh
Rips, Lance J.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Time-Course and Cost of Telicity Inferences
Andrea S. Proctor (a-proctor@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
2029 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL 60208 USA

Michael Walsh Dickey (m-dickey@northwestern.edu)
Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, Northwestern University
2240 Campus Drive, Evanston, IL 60208 USA

Lance J. Rips (rips@northwestern.edu)
Department of Psychology, Northwestern University
2029 Sheridan Road, Evanston, IL 60208 USA

Abstract
Recent evidence suggests that perceivers have consistent
intuitions regarding the boundedness properties of objects and
events (Solomon, Proctor, & Rips, in preparation). This paper
presents a self-paced reading study examining the speed and
accuracy with which readers draw such telicity inferences
during on-line language comprehension. Participants read
sentences containing either a consumption verb (“consume”)
or an observation verb (“monitor”) followed by either a mass
or a count object (“ice water” vs. “ice cube”). Each sentence
ended with an adverbial phrase that was either consistent or
inconsistent with the telicity of the preceding event
description (“in” or “for” adverbials), along with a
comprehension question. Reading-time results suggest that
comprehenders are slow to draw telicity inferences, even
when the type of verb unambiguously determines the telicity
of the sentence. However, responses to post-sentential
comprehension questions suggest that verb and noun
information together have a surprisingly robust influence on
comprehenders’ telicity inferences, even in the face of
supposedly unambiguous adverbial information. Together,
these results suggest that comprehenders make use of all
relevant information in making telicity inferences, but that
they do so much more slowly than strongly incremental
models of natural language understanding would predict (e.g.,
Marslen-Wilson & Tyler, 1980).

Introduction
We readily distinguish two types of physical entities in the
world—individuated objects and substances. We refer to
these two types of entities with different types of nouns:
substances are often referred to with mass nouns (e.g., tea)
and objects with count nouns (e.g., cat). These distinctions
seem to rest on the boundaries of the physical entities: count
nouns typically refer to objects with well-defined
boundaries, such as mouse or iceberg, while mass nouns
typically refer to substances1 without clear boundaries, such
as mud or water.
1

It should be noted, however, that this distinction between mass
and count nouns does not strictly coincide with the
substance/object distinction. Jackendoff (1991) notes that, in

The domain of events can be divided up similarly. Events
can be classified according to whether or not they have an
endpoint, or temporal boundary. Actions described by atelic
verbs have no inherent endpoint or boundary; these actions
have the potential to go on without end (e.g., singing). Verb
phrases describing atelic or unbounded events go naturally
with for adverbials, which describe the duration of an event,
and less naturally with in adverbials, which presuppose the
endpoint of an event. “She sang for an hour” sounds much
more natural than “She sang in an hour.” Actions described
by telic verbs such as delivering, on the other hand, have an
inherent endpoint; once an object has arrived at its
destination, delivering has reached its end, and cannot
logically continue.
Verb phrases describing telic or
bounded events go naturally with in adverbials and less
naturally with for adverbials: “She delivered the package in
an hour” sounds much more natural than “She delivered the
package for an hour.” These distinctions among verbs or
verb phrases are commonly referred to as lexical aspect
(e.g., Vendler, 1967; Dowty, 1979).
The current experiment explores how these lexical aspect
distinctions are computed during sentence comprehension.
It also examines when perceivers draw inferences about the
boundedness of events, just as they must draw inferences
about the boundaries of physical entities (see Solomon,
Proctor, & Rips, in preparation). There has been some
previous work exploring the cost of modifying or retracting
such inferences once they have been drawn: Piñango, Zurif,
and Jackendoff (1999) and Todorova, Straub, Badecker, and
Frank (2000) demonstrate that encountering information
(such as a for adverbial) that forces an event to be construed
as atelic causes processing difficulty if previous information
had suggested it was telic. The current experiment uses this
effect to explore when telicity inferences are drawn on-line.

addition to substances, aggregates of individuated objects can act
like mass nouns. For instance, the terms cattle and change behave
like mass terms, even though each refers to individuated objects
(cows and coins, respectively) and not to an unindividuated
substance.

1107

Parallels Between Noun and Verb Contrasts
Several authors have noted that strong parallels exist
between mass nouns and atelic events, and between count
nouns and telic events (Bach, 1986; Langacker, 1987;
Vendler, 1967). Just as masses have no intrinsic physical
bound, atelic events, such as running, painting, or watching,
have no intrinsic temporal bound. In contrast, just as
counted objects have inherent physical boundaries, telic
events, such as delivering, drowning, or walking a mile, all
have an intrinsic temporal bound. One cannot continue
delivering after a package has reached its destination,
drowning after one is dead, or walking a mile after that
distance has been crossed. Once the endpoint is reached,
the action is completed. The present experiment is
concerned with one subtype each of atelic and telic verbs:
activities and accomplishments, respectively.
Another key parallel between actions and objects involves
the extent to which a part of an object or action can be
considered to be in the same category as its whole. For both
masses and activities, a subpart (down to some lower limit)
of the whole is qualitatively equivalent to the whole—any
part of chocolate sauce is still chocolate sauce, just as any
part of eating is eating. This subpart or subinterval property
(Bennett & Partee, 1978) does not hold for counted objects
and accomplishments, however—any part of an aluminum
boat is not, itself, an aluminum boat, nor is any part of
lighting a fire (e.g., crumpling up newspaper) itself lighting
a fire.

Interactions Between Noun and Verb Boundaries
The physical boundaries of objects influence the temporal
boundaries of events affecting them. Several authors have
noted that the telicity or boundedness of an event often
depends on whether the verb describing it takes a mass or
count noun as its object (Pustejovsky, 1991, 1995; Verkuyl,
1993). When a consumption verb, such as eat, takes a count
noun as its object, readers should infer that the VP is an
accomplishment—the depletion of the object must end when
the object’s boundary is reached. When such a verb takes a
mass noun as its object, however, the VP is an activity—
since the substance is unbounded, the depletion could
potentially go on indefinitely. These telicity shifts only hold
for a subset of verbs such as consumption and creation
verbs, which describe events that cannot easily be repeated
and that entail an irreversible effect on their objects (Krifka,
1998). Verbs that do not entail an irreversible effect on
their objects should not demonstrate such an aspectual shift.
For example, whether a mass or count noun appears as the
object of a verb of observation (e.g., watching) should not
have an effect on the VP’s telicity—the action of watching a
mug should be just as unbounded as the action of watching
soup.
To date, there is limited evidence regarding how
perceivers draw these telicity inferences during
comprehension.
Solomon and her colleagues (in
preparation) provide evidence from off-line reasoning tasks
suggesting that readers are sensitive to the boundedness of

different events, and that their reasoning about event
boundedness parallels their reasoning about the
boundedness of physical objects. Further, readers make
inferences about lexical aspect on-line, re-interpreting their
default assumptions regarding the boundedness of an event
in order to bring it in line with the temporal characteristics
of the context in which it appears (Piñango et al., 1999;
Todorova et al., 2000). For example, “jump” might be
interpreted to be an iterative action when it appears in the
sentence “He jumped all day.”
Studies examining aspectual coercion have demonstrated
that sentential aspect is sensitive to parts of the sentence
other than the verb. However, they do not directly examine
how the boundedness of a verb’s object or the verb itself is
capable of influencing telicity inferences. If perceivers
draw inferences about a sentence’s temporal profile
incrementally, they should show early sensitivity to the
difference between observation verbs (whose boundedness
does not depend on the properties of the following object)
and consumption verbs (whose boundedness does depend
on the object). Similarly, if perceivers are actively and
predictively computing telicity based on verb and object
information, they should show evidence of an interaction of
verb and object information at the position of the object:
perceivers’ comprehension of a sentence should be affected
by whether an object is a mass or count noun only if the
verb preceding it is a consumption verb, not if it is an
observation verb. Strongly incremental views of language
understanding (e.g., Marslen-Wilson & Tyler, 1980; Clark,
1996) predict such early inferencing.

Overview
Is it the case that when we read a sentence in which an
(unbounded) activity verb, describing the consumption of its
object, takes a (bounded) count noun as its object, we then
interpret the sentence as if the verb phrase were bounded?
If, for instance, we read “Carol ingested Henderson Foods'
rice cake merrily for ten minutes” will we interpret that
action as being more temporally bounded than we would if
we had read that she had ingested Henderson Foods’ rice
cereal? When do we make these inferences? Do we begin
to draw inferences regarding telicity as soon as we
encounter a verb? Do we compute a sentence’s aspect as
soon as we have both the verb and noun information? Or do
we hold off making inferences until all potentially
informative information is available, until late in the
sentence? Previous results suggest that drawing telicity
inferences can be cognitively costly (see Piñango, et al.,
1999; Todorova, et al., 2000); the present experiment uses
this finding to address these questions.

The Experiment
We presented participants with sentences describing
characters either consuming or observing a mass or a
counted object (see Table l for examples). Sentences were
divided into five segments, and participants read through

1108

Table 1: Sample Set of Sentences

a
b
c
d
e
f
g
h

Segment 1
Leslie consumed
Leslie consumed
Leslie monitored
Leslie monitored
Leslie consumed
Leslie consumed
Leslie monitored
Leslie monitored

Segment 2
Polar Purity’s
Polar Purity’s
Polar Purity’s
Polar Purity’s
Polar Purity’s
Polar Purity’s
Polar Purity’s
Polar Purity’s

Segment 3
ice water
ice cube
ice water
ice cube
ice water
ice cube
ice water
ice cube

Segment 4
with zeal
with zeal
with zeal
with zeal
with zeal
with zeal
with zeal
with zeal

these sequentially at their own pace while their reading
times were recorded. The first segment contained either a
consumption or an observation verb, while the third
segment contained either a mass or a count noun. A fourth
segment consisted of a manner adverbial, which served as a
wrap-up segment. The final segment specified an interval
of time, preceded by either a for-adverbial (e.g., for eight
minutes) or in-adverbial (e.g., in eight minutes). Recall that
these adverbials typically appear with VPs describing
activities and accomplishments, respectively, and rarely
with the opposite type of event.
If incremental views of language understanding are
correct that readers will begin to draw inferences about the
temporal profile of a described event as soon as they
encounter relevant information, we would expect to find an
effect of verb at the first segment. Specifically, we would
expect to find that reading times for segments containing
observation verbs (e.g., “Leslie monitored”) would be
longer than those for segments containing consumption
verbs (e.g., “Leslie ingested”). Observation verbs license
immediate telicity inferences (since the telicity of such
events is independent of noun information later in the
sentence), but the telicity of consumption verbs depend on
noun information. Such a cost could conceivably continue
through the second and third segments.
Furthermore, if inferences about an event’s aspect are
occurring early on-line (as in the incremental view) and are
associated with a processing cost, then we would expect to
find slowed reading times at the third and/or fourth segment
(near the time of the object noun information) of sentences
containing consumption verbs. In the case of Leslie, for
example, if there were immediate processing costs
associated with integrating noun and verb boundary
information, we would expect participants to be slower to
read that she had consumed “ice cube” than “ice water.”
Such a cost could conceivably carry over to the following
segment, in which case we would expect slower reading of
“with zeal” among readers who had read the count version
relative to those who had read the mass version.
If, on the other hand, participants delay drawing
inferences about the telicity of described events until all
relevant information is available (until after verb and noun
information has been encountered), we would not expect to
see an effect of verb at the first segment, nor would we
expect an interaction between noun and verb later on.

Segment 5
for eight minutes.
for eight minutes.
for eight minutes.
for eight minutes.
in eight minutes.
in eight minutes.
in eight minutes.
in eight minutes.

Adverb
For
For
For
For
In
In
In
In

Verb
Telic
Telic
Atelic
Atelic
Telic
Telic
Atelic
Atelic

Noun
Mass
Count
Mass
Count
Mass
Count
Mass
Count

In the absence of slowing at segments three or four, we
could still determine that inferences about aspect were being
made based on a combination of a consumption verb with a
mass or count noun if we were to find slowing due to
mismatching of grammatical information at segment five. If
participants are making inferences about the aspect of the
sentences (e.g., inferring that eating a chocolate bar is an
accomplishment) and are then presented with a final adverb
(e.g., for ten minutes) that contradicts this inference, their
reading times at that final segment may be slowed.
As an additional test of readers’ inferences about the
aspect, we presented participants with a follow-up question
immediately after they had read through each sentence. For
example, after reading about Leslie consuming ice water,
participants were presented with the question, “After four of
those eight minutes, had Leslie actually ingested Polar
Purity’s ice water?” The questions were modeled after an
inferential test (Dowty, 1979) that distinguishes between
activities and accomplishments by assessing whether the
subinterval property applies to the action. If a participant
believes that the action was an activity, he or she should be
willing to ascribe the subinterval property to it. We thus
expected that participants would be more likely to respond
“yes” to the follow-up question after they had read about
Leslie consuming ice water than if they had read about
Leslie consuming Polar Purity’s ice cube, since the
consumption of a bounded object should lead participants to
interpret the action as telic. Observation verb sentences
should have the subinterval property ascribed to them
regardless of whether they contain a mass or count noun, as
the action has no effect on the object. We expected the
pattern for sentences ending with the in-adverb to be
qualitatively similar to that for sentences ending with the
for-adverb. However, overall likelihood of an atelic
response should be lower for in, given the strong association
of in-adverbials with telic actions.

Methods
Procedure In this study, participants completed a selfpaced reading task. They read through sentences, presented
on a computer screen while we recorded their reading times.
We instructed participants to read through each segment at
their normal pace, and to progress through the segments by
pressing the spacebar. The segments appeared sequentially

1109

and disappeared from view once they had been read;
participants could not return to a previously-viewed
segment.
A follow-up question appeared immediately after
participants had read the final segment of the sentence. The
follow-up question appeared with two possible responses
(“yes” and “no” for the experimental sentences), one
appearing on the left, and the other on the right. For each
list, participants saw “yes” on the left for half of the
experimental sentences, and “no” on the left for the other
half. We instructed participants to press one key (d) if they
felt that the response on the left was correct and another (k)
if they felt that response on the right was the better choice.
Each participant saw the sentences and their associated
follow-up questions in a different random order.
Materials We constructed 80 sentences, all describing a
character performing some action on an object or substance
over a specified interval. For each of these sentences, we
varied the type of verb (observation verbs vs. consumption
verb), the boundedness of the noun (mass vs. count noun),
and the final adverb (for X minutes vs. in X minutes),
yielding a set of eight variations on each of the 80 base
sentences. Each sentence contained five segments (an
example set of segmented sentences appears in Table 1).
The 640 experimental sentences were separated into eight
lists, such that each of the eight variations of any given base
sentence was assigned to a different list, and each list
contained ten of each of the variation types. Thus,
participants saw only one version of each base sentence, but
saw an equal number of each of the verb/noun/adverb
combinations. Each list also contained 32 additional
sentences, unrelated to the experimental sentences, which
served as filler items (e.g., “At the break, | Emily | had
already | finished the memo, | to her boss's relief.”)
Follow-up questions were constructed for all the
sentences. The follow-ups asked whether the character had
actually completed the specified action halfway through the
mentioned interval (an example set of follow-up questions is
presented in Table 2). If, during the course of reading a
sentence, the participant inferred that the described event
was atelic, then the subinterval property should apply, and
the expected response would be “yes”. If, on the other
hand, the participant inferred that the described event was
telic, he or she should respond “no”.
Table 2: Sample Set of Follow-up Questions
a, e
b, f
c, g
d, h

After four of those eight minutes, had Leslie
actually consumed Polar Purity’s ice water?
After four of those eight minutes, had Leslie
actually consumed Polar Purity’s ice cube?
After four of those eight minutes, had Leslie
actually monitored Polar Purity’s ice water?
After four of those eight minutes, had Leslie
actually monitored Polar Purity’s ice cube?

Participants Forty-eight undergraduate students enrolled at
Northwestern University participated in this experiment.
Participation was part of a course requirement in an
introductory psychology course. All participants were
native English speakers.

Results
An examination of the reading time data suggests that
readers did not begin generating telicity inferences as soon
as they encountered the relevant verb or verb+object
information. Reading times were, however, longer for
sentences in which the final adverbials were inconsistent
with the telicity of the preceding verb+object combination,
indicating that the verb+object information was used in
generating inferences about the telicity of these described
events. Responses to follow-up questions suggest that these
inferences were surprisingly robust: even in cases where the
sentence-final adverbial conflicted with the telicity of the
preceding verb phrase, participants showed some evidence
of having stuck with their original telicity inference.
Analyses on reading times and responses to follow-up
questions were computed separately using participants and
items as random factors.
Reading-Time Analyses Mean reading times for each
segment are presented in Figure 1. Reading times that were
over 10 seconds or under 100 milliseconds were excluded
from the analysis. These responses consisted of less than
2% of the data.
Segment-by-segment reading time analyses revealed a
significant effect of verb type at segment one (FP(1,47) =
7.21; FI(1,79) = 4.11, p < .05 for both); however, this effect
was in the direction opposite to that expected under a
strongly incremental view—observation verbs were read
more quickly than consumption verbs. There was no
evidence of additional inferencing work going on in the
atelic conditions.2
Also speaking against the predictions of an incremental
account is the finding that there were no significant
differences at segment three (the count/mass noun segment)
or segment four (the manner adverbial segment), indicating
there is no immediate processing cost associated with
drawing telicity inferences based on the integration of noun
and verb information.
Despite the lack of immediate processing, an examination
of the reading times for the final segment (see Figure 2)
provides some evidence that participants were combining
the verb and noun information to generate inferences about
the telicity of the events. Analyses of segment five reading
times reveal evidence of processing costs when participants
encounter grammatical information conflicting with
telicity inferences.
A 2x2x2 repeated measures
2

This main effect may have been the result of a confound with
word frequency—the mean frequency (Kučera & Francis, 1967) of
the observation verbs was significantly higher than that of the
consumption verbs (t(59) = 3.64, p < .01).

1110

Figure 1: Mean Reading Times
ANOVA revealed a three-way interaction between noun,
verb and final adverb (FP(1,47) = 4.29, FI(1,79) = 4.46, both
p < .05). This interaction reflects both the relatively long
segment five reading times for sentences whose final
adverbs conflict with the telicity information contained in
earlier segments (types e, g, and h). This difference was
confirmed with planned contrasts (FP(1,47) = 11.23, FI(1,79)
= 33.01, p < .01 for both).
Looking at the for-adverbial conditions alone, there was a
two-way interaction of verb and noun type with slower
reading times for sentences with consumption verbs and
count nouns than sentences with consumption verbs and
mass nouns, though it was only marginally significant in the
items analysis (FP(1,47) = 9.72, p < .01; FI(1,79) = 3.71, p <
.06). This suggests that participants had successfully drawn
telicity inferences based on verb and noun information
earlier in the sentence.

revealed main effects for final adverb (FP(1,47) = 66.84;
FI(1,79) = 757.12, both p < .001), verb (FP(1,47) = 64.08;
FI(1,79) = 131.67, both p < .001) and, though only marginal
in the items analysis, for noun (FP(1,47) = 4.27, p < .05;
FI(1,79) = 3.14, p = .08). This pattern of responses
indicated that, as expected, participants were more likely
respond “yes” (indicating an atelic interpretation) to the
questions following sentences that contained for adverbs,
atelic verbs, and mass nouns than they were for sentences
containing in adverbs, telic verbs, and count nouns,
respectively (see Figure 3). There were no significant
interactions.
Planned t-tests comparing responses to
questions following mass and count versions of the critical
consumption/for sentences revealed that participants were
more likely to attribute the subinterval property to an event
if it involved the consumption of a mass than a counted
object, though the difference was only marginal in the items
analysis (tP(47) = 2.23, p <.05; tI(79) = 1.97, p = .05),
indicating that they were more likely to treat a
consumption/mass action as an activity than a
consumption/count action. This pattern occurred despite the
presence of the for-adverbial, which should force an atelic
interpretation.

Figure 3: Follow-up Question Responses

General Discussion

Figure 2: Reading Times for Segment 5
Follow-up Question Data Responses to the follow-up
questions indicate that the participants were sensitive to the
experimental manipulations. Repeated measures ANOVAs

An incremental view of language understanding would
predict that participants should begin drawing telicity
inferences as soon as those inferences are licensed by the
text. In the current study, such a view predicts that
participants should show slowed reading times at the first
segment (the verb segment) for observation verbs (relative
to consumption verbs) since such verbs license immediate
inferences about the telicity of the events they describe,
whereas consumption verbs do not. The present study
found little support for this prediction—the main effect of
verb found at the first segment was in the opposite direction
of that predicted.

1111

An incremental view further predicts an interaction
between noun and verb at the third and fourth segments (the
noun and manner adverbial segments).
If drawing
inferences about the telicity of a VP based on verb and noun
boundaries were costly, we would expect to see a slowing in
reading times as soon as conflicting information appeared
(e.g., when a count noun followed a consumption verb).
This prediction also failed—there was no such interaction.
Nevertheless, participants were using the combined verb
and object information to make inferences about the
boundedness of events. Both reading time differences at
segment five and responses to follow-up questions provide
support for these inferences. In the former case, reading
times increased when a final adverbial was inconsistent with
the verb+object combination. In the latter case, participants
were more likely to agree with the subinterval property for
the consumption of a mass than for the consumption of a
counted object.

Conclusions
Earlier work shows that there is a processing cost for
drawing inferences about the telicity of events (Piñango et
al., 1999; Todorova et al., 2000). The present study
investigated the time course of such inference-drawing.
Two strong possibilities presented themselves at the outset:
participants could either make inferences early, as the
relevant information was presented to them (as in an
incremental account) or, alternatively, they could hold off
making telicity inferences until late in sentence processing,
when all information was available (minimally, until after
verb and noun information was available; Pustejovsky,
1991, 1995; Verkuyl, 1993). The reading time results from
the present study support the second alternative—there is no
indication that participants made rapid use of either the verb
or verb+object information to draw boundedness inferences.
Instead, it seems that all the costly inferencing work was
carried out at the final segment. This finding is consistent
with other work: for example, Todorova and her colleagues
(2000) find no cost for combining a telic verb (such as send)
with a bare plural noun (such as letters), even though the
bare plural forces an atelic interpretation for the verb phrase.
The absence of such a cost is surprising under strongly
incremental views of natural language interpretation
(Marslen-Wilson & Tyler, 1980; Altmann & Kamide,
1999). This pattern is also consistent with the possibility
that drawing (or delaying) inferences regarding telicity may
be a relatively cost-free process, much as delaying choosing
among different metonymic or metaphoric uses of a
polysemous noun (such as newspaper) (Rayner & Frazier,
1989). In the domain of telicity, participants are willing to
hold off on doing costly inferences until they are forced to
make an interpretation.

programming, and three anonymous reviewers for detailed
and useful comments on the paper.

References
Altmann, G. T. M., & Kamide, Y. (1999). Incremental
interpretation at verbs: Restricting the domain of
subsequent reference. Cognition, 73, 247-264.
Bach, E. (1986). The algebra of events. Linguistics and
Philosophy, 9, 5-16.
Bennett, M., & Partee, B. (1978). Toward the logic of tense
and aspect in English. Bloomington, Ind: Indiana
Linguistics Club.
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using Language. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
Dowty, D. (1979). Word meaning and Montague grammar.
Boston: D. Reidel Publishing Company.
Jackendoff, R. (1991). Parts and boundaries. Cognition,
41, 9-45.
Krifka, M. (1998). The origins of telicity. In S. Rothstein
(Ed.), Events and Grammar. Boston: Kluwer Academic
Publishers.
Kučera, H., & Francis, W. N. (1967). Computational
analysis of present-day American English. Providence,
RI: Brown University Press.
Langacker, R. W. (1987). Nouns and verbs. Language, 63,
53-94.
Marslen-Wilson, W. D., & Tyler, L. K. (1980). The
temporal structure of spoken language understanding.
Cognition, 8, 1-71.
Piñango, M. M., Zurif, E. B., & Jackendoff, R. (1999).
Real-time processing implications of enriched
composition at the syntax-semantics interface. Journal of
Psycholinguistic Research, 28, 395-414.
Pustejovsky, J. (1991). The syntax of event structure.
Cognition, 41, 47-81.
Pustejovsky, J. (1995). The generative lexicon. Cambridge,
MA: The MIT Press.
Rayner, K., & Frazier, L. (1989). Selection mechanisms in
reading lexically ambiguous words.
Journal of
Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 27, 556-573.
Solomon, K. O., Proctor, A. S., & Rips, L. J. (in
preparation). Concept boundaries: Analogies between
objects and events.
Todorova, M., Straub, K., Badecker, W., & Frank, R.
(2000). Aspectual coercion and the online computation of
sentential aspect. Proceedings of the Twenty-second
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, (pp.
3-8).
Vendler, Z. (1967). Linguistics in philosophy. Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press.
Verkuyl, H. J., (1993).
A theory of aspectuality.
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NSF grant SES-9907414. We
would like to thank Sam Day for his assistance with
1112

