UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Development of Induction: From Similarity-Based to Category-Based

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5st2f1z7

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Fisher, Anna V.
Sloutsky, Valdimir M.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Development of Induction: From Similarity-Based to Category-Based
Anna V. Fisher (fisher.449@osu.edu)
Department of Psychology & Center for Cognitive Science
The Ohio State University
208B Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place
Columbus, OH 43210 USA

Vladimir M. Sloutsky (sloutsky.1@osu.edu)
Center for Cognitive Science
The Ohio State University
208C Ohio Stadium East, 1961 Tuttle Park Place
Columbus, OH 43210 USA
members of the same categories share many unobservable
properties.
According to another position, young children perform
induction (as well as categorization) by detecting multiple
correspondences, or similarities, among presented entities
(e.g., see Jones & Smith, 2002; McClelland & Rogers,
2003; Sloutsky & Fisher, in press-a; Sloutsky, 2003).
Because members of a category often happen to be more
similar to each other than they are to nonmembers, young
children are more likely to induce unobserved properties to
members of the category. One such similarity-based model,
SINC (abbreviated for Similarity, Induction, and
Categorization) was proposed recently by Sloutsky and
colleagues (Sloutsky et al., 2001; Sloutsky, 2003, Sloutsky
& Fisher, in press-a). Under this view, conceptual
knowledge (i.e., knowledge that that members of the same
category share many unobservable properties) is a product
of learning and development rather than an a priori
assumption.
In short, under the former view, induction is categorybased (i.e., it is a product of categorization), whereas under
the latter view, induction is a product of computation of
similarity. One of the goals of this research is to distinguish
between these positions.
Traditionally, inductive inference in children has been
studied directly, by asking participants to perform inductive
generalizations and assessing their performance. However,
this approach may not be an optimal way of examining
representations underlying performance on induction tasks.
An alternative framework has been recently suggested
(Sloutsky & Fisher, in press-b). In this framework,
representations underlying induction performance are
studied by examining memory traces formed in the course
of Induction. Participants are first presented with sets of
pictures of familiar animals, and are asked to make
inductive inferences about these animals. Later participants
are given a surprise recognition memory test, in which they
are presented with some old pictures (i.e., pictures they had
previously reasoned about in the induction task), and some
Critical Lures (i.e., “new” pictures that belong to the same
category as “old” pictures).
If participants perform
induction in a similarity-based manner, they should form

Abstract
The ability to perform inductive generalizations has been
demonstrated to develop very early in life. We argue that while
adults use their conceptual knowledge when performing
induction, young children perform induction by computing the
similarity among presented entities. We further argue that this
differential processing underlying children’s and adults’
induction results in different memory traces, and affects
accuracy on a subsequent memory test. Experiment 1
demonstrates that while performing induction decreases memory
accuracy of adults and 12-year-olds, it does not affect memory
accuracy of 5-, and 7-year-olds. In Experiment 2, 5- and 7-yearolds were trained to perform category-based induction, which
resulted in a decrease of their memory accuracy. In Experiment
3, a delayed transfer task was used to examine whether 5- and 7year-olds could retain their learning over time. Overall, results
of the reported experiments point to a developmental trend from
similarity-based to category-based induction.

Introduction
The ability to make inductive generalizations is undoubtedly
crucial for humans, for not only does it facilitate acquisition
of new knowledge and skills, but also aids survival: “our
knowledge that leopards can be dangerous leads us to keep a
safe distance from jaguars” (Sloman, 1993, p.321).
It has been demonstrated that infants and very young
children can perform simple induction tasks (Gelman &
Markman, 1986; Sloutsky, Lo, & Fisher, 2001, Welder &
Graham, 2001). The process underlying this basic ability is,
however, still open to debate.
According to one view, children’s inductive
generalizations are driven by a priori conceptual
assumptions (Keil, Smith, Simons, & Levin, 1998, Gelman
& Hirschfeld, 1999). Under this view, which has
traditionally been referred to as a naïve theory position,
even early in development, induction is driven by the
category assumption – a belief that entities are members of
categories, and members of the same category have much in
common. Thus, in the course of induction, children first
identify presented entities as members of categories, and
then perform inductive inferences on the basis of this
categorization, because they presumably believe that
1
392

in both conditions, whereas the study phase differed across
conditions.

item-specific representations, and exhibit high accuracy on a
recognition test. At the same time, if participants form
category-level representations (which might be the case if
induction is category-based), they should poorly distinguish
between Old Targets and Critical Lures.
Results reported by Sloutsky and Fisher (in press-b)
indicate that young children exhibit high recognition
accuracy for Critical Lures (thus pointing to similaritybased induction), whereas adults exhibit low recognition
accuracy for Critical Lures (thus suggesting category-based
induction). It has also been demonstrated that adults’
category-based induction results in a decrease in memory
accuracy compared to the Baseline memory tasks, while
young children’s similarity-based induction does not.
The goal of the series of experiments presented below is
to compare the two theoretical positions by examining the
pattern of development of inductive inference. The
similarity-based position assumes a gradual transition from
similarity-based to category-based induction in the course of
learning and development, whereas no such transition is
predicted by the naïve theory position. According to this
position, even young children perform category-based
induction. Another goal is to provide a learning account of
the transition from similarity-based to category-based
induction.

Figure 1: Examples of stimuli in Experiment 1.
In the study phase of the Baseline condition participants
were presented with 30 pictures of animals, and their task
was to remember these pictures for a subsequent recognition
test. In the study phase of the Induction condition
participants were first presented with a picture of a cat, and
informed that it had “beta-cells inside its body”.
Participants were then presented with 30 pictures of animals
(identical to those presented in the Baseline condition), and
asked whether each of the animals also had beta-cells inside.
After responding, participants were provided with “yes/no”
feedback, indicating that only cats, but not bears or birds,
had beta-cells. The recognition test was not mentioned in
the study phase of this condition.
During the recognition phase, which immediately
followed the study phase, participants were presented with
28 pictures and were asked to determine whether each was
“old” (i.e., exactly the one presented during the study phase)
or “new.” No feedback was provided during the recognition
phase
Children were tested individually in their day care centers
by female hypothesis-blind experimenters. Undergraduate
students were tested individually in a laboratory on campus.
For all participants, stimuli were presented on a computer
screen, and stimuli presentation was controlled by Super
Lab Pro 2 software (Cedrus Corporation, 1999).

Experiment 1
Method
Participants Participants were 45 5 year-olds (19 girls, 26
boys, M age= 5.2 years, SD = .32 years), 35 7 year-olds (21
girls, 14 boys, M age= 7.9 years, SD = .54 years), 39 12
year-olds, (18 girls, 21 boys, M age = 12.1 years, SD = .48),
and 30 introductory psychology students at a large
Midwestern university (12 women and 18 men, M age= 19.5
years, SD = .99 years).
Materials, Design and Procedure Materials were 44 color
photographs of animals presented against the white
background. All animals were highly familiar to both
children and adults, with familiarity established in a
separate experiment (Sloutsky & Fisher, in press-b).
Examples of the photographs used are presented in Figure 1.
During the study phase, participants were presented with 30
pictures, one picture at a time, from three different
categories (10 cats, 10 bears, and 10 birds). During the
recognition phase, they were presented with 28 pictures, one
picture at a time, and were asked whether they had seen
each picture during the study phase. Half of the recognition
pictures were previously presented during the study phase,
and the other half were new pictures. The recognition
pictures represented animals from three different categories:
cats (7 of which were old and 7 were new), bears (all 7 of
which were old), and squirrels (all 7 of which were new).
The experiment included two between-subject conditions:
Baseline and Induction. The recognition phase was identical

Results and Discussion
Although participants in every age group were very accurate
in the study phase of the Induction condition, adults and 12
year-olds were somewhat more accurate (averaging 91%
and 94% of correct inductions respectively) than 5- and 7year-olds (74% and 84% of correct inductions respectively),
F (3, 78) = 5.9, p < .01, post-hoc Tukey test, ps < .05 for all
differences.
2
393

We argue that high recognition accuracy of younger
participants of Experiment 1 was due to the fact that they
were engaged in item-specific processing regardless of the
experimental condition. Adult participants, on the contrary,
demonstrated high memory accuracy only in the task that
forced them to perform item-based processing, the Baseline
condition. In the Induction condition, however, adults
demonstrated low memory accuracy, due to engagement in
category-level processing. Results of Experiment 1 therefore
point to a developmental trend from similarity-based to
category-based induction: memory sensitivity of younger
children does not decrease at all in the Induction compared
to the Baseline, while sensitivity of 12 year-olds decreases
somewhat, and sensitivity of adults reduces dramatically.

In the recognition phase of the experiment all participants
were highly accurate in rejecting non-target distracters (i.e.,
squirrels), averaging over 91% of correct responses across
conditions.
However, participants exhibited differential accuracy for
the Targets (items previously presented during the study
phase, i.e. old cats and bears) and Critical Lures (new items
from the same category as the Targets, i.e., new cats) in the
Induction and the Baseline. To examine the ability of
participants to discriminate previously presented Targets
from Critical Lures, memory sensitivity A-prime scores
were computed. A-prime is a non-parametric analogue of
the signal-detection statistics d-prime (Snodgrass & Corwin,
1988). If participants do not discriminate old Targets from
Critical Lures, A-prime is at or below 0.5. The greater the
discrimination accuracy, the closer A-prime scores are to 1.
Proportions of hits (i.e., correct recognitions), false alarms
on Critical Lures (FA), and A-prime scores by age group
and condition are presented in Table 1.
Data in the table indicate that 5-, 7- and 12-year-olds
well discriminated old items from Critical Lures in the
Induction as well as the Baseline condition (A-primes > 0.5,
one-sample ts > 2.8, ps < .01). At the same time, adults
were accurate in the Baseline condition (A-primes > .5, onesample t (14) 16.1, p < .001), whereas they were not
accurate in the Induction condition: unlike children, adults’
A-primes in this condition were not different from 0.5, onesample t < 1, indicating no discrimination between old items
and Critical Lures. Furthermore, adults’ accuracy was
lower than that of 5-year-olds or 7-year-olds, both
independent sample ts > 2, ps <.05.

Chnage in A-prime scores

0.05

Hits

Baseline
FA
Aprime

Hits

.82

.59

.66

.71

.56

.69

7 year-olds

.75

.40

.72

.77

.45

.74

12 year-olds

.79

.39

.78

.79

.59

.63

Adults

.88

.40

.84

.81

.74

.54

5 year-olds 7 year-olds

12 yearolds

Adults

-0.1
-0.15
-0.2
-0.25
-0.3

Figure 2: Change in the A-prime scores in the Induction
condition compared to the Baseline across age groups.
Experiment 2 was designed to provide a learning account
of the category-based induction found in adults, by training
5- and 7-year-olds to perform induction in the categorybased manner. If training is successful, that is if memory
accuracy of younger children can be reduced to the level of
adults, this would further undermine the claim that
reasoning in young children is a priori conceptually
constrained.

Induction
FA
Aprime

5 year-olds

-0.05

-0.35

Table 1: Proportions of Hits, False Alarms (FA) and Aprime scores by age group and condition.
Age group

0

Experiment 2
Method
Participants Participants were 27 5 year-olds (16 girls, 11
boys, M age= 5.2 years, SD = .26 years), and 15 7 year-olds
(11 girls, 4 boys, M age= 7.6 years, SD = .44 years).

These findings are summarized in Figure 2, which
presents a change in the A-prime scores in the Induction
condition compared to the Baseline. Data in the figure
indicate that in the Induction condition recognition memory
was somewhat reduced in 12 year-olds and dramatically
attenuated in adults, while Induction had virtually no effect
on the recognition accuracy of 5- and 7-year-olds. The
significant age by condition interaction was confirmed by
the two-way (age by experimental condition) ANOVA
performed on the A-prime scores, F (3, 141) = 5.7, p < .001.

Materials, Design and Procedure Materials were identical
to those of Experiment 1, however, participants were tested
in the Induction condition only. The procedure of
Experiment 2 was different from Experiment 1 in that prior
to the study phase, participants were trained to perform
category-based induction. Children were taught that animals
that have the same names belong to the same category, and
3
394

that animals that belong to the same category share
unobservable properties. Picture cards representing rabbits,
dogs, and lions were used for the training procedure; none
of these categories of animals were used in the experiment
proper.
Upon completing the training, participants were presented
with the experimental task, which was identical to the
Induction condition of Experiment 1. Hypothesis-blind
female experimenters tested children individually in their
schools and child care centers.

of 5- and 7-year-olds to retain this new knowledge over a
time delay.

Experiment 3
Method
Participants Participants were 17 5 year-olds (11 girls, 7
boys, M age= 5.3 years, SD = .17 years), and 19 7 year-olds
(4 girls, 15 boys, M age= 7.6 years, SD = .44 years).
Materials, Design and Procedure Materials and procedure
were identical to those of Experiment 2 with one important
difference: there was a delay between training to perform
category-based induction and the experiment proper. The
delay was on average 14.6 days (SD = 1.5 days, range 14 –
18 days). As in the previous experiments hypothesis-blind
female experimenters tested children individually in their
schools and child care centers.

Results and Discussion
Overall participants were highly accurate during the study
phase of Experiment 2, averaging over 92% of correct
inductions. Similar to Experiment 1, participants were also
very accurate in rejecting non-target distracters (i.e.
squirrels), giving on average 98% of correct responses.
However, unlike Experiment 1, memory sensitivity of
participants in both age groups, as indicated by the Aprimes scores, did not differ from chance, both one-sample
ts < 1.7, ps > .1. Proportions of hits, false alarms on Critical
Lures, and A-prime scores are presented in Table 2.
Results of Experiment 2 indicate that training to perform
category-based induction significantly reduced memory
accuracy of both 5- and 7-year-olds, bringing their
recognition performance to chance and making it
comparable to the performance of adult participants in
Experiment 1.
Could it be that training had a non-specific effect on
memory accuracy, such that, regardless of the experimental
task, children participating in the training experiment
exhibited reduced memory accuracy? This issue was
addressed by Sloutsky and Fisher (in press-b), who
demonstrated that training had no adverse effects on
children’s memory in the Baseline condition.

Results and Discussion
Similar to previous experiments participants were highly
accurate both in rejecting non-target distracters (averaging
over 96% of correct rejections), and making correct
inductions during the study phase (84% and 86 % of correct
inductions in the groups of 5- and 7-year-olds respectively).
However, in contrast to Experiment 2, participants
demonstrated differential memory accuracy for Critical
Lures. Proportions of hits, false alarms on Critical Lures,
and A-prime scores are presented in Table 3. Memory
accuracy of 7 year-olds indexed by the A-prime scores was
close to chance (which was similar to their accuracy in
Experiment 2), one-sample t (18) = 1.9, p > .07. On the
other hand, recognition memory of 5 year-olds was clearly
above chance, one-sample t (16) = 4.9, p < .0001.
Table 3: Proportions of Hits, False Alarms (FA) and Aprime scores by age group in Experiment 3.

Table 2: Proportions of Hits, False Alarms (FA) and Aprime scores by age group in Experiment 2.
Age group
Hits
5 yearolds

.82

7 yearolds

.73

Training Condition
FA
A-prime
.65
.59

.58
.57

Age group

Delayed Transfer Condition
Hits
FA
A-prime

5 yearolds

.82

.59

.67

7 yearolds

.91

.75

.59

Thus, results of Experiment 3 indicate that while 7 yearolds retained what they had learned during training over a
two-week delay, 5 year-olds were unable to do so.
Therefore, retaining of the learned ability to perform
induction in a category-based manner seems to be a function
of age.
Memory accuracy of 5- and 7-year-olds across three
reported experiments is presented in Figure 3. Results
presented in Figure 3 point to an interesting developmental
pattern: while both 5- and 7-year-olds do not perform

While demonstrating that both 5- and 7-year-olds were
successful in learning to perform category-based induction,
the experiments left an important question unanswered. In
particular, it remained unclear whether effects of this
training would be retained over time. Results of Experiment
2 together with the developmental trend found in
Experiment 1 suggest that older children should be better
able to retain what they learned during training over a time
delay. Experiment 3 was designed to investigate the ability
4
395

category-based induction spontaneously (i.e., under the notraining condition of Experiment 1, their accuracy is high),
children in both age groups can be successfully trained to
perform category-based induction (as evidenced by their
reduced accuracy in the training condition of Experiment 2).
However, only 7 year-olds are able to retain the results of
training over longer periods of time (i.e., after the delayed
condition in Experiment 3, their accuracy remained low).
At the same time, 5-year-olds reverted back to similaritybased induction (i.e., after the delayed condition in
Experiment 3, their memory accuracy returned to the high
pre-training level).

0.8

5 year-olds

0.75

8 year-olds

(although the length of retention is a function of age).
These results support predictions of the similarity-based
account of induction, while presenting challenges to the
naïve theory approach. In what follows, we consider
theoretical implication of these results.

Induction and
Development

Accuracy

Across

The results support the contention of the similarity-based
approach that early in development children perform
induction by computing similarity among compared entities.
As a result, these participants form item-specific
representations, and accurately remember individual items
encountered in the course of induction. At the same time,
older children and adults perform category-based induction
(i.e., they first categorize entities, and then generalize
properties to members of the same category), and as a result
they form category-level, but not item-specific
representation, thus exhibiting poor memory for individual
items encountered in the course of induction. Note that
older children and adults have no difficulty remembering
individual items, in the Baseline condition, in which they
are not required to perform induction. Furthermore, there is
additional evidence that category-based induction affects
memory accuracy for individual items: when younger
participants were trained to perform category-based
induction, their memory accuracy in the Induction (but not
in the Baseline) condition dropped to the level of adults.
Taken together, these findings do not support the
contention of the naïve theory position that induction in
young children is category-based, but they rather support
the contention of SINC that induction in young children is
similarity-based.

0.7
0.65
0.6
0.55
0.5
0.45
0.4
No Training
Condition
(Experiement 1)

Memory

Training Condition Delayed Transfer
(Experiment 2)
(Experiment 3)

Figure 3: A-prime scores for 5- and 7-year-olds in the
Induction task across Experiments 1 – 3.

General Discussion
Several important findings stem from the three reported
experiments. First, there is a clear trend in the development
of induction: induction task attenuates memory accuracy for
individual items of 12-year-olds and adults, whereas 5- and
7-year-olds exhibit accurate memory for individual items.
Furthermore, in the Induction (but not in the Baseline)
condition younger participants exhibit greater memory
accuracy than older participants or adults. Second, training
to perform category-based induction leads to a decrease in
memory accuracy of 5- and 7-year-olds to the level of
adults. And third, 7-year-olds retain training over longer
periods of time than 5-year-olds: 5-year-olds sooner than 7year-olds exhibit high levels of memory accuracy for
individual items, returning to their pre-training high
accuracy.
These results indicate that: (1) while 12-year-olds and
adults perform category-based induction (which results in
mostly category-level representations), 5- and 7-year-olds
perform similarity-based induction (which results in itemlevel representations); (2) there is a gradual developmental
transition from similarity-based to category-based
induction; and (3) category-based induction does not have to
be a priori, it can be learned and retained over time

The Development and Learning of Category-Based
Induction
The reported results also present developmental and
learning accounts of category-based induction. First,
category-based induction gradually emerges in the course of
development: there is little evidence that 5- or 7-year-olds
spontaneously perform category-based induction, whereas
12-year-olds are more likely to perform it than younger
children, and adults are more likely to perform it than 12year-olds. Second, people do not need a priori category
assumption – young children can be trained to perform
category-based induction. However, the retention of this
training is a function of age – 7-year-olds are more likely to
retain training over time than younger children. Therefore,
it seems reasonable to conclude that (a) there is a transition
from similarity-based to category-based induction, and this
transition is gradual; (b) category-based induction can be
successfully learned; and (c) the retention of learning is a
function of age. These findings provide a learning account
of category-based induction suggesting that it is
unnecessary to posit that conceptual knowledge is a priori.
Recall that in Experiment 2, participants were taught that (a)
5
396

Sloutsky, V. M., & Fisher, A. V. (In press-a). Induction and
categorization in young children: A similarity-based
model. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General.
Sloutsky, V. M., & Fisher, A. V. (In press-b). When
development and learning decrease memory: Evidence
against
category-based
induction
in
children.
Psychological Science.
Snodgrass, J. G., & Corwin, J. (1988). Pragmatics of
measuring recognition memory: Applications to dementia
and amnesia. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 117, 34-50.
Welder, A. N., & Graham, S. A. (2001). The influences of
shape similarity and shared labels on infants' inductive
inferences about nonobvious object properties. Child
Development, 72, 1653-1673.

similar things that have the same name belong to the same
kind, (b) things that belong to the same kind share many
non-observable properties, and (c) things that have the same
name share many non-observable properties. It is possible
that (a) and (b) are taught in school, whereas (c) is a direct
consequence of (a) and (b). Therefore, results of Experiment
2 may explain the transition from the similarity-based
induction exhibited by children to category-based induction
exhibited by adults, suggesting that category-based
induction and requisite conceptual knowledge could be a
product of feedback-based learning. While presenting a
learning account of category-based induction, these findings
seriously challenge the contention of the naïve theory
position that category-based induction has to be based on a
priori assumptions.

Conclusion
Overall, results of the three reported experiments represent
novel findings indicating that (a) early in development
people spontaneously perform similarity-based rather than
category-based induction; (b) there is a gradual transition
from similarity-based to category-based induction; and (c)
category-based induction is a product of learning. These
results support the similarity-based account of young
children’s induction, while presenting challenges to the
naïve theory approach.

Acknowledgments
This research is supported by grants from the National
Science Foundation (BCS # 0078945 and REC # 0208103)
to Vladimir M. Sloutsky.

References
Gelman, S. A., & Markman, E. (1986). Categories and
induction in young children. Cognition, 23, 183-209.
Gelman, S. A. & Hirschfeld, L. A. (1999). How biological
is essentialism? In S. Atran & D. Medin (Eds.).
Folkbiology, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Jones, S. S., & Smith, L. B. (2002). How children know the
relevant properties for generalizing object names.
Developmental Science, 5, 219-232.
Keil, F. C., Smith, W. C., Simons, D. J., & Levin, D. T.
(1998).
Two dogmas of conceptual empiricism:
Implications for hybrid models of the structure of
knowledge. Cognition, 65, 103-135.
McClelland, J. L., & Rogers, T. T. (2003). The parallel
distributed processing approach to semantic cognition.
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 4, 310-322.
Sloman, S. A. (1993). Feature-based induction. Cognitive
psychology, 25, 231 – 280.
Sloutsky, V. M., Lo, Y.-F., & Fisher, A. V. (2001). How
much does a shared name make things similar? Linguistic
labels and the development of inductive inference. Child
Development, 72, 1695-1709.
Sloutsky, V. M. (2003). The role of similarity in the
development of categorization. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 7, 246-251.
6
397

