UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
The Origin of the Linguistic Gender Effect in Spoken-Word Recognition: Evidence from NonNative Listening

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3v3361hc

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Weber, Andrea
Paris, Garance

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

The Origin of the Linguistic Gender Effect in Spoken-Word Recognition: Evidence
from Non-Native Listening
Andrea Weber (aweber@coli.uni-sb.de)
Dept. of Computational Psycholinguistics, Saarland University, 66041 Saarbrücken, Germany

Garance Paris (gparis@coli.uni-sb.de)
Dept. of Computational Psycholinguistics, Saarland University, 66041 Saarbrücken, Germany
Abstract
Two eye-tracking experiments examined linguistic gender
effects in non-native spoken-word recognition. French
participants, who knew German well, followed spoken
instructions in German to click on pictures on a computer
screen (e.g., Wo befindet sich die Perle, “where is the pearl”)
while their eye movements were monitored. The name of the
target picture was preceded by a gender-marked article in the
instructions. When a target and a competitor picture (with
phonologically similar names) were of the same gender in
both German and French, French participants fixated
competitor pictures more than unrelated pictures. However,
when target and competitor were of the same gender in
German but of different gender in French, early fixations to
the competitor picture were reduced. Competitor activation in
the non-native language was seemingly constrained by native
gender information. German listeners showed no such
viewing time difference. The results speak against a formbased account of the linguistic gender effect. They rather
support the notion that the effect originates from the
grammatical level of language processing.

Introduction
Gender is a grammatical category that varies largely across
the languages of the world. The range goes from elaborate
gender systems in some languages to the absence of gender
in others. Both German and French are languages with
grammatical gender. The form of definite articles, for
example, marks gender in both languages. German definite
articles are der(masc.), die(fem.), and das(neut.); French definite
articles are l e(masc.) and l a(fem.) respectively. Grammatical
gender usually becomes most noticeable when we learn a
second language with gender. Is it der Berg (“mountain”) or
die Berg in German? Do the French say le citron (“lemon”)
or la citron? The present study investigated how gender
marking influences the recognition of spoken-words in a
non-native language. Results help clarify the origin of the
linguistic gender effect.
It is generally accepted in the psycholinguistic
community that during the recognition of spoken words,
multiple word candidates get simultaneously activated and
compete against each other (e.g., Marslen-Wilson & Welsh,
1978; McQueen, Norris, & Cutler, 1994). When a native
speaker hears, for example, the German word P e r l e
(“pearl”), lexical representations of words with similar
onsets, such as Perücke (“wig”), will initially be activated
along with Perle. Activated word candidates compete for

recognition until they no longer match incoming segmental
information. Thus, Perücke will drop out of the competitor
set as the /l/ in Perle is being heard. It has also been shown
that non-native listeners consider candidate words in both
the non-native and their native language simultaneously
(e.g., Marian & Spivey, 2003; Weber & Cutler, 2004). Thus,
for French listeners the beginning of German Perle may
additionally activate French words like perruque and persil.
Eye-tracking is a methodology that has been found to
be eminently suited for the investigation of competitor
activation (e.g., Tanenhaus, Spivey-Knowlton, Eberhard, &
Sedivy, 1995). It makes use of the fact that participants
make saccadic eye movements to pictures of objects on a
computer screen as the names of the objects are mentioned
in spoken sentences. Locations and latencies of eye
movements on pictures are recorded using a camera
mounted on a headband and can be used to examine lexical
competition in spoken-word recognition. While participants
hear the name of a target picture, they look more often to
pictures with names that are similar in onset with the target
name than to pictures with phonologically unrelated names.
It has been shown that such competition effects, defined as
fixation proportions to pictures, closely map to activation
levels of word candidates as simulated in computational
models of spoken-word recognition such as TRACE
(Allopenna, Magnuson, & Tanenhaus, 1998; Dahan,
Magnuson, & Tanenhaus, 2001).
By now, numerous eye-tracking studies have successfully
confirmed phonological competitor activation in spokenword recognition. Dahan, Swingley, Tanenhaus, and
Magnuson (2000) took the subject one step further by
testing whether morphosyntactic context can affect
competitor activation. In particular, they tested whether
gender marking on definite articles influences the
recognition of subsequent nouns. A number of studies had
already looked at lexical gender effects in word recognition
using experimental paradigms other than eye-tracking (e.g.,
Bates, Devescovi, Hernandez, & Pizzamiglio, 1996; Colé &
Segui, 1994; Grosjean, Dommergues, Cornu, Guillelmon, &
Besson, 1994). These studies found that the presence of
gender-congruent articles or adjectives enhances the
recognition of target nouns whereas gender-incongruent
forms slow recognition down. Dahan et al. (2000),
investigated the role of gender information on spoken-word
recognition more directly: They tested the activation of
competitors that matched the initial sounds of a target noun

1446

but mismatched the gender marking on the article. They
found that the presence of a gender-marked definite article
could prevent early activation of competitors inconsistent
with that gender: Upon hearing cliquez sur le bouton (“click
on the(masc.) button”), French listeners did not fixate the
picture of a bouteille (“bottle(fem.)”) more often than pictures
with unrelated names.1
The study by Dahan et al. (2000), however, could not
assess the origin of the lexical gender effect. Are listeners
really sensitive to grammatical gender information in the
preceding context or is it simply listeners’ sensitivity to the
co-occurrence of the form of the article with the form of the
noun that restricts lexical access? In order to reduce the high
co-occurrence of definite articles and nouns, Dahan and
colleagues interposed a gender-marked adjective in a
follow-up study. In their preliminary results, activation of
gender-mismatching competitors was no longer reduced
when low frequency gender-marked adjectives preceded
target nouns. This was seen as evidence for a form-based
origin of the gender effect. In a Russian eye-tracking study,
however, Sekerina (2003) found that gender-marked color
adjectives do restrict referential sets to gender-matching
nouns. She interpreted the results as evidence for a
grammar-based effect of gender in spoken-word
recognition.
Spoken-word recognition in a non-native language offers
the possibility to distinguish between a form-based and a
grammar-based account of the linguistic gender effect. The
gender of a noun can differ across languages: Canon is, for
instance, feminine in German but masculine in French. The
present study tested whether French listeners, who are
highly proficient in German, use native French gender
information during the recognition of spoken words in
German. Since the form of the article differs in German and
French, presentation of the German article should not give
rise to co-occurrence information for the French form of the
article and a given noun. Thus, if the gender of words in
French exerts an effect on the recognition of spoken words
in German (even though French is not presented), this
would strongly suggest that the locus of the gender effect is
not form-based.2
Recent eye-tracking studies have shown that listeners
cannot deactivate the lexicon of the native language even in
a monolingual non-native situation where the native
vocabulary is irrelevant (Marian & Spivey, 2003; Spivey &
Marian, 1999; Weber & Cutler, 2004). Native language
competitors that were phonologically related to the non-

native target were activated more than phonologically
unrelated words: Upon hearing the English target desk,
Dutch listeners, who knew English well, fixated the picture
of a lid more than unrelated pictures because the Dutch
name for lid (deksel) was phonologically related to desk
(Weber & Cutler, 2004). Similarly, grammatical information
from the native language might interfere with non-native
listening. Imagine native French speakers listening to
German in an eye-tracking study. Spoken instructions in
German tell them to click on target pictures on a screen. The
name of the target picture is preceded by the definite article
in the instructions, and target and competitor names overlap
in onset in both languages. In the non-native presentation
language German, target and competitor names share
gender, so the gender marking on the article cannot exclude
the competitor as a lexical candidate. In the native language
French, however, target and competitor differ in gender. If
we find no competitor activation for French listeners, this
would suggest that they use native French gender
information to disambiguate between target and competitor.

Experiment 1
Method
Participants Eighteen native speakers of French, mostly
students (mean age of 22), took part in the experiment for
monetary compensation. They had normal or corrected-tonormal vision and normal hearing. On average, they had
studied German as a foreign language for 10 years in
secondary education, starting at a mean age of 12 (ranging
from 10 to 16). To confirm their high proficiency in the
non-native language, they underwent a vocabulary test in
German after completing the eye-tracking experiment. For
each target and competitor noun in the experiment plus a
number of filler nouns with neuter gender, they had to name
the correct gender. The average score was 78% correct.

1

Dahan et al. (2000) also showed that when no phonological
overlap between picture names was given, gender-marked articles
were not sufficient to restrict participants’ attention to pictures
with gender matching names.
2
Only very few studies have looked at gender marking effects in
non-native spoken-word recognition. Guillelmon and Grosjean
(2001), for example, found in an auditory naming study no effects
of congruency for late English-French bilinguals. It is not
established yet whether gender marking influences competitor
activation in a second language.

1447

Figure 1: Example of visual display presented to
participants.

Table 1: Examples of German (G) target-competitor pairs
and their French (F) translations.
same-gender pair

G
F

different-gender pair

G
F

target
Perle(fem.)
perle(fem.)
“pearl”
Kassette(fem.)
cassette(fem.)
“tape”

intended names was 88% correct, and the goodness of the
pictures was rated with a mean of 5 on a scale from 0 to 6.
German target nouns, preceded by their definite article
with nominative case marking, were embedded in a carrier
sentence (e.g., Wo befindet sich die Perle, “Where is the
pearl”). Spoken instructions were recorded. The duration of
putative overlap between target and competitor (e.g., the
duration of /pEr/ in Perle) was on average 200 ms for samegender pairs and 174 ms for different-gender pairs.

competitor
Perücke(fem.)
perruque(fem.)
“wig”
Kanone(fem.)
canon(masc.)
“canon”

Materials Thirty German nouns referring to picturable
objects were chosen as targets.3 Each target was paired with
a competitor. The onset of the competitor overlapped
phonemically with the onset of the target in both German
and French (e.g., German target Perle /pErl´/ was perle
/pErl/ in French; German competitor Perücke /pEryk´/ was
perruque /pEryk/ in French). The target was always of the
same gender in German and French, but the gender of the
competitor divided the pairs into two groups (see Table 1).
In 15 “same-gender” pairs, target and competitor shared
gender in both languages. The target Perle (“pearl”),
feminine in both German and French, was for example
paired with the competitor Perücke (“wig”), also feminine
in both languages. In these pairs, neither German nor French
gender information could constrain initial competitor
activation. In 15 “different-gender” pairs, target and
competitor still shared gender in German, but were of
different genders in French. The target Kassette (“tape”),
feminine in both languages, was for instance paired with the
competitor Kanone (“canon”), which is feminine in German
but masculine in French. Whereas German gender
information could not exclude the competitor as a potential
lexical candidate in these pairs, French gender information
could.
Two phonologically unrelated distractors, with random
gender, were added for each target (e.g., snail and belt).
Neither the German nor the French names of the unrelated
distractors overlapped with the German target nouns. The
target was heard in the experiment, whereas competitor and
unrelated distractors were not heard. The overall lexical
frequency of targets and competitors did not differ
significantly in either of our target-competitor pairs.
Thirty filler trials were added. Great care was taken in
the fillers to dispel expectations that pictures with
phonologically similar names or matching gender were
likely targets. Three more representative trials were
constructed as practice trials.
All pictures were colored line drawings, taken from the
IMSI MasterClips Image Collection (1990). In pre-tests, we
asked participants to name and rate target and competitor
pictures. The agreement between participants’ responses and

Procedure Participants were tested individually. At the
beginning of a session, they received instructions in
German, telling them to click on the object on the screen
that was mentioned in a sentence. Sentences were presented
auditorily over headphones and started 550 ms after the
appearance of the pictures on the screen. The set of pictures
was not shown to the participants before the experiment.
While they were listening, participants’ eye movements
were monitored using an SMI EyeLink head-mounted eyetracker. A camera on the participants’ dominant eye
provided the input to the tracker. Onset and offset times and
the spatial coordinates of the participants’ fixations were
recorded (250 Hz sampling rate). All pictures were
presented in color on a 3 x 3 gray grid (see Figure 1). Each
cell measured 7.5 x 7.5 cm, corresponding to a visual angle
of approximately 7°, which is well within the resolution of
the eye-tracker (better than 1°). The pictures of a target
item, its competitor, and two unrelated distractors were
displayed together in one trial. Positions of target and
competitor objects were randomized across trials. Each
experimental trial was preceded by at least one filler trial.
Along with the eye movements, the position of the mouse
click was recorded.
For the analysis, graphical software was used to display
the locations of the participants’ fixations as dots
superimposed on the four pictures for each trial and each
participant. Fixations were coded as pertaining to the cell of
the target object, the competitor object, or one of the two
unrelated distractors. Fixations that lay clearly outside the
cell of an object were not used for the computation of the
fixation probabilities. Saccade times were not added to
fixation times.

Results and Discussion
Seventeen trials were removed from the analysis because
participants clicked on an object other than the target or no
fixation on the target object was found (3.2% of all trials).
The low percentage of errors suggests that French
participants had no difficulties performing the task in
German. Fixation proportions, at successive 10 ms time
frames, were averaged over participants and items for
separate analyses.

3

Since the French gender system is limited to feminine and
masculine, selected German target nouns were either of feminine
or masculine gender, but never neuter.

1448

Figure 2: Same-gender pairs. Fixation proportions of
French listeners over time for German targets, competitors,
and averaged distractors.

Figure 3: Different-gender pairs. Fixation proportions of
French listeners over time for German targets, competitors,
and averaged distractors.

Figure 2 presents the averaged proportions of fixations after
target noun onset for trials with same-gender pairs. Fixation
proportions for the two unrelated distractors were averaged.
It takes typically about 150 to 200 ms before a programmed
eye movement is launched (e.g., Matin, Shao, & Buff,
1993). Thus, fixations on the target object that are triggered
by acoustic information are observable starting around 200
ms after target noun onset.
In same-gender pairs, French listeners fixated
competitor objects more than distractor objects. Between
200 and 600 ms, the proportion of fixations was on average
23.9% for the competitor and 14.9% for the unrelated
distractors. A one-factor ANOVA on the mean proportion of
fixations between 200 and 600 ms, with picture (with the
two levels ‘competitor’ and ‘unrelated distractors’) as the
within-participants factor, showed that the competitor was
fixated significantly more than the average of the unrelated
distractors (F1[1, 17] = 11.41, p < .005; F2[1, 14] = 13.92, p
< .005). Neither gender information from the non-native
presentation language, nor gender information from their
native language could narrow the lexical candidates down to
the target. In consequence, the competitor was activated
during the presentation of the target due to their
phonological similarity.
Prior to the point that fixations could be driven by
acoustic information from the target noun, no variation
between fixation proportions was found. Analyses in the 0200 ms time window showed no reliable difference in initial
fixations between competitor and unrelated distractors
(F1[1, 17] = 2.15, p > .1; F2 < 1). Thus, the difference
between fixations to the competitor and the unrelated
distractors in the 200-600 ms time window cannot be
attributed to a general bias toward the picture of the
competitor.
The pattern of results changed for different-gender
pairs. French participants no longer fixated competitor
objects more than distractor objects (see Figure 3).

Over the 200-600 ms time window, 17.9% of the fixations
were on average to the competitor and 15.6% to the
distractors. A one-factor ANOVA confirmed the lack of a
difference in viewing times (F 1 & F 2< 1). As before, no
reliable differences were found for different-gender pairs in
initial fixation proportions between 0 and 200 ms after
target noun onset (F1 & F2 < 1).
In different-gender pairs, gender information carried by
the article in German could not constrain competitor
activation, but French gender could. Despite its
phonological similarity with the target noun, the competitor
was not activated when the article of the target noun did not
match in gender with the competitor in French. Evidently,
French listeners used native French gender information to
constrain competitor activation in German.4 The experiment
was conducted in German, and the linguistic form of the
article did not exclude the competitor as a potential lexical
candidate. In other words, the probability of the target noun
being Perle or Perücke was equally high after hearing the
phoneme sequence /di˘pEr/, die Per. Nevertheless,
competitor activation was eliminated for French listeners.
This suggests that the high form-based co-occurrence of
article and target did not constrain lexical access in our
experiments, but rather grammatical gender carried by the
article did.

Experiment 2
As a control, we presented the same stimuli to listeners
whose native language was German. If native gender
information of the pictures had restricted eye movements in
Experiment 1, both same-gender pairs and different-gender
pairs should now offer competition for German listeners in
Experiment 2, since in German target and competitor share
gender in both pairs.
4

The same analyses were run again after removing trials for which
the French native speakers made a mistake in the vocabulary test.
The results were comparable.

1449

Results and Discussion
Participants never clicked on an object other than the target.
Figure 4 shows the averaged proportions of fixations after
target noun onset for trials with same-gender pairs. As is
immediately apparent, higher fixation probabilities were
observed for the competitor than for the unrelated
distractors. Over the 200-600 ms time window, the
proportion of fixations was on average 26.74% for the
competitor and 11.16% for the unrelated distractors. This
difference was significant in a one-way ANOVA (F1[1, 11]
= 22.97, p < .002; F 2[1, 14] = 19.47, p < .01). Just as the
French listeners in Experiment 1, German listeners activated
competitors when gender-marked articles could not exclude
them as potential lexical candidates. No reliable difference
in viewing times was observed in the first 200 ms after
target noun onset (F1[1, 11] = 1.30, p > .2; F2[1, 14] = 1.97,
p > .1).
In contrast to the French listeners, however, German
listeners also looked more often at the competitor than at the
unrelated distractors in different-gender pairs. Between 200600 ms after target noun onset the proportion of fixations
was on average 20.98% for the competitor and 11.84% for
the unrelated distractors. An ANOVA showed a significant
effect of type of picture (F 1[1, 11] = 10.68, p < .01;
F2[1, 14] = 8.34, p < .02). Again, viewing times for
competitor and unrelated distractors did not differ in the first
200 ms after target noun onset (F1 & F2 < 1).
The results of Experiment 2 showed that during the
presentation of the target noun, German listeners activated
the competitor in both same-gender and different-gender
pairs.

Figure 4: Same-gender pairs. Fixation proportions of
German listeners over time for German targets, competitors,
and averaged distractors.

Summary
Figure 5: Different-gender pairs. Fixation proportions of
German listeners over time for German targets, competitors,
and averaged distractors.

Method
P a r t i c i p a n t s Twelve native speakers of German
participated, in return for a small payment. They were all
students (mean age of 21), and had normal or corrected-tonormal vision and normal hearing. They had all learned
French as a second language in school, but were not
required to exercise their proficiency here.
Materials The materials were as in Experiment 1.
Procedure The procedure was as in Experiment 1.
Participants were not made aware of potential crosslanguage competition in the experiment.

A recent eye-tracking study by Dahan et al. (2000) has
shown that grammatical context can constrain lexical
access. In their study, French participants followed spoken
instructions in French to click on pictures on a screen while
their eye movements were monitored. Eye movements to
pictures were interpreted as evidence for the activation of
the words corresponding to those pictures. We know from
previous eye-tracking studies that competitor pictures with
names that overlap in onset with the name of a target picture
are fixated more than pictures with unrelated names (see
e.g., Tanenhaus et al., 1995). In the spoken instructions in
Dahan et al’s study, the names of the target pictures were
immediately preceded by articles. In the absence of gender
marking on the article (i.e., French plural article les),
competitor activation was found for phonologically related
nouns. However, when competitors matched in initial
sounds with a target noun but mismatched in gender
marking on the preceding article, early competitor activation
was eliminated.
The present eye-tracking studies investigated the role of
linguistic gender for the process of listening to a non-native
language. An interesting aspect of non-native listening is
that the gender of words can vary between the native and the
non-native language. Thus, gender information as conveyed

1450

by the presentation language, i.e. the non-native language,
can be opposed to gender information from the listeners’
native language. In Experiment 1, French participants
followed spoken instructions in German to click on pictures
on a computer screen (e.g., Wo befindet sich die Perle,
“Where is the pearl”). When target and competitor noun
shared gender in both German and French, French
participants fixated competitor pictures more than unrelated
pictures. However, when target and competitor were of the
same gender in German but of different gender in French,
early fixations to the competitor picture were eliminated.
This result was interpreted as evidence that competitor
activation in the non-native language was constrained by
native gender information. In Experiment 2, German
listeners were presented with the same materials and
showed no such difference in viewing time.
In general, our results support Dahan et al’s (2000)
findings that gender information influences lexical access,
but also crucially offer new insights with respect to the
origin of the gender effect. On one account, listeners
compute distributional regularities between the cooccurrence of the form of the article and the form of the
noun and use these form-based regularities to restrict lexical
access. On another account, distributional regularities would
be computed using grammatical categories. On the formbased account, probabilities would express the likelihood of
the target being Perle upon hearing the segmental sequence
/di˘pEr/; on the grammar-based account, probabilities would
express the likelihood of the target being Perle upon hearing
/pEr/ plus having feminine gender information from the
context. Within one language, these two accounts are
difficult to tease apart. However, non-native listening
offered the possibility to separate them, because linguistic
gender effects of the non-presentation language are unlikely
to be caused by form-based regularities of that language.
The fact that, for French listeners in Experiment 1,
competitor activation in German was eliminated when
French gender information mismatched the gender of the
target speaks against an form-based account of the linguistic
gender effect. Our results rather support the notion that the
linguistic gender effect originates from the higher,
grammatical level of language processing.

Acknowledgments
We thank Delphine Dahan for inspiring discussions on the
topic. Further thanks go to Alissa Melinger for helpful
comments on an earlier version of this paper. This research
was funded by SFB 378 “ALPHA” to the first author,
awarded by the German Research Council.

References
Allopenna, P., Magnuson, J., & Tanenhaus,. M. (1998).
Tracking the time course of spoken-word recognition
using eye movements: Evidence for continuous mapping
models. Journal of Memory and Language, 38, 419-439.
Bates, E., Devescovi, A., Hernandez, A., & Pizzamiglio, L.
(1996). Gender priming in Italian. Perception &
Psychophysics, 85, 992-1004.
Blair, I., Urland, G., & Ma, J. (2002). Using internet search
engines to estimate word frequency. Behavior Research
Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 34, 286-290.
Colé, P., & Segui, J. (1994). Grammatical incongruency and
vocabulary types. Memory & Cognition, 22, 387-394.
Corbett, G. (1991). Gender. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Dahan, D., Magnuson, J., & Tanenhaus, M. (2001). Time
course of frequency effects in spoken-word recognition:
Evidence from eye-movements. Cognitive Psychology,
42, 317-367.
Dahan, D., Swingley, D., Tanenhaus, M., & Magnuson, J.
(2000). Linguistic gender and spoken-word recognition in
French. Journal of Memory and Language, 42, 465-480.
Grosjean, F., Dommergues, J., Cornu, E., Guillelmon, D., &
Besson, C. (1994). The gender-marking effect in spokenword recognition. Perception & Psychophysics, 56, 590598.
Guillelmon, D., & Grosjean, F. (2001). The gender marking
effect in spoken word recognition: The case of bilinguals.
Memory and Cognition, 29, 503-511.
IMSI Master Clips (1990). Premium image collection
303,000. (http://www.imsisoft.com)
Marian, V., & Spivey, M. (2003). Bilingual and monolingual processing of competing lexical items. Applied
Psycholinguistics, 24, 173-193.
Marslen-Wilson, W., & Welsh, A. (1978). Processing
interactions and lexical access during word-recognition in
continuous speech. Cognitive Psychology, 10, 29-63.
Matin, E., Shao, K., & Buff, K. (1993). Saccadic overhead:
information processing time with and without saccades.
Perception & Psychophysics, 53, 372-380.
McQueen, J., Norris, D., & Cutler, A. (1994). Competition
in spoken word recognition: Spotting words in other
words. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 20, 621-638.
Sekerina, I. (2003). Grammatical gender and mapping of
referential expressions in Russian. Talk presented at the
9th Annual Conference on Architectures and Mechanisms
for Language Processing, Glasgow, Scotland.
Spivey, M., & Marian, V. (1999). Crosstalk between native
and second languages: Partial activation of an irrelevant
lexicon. Psychological Science, 10, 281-284.
Tanenhaus, M., Spivey-Knowlton, M., Eberhard, K., &
Sedivy, J. (1995). Integration of visual and linguistic
information in spoken-language comprehension. Science,
268, 1632-1634.
Weber, A., & Cutler, A. (2004). Lexical competition in nonnative spoken-word recognition. Journal of Memory and
Language, 50, 1-25.

1451

