UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Time is of the Essence: Processing Temporal Connectives During Reading

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4pr3w9mw

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Hoeks, John C.J.
Stowe, Laurie A.
Wunderink, Charlotte

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Time is of the Essence:
Processing Temporal Connectives During Reading
John C. J. Hoeks (j.c.j.hoeks@let.rug.nl)
BCN NeuroImaging Centre, PO Box 716,
9700 AS Groningen, The Netherlands.

Laurie A. Stowe (l.a.stowe@let.rug.nl)
BCN NeuroImaging Centre, PO Box 716,
9700 AS Groningen, The Netherlands.

Charlotte Wunderink (c.wunderink@let.rug.nl)
BCN NeuroImaging Centre, PO Box 716,
9700 AS Groningen, The Netherlands.

Abstract

1a. Before the author submitted the paper, the journal
changed its policy.

An important study by Münte, Schiltz, and Kutas [Nature 395
(1998) 71-73] using ERPs (=Event-Related brain Potentials)
suggested that sentences starting with the temporal connective
before are more taxing for working memory than sentences
starting with after, as evidenced by a slow negative shift for
before sentences. According to Münte et al., before sentences
present events out of the correct chronological order, as in
Before the author submitted the paper [=second event], the
journal changed its policy [=first event]. In order to come up
with the correct discourse representation of the sentence, the
correct chronological order has to be restored, leading to extra
memory load. In the present experiments using a self-paced
reading paradigm it will be shown that before sentences are
not more difficult to process than after sentences, but that
they are even read faster than after sentences. In addition, it is
shown that before sentences in which events are presented in
the correct chronological order, as in The journal changed its
policy [=first event], before the author submitted the paper
[=second event] are read more slowly than corresponding
sentences with after. Implications for Münte et al.'s theory are
discussed and objectives for future research are formulated.

Here, the event of submitting a paper precedes the event
of policy change in this specific sentence, but in reality, the
policy change happened first, which can be described as
Before [Event2], [Event1]. In contrast, sentences
starting with after, such as 1b, present the events in their
correct chronological order, exactly as they purportedly
happened in reality: first a submission, then change of
policy, so: After [Event1], [Event2].
1b. After the author submitted the paper, the journal
changed its policy.

Introduction
Readers do not wait with the interpretation of a sentence
until they have received the final word. On the contrary, the
process of understanding sentences occurs in a highly
incremental fashion, approximately as each word is
encountered (e.g., Altmann & Steedman, 1988). A striking
illustration of this phenomenon is provided by Münte,
Schiltz, and Kutas (1998). In a study using ERPs (=EventRelated brain Potentials), they showed that sentences
starting with the temporal connective before were processed
differently from sentences starting with after. Almost
immediately after presentation of the temporal connective,
the ERP waveforms for the before and the after sentences
started to diverge, with the more negative values for the
before sentences. Münte et al. argued that this negative shift
reflected the additional discourse-level processing that is
necessary to deal with sentences that present events out of
their correct chronological order. Consider, for instance,
sentence 1a, which is an example sentence of the materials
used by Münte et al. (1998).

577

As the size of the negative shift in the ERP waveforms
turned out to be highly correlated with the individual
working memory spans of the participants (the higher the
memory span, the larger the effect), Münte et al. concluded
that the problem with before sentences is really a working
memory problem. In other words, it is claimed that when
reading a sentence starting with before, readers immediately
realize that the events that they are going to read about will
have to be re-ordered at some stage to arrive at a coherent
and valid semantic representation of the sentence. Thus, the
temporal connective before may act as a kind of cognitive
operator instructing the language processor to hold in
memory the event reported on in the first clause, in order to
enable the reconstruction of the events in their correct
chronological order, presumably after the sentence has been
read.
There are, however, a number of problems with this
interpretation. First of all, there is no a priori reason to
interpret a negative shift as evidence for processing
difficulty or any other form of effortful (memory-related)
processing. For instance, a well-known ERP component
such as the 'P600' is a positive component (occurring about
600 ms post-onset of a critical stimulus), which can be
evoked by a number of syntactic problems, such as
ungrammatical sentences (Osterhout & Holcomb, 1992),
correct sentences with an unpreferred syntactic structure

(Hagoort, Brown, & Groothusen, 1993), syntactically
complex sentences (Kaan, Harris, Gibson, & Holcomb,
2000), and even in sentences with a correct syntactic
structure that are semantically anomalous (Hoeks, Stowe, &
Doedens, 2004). In other words, it cannot be excluded that
for some reason or other the after sentences are the most
difficult, and that this processing difficulty is reflected as a
positive shift in the ERP signal.
But even if the negativity does indicate processing
problems, and the before sentences are actually the most
difficult, there is another reason why the interpretation of
Münte et al might be wrong. For example, if we take a look
at the data that Münte et al. provide on the participants with
the high and the low working memory score, visual
inspection of the waveforms suggests that the ERPs for the
before sentences actually do not differ between the two
working memory groups. Shouldn't these before sentences
be extra taxing for the group with the smallest working
memory capacity, as compared to the high working memory
group? What we see instead is a difference between the
groups for the after sentences, which are more positive for
the group with the high working memory score. This is quite
unexpected, given that the after sentences are relatively
'easy' and do not tax memory at all, at least much less than
before sentences, as Münte et al. claim. In addition, there is
only a very slight difference in the low working memory
group between the the 'difficult' before sentences and 'easy'
after sentences, which is also rather unexpected. It is not
immediately clear how this pattern of results should be
interpreted, but it is clear that it does not support Münte et
al.'s hypotheses.
In the light of these problematic aspects it seems
necessary that two specific issues regarding the processing
of sentences with temporal connectives be resolved. First, it
is very important to find out whether before sentences are
more difficult than after sentences, or whether it is the other
way around. Once this is known, we also know how to
interpret the negative shift for before sentences reported by
Münte et al. Indeed, we might be looking at a positive shift,
if the after sentences turn out to be the most difficult.
Secondly, if before sentences are more difficult than after
sentences, we should be able to establish whether this is
caused by the chronological order of the events described in
the sentence or perhaps by other factors. In the present
experiment we will focus on exactly those issues using a
self-paced reading paradigm.
The first issue can be tackled rather straightforwardly: by
measuring the time people take to read the sentence in either
the before or the after version, we can establish which
condition is the most difficult, as it will be read more
slowly. The second issue is more complicated, but can be
investigated in the following way. Consider sentence 2a,
which is an example sentence from the present experiment
(with English translation in brackets).

first, actually happened later than the 'eating' event.
However, in a sentence such as 2b, the events are presented
in their chronological order again.
2b. Stefan at de koekjes op, voordat Piet de sinas dronk.

(Stefan ate the biscuits, before Piet drank the soft drink)

Thus, sentence 2b should not be problematic at all, and be
processed faster than a similar sentence with after in the
second clause (e.g., Stefan ate the biscuits [event2], after
Piet drank the soft drink [event1]).

Experiment 1
This experiment is a reading time experiment in which
participants read sentences for comprehension and made
semantic plausibility judgments after reading each sentence.

Method
Participants Forty native speakers of Dutch were paid for
participating in this experiment (28 female; mean age 21
years, age range 18-30). All were currently receiving a
university education.
Materials & Design For this experiment, 80 sets of
sentences were constructed, each set consisting of eight
versions of a given item. Experimental lists were
constructed with 10 experimental items per condition, and
no list containing more than one version of a given item. All
80 experimental sentences were plausible as determined by
two expert raters. An equal number of implausible filler
sentences (see sentence 4 below for an example) were added
such that each list contain an equal number of plausible and
implausible items. The purpose of the semantic plausibility
test and the implausible fillers was to encourage deep
semantic processing of the experimental sentences.
The order in which experimental and filler items appeared
was determined semi-randomly and was the same for each
list. Each list was presented to an equal number of
participants (i.e., five) and each participant saw one list.
Only the first four of the eight conditions belong to the
present Experiment 1; the other four conditions were part of
a related experiment that will be discussed below as
Experiment 2. The experimental sentences for the first
experiment appeared in the following forms:
3a. Before (first clause), Incorrect order (E2 - E1)

Before Piet drank the soft drink [E2], Stefan ate the biscuits [E1].

3b. After (first clause), Correct order (E1 - E2)

After Piet drank the soft drink [E1], Stefan ate the biscuits [E2].

3c. Before (second clause), Correct order (E1 - E2)

Stefan ate the biscuits [E1], before Piet drank the soft drink [E2].

3d. After (second clause), Incorrect order (E2 - E1)

2a. Voordat Piet de sinas dronk, at Stefan de koekjes op.

Stefan ate the biscuits [E2], after Piet drank the soft drink [E1].

(Before Piet drank the soft drink, Stefan ate the biscuits)

This sentence presents the events out of chronological order,
as did sentence 1a. The 'drinking' event which is mentioned

578

The filler sentences had exactly the same form as the
experimental sentences (in exactly the same quantities) but
were semantically implausible, as sentence 4.

A practice session consisting of 30 items preceded the actual
experiment.
Procedure Participants were seated behind a computer
screen in a sound-proof cabin. Each sentence was preceded
by an asterisk indicating the start of a new sentence.
Participants were instructed to use the 'b'-key on a keyboard
before them to read the sentence clause-by-clause. That is,
after the first key-press the asterisk disappeared and the first
clause appeared (e.g., "Before Piet drank the soft drink,");
after the second press the first clause disappeared and the
second clause appeared (e.g., "Stefan ate the biscuits."); at
the next press the second clause disappeared and the
question "Goed?" (="Correct?") appeared. Participants had
to press the right SHIFT button to indicate that the sentence
was semantically plausible, and the left SHIFT button if
they felt it was not. Each response was followed by
feedback on the correctness of the answer (i.e., "Correct!" /
"Wrong!"). Participants were asked to read the sentences
carefully and to respond as quickly as possible without
compromising accuracy. After the feedback the asterisk
reappeared. In all, the experiment took approximately 20
min.

sentences as far as the first clause is concerned (though
reading times of first clauses containing before were
numerically smaller than those of first clauses containing
after). Much larger differences were found in the second
clause. The second clause of sentences with before in the
first clause was read significantly faster than of sentences
with after in the first clause (p<.05). The opposite pattern,
however, was found for the sentences with the temporal
connective in the second clause: here, the before sentences
were read more slowly than the after sentences, though this
difference was only marginally significant (p=.09).
100
90
Accuracy

4. Before the murder was committed, the police found the
dead body.

Before-1st
After-1st

80

Before-2nd

70

After-2nd

60
50
Plausibility Judgment
2200
Before-1st

2000

After-1st

Results
Analysis First, reading time data were screened for outliers.
Reading times less than 200 or greater than 4000 ms were
excluded. After that, all observations were excluded which
deviated more than 2.5 SDs from either the participant or the
item mean of each clause in each condition. Two analyses
were performed: an F1-ANOVA on the condition means for
each participant and an F2-ANOVA on the condition means
for each item. The factors Temporal Connective (before vs.
after), Connective Position (in first clause vs. in second
clause), and Clause (first clause vs. second clause) were
treated as within-participants and within-items factors. In
the participant-based analyses, the factor List (i.e., grouping
together participants that were presented with the same list)
was also included in the analyses as a between-participant
factor, and in the item-analyses the factor Itemgroup (i.e.,
grouping together items that appeared in the same condition
in each list) was entered as a between-items factor. Both
factors had 8 levels as there were 8 lists and 8 itemgroups
(see design section above). In addition, accuracy
percentages were calculated per condition. Mean reading
times and accuracy are presented graphically in Figure 1.
Accuracy As can be seen in Figure 1, accuracy was high for
each condition (overall accuracy 90 %). No significant
interactions or main effects were found (all F-values < 1).
Reading Times The 3-way interaction between Temporal
Connective x Connective Position x Clause was significant
in the analysis on items (F2(1,72)=4.12; p<.05) and
marginally significant in the participant analysis
(F1(1,32)=3.23; p=.08). Post Hoc analyses showed that
there was no significant difference between before and after

579

RT 1800

Before-2nd
After-2nd

1600
1400
Clause1

Clause2

Figure 1. Accuracy (in percentages, upper panel) and
Reading times (in ms, lower panel) for Experiment 1.
"Before/After-1st"=temporal connective in first clause;
"Before/After-2nd"= connective in second clause.
A number of other effects were significant, which should of
course be interpreted with caution in the presence of the
significant 3-way interaction. For instance, the 2-way
interaction of Connective Position and Clause was
significant (F1(1,32)=107.16; p<.0001; F2(1,72)=87.80;
p<.0001), reflecting longer reading times for the clause in
which the temporal connective was present (connective in
first clause: first clause: 1865 ms, second clause: 1525 ms;
connective in second clause: first clause: 1959 ms, second
clause: 2138 ms). More interestingly, there was also an
interaction between Connective Position and Temporal
Connective (F1(1,32)=5.06; p<.05; F2(1,72)=4.80; p<.05),
indicating that before sentences as a whole were read faster
when the temporal connective appeared in the first clause
(before: 1884 ms; after: 1940 ms) than when it appeared in
the second clause (before: 1854 ms; after: 1808 ms). No
other effects concerning Temporal Connective were
significant (all F-values < 1). The factors Clause (Clause 1:
1695 ms; Clause 2: 2048 ms) and Connective Position
(connective in first clause: 1912 ms; in second clause: 1831

ms) had significant main effects (F1(1,32)=34.80; p<.0001;
F2(1,72)=84.98; p<.0001, and F1(1,32)=10.08; p<.005;
F2(1,72)=13.69; p<.0001), respectively).

Discussion
This experiment yielded two important results. First, in
the conditions where the temporal connective appeared in
the first clause, there was no evidence at all for before
sentences being more difficult than after sentences as
expected on the basis of Münte et al.'s arguments (1998).
Quite on the contrary, the first clause of before sentences
was read numerically faster than the first clause of after
sentences. More importantly, the second clause of before
sentences was read significantly faster than that of after
sentences, with an average advantage of 97 ms for the
before sentences. This finding clearly indicates that before
sentences are in fact easier to process than after sentences,
contra Münte et al.'s predictions. So perhaps the slow
negative shift for the before sentences is actually a slow
positive shift for the more difficult after sentences.
The second important result comes from the conditions
where the temporal connective was placed in the second
clause. Here, we see no difference in reading times in the
first clause, which is as one would expect given that there is
no difference between the conditions yet, as the temporal
connective only appears in the second clause. We do see
substantial differences in the second clause, but in a
direction opposite to Münte et al.'s predictions. Recall that
the before sentences with the temporal connective in the
second clause present the events in the correct chronological
order (see sentence 3c), in contrast to sentences with after in
the second clause (see sentence 3d). This should have solved
the problems of increased memory load and thus have led to
a processing advantage for the before sentences as compared
to the after sentences. However, what we find is a 110 ms
disadvantage for before sentences with the events in the
'correct' temporal order. This strongly suggests that
presenting events out of chronological order does not lead to
processing difficulty. It even seems that presenting events in
the correct chronological order leads to an increase in
processing difficulty.
Summarizing, this experiment showed, contrary to
expectation, 1) that sentences starting with before are easier
to process than sentences starting with after, and 2) that
presenting events out of chronological order does not cause
processing difficulty.

Experiment 2
Experiment 1 was intended to answer two straightforward
questions about the processing of temporal connectives: 1)
are before sentences more difficult than after sentences, and
2) is that the case because before sentences present events
out of chronological order? We have seen that neither one
was true. Experiment 2 was more exploratory, focussing on
the possible interaction between temporality, or the
chronological ordering of events, with the processing of
referential expressions which is another important aspect in
the construction of a coherent discourse representation
(Garnham, 1999). The main issue here is whether temporal
and referential processing draw on the same resources, or

580

whether they are processed in parallel by independent
mechanisms.
It is assumed that the use of referential elements such as
pronouns (e.g., 'he' or 'she') in a sentence may increase the
processing load during comprehension. When a pronoun is
encountered, a search process needs to be initiated in order
to find the intended referent for the pronoun (i.e., the person
or thing that is referred to by the pronoun). It has been
shown that this search process can be more costly than for
instance having a proper name (e.g., Stefan) where no search
process is necessary (Streb, Rösler, & Hennighausen, 1999).
In Experiment 2, the materials from Experiment 1 were
used, except that in each sentence a pronoun was inserted, as
in sentence 5a.
5a. Stefan at de koekjes op, voordat hij de sinas dronk.

(Stefan ate the biscuits, before he drank the soft drink)

In this sentence, the pronoun he appears in the second clause
and is used anaphorically, that is, it refers back to an entity
that is mentioned earlier (in this case Stefan). Although there
is a pronoun present that might induce a search process, it
does not seem likely that in this specific case this search
process is in any way difficult. In fact, in a sentence such as
5a there is only one possible referent (i.e., Stefan) and the
use of a proper name, permitting immediate identification of
the referent, would even be sub-optimal (see e.g., Gordon,
Grosz, & Gilliom, 1993, regarding a phenomenon called the
'repeated name penalty'). However, if the pronoun were to
precede its referent, this might be taxing for working
memory, or lead to other processing difficulty, because it
will not be possible to fully process the clause that contains
this pronoun before the referent is known. Consider 5b, for
an example of such a sentence.
5b. Voordat hij de sinas dronk, at Stefan de koekjes op.
(Before he drank the soft drink, Stefan ate the biscuits)
In this sentence, the pronoun is used as a cataphor, or
backwards anaphor (Garnham, 1999), and refers to an entity
that will be mentioned later. Because the first clause cannot
be fully interpreted as it lacks crucial information on whom
the pronoun refers to, and because the reader does not know
when this referent will be presented, it seems reasonable to
assume that these sentences are difficult to process, as
compared to sentences such as 5a. If this kind of effortful
processing of cataphors is handled by the same mechanism
that is responsible for temporal processing one would expect
an interaction between these two factors. If, on the other
hand, these two kinds of processes proceed in parallel and
are carried out by independent systems, then there will be no
interaction.
In summary then, Experiment 2 aims to clarify two
things:
1) whether cataphoric constructions are more difficult to
process than anaphoric ones, and
2) whether this difference in processing load has a
(possibly differential) effect on how before and after
sentences are handled. In other words, do temporal and
referential processes interact?

Method
Participants, Design, & Procedure Participants, design
and procedure are described in the method section of
Experiment 1.
Materials Most aspects of the materials are described above
in the materials section of Experiment 1, except for the
conditions of the current experiment, which were the
following:

values>.20). Perhaps more importantly, there was also a
trend towards an interaction between Temporal Connective
and
Connective
Position
(F1(1,32)=3.07;
p=.09;
F2(1,72)=1.67; p=.20), suggestive of shorter times for
before sentences as a whole when the temporal connective
appears in the first clause (i.e., before: 1704 ms vs. after:
1762 ms), contrasting with the pattern of results when the
temporal connective appears in the second clause (i.e.,
before: 1771 ms vs. after: 1756 ms).

6a. Before (first clause), Incorrect order, cataphor

100
Accuracy

Before he drank the soft drink [E2], Stefan ate the biscuits [E1].

6b. After (first clause), Correct order, cataphor

After he drank the soft drink [E1], Stefan ate the biscuits [E2].

6c. Before (second clause), Correct order, anaphor

90

Before-1st

80

After-1st
Before-2nd

70

After-2nd
60

Stefan ate the biscuits [E1], before he drank the soft drink [E2].

50

6d. After (second clause), Incorrect order, anaphor

Plausibility Judgment

Stefan ate the biscuits [E2], after he drank the soft drink [E1].

Note that a full factorial design is not possible, as sentences
with a pronoun in the first clause and a connective in the
second clause are ungrammatical when the pronoun is
intended to refer to the entity mentioned in the second
clause (as in: "He(i) drank the soft drink, before Stefan(i) ate
the biscuits"). Instead, a reduced design was chosen that
would enable us to answer some important questions
regarding the interaction of temporal and referential
processing.

2200
Before-1st

2000

After-1st
RT 1800

Before-2nd
After-2nd

1600
1400
Clause1

Clause2

Results
Analysis After screening for outliers (see Experiment 1),
mean RTs and mean accuracy percentages in each condition
were calculated for both participants and items. Figure 2
presents the mean reading times and accuracy for
Experiment 2.
Accuracy As can be seen in Figure 2, accuracy was high for
each condition (overall accuracy 87 %). The main effect of
Temporal Connective was marginally significant in the
participant-based analysis (F1(1,32)=2.80; p=.10), but not in
the item-based analysis (F2(1,72)=1.74; p=.19), indicating a
trend for slightly greater accuracy in the before sentences
(89%) as compared to the after sentences (86%). There was
no significant effect of Connective Position (F-values < 1).
Reading Times The 3-way interaction between Temporal
Connective x Connective Position x Clause was not
significant in the present experiment (both F-values < 1).
The interaction of Temporal Connective and Clause was
significant in both participant-based and item-based
analyses (F1(1,32)=5.89; p<.05; F2(1,72)=8.95; p<.005).
This interaction is caused by before sentences taking longer
than after sentences in the first clause (i.e., 1558 vs. 1519
ms, respectively) with a reverse pattern for the second
clause (i.e., before: 1917 ms vs. after: 1999 ms). None of
these two separate contrasts were significant, however (p-

581

Figure 2. Accuracy (in percentages, upper panel) and
Reading times (in ms, lower panel) for Experiment 2.
"Before/After-1st"=temporal connective in first clause,
pronoun is cataphor; "Before/After-2nd"=temporal
connective in second clause, pronoun is anaphor.
As to the main effects, there was a marginally significant
main effect of Connective Position (F1(1,32)=1.55; p=.22;
F2(1,72)=3.06; p=.09), suggesting that sentences take longer
to read when the temporal connective appears in the second
clause than when it is present in the first clause (i.e., 1764
ms vs. 1733 ms). Finally, there was a significant main effect
of Clause (F1(1,32)=56.37; p<.0001; F2(1,72)=195.57;
p<.0001), reflecting the large difference in reading times
between first clause (1539 ms) and second clause (1958 ms).
There was no main effect of Temporal Connective (before:
1737 ms; after: 1759 ms; p-values >.30).

Discussion
The aim of this experiment was to establish whether
cataphoric constructions were more difficult to process than
anaphoric ones, and also whether any difference between
them would affect the processing of temporal structure.
Some tentative evidence for such an interaction seems to
come from the finding that before sentences are faster than

after sentences when containing cataphors, but not when
containing anaphors. However, this might very well be the
result of an unfortunate 'blip' in the data, that is, the fact that
reading times for the first clause differ between conditions
that had identical first clauses (i.e., of sentences with the
connective in the second clause). It is not unlikely either that
the marginally significant main effect of Connective
Position, another indication of a possible difference between
cataphors and anaphors, is caused by just that spurious
effect. So what can we say about cataphors and anaphors
then?
What we can say about cataphors is that they do not seem
to be hard to process. Perhaps the most striking difference
between the present two experiments is the large reduction
in first clause reading times when proper names / NPs (i.e.,
in Exp. 1) are replaced by cataphoric pronouns (i.e., in Exp.
2), indicating that inserting cataphoric pronouns makes
sentences easier. However, because these clauses differ
between experiments in the lexical material they contain, no
strong conclusions can be drawn from this outcome. What is
equally apparent, however, is that cataphors do not create a
difference between before and after sentences: there is no
difference at all in the first clause and only a slight
difference in the second clause, which is numerically almost
identical to the pattern of results in Experiment 1 (for
sentences with the temporal connective in the first clause,
see also Figure 1). As for anaphors, it seems clear that they
do not cause processing difficulty either. On the contrary,
they seem to make the processing of before sentences easier,
if we compare the results of both experiments: In
Experiment 1 before (with the correct order of events) was
read more slowly than after (with the incorrect order of
events) in the sentences with the connective in the second
clause; in Experiment 2 this is (numerically at least) the
other way around. In summary then, the outcome of this
experiment strongly suggests that cataphors are not difficult
to process, that anaphors are even easier, and that
chronological order of events is not a factor of importance.

Conclusion & Future Directions
The present experiments have convincingly shown that
before sentences are actually easier to process than after
sentences. In addition, it has become clear that the
chronological order of events does not strongly influence
ease of sentence processing. Finally, as there was no strong
evidence for an interaction between temporal and referential
processing, it is still a bit unclear whether these two kinds of
information are processed by the same or by different
cognitive mechanisms.
When we try to understand the Münte et al. results in the
light of the present findings, we must conclude that the slow
potential difference building up while the sentence is read
should not necessarily be interpreted as a negativity for the
before sentences, but rather as a positivity for the after
sentences. In addition, this slow wave difference does not
seem to be related, or at least not directly, to presenting
events in or out of their correct chronological order, nor
with memory processes per se (recall that the low working
memory group from Münte et al. did not show a difference
between before and after sentences). This leaves us with a

582

lot of new questions: why are after sentences more difficult
to process than before sentences? and how should we then
conceive of the relationship between working memory
capacity and temporal processing, if it does not work as
Münte et al. hypothesized? It is possible that connectives
(and also pronouns) evoke certain processing strategies that
do not tax memory, or only minimally. Hoeks and Stowe
(2002), for instance, have speculated that before might
activate a relatively cost-free 'temporal ordering frame'
(maybe only available for individuals with high working
memory capacity?) that allows for fast sentence integration,
whereas after does not. More research focussing on these
processing aspects of temporal connectives is definitely
needed. But also research using language corpora in order to
establish both form and function of different kinds of
temporal expressions in text and communication.

Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge Ingeborg Prinsen for her help
with the construction of the materials and the programming
of the experiment.

References
Altmann, G. T. M., & Steedman, M. (1988). Interaction
with context during human sentence processing.
Cognition, 30, 191-238.
Garnham, A. (1999). Reference and anaphora. In: S. Garrod
& M. Pickering (Eds.), Language processing (pp. 335362). Hove, UK: Psychology Press.
Gordon, P. C., Grosz, B. J., and Gilliom, L. A. (1993).
Pronouns, names, and the centering of attention in
discourse. Cognitive Science, 17, 311-347.
Hagoort, P., Brown, C.M., & Groothusen, J. (1993). The
Syntactic Positive Shift (SPS) as an ERP measure of
syntactic processing. Language and Cognitive Processes,
8, 439-483.
Hoeks, J.C.J., & Stowe, L.A. (2002). Temporal processing
and sentential complexity. Poster presented at AMLaP
2002.
Hoeks, J.C.J., Stowe, L.A., & Doedens, G. (2004). Seeing
words in context: the interaction of lexical and sentence
level information during reading. Cognitive Brain
Research,19, 59-73 .
Kaan, E., Harris, A., Gibson, E., & Holcomb, P.J. (2000).
The P600 as an index of syntactic integration difficulty.
Language and Cognitive Processes, 15, 159-201.
Münte, Th.F., Schiltz, K., & Kutas, M. (1998). When
temporal terms belie conceptual order. Nature, 395, 7173.
Osterhout, L. & Holcomb, P. (1992). Event-related brain
potentials elicited by syntactic anomaly. Journal of
Memory and Language, 31, 785-806.
Streb, J., Rösler, F., & Hennighausen, E. (1999). Eventrelated responses to pronoun and proper name anaphors in
parallel and nonparallel discourse structures. Brain and
Language, 70, 273-286.

