UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Understanding Knowledge Models: Modeling Assessment of Concept Importance in Concept
Maps

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9df4g2w1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Leake, David
Maguitman, Ana
Reichherzer, Thomas

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Understanding Knowledge Models:
Modeling Assessment of Concept Importance in Concept Maps
David Leake, Ana Maguitman and Thomas Reichherzer
Computer Science Department, Indiana University
Lindley Hall 215, Bloomington, IN 47405, USA
leake, anmaguit, treichhe @cs.indiana.edu



Abstract

sites. The CmapTools software has been downloaded by
users in approximately 150 countries, and has been used in
major educational initiatives, such as the Quorum project
[Canas et al., 1995], which involved more than one thousand
schools in Latin America. It has also been used for modeling
and sharing the knowledge of human experts, for example, for
modeling NASA experts’ knowledge of Mars (http://cmexwww.arc.nasa.gov/).
CmapTools provides a convenient framework for knowledge construction, but users may have dif culty nding relevant resources, remembering speci c aspects of a domain to
include, or locating relevant concept maps to compare. To
alleviate this problem, projects are under way at Indiana University and the IHMC to develop intelligent suggesters to
support users by retrieving resources such as prior concept
maps and multi-media materials [Leake et al., 2003]. Figure 1 shows a screenshot of a Mars knowledge model under
construction, with suggestions of propositions, resources, and
topics to consider. The suggesters’ effectiveness depends on
their ability to retrieve topic-relevant information, which in
turn depends on modeling users’ own judgments as they examine concept maps. Thus modeling users’ judgments of the
importance of concepts to a map’s topic has practical value
for suggester software to support concept mapping and scienti c value, for better understanding what in uences human
understanding of the knowledge that concept maps convey.
The assessment of concept importance may depend on the
concepts they include (based on their labels in the concept
map), on the concept map topology, or on layout differences
between isomorphic maps. Especially for users unfamiliar
with a domain, we would expect topology and layout to play
an important role in their assessment of the topic of a concept map. However, to our knowledge, no previous studies have investigated whether/how the topology and layout
of a concept map actually in uence judgments of its topic.
To hypothesize candidate topological and layout factors that
might in uence decisions of which concepts are most topicrelevant, we considered general structure and layout guidelines for building good concept maps in the concept mapping literature, as well as methods for identifying important
nodes from the structure of hyperlinked environments. These
were used to develop candidate models for the in uence of
structural features on identifying the concepts most important to the topic of a concept map. We then performed experiments in which twenty paid subjects judged the relative importance of concepts in concept maps selected to investigate
particular structural in uences. We used this data to set pa-

Concept mapping is widely used in educational and other settings to aid knowledge construction, sharing, and comparison;
concept maps are also used as a vehicle for assessing understanding. To aid the concept mapping process, projects at Indiana University and the Institute for Human and Machine Cognition (IHMC) are developing “intelligent suggesters” to support users as they build concept maps, by presenting them with
relevant information from existing knowledge models and the
Internet. This depends on identifying important concepts in
the concept map under construction. This paper presents and
evaluates models of the influence of concept map layout and
structure on the selection of concepts expected to be relevant
to the topic of concept maps. It presents and assesses a set of
potentially-relevant structural factors and evaluates how these
factors combine to affect human judgments of concept importance. Twenty subjects were asked to judge the relative importance of concepts in concept maps selected to highlight particular characteristics, and three models were compared to their
judgments. Analysis of the results shows that subjects were
significantly influenced by concept map topology, but little influenced by other aspects of concept map layout. The results
suggest that layout-independent models of concept maps can
provide a suitable representation for guiding retrieval of topicrelevant information to support concept map construction, provided that the representation reflects topologically-based influences. The results are applied in the design of the suggesters’
similarity assessment procedures for retrieving relevant concept maps.

Introduction
Concept mapping [Novak and Gowin, 1984] has been widely
used to elucidate humans’ knowledge and to facilitate knowledge elicitation, construction, and comparison and sharing. In concept mapping, users construct a two-dimensional,
visually-based representation of concepts and their relationships. The concept map representation encodes propositions describing two or more concepts and their relationships, in simpli ed natural language sentences. In educational settings, concept mapping exercises have been used
to encourage students to actively construct an understanding of concepts and relationships within domains of interest. To facilitate concept map construction and sharing,
the Institute for Human and Machine Cognition (IHMC)
has developed CmapTools, publicly-available tools to support generation and modi cation of concept maps in an electronic form (http://cmap.ihmc.us/). CmapTools enable interconnecting and annotating maps with material such as
other concept maps, images, diagrams, and video clips,
providing rich, browsable knowledge models available for
navigation and collaboration across geographically-distant
795

Figure 1: Portion of a Knowledge Model developed by the NASA Center for Mars Exploration, with Sample Suggestions.
[Quillian, 1968], attempt to provide a representation suitable for machine processing. Proposals for non graph-based
representations to model concepts and their relationships
include formal concept analysis [Ganter and Wille, 1999],
which models the organization of concepts in terms of lattice theory, and the geometric structure of conceptual spaces
[G¤ardenfors, 2000].

rameters in the models and to assess the ability of the models
to predict the subjects’ performance. Our results suggest that
topology is important; the structure of concept maps plays an
important role in assessments of concept importance. However, they also suggest that layout plays a less important role.
Methods suggested by the models have been implemented in
the suggesters to provide support for students and experts’
concept map construction.

Despite the many differences among theories of knowledge organization, they share a fundamental assumption
that knowledge can be modeled in terms of a set of components and their relationships. Concept mapping is a
method for externalizing such a structure in an individual, making concepts and relationships explicit. Thus examination of concept maps can be used to assess subjects’ knowledge [West et al., 2002], and support for the usefulness of this approach has been provided by empirical
studies[Aidman and Egan, 1998, Michael, 1994]. However,
there has been little study of what affects subjects’ judgments
of the topic of a concept map, how to determine topic similarity from concepts maps, and the types of representations that
may support computer models of concept map retrieval. In
previous studies using similar types of representations, topological information about graphs has been used to de ne measures of graph similarity [Goldsmith and Davenport, 1990]
and for concept clustering [Esposito, 1990]. These frameworks are based on the premise that the closer the relationship of two concepts the closer they are in cognitive
structure the closer they will be in the graph representation.
This has been used to induce concept proximity or relatedness. Our study investigates a complementary question, the
in uence of other structural factors, such as the numbers of
incoming and outgoing links. How graph topology and layout
affect assessments of concept importance is central to understanding the information conveyed by concept map structure,
as well as for developing models of topic similarity for concept maps.

Modeling Concepts and their Relationships
Concept mapping was developed in an educational setting by Joseph Novak, in an effort to design better teaching and learning activities [Novak and Gowin, 1984]. Novak based the approach on Ausubel’s cognitive learning theory[Ausubel, 1963], which proposes that meaningful
learning requires deliberate effort by the learner to connect
new concepts to relevant preexisting concepts and propositions in the learner’s own cognitive structure. Concept mapping was designed to support the learner’s effort by externalizing concepts and propositions known to the student, making them visually apparent to facilitate their connection with
newly acquired concepts. Concept maps have been used by
teachers to assess students’ understanding, by students to
compare their knowledge and collaboratively re ne their understanding, and by experts as a vehicle for modeling and
sharing their knowledge.
Concept maps relate to several other frameworks developed in cognitive psychology and arti cial intelligence to
model concepts and their relationships. Schemes based
on graphs or networks are commonly used as models
of human memory organization, to account for phenomena such as similarity judgments or hierarchical category
structure. Early examples include the hierarchical network model [Collins and Quillian, 1969], semantic memory
[Tulving, 1972] and conceptual structures [Ausubel, 1963].
More formal approaches to graph-based representations, such
as conceptual graphs [Sowa, 1984] or semantic networks
796

Models for Analyzing Concept Maps
We developed four candidate models of the in uence of structural and layout characteristics on expectations for the importance of particular concepts to the topic of concept maps.
In the models, concepts are represented as nodes in the concept map graph. The baseline model treats map topology and
layout as unimportant. The three remaining models use the
topology of the concept map to compute a weight predicting
each concept’s importance in describing the topic of the map.
To determine which factors to include in the models, we
rst considered factors from the concept mapping literature. Novak proposed that meaningful learning is facilitated
when new concepts or concept meanings are subsumed under broader, more inclusive concepts, which suggests that
concept maps should have a hierarchical structure. All of
the non-baseline models can re ect such a structure, with
weighings re ecting that important concepts are at the top
of the map, and less important at the bottom. However,
the models are parameterized so that the actual contribution
of hierarchical structure if any can be determined empirically. We also considered the applicability of topological
analysis methods from other domains, in particular, Kleinberg’s algorithm[Kleinberg, 1999] for topological analysis of
graphs, used to identify important nodes in a hyperlinked
environment. Kleinberg’s work characterized nodes on the
World Wide Web as hubs and authorities based on their
interconnections. When applied to concept maps, we expected hub and authority concepts to be especially important
to determining the topic of concept maps.

Figure 2: A simple concept map about glaciers.
cept, the larger its weight and therefore relevance in the topic
of the map.

Hub Authority and Root-Distance Model (HARD)
The Hub Authority and Root-Distance Model also explores
the importance of the root node and the hierarchical organization of concepts in maps. However, while CRD performs a
local analysis, only taking immediate neighbors into account,
HARD performs a global analysis on the in uences of the
concepts on each other. Its analysis centers on three different
types of concepts that may be found in a concept map:

!

Authorities are concepts that have multiple incoming connections from hub nodes.

Connectivity Root-Distance Model (CRD)

!

The connectivity root-distance model is based on two observations. First, concepts that participate in more than one
proposition, as indicated by their connectivity the number
of incoming and outgoing connections may be more important in de ning a map’s content than concepts with lower
connectivity. Second, Novak argues that concept maps are
best constructed if a focus question or a single root concept
guides the selection of concepts and their hierarchical organization in the map. The root concept, typically located at
the top of a map, tends to be the most general and inclusive
concept and to specify the map’s topic. This suggests that
concept importance may increase with proximity to the root
concept.
The CRD model determines proximity by counting the
number of direct links between the map’s root concept and a
given concept. For example, in gure 2, the concept masses
of ice has a connectivity of four (one outgoing and three
incoming links) and a distance of one to the root concept
glaciers . If concept in a map has outgoing and incoming connections to other concepts and is steps distant
from the root concept of the map, then the weight assigned to
by the CRD model is









!

Hubs are concepts that have multiple outgoing connections
to authority nodes.
Upper nodes include the root concept and concepts closest
to the root concept.

To determine a node’s role as a hub or authority, we
adapted Kleinberg’s algorithm for analyzing hyperlinked
graphs to concept maps. Our algorithm, described in detail in [Canas et al., 2001], associates each concept with three
weights between 0 and 1, each re ecting the concept’s role
as a hub, authority, or upper node. A given concept may
simultaneously have properties of all three, but in Figure 2,
glaciers is primarily a hub concept, due to the number of
outgoing connections, and masses of ice is primarily an authority, due to its mostly incoming connections. Among the
three concepts with outgoing links to the concept masses of
ice , glaciers is the one with the greatest in uence in making masses of ice an authority node, because of the comparative strength of glaciers as a hub.
In the HARD model, the three weights of a selected concept are combined into a single weight as follows:





"#  $ &%'  $)( &*+  
% # *
In the above formula , , and are the corresponding authority, hub, and upper node weights of a concept in a map
and ,  , and ( are the model parameters. As above, the
parameters re ect the in uences of the different roles that a

 

                
The model parameters ,  , and determine in uence of the
incoming connections, outgoing connections, and distance to
the root concept. The formula implies that the higher a concept’s connectivity and the shorter its distance to the root con-

 

concept may play.

797

Path Counter Model (PC)

test speci c hypotheses about the topological and layout factors that may in uence subjects’ evaluation of relevance of
concepts to a concept map’s topic; the absence of domain
information forced subjects to rely entirely on topology and
layout.

The Path Counter Model, like the CRD model, re ects the
expectation that concepts participating in more propositions
will tend to be more important to the topic of a map. However, instead of considering only a concept node’s immediate
connectivity, like the CRD model, the PC model considers indirect relationships as well. It counts all possible paths that
start from the root and either (1) end on a concept with no outgoing connections, or (2) end on a concept that has already
been visited in a path. We note that if a concept has high
connectivity (which allows for many paths through the map
to include that concept), then the number of paths crossing
concepts indirectly linked to the high-connectivity concept
increases as well. For example, the PC value for the concept
gravity in gure 2 is three, because there are three paths extending from the root concept to gravity, due to masses of
ice which is well connected in the map. Formally, to determine the weight
of a concept in a map, assume that
is the number of paths crossing . Then the weight is computed as
. Unlike the previous two models, this
model considers only a single in uence on concept weight,
and consequently requires no parameters.

,

 
  - ,

Results
To test whether subjects’ judgments of the importance of two
concepts changed signi cantly from one map to another, we
used a
test of independence when comparing the subjects’
selections from two different maps. Table 1 summarizes the
statistical results.
Distance to root concept: To test the in uence of distance
to the root concept, subjects evaluated two concept maps in
which the distance from a test concept to the root concept
was changed from 2 to 1, by inserting an intermediate node.
In a series of questions, subjects were asked to compare importances of the test concept, which was moved in the map’s
hierarchy, to the root concept and neighboring concepts of
the moved concept. The results show that the root concept
was considered most important compared to the other concepts, and that the importance of the test concept increased as
it moved up the hierarchy. The differences in the selection of
the moved concept over its neighboring concepts between the
two concept maps were statistically signi cant.
Connectivity of a concept: To test the in uence of connectivity, we used two concept maps which differed by increasing a test concept’s connectivity the number of incoming
and outgoing connections to neighboring concepts from 1
in the rst map to 6 in the second. Subjects were asked to
compare importances of the test concept to the root concept
and the neighboring concepts of the modi ed concept. When
the test concept’s connectivity was increased, participants favored it over neighboring concepts and sometimes even over
the root concept. All differences were statistically signi cant
except for the preference over the root concept.
Layout of a map: To test whether a difference in layout affects subject’s selections, two concept maps were constructed
with identical topology but substantially different layout. The
layout changes primarily involved horizontal organization,
but in one instance a single concept was moved from the
center right to the bottom left position. The questions asked
for both layouts compared the concept that changed its position to its neighboring concepts. The statistical evaluation
revealed that the layout changes had no signi cant affect on
the concept ratings.
Direct and indirect influences of hub and authority nodes
in a map: To test the effects of direct and indirect in uences,
a total of four concept maps were constructed with strong
hub and authority concepts connected to other concepts in
the map. The results showed that hub and authority concepts
have an in uence on the selection of concepts, and that authorities play a stronger role than hubs. However, the indirect
in uence of either a hub or authority concept on other concepts (when a hub or authority is indirectly connected to a
test concept) did not signi cantly affect concept importance.

.+/

 

Experiments and Results
We conducted a human-subjects experiment to study the inuences of the hypothesized factors on human judgments of
concept importance, and the overall t of the four models’
predictions to human judgments, with the parameter settings
that best t the CRD and HARD models to the subject data.

Method
Twenty paid subjects, all students admitted to Indiana University, were recruited by postings on electronic message boards
and bulletin boards for a one-hour experiment conducted on
the Web. In a training phase, participants were given a brief
description of concept maps and their applications and asked
to write a short summary of two concept maps from different
domains. In the test phase, subjects answered 56 questions
about a total of 12 small concept maps (fewer than 15 concepts each). The maps were designed with controlled differences in their topological structure and layout, to investigate
the presence or absence of in uences from particular types
of changes (e.g., changing position of a node without affecting topology). Each question presented a concept map and
two concepts selected from that map. Participants were asked
to examine a map and to answer which of the two concepts
best described the map’s topic, or whether both described it
equally well.
To allow participants to rst practice decision making on
regular concept maps, the rst 2 of the 12 concept maps used
regular words in the concepts. To prevent domain knowledge from in uencing participants’ decisions, concept labels
were replaced with arti cial terms in the remaining 10 maps,
and only responses concerning the latter 10 test maps were
used in evaluating the models. To minimize the in uence of
previously-seen concept maps on new responses, different arti cial labels were used for each map, and both the ordering
of options for questions and ordering of topological and layout changes between successive concept maps was randomized. The concept maps in the experiment were designed to

Fitting the Models to the Data
A hill-climbing algorithm was used to determine the parameter settings for the CRD and the HARD models which gave
798

In uence
distance to root concept
concept connectivity
map layout
direct, hub concept
direct, authority concept
indirect, hub concept
indirect, authority concept

Signi cant
yes
yes
no
yes
yes
no
no

.+/ 0Test
8
1 32of545Independence
798
01 3254?6@ &A8 4BC27 ,, :<:<;=;D44 8 4?45>>
E501 F2?456G4 8IHJB , :<K=4 8 45>
8
E01
798I7
E501 F232?5454?66  > 8 A2 ,B :<, :<;L;=4 4 4?8 4?> >
01 3254?@ B 8M7NB , :<KL4 8 45>
E501 F2?456 B8I7JB , :<K=4 8 45>

Table 1: Statistical evaluation of in uences on concept importance.
Model
CRD
HARD
PC
Baseline



(

Parameters for Best Fit
/
0.930 4.959 3.603
0
2.235 1.764
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A

RMSE
0.072
0.1487
0.170
0.564

Discussion

Cumul.
Error
27.5%
32.8%
27.8%
66.8%

The experiments studied how topology and layout affect
assessments of the importance of concepts within concept
maps. They compared four candidate models which, using
only analysis of a map’s topology, compute a weight for each
concept in a map. The computed weights provide an estimate
of the importance of each concept as a descriptor of the topic
of the map, according to subjects’ judgments of topic importance.
The studies highlighted the importance of topological information; to our knowledge, this is the rst study to show
this effect. They also suggested that speci c layout does not
have a signi cant effect. This is important for being able to
recognize similarity across concept maps developed by different individuals, despite super cial differences that might
affect user judgments. It is also interesting to note that despite
the importance of topology, local information alone was sufcient to account for the observed results. The CRD model,
which considers distance from the root node and local connectivity, outperformed the HARD model, which takes indirect in uences into account as well.
The current study did not examine interobserver variation;
this is an interesting area for future work. Also, the experiment used small concept maps, and considered only the topological and layout factors of the maps, rather than their content. We are conducting additional studies to explore the role
of content in assessments of concept importance. However,
preliminary results suggest that structure plays a surprisingly
strong role, with structural information alone often suf cient
to make high-quality predictions.

Table 2: Summary of model parameters and RMSE.

the best t between the models and user data. Table 2 summarizes the chosen parameter values, the root-mean-square error
(RMSE) of user and model data, and the cumulative error.
The cumulative error is the percentage of the total questions
(44 questions per subject, involving the 10 test concept maps)
for which the models determine different responses from the
subjects. To determine a model’s preference between two
concepts in a concept map, we compared the model’s importance values for the two nodes. The model was considered to treat the concepts as equally relevant when their relevance values were within a xed threshold of each other, for a
threshold distance determined by hill-climbing. The last row
of the table shows the RMSE and the cumulative error for a
baseline model. In this model each concept in a map is rated
equally important by assigning it a weight of 1.
The results show that the CRD model provides the best t
to the user data, followed by HARD and PC. All models except the baseline agree with more than 67% percent of the decisions reached by the participants, who were in a few cases
strongly divided in their vote for the best topic-describing
concepts. For the remaining 33%, in most cases the models’ predictions match the decisions of some subjects. Only
once for the CRD model, twice for the HARD model, and
four times for the PC model were model and user predictions
entirely disjoint. Overall, CRD, HARD, and PC perform better than the baseline model.
Further analysis of the best- t parameters for the CRD and
HARD models supports the importance of authority nodes
(nodes with incoming connections). For the CRD model,
nodes with incoming connections (nodes that play the role
of an authority) are more relevant than nodes with outgoing
connections (nodes that play the role of a hub) because their
is greater than . With the best- t parameters for the HARD
model, hub nodes are not considered relevant when computing the weight of a node. However, we note that hub nodes
still play an important role when computing the level of authority of other nodes in the map.

Application in the Suggesters

The experimental results are re ected in the design of the
CmapTools suggesters, two of which are shown in use in the
lower center of Figure 1. The rst suggester uses the calculated importance values to weight keywords from concept
labels in a concept map, in order to retrieve similar prior concept maps for comparison and to suggest propositions from
those maps. This approach to supporting concept map generation is inspired by case-based reasoning [Kolodner, 1993];
concept maps constructed by different users are considered as
case-bases of their concept-mapping activity, with each concept map considered to be a separate case. When a user wants
to extend a concept to add a new connected concept
the system draws upon prior concept maps that include the
original concept, as examples of how that concept was extended in similar past contexts. The second suggester uses
the similarity weighting to weight keywords for Web search,



799

[Canas et al., 2001] Canas, A., Leake, D., and Maguitman,
A. (2001). Combining concept mapping with CBR:
Experience-based support for knowledge modeling. In
Proc. of the Fourteenth Int. Florida Artificial Intelligence
Research Society Conf., pages 286 290. AAAI Press.

to derive topics for the user to consider when starting a
new concept map to broaden the knowledge model. These
and other implemented suggesters are described in detail in
[Leake et al., 2003].

Conclusion

[Collins and Quillian, 1969] Collins, A. M. and Quillian,
M. R. (1969). Retrieval time from semantic memory. Journal of verbal learning and verbal behavior, 8:240 248.

This paper explores factors affecting human judgments of
concept importance in determining the topic of concept maps.
Modeling such judgments helps elucidate the knowledge captured in concept maps, provides information to guide the design of concept maps in educational settings, and aids the development of intelligent support systems to provide relevant
material during concept mapping. Our experiments assessed
the in uence of speci c factors and examined the ability of
four different models to re ect human assessments of concept importance.
Among the three models, the CRD model, which considers connectivity and distance to the root concept, provided
the best match to human data: Its predictions were consistent with the average predictions made by the participants
for forty-three out of forty-four questions. The results highlight the importance of local topology and suggest that human
topic decisions are robust to layout differences, which is encouraging for the generality of concept mapping for knowledge sharing and the development of support tools to retrieve
similar concept maps and topic-relevant information. We are
performing followup studies to examine the role of domain
content and the t between the predictions of these models
and the concept maps developed by domain experts for sample domains.
Principles suggested by the results have been applied to
intelligent suggesters to aid the human knowledge modeling process, and the implemented systems appear to give
good results in practice. We consider the type of evaluation
presented here as important step for guiding the design of
such tools, and are now designing experiments to more formally test the relevance of the suggester systems’ recommendations during the concept map construction process.

[Esposito, 1990] Esposito, C. (1990). A graph-theoretic approach to concept clustering. In Pathfinder associative networks: studies in knowledge organization, pages 89 99.
Ablex Publishing Corp.
[Ganter and Wille, 1999] Ganter, B. and Wille, R. (1999).
Formal Concept Analysis: Mathematical Foundations.
Springer, Berlin - Heidelberg - New York.
[G¤ardenfors, 2000] G¤ardenfors, P. (2000).
Conceptual
Spaces: The Geometry of Thought. MIT Press.
[Goldsmith and Davenport, 1990] Goldsmith, T. E. and Davenport, D. M. (1990). Assessing structural similarity of
graphs. In Pathfinder associative networks: studies in
knowledge organization, pages 75 87. Ablex.
[Kleinberg, 1999] Kleinberg, J. (1999). Authoritative sources in a hyperlinked environment. J. of the ACM,
46(5):604 632.
[Kolodner, 1993] Kolodner, J. (1993). Case-Based Reasoning. Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo, CA.
[Leake et al., 2003] Leake, D., Maguitman, A., Reichherzer,
T., Canas, A. C., Carvalho, M., Arguedas, M., Brenes, S.,
and Eskridge, T. (2003). Aiding knowledge capture by
searching for extensions of knowledge models. In Proceedings of the Second Int. Conf. on Knowledge Capture
(K-CAP), New York. ACM Press, pages 44 53.
[Michael, 1994] Michael, R. S. (1994). The Validity of Concept Maps for Assessing Cognitive Structure. PhD thesis,
School of Education, Indiana University.

Acknowledgments
This research is supported by NASA under award No NCC
2-1216. We thank Alberto Canas and the IHMC CmapTools
development team for their many contributions to the project,
Tei Laine for her comments on a draft of this paper, and John
Kruschke for assistance on experimental design and analysis.

[Novak and Gowin, 1984] Novak, J. and Gowin, D. (1984).
Learning How to Learn. Cambridge University Press, NY.
[Quillian, 1968] Quillian, M. R. (1968). Semantic memory.
In Minsky, M., editor, Semantic Information Processing,
pages 216 270. MIT Press.

References

[Sowa, 1984] Sowa, J. F. (1984). Conceptual Structures: Information Processing in Mind and Machine. AddisonWesley.

[Aidman and Egan, 1998] Aidman, E. and Egan, G. (1998).
Academic assessment through computerized concept mapping: validating a method of implicit map reconstruction.
Int. Journal of Instructional Media, 25(3):277 294.

[Tulving, 1972] Tulving, E. (1972). Episodic and semantic
memory. In Organization of Memory. Academic Press.

[Ausubel, 1963] Ausubel, D. (1963). The Psychology of
Meaningful Verbal Learning. Grune and Stratton, NY, NY.

[West et al., 2002] West, D., Park, J., Pomeroy, J., and Sandoval, J. (2002). Concept mapping assessment in medical
education: a comparison of two scoring systems. Medical
Education, 36(9):820 826.

[Canas et al., 1995] Canas, A., Ford, K., Brennan, J., Reichherzer, T., and Hayes, P. (1995). Knowledge construction
and sharing in quorum. In World Conf. on Artificial Intelligence in Education, AIED’95, pages 218 225. AACE.
800

