UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Visual Imagery in Deductive Reasoning: Results from experiments with sighted,
blindfolded, and congenitally totally blind persons

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5r90833t

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Knauff, Markus
May, Elisabeth

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Visual Imagery in Deductive Reasoning: Results from experiments with sighted,
blindfolded, and congenitally totally blind persons
Markus Knauff (markus.knauff@tuebingen.mpg.de)
Max-Planck-Institute for Biological Cybernetics
Tübingen, Germany

Elisabeth May (elisabeth.may@mail.uni-oldenburg.de)
Department of Psychology, University of Oldenburg
Oldenburg, Germany
plays a role in reasoning (e.g. Sternberg, 1980, Richardson,
1987; Johnson-Laird, Byrne, & Tabossi; 1989; Newstead,
Pollard, & Griggs, 1986). In Knauff and Johnson-Laird
(2000; 2002) we argued that a possible resolution of the
inconsistency in the previous results is that these studies
have overlooked the distinction between visual images and
spatial representations (e.g. Ungerleider & Mishkin, 1982;
Logie, 1995; Smith et al., 1995). We conducted a series of
experiments to test this hypothesis. We initially accomplished rating studies to identify a set of verbal relations that
varied in the ease of constructing visual images and spatial
representations from it. Their results yielded three sorts of
verbal relations:
1. visuospatial relations that are easy to envisage visually
and spatially; e.g. above – below;
2. visual relations that are easy to envisage visually but
hard to envisage spatially, e.g. cleaner – dirtier;
3. control relations that are hard to envisage both visually
and spatially, e.g. smarter – dumber
From the three sorts of verbal relations we constructed a
set of three-term- and four-term-series problems. In three
experiments, visual relations such as cleaner and dirtier
significantly impeded the process of reasoning in comparison with control relations such as smarter and dumber. In
contrast, visuospatial relations, such as front and back,
which are easy to envisage visually and spatially, speeded
up the process of reasoning in comparison with control relations (Knauff & Johnson-Laird, 2002). In a subsequent
neuroimaging study (fMRI) we showed that in the absence
of any correlated visual input, all types of reasoning problems evoke activity in spatial areas of the brain (right superior parietal cortex, and bilaterally in the precuneus), but
that only the problems based on visual relations also activated early visual areas corresponding to V2 (Knauff,
Fangmeier, Ruff, & Johnson-Laird, 2003). We explained the
findings by an interplay of visual images and spatial representations. For example, given the premises:
The cat is above the ape.
The dog is below the ape.
the participants construct a spatial array representing the
relative positions of the three individuals:

Abstract
We report three experiments on visual mental imagery in deductive reasoning. Reasoning performance of sighted participants was impeded if the materials were easy to envisage as
visual mental images. Congenitally totally blind participants
did not show this visual-impedance effect. Blindfolded participants with normal vision showed the same pattern of performance as the sighted. We conclude that irrelevant visual
detail can be a nuisance in reasoning and impedes the process.

Introduction
Various sorts of evidence are compatible with the conjecture
that visual mental imagery is a vital part of human cognition, including the famous studies of the mental rotation and
the mental scanning of images (Shepard & Cooper, 1982;
Kosslyn, 1980). The aim of the present paper, however, is to
show that visual mental imagery is not necessary in reasoning. It can even be a nuisance in reasoning and impedes the
process. The article is motivated by the distinction between
visual and spatial representations and processes that has
been introduced by Ungerleider and Mishkin (1982). In addition, the article is motivated by studies showing that congenitally totally blind persons are as good as sighted in the
construction and application of spatial representations (e.g.
Kerr, 1983), but differ from sighted people in their use visual images.
The paper begins with a brief summary of previous findings on imagery and reasoning. We focus on deductive reasoning, in which the truth of the premises ensures the truth
of the conclusion. We then outline our hypothesis regarding
the connection between visual images, spatial representations, and congenital blindness. We report three experiments
that test this hypothesis. Finally, we draw some general
conclusions about visual imagery, spatial representations,
and reasoning.
An influential study of imagery and deductive reasoning
was carried out by DeSoto, London, and Handel (1965),
who investigated so-called three-term series problems, such
as “Ann is taller than Beth.”, “Cath is shorter than Beth”,
“Who is tallest?” and argued that reasoners represent the
three individuals in a visual image, and then “read off” the
answer by inspecting the image. There are several other
authors who argued in the same vein (e.g. Huttenlocher,
1968; Shaver, Pierson, & Lang, 1976; Clement & Falmagne,
1986). Other authors did not find evidence that imagery

cat
ape
dog

708

reasoning in sighted people. They, however, should not hinder the reasoning of congenitally totally blind people, because they are able to construct spatial representations
without being sidetracked by irrelevant visual images.
The aim of the following experiments is to test this hypothesis. In Experiment 1 sighted students solved threeterm-series problems with the three sorts of verbal relations,
in Experiment 2 people who were blind from birth, and in
Experiment 3 sighted people who were blindfolded to remove any visual input.

They evaluate a possible conclusion by checking whether
it holds in the representation. Perhaps the ability to envisage
spatial representations is a precursor to many forms of abstract reasoning (Johnson-Laird, 1996). Likewise, relational
terms that lead naturally to spatial representations should
speed up the process of reasoning. In contrast, a visual relation, such as dirtier, may elicit irrelevant visual detail. One
imagines, say, a cat caked with mud, but such a representation is irrelevant to the transitive inference. It takes additional time to replace this vivid image with one in which
dirtiness is represented in degrees. In other words, the visual
relations, which are hard to envisage spatially, lead to a
mental picture, but the vivid details in this picture impede
the process of thinking.
If visual relations impede reasoning in sighted people,
what happens if congenitally totally blind people reason
with the same materials? In the last two decades, comparisons between blind and sighted people have been made on a
large variety of visuospatial tasks, involving mental scanning, mental rotation, memory for paths and words, etc.
(e.g. Kerr, 1983; Marmor & Zaback, 1976; Zimler &
Keenan, 1983). They always reported the same results: people who are blind from birth are able to envisage abstract
spatial arrangements, but unable to envisage visual mental
images. Most of the explanations rely on the distinction of
two different neural pathways associated with the processing of “what” and “where” information (Ungerleider &
Mishkin, 1982). The distinction is well-established in numerous fields of cognitive science (e.g. Kosslyn, 1994; Landau & Jackendoff, 1993), and is supported by investigations
with brain damaged patients (e.g., Newcombe, Ratcliff, &
Damasio, 1987), neuroimaging studies (e.g., Smith et al.,
1995), and experiments on visual and spatial working memory (c.f. Logie, 1995).
The “what” and “where” distinction in mental imagery
has also been studied with congenitally blind participants.
Vecchi (1998) conducted experiments in the dual-task paradigm with participants who were blind from birth and report
that mental imagery can rely on purely spatial representations without a visual component. In a PET study, Büchel,
Price, Frackoviak, and Friston (1998) demonstrated that
congenitally blind people show task-specific activation in
parietal association areas, whereas blind participants who
lost their sight after puberty show additional activation in
the primary visual cortex in the same task (Braille reading).
Luzzatti et al. (1998) in a case study showed that visual and
spatial imagery can be differentially impaired after brain
injuries. All these studies clearly show that visual and spatial imagery are functionally independent processes which
must rely on different neural systems.
What does that mean for the hypothesis that the ability to
envisage spatial representations is a precursor to reasoning,
but visual imagery can impede the process? The results concerning visual and spatial imagery in the congenitally blind
motivate the following hypothesis:
Relations that elicit visual images containing details that
are irrelevant to an inference should impede the process of

Experiment 1: Sighted Participants
In our previous experiments (Knauff & Johnson-Laird,
2000; 2002) the reasoning problems were presented visually
as sentences on the screen. The aim of the first experiment
was to replicate the visual-impedance effect with sighted
people but with an auditory presentation of the materials.
Participants. We tested 24 sighted undergraduate students from the University of Oldenburg (mean age 22.7; 18
female, 5 male), who received a course credit for their participation.
Materials. The experiment used the set of verbal relations
that has been identified in Knauff and Johnson-Laird (2000;
2002). The three sorts of relations were:
1. visuospatial relations: above – below, front – back
2. visual relations: cleaner – dirtier, fatter — thinner
3. control relations: better — worse, smarter – dumber
From these verbal relations we constructed a set of threeterm series problems which all concerned the same terms
(dog, cat, ape). Here is an example of a problem with a
valid conclusion:
The dog is cleaner than the cat.
The ape is dirtier than the cat.
Does it follow:
The dog is cleaner than the ape?
All sentences of the reasoning problems were recorded as
audio files, edited for similar length and normalized for
loudness and peak gain. Half of the problems had valid conclusions and half had invalid conclusions. The participants
were told to evaluate whether the conclusion followed from
the premises. In the example, cleaner and dirtier are used
once in each premise, and cleaner occurs in the conclusion.
But, in the experiment as a whole, each relation and its converse occurred equally often in each premise and in the conclusion.
Design. The participants acted as their own controls and
evaluated 8 inferences of all three sorts (visuospatial, visual,
and controls), making a total of 24 three-term series problems. The relations in these problems were those given
above. The problems were presented in a randomized order
over the set of participants.
Procedure. The participants were tested individually in a
quiet room, and they sat at a PC that administered the experiment. The reasoning problems were presented in auditory format via headphones. The participants were told to
evaluate whether or not the conclusion followed necessarily
from the premises. They were instructed to respond as accu-

709

due to retinopathy of prematurity. The participants we recruited from two self-helping groups for the blind. All participants gave their informed consent prior to the participation in the study.
Materials, Design, and Procedure. The materials and
the design were identical to Experiment 1. The instructions
were read to the participants by one of the experimenters.
The participants were tested individually in a quiet room at
the institutions, and they sat in front of a Laptop that administered the experiment. Except of the two keys associated
with “yes” and “no” and the spacebar, all other keys were
removed from an external keyboard.
Results and Discussion. The second row of Table 2 presents the mean latencies and correct responses to the three
sorts of relational inferences. Overall, the blind responded
correctly to 76.2 % of the inferences and again there was no
significant difference between accepting valid conclusions
(76.7% correct) and rejecting invalid conclusions (75.8%
correct). Hence, we pooled the results from these conditions.
The ANOVA showed no significant difference in reasoning accuracy between the three sorts of problems, F (2, 18)
= .36, p > .70, and none of the single contrast revealed a
significant difference (visual vs. control: F (1, 9) = 2.38, p >
.63; visuospatial vs. control: F (1, 9) = .70, p > .79; visuospatial vs. visual: F (1, 9) = .74, p > .41). In the response
latencies there was also no difference between the three
sorts of problems, F (2, 18) = .928, p > .41, and not one of
the single contrast showed a significant difference (visual
vs. control: F (1, 9) = 1.51, p > .24; visuospatial vs. control:
F (1, 9) = 1.32, p > .28; visuospatial vs. visual: F (1, 9) =
.35, p > .56).
The results shed new light on the role of visual images
and spatial representation in reasoning. Mental representations must be derived from perception and thus the representations of persons who are blind from birth must be different to that of sighted persons. In particular, haptics or
auditory perceptions lead to spatial representations without
a visual component. This account is supported by several
studies that report the same pattern of performance in
highly spatial tasks in sighted and congenitally blind persons. In a classical study by Kerr (1983) congenitally totally blind and sighted showed almost the same pattern of
response times depending on imagined distance, image size,
etc. Kerr concluded that "picturability" does not affect the
recall of “mental images” in the blind. The only difference
was that sighted participants reported forming the images
while the blind did not (or at least significantly slower).
Marmor and Zaback (1976) explored Shepard and Metzler’s
mental rotation tasks and found that blind people also show
longer reaction times for larger rotation angles. Zimler and
Keenan (1983) found similar results in congenitally blind
children and adults. In addition, they reported that the haptic
images of the blind maintain the same spatial information
just as the visual images of the sighted do. Obviously, people who are blind from birth do not tend to construct visual
mental images. But they are able to construct and to employ
spatial representations. In fact, most of our blind partici-

rately and quickly as possible. They made their response by
pressing the appropriate key on the keyboard, and the computer recorded their response and latency. Prior to the experiment, there were four practice trials.
Results and Discussion. Table 1 presents for all three of
our experiments the percentages of correct conclusions and
their mean latencies for the different sorts of relational inferences. The present inferences were relatively easy (92.5%
correct overall) and there was no significant difference between accepting valid conclusions (94.5% correct) and rejecting invalid conclusions (95.2% correct). Thus, we
pooled the results from these conditions.
The MANOVA for dependent measures on the accuracy
data revealed a reliable difference across the three sorts of
problems, F (2, 46) = 5.30, p < .01. There was also a difference in the mean number of correct responses between the
visual problems and the control problems, F (1, 23) = 6.57,
p > .02, and the (not orthogonal) contrast between visuospatial and visual problems was significant, F (1, 23) = 6.57, p
< .02. The response latencies also showed the predicted
trend (visual relations resulted in longer response latencies
than control problems and reasoning with these problems in
turn took longer than with visuospatial problems), but the
main effect across the three sorts of problems was statistically not significant, F (2, 46) = .53, p >.6.
The main goal of the experiment was to test a new experimental setup that can be used with the blind people later
on. The experiment was successful in showing that the visual-impedance-effect also appears with the auditory presentation of the materials. Thus, we can use the same experimental setting in the later studies. A second corollary from
the findings is that the visual-impedance effect does not
depend on the visual presentation of the materials. It rules
out that the impedance is simply due to interference between the visual process of reading the premises and conclusions and the mental activity of envisaging a visual mental image to solve the problem. Instead, the findings again
emphasize the importance of distinguishing between visual
and spatial representations. Visual relations such as fatter
and thinner impeded the process of reasoning in comparison
with control relations such as smarter and dumber. In other
words, the visual relations, which are hard to envisage spatially, lead to a mental picture, but the vivid details in this
picture impede the process of thinking.

Experiment 2: Congenitally Totally Blind
Participants
This experiment directly tests the hypothesis that the visual
relations do not impede the reasoning of congenitally totally
blind people, because they are able to construct spatial representations without being sidetracked by irrelevant visual
images.
Participants. We tested 10 congenitally totally blind participants (mean age 24.8; 7 female, 3 male). According to
the German Law, a person is congenially totally blind, if she
or he has less than 5% of normal vision and got blind before
the age of 2. Most of the participants were blind from birth

710

visuospatial (although the single contrast between visual
and control problems did not reach statistical significance in
the lantencies). These data clearly show that the characteristics of the reasoning problems lead to the visual-impedance
effect. It is not simply due to interference between the visual
input from the surrounding and the mental activity of envisaging a visual mental image.

pants reported not using visual images. Instead, they reported that they located the objects of the inference on a
spatial scale or in degrees, representing, say “dirtiness”.
Although such introspections certainly can be wrong, they
agree with the experimental findings: The blind are able to
construct spatial representations without being irritated by
irrelevant visual images.

Table 1: Percentages of correct responses and their mean
response latencies (in s) in the three experiments as a function of the different sorts of relations: visual relations, control relations, visuospatial relations.

Experiment 3: Blindfolded Participants
Is there an alternative explanation for the different patterns
of results in sighted and blind participants? One possible
account is that the visual-impedance effect in the sighted is
simply due to interference between the visual input from the
surrounding and the mental activity of envisaging a visual
mental image. To rule out this explanation in the third experiment the participants had normal vision, but were blindfolded to eliminate any visual input. If the visualimpedance-effect is due to interference between visual imagery and visual perception, they should be also resistant to
the impedance effect of visual relations—much as the congenitally blind people are. If, in contrast, the tendency of
sighted people to construct visual images is responsible for
the visual-impedance effect, then the pattern of results
should be similar to that in Experiment 1.
Participants. We tested 30 sighted undergraduate students of University of Oldenburg (mean age 23.3; 18 female, 10 male). They were completely blindfolded to remove any visual input. They received a course credit for
their participation.
Materials, Design, and Procedure. The design, the materials and the procedure were identical to Experiment 1 and 2.
As in Experiment 2, the instructions were read to the participants by one of the experimenters and except for the two
keys associated with “yes” and “no” and the spacebar, all
other keys were removed from an external keyboard.
Results and Discussion. Overall, there were 90.8% correct responses and there was no significant difference between accepting valid conclusions (90.2% correct) and rejecting invalid conclusions (91.6% correct). They were
pooled again. The MANOVA showed a reliable difference
in accuracy across the three sorts of problems, F (2, 58) =
3.71, p < .03. There was also a significant difference in the
mean number of correct responses between the visual problems and the control problems, F (1, 29) = 5.80, p < .03 and
the visual problems and the visuospatial problems, F (1, 29)
= 4.29 p < .05
The response latencies showed that visual problems were
slower than control problems, which in turn were slower
than the visuospatial problems. The main effect across the
three types of problems is statistically significant, F (2, 58)
= 4.22, p < .02. The difference between visual and control
relations did not reach statistical significance, F (1, 29) =
2.25 p > .14, but the difference between visual and visuospatial problems was reliable, F (1, 29) = 7.01, p < .02.

Visual
inferences

Control
inferences

Visuospatial
inferences

sighted
(Exp 1)

86.9%

94.8%

94.8%

1.26

1.01

.97

blind
(Exp 2)

75.0%

73.6%

79.9%

5.24

5.29

6.06

blindfolded
(Exp 3)

86.7%

92.9%

92.9%

1.42

1.08

.86

General Discussion
The starting point of our studies was the distinction between
visual and spatial modes of representation in reasoning.
Previous studies enabled us to identify visuospatial relations, such as above-below, which are easy to envisage both
visually and spatially, visual relations, such as cleanerdirtier, which are easy to envisage visually but hard to envisage spatially, and control relations, such as better-worse,
which are hard to envisage both visually and spatially. Our
former studies showed that visual relations significantly
impede the process of reasoning by slowing it down. We
refer to that as visual-impedance-effect (Knauff & JohnsonLaird, 2002).
In the present studies we tested a group of sighted participants, one group of congenitally totally blind participants,
and one group of blindfolded participants with normal vision. In the sighted participants the visual relations significantly impeded the process of reasoning by slowing it down.
The blindfolded did show the same impedance effect. But,
the participants who were blind from birth were not affected
by the ease of envisaging the verbal relations visually. They
showed the same reasoning performance across all sorts of
problems.
What might cause visual imagery to impede reasoning in
the sighed participants? A theory that relies on visual imagery as the medium for reasoning is implausible, because
individuals can reason about relations that they cannot visualize. Similarly, such a theory cannot readily explain why
relations that are easy to envisage visually impeded reasoning. One could object that the ability to visualize the visual
relations was impeded by the concurrent visual perception.
In fact, several studies have shown that visual imagery and
visual perception interfere and that visual imagery performance is impaired under this condition (c.f Logie, 1995). Our

The pattern of performance in the blindfolded participants is
almost identical to that of the sighted participants in Experiment 1. There was again the trend visual > control >

711

seen as a visual imagery deficit of the congenitally blind. In
particular, haptics or auditory perceptions also lead to spatial representations, but it is argued that these representations might be sub-optimal compared to vision-based representations (a recent discussion can be found in Fleming,
Ball, Collins, & Ormerod, in press). From this view, our
blind participants show less good performance, because they
are less good in visual mental imagery. However, this account cannot readily explain why the impedance effect of
visual relations disappears in the blind. If a visual imagery
deficit is responsible for the overall performance deficit of
the blind, the impedance effect should be even more pronounced in the blind compared to the sighted.
A second critical aspect in the data is that 9 out of 10
blind participants showed a minor increase of response latencies in the visual problems. The differences were particularly small and apparent only in the visual inspection of the
data. However, one could argue that under these conditions
the non-effect in the MANOVA (and in the post-hoc computed nonparametric tests) is just due to the small number of
participants. If the effect would turn out to be reliable it
could have two causes: It could either indicate that even the
blind try to envisage the visual relations in a visual mental
image (what is implausible due to the above reasons) or that
the relations differ in the degree to which they imply transitivity. Spatial relations are unequivocal, but visual relations
might be more dubious. Given, say, the following premises:
The cat is fatter than the ape.
The ape is fatter than the dog.
Reasoners might have wondered whether the fatness of
cats, apes, and dogs, is commensurable. They claim that,
say, an elephant is thin is relative to elephants, and so it is
sensible to assert that a thin elephant is fatter than a fat dog.
The criterion for fatness shifts from one animal to another.
This factor might have confused reasoners in our experiment, and impeded their inferences with the visual relations.
A related factor is the degree to which the premises accord
with the participants’ existing beliefs. For example, the preceding premise (The cat is fatter than the ape) might strike
some individuals as implausible. However, these explanations are unlikely, because in the experiments as a whole,
each such plausible premise is matched with one using the
converse relation (The cat is thinner the ape), and so this
factor seems not likely to account for our results.
A last point is that we did not use purely spatial relations,
i.e., those that are hard to envisage visually but easy to envisage spatially. If, as our findings suggest, the visual character of the materials leads to an impairment of reasoning
performance, whereas the possibility of spatially envisaging
the materials speeds up reasoning, then tasks based on
purely spatial relations should be processed most quickly.
Indeed, we found a (not significant) trend in this direction in
Knauff & Johnson-Laird (2002). However, we encountered
some technical problems with these relations and some colleagues overall doubt the existence of such relations.
In conclusion, our results suggest that the content of verbal relations can affect the process of inference. If the con-

third experiment with the blindfolded participants, however,
clearly falsifies this hypothesis. An explanation based on
formal inference rules (Rips, 1994; Braine & O’Brien,
1998), is also questionable, because it does not account for
the effects of content, and does not immediately suggest an
explanation of the visual impedance effect.
The present findings support a spatial account of reasoning. The initial idea has been introduced by Huttenlocher
(1968) and was further elaborated in the mental models theory of reasoning (Johnson-Laird, 1983; Johnson-Laird &
Byrne, 1991). The model theory does not rely on linguistic
processes like rule-based-approaches of reasoning (Braine
& O’Brein, 1998; Rips, 1994). Such processes are relevant
only to transfer the information from the premises into a
spatial array and back again, but the reasoning process itself
totally relies on non-linguistic processes for the construction
and inspection of spatial mental models. The mental models
mirror the spatial relations between the represented objects.
In contrast to visual images, mental models can represent
any possible situation and can abstract away from such visual details as colors, textures, and shapes (Johnson-Laird,
1983; Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 1991). Mental models can
also represent class-inclusion, temporal order, and abstract
relations such as ownership (c.f. Johnson-Laird & Byrne,
1991). Several studies have shown that the content can facilitate inferences in certain cases and impede them in other
cases (e.g. Johnson-Laird & Byrne, 2001). Likewise, a visual relation, such as dirtier than, can elicit a vivid visual
detail, such as an animal caked with mud that is irrelevant to
an inference. It will then take additional time to retrieve the
information needed to construct the appropriate spatial mental model for making the inference.
The blind participants, however, did not show this visual
impedance effect. This provides additional support for the
spatial account of reasoning. Clearly, people who are blind
from birth do not tend to use visual mental images, unless
they are forced to do so, as in the studies from the literature.
But they are able to construct and to employ spatial representations. Such models represent the objects of the inference in degree or on a spatial scale. For this reason, they are
not sidetracked by irrelevant visual images and thus perform
relatively better than sighted persons in the visual problems.
There are, however, some ambiguities in the data from the
blind. First, the data are in line with other studies that compared blind and sighted people on a large variety of visuospatial tasks. They consistently reported that blind persons
in absolute terms perform less accurately or more slowly
than the sighted on such tasks (e.g. Kerr, 1983). Such an
overall deficit of the blind participants is also visible in the
present studies. The sighted participants solved on average
92.2% of the inferences correctly, but the blind participants
only 76.2%. The sighted needed 1.08 seconds on average to
respond to a problem; the participants who were blind from
birth needed 5.3 seconds. Even the blindfolded participants
from Experiment 3 performed much better than the blind
persons. The dominant approach to explain such findings
runs somewhat counter to our own account. It is usually

712

Knauff, M. & Johnson-Laird (2000). Visual and spatial representations in spatial reasoning. In Proceedings of the
Twenty-Second Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 759-765). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Knauff, M. & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2002). Visual imagery
can impede reasoning. Memory & Cognition, 30, 363371.
Kosslyn, S.M. (1980). Image and mind. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Kosslyn, S. M. (1994). Image and brain. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Landau, B., & Jackendoff, R. (1993). "What" and "where"
in spatial language and spatial cognition. Behavioral and
Brain Sciences, 16, 217-265.
Logie, R.H. (1995). Visuospatial working memory. Hove,
UK: Erlbaum.
Luzzatti C., Vecchi T., Agazzi D., Cesa-Bianchi M., & Vergani C. (1998). A neurological dissociation between preserved visual and impaired spatial processing in mental
imagery. Cortex, 34, 461-469.
Marmor, G., & Zaback, L. (1976). “Mental rotation by the
blind: Does mental rotation depend on visual imagery?”
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception
and Performance, 2, 515-521.
Newcombe, F., & Ratcliff, G. (1989). Disorders of visuospatial analysis. In F. Boller & J. Grafman (Eds.), Handbook of Neuropsychology (pp. 333-356). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Newcombe, F., Ratcliff, G., & Damasio, H. (1987). Dissociable visual and spatial impairments following right posterior cerebral lesions: Clinical, neuropsychological and
anatomical evidence. Neuropsychologia, 18, 149-161.
Newstead, S.E., Pollard P., & Griggs, R. A. (1986). Response bias in relational reasoning. Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 2, 95-98.
Richardson, J.T.E. (1987). The role of mental imagery in
models of transitive inference. British Journal of Psychology, 78, 189-203.
Rips, L. J. (1994). The psychology of proof. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Shepard, R. N., & Cooper, L. A. (1982). Mental images and
their transformations. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Smith, E. E., Jonides, J., Koeppe, R. A., Awh, E.,
Schuhmacher, E. H., & Minoshima, S. (1995). Spatial
versus object working memory: PET investigations. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 7, 337-356.
Sternberg, R. J. (1980). Representation and process in linear
syllogistic reasoning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 109, 119-159.
Ungerleider, L.G., & Mishkin, M. (1982). Two cortical visual systems. In D. J. Ingle, M. A.Goodale, & R. J. W.
Mansfield (Eds.), Analysis of visual behaviour (pp. 549586). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Vecchi, T. (1998). Visuospatial imagery in congenitally
totally blind people, Memory, 6, 91-102.
Zimler, J., & Keenan, J.M. (1983). Imagery in the congenitally blind: How visual are visual images? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 9, 269-282.

tent yields information relevant to an inference, as it does
with visuospatial relations, then reasoning proceed
smoothly, and may even be slightly faster than with other
sorts of content. But, if the content yields visual images that
are irrelevant to an inference, as it does with visual relations, then reasoning of sighted persons is impeded and
takes reliably longer. People who are blind from birth are
immune to such impedance effects, since they do not tend to
use disrupting visual images. A word of caution, on the
other hand, is that the visual and spatial nature of representations in reasoning also depends on the nature of the problem. Transitive inferences might elicit spatial representations, but that does not rule out that other problems rely on
visual images in addition.

Acknowledgments
M.K. is supported by a Heisenberg Award from the
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) and by the grants
Kn465/2-4 and BACKSPACE in the Transregional Collaborative Research Center on Spatial Cognition (SFB/TR 8).
The authors are grateful to Jack Loomis, who had the initial
idea of testing the visual-impedance-hypothesis with blind
people. We are also indebted to three anonymous reviewers
and to Mrs. Backsmann and Mr. Becker from the selfhelping groups in Oldenburg and Hannover.

References
Büchel C, Price C, Frackowiak R.S, & Friston K (1998).
Different activation patterns in the visual cortex of late
and congenitally blind subjects, Brain, 121, 409-19.
Braine, M. D. S., & O’Brein, D. P. (Eds.) (1998). Mental
logic. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
DeSoto, L B., London, M., & Handel, M.S. (1965). Social
reasoning and spatial paralogic. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 2, 513–521.
Fleming, P., Ball, L.J., Collins, A.F., & Ormerod, T.C. (in
press). Spatial representation and processing in the congenitally blind. Chapter in S. Ballesteros, & M.A. Heller
(Eds.): Touch, Blindness, and Neuroscience. Madrid:
UNED Press.
Huttenlocher, J. (1968). Constructing spatial images: A
strategy in reasoning. Psychological Review, 75, 550–560.
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1983). Mental models. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. (1991). Deduction. Hove,
UK: Erlbaum.
Johnson-Laird, P.N., & Byrne, R. M.J. (2001) Conditionals:
a theory of meaning, pragmatics, and inference. Psychological Review, in press.
Johnson-Laird, P. N., Byrne, R., & Tabossi, P. (1989). Reasoning by model: The case of multiple quantifiers. Psychological Review, 96, 658-673.
Kerr, N.H. (1983). The role of vision in "visual imagery"
experiments: Evidence from the congenitally blind. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 112, 265-277.
Knauff, M., Fangmeier, T., Ruff, C. C. & Johnson-Laird, P.
N. (2003). Reasoning, models, and images: Behavioral
measures and cortical activity. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 4, 559-573.

713

