UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
What is Universal in Perceiving, Remembering, and Describing Event Temporal Relations?

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/9zx7r9cv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 26(26)

Authors
Lu, Shulan
Graesser, Arthur C.

Publication Date
2004-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

What is Universal in Perceiving, Remembering, and Describing
Event Temporal Relations?
Shulan Lu (slu@memphis.edu)
Arthur C. Graesser (a-graesser@memphis.edu)
Department of Psychology, 202 Psychology Building, University of Memphis,
Memphis, TN 38152, USA
goal based theories could account for events overlapping in
time.
How are events represented in temporal dimension? There
are two types of primitives for temporally representing
events (Allen, 1984; 1991). A point based representation
captures events as being indexed as points in time. One
event can be a single point in time, as in the case of a
sunrise at 4:30 or a hiccup. There are many singular point
expressions in natural language (Moens & Steedman, 1988;
TerMeulen, 1995); the events described in these point
expressions appear to be conceptually instantaneous. A
point based representation can also represent noninstantaneous events with a set of points in time. For
example, a person’s cleaning the fish tank can have a
beginning at 2:15 and an end at 2:35 p.m. Its sub-event
getting the supplies begins at 2:16 and ends at 2:19 p.m.
Each of these events has points in time marking the
beginning and the end.
In contrast, an interval based representation captures
events as durations that may gloss over exact time points.
Thus, the interval of getting the supplies occurred during the
interval of cleaning the fish tank, without any specification
of the exact points in time that mark the beginning and end
points of events. Psychological studies have reported that
people have a grasp of the range of time during which an
event occurs (Golding, Magliano, & Hempill, 1992; Loftus,
Schooler, Boone, & Kline, 1987). For example, John may
not know exactly at which points of time he opens his car
door, yet he knows it takes two or three seconds to open it.
The chief theoretical challenge lies in specifying how to
relate the intervals of events and how to draw inferences
about the relative timing of events on the basis of interval
constraints.
In the fields of artificial intelligence and computational
linguistics, Allen (1984; 1991) developed a formalism that
captures the various temporal relations between two events
that are represented in intervals. Figure 1 provides an
illustration of these seven relational structures: BEFORE,
MEET, OVERLAP, START, DURING, FINISH, and
EQUAL. In Figure 1, each double-headed arrow represents
an event that occurs over some time interval, and each
arrow-head represents either the beginning or the end of an
event. The relation between each pair of events is described
by one of the seven predicates. The BEFORE relation
means that one event is prior to another event and that two
events do not overlap in any way, whereas the MEET
relation means that one event starts at the time another event
ends. START means that two events share the same

Abstract
What temporal relations do humans use to form dynamic
mental representations of events? In the fields of artificial
intelligence and computational linguistics, some have
proposed an interval based representation, in which two
events could be related in time by seven primitives. The seven
primitives are BEFORE, MEET, OVERLAP, START,
DURING, FINISH, and EQUAL. In the present study,
perception, memory, and language about event temporal
relations were investigated. The results showed that
BEFORE, MEET, and DURING seem to be prevalent in the
temporal experiences across a range of cognitive tasks,
despite that there is variability with respect to different
cognitive tasks.

Event Temporal Representation
Time is an inherent dimension of event representations
(Freyd, 1987; Lu, 2003; Schank & Abelson, 1977; Zacks &
Tversky, 2001; Zwaan, Magliano, & Graesser, 1995). In
everyday life, there are many goal oriented activities that
require an understanding of fine-tuned and subtle timings of
events, as in the case of making chicken soup, operating
certain mechanical devices, and making a camp fire. There
are also many events that are loosely related, as in the case
of recalling some quarreling couple while dinning at a
restaurant, hearing a loud sound from a house while taking
a walk, and seeing a squirrel running on the electrical wire
while walking past a fence. How do people construct the
temporal relations of events that may or may not be related
in an overarching conceptual structure? For the purpose of
this paper, the term event will be used as a covering term for
both intentional actions (as in the case of an agent making
chicken soup) and events that are not governed by the goals
of an agent (as the in the case of oil turning smoky).
Previous research suggests that the plan and goal
structures of everyday activities play an extremely
important role in the encoding and retrieval of event
temporal relations (Lichtenstein & Brewer, 1980). When
people are asked to recall the sequence of events, they often
place events in an order that maps onto the logical
inferences derived from the goal and causal constraints
instead of the actual order in time (Bauer & Mandler, 1989;
Lichtenstein & Brewer, 1980). It is notable that the type of
the events investigated in these studies tends to be the case
where one agent manipulates one object and enacts one
action at a time (Lu, 2003), whereas the examples in the
previous paragraph seem to suggest that humans often
experience events that have overlap in time. Additional
research is needed to specify the details of how the plan and
855

In this paper, four experiments are reported to investigate
the temporal relations people tend to construct. In
Experiments 1 and 2, animated events of fish swimming
were presented, and judgments of temporal relations were
made. In Experiment 3, events were presented linguistically,
and a production task was used. In Experiment 4, three
separate sentence sorting tasks were conducted to see what
semantic distinctions humans make when they describe
events and their temporal relations.

beginning, but one ends before another, whereas EQUAL
means that two events share the same interval and the same
beginning and end. These primitives are essential for
constructing a computational system of event
representations (Allen, 1984). To what extent are Allen’s
seven relations used as conceptual primitives in event
temporal representation?

BEFORE

Experiment 1: Perception of animated events
Experiment 1 investigated which temporal relations humans
tend to construct out of the 7 primitives in the context of
event perception. Participants were presented with
animations of fish swimming events made in an animation
program, called 3D Studio Max. Participants were asked to
make judgments about which temporal relation out of the 7
choices best captures the animated events they saw.
Participants There were 51 college students at the
University of Memphis who participated for course credit.
Materials Forty-two 3D animations were made using an
animation program called 3D Studio Max release 5. Each
animation depicted two fish of different colors and sizes
swimming in the water. The spatial trajectory of the fish
swimming was a straight line. For each relational structure
in Allen’s scheme, there were two sets of animations. One
set of animations holds the distances of fish swimming
constant but varies the speed of fish swimming, whereas the
other set of animations holds the speed of fish swimming
constant but varies the distances. For each set, there were
three different perspective combinations: horizontal –
horizontal, vertical - vertical, and horizontal - vertical.
The animation quality is near photorealistic. Each
animation was 25 seconds in length and was run at
approximately 30 frames / second.
Procedure Each participant was seated in front of a
Pentium computer, which used MediaLab 2000 (Jarvis,
2000) to display the materials. Participants were asked to
make judgments concerning how fish swimming events
were related in time, as discussed below.
Participants were shown Figure 1 (without linguistic
labels), and steps were taken to make sure they understood
Figure 1. Participants were instructed to choose one relation
out of the seven which best captured how two animated
events were related in time. Before the animations were
launched, participants were told that they could only have
one viewing of each animation and that the screen with 7
choices would automatically pop up after each animation.
Participants made choices by clicking a number that was
next to the temporal relation.
Each participant received the same order of the temporal
relations depicted in a diagram throughout the experiment.
There were 20 sets of orders in which the temporal relations
were presented. For each participant, the animations were
presented in a random order.
Confusability Analysis Entropy was used to calculate the
conceptual distance between each pair out of the 7 temporal

MEET

OVERLAP

START

DURING

FINISH

EQUAL

Figure 1: Temporal Representations by Allen (1991).
The formalism laid out in Figure 1 may capture some
intuitive aspects of human temporal reasoning. For example,
there is some evidence that endorses the distinction between
BEFORE and MEET. Kate, a language found in Papua New
Guinea, makes grammatical distinctions between the
following two types of events: (a) events that are separated
by a period of time with nothing significant, and (b) events
that have successive temporal relations (Grime, 1975; but
see Zwaan & Radvansky, 1998, pp. 176). In the Newtson
task, participants are asked to segment a videotape of an
activity into events and their parts (Newtson & Engquist,
1976). Participants are told to press the spacebar when they
think one event ends and another begins. This methodology
implicitly endorses MEET as the typical temporal
experience encountered in the world.
Gestalt laws of perception postulate that forms are easier
to process psychologically if they have more redundancy in
pattern and permit fewer alternative forms. Conversely,
forms are harder to process psychologically if they have less
redundancy in pattern and render more alternative forms
(Garner, 1974; Rock & Palmer, 1990). Examining Figure 1
based on Gestalt laws of perception, the complexity of the
seven temporal relations seems to vary. For example,
EQUAL may not have alternative forms, whereas START
may have several alternative forms pending on the intervals
of events. It is reasonable to infer that humans may capture
some relations easily, but have some other relations
confused (Lu, Graesser & Wolff, 2003).
856

People seem to make mistakes often among the five
temporal relations that have overlap in time.

relations. The construct of entropy originated in information
theory, which is a mathematical formulation of the
uncertainty in a data set (Shannon, 1948). In the current
study, each item may have 7 types of responses. For a given
item, the following formula computes how likely one
relation is confused with another one.

Experiment 2: Perception of animated events
in the speeded condition
In Experiment 1, participants were given the luxury of
focusing on two events. Experiment 2 investigated whether
the effects observed in Experiment 1 are the result of people
having enough attentional and cognitive resources during
event perception. The animations used in Experiment 1 were
presented at a faster rate (see Graesser & Nakamura, 1982;
Reiger & Zheng, 2003, for the same method). Participants
made judgments of the animated events in the same way as
Experiments 1.
Participants There were 40 college students at the
University of Memphis who participated for course credit.
Materials The same set of 42 3D animations used in
Experiment 1 was used in Experiment 2. The animations
were speeded up using an animation program called
VirtualDub. The animations were displayed 30 frames /
second in Experiment 1, whereas the animations was
speeded to 75 frames / second in Experiment 2.
Results and Discussions
The probability of people
making the correct judgment of temporal relations was .66
on average. The error rates of the seven relations were the
following: BEFORE (.34), MEET (.40), OVERLAP (.40),
START (.23), DURING (.41), FINISH (.43), and EQUAL
(.10). Compared with Experiment 1, the error frequency
increased in Experiment 2.
The similarity matrix was constructed in the same way as
Experiment 1, and then was submitted to the
multidimensional scaling program. The MDS solutions
showed the same pattern of structure clustering yielded as in
Experiment 1. The seven temporal relations were clustered
into three main groups: BEFORE, MEET, versus
(OVERLAP, FINISH, START, EQUAL, DURING). The
relational clustering in Experiment 2 did not differ from
Experiment 1. Whether two events had overlap in time was
again used to distinguish BEFORE and MEET from the rest
of the temporal relations. Experiment 2 ruled out the
possibility that the pattern observed in Experiment 1 was
merely the effect of attentional allocation.

N

Ei= −

∑ p ln p
i =1

i

i

ln N

The pi refers to the proportion of times a given choice is
selected out of the N possible choice items.
The entropy gives an index of how similar any two given
structures (e.g. BEFORE and MEET) appeared to
participants. A similarity matrix can thus be constructed,
and then entered into the multidimensional scaling program
implemented in SYSTAT version 9 with Young’s SSTRESS scaling method (Wolff & Song, in press).
Results and Discussions The probability of people making
the correct judgment of temporal relations was .80 on
average. The error rates of the seven relations were the
following: BEFORE (.20), MEET (.29), OVERLAP (.33),
START (.15), DURING (.29), FINISH (.26), and EQUAL
(.07). The EQUAL relation has the lowest error rates.
2

Dimension-2

1
BEFORE
START
OVERLAP
FINISH
DURING

0

-1
MEET

-2
-2

-1

1
0
Dimension-1

2

Figure 2: MDS Solution of Perception Task.
The confusability index was computed in entropy Ei. The
similarity matrix was constructed using the entropy formula.
This similarity matrix was submitted to the
multidimensional scaling program. The MDS solutions in
Figure 2 showed the following pattern of structure
clustering yielded from the perception task. The similarity
matrix was fit by a 2-dimensional MDS solution, with a
very low stress value (.01), and a high proportion of
variance accounted for (R2 = 0.99). The seven temporal
relations in Figure 1 were clustered into three main groups:
BEFORE, MEET, versus (OVERLAP, FINISH, START,
EQUAL, DURING).
The results showed that people tend to make distinctions
whether events have overlap in time, as BEFORE and
MEET stand out from the rest of the five temporal relations.

Experiment 3: Memory of everyday event time
using a drawing task
Experiments 1 and 2 investigated the perception of events
and their temporal relations. The question at this point is
whether the relational clustering in the perception of
everyday events will also be observed in the memory of
everyday activities. In the perception judgment experiments,
participants were provided Allen’s seven relations. We were
curious to find out whether the same pattern will be
observed if Allen’s seven relations are not provided.
Participants were presented pairs of everyday events that
were coded to have the temporal relations in Allen’s
representation. Participants read pairs of events, and then

857

drew which temporal relation in Allen’s representation best
captures the events they read.
Participants There were 34 college students at the
University of Memphis who participated for course credit.
Materials A sample of events from everyday activities were
collected. To ensure generality, the events were chosen from
a wide range of everyday activities. Some examples include:
driving a car, grocery shopping, cashing a check, and so on.
Three raters were trained to understand Allen’s
representation, and made judgments on how each two events
were related in time separately. The materials used in the
experiment were the items agreed upon by all three judges.
For every pair of events, a supporting context was
provided. An example is below:
Context: Imagine a passenger at an airport.
Events: She went through the security screening.
Her carry-on bags were x-rayed.
For each of the 7 temporal relations in Allen’s proposal,
there were 10 test items. There were 70 test items in total.
Procedure Participants were introduced how to represent an
event occurring over some time with beginning and end
points. Then they were given two examples: one indicating
one event occurring before another, the other indicating one
event occurring in the middle of another. The events were
presented on A4 size papers, and space was provided for
drawing. Allen’s 7 temporal relations were used to code the
drawings. The inter-rater agreement was 96%.
Results and Discussions The probability of people making
the correct judgment of temporal relations was .29 on
average. The error rates of the seven relations were the
following: BEFORE (.31), MEET (.83), OVERLAP (.82),
START (.95), DURING (.73), FINISH (.83), and EQUAL
(.51). The probability of drawing START was significantly
lower than chance, whereas the probability of drawing other
six relations was higher than chance. For example,
compared with the probability of drawing FINISH, the
probability of drawing START are significantly lower, t
(33) = 3.021, p < .005, using Bonferroni correction.

The similarity matrix, which was used to fit a 2dimensional MDS solution, does not include START. The
resulting MDS solution had a very low stress value (.01),
and a high proportion of variance accounted for (R2 = 0.99).
The six temporal relations were clustered into three main
groups with varying distances: BEFORE, MEET, versus
(OVERLAP, FINISH, DURING, EQUAL). Compared with
the MDS solution in the perception experiments, the
distances among the four relations that have overlap in time
are farther apart in the drawing task. Nonetheless, the
clustering formed by the rest of the 6 temporal relations, are
not incompatible with the previous perception tasks.
Whether two events have overlap in time continued to be an
important dimension in the memory of everyday events.

Experiment 4: Semantic organization of
temporal lexemes
Children tend to describe an event when they answer
questions about time (Nelson, 1996). Consider such an
example. When do you go to bed? When mommy comes to
get me. The child did not say something like at night. This
example suggests that how we talk about time is correlated
with how we think of time (Gentner & Boroditsky, 2001).
Does the pattern of event temporal relations observed in the
perception and memory of events reflect in the language
about event temporal relations?
Experiment 4 investigated the semantic clustering of
temporal event language when college students performed
linguistic sorting tasks. Participants were presented
sentences with temporal words embedded in them. They
sorted the sentences into groups which shared similar
meanings of the embedded words. The central question is
whether the words would cluster according to theoretically
interesting dimensions. Three experiments were conducted
separately for verbs, adverbs, and prepositions plus
conjunctions.

Experiment 4 (a): Verb sorting
Participants There were 27 college students at the
University of Memphis who participated for course credit.
Materials A list of verbs and their synonyms encoding how
two events are related in time was assembled from several
thesauruses. Each of the 17 verbs in (4a) was printed at the
top of a 4” x 6” index card. Below each verb were printed
two sentences that illustrated the use of the verb. The
example sentences were selected from the British National
Corpus.
Procedure Participants were asked to read the sentences on
the verb index card, and then sort the verb index cards into
as many or as few groups as they felt appropriate. They
were told that the cards in each group should have
“essentially the same meaning”.
Results The frequency of each pair of words co-occurring in
the same group was scored and assembled in a word-pair
co-occurrence matrix. The MDS solutions showed a pattern
of verb clustering. The sorts were fit by a 2-dimensional
MDS solution, with a very low stress value (.18), and a high
proportion of variance accounted for (R2 = 0.87). The verbs

2

Dimension-2

1

MEET

OVERLAP

0

DURING

EQUAL
BEFORE

FINISH

-1

-2
-2

-1

0
Dimension-1

1

2

Figure 3: Drawing MDS Solution.
858

in (4a) were sorted into three main groups as shown in
Figure 4:
BEFORE – type verbs (anticipate, be before, foresee, go
before, and precede);
AFTER – type verbs (come after, go after, follow after,
succeed, and result);
DURING – type verbs (coincide, concur, co-occur, ensue,
fall together, go with and overlap).

Discussions of Experiment 4
Across grammatical categories, Experiment 4 showed that
people are predisposed to three types of temporal relations
when they talk about time. The results are compatible with
the proposals by Wierzbicka (1973) in linguistics and
Graesser et al. in psychology (Graesser, Wiemer-Hastings,
& Wiemer-Hastings, 2001). The mapping between linguistic
primitives and Allen’s primitives may be more complex
than the MDS solutions suggested. Nonetheless, the
evidence in linguistics may indicate some alignment
between the linguistic clustering and the conceptual
clustering that emerged from the previous experiments.
The linguistic primitive AFTER may correspond to some
aspects of MEET. Wierzbicka and others have noted that
BEFORE and AFTER encode somewhat different temporal
conceptions of events (Thompson & Longacre, 1985, but
see Wierzbicka 2002; Wierzbicka, 2002). One difference is
that the event in the BEFORE clause usually does not begin
until the event in the main clause ends, whereas AFTER
does not have this constraint. Consider the following two
examples: (a) John took out the water pipe before he
drained the fish tank and (b) John washed the dishes after
he cooked the dinner. The two events in example (a) have to
occur one before another, whereas washing the dishes in
example (b) could occur before finishing the cooking. There
is some empirical evidence in support of this conjecture. In
a separate sentence rating task we conducted, two types of
after sentences were selected from a corpus. One type refers
to the situation where one occurs after another with a time
interval in between, whereas a second type refers to the
situation where the beginning of one event is after another
event but both events have overlap in time. There were
significant differences between the likelihood ratings of
whether the two events described in each sentence have
overlap in time.

2

Dimension-2

1

0

FORESEE
ANTICIPATE
COINCIDE
FALLTOGETHER
OVERLAP
CONCUR
COOCCUR
GOWITH ENSUE

SUCCEED
FOLLOWAFTER
RESULT
GOAFTER
COMEAFTER

-1

-2
-2

BEBEFORE
GOBEFORE
PRECEDE

-1

0
Dimension-1

1

2

Figure 4: Verb Sorting MDS Solution.

Experiment 4 (b): Adverb sorting
There were 58 undergraduates at the University of Memphis
who participated for course credit. Materials and procedure
were the same as Experiment 4 (a).
Results The MDS solutions showed a pattern of adverb
clustering. The sorts were fit by a 2-dimensional solution,
with a very low stress value (.13), and a high proportion of
variance accounted for (R2 = 0.94). The adverbs in (4b)
were sorted into three main groups:
BEFORE – type adverbs (before, beforehand, earlier,
formerly, in advance, previously and sooner;
AFTER – type adverbs (after, afterwards, later, later on,
next, sooner or later, and subsequently);
DURING – type adverbs (at the moment, at the same time,
concomitantly, concurrently, contemporaneously, for now,
in chorus, in concert, in the meantime, in the same breath, in
time, in unison, instantaneously, meanwhile, on the beat,
simultaneously, synchronously).

Summary and Discussions
Four experiments investigated how people piece together
events that may or may not have an overarching conceptual
structure in a range of cognitive tasks. The results suggested
that the distinctions made among BEFORE, MEET, and
DURING seem to be prevalent when people perceive,
remember, and describe how events are related in time.
However, there is apparently some variability in the
MDS solution yielded from different cognitive tasks. When
people had to linguistically encode and retrieve events, the
event temporal representations may be harder to construct.
The MDS solution in Figure 3 indicated the trend that
BEFORE, MEET, and EQUAL are more likely to be
constructed than other temporal relations. BEFORE, MEET,
and EQUAL may be easier for humans to process because
they have inherent simplicity, symmetry, and good forms,
which are hallmarks of the Gestalt Law of Prägnanz (Rock
& Palmer, 1990).
It is not clear at this point how the linguistic primitives
map onto the primitives in perception and memory tasks.
According to the relational relativity hypothesis, language

Experiment 4 (c): Preposition sorting
There were 76 undergraduates at the University of Memphis
who participated for course credit.
Results The MDS solutions showed a pattern of preposition
clustering. The sorts were fit by a 2-dimensional solution,
with a very low stress value (.14), and a high proportion of
variance accounted for (R2 = 0.91). The prepositions in (4c)
were sorted into three main groups:
BEFORE – type prepositions (before, prior to);
AFTER – type prepositions (after, soon after, as soon as,
until, pending, by);
DURING – type prepositions (just as, when, as, along with,
while, amid, during, in the course of, throughout, over).
859

Spooren (Eds.), Text representation: Linguistic and
psycholinguistic aspects. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Lichtenstein, E. D., & Brewer, W. F. (1980). Memory for
goal-directed events. Cognitive Psychology, 12, 412-445.
Loftus, E. F., Schooler, J. W., Boone, S. M., & Kline, D.
(1987). Time went by so slowly: Overestimation of event
duration by males and females. Applied Cognitive
Psychology, 1, 3-13.
Lu, S. (2003). Perceiving, imagining, and describing events.
Unpublished manuscript, University of Memphis.
Lu, S., Graesser, A. C., & Wolff, P. (November, 2003).
Perceptions and conceptions of time. Poster presented at
the 44th Annual Meeting of the Psychonomic Society,
Vancouver, Canada.
Moens, M., & Steedman, M. (1988). Temporal ontology and
temporal reference. Computational Linguistics, 14, 15-28.
Nelson, K. (1996). Language in cognitive development:
Emergence of the mediated mind. New York, NY:
Cambridge University Press.
Newtson, D., & Engquist, G. (1976). The perceptual
organization of ongoing behavior. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 12, 436-450.
Regier, T., & Zheng, M. (2003). An attentional constraint
on spatial meaning. In R. Alterman & D. Kirsch (Eds.),
Proceedings of the 25th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Rock, I., & Palmer, S. (1990). The legacy of Gestalt
psychology. Scientific American, 163, 84-90.
Shannon, C. E. (1948). A mathematical theory of
communication. Bell System Technical Journal, 27, 379423. Continued in following volume.
Schank, R. C., & Abelson, R. P. (1977). Scripts, plans,
goals, and understanding: An inquiry into human
knowledge structures. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Ter Meulen, A. G. B. (1995). Representing time in natural
language: The dynamic interpretation of tense and
aspect. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Wierzbicka, A. (1973). In search of a semantic model of
time and space. In F. Kiefer, & N. Ruwet (Eds.),
Generative Grammar in Europe. Dordrecht, Holland: D.
Reidel Publishing.
Wierzbicka, A. (2002). Semantic primes and linguistic
typology. In C. Goddard, & A. Wierzbicka (Eds.),
Meaning and Universal Grammar: Theory and Empirical
Findings. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Wolff, P., & Song, G. (in press). Models of causation and
semantics of causal verbs. Cognitive Psychology.
Zacks, J. M., & Tversky, B. (2001). Event structure in
perception and conception. Psychological Bulletin, 127,
3-21.
Zwaan, R. A., Magliano, J. P., & Graesser, A. C. (1995).
Dimensions of situation model construction in narrative
comprehension. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 21, 386-397.
Zwaan, R. A., & Radvansky, G. A. (1998). Situation model
in language comprehension and memory. Psychological
Bulletin, 123, 162-185.

affects thought in more abstract domain (Gentner &
Boroditsky, 2001; Gentner, 2003). Temporal constructs are
abstract, this points to the possibility that the way we talk
about time affects how we encode the temporal aspects of
events. The MDS solutions in the current study indicate
some alignment among the primitives across different
cognitive tasks. However, the alignment may be more
complicated and needs further investigations.
It appears that BEFORE, MEET, and DURING are used
in the perception, memory, and linguistic experiences of
temporal representations. When the representations are
harder to construct, for example, in the case of linguistic
retrieval of event representations, people are more likely to
mistake one temporal relation with another. In further
studies, it is necessary to investigate the cognitive principles
that constrain the constructions of temporal event relations.

Acknowledgments
The research was supported by a grant from the National
Science Foundation (REC0106965). We thank Phillip Wolff
for discussions of this work, Srinivas Achunala for 3D
animations, and Zhiqiang Cai for discussions on entropy.
We also thank Stephanie Coe, Dorothy Presbury, and Amy
Vitale for help with data collection.

References
Allen, J. F. (1984). Towards a general theory of action and
time. Artificial Intelligence, 23, 123-154.
Allen, J. F. (1991). Time and time again: The many ways to
represent time. International Journal of Intelligent
Systems, 6, 341-355.
Bauer, P. J., & Mandler, J. M. (1989). One thing follows
another: Effects of temporal structure on 1-to-2-year-olds’
recall of events. Developmental Psychology, 25, 197-206.
Freyd, J. J. (1987). Dynamic mental representations.
Psychological Review, 94, 427-438.
Garner, W. R. (1974). The processing of information and
structure. Protomac, MD: Erlbaum Associates.
Gentner, D. (Eds.). (2003). Language in mind: Advances in
the study of language and thought. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Gentner, D., & Boroditsky, L. (2001). Individuation,
relativity, and early word learning. In M. Bowerman & S.
Levinson (Eds.), Language acquisition and conceptual
development. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
Press.
Golding, J. M., Magliano, J., & Hemphill, D. (1992). When:
A model for answering “when” questions about future
events. In T. W. Lauer, E. Peacock, & A. C. Graesser
(Eds.). Questions and information systems. Hillsdale, NJ:
Earlbaum.
Graesser, A. C., & Nakamura, G. V. (1982). The impact of
schemas on comprehension and memory. In G. H. Bower
(Eds.), The Psychology of Learning and Motivation, Vol.
16. New York, NY: Academic Press.
Graesser, A. C., Wiemer-Hastings, P., & Wiemer-Hastings,
K. (2001). Constructing inferences and relations during
text comprehension. In T. Sanders, J. Schilperoord, & W.
860

