UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A comprehensive model of spoken word recognition must be multimodal: Evidence from
studies of language mediated visual attention

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/73w1w3b1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Smith, Alastair
Monaghan, Padraic
Huettig, Falk

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A comprehensive model of spoken word recognition must be multimodal: Evidence
from studies of language mediated visual attention
Alastair C. Smith (alastair.smith@mpi.nl)
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Wundtlaan 1,
Nijmegen, 6525 XD, The Netherlands

Padraic Monaghan (p.monaghan@lancaster.ac.uk)
Department of Psychology, Lancaster University,
Lancaster, LA1 4YF, U.K.

Falk Huettig (falk.huettig@mpi.nl)
Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Wundtlaan 1,
Nijmegen, 6525 XD, The Netherlands

Abstract
When processing language, the cognitive system has access to
information from a range of modalities (e.g. auditory, visual)
to support language processing. Language mediated visual
attention studies have shown sensitivity of the listener to
phonological, visual, and semantic similarity when processing
a word. In a computational model of language mediated
visual attention, that models spoken word processing as the
parallel integration of information from phonological,
semantic and visual processing streams, we simulate such
effects of competition within modalities. Our simulations
raised untested predictions about stronger and earlier effects
of visual and semantic similarity compared to phonological
similarity around the rhyme of the word. Two visual world
studies confirmed these predictions. The model and
behavioral studies suggest that, during spoken word
comprehension, multimodal information can be recruited
rapidly to constrain lexical selection to the extent that
phonological rhyme information may exert little influence on
this process.
Keywords: The Visual World Paradigm, Connectionist
Modeling, Visual Attention, Spoken Word Comprehension.

Introduction
Words are complex entities that link representations
across multiple modalities (e.g. phonological, orthographic,
semantic, visual …). When processing spoken words in
natural, ‘real world’ settings the cognitive system often has
access to information from many modalities each of which
may provide a reliable source of information that can be
used to constrain lexical selection. Yet comparatively little
is known about how these various sources of information
interact and the temporal structure of this multimodal
process.
Language mediated visual attention requires the ability to
map between information activated by the visual
environment and information activated by spoken language.
Empirical studies of this process conducted using the visual
world paradigm, in which participants view a visual display
and simultaneously hear a spoken utterance while their eye
gaze is recorded, have helped isolate the types of

information involved in this mapping and the temporal
structure of this process.
Huettig and McQueen (2007), presented participants with
scenes that contained objects that overlapped with the
spoken target word (e.g. beaker) in either a visual dimension
(e.g. bobbin), a semantic dimension (e.g. fork) or shared
their phonological onset (e.g. beaver). They observed that
participants looked first towards items that shared their
phonological onset, then once the speech signal
disambiguated between phonological representations of the
target and onset competitor, participants looked more
towards items that overlapped in either a visual or semantic
dimension.
Such eye gaze data has been used to index the timing of
activation of specific forms of information by the speech
signal and further has been offered as a measure of the
relative influence of information types during spoken word
comprehension. For example, the influence of phonological
rhyme overlap on eye gaze in visual world studies is often
only marginally significant, and less robust than onset
overlap effects (Allopenna et al., 1998;McQueen & Huettig,
2012). This exposes features of the underlying mechanism
that have been used to constrain models of speech
processing. For example empirical evidence of rhyme
effects has proved influential as they are predicted by
continuous mapping models of spoken word recognition
(e.g. TRACE: McClelland & Elman, 1986).
Evidence provided by these studies demonstrates that as a
spoken word unfolds information associated with the word
in phonological, visual and semantic dimensions is rapidly
activated. Further this information can be utilized by the
cognitive system to connect the unfolding speech signal to
information that has been activated through other
modalities. In the case of language mediated visual attention
to map to information activated by the visual environment.
Although it has been established that phonological rhyme
overlap can influence gaze behavior this has only been
demonstrated under heavily constrained conditions in which
a phonological mapping provides the only connection to
spoken target words. Therefore its influence under more

1449

natural conditions, when overlapping information in other
modalities (e.g. visual or semantic) is available, is unknown.
Within this study we examine the influence of phonological
rhyme on language mediated visual attention under
conditions in which competition is provided by items that
share semantic and visual relationships with spoken target
words. We first simulate the effects of this multimodal
competition in a model of language mediated visual
attention in which the processing of spoken words involves
the parallel integration of information concurrently available
in phonological, visual and semantic domains and then test
whether such a model successfully predicts the behavioral
consequences of the multimodal competition induced within
two visual world studies. We discuss the results of these
experiments both in respect to the mechanisms driving
language mediated eye gaze and more broadly the possible
implications for models of spoken word recognition.

direction of attentional focus as a consequence of the
integrated multimodal input. Each unit in the eye layer was
associated with one of the four locations in the visual field.
The models ‘gaze’ was interpreted as directed towards the
location associated with the most activated eye layer unit.
Representations To train and test the network an artificial
corpus was constructed consisting of 200 items, with each
item assigned unique visual, phonological and semantic
representations. Within the corpora were embedded 20
target items each of which was paired with a different
semantic, visual and phonological rhyme competitor. The
distance between targets and competitor representations was
on average half the distance of that between a target and
unrelated item in the modality that defined the competitor
class (see Table 1).
Table 1: Relationships defining target, competitor (Com.)
and distractor (Un.) items

Simulating multimodal competition in
language mediated visual attention
Model
Simulations were conducted using the amodal shared
resource model of language mediated visual attention which
has previously been shown to replicate a broad range of
word level effects reported in the visual world paradigm (
see Smith, Monaghan & Huettig, 2013a; Smith, Monaghan
& Huettig, 2013b). A diagram of the model’s architecture is
displayed in Figure 1.

Figure 1: Network Architecture.

Mod.

Item

Pho.

Com.
Un.
Com.
Un.
Com.
Un.

Sem.
Vis.

Constraint
(Features shared with target)
Final 3 of 6 phonemes
Max. 2 consecutive phonemes
4 of 8 semantic features
Max. 1 semantic feature
Min. 5 of 10 visual features
Features shared with p = (0.5)

Cosine
Distance
.259
.496
.500
.959
.264
.506

Training The model was trained on four cross modal
mapping tasks, these were: to activate an item’s semantic
representation when fixating on its visual representation; to
activate an item’s semantic representation when presented
with its phonological representation; to activate the eye unit
associated with the location of an item indicated by the
presence of its phonological representation (phonological
orienting) and to activate the eye layer unit associated with
the location an item indicated by the presence of its
semantic representation (semantic orienting). All four tasks
were randomly interleaved although the task of mapping
from speech to location was four times less likely to occur
than all other tasks. Initial connection weights were
randomized and adjusted over the course of 850 000 training
trials using recurrent back propagation (learning rate 0.05).
Once trained the model performed all training tasks
accurately for over 99% of items in the training corpus.

Simulations

Architecture The network consists of four modalityspecific layers connected via a central resource. Input is
provided by visual, semantic and phonological layers. The
visual layer simulates the extraction of visual information
from four locations in the visual field, the phonological
layer simulates the extraction of phonological information
from the speech signal over time, and the semantic layer
allows the network to associate semantic features with a
given object or spoken word. Output behavior is represented
by the eye layer which provides a measure of the models

Simulation 1 The visual input presented to the model at
trial onset consisted of the visual representations of a rhyme
competitor and three unrelated distractors. 5 time steps
followed display onset to enable pre-processing of visual
information before the first phoneme of the target word was
presented to the phonological layer. An additional phoneme
was provided at each subsequent time step until the entire
phonological representation of the target word has unfolded.
The most active unit in the eye layer was recorded at each
time step. In total 480 trials were simulated, with all 20

1450

target – competitor pairs tested with distractors in all
possible locations in the visual field (n = 24).
Figure 2 presents the change in the proportion of fixations
directed towards each category of item (rhyme competitor
or average distractor) from word onset.
To examine whether the model fixated rhyme competitors
more than distractors we first calculated the proportion of
time steps in the display preview period (ts 0 - 5) in which
the rhyme competitor was fixated. We then calculated the
same measure for the unrelated distractors. As there were
three distractors and only one competitor, distractor fixation
proportions were divided by 3. We then compared using
paired t-tests the mean log-transformed ratio of the
proportion of fixations toward rhyme competitors /
proportion of fixations toward unrelated distractors in the
preview period to the same ratio calculated for each time
step post word onset (ts 6-29). Results of the analysis
showed that the model first displayed a bias toward fixating
rhyme competitors over distractors from time step 13 [M = 0.247, SD = 0.207, tsimulation(7) = -3.374, p = 0.012; M = 0.258, SD = 0.352, titem(19) = -3.267, p = 0.004]. This bias
continued for all subsequent time steps.

Comparing semantic competitor – distractor ratios
showed increased fixation of semantic competitors from
time step 13 [M = -0.324, SD = 0.299, tsimulation(7) = -3.068,
p = 0.018 ; M = -0.291, SD = 0.241, titem(19) = -5.393, p <
0.001], semantic competitors remained fixated above
distractor levels for all remaining time steps.
Finally, comparing rhyme competitor – distractor ratios
showed that rhyme competitors were first fixated more than
distractors in time step 17 [M = -0.376, SD = 0.366,
tsimulation(7) = -2.904, p = 0.029; M = -0.349, SD = 0.411,
titem(19) = -3.796, p = 0.001], rhyme competitors continued
to be fixated more than distractors in all subsequent time
steps.
We also calculated for each competitor the competitor –
distractor ratio over the entire post word onset period (ts 6 –
29) and compared this between competitor types using
paired t-tests. We observed a greater visual competitor
effect than either semantic or rhyme effects
[visual/semantic: M = 0.121 SD = 0.164, tsimulation(7) = 2.098, p = 0.074; M = 0.151, SD = 0.204, titem(19) = 3.305,
p = 0.004; visual/rhyme: M = -0.500, SD = 0.231,
tsimulation(7) = 6.134, p < 0.001; M = 0.536, SD = 0.305,
titem(19) = 7.860, p < 0.001], while the semantic competitor
effect was greater than the rhyme effect [semantic/rhyme:
M = 0.379, SD = 0.272, tsimulation(7) = 3.938, p = 0.006; M =
0.386, SD = 0.253, titem(19) = 6.822, p < 0.001].

Figure 2: Change in fixation proportions from trial onset
for simulations of Experiment 1.
Simulation 2 An identical procedure was followed as
described for simulations 1 yet scenes now contained a
rhyme competitor, a visual competitor, a semantic
competitor and an unrelated distractor. Figure 3 displays the
change in the proportion of fixations to each category of
item from word onset.
For each competitor type separate analysis was conducted
following the same procedure used in simulation 1.
Comparing visual competitor – distractor ratios showed that
the model first fixated visual competitors more than
distractors in time step 12 [M = -0.262, SD = 0.276,
tsimulation(7) = -2.682, p = 0.031; M = -0.275, SD = 0.281,
titem(19) = -4.375, p < 0.001], the model continued to fixate
visual competitors more than distractors for all subsequent
time steps.

Figure 3: Change in fixation proportions from trial onset
for simulations of Experiment 2.

Discussion
Simulations predict that the effect of visual and semantic
overlap will be greater than that of rhyme overlap and that
visual effects will precede semantic effects, with both
preceding rhyme effects. Finally, the model predicts that
added competition from semantic and visual competitors
will lead to a delay in the emergence of rhyme effects.

1451

whose name corresponded to the spoken target word was
presented along with the images of three unrelated distractor
objects. In target absent displays images of four unrelated
distractors were presented.

Experiment 1: Effects of rhyme overlap in
target absent scenes
An initial visual world experiment was conducted to
establish that the materials constructed captured the effect of
phonological rhyme overlap on language mediated visual
attention.
Participants 40 participants aged between 18 and 30 (mean
= 21.6) participated in this experiment. All were native
speakers of Dutch.
Materials 15 experimental trials were constructed each
consisting of a visual display and spoken Dutch sentence.
Each sentence consisted of a target word embedded in a
neutral carrier sentence in which the target word was not
predictable (e.g. Dutch: “Zij begrepen niet waarom de roos
verwelkt was.” English translation: “They could not
understand why the rose was withered.”).

Procedure A tower mounted eye tracker was used to record
participant’s eye movements as they viewed displays on a
computer monitor and listened to sentences through
headphones. Participants were asked to look at the display
while listening to the spoken sentences. Within the
experiment the 15 experimental trials, 15 target absent trials
and 15 target present trials were randomly interleaved. Each
trial proceeded as follows, replicating the procedure in
Huettig & McQueen, 2007). First a fixation cross appeared
in the center of the screen for 500 ms, this was followed by
a blank screen for 600 ms. Then a scene consisting of four
images was presented, at which point a spoken sentence
began to unfold. The location of each item was randomized
across items and participants.
Results Figure 5 presents a time course graph recording the
difference from target word onset, in the proportion of
fixations directed towards phonological rhyme competitors
and unrelated distractors for the first 1600ms post target
word onset. Average distractor fixation proportions were
calculated by dividing the total proportion of fixations
towards unrelated distractors by three.

Figure 4: Example of a visual display from an experimental
trial in Experiment. In this trial the target word was cent, the
rhyme competitor tent and the three unrelated distractors
pop (doll), ster (star) and fles (bottle).
Experimental displays contained a phonological rhyme
competitor and three unrelated distractors. Phonological
rhyme competitors differed only in their initial phoneme
from the target words phonological representation. The
following relationships were controlled between the target
word, and competitors and distractors: word frequency,
number of syllables, number of letters, number of shared
phonemes, visual similarity, semantic similarity. Separate
semantic similarity and visual similarity norming studies
were conducted to gain measures of the similarity between
each of the images presented in the visual display and the
paired target word. All images used within the study were
black and white line drawings. To ensure that the names
attributed to displayed images were well motivated a picture
name correspondence pre-test was conducted.
In addition to the 15 experimental trials, 15 target absent
and 15 target present filler trials were constructed. These
also consisted of a spoken target word embedded in a
neutral sentence paired with a display containing four black
and white line drawings. In target present displays an image

Figure 5: Change in the proportion of fixations directed
towards rhyme competitors and average unrelated distractor
from word onset displayed by participants in Experiment 1.
For analysis we divided the first 1600 ms period post
word onset into four 400 ms bins and compared behavior in
each of these periods to behavior in the 400 ms prior to
target word onset. For each bin, in each test trial we
calculated the empirical log odds of fixating each category
of item (competitor or distractor). To form our dependent
variable we calculated the difference between the log-odds
of fixating the rhyme competitor and the log-odds of
fixating a distractor, this variable reflects the difference in
fixation behavior as a consequence of phonological rhyme

1452

overlap. This measure was then analyzed using linear mixed
effects models to examine whether for each 400ms window
post target word onset the difference between fixation of
distractors and rhyme competitors differed from the
difference observed in the baseline window prior to target
word onset. The model used a fixed effect of window and
random effects of subject and item including random
intercepts and slopes for time window both by subject and
item. To derive p-values we assume t-values were drawn
from a normal distribution.
We observed a significant effect of rhyme overlap 801–
1200 ms post word onset [β = 0.68; t = 2.22; p = 0.03] with
participants fixating rhyme competitors more than
distractors in this window compared to the baseline period.
There was also a marginal increase in fixation of
phonological rhyme competitors in the window 1201–1600
ms post word onset in comparison to the baseline period [β
= 0.05; t = 1.85; p = 0.06].
Experiment 1 establishes that the level of phonological
rhyme overlap embedded within the materials is sufficient
to induce increased fixation of rhyme competitors over
distractors replicating previous rhyme effects reported in the
literature.

between the baseline window and the 400ms directly
following word onset. Fixation of visual competitors in
relation to distractors did differ from baseline levels in
windows 401 – 800ms [β = 0.67; t = 2.24; p = 0.03], 801 –
1200ms [β = 0.80; t = 2.68; p = 0.01] and 1201 – 1600ms [β
= 0.58; t = 2.01; p = 0.05]. Throughout this period there was
an effect of visual similarity with visual competitors fixated
more than distractors in comparison to behavior in the
baseline window. Differences between semantic competitor
fixations and unrelated distractor fixations did not differ
from baseline levels in first 800 ms post word onset. There
was however a marginal difference in the 801-1200ms
window [β = 0.45; t = 1.79; p = 0.07], with semantic overlap
leading to increased fixation in this period compared to the
baseline window. This increase over baseline levels was
significant in the final 400ms window [1201 – 1600 ms: β =
0.66; t = 2.51; p = 0.01]. There was however no evidence
for an influence of phonological rhyme overlap at any point
post word onset.

Experiment 2: Effects of Rhyme overlap in
scenes containing Semantic and Visual
competitors
A second experiment examined the influence of competition
from items that overlapped in either a visual or semantic
dimension on the previously observed rhyme effect.
Participants 39 participants aged between 18 and 30 (mean
= 25.3) participated in experiment 2. All participants were
native speakers of Dutch.
Materials Experiment 2 used the same materials as used in
experiment 1 other than in each experimental display one
unrelated distractor was replaced by a visual competitor,
while a second was replaced by a semantic competitor.
To ensure that visual and semantic competitors shared
greater visual and semantic similarity respectively with their
paired target word, visual and semantic similarity norming
studied were conducted on all experimental scenes.
Additional controls ensured that competitor sets only
differed from distractors in their relationship to the target
word in the dimension intended.
Procedure The procedure applied in experiment 1 was
replicated in experiment 2.
Results Figure 6 displays the difference in the proportion of
fixations from display onset directed toward each category
of item displayed.
We applied the same method of analysis to the result of
experiment 2 as used in experiment 1. The difference
between the log-odds of fixating a visual competitor and
those of fixating an unrelated distractor did not differ

Figure 6: Change in the proportion of fixations directed
towards rhyme competitors, semantic competitors, visual
competitors and unrelated distractors from word onset
displayed by participants in Experiment 2.
When presented with scenes containing a visual
competitor, a semantic competitor, a rhyme competitor, and
an unrelated distractor participants displayed a bias towards
fixating visual competitors from 401 – 800ms post word
onset. Participants also displayed at later time points a bias
toward fixating semantic competitors from 801 – 1200 ms.
However, in contrast to the results of experiment 1, no
evidence was found for an influence of phonological rhyme
overlap on fixation behavior.

General Discussion
Our two visual world studies demonstrate that visual and
semantic relationships exert a greater influence on language
mediated visual attention than phonological rhyme. Further
they show that the presence of visual and semantic overlap
can eliminate the influence of phonological rhyme on such

1453

behavior. For such effects to be observed visual and
semantic information relating to the unfolding spoken target
word must have been activated and available to map onto
pre-activated information, before phonological rhyme
overlap could begin to exert an influence on eye gaze, which
from experiment 1 we know that it can. Our results therefore
provide further evidence that visual and semantic
information can be activated rapidly when processing
spoken words and that this information can be used to
constrain selection of items in the visual environment.
Our simulations predicted a greater influence of visual
and semantic overlap on visual attention in comparison to
phonological rhyme overlap. In the model the rhyme
competitor effect is delayed when visual and semantic
competitors are also present in the scene. This is driven by
the model’s gaze being directed towards only the most
salient item. In scenes in which rhyme provides the only
connection to the target, rhyme competitors are likely to be
the most salient item and therefore attract attention.
However, overlapping visual and semantic features of the
corresponding competitors are more salient than features of
the overlapping phonological rhyme. Therefore, when such
items are present in the scene rhyme competitors are less
likely to be the most salient item and therefore less likely to
be fixated.
What drives the visual and semantic competitor
advantage within the model is the contrast in the temporal
structure of representations across modalities. Unlike visual
and semantic representations, phonological representations
possess a temporal component. In the model initial
phonemes present a good predictor of the intended target
and are therefore more influential than phonemes in the
rhyme, that become available after the system has sufficient
information to identify the target item. The current study
indicates that such a mechanism leads to a greater saliency
of overlapping visual or semantic information than
phonological rhyme, to the extent that phonological rhyme
information did not have an observable behavioral influence
on fixation behavior when in competition with visually or
semantically overlapping items.
We know from earlier modelling (see Smith, Monaghan
and Huettig, 2013a) that the addition of noise to the
phonological input in the training stage modulates the level
to which such initial phonemes predict the target item, and
therefore the weight the model places on the influence of
none overlapping phonemes on fixation of rhyme
competitors. Previous empirical work has demonstrated that
the amount of noise in the speech signal can modulate the
influence of phonological rhyme (McQueen & Huettig.,
2012). It would therefore be interesting to examine whether
under conditions in which information across multiple
modalities can be recruited to map between items, noise is
able to dynamically adapt the influence of information
types, does visual noise lead to an increase in visual overlap
effects, and does auditory noise lead to an emergence of
phonological rhyme effects.

Our results provide further evidence for a rapid
recruitment of multimodal information to constrain lexical
processing. Based on our findings we propose that spoken
word comprehension in natural settings, in which semantic
and visual information is likely to be pre-activated, semantic
and visual information is recruited rapidly by the cognitive
system to the extent that later phonological information
often exerts little or no influence on this process.
Although models of spoken word recognition that focus
purely on phonological information processing (e.g.
TRACE: McClelland & Elman, 1986; Shortlist B: Norris &
McQueen, 2008) provide an important contribution to our
understanding of the manner in which information carried in
the acoustic signal is used to constrain lexical processing,
our results indicate that as models of day to day spoken
language processing, such models provide a narrow view of
the cognitive processes involved, describing the contribution
of only one component of a complex multimodal system.
Our data suggests that under conditions in which
information from other modalities is available to constrain
lexical access the role of phonological processing post word
uniqueness point is often marginal or inconsequential.
Spoken word recognition models must therefore be
multimodal to offer a comprehensive description of day to
day spoken language processing.

References
Allopenna, P. D., Magnuson, J. S., and Tanenhaus, M. K.
(1998). Tracking the time course of spoken word
recognition using eye movements: evidence for
continuous mapping models. Journal of Memory and
Lanugage, 38, 419–439.
Huettig, F., and McQueen, J. M. (2007). The tug of war
between phonological, semantic, and shape information in
language-mediated visual search. Journal of Memory and
Language. 54, 460–482.
McClelland, J. L., & Elman, J. L. (1986). The TRACE
model of speech perception. Cognitive psychology, 18(1),
1-86.
McQueen, J. M., & Huettig, F. (2012). Changing only the
probability that spoken words will be distorted changes
how they are recognized. The Journal of the Acoustical
Society of America, 131, 509-517.
Norris, D., & McQueen, J. M. (2008). Shortlist B: a
Bayesian model of continuous speech recognition.
Psychological review, 115(2), 357.
Smith, A. C., Monaghan, P., & Huettig, F. (2013a). An
amodal shared resource model of language-mediated
visual attention. Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 00528.
Smith, A.C., Monaghan, P., & Huettig, F. (2013b).
Modelling language-vision interactions in the hub-andspoke framework. In J. Mayor, & P. Gomez (Eds.),
Computational Models of Cognitive Processes:
Proceedings of the 13th Neural Computation and
Psychology Workshop (NCPW13). Singapore: World
Scientific Publishing.

1454

