UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Distributed Model of the English Past Tense Formation

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5g34505r

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Howell, Steve
MacDonald, Maryellen
Seidenberg, Mark

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Distributed Model of the English Past Tense Formation
Steve R. Howell (steven.howell@keystone.edu)
Department of Psychology, Keystone College, 1 College Green, La Plume, PA 18440 USA

Maryellen C. MacDonald (mcmacdonald@wisc.edu) & Mark S. Seidenberg (seidenberg@wisc.edu)
Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1202 W. Johnson Street, Madison, WI 53706 USA

Abstract
We developed a version of the Joanisse and Seidenberg
(1999) past-tense model to address two issues: whether the
model’s performance depended on the use of localist semantic
representations, and the challenges to this account presented
by a patient who was impaired in generating irregular past
tenses despite apparently intact semantics. The model also
demonstrates the frequency by regularity interaction from
Patterson et al (2001), and shows that a single-mechanism
connectionist model can perform realistically on the pasttense task.
Keywords: Past tense; neural network; language

A Distributed Model of the English Past
Tense Formation
For more than twenty years, the process of past-tense
formation in English has served as a battleground between
competing theories of language processing (see Seidenberg
and Plaut, in press, for a review). In English, the past tense
of a verb is usually formed by adding the inflectional
morpheme spelled –ed to the end of the verb. However, for
about 180 irregular verbs, the past tense is irregular, formed
not by adding –ed but via a vowel change or some other
mechanism (e.g. run-ran, keep-kept, go-went).
The
differences between regulars and irregulars are standardly
taken as indicating that they involve different types of
knowledge and processing mechanisms. Regular forms are
generated by applying a rule, whereas the irregulars are
stored in memory. Much evidence has been marshalled in
support of this “dual-mechanism” account (e.g. Pinker and
Ullman, 2002).
An alternative viewpoint holds that past tenses are
generated by a common lexical system encoding relations
among phonology, semantics, and (in literate individuals)
orthography. The system (which underlies many lexical
phenomena, not just verb morphology) picks up on
statistical regularities in the mappings between codes. A
central claim is that generating irregular forms tends to
require greater input from semantics compared to regulars.
This theory and its application to patients with semantic
impairments is summarized elsewhere (McClelland &
Patterson, 2002; Seidenberg and Plaut, in press). The
approach holds that the distinction between regular forms
and irregular forms is invalid because of their overlapping
structure, and that the past tense rule is an idealization that

abstracts away from details of the actual processing
mechanism.
One of the more successful recent models of the past
tense formation was developed by Joanisse and Seidenberg
(1999) . Earlier models of the past tense (e.g. Rumelhart
and McClelland, 1986) had focused on tasks involving
mappings between the phonological forms of the present
and past tense. By design such models could not address
any semantic phenomena, and thus they could not
distinguish between homophones with different past tenses
such as ring-ringed and ring-rang. The Joanisse and
Seidenberg (1999) model (hereinafter J&S) was an advance
in two respects: it incorporated both semantics and
phonology, and it acquired this knowledge in the course of
performing several language functions or tasks. These tasks
included hearing or comprehending (mapping input
phonemes to semantics), speaking (mapping semantics to
output phonemes), repeating (mapping input phonemes
directly to output phonemes) and transforming (past tense
formation – mapping input phonemes of a verb to the output
phonemes of the past tense of the verb).
The J&S model was trained on the present and past tenses
of 600 monosyllabic verbs, of which 64 had irregular past
tenses. The repeating tasks included an additional 594
English verbs to increase the model’s exposure to English
phonology. After training, the model performed quite well,
exhibiting correct performances after training of 99.8%,
99.5%, 98.2% and 99.3% on speaking, hearing, repeating,
and transforming respectively. The model was tested on the
20 nonce verbs from Ullman et al. (1997) in order to
determine its capacity to generalize to verbs which had not
been included in the training set. Test performance was
90%, and even the errors were of a type that people
occasionally produce.
The trained model was then lesioned in two ways,
phonologically and semantically. Phonological damage
affected performance on all three types of verbs, but had the
largest effect on nonwords. Semantic damage also affected
all three types of verbs, but the effect was largest for
irregular verbs.
The conclusion from the model’s
performance was that the “double dissociation” observed
across patient groups can be replicated by different types of
lesions in a system that does not include separate 'rule' and
'exception' mechanisms (Joanisse and Seidenberg, 1999).
Further, the model’s errors were also broadly consistent
with the patient data.

2375

Later work highlighted some of the limitations of this
model, chiefly that it used an arbitrary localist
representation for semantics that did not include any real
word meaning or allow for different degrees of similarity
among semantic representations of words.
While
neuropsychological data on anterior lesions was interpreted
by Pinker and Ullman (2003) as a challenge to the J&S
model, work by Bird et al (2003) refuted Ullman’s own
findings (Ullman et al., 1997) by identifying a confound of
phonological complexity in the experimental materials with
their word representations.
More challenging evidence was introduced by Miozzo
(2003). Miozzo presented evidence of a neuropsychological
patient (AW) with acquired brain damage who encountered
problems accessing phonology in speech production, but
seemed to have intact ability to access word meaning. In
the context of J&S, this would mean damage to the
phonological units, but intact semantic units. AW was
better able to produce the past tenses of regular verbs than
irregular verbs, the opposite of what one would expect if
J&S were correct. That is, damage to semantics (posterior
lesions) is thought to impair irregular performance more
than regular, with damage to phonology (anterior lesions)
affecting regulars more.
The appearance of a selective deficit for irregulars when
lexical access is impaired was argued to be more in line
with a dual-mechanism account, since it specifies that
irregular forms are specified in the lexicon while regulars
are processed via a “rule” mechanism. Specifically, Miozzo
claimed that J&S could not account for such a deficit, a
problem for the single-mechanism viewpoint.
The critical issue about the Miozzo patient is not whether
semantics is “intact” but rather his ability to use this
information in performing different tasks. The claim that
semantics was well-preserved derived from performance on
one type of task, word-picture matching. This task speaks
to properties of the mapping from phonology to semantics
which was well-enough preserved to allow performance at a
high level. However, the patient was also severely anomic,
unable to generate names of objects. This task speaks to
properties of the mapping from semantics to phonology,
which was highly impaired. The past tense generation task
used to assess verb knowledge involves speech production;
given the present tense as input, produce the past tense. In
the J&S model, semantics is relevant to generating past
tenses for irregular verbs. The patient’s poor performance
on irregulars follows from the inability to use semantics to
generate phonology.
In short, performance on irregular past tenses can be
impaired by damage to semantic representations (as in
semantic dementia) or in the use of semantic information to
compute phonology (as in anomia). The computation from
sound to meaning is not immediately relevant to the past
tense generation task and neither is AW’s ability to perform
tasks involving this computation. The computation from

meaning to sound is highly relevant to past tense generation,
especially for irregular words, and so is AW’s severe
anomia.
Although this account is consistent with the J&S model
and later models emphasizing the roles of semantics and
phonology in performing various tasks (e.g. Patterson et al,
2009), it is important to determine if the model will perform
in the expected ways when implemented, while continuing
to account for other phenomena.
Another interesting finding related to the past tense, is the
frequency by regularity interaction reported by Patterson,
Lambon-Ralph, Hodges, and McClelland (2001). They
found that, in patients with semantic lesions, more damage
occurred to irregulars than regulars, and especially to lowerfrequency irregulars.
Furthermore, McClelland and
Patterson (2003) argue that the frequency effect for
exceptions cannot be accounted for by the dual route model,
only by the interacting operation of a connectionist model.
Hence, we believe this effect is central to a complete model
of the past tense. The J&S model did not demonstrate such
an interaction, but we believe that a similar model which
incorporates richer semantics, thus reflecting human
processing more accurately, should also demonstrate
something like this frequency by regularity effect.
Thus, in the present work, we revise and extend the J&S
model to incorporate richer, more meaningful distributed
semantic representations, and test it to two purposes. One,
this revised model should be able to demonstrate the
alternative account of AW’s deficit, and so we will simulate
both types of damage to our revised PT model and compare
the results. We expect to find no difference, and thus
demonstrate that Miozzo’s patient is no challenge to the
connectionist account of the past tense formation.
Second, the model should exhibit the frequency by
regularity interaction when subject to a posterior (semantic)
lesion, a la Patterson et al. (2001). This sort of effect in
models is often dependent upon the use of a very realistic
training set that closely mimics the language that a human is
exposed to, and hence we will pay close attention to
incorporating the particular stimulus sets (in this case verbs,
matched for various dimensions such as frequency,
phonological complexity, etc.) that have recently been used
in human experiments (e.g. Ullman et al, 1997, Patterson et
al, 2001, Bird et al. 2003).

Method
We attempted to extend the J&S connectionist model of
past tense processing to the use of distributed
representations in order to account for the findings of
Miozzo (2003) and Bird et al (2003). The revised model is
shown in Figure 1.
Words were represented in various codes depending on
the subsystem involved in the past-tense generation task:
speech input (a phonological representation of the sounds of
words), speech output (a similar code used in generating

2376

speech), and distributed semantic representations (the
meanings of words). In humans, speech input consists of
continuous acoustic patterns that are recognized and parsed
into sequences of discrete phonemes by a process of
categorical perception. Speech output, on the other hand,
consists of sequences of articulatory gestures subserved by
the motor cortex that result in the physical production of
sound. Some have suggested that, with experience, humans
incorporate both auditory and motor cortex representations
of sound into a single phonemic representation. As a
simplifying assumption, we have followed this evidence and
used exactly the same distributed phonological code for
both input and output.

Figure 1: Model Architecture.
These representations employed a CCVVCCC-VC
template (C=Consonant, V=Vowel), with each phoneme
represented via 18 binary phonological features. Each
words vowel was aligned with the first V [VV was used to
represent dipthongs such as the /oy/ in (BOY)]. Initial
consonants were aligned with the C slots from right to left,
and following consonants were aligned with C slots from
left to right. The final VC was used represent the /Id/
syllable in words such as TASTED. Any units in empty
slots were set to 0.0 activation.
As pointed out in J&S, the use of a distributed code for
the phonological representations allowed the model to
represent degrees of similarity between words. A knowledge
of the similarities among words is essential to the model’s
ability to generalize. Units on the speech output layer were
connected to and from a series of “cleanup” units (Hinton &
Shallice, 1991; Plaut & Shallice, 1993). These units
provided a way of representing nonlinearly separable (and
hence more complex) phonological dependencies and made
the processing of phonological output a dynamic process in
which the model settles into a final pattern over a series of
time steps (McClelland and Rumelhart, 1981; Plaut,
McClelland, Seidenberg, and Patterson, 1996; Harm &
Seidenberg, 1999).

In the semantic layer, each verb was represented as a
distributed pattern of activation over a set of 254 semantic
“features”. These semantic representations were provided
by David Plaut (Plaut, 2004, Personal Communication) who
created them via an LSA-like process (e.g. Landauer, 1997).
Of course, the semantic bits used in this sort of distributed
semantic representation are not meaningful in themselves,
and hence are not really “features” in the sense that, for
example, the feature sets of Howell, Jankowicz, and Becker
(2005) are. The similarity of one verb to another is only
found in the overall pattern of overlap of the 254 bits,
including their covariance. However, at present such
meaningful feature sets for words have limited vocabularies,
such as 450 words or so, and hence would not be capable of
representing the 1300+ verbs used in the present model.
One additional node (the 255th) was used in the semantic
representations to indicate present or past tense. The
semantic layer was also connected to a cleanup layer of 100
units. This size is dramatically increased from the J&S
model, due to the increased complexity of the semantic
relationships in the Plaut semantic representations
One major advantage of the J&S model was the way it
incorporated a variety of language tasks into the learning of
the past tense. That is, people acquire their knowledge of
language by using it for different purposes. What is learned
from one task, such as speaking, may affect the ability to
perform other tasks, such as hearing (especially if the
phonemic representations of the two overlap, as discussed
above). We approximated this aspect of human learning by
interleaving training on three tasks. Speaking involved
taking the semantic representation of a present or past tense
verb as input and generating its phonology. This maps to a
person with a semantic meaning in mind who then must
articulate it. Hearing involved taking the phonological code
of a word as input and activating its semantic meaning.
This is of course the opposite process to the above.
Transforming, the task most specific to the issue at hand,
involved taking the phonology of a verb and an indication of
past-tense semantics (turning the past tense bit ON) as input
and generating past tense phonology. The model had to find
a set of weights on its connections that allowed it to perform
all of these tasks accurately.
The J&S model actually incorporated a fourth task,
repeating, which was added to give that model more
experience with the structure of English phonology. For the
present model we eliminated this task, as it was less central
than the other three, and tended to cause repetition errors on
the past tense task. Also, in the present model we were able
to include all 1365 words in all three tasks, rather than
having a large subset used only for the repeating task.
The model was trained on the present and past tense of
1365 monosyllabic English verbs, consisting of the
vocabulary used in the J&S model plus the non-overlapping
words drawn from Patterson, Lambon-Ralph, Hodges
&McClelland (2001), and Bird et al. (2003). These

2377

Results
Training was halted after 1.7 million training trials, at the
point where overtraining seemed to be becoming an issue.
At this point the accuracy of the trained network was
assessed on all three tasks (Speaking, Hearing, and
Transforming), over all of the words in the training set. For
the Speech Input and Speech Output layers, words were
scored phoneme by phoneme, using a Euclidian Distance
metric to select the phoneme closest to the network’s output.
If the closest phoneme differed from the target phoneme, it
was scored as incorrect. If any of a word’s several
phonemes were incorrect, the entire word was scored as
incorrect. Semantically, the word closest to the network’s
output was selected via the same Euclidian Distance metric.
If this selected word differed from the target word, it was
scored as incorrect. Accuracy on all tasks on the training set
was quite good: Speaking, 1288 correct out of 1365, or
94.4%; Hearing, 1289 correct of out 1365, or 94.4%; and
Transforming, 658 correct out of 685, or 96.1%. Note that
there are fewer trials (685) for the Transforming task, since
only present tense verbs can be transformed into the past
tense. However, each trial uses a present tense verb as
phonological input, and the past tense as phonological
output, so all 1365 words are still being used in all tasks.
The ability of the model to generalize and produce the
past tense for words on which it had not been trained was
assessed (as in J&S) using the 20 nonce words from Ullman
et al (1997). As these are meaningless nonwords without
semantics, the model was given only the phonological code
of the nonce verb as input, and the past-tense semantics bit
as input (indicating the model should perform the

transformation task). Using the same scoring criteria as
above, the network generated acceptably ‘correct’ past
tenses on 17 of the 20 nonce verbs, or 85% correct.
Accuracy on a variety of other test sets was also
calculated. First, two sets of test words (Regulars and
Irregulars) that were NOT included in the training set were
presented to the model. These verbs differ from the Ullman
nonce verbs above in that they have actual semantic
representations attached, but the model simply hasn’t been
trained on producing their past tense, only on the two other
tasks. Thus, unlike with the nonce verbs, it is possible that
semantic similarity between these novel verbs and other,
known, verbs could influence the formation of the past tense
form, in addition to phonological similarity as for the nonce
verbs.
Performance on the Regular test was perfect (20/20
correct; 100%), demonstrating that the model has acquired
the add –ed “rule” and is able to generalize well to novel
regular verbs. Performance on the Irregular test set was
good (13/16 correct; 81.2%), but understandably not as
good as for the Regulars.

Irregular Deficits with Intact Semantics
To demonstrate that the kind of deficit that Miozzo’s patient
exhibited can be produced by damage to either semantic
representations themselves, or to the connections from
semantics to phonology, we performed two different lesions
to the model and tested it under both conditions.
First, the semantic units themselves were lesioned
(Semantic Layer lesions or SL) by adding a varying amount
of noise to degrade their operation. This proportion was
gradually increased to illustrate the progression of damage
under lesions of varying severity. As expected, irregulars
were hit hardest by this type of lesion (see Figure 2), which
would in humans have corresponded to damage to the
semantic association area in temporal cortex.

2378

Past Tense Impairments with
Lesioned Semantic Representions

Percent Correct

additional words were included to make it possible to more
closely map to the human data reported therein by using the
same stimulus words.
The verbs were presented to the model with a probability
equal to their logarithmic frequency. Task probabilities
were set at: Speaking, 20%, Hearing, 40%, Transforming
(present-past), 40%). Other simulations indicated that the
model’s performance was not highly sensitive to the exact
proportion of trials of each type. The network was trained
using
the
backpropagation-through-time
algorithm
(Williams and Peng, 1990) and the MikeNet simulator
created by Mike Harm. Each trial began with the random
selection of an item (verb) and a task. The input appropriate
for a given task was presented, and activation was
propagated throughout the network for seven time steps.
Weights were then adjusted based on the discrepancy
between the observed and the expected patterns. Initial
(pre-training) weights were randomized to small values
between -0.01 and 0.01. The learning rate was set to 0.001,
a smaller value than used in J&S which seemed to allow for
smoother settling in this more complex model. A logistic
activation function was used, and error was calculated using
the cross-entropy measure (Hinton, 1989).

1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

SD of Gaussian Noise added to Semantic Units
Irregulars

Regulars

Nonwords

Figure 2: Performance after Semantic Lesion (SL)

reported in Patterson et al., and suggests our model is
capturing something even closer to the human experience
than did the J&S model, thanks to its distributed semantics.
Past Tense Performance of Model After Lesioning
(n=10, 1.7m patterns, Lesion Size 0.2)
1
Percentage Correct Past
Tense

Secondly, we tested the model after lesioning only the
connections from the semantic layer to the hidden layer (SH
lesions), and leaving the semantic layer’s units intact. This
would correspond to a patient with intact semantics (as in
Miozzo’s patient) who nonetheless had difficulty with
retrieving the form of a word to go with a meaning (lexical
retrieval deficit). Again, regular verbs and nonwords were
largely intact even at high levels of damage, but irregular
verbs showed a severe impairment that increased with the
level of damage (See Figure 3).

Past Tense Impairments with Lesioned
Semantic-Hidden Connections

Percent Correct

1

0.95
0.9
0.85
0.8
0.75
0.7
LF

0.8

HF

VH

Frequency

0.6

Regular

0.4
0.2

Figure 4: Performance after Semantic lesion, by regularity
and frequency

0
0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.1 0.12 0.14 0.16 0.18 0.2
Proportion of Connections Lesioned

Irregulars

Regulars

Irregular

Discussion

Nonwords

Figure 3: Performance after Semantic-Hidden Lesion

Frequency by Regularity Interaction
We simulated a semantic lesion by randomly severing
connections from the semantic layer to the hidden layer with
a probability of 0.2. After lesioning, the model was tested
again, this time with a set of known words (words that had
been included in the training set) that were derived from the
test set used in Patterson et al. (2001). These verbs are
divided into five lists, as discussed previously, and matched
as closely as possible on phonological characteristics: low
frequency regulars, high frequency regulars, low frequency
irregulars; high frequency irregulars, and very high
frequency irregulars. On this test set, the differential effect
of the lesion can be clearly seen (Figure 4).
For regular verbs, there is no significant difference
between low frequency and high frequency items.
However, for irregular verbs, the low frequency items suffer
the most after lesioning, with the high frequency items
being more spared and the very high frequency items being
even less affected. The difference between the irregular low
frequency items and the irregular high frequency items is
significant (t(18), p = 0.03), as is the difference between
irregular high frequency items and irregular very high
frequency items (t(18), p < 0.001). This matches the
frequency by regularity interaction in the human data

The J&S model (Joanisse and Seidenberg, 1999) of past
tense performance was a significant advance, showing that a
connectionist model could exhibit accurate, human-like
performance on the past tense task while accounting for a
variety of neuropsychological evidence. Furthermore, it did
this at a subsymbolic level, simply by learning the statistical
regularities between input phonology, output phonology,
and semantics. However, its artificial localist representation
of semantics prevented the J&S model from making use of
semantic similarity in the past tense task, something that
humans certainly could. Thus in the present model we used
richer, distributed semantics. It is important to note that
Woollams, Joanisse and Patterson (2009) have, since this
present work was conducted, also developed an extension of
the original J&S model that incorporates distributed
semantics, replicating and extending earlier findings.
First, thanks to the richer, distributed semantics
incorporated in this model, semantic similarity could now
exert its effects, if any, on the past tense task. Second, the
possession of richer semantics allowed the model to account
for the patient data that was argued by Miozzo (2003) and
Pinker and Ullman (2003) to be a challenge to the
connectionist account of the past tense. For these tasks, we
demonstrated that a lesion to the semantic representations
themselves (posterior lesion), or to the semantic-to-lexical
connections (perhaps some anterior lesions), will both result
in a deficit for irregulars in the past tense task. Perhaps
what Miozzo has demonstrated, however, is the importance
of additional patient testing to determine where in the
process the lesion has occurred. For example, if semantic

2379

access is intact (as in AW), but word production is not, then
the lesion is likely along the neural pathways from
semantics to phonology, rather than in semantic cortex.
Patients like AW do require us to emphasize what we
believe to be the central tenet of the connectionist approach
to the past tense, at least insofar as it contrasts with the dualroute approach.
That is, the connectionist approach
emphasizes that there is a single mechanism or process that
the brain uses to compute the past tense. That this process
might be distributed and involve multiple physical “routes”
should come as no surprise to those familiar with neural
networks. Several areas of the brain (e.g. auditory
phonological representations, articulatory phonological
representations, semantic representations.) might be
involved in the neural network that subserves this task, and
they might be located in separate areas of cortex (e.g.
auditory cortex, motor cortex, semantic association cortex,
etc.) where it is possible that they will be damaged
separately, and that component’s contribution impaired.
However, this is not damage or impairment of a distinct
route, but rather of a part of the mechanism, and it will
affect the processing of all words, regular, irregular, novel
or nonword.
We believe that the difference is between a focus on
delineated, non-interacting, modular or symbolic processes
on the one hand (dual route), and a distributed, multiplyinteracting, subsymbolic and statistical process on the other
hand (connectionist). This is not a division that is specific
to the past tense debate, but it is perhaps where the most
obvious battleground has been. The present model provides
additional evidence that the connectionist approach can
continue to account for data that is argued by some to
require the other approach.

References
Bird, H., Lambon Ralph, M. A., Seidenberg, M. S.,
McClelland, J. L., & Patterson, K. (2003). Deficits in
phonology and past-tense morphology: What's the
connection? Journal of Memory and Language, 48, 502526.
Harm, M. W. & Seidenberg, M. S. (1999) Phonology,
reading acquisition, and dyslexia: insights from
connectionist models. Psychological Review, 106, 491528
Hinton, G. E. (1989). Connectionist learning procedures.
Artificial Intelligence, 40, 185-234.
Hinton, G. E., & Shallice, T. (1991). Psychological Review,
98, 74-95.
Howell, S. R., Jankowicz, D., & Becker, S. (2005). A Model
of Grounded Language Acquisition: Sensorimotor
Features Improve Lexical and Grammatical Learning,
Journal of Memory and Language, 53(2), 258-276.
Joanisse, M. F., & Seidenberg, M. S. (1999). Impairments in
verb morphology after brain injury: A connectionist
model. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America, 7592-7597.

J. L. McClelland and D. E. Rumelhart. (1981) An
interactive activation model of context effects in letter
perception. Psychological Review, 88,375—407.
Landauer, T. K. & Dumais, S.T. (1997). A solution to
Plato's problem: The Latent Semantic Analysis theory of
the acquisition, induction, and representation of
knowledge. Psychological Review, 104, 211-242.
Miozzo, M. (2003). On the processing of regular and
irregular forms of verbs and nouns: evidence from
neuropsychology. Cognition, 87, 101-127.
McClelland, J. L. & Patterson, K. (2002). Rules or
Connections in Past-Tense inflections: What does the
evidence rule out? Trends in Cognitive Sciences.
Patterson, K., Lambon-Ralph, M.A., Hodges, J. R., &
McClelland, J. L. (2001). Deficits in irregular past-tense
verb morphology associated with degraded semantic
knowledge. Neuropsychologia, 39, 709-724.
Plaut, D. C. and Shallice, T. (1993). Deep dyslexia: A case
study of connectionist neuropsychology. Cognitive
Neuropsychology, 10, 377-500.
Plaut, D. C., McClelland, J. L., Seidenberg, M. S., &
Patterson, K. (1996). Understanding normal and impaired
word reading: Computational principles in quasi-regular
domains. Psychological Review, 103, 56-115.
Pinker, S., & Ullman, M. (2002). The past and future of the
past tense. Trends in Cognitive Science, 6(11), 456-463.
Pinker, S. & Ullman, M. T. (2003). Beyond one model per
phenomenon. Trends in cognitive science, 7(3), 108:109
Rumelhart, D. E., & McClelland, J. L. (1986). On learning
the past tense of English verbs. In J. L. McClelland & D.
E. Rumelhart (Eds.), Parallel distributed processing:
Explorations in the microstructure of cognition, 216-271.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Seidenberg, M. S., & Joanisse, M. F. (2003). Show us the
model. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7(3), 106:107
Seidenberg, M. S., & Plaut, D. C. (in press). Quasiregularity
and its discontents: The legacy of the past tense debate.
Cognitive Science.
Ullman, M.T., Corkin, S., Coppola, M., Hicock, G.,
Growdon, J. H., Koroshetz, W. J. & Pinker, S. (1997). A
neural dissociation within language: evidence that the
mental dictionary is part of declarative memory, and that
grammatical rules are processed by the procedural system.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 9, 266-276.
Williams, R. J. & Peng, J. (1990). An efficient gradientbased algorithm for on-line training of recurrent network
trajectories. Neural Computation, 2, 490-501.
Woollams, A.M., Joanisse, M., & Patterson K. (2009). Pasttense generation from form versus meaning: Behavioural
data and simulation evidence. Journal of Memory and
Language, 61, 55-76.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Wisconsin Alumni
Research Foundation. Thanks to David Plaut for providing
the model's semantic representations.

2380

