UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Recurrent Neural Network for Game Theoretic Decision Making

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8kj9w93m

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Bhatia, Sudeep
Golman, Russell

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Recurrent Neural Network for Game Theoretic Decision Making
Sudeep Bhatia (s.bhatia@warwick.ac.uk)
University of Warwick
Coventry, UK

Russell Golman (rgolman@andrew.cmu.edu)
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA. USA

Abstract
We describe the properties of a connectionist network that is
able to make decisions in strategic games. We use the
structure of Bidirectional Associative Memory (BAM), a
minimal two-layer recurrent neural network with binary
activation functions and binary connection weights. We apply
BAM to finite-strategy two-player games, and show that
network activation in the long run is restricted to the set of
rationalizable strategies. The network is not guaranteed to
reach a stable activation state, but any pure strategy profile
that constitutes a stable state in the network must be a pure
strategy Nash equilibrium.
Keywords: Decision making; Constraint satisfaction; Neural
networks; Game theory; Nash equilibrium

Introduction
Strategic decision making is an important feature of highlevel cognition. From coordinating meeting times to
cooperating on research projects or negotiating household
chores, interdependent scenarios – in which the choices of
an individual are contingent on the choices of others – are
ubiquitous in everyday life. Game theory provides a
mathematical framework with which rational decision
making in interdependent scenarios can be formally
represented and analyzed. It is an important area of research
in economics, political science, computer science, and
philosophy, and it is widely used for studying behavior in
social settings, where it describes and predicts the types of
cooperation, conflict, and coordination observed in groups
of human decision makers (see, e.g., Camerer, 2003).
Despite its importance for the study of human behavior
(as well as rational interdependent behavior, more
generally) the cognitive basis of game theoretic decision
making is still unclear. Solving game theoretic problems can
be computationally intractable (Daskalakis et al., 2008).
How do humans represent choices, reason through
contingencies involving the choices of others, and
ultimately make decisions, in strategic settings?
In this paper we present a connectionist model that is able
to reason through game theoretic problems in two-player
games. Our model is based on Kosko’s (1988) Bidirectional
Associative Memory (BAM) network, which is a minimal
two-layer recurrent neural network with binary activation
functions and binary connection weights. We assume that
the two layers in our network represent the strategies

available to the two players, with connections between these
layers encoding best-responses to any given strategy.
Like the Hopfield network, which it generalizes, BAM
can make decisions through constraint satisfaction, with
final choices corresponding to activated nodes once the
network stabilizes. Constraint satisfaction networks (see e.g.
McClelland & Rumelhart, 1981) are commonly used to
model decision making in non-strategic settings, including
causal reasoning, stereotype formation, analogical mapping,
legal reasoning, and preferential choice (Bhatia &
Chaudhry, 2013; Glöckner & Betsch, 2008; Holyoak &
Simon, 1999; Mischel & Shoda, 1995; Simon et al., 2004;
Thagard, 1989; see also Van Overwalle, 2007). The implicit
assumption in constraint satisfaction networks is that longterm activation is necessarily described by a stable state. We
find that our implementation of game theoretic decision
making in the BAM network restricts long-term activation
to the set of rationalizable strategies, even if the network
never reaches a stable activation state. In settings in which
network stabilizes with the activation of a particular strategy
profile, this profile is guaranteed to be some pure strategy
Nash equilibrium. Conversely, every pure strategy Nash
equilibrium corresponds to some stable state in the BAM
network. These results show that rational choice in strategic
games can be described by the same cognitive principles at
play in nonstrategic settings, and that models based on
constraint satisfaction are able to provide a wide range of
valuable insights regarding the cognitive basis of human
reasoning, judgment, and decision making.

Game Theoretic Decision Making
In strategic games, two or more players make choices over a
set of strategies. Crucially, the strategies chosen by the
players collectively determine the outcomes of the game, so
that each player’s utility depends on the other’s choice as
well as on their own. We define a finite-strategy two-player
game with a set of pure strategies for each player,
and
respectively, and a pair
of payoff functions
and
that give each player’s utility
for each profile of pure strategies
(see, e.g., Hart,
1992). Thus if player 1 selects
and player 2 selects the
utility for player 1 is
and the utility for player 2
is
. We use the notation
as a shortcut for
(
).

1923

The most standard solution concept for a strategic game is
Nash equilibrium, which relies on common knowledge of
rationality and accurate (so-called “rational”) expectations.
A Nash equilibrium is a strategy profile in which no player
can obtain higher utility by unilaterally changing her
strategy; each player is already playing a best response to
the equilibrium strategy profile. We define the set of best
responses for player
to an opponent’s strategy
as
B ( )
arg max
. Then a pure strategy
Nash equilibrium can be defined as a strategy profile
such that
B
and
B
.
The concept of Nash equilibrium can be generalized to
relax the assumption that players somehow have correct
expectations about what others will do. The solution
concept of rationalizability (Bernheim, 1984; Pearce, 1984)
retains the assumption of common knowledge of rationality,
but imposes no additional constraints on behavior. As in a
Nash equilibrium, players best respond to the strategy they
expect their opponent to select, but in contrast to a Nash
equilibrium, this expectation is not necessarily correct.
Players must only be able to “rationalize” their strategy
choice as a best response to one of the opponent’s
rationalizable strategies. We define the set of rationalizable
strategies for each player as the maximal sets
and
such that any
satisfies
B
for some
and any
satisfies
B
for some
.
Clearly, any Nash equilibrium profile is
rationalizable, and if the sets of rationalizable strategies are
singletons, then these strategies form a Nash equilibrium.

Bidirectional Associative Memory
Nash equilibrium and rationlizability are two of the most
important solution concepts in game theory. Here we will
examine how choices corresponding to these solution
concepts are generated by human decision makers, modeled
with constraint satisfaction neural networks. These types of
networks rely on bidirectional (recurrent) connectivity
between their component nodes, which is able to generate
sophisticated dynamics and subsequently explain a range of
human behavior. Although these networks have traditionally
been used only to explain behavior in non-strategic settings
(Bhatia & Chaudhry, 2013; Glöckner & Betsch, 2008;
Holyoak & Simon, 1999; Mischel & Shoda, 1995; Simon et
al., 2004; Thagard, 1989), they can be easily be applied to
strategic game theoretic decision making. Indeed these
networks are particularly suitable for this task, as game
theoretic decision making features complex interactions
between the choices of different decision makers;
interactions that can be captured through bidirectional
connectivity.
The Bidirectional Associative Memory Network (BAM)
is a particularly powerful (and mathematically tractable)
constraint satisfaction neural network (Kosko, 1988). It
consists of two layers with binary connections between their
respective nodes and binary activation functions for any
given node. When the connections between its nodes are

symmetric then BAM is guaranteed to reach a stable pattern
of activation, regardless of its starting state. This property
has been used by scholars to solve a variety of practical
tasks involving associative memory and pattern completion
(Kosko, 1988; see also Cao, 2003 or Gopalswamy & He,
1994 for additional results) and also model human decision
making and the biases that it often involves (Bhatia &
Chaudhry, 2013).
In this paper, we model how an individual decision maker
reasons through two-player finite strategy games, using the
BAM network. Strategies in these games for each of the two
players can be represented in each of BAM’s two layers. We
will assume that the first layer in the BAM network
represents strategies available to the decision maker (or
self). If the decision maker can choose from the set of
strategies
, then the first layer in our
network consists of N nodes, with node i representing
strategy . The activated nodes in this layer represent the
strategies that the decision maker considers playing in the
game.
Correspondingly we will assume that the second layer in
the BAM network represents strategies available to player 2
(or other). If player 2 can choose from the set of strategies
, then the second layer in our network
consists of M nodes, with node j representing strategy
.
The activated nodes in this layer represent the strategies that
the decision maker thinks other might play in the game.
As mentioned earlier, node activation in BAM is binary,
with each node being on or off. We will assume that every
node has the same binary activation function, with
activation triggered by strictly positive input. For any node
k (in either layer of the network) with input , the activation
function is specified by the following equation:
{
In a slight abuse of notation, we denote by f the activation
function for either layer of the network, with components
for every node k.
Connections between nodes are also binary, with each
node in the first layer either connected or not connected to
each node in the second layer, and each node in the second
layer either connected or not connected to each node in the
first layer. There are no connections between two nodes in
one layer. The network structure can thus be described by
the matrices W12 and W21 which represent connections from
layer 1 to layer 2, and from layer 2 to layer 1 respectively.
We will assume the pattern of connections in our network
captures best-responses. Particularly, if
B
then
we assume the connection from node i in the first layer to
node j in the second layer is
= 1. If
B
then
we assume
= 0.We assume a similar pattern of
connectivity from the second layer to the first, so that
=
1 if
B
and
= 0 otherwise. Figure 1
provides an illustration of the proposed network.

1924

oscillating pattern correspond to strategies that are ignored
by the decision maker.

Results
First, suppose the network reaches a stable state
corresponding to a pure strategy profile, that is, a stable
state of activation in which only one node is activated in
each layer of the network. Our first result characterizes that
stable activation state as corresponding to a Nash
equilibrium.
Proposition 1.

Figure 1: Example of a BAM network encoding a game
with two strategies for self and three strategies for other.
We write the activation of any node i in the first layer, at
time t, as A1i(t), and any node j in the second layer, at time t,
as A2j(t). With the connectivity specified above, vectors
A1(t) and A2(t) together represent network activation at time
t. We can describe their dynamics in the following
equations:
A1(t) = f (A2(t-1)∙W21)
A2(t) = f (A1(t)∙W12)
As formalized in the above equation, node updating in our
network is sequential, with layer 1 updating before layer 2.
This does not affect the network’s behavior, except at the
starting point t = 0. Here, the above assumption implies that
the network begins processing the decision when some
nodes in layer 1 are activated exogenously (intuitively, self
begins the decision process by first considering his
strategies). The choice of the starting point activation in our
network can affect subsequent node activation and
sometimes will determine selection among multiple stable
states.
Like related recurrent neural network models, the BAM
network can make decisions through constraint satisfaction,
that is, by settling into a stable activation state. A stable
activation state in the network is a state from which
endogenous deviations are not possible. Activation states
A1* in layer 1 and A2* in layer 2 are stable if A1*(t) =
A1*(t+1) and A2*(t) = A2(t+1). We assume that a decision
maker chooses one of the strategies that are activated in
layer 1 and expects other to choose one of the strategies
activated in layer 2, in the network’s stable state.
Note that the connections assumed in this paper are not
necessarily symmetric, as strategy
can be a best response
to strategy
without
being a best response to strategy
. This means that the network is not always guaranteed to
stabilize. If the network does not stabilize, then it enters a
pattern of oscillating activation in which a certain subset of
nodes are activated and deactivated consecutively. We
assume that the nodes that are activated (but then
deactivated) as part of this oscillating pattern correspond to
the set of strategies from which decision makers make their
final choice. Nodes that are not activated as part of this

Suppose that

(

)

with unique nodes i and j in each layer for which
and
.
Then
is a Nash
equilibrium.
Proposition 1 will turn out to be a special case of
Theorem 1 below, so we omit proof here.
Proposition 1 tells us that the neural network will find a
Nash equilibrium if it is able to converge on a single
strategy profile. The process through which the network
finds this Nash equilibrium is constraint satisfaction. The
example of the traveler’s dilemma in the section below
illustrates how the network converges on a pure strategy
Nash equilibrium.
The game of rock-paper-scissors discussed in the section
below illustrates that the network may not converge to a
stable state. Even if the network does not reach a stable
state, however, we can characterize the nodes which may
experience recurrent activation. In the long run, activation
is restricted to the set of rationalizable strategies, R1 and R2
respectively. Let ̅
and ̅
respectively denote the
̅
sets of strategies that are activated at time t, i.e.,
if
.
Theorem 1. There exists τ such that for any t > τ we have
̅
and ̅
.
Proof. We show that if
, then for large enough t,
. (The argument for player 2’s strategies is
analogous.)
If
, then any chain of best responses can include
at most once. Strategy
is activated at time t (i.e.,
) if and only if there exists
such that
B
and
. The players only have a
finite number (N+M) of strategies, so for t
+M, there
are no more strategies available to seed a chain of best
responses, so
.
Theorem 1 tells us that we should expect strategically
sophisticated individuals only to play rationalizable
strategies. The network may never converge to a state with
stable activation, so we may not be able to identify a single
strategy that will necessarily be chosen, but we can make
testable predictions about what will not be chosen.

1925

We can also recognize that the lack of a point prediction
creates space for contextual factors to matter.
An
individual’s eventual decision may depend on which
strategy she considers first, which could in turn depend on
the salience of different options, how the options are
framed, or how the decision maker’s attention is anchored.
The coordination game discussed in the section below
illustrates how the starting point determines which of the
multiple Nash equilibria is eventually selected by the
network.
It is straightforward to observe that any pure strategy
Nash equilibrium would constitute a stable state in our
network. The strategies in the Nash equilibrium would, due
to the nature of the connection weights, reinforce each other
and, once activated, sustain their activation.
Theorem 2. If
exists a stable state
each layer for which

is a Nash equilibrium, then there
with unique nodes i and j in
and
.

Proof. This follows from our assumption that strategies are
connected to their best responses. 

response is always to claim exactly $1 less than the other
traveler does (if it is feasible to do so). As it turns out, the
only rationalizable strategy for either player is to claim $2,
and the unique Nash equilibrium has both players claim $2.
The network connectivity implied by the traveler’s
dilemma is illustrated in Figure 2. Given enough time this
network is guaranteed to stabilize with the activation of the
node corresponding to $2 in layer 1, the node corresponding
to $2 in layer 2, and the deactivation of all the other nodes
(corresponding to higher claims). If, for example, the
deliberation process begins with self considering claiming
$100, i.e., node $100 being activated in layer 1, then node
$99 will become activated in layer 2, and in turn node $98
will become activated in layer 1, and so on, until only the
nodes corresponding to $2 in each layer are activated. The
unique Nash equilibrium corresponds to the only stable state
of activation here, because it consists of the only
rationalizable strategy for each player. Intuitively, when a
decision maker is given enough time to reason, our model
predicts that he will choose to claim $2 and will expect the
other player to do so as well.

Illustrations
In this section we apply the BAM network to three
representative games. The games vary in the number of
Nash equilibria and in the size of the set of rationalizable
strategies. These examples demonstrate that activation in the
BAM network in different contexts either may converge to a
unique pure strategy Nash equilibrium from any initial state,
may fail to converge at all as it oscillates through multiple
rationalizable strategies, or may converge to one of many
stable profiles depending on the initial state.

Rock-Paper-Scissors

Traveler’s Dillema
The traveler’s dilemma is a generalization of the famous
prisoner’s dilemma, conceived in order to demonstrate
unraveling in a strategic game (Basu, 1994). In the original
parable, two travelers have lost identical antiques and must
request compensation between $2 and $100. The airline
(which is responsible for the lost luggage) will accept the
lower claim as valid and pay that amount to both players,
and, to deter lying, will penalize the higher claimant with a
$2 fee and will reward the lower claimant with $2 bonus.
We represent the game with the strategy sets
, where x1i and x2j correspond to the dollar
amounts associated with strategies s1i and s2j, and with the
following utilities:
(
{(

Figure 2: Example of a BAM network encoding traveler’s
dilemma game.

The classic game of rock-paper-scissors is the simplest
symmetric, zero-sum game with non-transitive winning
strategies. Each player has three pure strategies: rock, paper,
or scissor. The loop is that rock “defeats” scissors, scissors
“defeats” paper, and paper “defeats” rock. If both players
play the same strategy, then the game is a tie. We can
represent the rock-paper-scissors game with the utilities uij
described in table 1.
Table 1: Utilities in rock-paper-scissors

)
)

The airline’s scheme, of course, does not actually reward
honesty; it rewards undercutting the other traveler. The best

The game of rock-paper-scissors has no pure strategy
Nash equilibrium, but every strategy is rationalizable. Every
strategy is a best response to some other strategy, but no
strategy is a best response to itself.

1926

The network connectivity implied by the rock-paperscissors game is illustrated in Figure 3. With a single node
initially activated, the network will never stabilize,
regardless of which node is the starting point. Instead, the
network will display an oscillating pattern of activation, in
which each node in each layer activates consecutively. If,
for example, the network begins with the activation of the
rock node in layer 1, then the node corresponding to paper
(the best response to rock) will activate in layer 2. In turn,
the node corresponding to scissors will then activate in layer
1. This leads to activating rock in layer 2, and so on.
Intuitively, our model predicts that a decision maker will
cycle through all three possible strategies as she reasons
about the game, and any of these strategies may eventually
be chosen.

The network connectivity implied by a coordination game
is illustrated in Figure 4. The network is guaranteed to
stabilize with the activation of the same strategy nodes in
layers 1 and 2. The precise strategies activated in the stable
state depend on the starting point in the deliberation process,
so that if deliberation begins with the activation of node i in
layer 1 (representing strategy
for self), then the network
will stabilize with the activation of node i in layer 1 and the
activation of the corresponding node j=i in layer 2. Any pair
of nodes corresponding to a Nash equilibrium creates a
mutually reinforcing pattern of activation, a stable state in
the network. Intuitively, our model predicts that a decision
maker will choose to play the strategy that he first begins
thinking about and will expect other to play this strategy as
well.

Figure 3: Example of a BAM network encoding rock-paperscissors game.

Figure 4: Example of a BAM network encoding
coordination game.

Discussion

Coordination Game
A coordination game captures situations in which the
players’ primary incentives are to behave similarly, as for
example in the case that two friends would like to get
together at a meeting place and each has to choose where to
go. If they both arrive at the same location, then they each
obtain a high reward (e.g., they get to enjoy each other’s
company). If they arrive at different locations, then they
each obtain a low reward or a punishment (e.g., a solitary
evening). We can represent a coordination game with
and a utility function that has the following
property:
{
with
and
for all i and j. In a coordination
game, self is always incentivized to play the strategy that he
expects other to play and vice versa, regardless of the
specific strategy involved. Thus, there are N = M pure
strategy Nash equilibria in the game, with each Nash
equilibrium corresponding to an outcome in which self and
other choose the same strategy. As in the rock-paperscissors game, every strategy is rationalizable. However,
whereas the network never stabilizes for the rock-paperscissors game, it immediately stabilizes for a coordination
game.

Constraint satisfaction is a key feature of high-level
cognition, and models of constraint satisfaction --often
formalized using recurrent neural networks-- are frequently
used to study human reasoning, judgment, and decision
making. In this paper we extend this research to game
theoretic decision making. In particular, we adapt the
Bidirectional Associative Memory (BAM) model (Kosko,
1988), a minimal two-layer recurrent neural network, to
make decisions in finite strategy two-player games.
BAM is well-suited for this task. Choices in these game
theoretic settings are interdependent, with the payoff
generated by choosing any one strategy being a function of
the choice made by the other decision maker. The recurrent
connectivity in BAM can be used to model this type
interdependence. We assume that the two layers in the BAM
represent strategies available to the self and strategies
available to the other, and connections between these two
layers capture the best-responses to the various strategies.
With this structure, we show that activation in the BAM
network in the long run can only be sustained for
rationalizable strategies. Decision making with the BAM
network can thus achieve full strategic sophistication (i.e.,
rational strategic choice), although it dispenses with the
assumption of perfect foresight (i.e., rational expectations).
Of course, real people do not exhibit so much strategic
sophistication. In the aforementioned traveler’s dilemma,
for example, people often make higher claims, which cannot
be supported by any rationalizable strategy (Capra et al.,

1927

1999). Actual behavior is often better modeled by level-k
thinking, which captures bounded rationality (Nagel, 1995).
The level-k model assumes that players can reason through
k steps of best response analysis, where the value of k may
be heterogeneous in a population. Our proposed BAM
network could capture this sort of level-k thinking if we did
not associate decisions with asymptotic patterns of
activation, but rather terminated the network dynamics at a
finite time horizon and associated decisions with activation
when this horizon was reached.
Although game theory is most commonly used to describe
economic phenomena, such as price setting in markets and
bidding in auctions, it also has a large number of
applications for the study of cognition and behavior. For
example, games such as the traveler’s dilemma can help us
understand some of the difficulties involved in maintaining
cooperation in social settings (Axelrod & Hamilton, 1981).
Likewise rock-paper-scissors can be used to represent
evolutionary predator-prey dynamics (Nowak & Sigmund,
2004), and the coordination game provides a perspective for
understanding the evolution of language, as different
individuals have to agree on the meaning of words
(Demichelis & Weibull, 2008).
Our paper leaves open the question of strategy learning.
We have assumed the network is able to encode bestresponses, but how do decision makers learn these bestresponses? One solution to this problem may involve a
simple form of supervised learning. If, after playing each
game, the decision maker is able to infer both the bestresponse to the strategy that was played by other, and
other’s best-response to the strategy that was played by self¸
then a variant of the perceptron learning rule (that is
restricted to binary connections) could over time allow the
network to learn the pattern of best-response connectivity
assumed in our BAM model. This could also be
accomplished by reinforcement learning, as the individual
considers various possible responses to each strategy. In the
long run, reinforcement learning would ensure that the
response with the highest payoff would be selected for, and
the connection to the best response would be the strongest
of all connections. Future work should examine these
conjectures formally and should compare the predictions of
BAM given different forms of learning with real choice
observed in experimental settings.

References
Axelrod, R., & Hamilton, W. D. (1981). The evolution of
cooperation. Science, 211(4489), 1390-1396.
Basu, K. (1994). The traveler's dilemma: Paradoxes of
rationality in game theory. American Economic Review,
84(2), 391-395.
Bernheim, B. D. (1984). Rationalizable strategic
behavior. Econometrica, 1007-1028.
Bhatia, S. & Chaudhry, S. (2013). The dynamics of
anchoring in bidirectional associative memory networks. In
M. Knauff, M. Pauen, N. Sebanz, & I. Wachsmuth (Eds.),

Proceedings of the 35th Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society (pp. 1899-1904).
Camerer, C. (2003). Behavioral game theory:
Experiments in strategic interaction. Princeton University
Press.
Cao, J. (2003). Global asymptotic stability of delayed bidirectional associative memory neural networks. Applied
Mathematics and Computation, 142(2), 333-339.
Capra, C., Holt, C., Goeree, J., & Gomez, R. (1999).
Anomalous behavior in a traveler's dilemma? American
Economic Review, 89(3), 678-690.
Daskalakis, C., Goldberg, P. W., & Papadimitriou, C. H.
(2009). The complexity of computing a Nash equilibrium.
SIAM Journal on Computing, 39(1), 195-259.
Demichelis, S & Weibull, J. W. (2008). Language,
Meaning, and Games: A Model of Communication,
Coordination, and Evolution. American Economic Review,
98(4), 1292-1311.
Glöckner, A., & Betsch, T. (2008). Modeling option and
strategy choices with connectionist networks: Towards an
integrative model of automatic and deliberate decision
making. Judgment and Decision Making, 3(3), 215-228.
Gopalsamy, K., & He, X. Z. (1994). Delay-independent
stability in bidirectional associative memory networks.
Neural Networks, IEEE Transactions on, 5(6), 998-1002.
Hart, S. (1992). Games in extensive and strategic forms.
Handbook of Game Theory with Economic Applications, 1,
19-40.
Holyoak, K. J., & Simon, D. (1999). Bidirectional
reasoning in decision making by constraint satisfaction.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 128(1), 3.
Kosko, B. (1988). Bidirectional associative memories.
Systems, Man and Cybernetics, IEEE Transactions on,
18(1), 49-60.
McClelland, J. L., & Rumelhart, D. E. (1981). An
interactive activation model of context effects in letter
perception: An account of basic findings. Psychological
Review, 88(5), 375.
Mischel, W., & Shoda, Y. (1995). A cognitive-affective
system theory of personality: reconceptualizing situations,
dispositions, dynamics, and invariance in personality
structure. Psychological Review, 102(2), 246.
Nagel, R. (1995). Unraveling in guessing games: An
experimental study. American Economic Review, 85(5),
1313-1326.
Nowak, M. A., & Sigmund, K. (2004). Evolutionary
dynamics of biological games. Science, 303(5659), 793-799.
Pearce, D. G. (1984). Rationalizable strategic behavior
and the problem of perfection. Econometrica, 1029-1050.
Simon, D., Krawczyk, D. C., & Holyoak, K. J. (2004).
Construction of preferences by constraint satisfaction.
Psychological Science, 15(5), 331-336.
Thagard, P. (1989). Explanatory coherence. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 12(3), 435-502.
Van Overwalle, F. (2007). Social connectionism: A
reader and handbook for simulations. Psychology Press.

1928

