UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
A Structure-dependent Causal Diversity Effect in Diagnostic Reasoning

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/53q1m2j5

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Rebitscheck, Felix G.
Krems, Josef F.
Jahn, Georg

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

A Structure-dependent Causal Diversity Effect in Diagnostic Reasoning
Felix G. Rebitschek (felix.rebitschek@uni-greifswald.de)
University of Greifswald, Department of Psychology

Josef F. Krems (josef.krems@phil.tu-chemnitz.de)

Technische Universität Chemnitz, Department of Psychology

Georg Jahn (georg.jahn@uni-greifswald.de)

University of Greifswald, Department of Psychology

Abstract

each into two effects. The effects 1 and 2 form a proximal
pair of effects (likewise effects 3 and 4). In contrast, distally
located effects, which do not share an intermediate cause
form a diverse pair (e.g., effects 2 and 3).

The purpose in diagnostic reasoning is to find the cause of
observed effects by applying knowledge about the effects and
their potential causes. In the causal structure linking causes
and effects, effects can share causes or be linked more
indirectly. The causal diversity effect reflects the increased
support of a cause by a more widespread distribution of
effects within the underlying causal structure. We report two
experiments, in which participants acquired knowledge about
causal structures and then evaluated diverse and proximal
effect patterns with regard to their support for inferring a
cause. The diversity effect in diagnostic reasoning was
stronger if participants had acquired integrated knowledge
about causal structures. Moreover, teaching a reduced
structure with less nodes open to alternative causation of
proximal effects decreased the diversity effect. This
confirmed that the causal diversity effect results from
considering alternative causation and more generally that
diagnostic reasoning draws on causal representations.

Figure 1: Exemplary causal structure depicted as a graphical
causal model; equals the causal structure regarding a single
chemical in Experiment 2.

Keywords: causal diversity effect; diagnostic reasoning;
causal reasoning; causal models

Introduction
In finding the cause of observed effects, a diagnostician
consults knowledge about the effects and their relation to
potential causes. However, there are varying ideas about
how this causal knowledge is represented. Reasoning about
causality can proceed without representations of causal
concepts (e.g. Goldvarg & Johnson-Laird, 2001; Shanks,
2010). Nevertheless, causal model representations have
many proponents (Krynski & Tenenbaum, 2007; Sloman,
2005; Waldmann & Hagmayer, 2013), and are assumed in
causal learning (Holyoak & Cheng, 2011) and causal
reasoning (Fernbach & Erb, 2013; Sloman & Lagnado,
2005; Waldmann , 2000).
Evidence consistent with causal model representations
was provided, for instance, by the causal status effect (Ahn,
Kim, Lassaline, & Dennis, 2000). Furthermore, the
distribution of attributes in causal networks affects
categorization (Rehder & Hastie, 2001), and causal diversity
of symptoms was found to influence diagnostic reasoning
(Kim & Keil, 2003). The present study examines the causal
diversity effect.
Diversity in a causal structure means the widespread
distribution of effects. Regarding Figure 1, a single root
cause spreads into two intermediates, which in turn spread

If your task was to evaluate support for the root cause,
would you rate the support provided by a diverse pair of
effects as higher than the support provided by a proximal
pair? You should. Scientists are encouraged to search
widely varying support for their hypotheses (Heit, Hahn, &
Feeney, 2005) and statistical theory points to the value of
diverse evidence (Heit, 1998; Horwich, 1982): According to
Bayes’ theorem, hardly likely diverse evidence rules out
many of the most plausible causes, from which probably
one or more would cause proximal effects. In psychological
research, effects of diversity of information on thinking and
reasoning have been shown in the evaluation of categorical
arguments (premise diversity phenomenon in categorical
induction, Osherson, Smith, Wilkie, & López, 1990), in the
testing of arguments (López, 1995), in the search for
diagnostic information (Kim, Yopchick, & Kwaadsteniet,
2008), and in diagnostic reasoning (Kim & Keil, 2003).
Kim and Keil’s (2003) participants were taught a causal
structure similar to the one shown in Figure 2. The causal
chains linking the root cause with the effects were presented
separately in order to prevent visuo-spatial encoding of the
distance between effects. The subsequent diagnostic
reasoning task required to decide for whom of two patients
the root cause was more probable. One patient presented a
pair of proximal symptoms (e.g. in Figure 2, impaired
speech and disability of motion), the other patient presented
a pair of diverse symptoms (e.g., disability of motion and
stomachache). The patient with the diverse symptoms was

2829

chosen more often (Experiments 1 and 2) and the
probability of the root cause was rated higher for patients
presenting diverse symptom pairs (Experiment 3).
Only the proximal pair of symptoms can be
parsimoniously explained by the shared intermediate cause
(paralysis for the symptoms impaired speech and disability
of motion). The intermediate cause suffices as a simple
explanation (Read & Marcus-Newhall, 1993). In contrast,
for a diverse pair, no intermediate cause suffices as the
single cause, but the root cause is a simple sufficient
explanation.

Figure 2: Causal structure equal to the structure used in the
study of Kim and Keil (2003); here including an exemplary
assignment as used in Experiment 1.
Kim and Keil (2003) listed three possible explanations for
the diversity effect that was obtained with causal structures
involving three levels of intermediate causes (Figure 2).
Diversity effects could have resulted (1) because
participants counted the number of supported causal chains,
(2) because participants regarded correlated effects as less
informative, and (3) because participants considered
possibilities of alternative causation. Only the third
explanation predicts a reduced diversity effect for shorter
causal chains (Figure 1).
According to the first explanation – counting supported
chains, the diversity effect is based on a decomposition of
the causal structure. The root cause linking two causal
chains (Figure 2) may be mentally decomposed into two
distinct causes. Their chains are then expected to be
separately regarded by the reasoner. Whereas proximal
effects share the same causal chain, diverse effects are
located in two distinct chains. Thus, if participants had
judged the presence of the root cause by the number of
causal chains that the observed effects belong to, they would
have produced the diversity effect. To our knowledge there
is no study confirming this explanation. Because this
explanation does not relate to the length of causal chains,
there is no change of the diversity effect to be expected from
a causal structure with fewer levels.
The second explanation assumes that sets of effects that
are expected to regularly occur together due to their shared

intermediate cause are assigned a lower information value.
Such correlated proximal effects cannot be considered as
independently informative with respect to the root cause.
But if the co-occurrence of effects is more surprising as it is
for diverse effects (Kim, Yopchick, & de Kwaadsteniet,
2008) because the effects do not regularly appear together,
stronger inferences are licensed (see also Heit, Hahn, &
Feeney, 2005; correlation approach). This explanation
focuses on the sharing of an intermediate cause and does not
concern the length of causal chains either.
The third explanation concerns imaginable possibilities of
alternative causation. Diverse effects are caused by distinct
intermediate causes, while proximal effects share a direct
parent, a common intermediate cause. The presence of a
single intermediate cause can be more easily attributed to
causes different from the root cause in question. Thus, an
alternative causation for proximal effects is easy to imagine.
However, a diverse effect pair requires the presence of two
intermediates at once. Hence, there are less alternative
hypotheses of causation explaining the diverse effects. The
smaller set of contenders for the synchronous causation of
diverse effects affords stronger inferences (see also Heit,
Hahn, & Feeney, 2005; eliminative approach). This
difference between proximal and diverse effects still exists
with just one level of intermediate causes. Hence, a diversity
effect should be observed even with shorter causal chains,
but it should be smaller because with fewer intermediate
causes in the chain leading to proximal effects, there are
fewer nodes at which alternative causes can be imagined to
trigger the chain. Thus, the possibilities of alternative
causation differ less between proximal and diverse pairs
than in causal structures with longer causal chains.
The subsequently reported experiments explore the effect
of the length of causal chains on the diversity effect in
diagnostic reasoning with a task very similar to the one used
by Kim and Keil (2003) but with different materials.
Experiment 1 uses a causal structure with three levels of
intermediate causes as in the original experiments.
Extending Kim and Keil (2003), in Experiment 2, the levels
are reduced to one intermediate. Reducing the number of
levels does not change the number of chains and proximal
effects do still share an intermediate cause as parent. Just the
possibilities of alternative causation should differ less
between proximal and diverse pairs if causal chains are
shortened. Thus, a reduced diversity effect in Experiment 2
would suggest that participants consider alternative
causation.

Experiments
The first experiment aimed to replicate the causal
diversity effect with a paradigm from research on diagnostic
reasoning (Jahn & Braatz, 2014; Mehlhorn, Taatgen,
Lebiere, & Krems 2011; Rebitschek, Scholz, Bocklisch,
Krems, & Jahn, 2012). The causal structure from Kim and
Keil (2003) was adapted using new quasi-medical material
(an exemplary assignment is illustrated in Figure 2).

2830

Participants were instructed that they would learn about a
chemical that causes symptoms and they would later
evaluate patients’ symptoms with regard to this chemical.
For acquiring the causal structure without seeing it fully
depicted (Kim & Keil, 2003), the structure was presented as
four individual linear causal chains (each with one cause,
the intermediate causes, and one effect). While participants
in Experiment 1 had to acquire a causal structure with three
intermediate levels (Figure 2), Experiment 2 presented a
structure with one intermediate level (Figure 1). Participants
studied, memorized, and reported the causal chains to the
experimenter. When all four chains could be reported, the
diagnostic task started.
Each presentation slide in the diagnostic task presented
two patients with symptom sets; one diverse and one
proximal set. Participants had to rate the probabilities that
the patients had come into contact with the respective
chemical. Participants evaluated symptom sets with regard
to one chemical, and subsequently learning and diagnostic
judgments were repeated for a second chemical.

Method

Participants Fifty (33 female, mean age 22.9, SD = 3.1)
undergraduate students from the University of Greifswald
participated in Experiment 1, forty-nine (39 female, mean
age 22.6, SD = 2.8) from the Technische Universität
Chemnitz took part in Experiment 2. Two participants were
excluded from the analysis of Experiment 1 and one
participant from the analysis of Experiment 2 because they
reported professional medical expertise, which was an apriori criterion of exclusion (regarding our quasi-medical
scenario).
Design The design included one within-factor reflecting the
different symptom sets that were presented in the diagnostic
task (diverse and proximal). Furthermore, the number of
hierarchical levels in the causal structures was varied
between Experiments 1 (three intermediates) and 2 (one
intermediate).
Material In Experiment 1, the causal structure for each of
the two chemicals that had to be acquired as diagnostic
knowledge, consisted of the root cause (the chemical, e.g.,
W), two chains of intermediate causes (e.g., the two middle
columns in the bottom half of Table 1: Dry Eyes, Eye
Irritations, Reddened Eyes and Skin Tingling, Itching,
Scratch Wounds), and two pairs of effects (the symptoms,
e.g., Epiphora, Impaired Vision and Dermatitis, Scarring);
another example with the two columns in the top left of
Table 1 is depicted in Figure 2. The used causal structures
(Table 1) reflect the outcome of several pretests, regarding
plausibility, the instructions, and symptoms’ assignments.
Prior to Experiment 2, the plausibility of reduced strands
including only one intermediate cause was pretested (formal
structure in Figure 1) and the underlined intermediate causes
in Table 1 were finally selected.

Table 1. Causal chains. Participants learned about two
chemicals (e.g., R and K), each with two causal chains
spreading into two symptoms. The two causal chains of a
chemical were selected from the possibilities listed in the
table. In Experiment 1, all listed intermediate causes were
learned, in Experiment 2, just the underlined intermediate
causes were learned.
Chemical B / R (1st level)
Level Intermediate Intermediate Intermediate
causes
causes
Causes
2nd
Overexcited Stomach
Throat
Muscles
Irritations
Irritations
3rd
Muscle
Gastric Acid Mucosa
Cramps
Secretion
Tears
4th
Paralysis
Impaired
Sore
Digestion
Throat
5th
Effects Disability of Diarrhea
Bleeding
Motion
Throat
Impaired
Stomachache Mucous
Speech
Congestion
Chemical W / K (1st level)
Level Intermediate Intermediate Intermediate
Causes
causes
causes
2nd
Bleedings
Dry
Skin
Eyes
Tingling
3rd
Blood
Eye
Itching
Deficiency Irritations
4th
Low Blood Reddened
Scratch
Pressure
Eyes
Wounds
5th
Effects Paleness
Epiphora
Dermatitis
Freezing

Impaired
Vision

Scarring

Note. Originally material was in German

Intermediate
causes
Impaired
Lymph No.
Imm. Cell
Deficiency
Susceptib.
to Infection
Pneumonia
Fungal
Disease
Intermediate
causes
Allergic
Reaction
Bronchoconstriction
Asthma
Attack
Difficult
Breathing
Chest
Pain

In addition to the symptoms taught as part of causal
chains, participants were told that general symptoms
(Tiredness, Thirst) could occur. They were introduced as
unspecific symptoms that can be caused by any chemical.
In each trial of the diagnostic reasoning task, symptom
sets for two patients were presented (Table 2 lists exemplary
symptom sets). One patient showed proximal symptoms
(e.g. Impaired Speech, Disability of Motion) and the other
showed diverse symptoms (e.g. Impaired Speech,
Stomachache). Either both patients showed an additional
unspecific symptom or neither showed unspecific
symptoms.
Procedure Participants worked through the learning
phase and diagnostic reasoning trials for one chemical and
then again for a second chemical. First, the cover story was
introduced, according to which the participant in the role of
a doctor has to diagnose patients who are workers from an
industrial plant processing chemicals.

2831

Participants should learn how the presented chemical
could cause symptoms in people. First, they were informed
about unspecific symptoms that can be caused by both
chemicals. Then, slides presented the knowledge about the
first chemical causing symptoms via intermediate causes.
Slide presentation was self-paced. The chemical’s letter and
two out of four possible chains of intermediate causes and
symptoms (Table 1) were assigned in a pseudo-randomized
way. Likewise, a letter and two out of the other four chains
were assigned to the second chemical. The assignment of
chains was counterbalanced.
Each presentation slide showed a single linear chain
depicting the cause (e.g. W), the intermediates (e.g. Skin
Tingling, Itching, Scratch Wounds), and one effect (e.g.
Dermatitis); the terms were vertically arranged and linked
by downwards pointing arrows. Four slides contained the
entire structure spreading from the root cause (the chemical)
down to four effects (the symptoms). A landing slide
informed the participants that they could repeat studying the
slides by pressing letter “w”. Presentation of slides was
pseudo-randomized; slides showing strands with the same
intermediates were never consecutively presented.
After participants had memorized the chains, they
reported the acquired knowledge to the experimenter.
Reports were only required to be complete, which means
that all terms that were presented on the slides should be
mentioned. Any specific order, any causal or temporal links,
or links at all were not required. While Kim and Keil (2003,
p. 159) had prompted participants to explain "all the
information about that medical condition that they had read
in the preceding diagrams" in a written single paragraph, we
prompted our participants to explain to the experimenter
how the chemical causes symptoms. The experimenter
invited the participant to study the slides again as long as
the report was incomplete and noted the way the knowledge
was reported. This learning procedure ensured complete
knowledge and allowed to note whether participants had
linked the chains into a single causal structure.
Subsequent to the learning phase, participants were
informed that the patients to be diagnosed suffered from two
to three symptoms. Missing symptoms were explicitly
claimed to be absent. The diagnostic task was instructed as
prompting to rate the probabilities that patients had come
into contact with the given chemical. Pressing the space bar
started the presentation of items.
On the right side of each slide presenting symptom sets to
be rated, two lists of symptoms corresponding to two
patients were shown in a vertical arrangement. The lists
consisted of either two symptoms or three symptoms
(additionally including an unspecific symptom). One list
was a proximal set of symptoms, the other was a diverse set.
To the left of each symptom set, it was asked: How
probable is it (on a scale from 0 to 100) that this patient had
come into contact with chemical <X>? with X replaced by
the letter of the learned chemical. Additionally, a block of
text at the top of the slide instructed participants to consider
both patients prior to any judgment and to start rating by

pressing the space bar. The key press opened the input field
for the first rating about the top patient. Participants rated
the probability for the first symptom set with the number
keys and switched to rating the next patient by pressing the
return key.
Four slides with symptom sets were presented for each
chemical. The two possible proximal sets from a chemical’s
structure were presented two times, each time combined
with a diverse set randomly drawn from four diverse sets.
Table 2 shows the possible proximal and diverse symptom
sets for the structure in Figure 2. On half of the slides, the
symptom sets included additional unspecific symptoms
(Tiredness, Thirst).
Table 2. Exemplary proximal and diverse sets of effects
matching with the effects in Figure 2. Each of the proximal
sets could be combined with each of the diverse sets for
trials of the diagnostic reasoning task.
Proximal Sets
Diverse Sets
Effect 1
Effect 3
Impaired
Stomachache
Effect 1
Effect 2
Speech
Impaired
Disability
Effect 1
Effect 4
Speech
of Motion
Impaired
Diarrhea
Speech
Effect 2
Effect 3
Disability of
Stomachache
Effect 3
Effect 4
Motion
Stomachache Diarrhea
Effect 2
Effect 4
Disability of
Diarrhea
Motion
Vertical positions of proximal and diverse symptom lists
were balanced. The order of symptoms within lists was
randomized.
Subsequently, participants repeated the entire procedure
with a second chemical. In the end, eight diverse and eight
proximal symptom lists were rated per participant. While
the first experiment lasted about 40 minutes, the second
lasted about 30 minutes, because participants took less time
to acquire the reduced causal structure.

Results
In Experiment 1, the probability ratings for diverse sets
were higher than those for proximal sets with a mean
difference of M = 6.1, 95% CI [0.2, 12.0]. The standardized
effect size of this diversity effect in ratings was d = 0.30.
For comparison, notice that Kim and Keil (2003,
Experiment 3) had obtained a stronger diversity effect with
a (derived) size of Cohen’s d of 0.82.
The diversity effect could depend on participants’
knowledge representation. It could be stronger if the
representation was similar to the actual causal structure of
the causal chains linked by the root cause. Hence, we
analyzed the diversity effect with regard to participants’
reports on the acquired knowledge (top half of Figure 3).
While the majority of participants (77%), prior to the first

2832

rating, reported knowledge whose representation obviously
equaled the causal structure underlying the task, others’
reports lacked any structure or plausible links. Indeed,
ratings of participants in the latter group did not indicate any
diversity effect (d = -0.01), but those whose report equaled a
causal structure showed a clear diversity effect with a mean
rating difference of M = 8.0, 95% CI [1.8, 14.1], d = 0.43.
Experiment 1
100
proximal symptoms
diverse symptoms

Rating of Likelihood

80
60
40
20
0

Causal Model (N=37)

Other reports (N=11)

Reported knowledge

Experiment 2
100
proximal symptoms
diverse symptoms

Rating of Likelihood

80
60
40
20
0

Causal Model (N=37)

Other reports (N=11)

Reported knowledge

Figure 3: Experiments 1 (above) and 2 (below): Diagnostic
ratings contrasting diverse and proximal symptoms,
separated according to participants’ reports of acquired
knowledge.
Experiment 2 presenting a reduced causal structure that
included only one intermediate cause did not confirm the
diversity effect when ratings were analyzed irrespective of
the reported knowledge. The mean difference in ratings was
M = 3.4 in favor of diverse symptom sets, 95% CI [-1.7,
8.6]. As shown in the bottom diagram in Figure 3,
participants reporting a causal structure after learning (again
77%) produced a small but reliable diversity effect with M =
4.8, 95% CI [-0.8, 10.4], d = 0.29. In contrast, the diversity
effect was absent for the remaining participants (d = -0.06).
In Experiment 1, 67% of participants showed a diversity
effect (higher probability ratings for the diverse symptom
set) compared to only 56% in Experiment 2.

Discussion
The described experiments presented sets of symptoms,
which were manipulated according to their distribution in a
causal structure with a chemical at the root causing these
symptoms along one or two causal chains. Diverse symptom
sets, that a chemical caused via two different causal chains,

and proximal sets sharing one causal chain were contrasted
regarding participants’ ratings of the probabilities that the
chemical caused the respective symptoms. Adapting the
causal structure used in the experiments reported in Kim and
Keil (2003), we replicated the diversity effect in diagnostic
reasoning with new material. Participants’ rated diverse
symptoms as more probably caused by the chemical than
proximal symptoms.
Moreover, both experiments revealed that the diversity
effect clearly depends on knowledge representations of
cause-effect-relationships that equal the causal structure
underlying the construction of symptom sets to be rated.
Hence, this precondition of the causal diversity effect leads
us to conclude that participants consulted a knowledge
representation that reflected some causal structure
information.
Important for deciding between explanations of the
diversity effect, a smaller diversity effect was shown for
causal structures with shorter causal chains in Experiment 2.
Although the difference in effect size between experiments
is small and comparisons between experiments should be
drawn with caution, the diversity effect in Experiment 2 was
probably smaller than in Experiment 1.
The reduced diversity effect in Experiment 2 provides
some evidence that participants considered possibilities of
alternative causation in evaluating symptom sets. Shorter
causal chains contain fewer nodes that could be activated by
alternative causes that then would bring about the effects
instead of the root cause. Thus, there are more possibilities
for alternative causation of proximal symptom sets at the
end of a longer causal chain. For diverse symptom sets, a
synchronous alternative causation in two separate chains is
hard to imagine even for longer chains.
The two other explanations of a diversity effect in the
present diagnostic task that were discussed by Kim and Keil
(2003) do not account for the presumed reduced effect size
in Experiment 2. A decomposition of the root cause and its
dependents into two separate causal chains that then are
checked for confirmation by observed effects should have
produced similar effects in both experiments. Likewise, if
participants had rated proximal symptom pairs lower
because they are linked by a single parent node and do not
provide independent evidence, they should have done so in
both experiments.
To confirm that the studied diversity effect in diagnostic
reasoning varies with the length of causal chains, the length
of causal chains should be manipulated as a betweensubjects factor in a single experiment. Furthermore, the
hypothesis that participants evaluate possibilities of
alternative causation could be tested more directly with
direct manipulations of possibilities for alternative
causation. Such a manipulation could also help to explain
why the effect size in Experiment 1 was smaller than in Kim
and Keil (2003, Experiment 3) even for participants
reporting causal structures.
Notwithstanding possible extensions and methodological
improvements, the reported experiments confirm the

2833

diversity effect and show that it requires the representation
of a causal structure. In addition, they show that varying a
branching hierarchical structure changes diagnostic
judgments. This extends previous evidence showing that
manipulating a causal model changes causal reasoning
(Meder, Hagmayer, & Waldmann, 2009). More generally,
our results support causal model theories of causal
reasoning under uncertainty (for conditionals, see Fernbach
& Rehder, 2013).
The idea that evidential information is mapped onto a
qualitative model representation of the acquired causal
structure for diagnostic judgments was elaborated by
Krynski and Tenenbaum, 2007. Future experiments
targeting the diversity effect can examine manipulations of
causal strengths or causes’ base rates. Such manipulations
can test how well causal model theories can predict
modulations of the diversity effect and will help to clarify
the causal representations underlying diagnostic reasoning.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Ramona Groß and Agnes Scholz who
helped to manage the experiments and Susann Arnold,
Theresa Beuster, Miriam Müller-Bardorff, Maria Stephan,
and Barbara Wulfken for their help in conducting pretests
and in collecting data. This research was supported by
German Research Foundation (DFG) grants JA 1761/7-1
and KR 1057/17-1.

References
Ahn, W. K., Kim, N. S., Lassaline, M. E., & Dennis, M. J.
(2000). Causal status as a determinant of feature
centrality. Cognitive Psychology, 41(4), 361-416.
Fernbach, P. M. & Erb, C. D. (2013). A quantitative causal
model theory of conditional reasoning. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 39 (5), 1327-1343.
Fernbach, P. M., & Rehder, B. (2013). Cognitive shortcuts
in causal inference. Argument & Computation: Vol. 4,
Formal Models of Reasoning in Cognitive Psychology,
64-88.
Goldvarg, E., & Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2001). Naïve
causality: a mental model theory of causal meaning and
reasoning. Cognitive Science, 25, 565-610.
Heit, E. (1998). A Bayesian analysis of some forms of
inductive reasoning. In M. Oaksford & N. Chater (Eds.),
Rational models of cognition (pp. 248-274). Oxford
University Press.
Heit, E., Hahn, U. & Feeney, A. (2005). Defending
diversity. In W. Ahn, Goldstone, B.C., Love, A.B. &
Wolff, P. (Eds.), Categorization inside and outside of the
lab: Festschrift in Honor of Douglas L. Medin (pp. 87100). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.
Holyoak, K. H., & Cheng, P. W. (2011). Causal learning
and inference as a rational process: The new synthesis.
Annual Review of Psychology, 62, 135-163.

Horwich, P. (1982). Probability and evidence. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Jahn, G., & Braatz, J. (2014). Memory indexing of
sequential symptom processing in diagnostic reasoning.
Cognitive Psychology, 68, 59-97.
Kim, N. S., & Keil, F. C. (2003). From symptoms to causes:
Diversity effects in diagnostic reasoning. Memory &
Cognition, 31, 155-165.
Kim, N. S., Yopchick, J. E., & de Kwaadsteniet, L. (2008).
Causal diversity effects in information seeking.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 15, 81-88.
Krynski, T. R., & Tenenbaum, J. B. (2007). The role of
causality in judgment under uncertainty. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 136(3), 430-450.
López, A. (1995). The diversity principle in the testing of
arguments. Memory & Cognition, 23, 374-382.
Meder, B., Hagmayer, Y., & Waldmann, M. R. (2009). The
role of learning data in causal reasoning about
observations and interventions. Memory & Cognition, 37,
249-264.
Mehlhorn, K., Taatgen, N. A., Lebiere, C., Krems, J. F.
(2011). Memory Activation and the Availability of
Explanations in Sequential Diagnostic Reasoning. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, &
Cognition, 37, 1391-1411.
Osherson, D., Smith, E. E., Wilkie, O., & López, A. (1990).
Category-based induction. Psychological Review, 97(2),
185-200.
Read, S. J., & Marcus-Newhall, A. R. (1993). Explanatory
coherence in social explanations: A parallel distributed
processing account. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 65, 429-447.
Rebitschek, F. G., Scholz, A., Bocklisch, F., Krems, J. F., &
Jahn, G. (2012). Order effects in diagnostic reasoning
with four candidate hypotheses. In N. Miyake, D. Peebles,
& R. P. Cooper (Eds.), Proceedings of the 34th Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 905910). Austin, TX: Cognitive Science Society.
Rehder, B., & Hastie, R. (2001). Causal knowledge and
categories: The effects of causal beliefs on categorization,
induction, and similarity. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 130, 323-360.
Shanks, D. R. (2010). Learning: From Association to
Cognition. Annual Review of Psychology, 61, 273-301.
Sloman, S. A. (2005). Causal models: How we think about
the world and its alternatives. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Sloman, S. A. & Lagnado, D. A. (2005). Do We "Do"?
Cognitive Science, 29, 5-39.
Waldmann, M. R. (2000). Competition among causes but
not effects in predictive and diagnostic learning. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 26, 53-76.
Waldmann, M. R., & Hagmayer, Y. (2013). Causal
reasoning. In D. Reisberg (Ed.), Oxford Handbook of
Cognitive Psychology. New York: Oxford University
Press, pp. 733-752.

2834

