UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Addressee Backchannels Influence Overhearers' Comprehension of Dialogue

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4ts237d4

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Tolins, Jackson
Fox Tree, Jean E.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Addressee Backchannels Influence Overhearers’ Comprehension of Dialogue
Jackson Tolins (jtolins@ucsc.edu)
Jean E. Fox Tree (foxtree@ucsc.edu)
Psychology Department, University of California Santa Cruz
Santa Cruz, CA 95064 USA
Abstract
We tested whether overhearers made use of the relationship
between specific (e.g. really, oh) and generic (e.g. uh huh, mhm)
backchannels and speakers’ talk in online dialogue comprehension.
In Experiment 1 we found that words that followed specific
backchannels were recognized more slowly than words that
followed either generic backchannels or pauses. In Experiment 2
we found that the type of backchannel and the discourse
relationship between the speaker’s subsequent and previous turn
predicted overhearer’s recall of words that preceded backchannels
and pauses. When the turn was a continuation of the narrative
preceding the test point, specific backchannels resulted in faster
responses. When the turn was an elaboration of the narrative
preceding the test point, specific backchannels resulted in slower
responses. We conclude that overhearers make use of the
predictive relationship between listener backchannels and
speakers’ discourse in comprehending dialogue.
Keywords: Dialogue; Comprehension; Backchannels;
Overhearers; Narratives; Elaborations; Continuations

Introduction
Observing others in interaction is a common means of
communication, from political debates and television
dramas to overhearing conversations at work or at the bus
stop. According to the collaborative theory of language use
(Clark, 1996), all active participants play a role in shaping a
conversation, no matter whether they contribute multi-turn
utterances, short utterances like uh huh, facial expressions,
or postural responses. While early understanding of how the
collaborative theory affected third party dialogue
comprehension demonstrated both enhanced and decreased
performance for overhearers of interactions (Fox Tree,
1999), increasing evidence has shown that overhearers view
interactive dialogue holistically. For example, children used
overheard conversation to learn novel words (Akhtar,
Jipson, & Callanan, 2001) and adults used information
created through dialogue to enhance success in referential
tasks (Branigan, Catchpole, & Pickering, 2011; Fox Tree,
1999). In the current experiments, we demonstrate that noninterruptive addressee responses also influence overhearers’
comprehension of speakers’ talk in two-party dialogue.

Speakers, Addressees, and Overhearers
In our studies, we treat speakers as the conversational
participants who produced the principal narratives in our
experimental materials. We treat addressees as listeners of
the narratives, who in our cases contributed backchannels
such as uh huh to the ongoing dialogue. Overhearers are
listeners who do not actively participant in the talk.

Addressees can make significant contributions to the
development of ongoing talk. Speakers actively monitor
their audience and dynamically adjust their speech
accordingly (Clark & Krych, 2004). Rather than being
passive recipients of information, listeners actively
participate in the construction of ongoing dialogue, even
when they are only using backchannels rather than full turns
at talk. The type of backchannels provided may change the
course of the dialogue, for example, influencing how well
stories are told (Bavelas, Coates, & Johnson, 2000).
Backchannels can also influence the way narratives develop
turn by turn, leading people to make predictions about what
will happen next in a conversation (Tolins & Fox Tree,
submitted). At the level of discourse construction, when
addressees provide generic backchannels such as mhm and
uh huh, displaying attention and understanding, participants
expected speakers to continue their subsequent talk with
new events, or continuations. However, when addressees
respond with context specific backchannels such as oh and
really, it was expected that the next turn would be an
explanation of the prior talk, or elaboration. That is, the
type of backchannel the addressee displayed may modulate
not only global features of narration such as quality and
story structure (Bavelas et al., 2000), but also the utteranceby-utterance development of the speaker’s talk (Tolins &
Fox Tree, submitted).
In addition to speakers and addressees, any particular
conversation may have a number of other individuals
involved. For example, a conversation could have ratified
and unratified side listeners, such as an audience listening in
on an interview (ratified) or a child listening to parents
through a door (unratified; Goffman, 1981). Similarly based
on participation status, listeners can be divided into
addressees and overhearers (Schober & Clark, 1989), with
addressees participating in the conversation and overhearers
not participating. Overhearers can be further divided into
those whom the conversational participants are aware of,
bystanders, and those whom the conversational participants
are not aware of, eavesdroppers (cf Clark & Schaefer, 1987;
Schober, 1998). The speakers whose communication was
tested in our studies knew they were being recorded for
potential future comprehension experiments, thus making
our listeners ratified overhearers of the bystander sort,
which we will henceforth refer to as overhearers.
Overhearers understand talk differently from direct
addressees. Because they are unable to participate in the
process of grounding, they have reduced access to the
jointly maintained mutual knowledge (Garrod & Anderson,
1987). As such, they fare worse on a number of tasks

1610

compared to addressees who are able to provide their
conversational partners with feedback. For example, they
are less accurate in matching speakers’ descriptions to
abstract objects, and also fare worse in story retelling (Clark
& Wilkes-Gibbs, 1986; Kraut, Lewis, & Swezey, 1982;
Schober & Clark, 1989). Through the use of common
ground and mutually shared knowledge, active interactants
develop partner-specific conceptual pacts (Brennan & Clark,
1996; Brown-Schmidt, 2009) that often create a barrier to
overhearers’ comprehension – although sometimes it can
lead to overhearers’ outperforming addressees, such as in
detection of evasion (Bly, 1993). Because addressees are
vested in co-constructing meaning with a speaker, they fail
to spot evasive language that overhearers detect.
The approach we take to overhearers varies from that
taken by prior researchers. Prior researchers have focused
on either global features of the dialogue, for example
number of discourse markers used or number of
perspectives presented, or more specifically on the
relationship between speakers and overhearers (Schober &
Clark, 1989), rather than focusing on the role that all active
interactants play in providing useful information to the
overhearer. We suggest that as overhearers listen to
dialogue, responses from the addressee may be informative,
cueing the overhearer to interpret the speaker’s talk in a
particular way or allowing the overhearer to make
predictions as to what the speaker’s next talk will likely be
(Tolins & Fox Tree, submitted).

Specific and Generic Backchannels
Backchannels serve an interactional function in
conversation. They are used, among other things, to indicate
continued attention on the part of the listener, display
comprehension, or present the addressee’s stance on the
speakers’ talk (Bangerter & Clark, 2003; Brunner, 1979).
Backchannels can be verbal, such as yeah, oh, okay, uh huh
or mhm, or visual, such as facial expressions, nods, and
gestures (Bavelas et al., 2000). In the current report, we
focus on verbal backchannels.
Verbal backchannels have been broken down into two
main categories: those that display continued attention, such
as mhm, and those that indicate a listener’s assessment of
preceding talk, such as oh no! (Goodwin, 1986).
Assessment backchannels can communicate affective
responses to the content of the current speaker’s speech,
such as demonstrating disgust or sorrow at appropriate
points in a story telling. They can also be informational,
indicating that what the speaker just said was new for the
listener. Affective/informational, or specific, backchannels
have been analyzed as relying more heavily on the specific
conversational context in which they occur than attentionindicating, or context generic, backchannels (Bavelas et al.,
2000; Goodwin, 1986).
In a previous study that paired qualitative analysis of
spontaneous story telling in conversation with an
experimental test of the inductively derived hypotheses, we
found evidence that listener backchannels, whether generic

or specific, shape the unfolding narrative (Tolins & Fox
Tree, submitted). While both types of backchannels ground
the speaker’s developing story and add to the shared
common ground of the interactants, specific backchannels,
as displays of surprise or discourse newness, act as requests
for elaboration from the speaker. Following generic
backchannels, speakers continued on to a new discourse
event, whereas following specific backchannels, the
speaker’s next utterance presented an elaboration or
explanation of the event being responded to.
Given the influence that backchannels have on speakers’
ongoing talk, and in particular the relationship between
generic and specific backchannels and the speaker’s
following utterance, it is possible that overhearers may rely
on listener communication as cues for comprehension,
allowing them to predict how the discourse will develop
next. However, if the context of dialogue comprehension
leads overhearers to imagine themselves as direct
addressees, they may comprehend the speaker’s talk as
though it was directed towards themselves and become
distracted by responses from the listener.

The Current Investigation
We compared how specific and generic backchannels
influenced third party comprehension. In two experiments
we compared overhearers’ comprehension of speakers’ talk
before and after the two different types of backchannels, as
well as before and after pauses in which no addressee
feedback was provided. We explore three distinct
hypotheses.
Backhannels may not provide any information to
overhearers. Although they affect how speakers tell stories
(Bavelas et al., 2000) and what overhearers think will
happen if they put themselves into the speaker’s place
(Tolins & Fox Tree, submitted), they may not have any
effect on ovehearers’ listening in on a conversation that they
are not participating in or contributing towards. They are
small words of seemingly little consequence that might be
easily tuned out. We will call this the tuned out hypothesis.
Listening to two people talk may be more cognitively
demanding than listening to one. That is, overhearers may
find listener responses distracting in that listener responses
may cause overhearers to set up two models in their heads,
one of the speaker’s communicative processes, and another
of the listener’s. Under this hypothesis, overhearers may
find specific responses more distracting than generic.
Because they are more informative, specific responses
demand increased processing. We will call this the
distraction hypothesis.
In contrast, listener responses may help overhearers
coordinate information from both the speaker and the
listener, with specific and generic backchannels serving as
distinct cues. Overhearers may use specific backchannels as
cues to how the next utterance should be integrated with the
discourse content of the previous turn (Tolins & Fox Tree,
submitted). By hypothesis, the type of backchannel will
indicate whether the next utterance will present a discourse

1611

new event or re-present a discourse old event in a new way.
When a specific backchannel predicts an elaboration,
overhearers should be prepared to update information from
the prior turn. We will call this the coordination hypothesis.
We tested the effects of backchannels on the processing
of information after the backchannels with a word
monitoring technique (Marslen-Wilson & Tyler, 1980). We
tested the processing of information prior to the
backchannels with a semantic verification technique (Fox
Tree & Schrock, 1999).
According to the tuned out hypothesis, no effect of
backchannels will be observed with either technique. If they
are tuned out as unimportant for overhearers, responses to
target words should be similar regardless of what listeners
say between speakers’ turns.
According to both the distraction and the coordination
hypotheses, hearing a specific backchannel should slow
word monitoring (Marslen-Wilson & Tyler, 1980) in
comparison to hearing a generic backchannel or a pause.
Specific backchannels should distract more than generic
backchannels, slowing monitoring more for specifics.
Alternatively, specific backchannels could also cause
overhearers to maintain access to the content of the previous
turn, as they allow the overhearer to predict that the next
speaker’s talk will likely involve elaborative information on
the same content. This divided focus between prior and
subsequent talk would slow word monitoring after specific
backchannels in comparison to generic backchannels and
pauses.
According to the distraction hypothesis, specific
backchannels should also slow semantic verification. That
is, distraction will play a role in both paying attention to
upcoming talk as well as recalling prior talk.
In contrast, according to the coordination hypothesis,
specific backchannels should speed or slow semantic
verification dependent on the next speaker turn. This
hypothesis suggests that hearing a particular backchannel
allows overhearers to predict what type of next turn the
current speaker will have, in relation to the information of
the turn to which the backchannel responds, what we will
call the discourse relationship. If specific backchannels
allow overhearers to make predictions as to the discourse
level relationship between two turns, then there should be an
interaction between backchannel type and relationship type.
Based on a prediction that elaborating or updating
discourse-old information with new information interferes
with access to the old, we make two distinct predictions. If
overhearers maintain access to the previous utterance
following hearing a specific backchannel, as they expect to
update this information, words from prior discourse should
be recognized faster compared to when these same words
are followed by generic backchannels or pauses when the
speaker’s next turn is a continuation, where no updating
occurs. In contrast, when an overhearer hears a specific
backchannel, and the next turn does present elaborative
information, writing over the previous turn, access to this
turn should be reduced.

Experiment 1 –Word Recognition
We tested how well overhearers monitored for words
following specific versus generic backchannels as well as in
comparison to the same talk with the backchannels replaced
with pauses. Target words all occurred in the next turn
following the backchannel of interest.

Method
Participants. 89 students from the University of
California, Santa Cruz, participated in exchange for course
credit.
Materials. Stimuli for both experiments were selected
from a previously recorded audio corpus of spontaneous
conversations. Interactants were asked to speak for 12
minutes with the topic of bad roommate experiences as the
starting point. From this corpus, 30 short audio clips were
selected, varying in length from 25 to 85 seconds. Audio
stimuli were selected in which the voices of both
participants in the interaction were heard prior to the target
backchannel, so as to allow participants a chance to hear the
addressee’s voice prior to the point in which the addressee
provided the critical feedback. Ten of the audio clips
contained an authentic generic backchannel token, 10
contained an authentic specific backchannel token, and 10
contained an authentic pause in the speakers’ talk. For each
stimulus item, a set was created using digital splicing
through Praat (Boersma & Weenink, 2005), with the critical
backchannel or pause removed and replaced with a token
from the other two categories. Because the generic
backchannels were generally reduced in length and in
volume compared to the specific backchannels, the audio
pairs were edited so that the onset of the backchannels and
the onset of the next turn at talk following the backchannel
were matched to within four milliseconds. Similarly, pauses
were created by taking white noise from elsewhere in the
audio recording for the same conversation and replacing the
backchannel tokens. In regards to the discourse relationship
across the turns surrounding the target backchannel, 16 were
continuations and 14 were elaborations.
The audio manipulation resulted in 30 triads of stimuli,
with each triad presenting the exact same audio except in
the critical location, which consisted of a specific
backchannel, a generic backchannel, or a pause. The generic
backchannels of interest included 12 mhms, 7 uh huhs, and
11 yeahs. For the specific backchannels there were 10 ohs,
11 reallys, and 9 from a more varied category of responses
including, for example, gee, whoa, and wow.
Target words were identified for each triad, and consisted
of unique content words found in the following turn at talk
by the speaker. Thus, there were no further addressee
responses between the critical backchannel location and the
target word. Target words were identified from a variety of
word categories and varied in length from 1 to 4 syllables
(average = 2.1). Target words followed the critical
backchannel location by 1 to 15 words, with an average
distance of 8 words (average time = 2.15 s). From the same
corpus we also selected 15 filler stimuli and 4 training

1612

stimuli. Filler trials did not contain targets, preventing
participants from adopting a strategy of immediate response.
Design. Three lists were created that contained equal
numbers of specifics, generics, and pauses, as well as equal
numbers of authentic and manipulated audio clips, with no
stimuli created from the same audio being presented
together in the same list. Both filler and target stimuli
contained a number of noncritical backchannels, so it was
unlikely that participants adopted a strategy of listening for
backchannels to predict a word’s occurrence.
Procedure. Instructions were presented on screen. After
reading the instructions, participants were given four
practice trials before starting the task. Each trial consisted of
the presentation of a target word to monitor for, followed by
the presentation of an audio conversation. Participants first
saw a centered fixation point for 500 ms, followed by the
presentation of the target word for 3500 ms. After the
presentation of target word, the screen was cleared and the
audio clip started. Participants pressed a reaction button as
soon as they heard the target word. If they did not hear the
target word they pressed no button. Participants were
randomly assigned to one of the three list conditions, each
consisting of 30 target and 15 filler trials.

Results
Reaction time was measured from the onset of the target
word to when the participant pressed the button on the
reaction pad. Participants who failed to respond to at least
two-thirds of the critical trials were not considered on task
and were dropped from the analysis (9 total). One item was
abandoned because the target word was phonetically similar
to a word earlier in the conversation, causing the majority of
participants to respond prematurely. Latencies longer than
three standard deviations from the mean were removed (27
data points in total), leaving an average of 24 critical trials
responded to for the 80 remaining participants. Remaining
latencies were analyzed with a 2 (discourse relation:
continuation or elaboration) x 3 (backchannel type: specific,
generic, pause) repeated measures ANOVA.
There was no main effect of discourse relation, F(1, 78) =
0.65 p = .42, and no interaction, F(2,77) = .94 p = .40. There
was a main effect of backchannel type, F(2,77) = 7.07, p =
.002. Post hoc comparisons with Bonferonni adjusted alpha
levels revealed that recognition of words following specific
backchannels, M = 1203 ms, SD = 442, was slower than
recognizing words following generic backchannels, M =
1056, SD = 349, mean difference = 147 ms, SE = 55, p =
.016, 95% CI = [22,271]. Similarly, words following
specific backchannels were recognized more slowly than
words following pauses, M = 1012, SD = 347, mean
difference = 190 ms, SE = 51, p = .002, 95% CI = [62, 319].
Response latencies for words following generic
backchannels and pauses did not differ, p > .05. See Figure
1 for a summary of the results.

Figure 1: Mean word recognition latencies after generic
and specific backchannels, and pauses by discourse relation,
(error bars present SE).

Discussion
Listeners’ specific backchannels slowed overhearers’
identification of subsequent words in a speaker’s talk in
comparison to generic backchannels and pauses. These data
go against the tuned out hypothesis, but support both the
distraction and coordination hypotheses. Whether or not the
next turn provided elaborative information, as the specific
backchannel would predict, specific backchannels caused
overhearers to have reduced ability to monitor the next turn.
This could be caused through distraction from more
informative responses, or because specific backchannels
lead overhearers to maintain activation of the content of the
prior turn, splitting cognitive resources. Experiment 2 tests
these hypotheses.

Experiment 2 – Semantic Verification
We tested how well overhearers recognized words
preceding specific versus generic backchannels in
comparison to the same talk with pauses instead of
backchannels.

Method
Participants. 88 students from the University of
California, Santa Cruz participated for course credit.
Materials. The same stimuli from Experiment 1 were
used in Experiment 2. Target words were unique content
words from the talk preceding the target backchannel.
Targets were from a variety of word categories, preceded
the target backchannel by an average of 7.13 words (range 1
to 15), and were on average 1.9 syllables in length (range 1
to 3). As before, the 15 filler trials did not contain the target
word, but did contain a semantically related word in the turn
prior to the target backchannel or pause.
Design. The design was the same as Experiment 1.
Procedure. Participants were randomly assigned to one
of the three counter-balanced lists. For each trial,
participants listened to the audio clip of the conversation
while watching a fixation cross on the screen. At a certain
point in each trial, a word replaced the fixation cross.
Participants pressed the reaction button as quickly as
possible if they remembered hearing the presented word

1613

spoken in the conversation. For critical trials, the target
word was present in the speaker’s turn prior to the critical
backchannel or pause. No other listener feedback, besides
the backchannel of interest in the backchannel conditions,
intervened between the target word and the verification
prompt. The visual prompt was displayed on the screen at
the onset of the target word in the following turn after the
backchannel used in the Experiment 1. This created an
average distance of 14.67 intervening words between target
and memory probe, (average time = 4.18 s). After reading
instructions, participants were given four practice trials
before starting the task. Reaction times were measured from
the onset of the visual display to the button press.

Results
Data from participants who failed to respond to at least two
thirds of the critical trials were removed (n = 6). As before,
latencies three standard deviations above the mean were
also removed (32 data points). Data were then entered into a
2 (discourse relation type) x 3 (backchannel type) repeated
measures ANOVA.
The ANOVA revealed a significant interaction between
backchannel and discourse relation, F(2, 80) = 8.02, p =
.001, (see Figure 2). Separate one-way repeated measures
ANOVAs were run for the different discourse types.
Specific backchannels had different effects depending on
whether they were followed by continuations or
elaborations.
For trials in which the next turn was a continuation, a
main effect of backchannel type was found, F(2, 80) = 4.0,
p = .02. Adjusted post hoc comparisons of backchannel type
revealed that words prior to specific backchannels, M =
1243 ms, SD = 345, were verified more quickly than words
prior to pauses, M = 1359, SD = 484, mean difference = 116 ms, p = .02, 95% CI = [-219, -12]. Words prior to
specific backchannels were not verified significantly faster
than words prior to generic backchannels, M = 1295, SD =
350, nor was there a significant difference in verification
latencies for words prior to generic backchannels compared
to pauses, all ps > .05.
For elaborative next turns, a main effect of backchannel
was also found, F(2, 80) = 4.6, p = .013. Adjusted post hoc
comparisons revealed that for next turn elaborations, words
prior to specific backchannels were verified more slowly
than words prior to generic backchannels, (M = 1507, SD =
461 for specific, and M = 1366, SD = 424 for generic), mean
difference = 156, p = .018, 95% CI = [21, 293]. Words prior
to specific backchannels were also verified more slowly
than words prior to pauses, M = 1350, SD = 374, mean
difference = 157, p = .035, 95% CI = [7, 275].

Discussion
Listeners’ specific backchannels had opposing effects
depending on the discourse relationship across speaker
turns. Specific backchannels slowed overhearers’

Figure 2: Mean response times in verifying target word
prior to generic backchannels, specific backchannels, and
pauses, by discourse relation (Error bars present SE).
verification of prior words in a speaker’s talk when the
subsequent talk consisted of elaborative information, and
sped overhearers’ verification of prior words when the
subsequent talk contained a continuation of the narrative.
Responses to generic backchannels and pauses were similar.
These data go against the tuned out hypothesis. They also
go against the distraction hypothesis, as specific
backchannels were not uniformly distracting. The data are
compatible with the coordination hypothesis.

General Discussion
In Experiments 1 and 2 we found evidence that listeners’
specific
backchannels
affected
how
overhearers
comprehended dialogue. By hypothesis, when overhearers
hear a specific backchannel, they expect the next turn to
present elaborative information on the content of the
previously presented discourse event, causing the previous
turn’s content to remain active longer in order to facilitate
integration. This activation has three effects.
First, specific backchannels’ activation of prior talk
reduces monitoring of the subsequent talk in comparison to
generic backchannels and pauses. Generic backchannels
suggest an upcoming continuation (Tolins & Fox Tree,
submitted), allowing overhearers to process the next turn
without maintaining heightened access to previous talk.
Thus, for overhearers a distinct pattern across generic
responses from listeners and no responses at all is not
visible in our data. Specific backchannels, in contrast, lead
overhearers to maintain strengthened access to the previous
turn, dividing attention between prior talk and upcoming
talk. This divided attention is manifested as slower reaction
times to the monitoring of upcoming words.
Second, specific backchannels’ activation of prior talk
increases access to prior talk when subsequent talk is a
discursive continuation. Because an elaboration is expected,
overhearers maintain increased access to the content of the
prior turn. When, in contrast with this expectation, a
continuation is presented this increased access is visible as
faster semantic verification of prior content words. With

1614

generics and pauses, previous talk is not maintained in
heighten activation, and so verification is slower.
Third, specific backchannels’ activation of prior talk
decreases access to prior talk when subsequent talk is an
elaboration. When the elaboration is expected and heard it is
integrated with the activated information from the prior turn,
updating the overhearers’ discourse model. This rapid
updating interferes with the recognition of discourse old
information, leading to increased latencies in verification.
A number of studies have demonstrated that discourse
comprehension involves the integration of information at
both local and global levels (Hagoort & van Berkum, 2007).
In the context of collaborative dialogue, this integration is
modulated turn by turn through attention to responses from
active listeners, and the predictive relation between these
responses and the unfolding discourse structure. While the
role of prediction in comprehension has been previously
explored (Federmeier, 2007; Pickering & Garrod, 2013),
this is the first study to demonstrate that in the context of
dialogue comprehension, overhearers make use of predictive
relations across conversational participants.
Historically, research pertaining to understanding the
status of overhearers has focused on the relationship
between the overhearer and the speaker. Overhearers tend to
perform worse on particular tasks compared to addressees
who can actively participate in the construction of the
speaker’s talk (Schober & Clark, 1989). Overhearers do
better, however, when listening in to a dialogue compared to
listening in to a monologue (Fox Tree 1999; Fox Tree &
Mayer, 2008). One possible reason that overhearing
dialogues leads to better performance than overhearing
monologues may be that addressee feedback enhances
comprehension. Backchannels may have cued overhearers
to predict the type of information in the next turn. Thus,
third-party dialogue comprehension does not simply involve
becoming another listener. Instead, understanding talk in
interaction involves actively coordinating information from
all active participants, based on the collaborative, jointly
constructed nature of natural conversation.

References
Akhtar, N., Jipson, J., Callanan, M. (2001). Learning words
through overhearing. Child Dev., 72(2), 416-430.
Bangerter, A., & Clark, H. H. (2003). Navigating joint
projects with dialogue. Cognitive Science, 27, 195-225.
Bavelas, J. B., Coates, L., & Johnson, T. (2000). Listeners
as co-narrators. Journal of personality and social
psychology, 79, 941-952.
Bly, B. (1993). Uncooperative language and the negotiation
of meaning (Unpublished doctoral dissertation).
Standford University, Standford, CA.
Boersma, P. & Weenink, D. (2005). Praat: doing phonetics
by computer (vesion 5.3.42). Retrieved from
http://www.praat.org/.
Branigan, H., Catchpole, C., & Pickering, M. (2011). What
makes dialogues easy to understand? Language and
Cognitive Processes, 26(10), 1667-1686.

Brennan, S. E. & Clark, H. H. (1996). Conceptual pacts and
lexical choice in conversation. Journal of Exp. Psych.,
22, 1482-1493.
Brown-Schmidt, S. (2009). Partner-specific interpretation of
maintained referential precendents during interactive
dialog. Journal of Mem. & Lang., 61, 171-190.
Brunner, L. (1979). Smiles can be back channels. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 37(5), 728-734.
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using Language. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Clark, H. H. & Krych, M. (2004). Speaking while
monitoring addressees for understanding. Journal of
Memory and Language, 50, 62-81.
Clark, H. H. & Schaefer, E. (1987). Concealing one’s
meaning from overhearers. Journal of Memory and
Language, 26, 209-225.
Clark, H. H. & Wilkes-Gibbs, D. (1986). Referring as a
collaborative process. Cognition, 22, 1-39.
Federmeier, K. (2007). Thinking ahead: The role and roots
of
prediction
in
language
comprehension.
Psychophysiology, 44, 491-505.
Fox Tree, J. (1999). Listening in on monologues and
dialogues. Disc. Proc., 27, 35-53.
Fox Tree, J. & Mayer, S. (2008). Overhearing single and
multiple perspectives. Disc. Proc., 45, 160-179.
Fox Tree, J. & Schrock, J. (1999). Discourse markers in
spontaneous speech: Oh what a difference an oh makes.
Journal of Memory and Language, 40, 280-295.
Garrod, S. & Anderson, A. (1987). Saying what you mean
in dialogue: A study in conceptual and semantic coordination. Cognition, 27, 181-218.
Goffman, E. (1981). Forms of talk. Philadelphia: University
of Pennsylvania Press.
Goodwin, C. (1986). Between and within: Alternative
sequential treatments of continuers and assessments.
Human Studies, 9, 205-217.
Hagoort, P. & van Berkum, J. (2007). Beyond the sentence
given. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B, 362, 801-811.
Kraut, R., Lewis, S., & Swezey, L. (1982). Lisstener
responsiveness and the coordination of conversation.
Journal of Pers. and Soc. Psych., 43(4), 718-731.
Marlen-Wilson, W. & Tyler, L. K. (1980). The temporal
structure of spoken language understanding. Cognition,
8, 1-71.
Pickering, M. J. & Garrod, S. (2013) Forward models and
their implications for production, comprehension, and
dialogue. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 36, 377-392.
Schober, M. (1998). How addressees affect spatial
perspective choice in dialogue. In: P. L. Olivier & K. P.
Gapp (Eds.), Representation and processing of spatial
expressions (pp. 231-245). Mahwaw, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum.
Schober, M. & Clark, H. H. (1989). Understanding by
addressees and overhearers. Cog. Psych., 21, 211-232.
Tolins, J. & Fox Tree. J. E. Backchannels in Collaborative
Narration. Manuscript submitted for publication.

1615

