UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
An ERP study of Japanese cleft constructions in context

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5695v6tf

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Yano, Masataka
Tateyama, Yuki
Kim, Yoan
et al.

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

An ERP study of Japanese causative cleft constructions in context
Masataka Yano (masayano@kyudai.jp)1, 2
Yuki Tateyama (tateyama.yuki@gmail.com)1, 2
Yoan Kim (subcyo@naver.com)1
Tsutomu Sakamoto (sakamoto@lit.kyushu-u.ac.jp)1
1

Kyushu University, 2 Japan Society for the Promotion of Science
Department of Linguistics, Kyushu University, 6-19-1, Hakozaki,
Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, 812-8581, Japan
b. Object cleft constructions (OC) = O(bject)-gap:
It was the barber that the lawyer saw <O-gap> in the
parking lot.
(Gordon et al. 2001, 1418)

Abstract
This study examined the processing of two types of Japanese
causative cleft constructions (subject-gap vs. object-gap) by
conducting an event-related brain potential (ERP) experiment
to clarify the processing mechanism of long-distance
dependencies. The results demonstrated that the subject-gap
constructions elicited larger P600 effects compared with
object-gap constructions. Based on these findings, we argue
that the linear distance between the extracted argument (filler)
and its original gap position is a crucial factor in determining
the processing costs in Japanese causative cleft constructions.
Keywords: sentence comprehension; dependency formation;
cleft constructions; event-related brain potentials (ERPs)

Introduction
Numerous studies on sentence comprehension have engaged
in clarifying the mechanism for associating long-distance
words in real-time sentence processing. Among various
dependencies, relative clauses and cleft constructions have
attracted a considerable amount of attention because the
typological differences among various languages allow
researchers to explore the language-universal and languagespecific aspects of sentence comprehension (Kahraman,
Sato, Ono, & Sakai, 2011a, 2011b, Miyamoto & Nakamura
2003, Ueno & Garnsey 2008). For example, consider the
English relative clauses and cleft constructions shown in (12).1

The results of earlier studies have indicated that
subject-gap constructions are easier to process compared
with object-gap constructions in English (i.e., S-gap
preference, Ferreira 2003, Gordon, Hendrick, & Johnson
2001). Two hypotheses have been proposed to explain this
preference for subject-gap constructions in English, namely,
the “Structural Distance Hypothesis” (SDH) (O’Grady
1997) and the “Linear Distance Hypothesis” (LDH) (Gibson
1998, 2000). Both hypotheses share two assumptions. The
first is that the major source of processing difficulties in
relative clauses and cleft constructions is the integration of
the displaced element (i.e., a filler) into its original position
(i.e., a gap). The second assumption is that the distance
between a filler and its gap determines the cost of the
integration process. However, as their names suggest, the
hypotheses use different characteristics of distance metrics.
SDH explains that the integration of the filler (i.e., the
reporter in (3) below) and its gap becomes more difficult as
the structural distance between them increases. As
illustrated in (3), the S-gap is structurally closer to the filler
than the O-gap is.2 Thus, SDH correctly predicts the S-gap
preference in English.

(1) a. Subject relative clauses (SR) = S(ubject)-gap:
The reporter that <S-gap> attacked the senator
admitted the error.
b. Object relative clauses (OR) = O(bject)-gap:
The reporter that the senator attacked <O-gap>
admitted the error.
(King & Just 1991, 581)

(3) a. SR:

the reporter
that
<S-gap>

(2) a. Subject cleft constructions (SC) = S(ubject)-gap:
It was the barber that <S-gap> saw the lawyer in the
parking lot.
1
A cleft construction is a construction derived from a canonical
sentence (e.g., the barber saw the lawyer in the parking lot) by
moving a constituent (i.e., filler) from its original position (i.e.,
gap) to the focus position.

attacked

2

the senator

The structural distance is defined in terms of nodes intervening
the filler (i.e., the reporter) and its original position (i.e., <gap>), as
indicated by the black dots.

3131

‘It is Ms. Takeuchi who <S-gap> nursed Ichiro
carefully last year.’
b. Object cleft constructions (OCs):
Kyonen
Ichiro-ga <O-gap>
teatsuku
Last year Ichiro-NOM
carefully
kaihoushita-nowa
Takeuchi-san-da.
nursed-nowa
Takeuchi-Ms.-COP
‘It is Ms. Takeuchi whom Ichiro nursed <O-gap>
carefully last year.’

b. OR:
the reporter
that
the senator
attacked

<O-gap>

In contrast, LDH accounts for the S-gap preference in
terms of a linear distance between the filler and its gap.
LDH predicts that the integration process becomes more
difficult as the linear distance between them increases. As
shown in (4), the linear distance between the filler and its
gap is shorter in S-gap constructions than it is in O-gap ones.
Thus, LDH also predicts the S-gap preference in English.
(4) a. SR:
The reporter that <S-gap> attached the senator …

In Japanese cleft constructions, SDH and LDH predict
different results. As illustrated in (6) below, the filler (i.e.,
Takeuchi-san, ‘Ms. Takeuchi’) is structurally closer to the
gap in SCs than it is in OCs (see Hiraiwa & Ishihara 2012
for syntactic analyses). Thus, SDH predicts that OCs would
be more difficult to process than SCs.
(6) a. SCs:

Ms.Takeuchi-COP

b. OR:
The reporter that the senator attached <O-gap> …

<S-gap>
Ichiro-ACC

nursed-nowa

b. OCs:

In English, both hypotheses predict the S-gap
preference. Thus, it is difficult to determine which
hypothesis is more appropriate to account for the S-gap
preference. To determine which of these two hypotheses is
correct, it is necessary to examine languages such as
Japanese. As explained below, Japanese cleft constructions
provide a testing ground for verifying SDH and LDH
because they offer different predictions.

Ms.Takeuchi-COP
Ichiro-NOM

<O-gap>

Previous studies

nursed-nowa

In contrast, LDH predicts that the SCs are more
difficult to process than OCs are due to the longer linear
distance between the filler and the gap.

Using the following stimuli, Yano, Tateyama, & Sakamoto
(2014) evaluated the validity of these two hypotheses.

(7) a. SC:
… <S-gap> Ichiro-ACC nursed-nowa Ms.Takeuchi-COP.

(5) Context:3
1. Non-verbal visual context: A picture shows that
there are two persons (Ms. Takeuchi and Ms.
Konishi).

b. OC:
… Ichiro-NOM <O-gap> nursed-nowa Ms.Takeuchi-COP.

2. Verbal context: Kono futari-no uchi
this two person-GEN among
‘among the two’

In sum, SDH predicts the S-gap preference, whereas
LDH predicts the O-gap preference. By conducting an ERP
experiment, Yano et al. (2014) demonstrated that the
integration process is more difficult in OCs than it is in SCs
at the verb-nowa (i.e., kaihoushita-nowa, ‘nursed-nowa’)
position in which ‘nowa’ signals cleft constructions (i.e., Sgap preference). The authors argued that this result favors
SDH over LDH to explain the consistent S-gap preference
in English and Japanese.

Experimental sentences:
a. Subject cleft constructions (SCs):
Kyonen
<S-gap> Ichiro-o
teatsuku
Last year
Ichiro-ACC carefully
kaihoushita-nowa
Takeuchi-san-da.
nursed-nowa
Takeuchi-Ms.-COP
3
In their experiment, context was presented to render the use of
cleft construction involving focus interpretations to be felicitous.

3132

(8) Context:
1. Non-verbal visual context: A picture shows that there are two persons (Ms. Takeuchi and Ms. Konishi).
2. Verbal context: Kono futari-no uchi
this two person-GEN among
‘among the two’
(9) a. Causative subject cleft constructions (SCs):
Kyonen
Kyoko-ga
<S-gap>
Ichiro-o
kaihou-saseta-nowa
Last year Kyoko-NOM
Ichiro-ACC nurse-CAUSATIVE-nowa
‘It is Ms. Takeuchi whom Kyoko let <S-gap> nursed Ichiro last year.’

Takeuchi-san-da.
Takeuchi-Ms.-COP

b. Causative object cleft constructions (OCs):
Kyonen
Kyoko-ga
Ichiro-ni
<O-gap>
kaihou-saseta-nowa
Last year Kyoko-NOM Ichiro-DAT
nurse-CAUSATIVE-nowa
‘It is Ms. Takeuchi whom Kyoko let Ichiro nursed <O-gap> last year.’

Takeuchi-san-da.
Takeuchi-Ms.-COP

However, this experimental evidence for SDH is not
tenable. Because there is no verb that can take an argument
with an accusative case (i.e., -o) as its subject in Japanese,
the accusative case at the sentence initial position (i.e.,
Ichiro-o, ‘Ichiro-ACC’) in (5a) signals the existence of a
non-canonical sentence. Thus, the parser may have
predicted that the sentence being processed must be a
sentence with a non-canonical word order, such as relative
clauses and cleft constructions. More specifically, in the SC
condition, the parser can detect the non-canonicality of a
sentence based on case information (i.e., Ichiro-o, ‘IchiroACC’) before encountering “verb-nowa”. In the case of the
OC condition in (5b), however, the parser cannot notice that
the given sentence is a non-canonical word order until
encountering the cleft marker (i.e., kaihoushita-nowa,
‘nursed-nowa’). Thus, it could be that the earlier gap
detection in SCs facilitates the integration process at the
“verb-nowa” position, whereas it does not in OCs. If this is
the case, Yano et al. (2014) may have failed to properly
examine the validity of SDH and LDH because they did not
control the timing of the gap detection.
A good way to control the timing of the gap detection
and independently examine the integration process is to use
causative cleft constructions in (9), as explained below. The
sentence in (10) shows an original form of causative cleft
construction, from which (9a) and (9b) are produced. The
causative subject and object cleft constructions in (9) are
derived from (10) by extracting a subject or an object of the
embedded verb (i.e., nurse), respectively. These causative
cleft constructions have an advantage for controlling the
timing of gap detection for the following reason.
(10) Simple causative sentence:
Kyoko-ga
Takeuchi-ni
Ichiro-o
kaihou-saseta.
Kyoko-NOM Takeuchi-DAT Ichiro-ACC nurse-CAUS
‘Kyoko let Takeuchi nurse Ichiro.
In Japanese, both the sequence of “NOM (-ga) - ACC
(-o)” and that of “NOM (-ga) - DAT (-ni)” in (9) can be
followed by simple transitive verbs because there are two

types of transitive verbs: the accusative-taking verbs in
(11a) and the dative-taking verbs in (11b).
(11) a. Accusative-taking verbs:
Kyonen
Kyoko-ga
Ichiro-o
Last year Kyoko-NOM Ichiro-ACC
‘Kyoko praised Ichiro last year’
b. Dative-taking verbs:
Kyonen
Kyoko-ga
Ichiro-ni
Last year Kyoko-NOM Ichiro-DAT
‘Kyoko met Ichiro last year.’

home-ta.
praise-PAST

at-ta.
meet-PAST

Previous studies on sentence comprehension argued
that the parser constructs a simple structure as far as
possible (Sato, Kahraman, Ono, & Sakai 2007). Thus, it is
natural to assume that an unnecessary gap is not posited on
encountering the second NP in (9), which indicates that the
sequence of these two NPs do not induce a prediction for
non-canonical constructions, such as relative clauses and/or
cleft constructions. Accordingly, it is at the “verb-CAUSnowa” phrase that the parser first recognizes the existence of
a gap in both SCs and OCs, which indicates that the timing
of the gap detection is controlled.

ERP Experiment
Stimuli and Procedure
In the present experiment, we presented the same contexts
in (8) as Yano et al. (2014) prior to two types of causative
cleft sentences in (9) (see footnote 3). The experimental
sentences consist of five phrases, and the only difference
between the conditions is the case particle (i.e., -o/ni
‘ACC/DAT’) in the third phrase. The verbs in the fourth
phrase (i.e., kaihou-saseta, ‘nurse-CAUS’) are accusativetaking verbs in causative form. Thus, the canonical word
order of all experimental sentences is “NP-NOM NP-DAT
NP-ACC VERB” (cf. Tamaoka et al. 2005). To avoid the
effect of animacy or thematic plausibility, all nouns were
animate and proper names that are highly plausible as both

3133

agents and patients of the verbs (i.e., they are thematically
reversal).
In addition to 64 pairs of cleft sentences, the same
number of dummy sentences with relative clauses were
added to the stimuli. These stimuli were distributed to two
lists such that the participants saw either the SC or the OC
of the same pair. The lists and response button were
counterbalanced among the participants. The stimuli were
presented randomly among the participants using
Presentation 16.3 (Neurobehavioral Systems, Albany, CA,
USA).
The participants were seated in a dimly lit soundproof
room with a CRT monitor positioned approximately 130 cm
in front of them. The presentation of stimuli occurred in a
non-cumulative manner, with one word presented at a time
with a stimulus onset asynchrony of 700 ms and an
interstimulus interval of 200 ms. To examine the
comprehension difficulties of each condition, a
comprehension question regarding the content of a sentence
was given at a rate of 50% of trials, and the participants
responded by pressing the YES/NO button.

Prediction
A number of studies have repeatedly observed that an ERP
component termed as the P600 reflects the cost for the
integration of a filler into its gap (Kaan et al. 2000, Phillips
et al. 2005, Ueno & Garnsey 2008). Thus, ERPs provide an
advantage for selectively keeping track of the integration
process with a temporal accuracy of milliseconds.
As discussed in the previous sections, we focus on
distance metric accounts, namely, LDH and SDH. As shown
below, because the filler (i.e., Ms. Takeuchi) is structurally
farther from the gap in OCs than it is in SCs, SDH predicts
that OCs would be more difficult to process and that OCs
would elicit a larger P600 compared with SCs (O’Grady
1997).
(12) a. SCs:

Conversely, DLT predicts that OCs are easier to
process, resulting in a larger P600 for SCs than for OCs
because of the shorter linear distance between the filler and
its gap (Gibson 1998, 2000).
(13) a. SCs:
NOM <S-gap> ACC

nurse-CAUS-nowa Ms. Takeuchi-COP

b. OCs:
<O-gap> nurse-CAUS-nowa Ms. Takeuchi-COP

NOM DAT

Because the integration process occurs at the “verbphrase, we did not expect any processing
asymmetry (i.e., no ERP effect) in the following phrase.
CAUS-nowa”

Participants
The participants were 12 native speakers of Japanese (11
females, M = 21.4, SD = 0.8). All participants were
classified as right-handed based on the Edinburgh
handedness inventory (Oldfield 1971) and had normal or
corrected-to-normal vision. None of the participants had a
history of reading disabilities or neurological disorders.
Written informed consent was obtained from all participants
prior to the experiment, and the participants were paid for
their role in the study.

Electrophysiological Recording
EEGs were recorded from 19 Ag electrodes (Nihon Kohden,
NE-113A) located at Fp1, Fp2, F3, F4, C3, C4, P3, P4, O1,
O2, F7, F8, T3, T4, T5, T6, Fz, Cz, and Pz, according to the
international 10-20 system (Jasper 1958). Additional
electrodes were placed on the left side of and beneath the
left eye to monitor horizontal and vertical eye movement.
The linked earlobes served as a reference. All electrodes’
impedances were maintained below 5 kΩ throughout the
experiment. The EEGs were amplified with a bandpass of
0.01 to 120 Hz, digitized at 1000 Hz.

Ms.Takeuchi-COP

Data Analysis

Kyoko-NOM
<S-gap>
Ichiro-ACC nurse-CAUS-nowa

b. OCs:

Ms.Takeuchi-COP
Kyoko-NOM
Ichiro-DAT

<O-gap>

nurse-CAUS-nowa

Trials with large artifacts (exceeding ±80 μV) were
automatically removed for further analysis. Any EEG was
filtered off-line with 30 Hz low-pass filtering. The ERP was
quantified by calculating the mean amplitude for each
participant in all conditions in time windows of 0–900 ms.
The baseline was set to 100 ms before the stimulus onset.
We conducted an omnibus ANOVA including all
electrodes. In addition, the statistical analyses were
conducted separately at the midline (Fz, Cz, and Pz),
parasagittal (F3, F4, C3, C4, P3, and P4), and temporal (Fp1,
Fp2, F7, F8, T3, T4, T5, T6, O1, and O2) arrays. The
midline analysis consisted of repeated measures ANOVAs
with two within-group factors: SENTENCE TYPE ×
ANTERIORITY. The parasagittal and temporal analyses
consisted of three within-group factors: SENTENCE TYPE ×

3134

HEMISPHERE × ANTERIORITY. The Greenhouse-Geisser
correction was applied for all effects involving more than
one degree of freedom (Greenhouse & Geisser 1959).

Results
Behavioral Data
The mean accuracy of the comprehension question was 74%.
The mean accuracy was marginally significant (SCs: 68%,
OCs: 80%, t (11) = -2.1283, p = .05674), indicating SCs
were more difficult to comprehend than were OCs.
Electrophysiological Data
Figure 1 shows the grand average ERP elicited at the “verbCAUS-nowa” (i.e., kaihou-saseta-nowa). A visual inspection
suggested that the ERPs of SCs (dotted line) indicate a
positive-going shift in the 500–900 ms compared with those
of OCs (solid line).

500–900 ms

Figure 1. The grand-average ERPs for SCs and OCs
The X-axis represents the time course from -100 to 900 ms, and
each hash mark represents 100 ms. The Y-axis represents the
voltage from -5 μV to 5 μV. Negativity is plotted upward. The
P600 amplitude in SCs (dotted line) was larger than in OCs (solid
line).

A repeated-measure ANOVA analysis was conducted
using the mean voltage from 500 to 900 ms after the onset
of the “verb-CAUS-nowa” (i.e., kaihou-saseta-nowa). An
omnibus ANOVA revealed that the main effect of
SENTENCE TYPE was significant (F (1, 11) = 5.4599, p
= .0394), which indicated that the P600 effects of SCs were
larger than OCs. We also conducted additional analyses in
each array. At the midline and temporal arrays, the main
effect of SENTENCE TYPE was significant, without any
interaction (Midline: F (1, 11) = 6.0411, p = .0318,
Temporal: F (1, 11) = 5.3037, p = .0418). At the parasagittal
array, the main effect of SENTENCE TYPE was marginally
significant (F (1, 11) = 4.7966, p = .0510). As expected, the
following phrase (i.e., Takeuchi-san-da, ‘Ms.TakeuchiCOP’) did not elicit a significant ERP effect in any time
window (all ps >.10).

In sum, of the two types of causative cleft
constructions, SCs elicited the more positive ERP
component with a peak of approximately 600 ms, indicating
that SCs elicited the typical P600 effect, which is considered
an index of the integration process. Therefore, we found that
it is more difficult for an SC to integrate a filler into its gap
than it is for an OC in Japanese. In the next section, we
discuss the results from the perspective of distance metrics.

General Discussion
The purpose of the present study was to examine the
validity of SDH and the LDH. Significantly, the results
revealed that the P600 amplitudes in SCs were larger than
those in OCs. These effects are considered to reflect greater
cost of gap-filling process. Our findings suggest the
following two points.
First, the processing advantage of OCs in Japanese
causative cleft constructions provides empirical support for
LDH. As explained above, LDH suggests that the
integration process is more costly when the elements are
linearly distant. In our case, LDH correctly predicts that SCs
are more difficult to process than OCs are because SCs have
more intervening words between the filler and its gap, as
shown in (13). In contrast, SDH predicts that the integration
is more difficult when two elements are structurally distant;
accordingly, OCs are expected to be more difficult, as
shown in (12). Thus, our experimental result contradicts
SDH.
Our result may also disprove the suggestion by Yano et
al. (2014) that the processing advantage of subject cleft
constructions is supportive evidence for SDH. As noted
above, in the experiment of Yano et al. (2014), an
accusative case at the sentence initial position may increase
the predictability of a gap, which may facilitate the
integration process in SCs. Because the present experiment
controlled the gap predictability and then supported LDH
over SDH, it seems plausible to consider that the previous
result simply reflects the facilitation of the integration
process due to the advantage of earlier gap detection.
Interestingly, Yano et al. (2014) observed left anterior
negativity (LAN) effects to “Ichiro-o” (Ichiro-ACC)
compared with “Ichiro-ga” (Ichiro-NOM) in (5). LAN (or
broadly distributed negativity) has been observed in the
position in which the sentence processor notices a noncanonical word order in German (Matzke, Mai, Nager,
Rüsseler, & Münte 2002, Rösler, Pechman, Streb, Röder, &
Hennighausen 1998, Schlesewsky, Bornkessel, & Frisch
2003). Thus, the LAN effect of “Ichiro-ACC” observed in
Yano et al. (2014) indicates that the appearance of an
accusative NP increased the predictability for S-gap
constructions. In the present experiment, however, we
confirmed that no LAN effect was elicited in the third
region (i.e., Ichiro-o/ni, ‘Ichiro-ACC/DAT’) (all ps >.10).
Thus, the sentence processor does not notice the gap until
the “verb-CAUS-nowa” phrase. In other words, the timing of
the gap detection was successfully controlled in our
experiment.

3135

Second, our result is well aligned with the previous
studies that controlled the predictability of a gap in a
sentence and reported the results in favor of LDH (Ishizuka,
Nakatani, & Gibson 2005, Ono & Ikemoto 2013, Sato et al.
2007). Thus, it seems plausible to consider that not only
causative cleft construction but also at least some types of
constructions show a preference for a shorter linear-overstructural distance.

Conclusion
To sum up, we noted the problem of the previous study
(Yano et al. 2014) and reported that subject-gap
constructions (SCs) are more costly to process than are
object-gap constructions (OCs). We argued that this
processing advantage of OCs provides a support for the
Linear Distance Hypothesis over the Structural Distance
Hypothesis in at least Japanese causative cleft constructions.

Acknowledgments
This study was supported by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific
Research (#13J04854, PI: Masataka Yano, #14J05113, PI:
Yuki Tateyama) and a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research
(A) (#25244018, PI: Tsutomu Sakamoto) from the Japan
Society for the Promotion of Science.

References
Ferreira, F. (2003) The misinterpretation of noncanonical
sentences. Cognitive Psychology, 47(2), 164-203.
Gibson, E. (1998) Linguistic complexity: Locality of
syntactic dependencies. Cognition, 68(1), 1-76.
Gibson, E. (2000) The dependency locality theory: A
distance-based theory of linguistic complexity. In A.
Marantz, Y. Miyashita, and W. O’Neil (eds.), Image,
language, brain, 95-126, Cambridge, MA, MIT Press.
Gordon, P. C., Hendrick, R., & Johnson, M. (2001) Memory
interference during language processing. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 27(6), 1411-1423.
Greenhouse, S. W., & Geisser, M. (1959) On methods in the
analyses of profile data. Psychometrika, 24, 95-112.
Hiraiwa, K., & Ishihara, S. (2012) Syntactic metamorphosis:
Clefts, slicing, and in-situ focus in Japanese. Syntax, 15(2),
142-180.
Ishizuka, T., Nakatani, K., & Gibson, E. (2006) Processing
Japanese relative clause in context. Paper Presented at
the 19th Annual CUNY Conference on Human Sentence
Processing, CUNY.
Jasper, H. H. (1958) The ten twenty electrode system of the
international federation. Electroencephalography and
Clinical Neurophysiology, 10, 371-375.
Kaan, E., Harris, A., Gibson, E. & Holcomb, P. (2000) The
P600 as an index of syntactic integration difficulty.
Language and Cognitive Processes, 15(2), 159-201.
Kahraman, B., Sato, A. Ono, H., & Sakai, H. (2011a)
Incremental processing of gap-filler dependencies:
Evidence from the processing of subject and object clefts

in Japanese. The Proceeding of the Twelfth Tokyo
Conference on Psycholinguistics, 113-147.
Kahraman, B., Sato, A. Ono, H., & Sakai, H. (2011b) Why
object clefts are easier to process than subject clefts in
Japanese: Frequency or expectation?. Technical report of
IECIE, 111, 67-72.
King, J. W., & Just, M. A. (1991) Individual differences in
syntactic processing: the role of working memory,
Journal of memory and language, 30(5), 580-602.
Matzke, M., Mai, H., Nager, W., Rüsseler, J., & Münte, T.
(2002). The costs of freedom: An ERP–study of noncanonical sentences. Clinical Neurophysiology, 113(6),
844-852.
Miyamoto, E. T., & Nakamura, M. (2003) Subject/object
asymmetries in the processing of relative clauses in
Japanese. In G. Garding and M. Tsujimura (eds.),
Proceedings of 22nd West Coast Conference on Formal
Linguistic, 342-355. Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press.
Oldfield, R. (1971) The assessment and analysis of
handedness: The Edinburgh inventory. Neuropsychologia,
9, 97-113.
O’Grady, W. (1997) Syntactic development. Chicago,
University of Chicago Press.
Phillips, C., Kazanina, N., & Abda, S. H. (2005) ERP
effects of the processing of syntactic long-distance
dependencies, Cognitive Brain Research, 22(3), 407-428.
Rösler, F., Pechmann, T., Streb, J., Röder, B., &
Hennighausen, E. (1998). Parsing of sentences in a
language with varying word order: Word-by-word
variations of processing demands are revealed by eventrelated brain potentials. Journal of Memory and Language,
38(2), 150-176.
Sato, A., Kahraman, B. Ono, H., & Sakai, H. (2007)
Universals and specificities in relative clause processing:
A view from Japanese causative relative clauses,
Technical report of IEICE, 107, 51-56.
Schlesewsky, M., Bornkessel, I., & Frisch, S. (2003) The
neurophysiological basis of word order variations in
German. Brain and Language, 86(1), 116-128.
Tamaoka, K., Sakai, H., Kawahara, J., Miyaoka, Y., Lim, H.,
& Koizumi, M. (2005) Priority information used for the
processing of Japanese sentences: Thematic roles, caseparticles or grammatical functions?, Journal of
Psycholinguistics Research, 34, 281-331.
Ueno, M,. & Garnsey, S. M. (2008) An ERP study of the
processing of subject and object relative clauses in
Japanese. Language and Cognitive Processes, 23(5), 646688.
Yano, M., Tateyama, Y., & Sakamoto, T. (2014) Processing
of Japanese cleft constructions in context: Evidence from
event-related brain potentials, Journal of Psycholinguistic
Research, DOI: 10.1007/s10936-014-9294-6.

3136

