UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Analogy Causes Distorted Memory by Blending Memory Episodes

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/55t8h8hv

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Pavlova, Margarita
Kokinov, Boicho

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Analogy Causes Distorted Memory by Blending Memory Episodes
Margarita Pavlova (margarita.velinova@gmail.com)
Boicho Kokinov
Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology,
New Bulgarian University, 21 Montevideo Street
Sofia 1618, Bulgaria

Abstract
The present study compares two cases of blending between
episodes: blending of episodes that share a number of
elements (superficially similar episodes) and blending of
episodes that share the same structure of relations but do not
share the same elements. According to classic theories and
models of blending, superficially similar episodes are more
likely to be blended because there is a larger overlap of the
feature vectors representing them. In contrast, according to the
AMBR model of analogy-making and memory, analogous
episodes are more likely to be blended. The results obtained in
the present study support the prediction of the AMBR model:
people blend structurally similar episodes much more often
than superficially similar ones. These results are consistent
with previous experiments on the influence of analogymaking on constructive memory.
Keywords: analogy; memory; memory distortions; blending of
episodes; psychological experimentation.

Constructive Memory
Two popular metaphors for memory are known to cognitive
psychologists. The classic one suggests that it is a physical
place where our memories for events, concepts, and objects
are stored and later on retrieved. The more recent metaphor
for memory views it as a dynamic and constructive process
(Moscovitch, 1995; Loftus, 1997; Neisser & Harsch, 1992;
Roediger & McDermott, 1995; Schacter, 1999). This
relatively modern concept of memory suggests that we
reconstruct episodes by taking a small piece of information
about the episode and then with the help of general
knowledge about the category to which it belongs, we
reconstruct it altogether (Kokinov & Petrov, 2001).
According to this constructivist point of view on memory,
recollections can not only be partial or lost, but they can
also be distorted. There are two known mechanisms of
memory distortion – episode blending and schematization
(use of general schematic knowledge).
There is much evidence now that people do distort real
episodes. Sir Frederick Bartlett (1932) first demonstrated a
case of memory distortions as a result of intrusions from
general schematic knowledge in the reconstruction of the
target event. Loftus and Palmer (1974) enriched these
findings and demonstrated that depending on the schema
activated, the reconstructed episodes varied. Furthermore,
various other experiments by Loftus (1977; 1997; 2003)

have indicated various instances of blending of episodes – a
slideshow and a piece of consecutive information
concerning the target object; a real event and an imagined
one; a personal experience and an advertisement; an actual
autobiographical recollection and an implanted one. All
these findings suggest that misinformation alters one’s
recollections about an event regardless of it being actual or
not. One important conclusion is drawn from these studies:
people pick elements from one event and implant them into
another, thus mixing up the two events and blending the
recollections of both. Simarly, the case study of John Dean’s
memory (Neisser, 1981) provided an analysis of his
recollections and revealed a lot of inaccuracies.
Discrepancies and fault memories are common even for
highly emotional events. Neisser & Harsch (1992) focused
on the so called flashbulb memories and explored the
participants’ immediate and delayed recollections of the
Challenger incident, showing that the participants wrongly
recalled the event and reported various details most
probably taken from different events, hence they strongly
believed that their memories were accurate and vivid.
Nystrom and McClelland (1992) also obtained similar
effects: after studying a number of sentences, their
participants blended them. Roediger and McDermott (1995)
demonstrated that a word not present in a list could be
wrongfully recalled if it was associated with some of the
words presented in the list.
All of the above mentioned data have been extended and
supported in a number of psychological experiments, as well
as in cognitive neuroscience, brain imaging, and brain
lesions studies (Moscovitch, 1995; Schacter, 1999; Kokinov
& Hirst, 2003).
Despite the extensive experimental work demonstrating
memory distortion, the mechanisms of memory construction
are still a topical issue. Various researchers suggest different
points of view on the mechanisms and explanation of
memory construction. This lack of theory ground in the
field makes the research move in various directions with no
clear predictions and explanations.
Among the few existing models that do explain and
reproduce episode blending are Murdock’s TODAM model
(1993; 1995), McClelland’s Trace Synthesis Model (1995),
and Metcalfe’s CHARM model (1990). Although they are
quite different in a number of aspects, these models share a

2729

common concept: they are based on distributed
representations of features of objects and episodes which
means that the overlap of these features causes memory
distortion. Therefore, these models explain the cases when
two similar episodes are blended (i.e. when most of the
features in the feature vector are the same).
However, it would be difficult to explain blending of
superficially dissimilar episodes using these models as a
theoretical ground. Moreover, these models represent
episodes as a list of features with no internal structure or
relations between their elements. This may not seem a
problem if structure does not play a role in the memory
construction process. But, is this really the case?

The Role of Analogy in Memory Construction
Analogy is a mechanism that can potentionally change the
representation of knowledge. Blanchette and Dunbar (2002)
demonstrated that structural similarity could alter the
representation of the target stimulus. Their data suggested
that integration of analogical inferences into the target
resulted in false recognition of information on a subsequent
recognition test. Perrott, Gentner & Bodenhausen (2005)
extended these findings and showed that this phenomenon
was true even for inferences that were incongruent with the
participants’ own attitudes. It can be implied from both
studies that structure is important to other cognitive
processes, including memory construction.
The classic models successfully predict and explain
blending of superficially similar episodes; however, there
are experimental data that show that even dissimilar
episodes can be blended.
Evidence from experiments conducted by Kokinov and
his colleagues suggests that structural similarity may have a
greater impact on the process of memory construction.
Accordingly, Kokinov and Zareva (2001) and Zareva and
Kokinov (2003) demonstrated that two dissimilar episodes
could be blended if they were connected to one another by a
double analogy with a third one. These experimental studies
can (only) be explained with the AMBR model of analogymaking and memory.
AMBR was introduced by Kokinov (1988) and then
further developed (Kokinov, 1994b; Kokinov & Petrov,
2001). It is based on the general hybrid (symbolic and
connectionist) cognitive architecture DUAL (Kokinov,
1994a) which is based on decentralized representations and
emergent computations produced by a vast amount of
micro-agents that act in parallel and tend to be co-activated.
The model views recall as a reconstruction by analogy,
which means that a new episode is constructed analogous to
an old one. During this recognition process there is a
competition among various elements from various episodes
to be transfered into the target. Two sets of hypotheses are
made in order to find the best match to the target. Now, if
two episodes share the same structure of relations, then the
hypotheses start to support each other, making the elements
of both episodes stronger. Therefore, the existance of

analogous episodes in memory results in greater possibility
of blending. Moreover, once there has been an analogy
established between two episodes, their elements get
connected by permanent links, which makes the blending
between them even more probable. The model predicts that
with all chances being equal it will be more probable that
two structurally similar episodes be blended than two
superficially similar ones (Kokinov, 1994b; 1998).
Several experiments (Kokinov & Zareva, 2001; Zareva &
Kokinov, 2003; Kokinov, Petkov, & Petrova, 2007;
Kokinov, Feldman, & Petkov, 2009), as well as computer
simulations (Grinberg & Kokinov, 2003) have been
conducted to test this and other predictions of the model
concerning the influence of structure on memory
construction. In the most recent one (Feldman and Kokinov
2009) the authors designed an experiment which tested the
two possible mechanisms of memory construction
simmultaneously. They used short stories which were either
superficially or structurally similar to one another. The
results were in favor of the AMBR model: the participants
blended structurally similar episodes more often than
superficially similar ones.
The current paper presents an experimental study that
supports and further extends the findings in the Feldman and
Kokinov (2009) work.

Experiments
Two very similar experiments were conducted with the goal
to explore the various mechanisms of construction of
memory episodes and to continue the line of experimental
work on the influence of analogy-making on constructive
memory.

Experiment 1
The main idea of Experiment 1 was to further develop and
improve the experiment conducted by Feldman and
Kokinov (2009) with a new procedure and new, simpler,
and better controlled stimuli. The problem with the previous
experiment was that it used short stories as stimuli, which
makes it very difficult (if not impossible) to control the
number of shared elements, interpretations, and associations
they may trigger in the participants. To address this issue
simpler non-verbal graphic stimuli were designed which
have limited and better controlled semantics, and thus make
it possible to accurately count the shared elements.
Hypothesis The hypothesis of the experiment is that
analogical episodes are more probable sources of intrusions
than superficially similar or dissimilar episodes.
Design The experiment had a within-subjects design. The
manipulated variable was the type of distracter and it had
three levels:

2730






Analogous – distracters designed by combining two
bases that share the same structure, but do not share the
same elements.
Superficially similar – distracters designed by
combining two bases that share the same elements and
thus are superficially similar, but do not share the same
structure, i.e. the relations between the elements in the
two bases are different.
Dissimilar – distracters designed by combining two
bases that share neither the same structure, nor the
same elements.

Procedure The experiment consisted of three sessions
immediately following one after another.
The participants were first presented with the four bases
for each set simultaneously. They had to observe the bases
and when they were finished, they were presented with the
next four bases of the next set and so on, until all the sets
have been presented. The sets were randomized.
Next, the participants were given a filler task. They read
an excerpt from “Dandelion Wine” by Ray Bradbury
translated into Bulgarian and answered some general
questions about the text. This session served as a retention
interval and its purpose was to guarantee that the
participants did not think of nor retain the bases from
session one in their working memory and had to extract
them from their long-term memory in the recognition task
later. The duration of this session was 15 to 20 minutes,
depending on the reading speed of each participant.
Last, the participants were given a recognition task. They
were once again presented with the eight sets of
configurations of geometric figures. This time, however,
they saw not only the bases, but also the distracters for each
set. Each set was presented separately, i.e. the participants
first saw all configurations for the first set, then for the
second, and so on. The order of the sets was the same as in
session one. The participants had to carefully observe each
configuration and then to point the four configurations they
believed they saw in session one, i.e. they had to recognize
which four of the configurations were the bases from the
first session. Their answers were registered in a protocol.

The distracters were designed in such a way that each
represented a specific combination of two bases. There were
three types of distracters – analogous, superficially similar,
and dissimilar.
The analogous distracters were designed by mixing the
elements of two analogous bases. We took one or more
elements from one base and placed them into the other,
keeping the original structure of both bases. We created 4
distracters of this type for all the sets (for each pair of bases
there were two corresponding distracters, see Figure 2). This
method was also applied to the superficially similar
distracters (in this case, we mixed two superficially similar
bases), and for the dissimilar distracters (in this case, we
mixed two dissimilar bases). Figure 2 illustrates all the
distracters designed for the bases in Figure 1.

Stimuli Eight sets of 16 configurations of geometric figures
were used for sessions one and three. In each set 4
configurations were the bases and the other 12 were the
distracters. Five independent experts assessed the superficial
and the structural similarity of the bases.
The bases were specifically designed so they composed
three pairs as follows: two pairs were structurally analogous
to one another (F1~F2 and F3~F4), two pairs were
superficially similar to one another, but did not share the
same structure (F1≈F3 and F2≈F4), and finally the last two
pairs were dissimilar and shared neither the same structure,
nor the same superficial elements (F1≠F4 and F2≠F3). See
Figure 1 for an example.

Figure 1: An example of the bases. The bases compose the
following pairs: analogous configurations (F1~F2 and
F3~F4), superficially similar configurations (F1≈F3 and
F2≈F4), dissimilar configurations (F1≠F4 and F2≠F3).

Figure 2: An example of the distracters designed for the
bases in Figure 1. Each line illustrates the variations of the
distracters for each pair of bases: Blending between: 1). F1
and F2 – analogous distracters. 2). F3 and F4 – analogous
distracters. 3). F1 and F3 – superficially similar distracters.
4). F2 and F4 – superficially similar distracters. 5). F1 and
F4 – dissimilar distracters. 6). F2 and F3 – dissimilar
distracters.

2731

Participants The sample consisted of 32 participants (17
female and 15 male). The age of the participants ranged
from 19 to 53 (M = 25.13, SD = 7.01). They were university
students and participated voluntarily.

Experiment 2

Results and Discussion The data are presented in Figure 3.
The data show that in 43% of the cases the participants
blended the bases. The amount of blending in this
experiment is considerably higher than the amount Feldman
and Kokinov (2009) observed; they registered 22.5%
intrusions. The higher percentage obtained in the current
experiment can be attributed to the new stimuli. The
configurations have more restricted semantics and are not
subjected to schemas or general knowledge and thus are
more difficult to be retrieved.
Figure 3 illustrates the distribution of both the correct
responses and the falsely recognized configurations in the
recognition task. A repeated measures ANOVA showed that
the main effect of type of distracter was significant [F (2,62)
= 12.561, partial η2 = 0.29, p = 0.001]. One-sample T-test
showed that there was a significant difference between the
analogous and the superficially similar distracters [t (1,31) =
2.837, p = 0.008], and between the analogous and the
dissimilar distracters [t (1,31) = 5.454, p < 0.001]. Although
there was no significant difference between the superficially
similar and the dissimilar distracters, there was a tendency
for a significance (p = 0.085).

Procedure The procedure of Experiment 2 was identical to
that of Experiment 1 with a modification of session three
and different filler tasks in session two. The experiment was
run on the E-prime software and the stimuli were presented
centered on the screen. The three sessions followed
immediately one after another.
Session one was exactly the same as in Experiment 1.
However, this time the participants observed the bases for a
maximum of 1 minute per set. This was done in order to
control the amount of time each participant spent studying
the bases.
In session two the participants were given filler tasks. The
duration of this session was 15 minutes. Its purpose was
again to serve as retention interval.
In session three the participants received a recognition
task. They were given all the configurations (bases and
distracters) presented one by one and fully randomized.
Their task was to decide for each configuration whether they
saw it in the first session by pressing the corresponding key
(Yes or No) on a B-box.

Means

Proportion of correctly recognized and
blended configurations
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

0.56
0.19

Correct

0.14

0.11

Analogous Superficially Dissimilar
similar

Type of configuration
Figure 3: Amount of correctly recognized bases and
blending in the recognition task in session three.
The obtained results are exactly as expected and predicted
by the AMBR model: the greatest amount of blending was
between the analogous bases. Nevertheless, the experiment
needed some improvement. It was speculated that the
participants did not make the analogical inference in the first
session alone, but made such inferences (again) in the third
session when they were once again presented with the full
set of distracters and bases. To refute this possibility, a new
experiment was conducted.

The goal of Experiment 2 was to replicate Experiment 1
with a new procedure: presentation of the stimuli in session
three one by one, not simultaneously.

Stimuli The stimuli for sessions one and three were the
same as in Experiment 1. Twenty water-jars problems were
used in session two. The stimuli for this session were
changed due to concerns about the possible associations and
mood the story by Bradbury may have triggered in the
participants. Previous data suggest that mood is a factor for
noticing relations between objects (Hristova, 2009). Thus, to
elliminate the possible influence of mood on analogymaking (and subsequently, memory construction) we
decided to use a neutral and simpler filler task.
Participants The sample consisted of 35 participants (18
female and 17 male). The age of the participants ranged
from 20 to 40 years (M = 27.11, SD = 5.68). They were
university students and participated voluntarily.
Results and Discussion The data are presented in Figure 4.
The data show that in 68% of the cases the participants
blended the bases. This percentage can be explained with
the different procedures used in Experiments 1 and 2. In
contrast with Experiment 1 where the participants gave an
explicit answer for only 32 configurations, this time they
gave an explicit answer for all 128 of them, which increases
the likelihood of error. One-sample T-test of the correctly
recognized bases showed a performance that was
significantly above the chance level [t (34) = 2.758, p =
0.009].
Figure 4 illustrates the distribution of both the correct
responses and the falsely recognized configurations (when
the participants gave a Yes answer to distracters and not to

2732

bases, indicating they have recognized them as familiar) in
the recognition task. Note that the participants did not have
the opportunity to examine each set separately and could not
make any inferences based on comparisons among the
configurations. Hence, the analogical inferences took place
in the first session alone. A repeated-measures ANOVA
showed that the main effect of type of distracter was
significant [F (2,68) = 5.15, p = 0.008]. The pair-wise
comparison showed that there was a significant difference
between the analogous and the superficially similar
distracters [F (1,34) = 1.371, p = 0.033], and between the
analogous and the dissimilar distracters [F (1,34) = 1.771, p
= 0.002]. There was no significant difference between the
superficially similar and the dissimilar distracters. The
results showed that the participants much more often
blended the bases which were analogous to one another.

Again, the obtained data confirmed the predictions of the
AMBR model, restating the results from Experiment 1, and
from previous research (Feldman and Kokinov, 2009).

similar, or dissimilar to one another. This means that within
each base there is a superficial similarity to another base
(e.g. the same objects, the same pattern, the same frame or
contour in both configurations), and a structural similarity to
yet another one (e.g. the same system of relations between
objects that are distant on the surface level in both
configurations). In addition, to have even better knowledge
of the sources of intrusion, specific distracters were also
designed. They provided the opportunity to correctly
examine and accurately assign the observed intrusions to the
corresponding type. By engaging the participants into a
recognition task and not a free recall task, we eliminated the
possibility of guessing the origin of each element while
analysing the data.
The results support the predictions of the AMBR model
and accord with the data from prior research (Feldman &
Kokinov, 2009). Even though it might be argued that the
results could be assigned to a different strategy (for
example, picking distracters that are more similar to the
studied items), the data suggest that the most consistent
strategy used by the participants was choosing analogous
distracters. In other words, the participants blended
analogous configurations more often than superficially
similar ones. In addition, the results show that even when
there is no internal structure based on semantics and general
knowledge, but only on analogy, the analogy is sufficient to
establish blending between the episodes. Moreover, the data
obtained in the current paper further extend the findings of
Blanchette and Dunbar (2002), and Perrott et al. (2005)
studies showing that even when there is both structural and
superficial similarity between episodes, people tend to blend
episodes based on their structural, and not their superficial
similarity.
Certainly, future experiments and computer simulations
on the role of analogy-making in memory will shed more
light on the mechanisms of memory construction.

General discussion

Acknowledgements

The study presented in this paper contrasts two different
types of explanations of the mechanisms of blending
between episodes. According to the classic models and
experiments (Loftus, 1977; McClelland, 1995; Metcalfe,
1990) episodes are blended because they share a lot of
elements. The events in classic models are represented by
feature vectors and when there is a case of two events whose
features are the same, the vectors get mixed and a new
blended event appears in the output. The AMBR model
predicts that events that share the same structure of relations
i.e. are analogous, are more probable sources of blending.
The presented experiments test this prediction and try to
distinguish between the two contrasting points of view on
the process of memory construction. Eight sets of four
configurations of geometric figures (bases) were designed
specifically so that they are relevant to both views. In each
pair the two bases are either analogous, or superficially

We would like to express our gratitude towards Penka
Hristova and Georgi Petkov for the constructive feedback
they shared concerning the initially designed stimuli. We
would also like to thank Viara Kuneva, Violeta Andreeva,
Kristina Gotseva, Victoria Kuzeva, and Dimitar Lazov for
their expert assessment of the stimuli. Last but not least, we
wish to thank Armine Janyan for her help in conducting the
second experiment.

Means

Proportion of correctly recognized and
blended configurations
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0

0.32

Correct

0.25

0.22

0.21

Analogous Superficially Dissimilar
similar

Type of configuration
Figure 4: Amount of correctly recognized bases and
blending in the recognition task in session three.

References
Bartlett, F. (1932). Remembering. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Blanchette, I., & Dunbar, K. (2002). Representational
Change and Analogy: How Analogical Inferences Alter
Target Representations. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 28(4),
672-685.

2733

Feldman, V., & Kokinov, B. (2009). Analogical Episodes
are More Likely to be Blended than Superficially Similar
Ones. Proceedings of the 31st Annual Conference on
Cognitive Science. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Grinberg, M., & Kokinov, B. (2003). Analogy-Based
Episode Blending in AMBR. In B. Kokinov, & W. Hirst
(Eds.), Constructive Memory. Sofia: NBU Press.
Hristova, P. (2009). People in Negative Mood May See
Relations Where People in Positive Mood May Not. In B.
Kokinov, K. Holyoak, & D. Gentner (Eds.), New
Frontiers in Analogy Research. Sofia: NBU Series in
Cognitive Science.
Kokinov, B. (1988). Associative Memory-Based Reasoning:
How to Represent and Retrieve Cases. In T. O'Shea, & V.
Sgurev (Eds.), Artificial Intelligence III: Methodology,
Systems, Applications. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science
Publishers.
Kokinov, B. (1994a). The DUAL Cognitive Architectre: A
Hybrid Multi-Agent Approach. In A. Cohn (Ed.),
Proceedings of the 11th European Conference on
Artificial Intelligence. London: John Wiley & Sons.
Kokinov, B. (1994b). A Hybrid Model of Reasoning by
Analogy. In K. Holoyak, & J. Barnden (Eds.), Advances
in Connectionist and Neural Computation Theory (Vol. 2
Analogical Connections). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Kokinov, B. (1998). Analogy is Like Cognition: Dynamic,
Emergent, and Context-Sensitive. In K. Holyoak, D.
Gentner, & B. Kokinov (Eds.), Advances in Analogy
Research: Integration of Theory and Data from the
Cognitive, Computational, and Neural Sciences. Sofia:
NBU Press.
Kokinov, B., & Hirst, W. (Eds.). (2003). Constructive
Memory. Sofia: New Bulgarian University Press.
Kokinov, B., & Petrov, A. (2001). Integration of Memory
and Reasoning in Analogy-Making: The AMBR Model.
In D. Gentner, K. Holyoak, & B. Kokinov (Eds.), The
Analogical Mind: Perspectives from Cognitive Science.
Cambrigde, MA: MIT Press.
Kokinov, B., & Zareva, N. (2001). Episode Blending as
Result of Analogical Problem Solving. Proceedings of the
23rd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ.
Kokinov, B., Feldman, V., & Petkov, G. (2009). AnalogyMaking Automatically Produces False Memories for Both
Mapped Situations. In B. Kokinov, K. Holyoak, & D.
Gentner (Eds.), New Frontiers in Analogy Research.
Sofia: NBU Press.
Kokinov, B., Petkov, G., & Petrova, N. (2007). ContextSensitivity of Human Memory: Episode Connectivity and
Its Influence on Memory Reconstruction. In B. Kokinov,
D. Richardson, T. Roth-Berghofer, & L. Vieu (Eds.),
CONTEXT 2007. Heidelberg: Springer-Varlag Berlin.
Loftus, E. F. (1977). Shifting Human Color Memory.
Memory & Cognition, 5(6), 696-699.
Loftus, E. F. (1997). Creating False Memories. Scientific
American(277), 70-75.

Loftus, E. F. (2003). Our Changeable Memories: Legal and
Practical Implications. Nature Reviews: Neoruscience, 4,
231-234.
Loftus, E. F., & Palmer, J. C. (1974). Reconstruction of
Automobile Destruction: An Example of the Interaction
Between Language and Memory. Journal of Verbal
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 13, 585-589.
McClelland, J. (1995). Constructive Memory and Memory
Distortions: A Parallel-Distributed Processing Approach.
In D. Schacter (Ed.), Memory Distortions: How Minds,
Brains, and Societies Reconstruct the Past. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Metcalfe, J. (1990). Composite Holographic Associative
Recall Model (CHARM) and Blended Memories in
Eyewitness Testimony. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 119(2), 145-160.
Moscovitch, M. (1995). Confabulation. In D. Schacter (Ed.),
Memory distortions: How minds, brains, and societies
reconstruct the past. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Murdock, B. B. (1993). TODAM2: A Model for the Storage
and Retrieval of Item, Associative, and Serial-Order
Information. Psychological Review, 100(2), 183-203.
Murdock, B. B. (1995). Developing TODAM: Three
Models for Serial-Order Information. Memory &
Cognition, 23(5), 631 - 645.
Neisser, U. (1981). John Dean's Memory: A Case Study.
Cognition, 9, 1-22.
Neisser, U., & Harsch, N. (1992). Phantom Flashbulbs:
False Recollections of Hearing the News about
Challenger. In E. Winograd, & U. Neisser (Eds.), Affect
and Accuracy in Recall: Studies of "Flashbulb
Memories". Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Nystrom, L., & McClelland, J. (1992). Trace Synthesis in
Cued Recall. Journal of Memory and Language, 31, 59164.
Perrott, D. A., Gentner, D., & Bodenhausen, G. V. (2005).
Resistance is Futile: The unwitting Insertion of Anlogical
Inferences in Memory. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review,
12(4), 696-702.
Roediger, H. L., & McDermott, K. B. (1995). Creating False
Memoeries: Remembering Words Not Presented in Lists.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 21(4), 803-814.
Schacter, D. L. (1999). The seven sins of memory: insights
from psychology and cognitive neuroscience. American
Psychologist, 54, 182-203.
Zareva, N., & Kokinov, B. (2003). Blending of Non-Similar
Episodes as a Result of Analogical Mapping With a Third
One. Proceedings of the 25th Annual Conference of the
Cognitive Science Society. Erlbaum, Hillsdale, NJ.

2734

