UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Analysis of motor skill acquisition in novice jugglers by three-dimensional motion recording
system

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2rh0v938

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Ichikawa, Jun
Miwa, Kazuhisa
Terai, Hitoshi

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Analysis of motor skill acquisition in novice jugglers
by three-dimensional motion recording system
Jun Ichikawa (ichikawa@cog.human.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Information Science, Nagoya University, Fro-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, Japan

Kazuhisa Miwa (miwa@is.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Information Science, Nagoya University, Fro-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, Japan

Hitoshi Terai (terai@is.nagoya-u.ac.jp)
Graduate School of Information Science, Nagoya University/ CREST, Japan Science and Technology Agency,
Fro-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, Japan

Abstract
In the acquisition of skills requiring periodic body movements
such as in cascade juggling, the establishment of stable body
movements seems crucial. We investigated the processes of
developing stable body movements in each of the three learning
stages defined by the framework established by Beek and Van
Santvoord (1992). We focused on two types of stability: stability
of the body’s physical center, representing global structure of body
movements, and that of arm swing, representing local structure.
The experimental results revealed that the skills for establishing
local and global structures were acquired sequentially; in this case,
first local and then global. In addition, the analysis of verbal
reports suggested that stable body movements and conscious
attention are mutually related.
Keywords:
recording

Skill

acquisition;

three-dimensional

Figure 1: Schematic of the temporal sequence of events in
three-ball cascade juggling
(Hashizume and Matsuo, 2004)

motion

into time loaded (TL), defined by time spent holding a ball,
and time unloaded (TU), defined by time not spent holding
a ball. On the basis of these three parameters, an index k is
defined by the following equation.

Introduction
Empirical investigation of learning in various fields has
indicated that as development progresses, performance not
only increases in a continual way, but also changes
noncontiguously through multiple stages of development. In
each developmental stage, learners use specific strategies to
perform a task (Delaney et al., 1998; Rickard, 2004). These
findings suggest that for developing expertise through skill
acquisition in sports and traditional art performances,
individual characteristics of body movements emerge in
each developmental stage when performing a task. As
Handford et al. (1997) showed, one such factor determining
each learning stage is the transition toward stability of body
movements.
In the current study, we investigate three-ball cascade
juggling as an experimental task in which stability of
periodic body movements is crucial for reaching a higher
level of performance. Beek and Van Santvoord (1992)
distinguished three stages of learning for skill acquisition in
three-ball cascade juggling by focusing on schematic
representations of the temporal sequence of events such as
tosses and catches (Figure 1).
They defined hand cycle time (HCT) as the time between
one toss and the successive toss (or one catch and the
successive catch) in a hand. Additionally, HCT is divided

k = TL / (TL + TU) where HCT = TL + TU (1)
In the initial stage of learning, Stage 1, the value of k is
greater than 0.75, as learners discover how to perform threeball cascade juggling through trial and error. In this stage,
stability of body movements is not yet established. As the
variability of HCT decreases, the learning stage moves to
Stage 2, in which the value of k is maintained at almost 0.75,
and does not decrease. Performers gradually learn to
continue three-ball cascade juggling by establishing stable
body movements. At this point, the value of k begins to
decrease, and the learning stage shifts to Stage 3. Beyond
Stage 3, performers have reached an expert level and are
capable of performing five- and seven-ball cascade juggling.
From the viewpoint of this analytical framework,
Hashizume and Matsuo (2004) also showed that specific
characteristics of body movements depend on the
developmental stage; that is, the value of k and the
variability of TU in body movements of those who reached
Stage 3 are less than those still in Stage 2. In another
analysis, Leroy, Thouvarecq and Gautier (2008) confirmed

643

that for expert jugglers, who can perform five-ball cascade
juggling, a latency between the maximal flexion of the right
elbow, and the maximal oscillation of the sacrum to the
right is more firmly stabilized than in middle-level jugglers,
who can perform three- but not five-ball cascade juggling.
These findings suggest that different characteristics of
body movements may emerge depending on the stage of
motor skills learning acquired. Previous studies have mainly
focused on the temporal sequence of events in three-ball
cascade juggling. In skill acquisition that needs periodic
body movements such as cascade juggling, the
establishment of stable body movements seems crucial. The
current study investigates the processes of developing stable
body movements by identifying specific characteristics in
each of the three stages defined by the framework
established by Beek and Van Santvoord (1992). We focus
on two types of stabilities: stability of the body’s physical
center, which represents global structure of body
movements, and that of arm swing, which represents local
structure. In almost every sport, such as baseball and tennis,
the establishment of both local and global stabilities is
required for skill acquisition.
First, to establish global stability, the variability of
movement in the body’s physical center should be
minimized. For example, the fundamental walking motion’s
stability is characterized by the flow and variability of the
center of mass (Stokes, Andersson and Forssberg, 1989). It
was confirmed that in complex body movements in sports
and traditional art performances, a lower level of movement
is a crucial factor that greatly affects smooth and stable
movements of the whole body (Abe, Yamamoto and
Fujinami, 2003; Escamilla et al., 2009).
Second, to establish local stability, each local part of the
body should be coordinated. Yamamoto and Gohara (2000)
confirmed that the variability of both physical center of the
body and individual arm swing of expert tennis players is
minimized, and that those spatial flows converge to fixed
patterns. In three-ball cascade juggling, the balls are directly
controlled by the movements of both hands. This systematic
ball control requires the establishment of stability of both
physical center of the body and individual arm swing.
In the current study, we investigate whether local and
global stabilities are established in parallel or sequentially.
Specifically, Beek and Van Santvoord (1992) showed that
in moving from Stage 2 to Stage 3, the value of k remains
constant at around 0.75 until the preparation for entering
Stage 3 is completed, and begins to decrease in moving
toward the Expert stage. We confirm how the two types of
stabilities are established around this crucial development
point.

(1) If a juggler is right-handed, he has two balls in the
right hand and one in the left hand.
(2) Toss the ball in the right hand toward the left hand.
(3) As the first ball falls, toss the second ball in the left
hand underneath toward the right hand. Catch the first
ball in the left hand.
(4) As the second ball falls, toss the final ball in the right
hand underneath toward the left hand. Catch the
second ball in the right hand.
(5) As the final ball falls, toss the first ball in the left hand
underneath toward the right hand. Continue with this
sequence to perform three-ball cascade juggling.
The performance of jugglers was evaluated by the number
of successive catches of balls according to the above
procedure. In the experiment, we had the participants
practice three-ball cascade juggling over one week.
Hashizume and Matsuo (2004) suggested that novices reach
Stage 1 when they are able to perform about 10 successive
catches, Stage 2 is reached when about 50 successive
catches are performed, and Stage 3 is reached by performing
more than 100 successive catches.

Experiment
Method
Participants Eleven right-handed male undergraduates and
graduates participated in the experiment (M = 20.3 years);
all were novices in juggling. In addition, three expert righthanded jugglers (M = 20.0 years) involved in a juggling
club in Nagoya University joined the experiment. They had
acquired complete skills for performing five-ball cascade
juggling.
Procedure Over a period of one week, the novices attended
six training sessions while the experts received no training.
On the first day, the novices were given three juggling balls
(diameter: 63 mm, weight: 90 g), and were instructed to
train themselves while referring to an instruction sheet on
how to perform three-ball cascade juggling and a video
demonstrating expert performance of three-ball cascade
juggling. They were informed that they could refer only to
the given materials. In each session, they were required to
train themselves to perform three-ball cascade juggling for
at least 60 min.
The participants’ performances were measured on the first
day (Day 1), the fourth day (Day 4), and the last day (Day 7).
Five trials took place on Days 1 and 4, and 10 trials were
performed on Day 7, where the participants tried to achieve
their best record while performing inside the frame border
(70 cm × 70 cm) on the floor. All experts were able to
perform three-ball cascade juggling without any difficulty;
therefore, on Day 7, they performed five trials, in which
their complete performances were confirmed within 30 s.
After the performance measurements, interviews were
conducted, where the participants were required to explain
the points they thought to be the most important for

Experimental Task
We investigated motor skill acquisition in three-ball cascade
juggling. The skills required for performing this juggling are
regarded to be among the fundamental ball juggling skills.
The following describes how to perform three-ball cascade
juggling (Beek and Van Santvoord, 1992).

644

performing three-ball cascade juggling. Explanatory
gestures and demonstrations with balls were allowed. When
the reports were incomplete or, difficult to understand, the
experimenter encouraged more detailed explanations by
requesting the participants to “give more specific
explanations on that point.”
On Day 7, during the performance measurement, a threedimensional motion recording system recorded the position
of seven light-reflecting markers in three-dimensional space
with nine infrared cameras at a sample rate of 100 Hz
(Hawk type, Hawk: five; Hawk-i: four, NAC Ltd.,
California, USA). The cameras were applied to the
following anatomical sites: the left and right wrists, the left
and right elbows, the left and right shoulders, and the chest.
Anterior deviation (X-axis), lateral deviation (Y-axis), and
vertical deviation (Z-axis) of each site were recorded in
three-dimensional space.

Table 1: Best performance of each participant
on Days 1, 4, and 7
Participant (No.) Day 1
Day 4
Day 7
No.1
5
18
40
No.2
6
7
7
No.3
2
3
9
No.4
3
5
8
No.5
27
80
242
No.6
4
10
30
No.7
19
101
354
No.8
4
5
10
No.9
10
334
283
No.10
2
4
57
No.11
21
36
183

Results
Best Performance Table 1 lists each participant’s best
performance on Days 1, 4, and 7. The table shows
considerable differences in performance among the
participants. On the basis of their best performances on Day
7, the participants were categorized into three groups
according to the framework suggested by Beek and Van
Santvoord (1992), and Hashizume and Matsuo (2004). The
Stage 3 group included the participants who performed over
100 successive catches (No.5, No.7, No.9, No.11, M = 266,
SD = 62.24), the Stage 2 group included those who reached
50 successive catches (No.1, No.6, No.10, M = 42, SD =
11.15), and the Stage 1 group included those who completed
no more than 10 successive catches (No.2, No.3, No.4, No.8,
M = 9, SD = 1.12).
Figure 2 indicates the transition of the means of the best
performances on Days 1, 4, and 7 in each group. The
horizontal axis shows the dates of measurement (Days 1, 4,
and 7), and the vertical axis shows the means of successive
catches as best performances with the log scale. Mixed
ANOVA with Group (Stages 1, 2, and 3) as a betweensubject factor and Day (Days 1, 4, and 7) as a within-subject
factor was performed on the successive catches. It revealed
a significant effect for both Group and Day (Group: F (2, 8)
= 17.24, p < .005; Day: F (2, 16) = 9.67, p < .005). The
interaction between Group and Day was also significant (F
(4, 16) = 5.89, p < .005).
The post-hoc Ryan test showed that on Days 4 and 7, the
best performances of the Stage 3 group were significantly
higher than those of the Stage 1 and 2 groups (Day 4: MSe =
2904.01, p < .05; Day 7: MSe = 2904.01, p < .05). In
addition, in the Stage 3 group, the successive catches on
Day 7 were significantly greater than those on Days 1 and 4
(MSe = 2617.59, p < .05).

645

Figure 2: Transition of the means of the best
performances on Days 1, 4, and 7 in each group
Stability of Movement Analysis
Analysis Procedure To evaluate the stability of body
movements, the following three indexes were examined.
The values of the indexes when tossing were analyzed
because the timing of body movements was expected to
determine the balls’ trajectories. First, the stability of arm
swing was examined using two indexes, standard deviation
(SD) of the wrist positions and that of the elbow positions.
Second, the physical center’s stability was examined using
the third index, i.e., SD of the chest positions.
The following procedure was utilized in the analysis. For
identifying the timing of tossing, we focused on the
movement of the wrist positions. The movement of the
wrists periodically repeated upward and downward motions;
and we regarded the top point in the vertical movement as
the tossing point. At the tossing point, we captured the
positions of three sites (the wrist, elbow, and chest) and
calculated the values of the three indexes. For the Stage 2, 3,
and Expert groups, to capture stable body movements that
had reached a steady state, we excluded the initial three
successive catches from the analysis. Twelve successive
catches (from four to fifteen) were analyzed. Meanwhile, for
the Stage 1 group, since the number of catches was much
lesser, an analysis based on the above requirement was

impossible. Therefore, for this group, we analyzed body
movements from the initial toss to the final catch. Two of
the four participants in the Stage 1 group were excluded
from the analysis because the recording system failed to
capture their body movements.
Basically, the trial that had the best performance recorded
was analyzed. However, when the recording system failed
to capture the positions of the three sites in the best
performance trial, we analyzed another trial in which the
second or third best performance was recorded.
Stability of Movement Result Figures 3, 4, and 5 show the
values of the three indexes in the four groups. The
horizontal axis shows Group (Stages 1, 2, 3, and Expert)
and the vertical axis indicates the means of SDs of the
positions of the three sites (the wrist, elbow, and chest, in
mm) at tossing timing. The error bars indicate the standard
errors. The participants in the Stage 1 group were excluded
from the statistical analysis because the criterion for
capturing data in that group was different, and the values of
each index were much larger than those in the other groups.
First, we evaluated the stability of arm swing for local body
movement. The ANOVA revealed a significant effect of the
Group factor on the SDs of the wrist positions (F (2, 7) =
6.97, p < .05). The post-hoc Ryan test showed that the SD in
the Stage 2 group was significantly larger than those in both
Stage 3 and Expert groups (MSe = 78.51, p < .05). The
ANOVA on the SDs of the elbow positions also revealed a
significant effect of the Group factor (F (2, 7) = 14.03, p
< .005). The post-hoc Ryan test also showed that the SD in
the Stage 2 group was significantly larger than those in
Stage 3 and Expert groups, respectively (MSe = 2.26, p
< .05).
Meanwhile, for stability of the body’s physical center, an
ANOVA on the SDs of the chest positions revealed a
significant effect of the Group factor (F (2, 7) = 6.84, p
< .05). The post hoc-Ryan test also showed that the SD in
the Stage 3 group was significantly larger than that in the
Expert group (MSe = 2.66, p < .05).
The overall results showed that the variability of body
movements in the Stage 1 group was much larger than that
in the other three groups. As for arm swing, representing
local structure of body movements, there was a significant
development from Stage 2 to Stage 3 in the stabilities of
both wrist and elbow movements; meanwhile, movements at
the chest’s physical center, representing global structure,
emerged between Stage 3 and the Expert stage. These
results imply that developmental stages in which local and
global structures are established are different. This also
suggests that the skills for establishing local and global
structures are acquired sequentially; in this case, first local
and then global.

Figure 3: Standard deviation of the wrist positions

Figure 4: Standard deviation of the elbow positions

Figure 5: Standard deviation of the chest positions

Discussion and Conclusion
In this study, we investigated what characteristics emerge in
each of the three learning stages defined by Beek and Van
Santvood (1992), focusing on the development of stable
body movements. The results showed that first, the stability
of arm swing is established from Stage 2 to Stage 3, and

646

then, the stability of the body’s physical center develops to
reach the Expert stage, beyond Stage 3. This implies that the
two types of skills, global and local stabilities, for
performing three-ball cascade juggling are acquired
sequentially. Our result, according to which an increase in
the stability of arm swing occurs with the development of
learning stages, is consistent with the findings of Mapelli et
al. (2012).
The shift in the stability of body movements from Stage 2
to Stage 3 in the current study may correspond to the change
in the value of k in Beek and Van Santvoord (1992). Our
results showed that first, the stability of arm swing is
established, and then the variability of the body’s physical
center is minimized. This implies that strategies for
performing the task are different at each learning stage.
Specifically, the participants who reached Stage 2 may use a
strategy for tossing and catching balls by controlling their
arms while those who reached Stage 3 may use a different
strategy for controlling the body’s physical center, with
whole body movements from side to side while maintaining
the stability of arm swing.
We also recorded the participants’ verbal reports
mentioning intentional concerns for achieving optimum
learning and reaching their best performance on Days 1, 4,
and 7. We also found differences in the reports among those
who reached each of the three stages. We categorized the
reported content into three categories.






participants in the Stage 1 group mainly referred to the first
category (physical), maintaining such references until the
interviews on Day 7 (three of four). The participants who
reached Stage 2 similarly referred to the first category in
their reports on Day 1 (three of three), but the rate of the
first category of reports gradually decreased from Day 1 to
Day 7 (zero of three on Day 7), and instead, references to
the second category (temporal) about the temporal structures
of body movements increased (three of three on Day 7).
Those who reached Stage 3 did not refer to the first category
from Day 1, maintaining this tendency until Day 7 (zero of
four on Day 7); and consistently referred mainly to the third
category (spatial) (about 47 % of the total). This tendency
was also observed in the Expert group.
The verbal reports reflect the intentional findings
consciously noted by the participants in each learning stage.
Table 2: Category of the participants’ reports

Physical: references to specific body movements. The
following are representative examples:
 Catch a ball with the palm of the hand, not with
fingertips.
 Continue three-ball cascade juggling while fixing
the position of the elbows.
 Note the other hand, and try to throw a ball to the
place of that hand.
Temporal: references to temporal structures of body
movements. The following are representative
examples:
 Throw a ball at the time when another ball begins
to fall from the zenith of its parabolic arc.
 Let the ball be in space, and lengthen that time as
much as possible.
 Try to perform rhythmic throws and coordinate the
rhythm to the movements of both hands.
Spatial: references to spatial structures of manipulated
objects (i.e., balls). The following are representative
examples:
 Throw a ball to a consistent place.
 When throwing a ball, predict the place, where the
ball will fall by watching the zenith of the parabolic
arc continuously.
 Try to fix the pathway of the ball to attain a
consistent parabolic arc shape.

Table 2 indicates the category of the participants’ reports
based on the above criteria. The table indicates that the

647

The systematic distribution of the reports reflects that such
conscious attention in training may relate to regularly
phased unconscious skill acquisition of stable body
movements captured in the current experiment. Beilock et al.
(2002) confirmed that in training novice performers, efforts
of continuous intentional attention to a series of specific
behaviors cause rapid development of performance. Beilock
and Carr (2001) reported that monitoring activities with
intentional attention to one’s own behaviors improves
performance in choking situations when under mental stress.
Additionally, Zentgraf and Munzert (2009) confirmed that
the instructor’s guidance causes improvements in both body
movements and ball trajectory; specifically, information
about body movements reduces the displacement of
behaviors, and that about ball trajectory around the body
decreases the variability of ball location at the zenith of the
parabolic arc.
These findings imply the possibility that stable body
movements and conscious attention are mutually related.
Our initial trials in the current study have started a trial to
propose an instructional program for skill acquisition that
reflects the cognitive mechanisms necessary at each learning
stage.
In the current study, the analysis was performed on a
between-subject design basis. In the future, we should
confirm similar shift patterns captured in the current study
over individual learning processes. Additionally, we focused
only on stability of body movements at the time of tossing.
However, catches are also crucial for continuing cascade
juggling. Stability seems crucial in tosses, but in catches,
other factors may be important because in catches, adaptive
behavior for responding to the variability of falling balls is
required, in which we should find another significant factor
besides stability.

References
Abe, M., Yamamoto, T., and Fujinami, T. (2003). A
dynamical analysis of kneading using a motion capture
device. Proceedings of the 3rd international workshop on
Epigenetic Robotics 2003, 41-48.
Beek, P. J., and Van Santvoord, A. A. M. (1992). Learning
the cascade juggle: A dynamical systems analysis.
Journal of Motor Behavior, 24, 85-94.
Beilock, S. L., and Carr, T. H. (2001). On the fragility of
skilled performance: What governs choking under
pressure?. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
130, 701-725.
Beilock, S. L., Carr, T. H., MacMahon, C., and Starkes, J. L.
(2002).
When
paying
attention
becomes
counterproductive: Impact of divided versus skill-focused
attention on novice and experienced performance of
sensorimotor skills. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Applied, 8, 6-16.
Delaney, P. F., Reder, L. M., Staszewski, J. J., and Ritter, F.
E. (1998). The strategy-specific nature of improvement:
The power law applies by strategy within task.
Psychological Science, 9, 1-7.

648

Escamilla, R. F., Fleisig, G. S., DeRenne, C., Taylor, M. K.,
Moorman, C. T., Imamura, R., Barakatt, E., and Andrews,
J. R. (2009). A comparison of age level on baseball
hitting kinematics. Journal of Applied Biomechanics, 25,
210-218.
Handford, C., Davids, K., Bennett, S., and Button, C. (1997).
Skill acquisition in sport: Some applications of an
evolving practice ecology. Journal of Sports Sciences, 15,
621–640.
Hashizume, K., and Matsuo, T. (2004). Temporal and
spatial factors reflecting performance improvement
during learning three-ball cascade juggling. Human
Movement Science, 23, 207-233.
Leroy, D., Thouvarecq, R., and Gautier, G. (2008). Postural
organisation during cascade juggling: Influence of
expertise. Gait and Posture, 28, 265-270.
Mapelli, A., Galante, D., Paganoni, S., Fusini, L., Forlani,
G., and Sforza, C. (2012). Three-dimensional hand
movements during the execution of ball juggling: Effect
of expertise in street performers. Journal of
Electromyography and Kinesiology, 22, 859-865.
Rickard, T. C. (2004). Strategy execution in cognitive skill
learning: An item-level test of candidate models. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 30, 65-82.
Stokes, V. P., Andersson, C., and Forssberg, H. (1989).
Rotational and translational movement features of the
pelvis and thorax during adult human locomotion. Journal
of Biomechanics, 22, 43-50.
Yamamoto, Y., and Gohara, K. (2000). Continuous hitting
movements modeled from the perspective of dynamical
systems with temporal input. Human Movement Science,
19, 341-371.
Zentgraf, K., and Munzert, J. (2009). Effects of attentionalfocus instructions on movement kinematics. Psychology
of Sport and Exercise, 10, 520-525.

