UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Attentional and Immediate Memory Capacity Limitations in the Acquisition of Non-Native
Linguistic Contrasts

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/81b1k7k1

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Schoenherr, Jordan
Logan, John

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Attentional and Immediate Memory Capacity Limitations
in the Acquisition of Non-Native Linguistic Contrasts
Jordan Schoenherr (psychophysics.lab@gmail.com)
John Logan (john.logan@carleton.ca)
Department of Psychology, Carleton University
1125 Colonel By Drive, Ottawa, ON K1S5B6 Canada
listeners can no longer detect within-category differences
between speech sounds (e.g., Eimas, 1975), later studies
suggested that the ability to perceive at least some nonnative contrasts can be demonstrated in adulthood (e.g.,
Pisoni, Aslin, Perey, & Hennessy, 1982; Werker & Logan,
1984). In order to determine the extent to which the
categorization of speech sounds is malleable, it is useful to
consider the processes underlying categorization more
generally.

Abstract
The acquisition of a non-native phonetic distinction by
second-language learners relies on basic sensory and
perceptual processes. In the present study we
examined whether central capacity limitations in
attention and immediate memory affected both
metalinguistic awareness of phonemic properties of
stimuli and the ease with which listeners could
perceptually reorganize native phonemic categories.
Immediate memory was positively related to
performance when listeners had to monitor their
performance whereas attention was positively related
to performance in identifying stimuli along the
acoustic continuum.

Contributions of Immediate and Long-Term Memory
In a manner similar to studies of speech perception,
categorization studies have examined how attention can be
focused on a region of a perceptual continuum through
feedback (Nosofsky, 1986), which can in turn transfer to
other tasks, such as stimulus discrimination performance
(Goldstone, 1994). In addition to attention, categorization
models have also noted how limited immediate memory
constrains categorization performance. For instance,
Ashby, Alfonso-Reese, Turken, and Waldron (1998)
suggests a two-process account wherein a fast, explicit
hypothesis-testing system which relies on attention and
immediate capacity retains a small number of stimulus
dimensions (usually one) to categorize stimuli. This
explicit system dominates response selection during early
stages of training. The explicit categorization system is in
competition with a slower, implicit procedural-learning
system that can acquire multidimensional categorization
structures. After extensive training, the procedural-learning
system dominates response selection. Although a number
of categorization models have been proposed to account for
how categories are learned, few models of speech
perception have incorporated these findings.
Pisoni and colleagues (e.g., Pisoni & Tash, 1974)
provided an early account of speech perception that shares
some features with categorization models. They proposed a
two-process model of speech perception in the context of
an ABX discrimination task. This model assumes that
listeners can initially use the acoustic properties of the
stimuli stored in immediate memory. If the sounds are
identical or they are distal to one another on a perceptual
continuum, response selection will occur rapidly using
acoustic properties. When stimuli are more confusable due
to being close together in psychological space and within
the same category, a secondary processing stage using the
phonemic properties stored in long-term memory is
activated. If acoustic information is available to listeners
(see Schoenherr & Logan, 2013), it remains unclear

Keywords: speech perception, category boundaries,
confidence processing, second language acquisition

Introduction
In the 1970s and 1980s the framework of categorical
perception (Liberman, Harris, Hoffman, & Griffith, 1957)
was a major impetus to work examining nonnative speech
perception in both adults (e.g., Pisoni, Aslin, Perey, &
Hennessey, 1982) as well as its developmental antecedents
(e.g., Aslin, Pisoni, Hennessey, & Perey, 1981). Although
this framework was integrated into mainstream cognitive
psychology via accounts of how auditory information could
be transformed into a more durable phonetic code (e.g.,
Pisoni, 1973), comparatively few studies have considered
the extent to which attention and immediate memory
limitations affect this process. The present study examines
these limitations in a speech perception task wherein
listeners must learn to perceptually reorganize an acoustic
continuum to accommodate a non-native speech sound.
Categorical Perception of Speech Sounds
Phonemic distinctions are evident early in development.
Starting at the end of the first year (Werker, 1989) and
continuing into adulthood (Hazan & Barrett, 2000),
listeners become desensitized to differences between
speech sounds within a specific range (we use
“desensitized” here as a neutral term that does not
necessarily imply a loss of sensory ability). As a result of
the experience, adult listeners use a highly restricted set of
acoustic cues to differentiate speech sounds (Jusczyk,
1992, 2000) similar to the way attention is allocated in
categorization tasks more generally (e.g., Nosofsky, 1986).
Although some researchers originally claimed that adult

2585

whether listeners represent this information explicitly or
implicitly.
Supporting the possibility of metalinguistic awareness
during speech perception, immediate memory has been
shown to be a determinant of the acquisition of native (e.g.,
Gathercole et al., 1992) and non-native vocabulary (e.g.,
Papagno, Valentine, & Baddeley, 1991). Capacity
limitations also affect speech perception according to some
studies. Pisoni and Greers (2000) investigated children who
received cochlear implants (CIs) and found immediate
memory was related to subsequent improvements in speech
perception. In conjunction with early studies that provided
listeners with explicit instructions to attend to acoustic
differences (Pisoni & Lazarus, 1974), these results suggest
considerable involvement of an explicit learning system
during perceptual reorganization. If correct, estimating the
role and capacity of executive function becomes crucial. In
the present study, we examine two aspects of executive
function, attentional control and executive working
memory capacity, to assess their impact on learning.
Alternative accounts have instead claimed that speech
perception is largely an implicit process. For instance, Ellis
(1992; 2002) has emphasized the substantial contributions
of implicit learning to language perception and production.
Frequency-based effects (e.g., Maye, Werker, & Gerken,
2002) are thought to underlie natural language acquisition
(for reviews, see Ellis, 1994) and the development of
artificial grammars (e.g., Reber, 1967). Additionally, using
a factor analysis of a psychometric battery, Ellis (1994)
provided evidence for both implicit and explicit processing
in second-language acquisition. A recent study by
Schoenherr and Logan (2013) further qualifies this pattern.
They examined acquisition of a non-native linguistic
contrast along the voice-onset time continuum. Using
identification performance, typicality ratings, and
subjective confidence reports, Schoenherr and Logan
demonstrated that whereas acoustic properties affected
performance in the identification task and typicality ratings,
subjective awareness appeared to reflect native linguistic
categories rather than acoustic properties or the novel
category boundary that they were attempting to induce in
the listeners.
Present Study
Ellis (1994) and Schoenherr and Logan (2013)
demonstrated a need to assess both implicit and explicit
sources of information in perception. In the present study
we again adopt subjective confidence reports on a scale of
50% (guess) to 100% (certain) in the study of subjective
awareness in speech perception (e.g., Schoenherr & Logan,
2013). We have previously argued that overconfidence
(i.e., when mean confidence is greater than accuracy) is
observed, it suggests subjective awareness of phonemes. In
contrast, response selection (i.e., the response to the speech
stimulus in a identification or discrimination task) appears
to be dominated by implicit acoustic properties of speech
sounds. This interpretation is consistent with a recent study
by Schoenherr and Lacroix (2013) that obtained greater

overconfidence bias for category structures thought have
explicit representations relative to a category structure
thought to have an implicit learning representation.
Divergent evidence for explicit and implicit
representations of speech sounds can also be obtained using
measures of immediate memory and attention. Models of
immediate memory typically include an active executive
function that maintains stimulus representations in the
focus of attention (for a review, see Miyake & Shah, 1999).
In addition to generative tests (Baddeley, 1996), Engle et
al. (1999) developed a reading span task to examine
executive function. In this task participants are presented
with grammatical sentences that vary in terms of the
realizability of their semantic content (e.g., "The young
pencil kept his eyes closed until he was told to look."),
responding either 'Yes' or 'No' based on whether the
sentences were meaningful. Following each sentence,
participants were then presented with a stimulus (e.g., the
word "SPOT") that they would be asked to recall at the end
of the task. Recall of these stimulus strings occurred after
the presentation of 2 to 5 sentences.
Contemporary models of attention also suggest that
attentional capacity is subject to a neuroanatomically-based
functional division. Posner and colleagues (e.g., Posner &
Dehaene, 1994) suggest a functional dissociation of
neuroanatomical attention networks supporting alerting,
orientation, and control. Fan et al. (2002) developed a task
(the Attentional networks test, or ANT) that combined a
visuospatial flanker task and a cued reaction time task,
revealing three distinct reaction time patterns
corresponding to three attention networks.
In the present experiment, we obtained responses to
measures of attention and immediate memory and
compared the results to identification performance and
subjective confidence reports in a speech perception task.
We interpreted evidence of overconfidence as suggestive of
explicit phonemic representations of speech sounds.
Additional evidence of explicit representations should also
be observed in strong positive correlations with attentional
measures of attentional control on the ANT and reading
span. Implicit representations should be evidenced in
identification performance, measures of orientation on the
ANT, and immediate memory components that require less
attentional control (ISPAN) relative to other measures
(RSPAN).
Replicating earlier studies (e.g., Pisoni et al. 1982;
Schoenherr & Logan, 2013) we used stimuli selected from
the VOT continuum and required listeners to learn a nonnative linguistic contrast from a portion of the continuum
for which they should have little to no familiarity. Because
stimuli from the /ph-b/ portion of the VOT continuum have
novel acoustic properties for listeners who do not use this
category, these listeners should experience increased
uncertainty if acoustic properties are being used to identify
the stimuli whereas the participants should remain certain
in their judgments of stimuli associated with the /p/
category that they are familiar with.

2586

Proportion Response ./ Subjective Confidence
Proportion Response ./ Subjective Confidence

1.0

1.0

0.9

0.9

0.8

0.8

0.7

0.7

0.6

0.6

0.5

0.5

0.4
0.3

0.4
/P/

0.3

/B/

0.2

/B/

0.2

Confidence

0.1

0.1

0.0

0.0
-70 -60 -50 -40 -30 -20 -10

0

10 20 30 40 50 60

70

-70 -60 -50 -40 -30 -20 -10

1.0

1.0

0.9

0.9

0.8

0.8

0.7

0.7

0.6

0.6

0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4

0.3
0.2
0.1

/P/

0

10 20 30 40 50 60

0

10

70

0.3

/P/

0.2

/B/

/P/
/B/

/Ph/

0.1

Confidence

0.0

/Ph/

0.0
-70 -60 -50 -40 -30 -20 -10

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

-70 -60 -50 -40 -30 -20 -10

Voice-Onset Time

20

30

40

50

60

70

Voice-Onset Time

Method
Participants
Sixty-six Carleton University students participated in
the study for course credit; all were native speakers of
English or had extensive experience with English and
reported normal hearing and no speech pathologies.

span. Two variants of the task were used consisting of
auditory (ASPAN) and visual stimuli (VSPAN).
The
ANT
was
retrieved
from
https://sacklerinstitute.org/cornell/assays_and_tools/ant/jin.
fan/. The program contained flanker stimuli consisting of a
centrally presented arrow pointing in either a leftward or
rightward direction. Conditions included congruent
(→→→), incongruent (←→←), and no flanking stimuli
(→). The target location could either be cued or left uncued
(for a complete description of stimulus, conditions, and
computation of ANT scores, see Fan et al., 2002). Listeners
simply clicked a button corresponding to the direction of
the arrow located in the middle of the array.

Materials
Identification Stimuli. Fifteen synthetic speech stimuli
were obtained from the Haskins Laboratories website (HL,
2011; Lisker & Abramson, 1967). These stimuli varied
along the VOT continuum from -70 to 70 ms VOT. As per
the method used by Pisoni et al. (1982), listeners were
presented with stimuli which corresponded to the voiceless
unaspirated, voiced aspirated, and voiceless aspirated stops.
The latter categories are present in English while the
former is not. The sounds were originally recorded on reelto-reel tape and later converted into AIFF format at
Haskins Laboratories. Stimuli were pre-processed using a
DC offset correction to eliminate clicks present in the AIFF
versions and then converted into .WAV files using
Audacity software.
Individual Differences Measures. Reading span (RSPAN)
stimuli consisted of sentences that were adopted from
Engle et al. (1999). Forty-two sentences were presented in
sets of 2 to 5. Each set was followed by a randomly
selected letter. A total of 10 stimulus sets were created for
the letter span task, each consisting of eight random letters.
Five sets were created to assess forward and backward

Procedure
Procedures were adapted from those used by Pisoni et
al. (1982). Listeners initially received training in which
they were presented with three stimuli each selected from
the three critical regions along the VOT continuum (-70, 0,
and 70 ms VOT, corresponding to the /ph/, /b/, and /p/
categories). After presentation, they then indicated whether
the speech sounds represented a /ph/, /b/, or /p/ phoneme
using the ‘V’, ‘B’, or ‘N’ keys, labelled as ‘_B’, ‘B’, and
‘P’, respectively. After they had indicated their response,
‘Correct’ or ‘Incorrect’ was presented visually on the
screen. Each stimulus was presented a total of 60 times
during the training phase, for a total of 180 trials.
Following training, listeners again identified the full
set of stimuli as a /ph/, /b/, or /p/ using the keyboard but no

2587

feedback was provided. In the first block, after they
completed each ID trial they also indicated their level of
confidence in their response using the ‘E’ through ‘I’ keys,
which were labeled to represent a 6-point scale with 50%
representing a guess and 100% representing certainty. In
the second block, confidence was not reported. Confidence
and No confidence consisted of 150 trials each (15 stimuli
× 10 repetitions). Block order was also counterbalanced.
Individual differences measures were presented prior
to the primary task. They included the administration of the
ANT, RSPAN, as well as the ASPAN and VSPAN tasks.
Listeners were presented with the visual stimuli via a
laptop computer. Auditory stimuli were presented over
headphones at a comfortable listening level. Presentation of
stimuli and collection of responses was controlled by
PsychoPy software (Peirce, 2007). The experiment took
place in a sound-attenuated booth and required
approximately 120 mins to complete.

A through D. Together, VOT and the number of phonemic
categories produced a significant change in ID
performance, F(14,798) = 30.62, MSE = .17, p< .001, η2 =
.35, as well as a marginally significant main effect of VOT,
F(14,798) = 2.43, MSE = .17, p = .056, η2 = .04. This
finding suggests a proficiency in the native-linguistic
contrast of our listeners as well as sensitization to specific
regions of the VOT continuum that are characteristic of
categorical perception. Confidence condition alone also
affected ID performance, F(1,57) = 4.19, MSE = .05, p =
.045, η2 = .07, again suggesting that the requirement of
confidence might in fact alter performance.
Qualifying the above main effects and interactions was
the three-way interaction between the number of phonemic
categories, the location of the stimuli along the VOT
continuum, and the confidence condition, F(14,798) =
2.02, MSE = .03, p = .05, η2 = .03. A comparison between
Panels A and C wherein confidence reports were required
with Panels B and D wherein no reports were required
presents a suggestive pattern. First, consider the 2-category
conditions. In Panel A subjective confidence is at ceiling
indicating considerable certainty in responses while ID
performance is characterized by a sharp category boundary.
In contrast, Panel B actually presents a less well-defined
category boundary for listeners presented with a native
linguistic contrast. In contrast to other studies that have
compared performance in 2- and 3-category ID task (Pisoni
et al.,1982; Schoenherr & Logan, 2013) listeners in the 2category in this study received the same training block and
feedback as those in the 3-category session. Thus, the
provision of feedback appears to have altered performance.

Results
An analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) was conducted
on mean identification accuracy and mean subjective
confidence with the ANT and immediate memory scores as
covariates. Due to space limitations and correlations
amongst measures, ANT and immediate memory subscores
were combined into single variables (see analysis and
discussion below). We report Greenhouse-Geisser adjusted
values and use unadjusted degrees of freedom. As a general
note, the ordering of confidence and no confidence block
did not significantly affect performance.
Individual Difference Measures. Prior to conducting
the principal analysis, we first examined correlations
between measures of immediate memory and the alert,
orienting, and executive components of ANT. Measures of
the orientation network were significant correlated with
both the alert network, r2 = .30, p < .001, and the executive
network, r2 = .07, p = .045. The alert and executive
network were not correlated, r2 = .00, p = .83.
Positive correlations were observed for RSPAN and
VSPAN, r2 = .17, p = .001, RSPAN and ASPAN, r2 = .10,
p = .02, and ASPAN and VSPAN, r2 = .62, p < .001. The r2
values indicate that the two components of immediate
memory (VSPAN and ASPAN) that require less attentional
control were more strongly related than the active
component (RSPAN) was to either.
The orientation component of the ANT correlated with
both VSPAN, r2 = .07, p = .038, and ASPAN, r2 = .06, p =
.06. Neither the alerting network nor the executive network
had strong relationships with measures of immediate
memory. Thus, given the positive correlations within
measures of ANT and RSPAN, ASPAN, and VSPAN we
collapsed within these measures. For the remainder of the
study we refer to ANT measures as a whole and mean
immediate memory score as immediate memory span
(ISPAN).
Proportion Identification. Identification results for 2and 3-category conditions are presented in Figure 1, Panel

Table 1. Mean identification performance for low- and
high-ANT participants when the requirement of confidence
was manipulated. Means for each region are presented.
Standard errors are reported in parentheses.
VOTs

Low-ANT

High-ANT

-70 to -20

.68 (.05)

.65 (.06)

-10 to +20

.71 (.04)

.74 (.04)

+30 to +70

.89 (.03)

.88 (.04)

Next, a different pattern is evidenced when
considering the 3-category condition. A comparison of
Panels C and D suggests that feedback was processed in the
same manner regardless of the requirement of confidence
reports. This could be taken as evidence that the process of
perceptual reorganization occurs below the level of
subjective awareness. Moreover, it additionally implies that
the acquisition of non-native speech sounds is unaffected
by the requirements of performance monitoring. This
suggests that using acoustic properties to develop a nonnative contrast is primarily a function of implicit processes.
The individual differences measures used in the
present study reveal a similar trend. Listeners’ aggregated
ANT score co-varied with ID task performance and the
location of the stimuli along the VOT continuum,

2588

F(14,798) = 2.62, MSE = .17, p = .04, η2 = .04. When
assessed along the VOT continuum, our results suggest that
the acoustic properties that differentiate stimuli along the
VOT continuum require attentional capacity in order to
learn and use phonemic categories (for the relationship of
performance and dichotomized ANT scores for the three
VOT regions of interest, see Table 1).

stimuli in the /ph-b/ range. Given that these stimuli were
previously associated with the /b/ phoneme relative to the
listeners’ native phonemecategories, this suggests that
listeners were aware of some acoustic properties in the /phb/ range but that they compared them to the pre-existing
phonemic structure.
No measure of subjective confidence co-varied with
measures of attention or immediate memory. Relative to
the results of the ID task, this suggests that although
processing of metalinguistic information is dependent on
immediate memory capacity, subjective awareness is not
independently affected by capacity limitations.

Table 2. Mean identification performance for low- and
high-ISPAN participants when the requirement of
confidence was manipulated. Standard errors are reported
in parentheses.
Condition

High- ISPAN

Low-ISPAN

No Conf.

.67 (.04)

.77 (.04)

Conf.

.70 (.04)

.80 (.04)

Conclusion
The results of the present study provide further
evidence for the ability of listeners to use the acoustic
properties of stimuli along a speech continuum to identify
exemplars defined in terms of non-native linguistic
contrasts. Relative to previous studies (Pisoni et al. 1982;
Schoenherr & Logan, 2013), greater uncertainty was
observed in participants’ identification response functions.
The results of our manipulation do suggest that immediate
response feedback allocates attention to specific
psychophysical properties of the stimuli. This is clearly
evidenced in the correct identification of the three training
exemplars. Moreover, additional support comes from the
observed performance decrements in the 2-category
condition when training preceded the ID task. In their
initial study, Pisoni et al. (1982) did not provide listeners in
the 2-category condition with feedback. Instead, ID task
responses were obtained in a no feedback, baseline
condition. By providing listeners with feedback, we have
demonstrated that the allocation of attention to the acoustic
properties of stimuli can produce perceptual reorganization
even when using a native linguistic contrast. Such feedback
dependencies have elsewhere been linked with implicit
learning (Ashby et al., 1998).
The nature of feedback processing, the dissociable
effects of attention and immediate memory, as well as
differences between identification performance and
confidence reports lend support to a dual-process account
of speech perceptions. Like Pisoni and Tash (1974), our
results suggest multiple processing stages for the
processing of acoustic and phonemic information. Because
no task relies on a single process (Jacoby, 1991), acoustic
and phonemic information are likely available to both
implicit and explicit processes. Our results, however, allow
for more specific claims. Attentional capacity appears to
contribute to performance by determining whether acoustic
or phonemic features are used for processing with greater
attentional capacity resulting in increasingly graded
identification functions. In contrast, immediate memory
appears to be responsible for the retention of information
obtained from the primary decision in order to monitor
performance. As a result, such a process might be more
important for self-regulation during learning in ecological
settings than in the context of the present study.

ISPAN scores also co-varied with ID task performance
and the requirement of confidence, F(1,57) = 3.86, MSE =
.05, p = .05, η2 = .06. Listeners appear to require greater
immediate memory capacity in order to monitor
performance, report confidence, and perform adequately in
the ID task. A dichotomized set of results is presented in
Table 2.
Confidence Reports. Two indices of subjective confidence
are reported here: mean confidence and overconfidence
bias. Mean confidence simply represented the average
confidence in a response. Overconfidence bias represented
the signed difference between mean subjective probability
and mean proportion correct. For a further discussion of
theoretical and computational issues, see Baranski and
Petrusic (1994).
The ANCOVA of mean confidence revealed a
significant effect of the number of number of phonemes,
F(1,57) = 15.89, MSE = 943.48, p< .001, η2 = .22, as well
as its interaction with the location of a stimuli along the
VOT continuum, F(14,798) = 12.52, MSE = 288.13, p<
.001, η2 = .18. In general, listeners expressed greater
confidence when identifying stimuli using their native
phoneme categories, with the greatest confidence reported
in the /p/ category for listeners in both 2- and 3-category
condition (see Figures 1A and 1C).
Overconfidence bias was similarly affected. A
significant interaction was obtained between the number of
phonemes and the location of a stimuli along the VOT
continuum, F(14,798) = 13.80, MSE = .10, p< .001, η2 =
.20. By taking into account mean response accuracy, the
measure of overconfidence indicates that listeners’
metalinguistic awareness was determined by the
representation of native phonemes. This pattern is
evidenced in Figure 1 Panels A and C. In both cases mean
confidence is greater whereas the reduction in confidence
in the 3-category condition (Panel C) is less than the
proportional decrease in accuracy. Support for a twocategory representation of stimuli along the VOT
continuum is evidenced by the reduction in confidence for

2589

Liberman, A. M., Harris, K. S., Hoffman, H. S., & Griffith,
B. C. (1957). The discrimination of speech sounds within
and across phoneme boundaries. Journal of Experimental
Psychology, 54, 358-368.
Lisker, L., & Abramson, A. S. (1967). The voicing
dimension: Some experiments in comparative phonetics.
Proceedingsof the 6th International Congress of
PhoneticSciences. Prague: Academia.
Miyake, A.,& Shah, P. (1999). Models of working memory:
Mechanisms of active maintenance and executive
control. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
Press.
Nosofsky, R. (1986). Attention, similarity, and the
identification-categorization relationship. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 115, 39-57.
Papagno, C., Valentine, T., & Baddeley, A. (1991).
Phonological short-term memory and foreign-language
vocabulary learning. Journal of Memory and Language,
30, 331-347.
Pisoni, D. B., Aslin, R. N., Percy, A. J., & Hennessy, B. L.
(1982). Some effects of laboratory training on
identification and discrimination of voicing contrasts in
stop consonants. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception and Performance, 8, 297-314.
Pisoni D. B.,& Geers, A. (2000). Working memory in deaf
children with cochlear implants: Correlations between
digit span and measures of spoken language processing.
Annals of Otology, Rhinology,& Laryngology, 109, 92–
93.
Pisoni, D. B., & Tash, J. B. (1974) Reaction times to
comparisons within and across phonetic categories.
Perception& Psychophysics, 15, 285-290.
Posner, M. I. & Dehaene, S. (1994). Attentional networks.
Trends in Neuroscience, 17, 75-79.
Reber, A. S. (1967). Implicit learning of artificial
grammars. Journal of Verbal Learning & Verbal
Behavior, 6, 855-863.
Schoenherr, J. R., & Lacroix, G. (2013). Is double-dipping
an alternative to double-dissociation?: Sampling two
representational systems using a single task. Proceedings
of the 35th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society, Berlin, Germany.
Schoenherr, J. R,. & Logan, J. (2013). Subjective
awareness during cross-language speech perception:
Attending unattended regions of an acoustic continuum.
Proceedings of the 35th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society, Berlin, Germany.
Werker, J. F. (1989). Becoming a native listener. American
Scientist, 77, 54-59.
Werker, J. F. & Logan, J. S. (1985). Cross-language evidence
for three-factors in speech perception. Perception &
Psychophysics, 37. 35-44.

References
Aslin, R. N., Pisoni, D. B., Hennessy, B. L., & Perey, A. J.
(1981). Discrimination of voice onset time by human
infants: New findings and implications for the effects of
early experience. Child Development. 52, 1135–1145.
Abramson, A., & Lisker, L. (1965). Voice onset time in
stop consonants: Acoustic analysis and synthesis.
Proceedings of the Fifth International Congress on
Acoustics, Liege, A51.
Ashby, F. G., Alfonso-Reese, L. A., Turken, A. U., &
Waldron, E. M. (1998). A neuropsychological theory of
multiple systems in category learning. Psychological
Review, 105, 442-481.
Baddeley, A. D. (1996). Exploring the central executive.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 49A, 528.
Baranski, J. V., & Petrusic, W. M. (1994). The calibration
and resolution of confidence in perceptual judgements.
Perception & Psychophysics, 55, 412-428.
Eimas, P. D. (1975). Auditory and phonetic coding of the
cues for speech: Discrimination of the [r-1] distinction
by young infants. Perception & Psychophysics, 18, 341347.
Ellis, N. C. (1994). Implicit and Explicit Learning of
Languages. London: Academic Press.
Engle, R. W., Tuholski, S. W., Laughlin, J. E., & Conway,
A. R. A. (1999). Working memory, short-term memory,
and general fluid intelligence: A latent-variable
approach. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
128, 309-333.
Fan, J., McCandliss, B. D., Sommer, T., Raz, A., & Posner,
M. I. (2002). Testing the efficiency and independence of
attentional networks. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience,
14, 340-7.
Gathercole, Willis, C. S., Emslie, H.,& Baddeley, A. D.
(1992). Phonological memory and vocabulary
developmentduring the early school years:A longitudinal
study. Developmental Psychology, 28, 887-898.
Goldstone, R. (1994). Influences of categorization on
perceptual discrimination. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 123, 178-200.
Haskins Laboratories (2011). Abramson/Lisker VOT
Stimuli.
Retrieved
01/12/2011.
From
http://www.haskins.yale.edu/featured/demoliskabram/index.html /.
Hazan, V. & Barrett, S. (2000). The development of
phonemic categorization in children aged 6-12. Journal
of Phonetics, 28, 377-396.
Jacoby, L. L. (1991). A process dissociation framework:
Separating automatic from intentional uses of memory.
Journal of Memory and Language, 30, 513-541.
Jusczyk, P. (1989). Developing phonological categories
from the speech signal. In C. A. Ferguson, L. Menn, &
C. Stoel-Gammon (Eds.), Phonological Development:
Models, Research, Implications. Timonium, MD: York.
Jusczyk, P.W. (2000). The Discovery of Spoken Language.
Cambridge: MIT Press.

2590

