UC Merced
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society
Title
Automatic Analogical Reasoning Underlies Structural Priming in Comprehension of
Ambiguous Sentences

Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8wz7j26t

Journal
Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society, 36(36)

Authors
Popov, Vencislav
Hristova, Penka

Publication Date
2014-01-01
Peer reviewed

eScholarship.org

Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Automatic Analogical Reasoning Underlies Structural Priming in Comprehension of
Ambiguous Sentences
Vencislav Popov (vencislav.popov@gmail.com)
Penka Hristova (phristova@cogs.nbu.bg)
Department of Cognitive Science and Psychology,
New Bulgarian University, 21 Montevideo Street
Sofia 1618, Bulgaria

Abstract
The structure of previous sentences influences both production
and comprehension of subsequent sentences, although there is
less support for the latter. This effect, called structural priming,
supposedly results from the repetition of syntactic structure,
while evidence for the influence of thematic roles is
controversial. We suggest that structural priming is achieved by
automatic analogical mapping and transfer, which predicts that
the thematic structure should be primed too. An experiment
showed that the shared thematic structure is responsible for
structural priming in comprehension of ambiguous sentences,
rather than the syntactic structure. When participants read an
unambiguous base sentence with an instrumental thematic role,
they tended to interpret the corresponding role in the
ambiguous prepositional phrase in the target as an instrument as
well. This effect was present only when base and target
sentences shared their whole thematic structure, not only the
key role and in the absence of syntactic repetition.
Keywords: structural priming, automatic analogy, thematic
roles, ambiguous sentences, language comprehension

Introduction
Here we present an experiment with ambiguity. Now, the
truth is that our study is about ambiguity, but can you really
determine this from the previous sentence without doubt? No,
it can also be easily interpreted to mean that our presentation
will be ambiguous, and although no article would begin with
such a confession, both interpretations are equally
grammatical if not equally probable. Traditional theories of
sentence comprehension propose that structural ambiguity is
resolved by purely syntactic considerations (Frazier & Fodor,
1978; Pickering & Ferreira, 2008). But can syntactic parsing
be affected by semantic factors as well?
Sentences such as the one we began with contain a
structural ambiguity called prepositional phrase attachment
(PPA) ambiguity (Schütze & Gibson, 1999). In such
sentences, a prepositional phrase (PP) can be attached either
to the verb or to the immediately preceding noun. For
example, in the sentence “The hunter watched the alpinist
with binoculars.” the PP can modify either the verb watched
or the noun the alpinist. Whereas the hunter is watching the
alpinist through binoculars in the verb-attachment condition,
in the noun-attachment condition, the alpinist had the
binoculars. This difference can be conceptualized in terms of
thematic roles too. When the PP modifies the verb, it serves
as an instrument of the action, and when the noun is modified,
it serves as its attribute.

Traditionally, the preferential parsing of one or the other
alternative has been explained by the minimal attachment
principle and by the late-closure strategy (Frazier & Fodor,
1978). According to the minimal attachment principle, the
parser tries to construct the simplest possible syntactic
structure, which happens when the PP is verb-attached. On
the other hand, the late-closure strategy proposes that new
lexical items are attached to the current constituent to reduce
working memory load. In that case, the PP would be attached
to the immediately preceding noun phrase.
Recent research indicates that some extraneous factors can
influence syntactic parsing as well. Branigan, Pickering, and
McLean (2005) used the structural priming paradigm to show
that the choice of analysis can be primed by a structurally
similar sentence. They argued that it was the repetition of
syntax across sentences which influenced interpretation.
However, both the thematic1 and the syntactic structures were
shared in their stimuli, and it is not clear which was
responsible for the effect. In fact, priming of thematic
structure was shown by Goldwater, Tomlinson, Echols, &
Love (2011), who suggested that analogical mapping and
transfer underlie structural priming in production. We had
two goals – to disentangle the effects of syntactic and
thematic structure in comprehension-to-comprehension
structural priming and to test the suggestion that analogical
reasoning is responsible for the effects. First we turn to a
discussion of relevant findings.

Structural priming
Structural priming2, the tendency for structural repetition
across utterances, has been extensively used for studying
processes both during sentence production (Bock, 1986; Bock
& Loebell, 1990; Pickering & Branigan, 1998; Goldwater et
al, 2011) and during comprehension (Branigan et al., 2005;
Thothathiri & Snedeker, 2008; Boudewyn, Zirnstein, Swaab,
& Traxler, 2013). Initial studies of structural priming in
production showed that the effects cannot be explained by
semantic or thematic factors (Bock, Loebell, & Morey, 1992;
Bock & Loebell, 1990). Because of that, syntactic repetition
has been used as an argument in favor of an abstract syntax
(Bock & Loebell, 1990; Pickering & Ferreira, 2008).
1

The organization of thematic roles in a sentences
By “structural priming” we denote the effects of all structural
repetitions. We will use the modifiers “syntactic” and “thematic”
when we discuss priming of the specific structures.

1192

2

While structural priming is a robust phenomenon in
sentence production, it can be elusive in comprehension
(Pickering & Ferreira, 2008, Thothathiri & Snedeker, 2008).
Evidence for it there comes mainly from eye-tracking data,
where participants seem to predict which object would be
mentioned next, if the current sentence follows the structure
of the previous one (Arai, Van Gompel, & Scheepers, 2007;
Thothathiri & Snedeker; 2008). Branigan et al. (2005)
presented behavioral evidence by using an expression-topicture matching task, in which participants read prime and
target sentences with PPA ambiguity. After reading each
sentence, participants view two pictures and had to choose the
one which matched the content of the previous sentence. One
of the pictures after the prime matched either the verb- or the
noun-attachment of the PP, whereas the other matched
neither, which disambiguated the prime. In contrast, the two
pictures after the target matched both of its possible
interpretations. Participants chose the verb-attachment picture
for the target more often when the PP in the base was also
verb-attached, and vice-versa.
Their results, however, are not necessarily due to syntactic
priming, but may also reflect the priming of thematic
structure. Their prime and target expressions shared both
structures – in the verb-attachment condition, the PP was
interpreted as an instrument of the action, whereas in the
noun-attachment condition, it was an attribute of the object in
the noun-phrase. While acknowledging that fact, the authors
argued that semantic similarity is somewhat minimized in
their stimuli, and that priming in comprehension is probably
like priming in production, where some studies show that
thematic roles do not contribute to it (Bock, Loebell, &
Morey, 1992; Bock & Loebell, 1990). However, they never
tested this possibility and it represents a serious confound.
In fact, there is ample evidence that thematic relations do
play a significant role in structural priming in production and
that they can be assigned independently of the syntactic
structure (Pickering & Ferreira, 2008). For example, contrary
to the expectations of syntactic priming, DO dative sentences
can prime preposition-object (PO) dative constructions, given
that they share their thematic structure (Hare and Goldberg,
1999). Similarly, when syntactic structure is kept constant,
the order of the thematic roles can be independently primed
(Chang et al., 2003). While these effects were shown in
production, not comprehension, they make the alternative
explanation of Branigan et al’s (2005) results more plausible.

Analogical reasoning
Not only is the alternative theoretically plausible, but it can
be predicted by a model rooted in analogical reasoning
(Taylor, Friedman, Forbus, Goldwater, & Gentner, 2011).
The model is based on Gentner’s (1983) structure-mapping
theory – it acquires abstract language patterns from
experience by generalization, and constructs new sentences
by analogy to structurally similar sentences. It demonstrates
structural priming in production by retrieving recently
activated patterns in working memory, and it does it with

fewer learning trials, compared to other computational
models in the field (Chang, Dell, & Bock, 2006).
Because analogical reasoning is reasoning about entities
not based on their attributes, but rather based on the roles they
fill in a certain relational structure (Holyoak, 2012), this
approach to structure priming predicts an increase in
production not only of the same syntactic structure, but of the
thematic structure as well. This prediction was confirmed by
Goldwater et al’s. (2011) who showed that when 4 and 5 year
old children are primed with a PO dative phrase, they not
only produce more PO datives than DO datives, but also
produce both constructions more often than other non-dative
constructions. Furthermore, 4 year old children show thematic
structure priming only when the surface similarity between
the prime and target expressions is high, but they show no
syntactic priming. Yet, 5 year olds show both types of
priming in both high and low similarity conditions. This is
precisely the case for analogy and is uniquely predicted by
this account.
To elaborate further, most structural priming studies
usually present participants with a prime expression, in which
both syntactic and semantic information contribute to its
relational structure, and then people either have to produce or
comprehend another structurally similar sentence. A person
faced with that task can retrieve an analogous sentence from
memory, then map the roles in the structure of the analog to
the corresponding roles in the target, and finally generate
inferences for the upcoming information based on the
mapping of those roles (Gentner & Smith, 2012).
Consider the expression-to-matching task that Branigan et
al. (2005) used. After the base was disambiguated, people had
an active representation of it in memory with the following
thematic structure: agent – patient – instrument. Afterwards
they saw a novel expression in which the first two roles were
again agent and patient, while the third one was ambiguous. If
the person maps the first two roles they can then generate an
inference about what the ambiguous role should be. This
predicts that the effect should be present even when the
syntactic structure between sentences is different.
While this suggestion seems reasonable, an objection can
be raised. Researchers often assume that structural priming is
automatic3, but analogical reasoning is argued to be a
complex, intentional and computationally expensive cognitive
process (Spellman, Holyoak, & Morrison, 2001; Cho,
Holyoak, & Cannon, 2007; Holyoak & Hummel, 2008).
According to some studies (Holyoak, 2012), people cannot
spontaneously find and use analogies to solve complex
problems, and they cannot even benefit from relational
similarities in simple structures such as subsequent word pairs
in a lexical decision task (Spellman et al., 2001). Indeed, it is
hardly believable that a conscious intentional process could
underlie an automatic one. Yet, evidence is accumulating that
analogical mapping and transfer can sometimes happen both
unintentionally and without awareness (Blanchette & Dunbar,
2002; Day & Gentner, 2005; Hristova, 2009; Day &
Golstone, 2011; Perrott & Gentner, 2005). However, Holyoak
3

1193

unintentional, unconscious, efficient and/or uncontrollable (Bargh, 1994)

(2012) notes that the unintended transfer in some studies may
be merely the result of priming of the key relational concept
and that it is not due to systematic mapping of the entire
relational structure. None of the aforementioned studies
included a condition in which only the key concept is shared,
but not the whole relational structure, so Holyoak’s (2012)
objection is still relevant. In the experiment presented below,
we address this problem by adding such a condition for
control.
In summary, modelling structural priming as analogical
reasoning predicts that the interpretation of ambiguous
sentences will be influenced by a preceding sentence which
shares their thematic structure even in the absence of
syntactic similarities. This prediction was confirmed for
sentence production in children (Goldwater et al, 2011), but
has not been tested in adults or with comprehension. We
undertook the following experiment to test that prediction,
and to disentangle the effects of syntactic and thematic
priming for structural priming in comprehension.

Experiment
We used an adapted version of the task used by Branigan et
al. (2005) to test it. The target was a sentence with a PPA
ambiguity (1):
(1) The hunter watched the alpinist with binoculars
(2) The doctor watched the patient by using glasses
(3) The doctor watched the patient who wore glasses
(4) The doctor and the patient watched by using glasses
(5) The doctor and the patient, who wore glasses, watched
(6) The doctor watched the patient and smiled.
The base was an unambiguous sentence which differed
syntactically from the target, and its key role was either an
instrument of the action (2, 4) or an attribute of the preceding
noun-phrase (3, 5). To address Holyoak’s (2012) concern
about the automaticity of analogies, the base was also varied
on whether it shared its whole thematic structure with the
target (2, 3) or only its key role (4, 5). A final control base (6)
was added with which to estimate priming relative to a null
condition. If people comprehend the ambiguity by using
analogy, they will tend to interpret the PP as an instrument
more often when the corresponding role in the base is also an
instrument, and if this is due to analogical reasoning and not
priming of the key relational concept, the effect will be
present only when the structures are analogous.

Figure 1. Time course of a single trial; each panel
represents successive screens.

Methods
Participants
Forty undergraduates at New Bulgarian University
participated for partial fulfillment of course credit (25
women). All were native Bulgarian speakers at mean age
24.58 years (SD = 7.08), ranging from 18 to 51 years.

Procedure
Each sentence was presented individually on a computer
screen with E-prime 2.0 software. A single experimental trial
consisted of an unambiguous base sentence followed by an
ambiguous target sentence and a comprehension test for the
target (fig. 1). Experimental trials were mixed with filter trials
and participants were not aware of any connection between
the sentences. They also thought that comprehension test
would appear randomly. The instructions were to read the
sentences carefully because sometimes they will have to
choose which one of two sentences expresses the same
meaning as the preceding sentence. Reading was self-paced
and participants pressed a button to proceed to the next
sentence. A red question mark appeared 500 ms after each
target, and after half of the fillers, but after none of the bases.
It was followed by a comprehension test, which consisted of
two alternative sentences, presented one under the other. For
target items, those were the two disambiguated version of the
target as presented in table 1, whereas for fillers one
expressed the same meaning, the other a slightly different
one. Their position (i.e. top vs bottom) was counterbalanced
across participants. Participants pressed a button on a
SRBOX to choose the sentence that matched the way they
understood the immediately preceding sentence. The
experiment began with ten practice trials of additional fillers,
some of which were ambiguous.
At the end participants answered two questions: 1) “Did
you notice any connection between consecutive sentences?”,
2) “Do you think that your interpretation of some sentences
might have been influenced by the preceding sentence?”

Materials
There were 20 sets of experimental stimuli; each consisted
of one ambiguous target sentence, five different base
sentences, and two disambiguated versions of the target that
matched each of its possible interpretations. A single set is
presented in table 1. All target sentences had the same
thematic structure, agent – patient – ambiguous (instrument
or attribute), and all of them could be interpreted with both
verb- and noun-attachment of the ambiguous PP.
None of the content words were used in more than one set
and the base and target sentences shared only their verb. All
non-control versions of each base used the same verb and
arguments. Half of the base sentences ended with the
adverbial clause "by using X" (instrumental), the other half
ended with the relative clause "who wore X" or "who had X"
(attributive). Within each role condition, one of the sentences
was analogical to the target, and had the same thematic
structure, agent – patient – instrument/attribute, whereas the

1194

Table 1. A complete set of translated items for a single target sentence (the original stimuli were in Bulgarian).
Item
Target
Disambiguated target 1
Disambiguated target 2
Base 1
Base 2
Base 3
Base 4
Control base

Type of role
Instrumental
Attributive
Instrumental
Instrumental
Attributive
Attributive
-

Type of structure
Analogical
Non-analogical
Analogical
Non-analogical
-

other one was not analogical to the target, and had the
structure agent – agent – instrument/attribute.
40 unambiguous filler sentences of various grammatical
structures intervened between experimental trials, and none of
them shared content words with the experimental sentences.
There were additional "catch trials", which mirrored the
structure of the base sentences. Because they were not
followed by ambiguous targets, this made it unlikely that
participants will consciously generate expectancies for the
targets (Boudewyn, Zirnstein, Swaab, & Traxler, 2013).
Another ten sentences had a relative clause ambiguity, such
as "The mistress searched for the phone of the man that she
lost." to draw some attention away from the targets.
Experimental items were placed into five lists with four
targets per each type of base in each list. Each participant saw
only one of the base sentences per target, and base sentences
were counter-balanced between-subject across lists, so that
each target was presented with each base equally often. This
controlled for possible confounds of the specific pairings of
words, phrases, etc. The 100 experimental and filler items
were randomized for each participant with the constraint that
each target followed immediately after its respective base,
and at least two fillers appeared after each target.

Design
We used a 2 (type of role: instrumental base vs attributive
base) by 2 (type of structure: analogical base vs nonanalogical base) within-subject design and all variables were
manipulated over base sentences. The control base was used
only to estimate the relative size of the priming in a
subsequent analysis and was not part of the design. Each
participant saw four targets in each condition and chose either
an instrumental or an attributive interpretation of each target,
which was the main dependent variable. Reading times for
the target we also recorded.

Results
The traditional ANOVA has known problems for
analyzing aggregated percentages data, so we analyzed the
raw results with mixed-effects logistic regressions with
random effects for subjects and items (Baayen, Davidson, &
Bates, 2008). Both analyses lead to the same conclusions, so
only the latter is presented. The basic model included
subjects and items as intercept random effects. Including

Sentence
The hunter watched the alpinist with binoculars.
The alpinist was watched by binoculars.
The alpinist with the binoculars was watched.
The doctor watched the patient by using glasses.
The doctor and the patient watched by using glasses.
The doctor watched the patient who wore glasses.
The doctor and the patient, who wore glasses, watched.
The doctor watched the patient and smiled.
random slopes for subject and items did not improve the
model fit, ΔAIC = 25.13, LLR χ2(10) = 4.86, p = .89,
therefore we assume that the priming effect is invariant
across subjects and items, and we continue with the initial
model. First, we tested the effect of type of role. Adding it
to the model as a fixed effect significantly increased its fit,
ΔAIC = -15.09, LLR χ2(1) = 17.085, p < .001 – people were
more likely to interpret the target instrumentally, when the
key role in the base was instrumental as well (M = .62, SE =
.028), than when it was attributive (M = .48, SE = .028).
There was no effect of type of structure, ΔAIC = -2, LLR χ2(1) = 0.003, p = .96 (M = .55, SE = .028 for the analogical
base, M = .553, SE = .028 for the nonanalogical base). The
interaction however improved the model significantly,
ΔAIC = -4.26, LLR χ2(1) = 6.26, p < 0.05. To explore the
interaction we split the data in half by type of structure, and
analyzed the type of role effect for the two datasets.
Instrumental interpretations of the target increased
significantly after an instrumental base only when the base
was analogical to the target (ΔM = 22.5%), ΔAIC = -19.21,
LLR χ2(1) = 21.208, p < 0.001, but not when the base was
not analogical (ΔM = 5.6%), ΔAIC = 0.63, LLR χ2(1) =
1.37, p = .243.
Next we compared the performance in each experimental
condition to the control condition to estimate the direction of
the priming. The factors of type of role and type of structure
were collapsed with the control condition to form a single
fixed effect with five levels. Including this factor significantly
improved the basic model, ΔAIC = -18.16, LLR χ2(4) =
26.165, p < .001. All conditions were compared to the control
condition, which was the reference category. Only the
instrumental analogical condition differed significantly from
the control, odds ratio = 2.6, SE = 1.31, z = 3.515, p < .001
(table 2).
Due to the self-paced reading procedure, reading times
(RTs) were extremely dispersed (overall M = 3857 ms., SD =
2148 ms, range from 421 ms. to 17661 ms.). We tried
several different procedures to deal with outliers, including
different cut-off values, both absolute and SD based, log and
inverse transformations (Ratcliff, 1993). Because they
produced very different results, we could not choose one
without bias and without increasing the method’s degrees of
freedom.

1195

Table 2. Mean proportion of instrumental interpretation of
the target by base type; logistic regression parameters
Type of base

M (SE)

Instrumental,
analogical
Attributive,
analogical
Instrumental,
nonanalogical
Attributive,
nonanalogical

0.66
(0.04)
0.44
(0.04)
0.58
(0.04)
0.53
(0.04)
0.50
(0.04)

Control

Odds (95CI)*

Wald z

2.6 (1.53, 4.43)

3.51 **

0.7 (0.42, 1.17)

-1.35

1.58 ( 0.94, 2.66)

1.72

1.14 (0.68, 1.92)

0.50

Note: * the control base was the reference category; ** p < .001

None of the participants noticed the structural similarity of
consecutive sentences and no one reported their interpretation
of some sentences to have been influenced by the
immediately preceding sentence.

Discussion
We demonstrated that a shared thematic structure is
sufficient to elicit structural priming in comprehension even
in the absence of syntactic repetition. In a target sentences,
such as “The hunter watched the alpinist with binoculars”,
participants interpreted the ambiguous role as an instrument
of the action more often when the corresponding role in the
base was also an instrument (The doctor watched the patient
by using glasses), compared to when it was an attribute of the
preceding noun-phrase (The doctor watched the patient who
wore glasses). The effect was present only when the whole
structure of the base was analogous to the target – the
nonanalogical base “The doctor and the patient watched by
using glasses” did not increase the amount of instrumental
interpretations of the target, although its key role was
instrumental. Therefore the effect was not due to the
activation and priming of the key concept instrument, as
Holyoak (2012) has previously suggested, but the result of
systematic mapping.
Moreover, people were neither instructed that there was a
connection between sentences, nor did they notice the
repetition of thematic structure between expressions. Thus,
the analogies were performed both unintentionally and
unconsciously. Although other studies reported evidence for
automatic analogies (Blanchette & Dunbar, 2002; Day &
Gentner, 2005; Day & Golstone, 2011; Perrott & Gentner,
2005), this is the first study that directly addresses Holyoak’s
(2012) concern. While behavioral criteria here point to
automatic processing (Bargh, 1994), reaction times were
harder to interpret. Lack of stability and statistical
significance prevents us from making a conclusion about the
online processing of comprehension. Furthermore, if a
difference was found, it is not clear how we would have

interpreted the data. Branigan et al. (2005) analyzed reaction
times only when the target interpretation was forced by the
procedure, which allowed them to make conclusions about
the ease of processing or transfer. Subsequent studies should
be designed to allow interpretation of reading times, and they
should control reading times much better than ours, for
example, by using the moving-window procedure.
Overall, we confirmed the predictions of Goldwater et al.
(2011) and Taylor et al. (2011), who suggested that analogical
structure-mapping underlies structural priming. While their
computational model and empirical results were concerned
with production, and were tested only in children, we
extended this work to comprehension and adults. Specifically,
adults seem to interpret structurally ambiguous sentences
partially by analogy when primed with structurally similar
expressions.
Our results complement the limited work on structural
priming in comprehension by providing direct evidence for
the role of thematic structure. The effect size we obtained of
22.5% is comparable with Branigan et al.’s (2005) effect of
18% in comprehension-to-comprehension and the 21% effect
in production-to-comprehension. Since the syntactic and
thematic structures were both repeated in their stimuli and
ours only shared their thematic structure we conclude that the
effect is likely due to the shared thematic structure. One
limitation of this conclusion is that the studies used different
stimuli sets, although similar in structure, and for some reason
the effect might be simply stronger with ours - syntactic
structure might have an incremental effect, however small.
Further work should directly compare the two structures for a
more clear conclusion.
The idea that structural priming is achieved by analogy also
explains the semantic boost effect – verb repetition across
prime and targets enhances structural priming and is
sometimes even required for the effect to appear, because
superficial similarity aids the retrieval of analogues (Holyoak,
2012). This boost is largely unexplained by the syntactic
approach (Pickering & Ferreira, 2008). We are currently
testing (similarly to Goldwater et al., 2011) whether structural
priming would appear even if the verb is not same, but it is
semantically similar, i.e. expresses a similar action (to direct
vs to orient).
Finally, based on our results and the accumulating literature
on the differential influence of thematic roles and syntax
(Hare & Goldberg, 1999; Chang et al., 2003), we suggest that
it will probably be useful to make a conceptual and
terminological distinction between syntactic, thematic and
structural priming (a related suggestion was put forward by
Goldwater et al., 2011, as well). Full structural priming
should probably denote only the more general effects of
repeated structure and it could be divided into the subordinate
concepts of syntactic and thematic structure priming. With
this conceptual distinction in hand interesting questions can
be derived for which we do not have a clear answer – what
are the relative contributions of each to structural priming in
general? Are their effects additive or do they interact in a
meaningful way?

1196

Conclusions
Semantic factors, such as the thematic roles that objects play
in a sentence, can influence syntactic parsing – structural
priming is successfully achieved in comprehension when the
thematic structure is shared even in the absence of syntactic
repetition. Most likely this is done by automatic analogical
mapping and transfer – faced with ambiguity people retrieve
expressions with a similar relational structure, map the
unambiguous roles and make inferences for the ambiguous
ones based on that mapping. Analogical reasoning seems to
be a crucial element of language comprehension.

Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Georgi Petkov with whom we had fruitful
discussions. We thank Radoslav Nedyalkov and Elena
Mikova, who gathered the data.

References
Arai, M., Van Gompel, R. P., & Scheepers, C. (2007). Priming
ditransitive structures in comprehension. Cognitive
Psychology, 54(3), 218–250.
Bargh, J. (1994). The four horsemen of automaticity: Intention,
awareness, efficiency, and control as separate issues.
Handbook of Social Cognition, 1, 1–40.
Baayen, R. H., Davidson, D. J., & Bates, D. M. (2008). Mixedeffects modeling with crossed random effects for subjects and
items. Journal of Memory and Language, 59(4), 390–412.
Blanchette, I., & Dunbar, K. (2002). Representational change
and analogy: How analogical inferences alter target
representations. JEP: LMC, 28, 672-685.
Bock, J. K. (1986). Syntactic persistence in language
production. Cognitive Psychology, 18(3), 355–387.
Bock, K., & Loebell, H. (1990). Framing sentences. Cognition,
35(1), 1–39.
Bock, K., Loebell, H., & Morey, R. (1992). From conceptual
roles to structural relations: bridging the syntactic cleft.
Psychological Review, 99(1), 150.
Boudewyn, M. A., Zirnstein, M., Swaab, T. Y., & Traxler, M. J.
(2013). Priming prepositional phrase attachment: Evidence
from eye-tracking and event-related potentials. The Quarterly
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1–31.
Branigan, H. P., Pickering, M. J., & McLean, J. F. (2005).
Priming
Prepositional-Phrase
Attachment
During
Comprehension. JEP: LMC, 31(3), 468–481.
Chang, F., Bock, K., & Goldberg, A. E. (2003). Can thematic
roles leave traces of their places? Cognition, 90(1), 29–49
Chang, F., Dell, G. S., & Bock, K. (2006). Becoming syntactic.
Psychological Review, 113(2), 234.
Cho, S., Holyoak, K. J., and Cannon, T.D. (2007). Analogical
reasoning in working memory: Resources shared among
relational integration, interference resolution, and
maintenance. Memory & Cognition, 35 (6), 1445-1455
Day, S. & Gentner, D. (2007). Nonintentional analogical
inference in text comprehension. Memory and Cognition, 35,
39-49.

Day, S., & Goldstone, R. (2011). Analogical transfer from a
simulated physical system. JEP: LMC, 37, 551-567.
Frazier, L., & Fodor, J. D. (1978). The sausage machine: A new
two-stage parsing model. Cognition, 6, 291–325.
Gentner, D. (1983). Structure-mapping: A theoretical
framework for analogy. Cognitive Science, 7(2), 155–170.
Gentner, D., & Smith, L. (2012). Analogical reasoning.
Encyclopedia of Human Behavior (2nd Ed.), VS
Ramachandran, Ed. Elsevier
Goldwater, M., Tomlinson, M., Echols, C., & Love, B. (2011).
Structural Priming as Structure-Mapping: Children Use
Analogies From Previous Utterances to Guide Sentence
Production. Cognitive Science, 35(1), 156–170
Griffin, Z. M., & Weinstein-Tull, J. (2003). Conceptual
structure modulates structural priming in the production of
complex sentences. Journal of Memory and Language, 49(4),
537–555.
Hare, M. L., & Goldberg, A. E. (1999). Structural priming:
Purely syntactic? In Proceedings of the 21st annual meeting
of the Cognitive Science Society (pp. 208–211).
Holyoak, K. J. (2012). Analogy and relational reasoning. The
Oxford Handbook of Thinking and Reasoning
Holyoak, K. J., & Hummel, J. E. (2008). No way to start a space
program: Associationism as a launch pad for analogical
reasoning. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 31(04), 388–389.
Hristova, P. (2009). Unintentional and Unconscious Analogies
Between Superficially Dissimilar but Relationally Similar
Simple Structures In B. Kokinov, K. Holyoak & D. Getner
(Eds.), New Frontiers in Analogy Research,193-203.
Perrott, D., Gentner, D., & Bodenhausen, G. (2005). Resistance
is futile: The unwitting insertion of analogical inferences in
memory. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 12, 696-702.
Pickering, M. J., & Branigan, H. P. (1998). The Representation
of Verbs: Evidence from Syntactic Priming in Language
Production. Journal of Memory and Language, 39(4), 633–
651.
Pickering, M. J., & Ferreira, V. S. (2008). Structural priming: A
critical review. Psychological Bulletin, 134(3), 427–459
Ratcliff, R. (1993). Methods for dealing with reaction time
outliers. Psychological Bulletin, 114(3), 510–532.
Schütze, C. T., & Gibson, E. (1999). Argumenthood and
English prepositional phrase attachment. Journal of Memory
and Language, 40(3), 409–431.
Spellman, B. A., Holyoak, K. J., & Morrison, R. G. (2001).
Analogical priming via semantic relations. Memory &
Cognition, 29(3), 383–393
Taylor, J., Friedman, S., Forbus, K., Goldwater, M., & Gentner,
D. (2011). Modeling structural priming in sentence
production via analogical processes. In Proceedings of the
33rd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society,
2916-2921
Thothathiri, M., & Snedeker, J. (2008). Give and take: Syntactic
priming during spoken language comprehension. Cognition,
108(1), 51-68

1197

